A SECOND TRUE DEFENSE OF THE MERE Nonconformists, AGAINST THE Untrue
ACCUSATIONS, REASONINGS and HISTORY of Dr. EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, DEAN of St.
PAUL'S, etc. Clearly proving that it is (not sin but) duty 1. Not wilfully to
commit the many sins of Conformity. 2. Not Sacrilegiously to forsake the
Preaching of the Gospel. 3. Not to cease public worshipping of God. 4. To use
needful Pastoral helps for salvation, though men forbid it, and call it Schism.

Written by RICHARD BAXTER, not to accuse others, but to defend Gods Truth, and
the true way of Peace after near 20 years loud Accusations of the silencing,
prosecuting Clergy and their Sons.

With some Notes on Mr. Joseph Glanviles Zealous and Impartial Protestant, and
Dr. L. Moulins Character.

1 Timothy 6. 5, 6. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth; supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thy self. But
godliness with contentment is great gain.

LONDON: Printed for Nevil Simons, at the Sign of the Three Golden Cocks at the
West End of St. Paul's. 1681.

AN Historical Preface.
1. THE matter of fact occasioning this second Defense, has been formerly, and
is after here opened in part. I need now but briefly tell the Reader, that
after the long difference between the English Prelatists, and those that
desired Reformation and Discipline; the most of the English Ministers who were
in possession of the Parish-Churches from 1646, till 1660, obeyed the
Parliament, so far as to disuse the English Book of Common Prayer, and
Subscription, and Obedience to the Diocesan Episcopacy; some of them being most
for Church Government by Synods of Parochial Pastors, and assisting Elders, and
most for a Reconciling of the several divided Parties, thinking somewhat in the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Independent Parties to be good, and somewhat in
each of them unwarrantable.

1. They were so far Independent as to hold, that particular Churches
associated for Personal Communion in faith, worship, and holy living, were of
Divine Institution (such as true Parish-Churches are) and that each of these
Churches ought to have its proper exercise of that Discipline which is
described by Christ, Mat. 18. and by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. and in other Texts of
holy Scripture, and was exercised in the days of Ignatius, and so on for many
hundred years; some part of it still remaining even to the times of Popery.
Therefore they held, that the Pastors of such Churches must be such as had
power to exercise the said Discipline. And they held, that Parish-Bounds were
of great convenience against disorder, though not of Divine Institution; not
taking all that dwell in a Parish to be eo nomine, of the Church, but such of
them as were capable, by continued owning their Baptismal Covenant, not
nullified by proved Heresy, or inconsistent wickedness. And they held, that no
unwilling person was capable of a sealed Pardon of sin, and so of
Church Communion, nor yet of the true receiving of the use of the Pastoral
office: And therefore that none but free Consenters should have the Sacrament,
nor be related to the Pastor, as his Flock of that Church: but the rest should
be constrained to live as Catechumens, or Hearers, as they were capable, in
peace and quietness (and such as the Magistrate found meet to be tolerated in
other Churches, who only were incapable in that).

2. They were so far for Presbytery, as to hold, that 1. If men of competent
sufficiency, were made by ordination Elders, ejusdem ordinis with the chief
Pastor, to be his Assessors and Assistants, though they seldom, or never
Preached publicly, but helped him in Catechizing, or private over sight, and
in judging persons and cases; and though in necessity they labored with their
hands, it would not be unlike the ancient Government. 2. And they judged, that
all Gods work should be done in the greatest concord, and with the best mutual
counsel and help that might be; and therefore that Synods are to that end of
great use: and if they were appointed at stated times and places, it would by
order, be a furtherance to their ends: But they were not for their assuming a
proper Regent Power, by Majority of Votes over the minor part, or the absent
Pastors; and thought that when sixedness occasioned that usurpation, occasional
Synods pro re nata, were better. And 3. They judged, that Presbyters are
ejusdem ordinis with Bishops, and that no Bishops have a divine right to govern
without the Presbyters assistance, nor to deprive them of any of their power,
nor their Churches of true Discipline or Worship, nor the people of their
Rights; much less to use any forcing power of the sword on any.

3. They were so far for Episcopacy, as to hold it lawful, and convenient, that
the particular Churches have one that shall have a Priority, and in many things
a Negative Vote, as the Incumbent in each Parish has among his Curates a sort
of power. And that the Presbyteries and Synods have their Moderators; and if
they were fixed durante vita, and had a Negative Vote in Ordinations, they
could consent; sobeit they were duly chosen as of old, and had no forcing power
by the sword, but only a Ministerial, teaching, guiding power. And some of them
thought it of Divine right, that the Apostles and Evangelists have Successors
in the ordinary parts of their office; and that to have a special ca^e of many
Churches, and their Bishops and Elders are some of that ordinary part.

4. And to the Erastians also they granted, that the King is the Supreme
Governor of the Church, by the sword, or force; and that we must obey him, not
only when he enforces the Commands of Christ, but in all acts of outward
circumstance and order, left by God to his determination, and not appropriated
to the Ministers office. These were the thoughts then of the far greatest part
of the Ministers that I had then knowledge of.

. 2. Before the King returned, many Episcopal Doctors and great men, persuaded
these Reconcilers, that thus much would be accepted to our common concord, if
the King were restored* But some said, They do but decieve you; there are such
men now got into chief credit on that side, that will silence you all, and
ruin you, unless you will follow Grotius, or be of the French Religion, or
unite in the Pope, as Principium unitatis, and obey him, as the Western
Patriarck, etc. And when you are all turned out, what men have they to supply
your places?

. 3. But when the King came in, and encouraged the Reconcilers with the promise
of his help, they made the attempt in 1660, and 1661. the History of which I
need not repeat, Since that foreseeing what the silencing of so many Ministers,
and the afflicting of the people of our mind would unavoidably cause, we
pleaded, we petitioned the Bishops to have prevented it, by those necessary
means which they might have yielded to, to their own advantage: But it was all
in vain.

. 4. When the Act of Uniformity came out, of about 9000 Ministers that kept in,
and had laid by the Liturgy before, about 7000 Conformed (to the altered
Liturgy, before any of them ever saw it, save a few) by declaring their Assent
and Consent (the Act being known before the Book could be Printed:) and about
2000 were silenced by that Act. How they behaved themselves since then, is so
well known, and I have here, and often declared; and how the Plague first, and
the burning of the Churches next, and the Kings Licenses next, did give them
the opportunities and calls which made more public Preaching seem to them a
duty, that I shall not make recital of it.

. 5. All this while abundance of invectiues were poured out against them, by
many of the Conforming Clergy, in Press and Pulpits; and especially in the ears
of great men, to whom we had no access, but seemed what such men described us
to be. The new Laws against Conventicles, and the Oxford Act of Consinement had
been added to the first: Many were hunted up and down, their Goods and
Libraries distrained; many were imprisoned; some there died: The Informers and
Prosecutors grew weary: They saw the severity came most from the Prelates, and
the Parliament, the King being not for severity therein: The Justices grew
unwilling of Execution; the Preachers reprove them, and call on them to put the
Laws in Execution; they are greatly offended at the Kings Licenses; they
continue to accuse us for Schism at least, and some of Sedition; though we
invaded none of their Temples, nor asked them for any part of their maintenance.
And the Parliament and Prelates were so sharp against us, that we durst not
tell the world what we refused in Conformity, and why, lest we put them upon
more severity; nor indeed could we do it, the Press was locked up by so great
penalties. But while we were forced to silence, we were lowdly called to, to
say what we stuck at, and what it was that we would have. And after 17 years
such calls, I ventured to name the things; and hence is the storm of the
present indignation.

. 6. I had before proved the wilful desertion of our Ministry, especially when
the King Licensed us, to be odious Sacriledg: To this I am told, of men's power
to silence such as they think deserve it: I grant it, if they truly think so:
so may they on just cause alienate Churches, and Church Lands, and hang
Malefactors: but not when no such cause is given, nor at their pleasure.

. 7. When in the fitst Plea for Peace I had stated the case of our
Nonconformity, I intended to bring the Proofs of each particular supposed
sinful, as I after found occasion. And meeting with abundance that accused us
of disloyal, rebellious Principles, I largly delivered my own, and many others
judgment of Civil and Eccesiastical Authority, the power of Princes, and the
duty of Subjects; and therein also wrote some Answer to Four Accusations
brought against us. 1. That we pretend Grace against Morality. 2. That we hold,
that things Indifferent became unlawful, if commanded. 3. I largly confuted
Bishop Morley's false Accusation of my Doctrine, of the Magistrates power to
command things unlawful by accident; and Dr. Parker's Doctrine of Scandal. 4. I
confuted them that extend our Nonconformity to things which we refuse not. All
this in the second Plea for Peace; which none yet, that I know of, have
answered.

. 8. And lest any should think that we are all for Negatives, I wrote a
Treatise of the only Terms of Universal Christian concord, which I value above
all the rest, being assured that the Churches will never otherwise be healed,
than by that impartial, sure, and easy Catholic way, which some have reviled,
but none since, that I know of, confuted. One Learned Bishop (that had a chief
hand in our present Impositions and ejection) I desired to tell me, which is
the way of Christian concord, if this be not: And he maintains, That the only
way is to obey the College of Pastors, who are to govern the Catholic Church
through all the world, per Literas formatas. Where this College, as one
governing power do meet, or how they signify their Majority of Votes, and in
what cases, and who must gather the Votes (from Abassia to Moscovie), and in
how long time, and how they shall come to all men with certainty; and whether
the ejected, silenced, and excommunicated, etc. may appeal to them, etc. I
could not learn.

. 9. In the same Book I sufficientiy confuted Mr. H. Dodwell's great Book,
which denies not only the Churches and Ministry, which are not by
uninterrupted Episcopal Ordination, but also the ordinary salvation of all such
Churches, as having no covenant promise, by valid Sacraments delivered them. He
has pretended some defense in a late Book of Letters: to which, if they can be
Printed, I hope to give easily a satisfactory reply.

. 10. In the same book he Publishes some old Letters of his to me, for the
Diocesan frame of Government; the notice of which beforehand given me, caused
me to Publish a full Treatise of Diocesan Episcopacy, containing the Reasons
why we cannot swear to it, or approve it, or swear never to endeavor any
reforming alteration of the frame here settled, and exercised. And whatever Mr.
Dodwell pretends to the contrary, if this Treatise do not fully answer his
Letter, and justify us in this part of Nonconformity, I am unable to judge of
the Cause, but am willing to recieve any better information.

. 11. And because I find false History, not the least cause of ordinary
mistakes, and men cry up Diocesan Prelacy, as the ancient, and chief cure of
Schism; I gathered an Abstract of the history of Bishops, and their Councils,
that the true matter of fact might not be so commonly mistaken as it is.

. 12. At the same time came out against me, First, a book of Mr. John Cheyneys,
the mistakes of which I manifested in an Answer: And afterward old Letters of
Mr. Hinkleys, to which I had an old Answer, which I cast by, and now Published:
and another Accuser, abounding with untruths, called the Impleder; and another
called Reflections, or Speculum, etc. And another Book of Mr. Cheneys, full of
most pitiful mistakes; All which, with Justice Roger L'Estrange's Dialogue, and
someothers, I answered together in a Book called the Third Defense of the
Nonconformists, etc.

. 13. But the Accusations of Dean Stillingfleet in his Sermon, made the loudest
noise: In the Answer to which, I chiefly desired to have come to some
understanding agreement with him, about the true state of our Case and
Controversy; and to that end, craved his answer to several necessary
questions; but was not able to procure it. And now in his large Book, where I
hoped to have found an Answer to them, I look for it in vain. Yea, though Mr.
Hikeringhill roughly provoked him but to expound his own Text, and tell us
intelligibly, what the same Rule is, which the Apostle would have all walk by,
he will not do it; but instead of that, with unusual gentleness tells me, he
will not differ about it, if I do but grant, that it is a Rule that binds us
all to do all that lawfully we can for peace, which I cheerfully grant; And if
it be not lawful for peace and concord to forbear silencing us, imprisoning us,
accusing us as odious for not wilful sinning, and urging Magistrates to execute
the Laws against us, and making us seem Schismatics for not forbearing to
Preach the Gospel, to which we were vowed and consecrated by Ordination; I know
not lawful from unlawful: I cannot yet get him to tell us, what he would have
the many score thousands do on the Lords Days, that have no room in the
Parish-Churches; with many such, which our case is concerned in.

. 14. I thought his Book had been an Answer to mine, and other men's Prefaces;
but I find that I was mistaken: Indeed he names five Books written against his
Accusation: what he says to Dr. Owen, and Mr. Alsop, I leave to themselves to
consider of: The Country Gentleman's Case, in sense, was this, Whether all they
that think Parish Communion, under the present impositions, to be sin, are
bound, till they can change their judgment, to forbear all Church-worship, and
live like Atheists, and so be damned? And who can find any Answer to this?

Mr. Barret's Queries out of his Books, he says, next nothing to, but a dark
retracting his Irenicon: And far be it from me to blame him for growing wiser.
But why took he no notice of his own words, cited in the Epistle, out of his
late Book against Idolatry, threatening us all with no less than damnation, if
me prefer not the purest Church.

And as to my Defense, his Book is nothing like an Answer, unless his naming
me, and citing out of that, and other Books, a few broken scraps, which he
thought he could make some advantage of, may be called an Answer.

. 15. I confess he has made some attempt to tell me what the National Church
of England is; but so Independently, as I doubt his party will disown it with
great offense. In short, he holds, that there is no such thing as a Church of
England, in the usual Political sense, having any Constitutive, Ecclesiastical,
Supreme Power, Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or Democratical, but it is only
the many Churches in England, associated by the common consent in Parliament,
etc. Remember that he and I are so far agreed.

As I was writing this, I saw a Book against him of a friend, too much for me,
and somewhat freely handling the Dr. which in this point would help them, by
saying, that the Convocation having the Legislative Church Power, may be the
Constitutive, Regent part: But he confesses to me, that he spoke not what is,
but what he counts should be, or wishes; for the Dr. himself had before told
us, that the Convocations of Canterbury and York are two, and not united to
make one National, supreme power; so that this proves no one political Church
of England at all, but only 2 Provincial Churches in England.

. 16. The Dr. has so judiciously and honestly pleaded our Cause in his defense
of A. Bishop Laud, and his Book against Idolatry, that I have made his words
the first Chap. of this Book, which if he heartily stand to, I see not but our
principles are the same.

. 17. His book is made up of 3 parts. I. Untrue Accusations. II. Untrue
Historical Citations (abundance). III. Fallacious Reasonings.

Would you have an undeniable Confutation, ad hominem, in few words?

I. As to his Principles, he says himself as aforesaid, Of Idolat. p. 7. We
are sure that wilful ignorance, or choosing a worse Church before a better, is
a damnable sin.

II. As to his History of the old Nonconformists, read A. Bishop Bancrofts
dangerous Positions, and Heylins History of Presbytery, charging them odiously
with the clean contrary, and the Canons made against them on that supposition.

III. As to his History, and Doctrine against the Election of Bps, which I
pleaded; (as I have fully proved his abuse of History in it,) I repeat Mr.
Thorndikes words, Forbear. of Penalty. It is to no purpose to talk of
Reformation of the Churchtoregular Government, without restoring the liberty of
choosing Bishops, and privilege of enjoying them to the Synods, Clergy and
people, in the making of those of whom they consist, and by whom they are to be
governed, that I need make no other reason of the neglect of Episcopacy, than
the neglect of it.

O pray hard to God to provide greater store of skilful, holy and peaceable
Laborers for his Harvest, that by the sound belief of a better world, have
overcome the deluding love of the honors, prosperity and pleasures of the
flesh, and wholly live to God and Heaven.

POSTSCRIPT.
DR. Edward Stillingfleet Irenic. P. 114. says, The Episcopal men will hardly
find any evidence in Scripture, or in the practice of the Apostles, for
Churches consisting of many fixed Congregations for worship, under the charge
of one Pastor; nor in the Primitive Church, for the Ordination of a Bishop,
without the preceding Election of the Clergy, and at least, consent and
approbation of the people; and neither in Scripture nor Antiquity, the least
foot-step of the delegation of Church Power; so that upon the matter all of
them at last make use of those things in Church Government, which have no other
foundation but the principles of humane prudence, guided by Scripture; and it
were well if that were observed still.

P. 370. Surely then their Diocesses we re not very large, if all the several
Parishes could communicate on the same day, with what was sent from the
Cathedral Church.

P. 361. I doubt not but to make it appear, that Philippi was not the
Metropolis of Macedonia, and therefore the Bishops there mentioned could not be
the Bishops of the several Cities under the jurisdiction of Philippi, but must
be understood of the Bishops resident in that City.

P. 157. There must be a form of Ecclesiastical Government over a Nation, as a
Church, as well as of Civil Government over it as a Society governed by the
same Laws. -- For every Society must have its Government belonging to it, as
such a Society: And the same reason that makes Government necessary, in any
particular Congregation, will make it necessary for all the particular
Congregations, joining together in one visible Society, as a particular
National Church: For the Unity and Peace of that Church ought much more to be
looked after, than of any one Congregation.

P. 131. The Churches power, as to Divine Law, being only directive and
declarative; but as confirmed by a Civil Sanction, is juridical and obligatory.

P. 113. Where any Church is guilty of corruptions, both in Doctrine and in
practice, which it avoweth, and professes, and requires the owning them, as
necessary conditions of Communion with her; there a Noncommunion with that
Church is necessary, and a total and positive separation is lawful and
convenient.

P. 117. Where any Church retaining purity of Doctrine, does require the owning
of, and conforming to any unlawful, or suspected practice; men may lawfully
deny Conformity to, and Communion with that Church in such things, without
incurring the guilt of Schism-. P. 119. Let men turn and wind themselves which
way they will, by the very same argument that any will prove separation from
the Church of Rome lawful, because she required unlawful things as Conditions
of her Communion; it will be proved lawful not to Conform to any suspected, or
unlawful practice, etc.-. They lay the imputation of Schism on all them who
require such Conditions of Communion, and take it wholly off from those who
refuse to Conform for Conscience sake.

A Premised explication of the Equivocal word CHURCH.
THE word [ CHURCH] being Equivocal, is unfit for our disputation, till
explained: It signifies (being a Relative) several sorts of related
Assemblies: which are distinct. I. In their Matter: A Church of Jews, Turks,
Christians, of Orthodox, and of Heretics, being not one thing.

II. In the Efficient: A Church of Gods instituting, or a Church of man's.

III. In the Fnds. 1. A Christian Assembly at a Fair, or Market, or Court, or
Army, etc. is not the same with an Assembly for Religious exercises. 2. Nor an
Assembly for Legislation about Religion (in Parliament), or Consultation in
Synods, or Disputation in Schools, the same thing as an Assembly for stated
worship. etc.

IV. In the Form, or Constitutive Relation to the Correlate: And so the great
difference which now concerns us to note is, that a Church of Equals in
Office and Power is one thing, and a Political Society, related as Governors,
and governed, is another.

The first, is either an accidental Assembly, or else a designed Assemby by
consent.

This last is either an Assembly of Laymen, which may be agreed hereafter to
come under Government; and may meet to worship God without a Pastor; and this
in Politics is usually called, a mere Community. 2. Or an Assembly of Rulers
or Pastors in equality (as to Government there): And this is called, a Council,
Synod, Diet, Parliament, Convention, etc.

V. A Governed* or Political Church is of Three several Species (at least) as
there are three Species of such Government.

I. A Christian Family, consisting of the Family-Government, and Governed,
living together in holy faith, love, worship, and obedience to God; the Master
being their Teacher, Ruler, and Guide in worship.

II. A Pastoral-Church, consisting of one, or more Pastors, and Christian
people correlated as his flock, for the benefit of his Pastoral office, which
essentially contains a power to teach them, lead them in worship, and govern
them by the Keys, as a Ministerial Judge, who is fit for that Commmunion. All
together is called also, the Power of the Keys, and is subordinate to Christ's
Teaching, Priestly, and Ruling Office.

III. A Royal, or Magistratical Church, consisting of a Christian Sovereign,
and Christian Subjects, to be ruled by his sword, or forcing power under
Christ, and his Laws, for the spiritual and temporal welfare of the society,
and the glorifying, and pleasing the Lord Redeemer.

And IV. The Universal Church comprehends all these three as parts, and is
most excellently, properly, and fully called, the Church, consisting of Jesus
Christ the chief Pastor ( Teacher, Priest, and King, an eminent perfect Policy)
with all Christians, as the subject part: It is visible in that the subjects,
and their profession, and worship are visible; aod Christ was visible on earth,
is visible in the Court of Heaven, his Laws, and Providence are visible, and he
will visibly judge the world, and reign for ever: And it is no further visible.
The constitutive, essential parts, are only Christ and his subject-body: The
noblest, organical parts of that body, are Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers.

In all this, note 1. That we have no difference, that I know of, about the
Church in any of these senses before mentioned, except,

1. How far men may invent Church-forms for Gods service (without Gods
particular prescript, or institution).

2. Whether it be true, that the King is so persona mixta, as some hold, as to
be King and Priest, and to have the power of Church-Keys, and Word, and
Sacraments.

3. Whether over and above the lowest Pastoral Churches Christ has instituted
a direct, superior Pastoral sort of Churches, to rule the inferior, in Faith,
Worship, and the Keys of Discipline, over Pastors and people? And if so, what
are these superior Pastoral Churches, whither Diocesan, Provincial, National,
Patriarchal, Papal, or all? And if Christ made no such, whether men may make
them?

2. And note, that we are certainly agreed, that the Magistratical form of
forcing power, and the Pastoral form of Sacerdotal power of the Keys, are two,
though the subjects should be the same (though usually the Church is in the
Commonwealth, as part): And none of us deny a Christian Commonwealth,
Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical; and though this power be over the
Pastoral Church, it is but Accidental, and not Essential to it.

3. And note, that the chief questions which I put to the Dr. about this, were,
1. What is the Pastoral specifying form of the Church of England? And 2.
Whether it be of Divine or humane Institution: And I have brought him to
maintain, that there is no such Church of England at all. And of the Royal
Church or Kingdom we are Members as well as he.

4. And Lastly, Note, that as to a Pastoral Church, we agree, I suppose, in
distinguishing a Transient, and a fixed relation. And as he that is a Licensed
Physician, acts as such where he comes, though related fixedly to no
Hospital; so if a lawful Minister of Christ, either fixed in another Church, or
in none but the Universal, be called, pro tempore, for a day, to do his office
in another Church, he acts as Christ's Minister, and their Pastor for that
day^: And if a traveling Christian join with them, he is a Member for that
day: Yea, if the whole company intend to meet but that one day in the same
relations, to the same ends, it is a temporary, transient Pastoral Church. But
fixed Inhabitants for order and edification, ought to fix their relation and
practice.

Though most of this be said after, where he calls me to it, I thought meet
here to premise the Explication of the word [ Church] (as in diverse books
largely I have done of the word [ Separation] lest I imitate him in leaving my
explication to the hinder part, and we should dispute about a word, which the
Reader, and perhaps our selves understand not.

But we have a greater controversy than this, risen since A. Bishop Laud's,
and Grotius's Reconciling design, v z. what the Catholic visible Church is?

1. Protestants have hitherto held, as the first point of difference from the
Papists, that the Universal Church has no constitutive Head, or supreme regent
Power but Christ. He has settled no one, Vicarious, or deputed supreme,
Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical.

2. Accordingly they noted the difference of two sorts of Papists, some that
set the Pope as superior, above Councils; others (as the Councils of Constance,
and Basil, and the French, that make the General Council supreme, the Pope
being President, as the chief of the Patriarchs, and having many privileges,
as Primate to the Universal Church.

3. But that in truth, the Catholic governing power of Pope, and the other
four Patriarchs, was but a humane form of Church Policy settled in one Empire as
a National kind of Church, and the Councils were Universal as to the Empire,
but not to all the Christian world (which I have proved against W. Johnson
fully) called by the Emperor that had no power over other Nations, and
subscribed by his subjects.

4. That the grand cheat that has set up Popery, is the turning this National
Church into an Universal Government of all the Christian world; and pretending
that Christ, or his Apostles set up that power over all, which Emperors, and
Imperial Councils set up only over one Empire.

5. We are sworn against Foreign Jurisdiction by the Oath of Supremacy. For
the Roman Empire is dissolved, and if it were not, we are no subjects of it.

6. Yet we hold that all Christians should live in all possible love and
concord, counselling, and helping one another for the edification of the
Church; and that such Councils are useful thereto, as may be had without more
hurt than good. But that no Universal governing power besides Christ's (for
Legislation, Judgment, or Execution) is needful to that concord; nor is a
Government of the whole Christian world by any one Political supreme, Pope or
Council, or College of Pastors, or Cardinals, any more possible or lawful to be
sought, than that all the Kingdoms on earth have one humane civil Sovereign;
though all Kings, as well as all Bishops, are bound to serve God with the
greatest concord that they can attain.

But now he that will read many late Divines of England, will find, that they
are come to this, 1. To take the foresaid Conciliar, and French Papists to be
no Papists; and so to make it a controversy, de nomine (in which, for me, let
them have their liberty). 2 To take it for a necessary thing, to believe that
the Universal Church in the world has one supreme governing power under
Christ, and is a Society, that is, therein visibly one. And 3. That this one
ruling power is either a General Council, or the College of all Bishops on
earth. 4. And that the Imperial Church-form was, and is to be the true
Universal Church form, viz. a General Council, where the five Patriarchs are by
themselves, or by consent. 5. And that the Pope is President, and Principium
unitatis, and chief Patriarch, and so to be obeyed by us. 6. And that there is
no true way to Universal concord but by being of this one Church, so formed,
and obeying its Universal Laws, which they say, christ has given them power to
make. 7. And that they are Schismatics, and not to be tolerated that do not so
consent and obey. 8. Yea, say some to us in England, it is compelled obedience
to all the present Impositions, which only must cure our divisions, without
abatement for Union, or any Tolerations.

A great deal more of this nature is built on this principle, that the Church
in all the earth is one, as under one humane supreme Government, under Christ,
and that all are Schismatics that are not of it, and obey it not. I am not for
disgracing any by the name of Papists that refuse it; whether the French, and
the councils of Pisa, Constance and Basil shall be called Papists I contend
not: But whether those false principles be the only terms of concord, wise men
will cautelously consider.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published a Book of the same Authors, called, A Search for the
English schismatic, by the Case and Characters 1. Of the Diocesan Canoneers.
2. Of the Present Mere Nonconformists. Not as an Accusation of the former, but
a necessary Defense of the latter, so far as they are wrongfully accused and
persecuted by them. And is to be sold by Nevill Simmons, at the Sign of the
Three Golden Cocks at the West End of St. Paul's.

THE CONTENTS.
AN Historical Preface: Dr. Stillingfleet's judgment as in his Irenicon. A
Premised explication of the equivocal word Church. What the Catholic Church is
in our judgment, and what in the judgment of many of our silencers. -- Chap. 1.
Dr. Stillingfleet's large and plain Asserting of our principles in his Defense
of Archbishop Laud, and Romans Idolatry. p. 1. Chap. 2. Some Animadversions on
his Preface: Whether the Jesuits first brought in Spiritual Prayer. A full
explication of our judgment about Spiritual Prayer. His hard terms against men's
(high or low) choosing Tutors for their Children. -- p. 11. Chap. 3. Dr.
Stillingfleet his Accusations examined: His confusion; disputing a question not
stated: What he means by [ Our Church] by Communion] by [ Constant] by [
Withdrawing] by [ Separate Congregations] what Separation I am for or against.
Whether he say true, that my Tremendous aggravations of the sin of Conforming
were written without the least provocation on their part: or that as designed
to represent the Clergy as notorious Lying perjured Villains, p. 22. etc. Chap.
4. His false History of the old Nonconformists: as if Bancroft's Danger. Posit.
Heylin, and all such old accusers, utterly belyed them, and the Canons made
against them had a false supposition: his citations examined: More proof of his
falsification: The difference between the Nonconformists and the Brownists. How
we are used by them. The Reformatio Legum Eccles. how much for discipline. I
now add my request to the Reader that would know how far the first Reformers
were of the Nonconformists mind, and against our new Churchmen, that they
would but read Cranmers, and the other Drs. words cited by Dr. Stillingfleet in
the end of his Irenicon (and left out of Dr. Burnet's History) and Bucer's
Scripta Anglicana, De Regno Del, his Censura of the Liturgy, and de cura Anim.
etc. The story of Dr. Ames, Paul Bayne, Dr. Fulk, etc. Dr. Humphrey's Letter to
the Bishops, -- p. 55, 56, 57. -- Chap. 5. The false Reasonings and accusations
of his second part, p. 59. My judgment and case stated, which he falsely
reports: Others Cases considered Whether it be true, That there is no other
reason against Communion than was at the first Reformation. Difference proved,
1. From the things imposed. 2. From the design of the imposers. 3. From the
effects. 4. From the case of the Church with whom we Communicate. 5. From the
additional reasons for our Preaching, p. 64. What he would have them do that
cannot have room in their Churches, p. 70. His appeal to my case at
Kederminster, shamed, p. 71, etc. His false supposition that most of my Hearers
need not our Teaching, because they sometimes hear in the Parish-Churches, p.
73. He acquits them from Schism that separate, if the Church be Schismatical,
74. (I desire the Reader then to Read my few Sheets, called A search for the
English Schismatic.) More mistakes. p. 74, 75. Chap. 6. Whether he be no
Christian, that is not a fixed Member of a particular Church? The Doctors
Schismatical Error Confuted, p. 76. (He by this condemns Apostles, and
Evangelists that were Itinerant and unfixed, such as Bucer de Regno Dei would
have sent abroad) my exceptions about Churches and Ministers justified, and his
Calumny detected, p 80. Whether I give too much to the People, or am against
the Rights of Patrons, or Magistrates, p. 82. Many more Calumnies to p. 89. He
accuses, me, as accusing them for naming the sins that I dare not commit, p.
89. More of his vain Accusations to p. 92. Whether he be for silencing us p.
92. More of his Calumny, p. 99. Considerable Quere to him, p. 94. How he would
drive men to Separation, p. 95, 96. He is come to Self-condemning Gentleness,
in expounding his Rule and Text, Phil. 3. 16. p. 97. His sad Ennumeration of
the causes of just Separation, p. 98. Chap. 7. He begins his Third Part with
more false Accusations, p. 99. His History for Diocesan Churches against
Parochial found fallacious, p. 100, etc. His vain Plea for the English Frame,
p. 106, etc. He says, Its probable while the Apostles lived there were no
fixed Bishops, or but few, p. 108. (And Dr. Hammond says, No Subject
Presbyters) whether John Fox were the Publisher (or Prefacer) of the Reformatio
Legum, etc. p. 109. Discipline hard, but not unnecessary, p. 111. Chap. 8. What
the National Church of England is, fully discussed; and the Doctors
Self-contradictions detected: He denies any true Political Church of England:
He and we more agreed, than he and other high Churchmen, that are for a
Constitutive Political Government, p. 112, 113, etc. He makes it an
introduction of Popery, to hold that a Church must have a Constutive Regent
Church Power; and so fasteneth Popery on the Masters of his cause. Chap. 9.
That the mutual Consent of Pastors and flock is necessary to the very being of
their Relation. About Thirty Proofs from Antiquity, that the Universal Church
was for about 1000 years of that mind, and decreed it, p. 128, etc. The
necessity of consent proved from the Nature of the work; where the reasons of
it are all plainly opened p. 133. etc. The Doctors contrary surmises and false
Histories fully confuted, p. 136, etc. Chap. 10. Of the imposed Use of the
Cross in Baptism, and denying Baptism to the refusers. p. 153. His vain
excuses confuted. Whether the Cross be used as a Sacrament. His disingenuous
falsifying my words of the use of Crucifixes and other Images, p. 156, etc.
What the Papists ascribe to Sacraments: p. 168. Chap. 11. Whether the
Excommunicating Church, or the Excommunicate Nonconformists, for not
Communicating, when ipso facto Excommunicate, be guilty of Schism. p. 163.
Chap. 12. Of the English sort of Sponsors, and the Exclusion of the Parents
Duty. p. 167. (see more in the Postscript) Chap. 13. Of the three French
Letters which he subjoyneth. p. 171. Chap. 14. Epistles and Testimonies,
Compared with the Doctors. And notes on Mr. Jo. Glanviles Book, called The
Zealous Impartial Protestant: With a Letter of his to the Author; and a
Digression about Dr. Lewis du Moulin, his Published Picture and Deathbed
Repentance. A Postscript, of five notices, viz. 1. Of a new Observation of the
Trade of taking money to be Godfathers to Poor men's Children, and missing
Baptism for want of money. 2. A Letter of Mr. W. Rathbands, of his Fathers
judgment and Practice. 3. An Excellent Confutation of Dr. Stillingfleets
History, of the extent of Dioceses, and Choice of Bishops, fully proving, that
the old Bishops were Parochial or Congregational, and always chosen by the
People, or not made theirs without their free Consent. By a Learned and
faithful Minister. 4. An Excellent Vindication of the silenced Ministers, by a
Conformist, etc. 5. My Apology for the Nonformists Preaching, Written by me,
and Coming out with this.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Sect. 17. line 13. read pleaded for. l. 17. after Clergy and
People, add of ^^^^ ^i^^^s^. So Evident is the right of Synods, Clergy and
People.

AN ANSWER TO Dean STILINGFLEETS, etc.
CHAP. I. The Concord of Dr. Stillengfleet and the Nonconformists, especially
with the Principles of my Book of Church Concord, about the true Nature of
Schism, and who is the Schismatic: written by him at age in his most owned
books, and not in youth in his Irenicon: I stand to all my words against Schism
which he has cited, and so I doubt not but he stands to these following of his.
DIscourse of Idolatry of Rome, p. 7. [Though we know not what allowances God
will make for invincible ignorance, we are sure that willful Ignorance or
CHOOSING A WORSE CHURCH BEFORE A BETTER IS A DAMNABLE SIN and unrepented of
destroys Salvation.

The Papists consent, p. 43. [I agree so far with him, that every Christian is
bound to choose the Communion of the purest Church: but which that Church is,
must be seen by the grounds it brings to prove the Doctrines it teaches to have
been delivered by Christ and his Apostles. That Church is to be judged purest
that has the best ground^, and consequently it is of necessity to Salvation to
embrace the Communion of it.

Page 194. 195. [1. The Churches power is only to Edification and not to
destruction: For this was as much as the Apostles challenged to themselves; and
I hope none dare challenge more: But this is a principle of Natural reason,
that no power in a society ought to be extended (...) the (...) of it, or to
contradict the end and design of it. 2. The Apostles were the most competent
Judges of what made for the Edification of the Church.]

Page 216. 217. [1. It is agreed on both sides that the Scriptures do cont^ine
in them the unquestionable will of that God whom we are bound to serve, and it
being the end of devotion (as it ought to be of our lives) to serve him, what
is there, the mind of any one who sincerely desires to do it, can be more
inquisitive after or satisfied in, than the rules God himself has given for
his own service. Because it is so easly a matter for men to mistake in the
ways they choose to serve him in: I see the world divided more scarce about
any thing than this: Page 218. Can any man imagine a better way, if it could be
hoped for, than that God himself should enterpose, and declare his own mind,
according to what way they ought to serve him! And this is acknowledged to be
done already by all Christians in the Scriptures, and after all this must not
all persons concerned be allowed to enquire into that which is owned to be the
will of God, or do they think that ordinary people that understand not Latin
and Greek ought not to be concerned what becomes of their Souls? If they be and
do in good earnest desire to know how to please God and serve him, what
directions will they give him? They must do as they are bidden] true, say they,
if we were to worship you for Gods, we would do as you bid us: for we think it
fitting to serve God in his own way: But we would know whether that God whom we
serve, has given us any Rules for his worship or no. How shall we know whether
we keep them or not, or will you take upon you the guilt of our sins in
disobeying his will? This seems to be a very just and reasonable request, and I
fear it will one day fall heavy on those who conceal that which they confess
to be the will of God, from the knowledge of the people.

Page 548. [I agree with him in the way of proof of a Churches purity, viz. by
agreement with the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and that the Church is
to be judged purest, which shows the greatest Evidence of that consent, and
that every one is bound to enquire which Church has the strongest motives for
it, and to embrace the Communion of it.

Page 565. [14. To suppose the books so written to be imperfect, i. e. that any
thing necessary to be believed or PRACTICED are not contained in them, is
either to charge the first Author of them with fraud, and not delivering his
whole mind, or the writers with insincerity in not setting it down, and the
whole Christian Church of the first ages with folly, in believing the fullness
and perfection of the Scriptures in order to Salvation.

Read the rest of those excellent Rules to the end.

In his excellent, Vindication of Arch Bishop La^d, called A Rational account
of the Protestants Religion, he has the same terms of Communion and the same
description of Schism with mine, and I know not how better to express my
thoughts, nor plead my Vindication, viz.

Page 289. [In his defense of Arch Bishop Land (not yet disowned) since so
great, and considerable parts of the Christian Churches have in these last ages
been divided in Communion from each other, the great contest and enquiry has
been which party stands guilty of the cause of the present distance and
separation. For both sides retain still so much of their common Christianity as
to acknowledge that no Religion does so strictly oblige the owners of it to
peace and unity as the Christian Religion does, and yet notwithstanding this,
we find these breaches so far from closing, that, supposing the same grounds to
continue, a reconciliation seems to humane reason impossible, an Evidence of
which is, that those persons who either out of a generous desire of seeing the
wounds of the Christian world healed, or out of some private interest or
design, have made it their business to propound terms of reconciliation
between the divided parties; have been equally rejected by those parties they
have professed themselves the members of.

Page. 290. [The distance then being so great as it is, it is a very necessary
enquiry what the Cause of it is, and where the main fault lies: and it being
acknowledged that there is a possibility that corruptions may get into a
Christian Church, and it being impossible to prove that Christianity obliges
men to Communicate with a Church in all those corruptions its communion may be
tainted with, it seems evident to reason that the cause of the breach must lie
there, where the corruptions are owned, and imposed as conditions of communion.
For can any one imagine it should be a fault in any to keep off from communion,
where they are so far from being obliged to it, that they have an obligation to
the contrary from the principles of their common Christianity? And where men
are bound not to communicate, it is impossible to prove their not communicating
to be Schism. For there can be no Schism; but where there is an obligation to
communion; Schism being nothing else but a willful violation of the bonds
Christian communion. And therefore whenever you would prove the Protestants
guilty of Schism, you must do it by proving they were bound to communicate with
your Church in those things which they are Protestants for disowning of, or
that there is so absolute and unlimited an obligation to continue in the
society of your Church, that no conditions can be so hard, but we are bound
rather to submit to them, then not join in Communion with you.

This being a matter of so vast consequence in order to the settling men's minds
in the present disputes of the Christian world, before I come to particulars, I
shall lay down those general principles which may manifest how free Protestants
are from all imputation of Schism. Schism then importing a violation of that
communion which we are obliged to the most natural way for understanding what
Schism is, is to enquire what the foundations are of Christian communion, and
how far the bounds of it do extend. Now the Foundations of Christian communion
in general depend upon the acknowledgment of the truth of Christian Religion.
For that Religion which Christ came to deliver to the world being supposed
true, is the reason why any look on themselves as obliged to profess it; which
obligation extending to all persons who have the same grounds to believe the
truth of it, thence arises the ground of society in this profession, which is
a common obligation on several persons joining together in some acts of common
concernment to them. The truth then of Christian Religion being acknowledged by
several persons, they find in this Religion some actions which are to be
performed by several persons in society with each other. From whence arises
that more immediate obligation to Christian society in all those who profess
themselves Christians; and the whole number of these who own that truth of
Christian Religion, and are thereby obliged to join in society with each other,
is that which we call the Catholic Church. But although there be such a
relation to each other in all Christians as to make them one common society,
yet for the performance of particular acts of communion, there must be lesser
societies wherein persons may join together in the actions belonging to them.
But still the obligation to communion in these lesser is the same with that
which constitutes the great body of Christians, which is the owning
Christianity as the only true Religion and way to eternal happiness. And
therefore those lesser societies cannot in Justice make the necessary
conditions of Communion narrower than those which belong to the Catholic
Curch, i. e. those things which declare men Christians ought to capacitate them
for communion with Christians. But here we are to consider that as to be a
Christian supposes men's owning the Christian Religion to be true, so the
conveyance of that Religion being now to us in those books we call the
Scriptures, there must be an acknowledgment of them as the indispensable rule
of faith and manners, which is, that these books are the great Charter of the
Christian society according to which it must be governed.

These things being premised as the foundation in general of Christian society,
we shall the better understand how far the obligation to communion in it does
extend. For which it must be considered that the grounds of continuance in
communion must be suitable and proportionable to the first reason of entering
into it. No man being obliged by virtue of his being in a society, to agree in
any thing that tends to the apparent ruin of that society: But he is obliged to
the contrary, from the general grounds of his first admission into it. His
primary obligation being to preserve the honor and interest of it, and to join
in acts of it so far as they tend to it. Now the main end of the Christian
society, being the promotion of Gods honor, and Salvation of men's Souls, the
primary obligation of men entering into it, is the advancement of these ends to
join in all acts of it so far as they tend to these ends; but if any thing come
to be required directly repugnant to these ends, those men of whom such things
are required, are bound not to communicate in those lesser societies where such
things are imposed, but to preserve their communion with the Catholic society
of Christians.

Page 291. Setting then aside the Catholic society of Christians, we come to
enquire how far men are bound to communicate with any less, society how
extensive soever it may pretend it is communion to be. 1. There is no society of
Christians of any one communion, but may impose some things to be believed or
practiced which may be repugnant to the general Foundation of Christian society.

Page 292. 2. There being a possibility acknowledged that particular Churches
may require unreasonable conditions of communion, the obligation to communion
cannot be absolute and indispensable; but only so far as nothing is required
destructive to the ends of Christian Society: Otherwise men would be bound to
destroy that which they believe, and to do the most unjust and unreasonable
things. But the greater difficulty lies in knowing when such things are
required, and who must be the Judge in that case, to which I answer.

3. Nothing can be more unreasonable than that the society imposing such
conditions of communion should be judge, whether those conditions be just and
equitable or no. If the question were only in matters of peace, convenience,
and order, the judgment of the society ought to overruled the judgments of
particular persons; but in such cases where great bodies of Christians judge
such things required to be unlawful conditions of communion, what Justice or
reason is there that the party accused should fit Judge in her own cause?

4. Where there is sufficient evidence from Scripture, reason and tradition
that such things, which are imposed, are unreasonable conditions of Christian
Communion, the not communicating with that Society, which requires these things
cannot incur the guilt of Schism, which necessarily follows from the precedent
grounds, because none can be obliged to Communion in such cases, and therefore
the not communicating is no culpable separation.

Page 324. His Lordship delivers his sense clearly and fully in these Words;
It Is too true indeed, that there is a miserable rent in the Church, and I make
no question but the best men do most bemoan it; nor is he a Christian, that
would not have Unity, might he have it with Truth. But, I never said or
thought, that the Protestants made this rent. The Cause of the Schism is yours;
for you thrust us from you, because we called for truth, and redress of abuses.
For a Schism must needs be theirs, whose the cause of it is. The Woe runs full
out of the mouth of Christ ever against him that gives the offense, not against
him that takes it ever.

Page 325. I do say it now; and most true it is, That it was ill done of those,
who e're they were, who first made the Separation. But then A. C. must not
understand me of actual only, but of causal Separation. For (as I said before)
the Schism is theirs, whose the cause of it is: and he makes the Separation,
that gives the first just cause of it; not he that makes an actual Separation
upon a just Cause preceding. And this is so evident a Truth, that A. C. cannot
deny it, for he says it is most true.

That the Reader may clearly understand the full State of this Controversy
concerning Schism; the upshot of which, is, that it is agreed between both
parties, that all Separation from Communion with a Church does not involve in
it the guilt of Schism, but only such a Separation as has no sufficient cause
or ground for it.

Page 131. There can be no Separation from the whole Church, but in such things
wherein the unity of the whole Church lies; for Separation is a violation of
some Union: Now when men separate from the errors of all particular Churches,
they do not separate from the whose, because those things, which one separates
from those particular Churches for, are not such, as make all them put together
to be the whole or Catholic Church. This must be somewhat further explained.
There are two things considerable in all particular Churches; those things
which belong to it as a Church, and those things which belong to it as a
particular Church. Those things which belong to it as a Church, are the common
ligaments or grounds of Union between all particular Churches, which taken
together make up the Catholic Church: Those things which belong to it as a
particular Church, are such as it may retain the essence of a Church without.
Now, I say, whosoever separates from any particular Church (much more from all)
for such things without which that can be no Church, separates from the
Communion of the Catholic Church: but he that separates only from particular
Churches, as to such things which concern not their being, is only separated
from the Communion of those Churches, and not the Catholic. And therefore
supposing that all particular Churches have some errors and corruptions in
them, though I should separate from them all, I do not separate from the
Communion of the whole Church, unless it be for something, without which those
could be no Churches. An evidence of which, is, that by my declaring the
grounds of my separation to be such Errors and corruptions, which are crept
into the Communion of such Churches, and imposed on me in order to it, I withal
declare my readiness to join with them again, if those errors and corruptions
be left out. And where there is this readiness of Communion, there is no
absolute separation from the Church as such, but only suspending Communion till
such abuses be reformed: which is therefore more properly a separation from the
errors, than the Communion of such a Church, wherefore if we suppose, that
there is no one visible Church, whose Communion is not tainted with some
corruptions, though if these corruptions be enjoined as conditions of
communion, I cannot communicate with any of those Churches, yet it follows not
that I am separated from the external Communion of the Catholic Church, but
that I only suspend Communion with those particular Churches, 'till I may
safely join with them. As, suppose all the particular men I can converse with,
were infected with Leprosy, my not associating with them, does not imply that
I am separated from the Communion of all Mankind, but that I am loath to be
infected as they are, and therefore withdraw my self, till I can meet with such
healthful persons with whom I may safely associate again. And if several other
persons be of the same mind with me, and we therefore join together, do we
therefore divide our selves from the whole World by only taking care of our own
safety? And especially if any company of such leprous persons should resolve
that none should live among them, but such as would eat of those meats which
brought that distemper upon them, our withdrawing our selves and associating
without them will still appear more reasonable and commendable. Therefore we
say, we do not necessarily separate from all Churches that have errors or
corruptions in them, supposing those errors and corruptions be not imposed on
us, as conditions of communion; and thence though we should grant, no one
visible Church free from taint or corruption, yet it is not necessary we should
separate from them all: for we may lawfully join in communion with Churches
having error and corruptions, if our joining be not an approbation of them.
Thus though the Greeks, Armenians, Albigenses, Abyssins may have some errors,
or corruptions, yet if they be not fundamental, and be not joined as necessary
to be approved in order to their communion, notwithstanding them, we may
lawfully communicate with them, it does not then at all follow, that if there
may be no one visible Church free from error and corruption, it would be
necessary to separate from the communion of the Catholic Church: Because, 1.
All those particular Churches may not make those errors conditions of
communion. 2. Though they did, we separate not from them as Catholic, but as
corrupt and erroneous particular Churches.

Page 336. To rectify such gross mistakes as these are for the future, you
would do well to understand that Schism formally taken always imports
something criminal in it, and there can be no just cause for a sin; But besides
that there is that (which if you understand it) you would call the materiality
of it, which is the separation of one part of the Church from another. Now this
according to the different grounds and reasons of it, becomes lawful or
unlawful, that is, as the reasons do make it necessary or unnecessary, for
separation is not lawful but when it is necessary; Now this being capable of
such a different nature that it may be good or evil according to its
circumstances, there can be no absolute judgment passed upon it, till all those
reasons and circumstances be duly examined, and if there be no sufficient
grounds, for it then it is formally Schism i. e. a culpable separation; If
there be sufficient cause then there may be a separation, but it can be no
Schism. And because the union of the Catholic Church lies in fundamental and
necessary truths, therefore there can be no separation absolutely from the
Catholic Church, but what involves in it the formal guilt of Schism; it being
impossible any person should have just cause to disown the Churches communion
for any thing whose belief is necessary to Salvation. And whosoever does so,
thereby makes himself no member of the Church, because the Church subsists on
the belief of fundamental truths. But in all such cases wherein a division may
be made, and yet the several persons divided retain the essentials of a
Christian Church, the separation which may be among any such must be determined
according to the causes of it. For it being possible of one side that men out
of capricious humors and fancies renounce the communion of a Church which
requires nothing But what is just and reasonable: And it being possible on the
other side, that, a Church, calling her self Catholic, may so far degenerate
in Faith and Practice, as not only to be guilty of great Errors and
corruptions, but to impose them as conditions of Communion with her, it is
necessary, where there is a manifest separation, to inquire into the reasons
and grounds of it; and to determine the nature of it according to the Justice
of the cause, which is pleaded for it.

Page 357. The Catholic Church therefore lies open and free, like a Common
field to all inhabitants. Now if any particular number of these Inhabitants
should agree together to enclose part of it without consent of the rest, and
not to admit any others to that right of Common, without consenting to it,
which of these two parties, those who deny to yield their consent; or such, who
deny their rights, if they will not, are guilty of the violation of the public
and common rights of the place?

Page 358. Although nothing separates a Church properly from the Catholic, but
what is contrary to the being of it; yet a Church may separate her self from
the Communion of the Catholic by taking upon her to make such things the
necessary conditions of her Communion, which never were the conditions of
Communion with the Catholic Church.

Page 359. Since it appears that the Communion of the Catholic Church was free
for many hundred years without approving or using these things; that Church,
which shall not only publicly use, but enjoin such things upon pain of
Excommunication from the Church, does as much as in her lies draw the bounds of
Catholic Communion within herself, and so divides her self from the true
Catholic Church. For whatever confines must likewise divide the Church, for by
that confinement a separation is made between the part confined and the other,
which separation must be made by the Party so limiting Communion. As it was in
the Case of the Donatists, who were therefore charged with Schism, because
they confined the Catholic Church, within their own bounds: And if any other
Church does the same which they did, it must be liable to the same charge that
they were. The sum of this discourse is, that the being of the Catholic Church
lies in Essentials, that for a particular Church to disagree from all other
particular Churches in some extrinsical and accidental things is not to
separate from the Catholic Church, so as to cease to be a Church: But still
what ever Church makes such extrinsical things the necessary conditions of
Communion, so as to cast men out of the Church, who yield not to them, is
Schismatical in so doing; For it thereby divides it self from the Catholic
Church: And the saparation from it is so far from being Schism, that being cast
our (...) that Church on those terms only, returns them to the Communion of the
Catholic Church. On which grounds it will appear that yours (...) the
Schismatical Church and not ours: For although before this imposing humor came
into particular Churches, Schism was defined by the Fathers and others to be a
voluntary departure out of the Church, yet that cannot in reason be understood
of any particular, but the true Catholic Church. For not only persons but
Churches may depart from the Catholic Church: And in such Cases not those, who
depart from the Communion of such Churches, but those Churches, which departed
from the Catholic are guilty of Schism. These things I thought necessary to be
further explained, not only to show how false that imputation is, of our
Churches departing from the true Catholic Church; but with what great reason
we charge your Church with departing from the communion of it; and therefore
not those whom you thrust out of Communion, but your Church so thrusting them
out, is apparently guilty of the present Schism.

Page 366. The truth is such pretenses as these are, are fit only for a Church
that hates to be reformed; for if something not good in it self should happen
in any one Age to overspread the visible Communion of all particular Churches,
this only makes a Reformation more necessary, so far is it from making it more
disputable. For thereby those corruptions grow more dangerous, and every
particular Church is bound the more to regard its own security in a time of
general infection. And if any other Churches neglect themselves, what reason is
it that the rest should? For any or all other particular Churches neglecting
their duty, is no more an Argument, that no particular Church should reform it
self, than that if all other men in a Town neglect preserving themselves from
the Plague, then I am bound to neglect it too.

Page 540. Every Church is bound to regard her own purity and peace, and in
case of Corruptions to proceed to a Reformation of them.

Page 541. Saint Augustine says not only in that place, but in very many
others, that Saint Peter did sustain the Person of the Church, when Christ said
to him, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

That he did universam significare Ecclesiam, signify the whole Church; and
that those things which are spoken of Peter, non habent illustrem intellectum
nisi eum referuntur ad Ecclesiam, cujus ille agnoscitur in figura gestasse
personam, have no clear sense, but ^hen they are referred to the Church, whose
person he did (...).

Page 542 He means the formal right of them was conveyed to the Church, and
that Saint Peter was only a public person to receive them in the name of the
Church.

It primarily and formally resides in the whole body of the Church.

Page 544. His Lordship says your opinion is yet more unreasonable; because no
body collective, whenever it assembled it self, did ever give more powerto
the representing body of it, than a binding power upon it self and all
particulars; nor ever did it give this power otherwise than with this
reservation in nature, that it would call again and reform, and if need were,
abrogate any law, or ordinance upon just cause made evident, that the
representing body had failed in trust or truth. And this power no body
collective, Ecclesiastical or Civil can put out of it self, or give away to a
Parliament or Council, or call it what you will, that represents it.

His Lordship says that the power which a Council has to order settle and
define differences arising concerning faith, it has not by an immediate
institution from Christ, but it was prudently taken up by the Church from the
Apostles example.

CHAP. II. Some Animadversions on his Preface.
1. THE impartial searchers after truth, have hitherto thought that a strict
method (at least agreeable to natural Logic) is more effectual than confusion
or wordy popular haranges: And that the controversy should be very clearly
stated before it can be profitably argued: And therefore that first all
ambiguity of terms be by due explication removed, that men may not mean several
things and not understand each other; and to Define and distinguish where it is
needful, and then Affirm or deny, and then effectualy prove. But why this
worthy person does far otherwise with us, both before and now, it is more his
part than mine to give the reason: I dare not say he cannot; Nor I dare not
say, he can, but will not, but all that I can say is that he does not, and I
know not why.

2. The Preface of his Book called Unreasonableness, etc. Is so much answered
already by Mr. Lob, that I will not lose time by doing much to the same again:
And there is a posthumous book of Dr. Worsleys called, The third part of naked
Truth, which has strenuously handled the same chief matter for Scripture
Sufficiency against unnecessary Impositions. It being supposed, though not
there expressed. 1. That he speaks not against the guiding determination of
undetermined accidents which must be determined one way or other: As Time,
Place, Utensils, Translationwords, Metres tunes, etc. 2. And that a man that
intollerably breaks Gods Laws (by Blasphemy, Treason, Murder, Fornication,
etc.) is not to be tolerated because he erroniously thinks he keeps them.

3. His sad saying [ that there is no improbability that the Jesuits should be
the first setters up of the way in England which he calls the Doctrine [ of
Spiritual Prayer] Mr. Lob has opened, as it deserves, in part; but to say all
that it deserves would seem so harsh, that I have reason to think that it
would but more offend than profit him.

4. For I find that he is grown too impatient with our Nameing what he
patiently and confidently does: The cause of his impatience I leave to himself.
But that it is much within him I must conjecture, when in his defense of Bishop
Laud I read him saying to the Papists [ To speak mildly, it is a gross
untruth.] And yet wen I speak not so plainly to him (and I think never more
sharply) he accounts it a continued Passion, Rage, Railing, Intolerable
indiscretion, etc. Do I give him harder words than these? Yet I profess I smart
not by them: I take them for very tolerable words, in comparison of his
miscarriges in the cause in hand.

Several sorts of men I have found think other men speak in passion: 1. Those
that hear and read with passion: They think that which angers them came from
anger. 2. Those that are too high to be dealt with on even terms, and think the
plain speech which agrees to others is a contempt of such as them. 3. Those
that commit miscarriages so gross and defend causes so bad, as have no names
but what are disgraceful, and then take all that is said to anatomatize their
cause and errors, to be said against themselves. With these and such others,
Truth, is not tolerable he raileth that confuteth them, and does Auriculas
molles mordaci radere vero. I profess I felt so little passion in writing that
book which he says was written in one continued Passion, that I think verily,
I sinned all the while, for want of a livelier sense of the sin and hurt which
I was detecting by my confutation. But I confess it is my opinion that Falsehood
of Speech may lie in describing a thing short of Truth, as well as in going
beyond it: And that the Truth of words is their Agreeableness to the matter
(and mind): And that verba rebus aptanda sunt: And that he that writes against
sin must call it sin, and open the evil of it.

5. His Preface gives us hopes that we are so far agreed in our ends, as to
be both for God, for truth, for unity and peace and Love, and against Popery,
and one would think this much should go far toward our Concord. But, alas, all
agree not what Piety is, or what Popery is, nor of the way to our ends.

If he think that to be against Spiritual Prayer would help us against Popery,
1. I would he would tell us, which way. If by reducing the Nonconformists to
think Forms lawful; so do the Jesuits: And he told us that they at Franckford
took a Form from Geneva as useful: And the present Nonconformists put their
judgment out of question an. 1660, and 1661. In their witings, offers and
Forms Printed. But all that are for Forms are not for all things in your
Forms.

2. And I would he would have better told us what the Spiritual Prayer is,
which the Jesuits first brought in and helps in Popery. For hitherto it is the
Dead Ceremonious formality and Imagery of Popery, destroying Spirituality, (by
words not understood, Mummeries, Beads, Canting Stage works) which has
alienated most Religious Protestants from them. I will. 1. Tell you what I take
Spiritual Prayer to be; and then. 2. Desire his judgment of it.

1. It is my judgment (if he know it to be erroneous, I crave his reasons) 1.
That Man's Soul is by sin so depraved that it is morally unable without Gods
Spirit, effectually to know, feel and desire deliverance from his own sin and
misery, and to desire Gods Grace and Glory, above all worldly sinful pleasures.

2. That therefore such desires in act and habit must be wrought in us by the
Spirit of God. And the whole work of Regeneration and Sanctification is a
giving to the Soul that new Divine nature, Love and delight, which works by
such holy desires. And that as the carnal mind is enmity to God, and cannot be
subject to his Law, and if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
none of his; so to be Spiritually minded is life and peace, and God who is a
Spirit will be worshipped in Spirit and truth, and by this we know that we are
the Children of God by the Spirit which he has given us; For he promised to
pour out the Spirit of Grace and supplication: And because we are sons, he has
given us the Spirit of his Son, by which we cry Abba Father: And this Spirit
helps our Infirmities in Prayer: If these things be in the Papists Bible, I
hope they are not therefore Popery. I suppose the Papists also own our God, our
Savior and our Creed.

3. The help in Prayer which we expect from the Spirit, is. 1. To illuminate us
to know what we need and should desire and ask. 2. To kindle in us holy desires
sincere and servent, of what we should ask. 3. To give us a true belief of and
trust in the Love of God, the entercession of Christ and the promises of the
Gospel, that we may pray in hope. 4. To give us thankful hearts for what we do
receive, and fit with joy to praise the giver. 5. To stir up all these
dispositions to particular acts in the due season: And to save us from the
contrary. 6. And we believe that a mind so illuminated, and affections so
sanctified and kindled, have a great advantage above others coeteris paribus to
express themselves in words: For. 1. A man that knows what to say can speak
it when the ignorant cannot? Does not a stock of knowledge enable you to Preach
without book? 2. Such a Soul will set it self diligently to think what and how
to speak in so great a business, when the careless mind it not. 3. Love and
delight are very speedy Learners. 4. Fervent desire sets all the powers of the
Soul awork, and is full and forward to express it self. Hunger can teach men
easily to beg: Poor men speak entreaties; Anger, Joy, every passion makes and
powers out words, where there is prerequisite ability.

4. We believe that he who by natural defectiveness or difuse cannot find words
fitly to utter his own mind, may have the help of Gods Spirit in uttering such
words as he reads or learneth of others; and (especially in the case of
Psalms which are not of sudden invention) if for Concord the Churches agree to
use the same meet words, Gods Spirit may actuate their desires therein.

5. We hold that this Holy Spirit, is as Tertullian speaks, Christ's Vicar,
Agent or Advocate, by preventing, operateing, Cooperating grace, thus to
illuminate, Sanctify and actuate believers, in all holy works, and especially
in prayer. And I could heartily wish that you would not be against so much, as
Spiritual Preaching, Spiritual Writing and disputing, and living, and not say
that the Jesuits brought them in.

6. I believe that we are Baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost as well as
of the Father and the Son, believing that he is thus Christ's Agent for all this
work upon our Souls, and covenanting to obey him.

7. I believe that sins against the Holy Ghost, especially deriding or
reproaching his great works, miraculous or Sanctifing, have a dangerous
malignity.

8. I suppose that in all this, the faculties of man's own Soul are the natural
recipients of the Spirits influx, and agent of the act which both causes
effect: And that its as vain a question, whether it be by the Spirit or by
natural faculties that we pray aright, as whether it be God as fons naturae, or
man's natural powers which cause our natural acts? Or whether the Act of seeing
be from the sun or the eye? As if the same effect might not, yea must not have
a Suprior and Inferior Cause?

9. Therefore as Gods. Spirit witnessing with ours that we are his Children, so
Gods Spirit helping our infirmities in Prayer, suspendeth not the exercise of
our Spirits, or makes our reason and consideration needless, but actuateth
them in their duty. Learning and studying how to pray, is consistent with the
Spirits help in Prayer.

10 I never talked of it with any Nonconformists who denied that an hypocrite
may without any special help of the Spirit, speak all the same words in prayer
without either book or form, which another may speak: The help of knowledge,
hearing, use and passion may help him to words: Therefore they never take a man
to be proved godly or sinceer, by his bare words: but by the grace of Prayer,
which is holy desire etc. and not by the speaking, gift, or habit.

11. But we think that it was not the Jesuits that first said, out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; and though the tongue may lie, it
is made to express the mind, and we must judge of other men's minds by their
words, till somewhat else disprove them. And its natural for the Heart to lead
the Tongue. And men are more affected by words which come from affection than
by those that do not: and Reading words written by another when we speak to
God, is not so natural a signification of desire or other affection, as
speaking them from the present dictate of the heart; For any Child that can
read may do the one, and it is not the usual signification of seriousness in
other actions. A beggar that should only read his begging lesson, or a Child or
Servant that should only read some words to his Father or Master, would be
thought less sensible of his wants.

12. Ministers should be men better aquainted than the people, how to speak to
God and man: It is their office; and therefore it belongs to them to choose
the words which are fittest: and to set up a Ministry that can do neither, is
to befriend the Prince of darkness against the Kingdom of Light, and to be a
deadly enemy to the Church and Souls. And to set up a ministry that need not do
it, but may choose, or is not obliged to it, is the way to set up a ministry
that cannot do it. Let the Ministers be bound to no more than to Read, and a
few years will transform them to such as can do no more than read. Moscovy
proves that, and too many other Countries.

13. If it be praying freely from present knowledge and desire, without a book
or set form which you call Spiritual prayer, either you are for the use of it
in the Pulpit or not. If you are, did the Jesuits teach it you? or will you go
on to follow them? If not, what a divided party are the Conformists, while so
many use it and pray spiritually? And what a Case is the Church of England in,
that has still so many Ministers that pray as the Jesuits Disciples? Or why do
you so reproach your Church and Ministry?

14. Do you think that there is more force in the name of a Jesuit to disgrace
Spiritual prayer, or in the name of Spiritual prayer to honor the Jesuits? And
do you not seem to prevaricate and highly honor the Jesuits, on pretense of
dishonoring Spiritual prayer? If you had said that the Jesuits first brought in
Spiritual preaching, and discourse and Spiritual living, would it not have more
honored them, than dishonored Spirituality? Will freedom from
Spiritual*prayer honor your Church? as Seneca thought Cato's name would do
more to honor Drunkenness, than Drunkenness could do to dishonor Cato?

I am not such an Antipapist, as to fall out with Father Son or Holy Ghost,
because the Jesuits own them. You do but help to confirm my charity, who have
long thought that among the Papists, there are many persons truly godly, though
their education, converse, and proud, tyrannical wordly Clergy, have sadly
vitiated them.

15. All prayers written or unwritten are made by some body. Those that the
Bishops write down for us in the Liturgy, and for our Fasts, were made by their
invention: Either they had the help of the Spirit in making them or not: If
yea, then why is it not as Jesuitical to write a Spiritual prayer, as to speak
one? If not, excuse them that say Gods Spirit made not your Liturgy, nor are
they Spiritual prayers.

16. And were it not too like high and dangerous Pride, if such a one as Bishop
Bancroft, Bishop Laud, Bishop Morley, Bishop Gunning, in a Convocation, or
before every public Fast, should be appointed to write the words of Prayer,
and should in effect say to all the most Learned Divines in England [ The
Spirit caused us to write these prayers, and our measure is so sure and great,
that none of you may presume to question it, nor to think that you can pray
Spiritually in any words of your own, but only in ours, at least in the
Assemby. The Spirit will help you if you say our words, but not your own. It
now comes into my mind what may be some of the meaning of Bishop Gunning's
Chaplain, Doctor Saywell, in his last Book, that none has power to ordain
Bishops, but they that have power to give the Holy Ghost for the work of their
Office. It may be it is, The Holy Ghost to write Doctrine Sermons and Prayers
for all their Clergy to use. But do you not say also to the Presbyters Receive
the Holy Ghost? If they have him, why cannot they speak their own hearts in
other words than yours? Is Spiritual prayer appropriated to your Liturgy, words
or forms, any more than at the Council at Trent he was to the Popes
instructions.

17. We all confess, that as all the actions of imperfect men, have their
imperfections, so have all our prayers, and these are easily aggravated: Sudden
free prayer, and book prayer, have both their conveniences and
inconveniences: The question is which hic and nunc has the greatest, and
whether forbidding either be not worst of all: I have named the conveniences
and inconveniences of each in my Christian Directory.

18. Experience tells the world, that the daily saying over only the same
words, and that read out of a paper imposed by others, by one that no further
shows any sense of what he does, is not so apt as more free and well varied
words in season, to keep people from sleepy senseless profanation, and praying
as the Papists do with their Masses, Rosaries, and Beads: And the variety of
Subjects preached on, and variety of occasions, and all accidents require some
diversification of words and methods.

19. It is a work of reverence to speak to the King; yet as it is lawful to
write a Petition to him, so to speak to him without Book. Judges have serious
work to do, for estate and life, and yet they are trusted to speak without
prescribed words; and so are Advocates, Lawyers, Ambassadors, Physicians,
Philosophers, and all men in their Professions, except Ministers and
Christians, as such.

20. We know not why men may not be entrusted to speak to God in the name of
imperfect man without imposed books and words, as well as to speak to man from
the most perfect God and in his name; in preaching. Man's actions will be like
man. Nothing that is not divine and spiritual should be spoken as from God and
in his name. And as after our frustrated Treaty for Concord 1661. one of them
(nameless) wrote a Book against free praying without an imposed form in the
Pulpit, and yet they never durst forbid it to this day; so I know who showed
his desire of a new Book of Homilies (of his own making its like) to have been
imposed instead of preaching, and of the old ones, on those that had not
special license to preach. But interest rules the world: They durst not so far
disgrace their Clergy, as to make them mere Readers, nor lose the advantage of
talking out of the Pulpit for their Cause, where none must contradict them.

Mr. Lob has asked you already; whether our Spiritual Prayer, as you call it,
or your Liturgy (and Bishop Cousins, and Dr Tailors Prayer-books, etc.) be
liker to the Popish Mass book, and many other Offices and Devotions? Indeed Mr.
Austins has so much gravity, as excepting his excursions to Saints, etc. it
may compare with many of yours.

And for that sort of spiritual Devotion, in which they fly too high, I have
found more of it in the Friars, Franciscans, Benedictines, etc. such as
Barbanson, Benedictus de Benedictis, etc. than in the Jesuits: And the
Oratoriana, Phil. Nerius Baronius, and the rest; and of their sober or
Religious men, as Sales, Mr. Ro^ti, etc. and of old. John Gerson, Kempis, etc.
have more of spirituality than the Jesuits. But enough of this.

6. As to the rest of his Prefatory discourse of the Advantages of Popery. 1.
We doubt not but the Papists play their game among all Parties, as far as they
are able, and put on diverse sorts of Vizors. But does he (that is a Historian)
not know, that all over the world their chief design is upon the Rulers and
Leaders, and they Cry, Fight neither against great or small, but to win one
Court Card signifies more than many others?

2. Does he think the Papists take the Conformists or the Nonconformists to be
nearer to them and less against them?

3. Did the Papists think Bishop Lauds reconciling design described by Doctor
Heylin, (entertained by Sancta Clara, Leander, etc.) or the Parliaments fears
of his introducing Popery in those times, to be more against them?

4. Are they liker to help in Popery, that are so apt to be over-averse to any
thing that favors of it, in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, and account the
Pope Antichrist? Or they that hold as follows. 1. (As Grotius) That a Papist
is but one that flatters the Popes, as if all were just that they say and do
(and so there are few Papists I hope in the World.) 2. That the Church of Rome
is sound in Faith. 3. And so are all the General Councils, even Trent. 4. That
Rome is the Mistress of all Churches; or as Bishop Bromhal, that for Concord we
must all obey the Pope, as Patriarch of the West, and Principium Unitatis
Catholicae, ruling according to the old Canons, (a Foreign Jurisdiction) and
all those pass for Schismatics, that refuse it (of which more after.) 5. That
the validity of our Ministry must be proved by the derivation of it from the
uninterrupted succession of the Roman Ordainers and Church. 6. That the Church
of Rome by that succession is a true, though faulty Church of Christ, but so
are none of the Reformed Churches which have not Bishops, or have them not by
such uninterrupted succession. 7. That the only way of the Concord of Churches
and all Christians is (says Bishop Gunning) to obey the governing part of the
Church Universal, which (...) Collegium Pastorum, all the Bishops of the
universal Church, in one Regent College, governing all the Christian World per
literas formatas. 8. That its safer and better for the Protestants in France to
be of the French Church of Papists than to continue without Bishops as they
are. 9. That we should come as near the Papists as the Greek Church does, or as
both Greek and Latin did at the rupture of the two Churches, or as in Greg.
1st. days say others, or as in Char. Mag. days, say others; receiving say
some the first six General Councils, say others the first 8. 10. That we must
amend the Oath of Supremacy for the Papists, as Thorndick says, and so many
Doctrines as he intimates. 11. That its desirable that the Papists had
continued in our Churches as in the beginning of Queen Eliz. And if they come
(as Church Papists do) should be received in our Communion. 12. That if the
Pope have not (as some hold) a right of such Primacy as belongs to Saint Peter's
successor, at least, His Primacy is a very prudent humane constitution. 1.
That there may be a Common Father to care for all the Church. 2. And one to be
a Head of Unity and order. 3. And one to call General Councils. 4. And one to
rule between when there are no such Councils (which are rare). 5. And one to
give power to Patriarcks and Archbishops who else will have none over them to
authorize, or Govern them. 6. And one to decide controversies, when Countries,
Churches and Archbishops disagree. 7. And one to send out Preachers among
Heathens, Infidels and Heretics, all over the world. 8. And one boldly to
reprove, admonish and, if need be, excommunicate Kings, which their own
subjects dare not do.

I do not mean that all these things or any of them are the Doctrine of the
Church of England, or held by all or most that conform. But if some of it have
been published by the Chief Prelates, and some by their chief defenders, and
some in conference with us by Clergy men, I only ask whether all this please
not and advantage not the Papists, more than Nonconformists any way do? And
whether Archbishop Usher and his Successor Archbishop Bromhal, Bishop Downam
and his Successor Bishop Tailor differed not as much as you and I do? And
whether the multitude of Parish Priest that were Papists in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and Bishop Godfrey Goodman a Papists Bishop of Gloucester, with all the
rest mentioned by Prin, Rushworth, Burnet, etc. tell us not that the Papists
had a hopeful game to play among the Bishops and Clergy of the Church?

7. As to his note out of Mr. Jo. Humpheries book, disclaiming Cruelty to
Papists, its known Mr. Humphery is a man of latitude and universal Charity, and
tyeth himself to no party or any men's opinions: He openly professes his hope
of the Salvation of many Heathens, and I so little fear the noise of the
censorious, that even now while the Plot does render them most odious, I freely
say. 1. That I would have Papists used like men, and no worse than our own
defense requires: 2, That I would have no man pat to death for being a Priest:
3. That I would have no writ de excommunicato capiendo, or any Law compel them
to our Communion and Sacraments. For I would not give it them (if I knew them)
if they came.

8. As to his Accusation of my first Plea for Peace, he has it after, and it
is after answered. And as to his Accusation of my book for Concord, I answer.
1. Is it no Ministers work, in a contending world, to tell and prove what are
Christ's ordained terms of Christian Concord, but his that is [ Christ's
plenipotentiary on Earth, and were to set the terms of Peace and War] Is this
spoken like a peace maker and a Divine? Does not he pretend also in his way to
declare the terms of Concord?

2. But no man more heartily agrees with him in lamenting the state of the
Church on earth, that when such men as Bishop Gunning, Dean Stillingfleet, Dr.
Saywel, etc. on one side, and such as I and many better men on the other side,
have so many years studied hard to know Gods will, I am certain for my self,
and I hope it of them, with an unseigned desire to find out the truth what ever
it cost, (and I profess as going to God, that would he but make me know that
Popery, silencing Prelacy, imprisoning, Banishing, or ruining all
Nonconformists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Quakers, or any that ever I wrote
against, are in the right, I would with greater joy and thankfulness recant and
turn to them, than I would receive the greatest preferment in the land) I say,
that yet after all this we should so far differ, as for one side to be
confident that the others way of Concord is the ready way to ruin, wickedness
and confusion, and to come to that boldness to proclaim this to the world, alas
how doleful a case is this?

What hope of Christian peace and concord when such excellent sober well
studied men as they, quite above the common sort, not biased by honor, or
preferments or power, by Bishoprics, Deaneries, Masterships, plurality, or
love of any worldly wealth, and such as we that study and pray as hard as they
to know the truth, are yet confident to the height that each others terms of
Love and peace, are but Satan's way to to destroy them both, and introduce (as
Dr. Saywel says Conventicles do) Heresy, Popery, Ignorance, Profaneness and
Confusion: And what we are past doubt that their way will do, experience says
more than we may do.

Oh what shall the poor people do in so great a temptation!

9. But I must pass from his Preface, where I have noted. 1. That he is yet so
peaceable as to propose some sort of abatements for our Concord; that the
benifit may be sibi and suis, not reaching our necesseries, but much better
than nothing.

2. That they are so ill agreed, that Bishop Gunnings Chaplain writes, against
it, making the only way of Peace to be by the sword to force all men to full
obedience to their Lordships in every thing enjoined, not abating an Oath, a
Subscription, a Covenant, a Word, a Ceremony, without Comprehension or limited
Toleration.

3 And I could wish the Doctor would consent, at least that Lords and
Parliament men may have the liberty themselves of educating their own Sons, so
it be in the Christian Reformed Religion, and to choose their Tutors, and not
confine them to Conformists only: The Papists are tolerated in choosing Tutors
for their Children: The King of France has not yet taken away this liberty
from the Protestants: Nor the Turks from the Greeks: And must you needs take it
away from all the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and Freeholders of
England. Perhaps Beggars will consent, if you will keep their Children, or do
what the Godfathers vow. Most Gentlemen, that keep Chaplains, expect that they
teach their Sons at home, sometime at least; what if a Lord or Knight have such
a Chaplain as Hugh Broughton, or Ainsworth, or as Amesius, Blondel, Salmatius,
as Gataker, Vines, Burges, etc. must the Law forbid them to read Hebrew,
Philosophy, or Divinity to their Sons? I doubt you will scarce get the
Parliament hereafter to make such a Law to fetter themselves, lest next you
would extend your dominion also to their Wives as well as Sons, and forbid*
them marrying any but Conformists.

Is it not enough to turn us all out of the public Ministry? Methinks you
might allow some the Office of a Schoolmaster, or Household Tutor, or Chaplain
under the Laws of Peace; unless the Sword be all that you trust too: If it be,
it is an uncertain thing: The minds of Princes are changable, and all things in
this World are on the Wheel: when Peter flies to the Sword, Christ bids him
put it up, for they that so use it perish by it: Hurting many, forces many to
hurt you, or to desire their own deliverance, though by your hurt.

CHAP. III. The beginning of the Doctors unreasonable Accusations examined: His
stating of the Case of Separation.
1. THis much instead of an intelligible stating of our Controversy he gives
us, Page 2. [ By separation we mean nothing else, but withdrawing from the
constant Communion of our Church, and joining with Separate Congregations, for
greater purity of worship, and better means of Edification.] And may we be seen
by this, that we understand the difference.

1. Whether by [ Our Church] he meant the Parochial Church, (and if so, whether
some or all) or the Diocesan Church; or the Provincial, or the National, or all
I know not. But I know well, that some withdraw from some Parish Churches which
join with others. And some think they withdraw not from the Diocesan or
Provincial, if they communicate with any one Parish Church in the Diocese: And
some renounce the Diocesan Church, which constantly join with the Parochial:
And for the National Church, who can tell whether we have Communion with it,
till we know what they mean by it? Indeed in the latter part, (after the long
dispute) he condescendeth beyond expectation to explain that term; But its so
as plainly to deny that there is any such thing as a Church of England in a
Political sense, that has any constitutive Regent part: But even there so late
he makes it not possible to us to know, whether we be members of the Church or
not: For he makes it to be but all the Christians and Churches in the Kingdom
joined by consent expressed by their Representatives in Parliament, under the
same civil Government and Rules of Religion (Doctrine, and Worship, and
Government) 1. As it is a Christian Kingdom, we are sure, that we are members
of it. 2. As it is all the Churches of the Kingdom consenting to the
Scriptures, yea, and to Articles of Doctrine, and all that Christ or his
Apostles taught, we are sure that we withdraw not from it: 3. But if every
Chancellor, Dean, Commissary* Surrogate* etc. Or every form or word or
Ceremony be essential to their Church, we cannot tell who is of it and who
not? Or really whether any reject not some one form, word or office? If every
such thing be not essential, he never in all the book tells us what is, or how
to know it, or who is of it.

2. And the word [ withdrawing] seems to imply former Communion: And if so,
he makes all the Anabaptists, Independants* Presbyterians, etc. Who never were
of their Church, to be none of the Separatists here meant.

But if by [ withdrawing] he mean [ not joining in Communion] either he means
in the whole Communion or but in part: If the whole, then the many thousands
that live in the Parishes and Communicate not in the Sacrament are no members
of the Parish Church. And who knows then who are of their Church? And how few
in many Parishes are of it, that yet pass for Members of the Church of England*
And yet I that join with them am none of it, in their account.

And. 3. What means he by [ Constant Communion] I go to the Parish Church
when sickness hinders not, once a day; I go to the Sacrament, and am none of
their Church. Thousands go but rarely, and thousands scarce at all, at least to
the Sacrament, and these are of their Church and no separatists.

4. But perhaps the conjunction is explicative [ and join with separate
Congregations for greater purity, and Edification: If so, then he that never
joyneth with them nor any other is none of the intended separatists. 2. Nor he
that goes to other Churches on other accounts than for purity of Worship and
Edification (As Papists that go as to the only true Church for the Authority).

3. But the utter ambiguity is in the word separate; And that you may
understand it he explaineth it by repeating it. By separation he means
withdrawing to separate Congregations. But the doubt is, which are the separate
Congregations. I named many sorts of Lawful and unlawful separations, but he
will not tell us which he means by any intrea^y.

. 4. I would my self yet that I may be understood, tell the reader what sorts
of separation I renounce and what I own: But I have done it so often and largely,
that I am ashamed to repeat it, as often as men's confusion calls me to it. The
reader who thinks it worth his labor, may see it done in my first Plea for
Peace, and in the Preface to my Cath. Theol. and specially in the beginning of
the third Part of my Treat. of Concord, and in Christ. Direct. And he calls me
here afterward to the same

Certainly it is only sinful separation that is in the question; and as
certainly there are many sorts not sinful. I am locally separate from all
Churches save that where I am. I morally separate from the Roman Church as an
unlawful Policy, and all other which are in specie against Gods word: I
separate from some for Heresy as being not capable matter of a Church, while
they own not all the Essence of Christianity. I separate from some as Imposing
sin, and refusing my Communion without it. I separate from some as having no
lawful Pastors; some being incapable matter, and some, being usurpers that have
no true call: I separate from some only so far as to prefer a better rebus sic
stantibus; sometime a better as to the Doctrine, sometime as to the Worship,
sometime as to the Discipline sometime and mostly as to the Pastors worth and
work; some go from their own Parish, because the Minister is very ignorant in
comparison of another to whom they go: some that hear the Minister preach
against preciseness and for Ceremonies, had rather hear another that calls
them to holiness: some that have tolerable Preachers go to Doctor Stilling
sleet and Doctor Tillotson as better: some go for neerness to another Church.
Some go from their own Parish because the Minister cuts the Commonprayer too
short, and Preaches too long; some because they would have it so, go to such:
some because the Parson is an Arminian; others because he is contrary. Some go
to the Minister that is strict in keeping the scandalous from the Sacrament:
some therefore go from him: some remove their Dwellings or Lodgings for these
ends; and some do not: some go from their own Parish for the benefit of the
Organs in another. And of old, when Nonconformists had Parish Churches and used
some part of the Liturgy, many went to them from their own Parishes. Some of
these are lawful, some are unlawful: Most certainly they that go from their own
Parishes, yea, or to Nonconformists Assemblies, in London, go not all on the
same account: Nor does the Doctor and such other separate from me as I am said
to do from them, but otherwise and much more.

. 5. If he would first have told us what Separation is sinful; secondly* and
then have proved us guilty of it, instead of the confused talk of Separation,
and a begging the question by suposing that to be sinful, which he will neither
discribe, nor prove such, it had been of some usefulness to our conviction. But
I confess I never liked those Physicians who give their Patients the Medicines
that they are best stored with, or they can best spare, be the disease
whatsoever; Nor the disputer that pours out what he is best furnished to say,
how useless soever to the reader or to the Cause. Disputeing should not be like
boys playing at Dust point, who cover their Points in a great heap of Dust, and
then throw Stones or Cudgels at it, and he that first uncovereth them wins
them. Dusty heaps of ambiguous words confusedly poured out, befriend not Truth
that should be Naked, nor the reader.

. 6. Some thought it was the Place called Conventicle houses, which made the
Conformists call us Separatists; and they got often into Parish Churches and
Chappells. But these were made the worst of separatists, and punished the more.
And doubletss it is not meeting at any of the new Tabernacles, nor at the
Spittle, nor at Sturbridge Fair, where Preaching has long been used, nor in a
Prison nor at the Gallows to Prisoners and People, which are faulty Separation.

. 7. Some thought that they meant that its want of the Commonprayer that makes
us Separatists; and they have tried and read the Common Prayer in their
Assemblys: But these have been accused and suffered the more. And even Mr.
Cheny was forced to fly his Country for reading it, and Preaching in an
unlicensed meeting. And some reading more and some less, by this it will not be
known who are the Separatists; The old Nonconformists in their Parish Churches
read some more, some less, and now some Conformists vary. They say a Conformist
at Greenwich keeps up a Common Prayer Conventicle; some Conformists are
accused for overpassing much: One lately suspended for wearing the Surplice too
seldom, and refusing to pray for [ our gracious Queen and James Duke of York.]
How much of this goes to make a Separatist?

. 8. Some thought it was want of the Magistrates leave that made them call us
separatists: But when the King Licensed us, the accusation was the same: yea
Mr. Hinkley and many others tell you, that they took this for worst of all.

. 9. Some say it is want of the Bishops License: But as Mr. Tho. Gouge has his
University License, and I have Bishop Sheldon's License (I think not
invalidate) and yet this goes for no justification of us; so is it with others.

. 10. Some think that it is a Conventicle as described by their Cannon that
must make us Separatists, which is of men that call themselves of another
Church. But that is not it: Mr. Gouge, Mr. Poole, Mr. Humphrey, and my self, and
abundance more that never gathered any Church, nor called our selves of any
other then their own, are nevertheless separatists in these men's account.

. 11. They that remembered what was called Separation in England of old,
supposed it had these two degrees, which made men called Brownists. First
falsely taking the Parish Ministers and Churches for no true Ministers and
Churches of Christ, and therefore not to be Communicated with. Secondly or (in
the lower rank) falsely taking the faults of the Parish Ministers and Churches
to be so great, that its a sin to have ordinary Communion with them. But they
that have still disclaimed both these are Separatists still in our Accusers
sense.

. 12. Some thought that ordinary Communicating in the Parish Churches and
pleading for it, would prove us no separatists with them. But this will not
serve as my own and many other men's Experience proves.

. 13. I am called after to say more of this: The sum of my separation is this.
First that I take not the Parish Churches to be the only Churches that I must
Communicate with, and will not confine my Communion to them alone, as if they
were a sect, or All: But will also have Communion with Dutch, French or
Nonconformists.

2. I take not the Order, Discipline and mode of worship in the Parish
Churches, nor the Preaching of very many Parsons, Vicars and Curates, to be the
best and most desirable.

3. I take those to be no true Political Churches, which have no Pastors that
have all the Qualifications, and Call, and Authority, which is Essential to the
Office; and therefore can communicate with them, but as with a flock without a
Pastor, or an Oratory, Community or Catechized Company.

4. I live peaceably under such Bishops as have many hundred Parishes, and no
Episcopos Gregis, true Bishops and Pastoral Churches under them, as they think:
But I own not their Constitution.

5. I join with all the Churches in England as Associated for mutual help and
Concord in all that the Scripture prescribes, and in all the Protestant
Religion, and all that all Christian Churches are agreed in, and all that is
truly needful to the ends of Christianity: But not absolutely in all, which
their Canons, Liturgy etc. conttaine: Especially their sinful Impositions, and
their Presumtious Canonical Excommunications of dissenters ipso facto.

6. I am one of the Christian Kingdom of England, as under the King according
to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and am for obeying the Laws and Rules
in all things lawfully belonging to their Power to command. But not for obeying
them in sin, against God, nor for believing all to be Lawful because they
command it; nor for their taking down Family Government or self Government, and
discerning private Judgment of the subjects. This is my measure of separation.

14. And I think in cases that concern our own and many men's Salvation we
should have leave freely to speak for our selves; and not be used as we are,
that must neither be endured to be silent, or to speak. Let this Dr. open our
case to you himself, says he [Pref. p. 36. Speaking of my first Plea for Peace
[ As though it had been designed on purpose to represent the Clergy of our
Church as a Company of Notorious, Lying and Perjured Villains for Conforming to
the Laws of the Land and orders established among us: For there are no less
than thi^ty tremendous aggravations of the sin of Conformity set down in it and
all this done without the (...) provocation given on oue side] And elsewhere he
says he shall less regard my aggravations.

Ans. 1. If I do that which you think as bad, I would gladly be told of it
(though false accusations I desire not) And impenitence is too soon learnt
without a Teacher or Academical degrees, and I had rather be saved from it. 2.
But Reader I once more appeal to the Judgment of all reason and humanity as
well as Christianity, to decide the case of this Accusation.

1. We did in, 1660. and 1661. All that we were able by labor petition and
yielding as far as we durst for fear of sin and Hell, to have been united and
lived in Church Concord with the Episcopal party.

2. When our labor and hopes were frustrate and two thousand of us cast out of
the Ministry, and afterward laws made against us as Conventiclers, first for
our Fining, Imprisonment, and then Banishment, and after besides Imprisonment
to pay twenty pound the first Sermon, and forty pound the next and so on; when
after this the Law that banished us from all Cities, Corporations, etc. and
places where we lately Preached, did most deeply accuse us as the cause; I
never wrote so much as the reasons of our dissent: When by the execution of
these Laws we were by Informers and others used, as is well known, I was still
silent. My not conforming showed my dissent, but I durst not so much as once
tell them why, lest it should more exasperate them.

3. At last I was often told that the Bishop that first forbad my Preaching,
and many others after him, often said to Great men, Mr. Baxter keeps up a Schism,
and yet holds all our conformity lawful, save renouncing a rebellious Covenant.
And I yet continued silent.

4. At last they wrote against us, that we durst not say that any part of
Conformity was sin, but only inconvenient.

5. Then many pulpits and books proclaim* that we against our Consciences kept
up a Schism, for a baffled cause which we had nothing to say for.

6. All this while Lords and Commons used to ask us, what is it that you would
have, and what keeps you from Conformity. [In private talk, but would never
allow us to speak for our selves and give the world or Parliament our reasons].

7. Many years together Pulpits and Printed Books of the Clergy, cried out to
the Magistrates to execute the Laws against us, (and as one said set fire to
the Faggot)* and blamed them for not doing it.

8. When the King gave us his License, they were greatly offended, as aforesaid.

9. At last one great Bishop told me that he would desire the King to
constrain us to give our reasons, and not keep up a Schism, and not tell for
what. And another greater told me, that the King took us to be not sincere,
that would not give our reasons. And all this while I durst not give them, as
knowing how they would be received.

10. When the Bishops kept me from Preaching and gave me leisure, I wrote. 1.
An Apology for our Preaching, 2 A Treatise of Episcopacy and diverse other such,
and yet durst not Print them (nor indeed could do it.)

11. At last after about seventeen or eighteen years silence* by such
importunity (and the Press being more open) I ventured first but to write my
first Plea for Peace, which only names matter of Fact, and our bare Judgment,
enumerating the things which we think sin, without our Arguments, lest it
should provoke them more. And therein professed that (knowing men's different
Educations, studies, interests, etc.) I did not by this accuse the Conformists,
nor the Law makers, but only tell. 1. What I thought would be sin in us, 2. And
how great a sin, if we conformed.

Reader, should I have stayed longer (the small Tract of Sacrilegious desertion
of the Ministry, came out when we were licensed, but ventured not to name the
matters of our Nonconformity) what could we do less? I staid till I think half
the silenced Ministers were dead. Is the call of superiors, the Interest of
our Ministry, and Consciences of so little regard as that I must not tell men
that so loud and long had asked, what is the matter? Must we neither be silent
nor speak?

And now see here. 1. If Dean Stillingfleet be a man to be believed in such
accusations, [ All this was done by me, without the least provocation on their
side] wonderful difference! Is my naming what I think God forbids me, so great
a provocation to them, and is all this for seventeen years before named [ not
the least provocation to us on their part? What shall one think could bring
such a man to such a word?

2. And that which I professed that I wrote not to accuse them, he tells you was
[ as if designed to represent them as a Company of notorious lying* Perjured
Villains. This Collection I feared; But how could I avoid it? Must not I tell
them that urge me, what sin I fear, least they say you represent us as such?

3. See here how they talk of us contrarily as the Barbarians of Paul, that now
make him a Murderer, and anon a God; For many years together, our Lords and
Masters persuaded men that we took Conformity to be no sin, save renouncing the
Covenant: And now how Contrary? Its the representation of a Company of
notorious, lying, perjured, Villains, with thirty tremendous aggravations.
Repent O England, says Bradford at the stake. But who would have thought that
Repentance had been so hard a work, in a case called so heinous, and that to
the Preachers of Repentance, as it is either to them or to us, which ever it be
that is found in the guilt.

CHAP. IV. Of his History of the case of the old Nonconformists.
1. AS to what he says of the sameness of the former Case and ours, I shall
tell him the difference after, where he more calls me to it; And shall show him
so much difference, as will discredit this assertion.

2. As to the case of the old Nonconformists. 1. It must be premised that we
take them not for any of our rule, but cleave to Gods word and the example of
the Primitive Church, looking still at the great ends of order and Government.

2. We maintain as well as he that the Chief Nonconformists were against that
called Brownism or Separation, and wrote more against it than the Conformists
did.

3. I still profess my self to be of their Judgment in this, and have practiced
accordingly.

4. But they were not against such Preaching, or any such sort of separation as
I have either practiced or defended.

3. Here therefore it must be known what the Controversy between them and the
separatists was. 1. The higher sort of separatists said, that the Church of
England was no true Church. The Nonconformists, said it was a true National
Church both as a Christian Kingdom, and as an Association of Churches, (and as
represented in National Synods were they made one.)

2. The said Brownists said that the Parish Churches were no true Churches, nor
to be owned as such, nor joined with. The Nonconformists held that they are
true Churches, (that have capable Ministers) though faulty.

3. The separatists said that the Parish Ministers were no true Ministers,
because ordained by Diocesans and not chosen by the people, etc. The
Nonconformists said, that the capable were true though faulty Ministers, owned
by the peoples consenting communion, and the ordination valid though culpable.

4. The separatists said that Ministers and people must gather Churches that
are purer, and set up better discipline in them, whatever Rulers say or do
against it, or whatever they suffer, as far as they are able. The
Nonconformists said, this is to be done where it may be done without doing more
hurt than good, but else it is no duty but a sin, viz. To do it Tumultuously,
Seditiously, or so as by running on the Magistrates sword, by improbable
attempts to lose their own advantages for doing and getting good, and hinder
the common parish reformation.

5. The Separatists said that no prohibition of the Magistrate will warrant a
Minister to forbear the public work of his office. The Nonconformists held
that it belongs to the Magistrate to restrain deceivers and all false
Teachers who do more hurt than good; and such should obey when they are
forbidden to Preach and Administer Sacraments: Yea if the Magistrate wrongfully
forbid a worthy Minister to Preach, for order he is bound to obey, unless the
need of the Church and Souls, and the probable benefit plainly weigh down that
matter of order, and make the Magistrates prohibition invalid, as being against
the common good, and the ends of the Ministry, and so against Christ.

6. The semi-separatists ( Robinsons party) after held that though the Parish
Churches may be called true Churches, as a Leper is a true man, and it may be
lawful to hear a Sermon in them, yet the Common Prayer is so bad, and the
people and Ministers so bad, and discipline so cast out, that it is unlawful to
join with them in Common Prayer, or Sacrament, or to become settled members of
them; but all must attempt, though in Foreign Countries, that are able* to set
up purer worship and discipline. The Nonconformists held that those that can
have better without more hurt than good, should cheose it: But they that cannot
may join in member-ship, Common Prayer and Sacrament, with such Parish Churches
as will admit them without their own actual sin, and consenting to their faults.

. 4. I shall now give you so full proof that the Nonconformists were for more,
which the Doctor calls Separation, than my Preaching or practice ever reached
to, as I shall tell the Reader, what credit this Doctors history deserves, and
what inhumane usuage the Nonconformists have from that sort of men.

. 5. Anno 1593. Was printed against them Bishop Bancroft's book called,
Dangerous Positions and Proceedings etc. Or English Scotizing for Discipline by
force etc. In the first book he makes their Reformations so odious, as that
Page 30. He says that in Scotland [ it has wrought more mischief in Thirty
years, than the Pope of Rome had done before, as I think in five hundred] you
see how that Spirit then did work, and whether our Archbishop Bancroft thought
better of the Presbyterian Churches or the Pope, and the Effects.

In the Second book he takes up what rash words he could from any indiscreet
men to make them odious.

In the third he shows what the English Nonconformists did for their
Church Way and Discipline. Chap. 1. p. 42. He says that the (...) Ten or
Eleven years of the Queens Reign they so clamoured etc. that they divided
themselves from their ordinary Congregations, and meeting in houses, woods and
fields, kept there unlawful and disorderly Conventicles: and Mr. Cartwright
defends them, saying, that the name of Conventicles was too light and
contemptuous for them; Then they framed their two admonitions: In one of which
p. 60, 61. They tell the Parliament that their Discipline was Gods order, and
they must in Conscience speak for it, and use it. And Anno 1572. They erected a
Presbytery at Wandsworth. The Elders are named. The persons named that set up
meetings are Mr. Field* Wilcox, Standen, Jackson, Bentham, Sancler, Crane,
Edmonds, and after Clark, Travers, Barber, Gardener, Cheston, Crook, Egerton.
Anno 1582. There was a meeting of threescore Ministers out of Essex,
Cambridg-shire and Norfolk at Cock-field, Mr. Knewstubs Town. And another that
year at a Commencement at Cambridge.

Chap. 3. That they drew up a book of their Discipline, where choice of
Ministers, Elders, Deacons etc. are named and regulated, and for Classical,
Provincial, Comitial Synods and Government. Chap. 4. He tells you how they
prosecuted it Anno 1583. Out of Cholmley, Field, Fen, Wilcox, Axton,
Gellebrand, Wright, Gifford. Chap. 5. How they proceeded. 1587. And 1590.
Northamptonshire was divided into three Classes. First the Northampton Classis
had Mr. Snape, Penrie, Sibthorp, Edwards, Littleton, Bradshaw, Lark, Fleshward,
Spicer etc. The Daventrie Classis had Mr. Barebon, Rogers, King, Smart, Sharp,
Prowdloe, Elliston etc. The Kettering Classis had Mr. Stone, Williamson*
Falksbr^^k, Patinson, Massey etc. And Johnson says it was received in
Warwickshire Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, and most parts of England; so Smith,
H^^gar, Holme witness, Mr Snape said. About Braintree the Classis had Mr.
Cul^^^wel, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Gifford, (one of our Doctor's witnesses) etc. That
at Colchester had Doctor Chapman, Doctor Chrick, Mr. Dowe, Mr. ^^rrar, Mr.
Newman, Mr. Tey, etc. Page 85. Mr. Snape said, It was agreed on in the
Classical and general assemblies, that the dumb Ministers were no Ministers,
and that all the Ministers should Preach for the aforesaid Government.

Chap. 6. Anno 1588. A Synod at Coventry agreed against private Baptism,
reading Homilies, the Cross in Baptism, and that the faithful ought not to
communicate with unlearned (they mean incapable) Ministers; though they may be
present at their Service, if they come of purpose to hear a Sermon. For Laymen
may read public Service. That the calling of Bishops etc. is unlawful. That it
is not lawful to be ordained by them, or denounce their Suspentions or
Excommunications. That its not lawful to rest in the Bishops deprivation of any
from the Ministry, except on consultation with neighbor Ministers and their
flock, it seems so good to them; but that he continue in the same till he be
compelled to the contrary by Civil force. and c. And the Discipline subscribed
by Cartwright, Fen, Wright, Oxenbridge, Gellybrand, Clevely, Nutter,
Fetherstone, Holm, Lord etc. To repeat all is too tedious.

But its worth the noteing that whereas the Prelatists usually say, that when
they were put to draw up a Liturgy themselves, they could not agree of any,
Bishop Bancroft says Page 96. They offered the Parliament a book of their own,
containing the form of Common prayers etc. and hoped to have had it established.

Page 164. Chap. 12. He tells you of their order for Parents to offer their own
Children to Baptism, and be Godfathers etc. He proceeds to show that they
resolved to practice their Discipline against the Magistrates will, and did
accordingly. And Chap. 15. p. 120. That they joined themselves into an
Association or brotherhood, and appropriated to their meetings the name of the
Church, thereby showing themselves to be most notorious Schismatics, citeing
their words (our Churches) And p. 121. That the Parish where they preach
assembled, is not the Church properly in their sense, but as many thereof only
as are joined to them with that inviolable bond, viz. The desire of the godly
Discipline, and those furthermore who leaving their own Parish Churches come to
them. e. g. The Church of God, forsooth in Black friars consists besides that
Parish of a number of men and Merchants wives dispersed here and there
throughout the whole City. Mr. Snape's testimony is cited.

6. By these words of Bancroft and the case compared, it is certain that on
these suppositions many of the Canons were made against them; as against
Conventicles and calling themselves another Church, and a brotherhood, and
about God fathers and many more, supposing them to be of this mind.

7. On supposition that these things were true, the Nonconformists have to this
day been accused by those that write against them, and the testimony of this
book alleged as proof. And Doctor Heylin has in folio accordingly described
them in his History of Presbytery, as many others have done.

8. And now comes Doctor Stillingfleet, and tells you, that [ he is certain
that all the old Nonconformists] were quite of another mind, and other men, and
to prove it cites four or five men's words against Brownists; When yet he
cites more of my own against Separation: and if my words prove me not to be
against it, how will theirs prove them to be against it?

9. Either Bancrofts, Heylins and such others words of them are true or false.
If true, how untrue are Doctor Stillingfleet's? If false, O what a sort of men
were these Prelates that so stigmatized and accused and so used so many hundred
such men, on so false a charge? And what a Church was it that made the Canons
against them on that supposition? And how shall we know which of them to
believe? Does not Doctor Stillingfleet heavily reproach his own Church for such
usuage of them?

10. The case is commonly known, First that a long time they had almost all of
them Parish Churches as other men had: and they sought to set up Discipline in
those Churches. And it had been folly then to gather others in other places.

2. When Bancroft and others had got many cast out and silenced, a great part
of them kept in by connivence of some peaceable Bishops, and by the mediation
of some Lords and Gentlemen, such as the Earl of Leicester, Bedford, Warwick,
the Lord Burghley, Sir Francis, Walsingham, Sir Amias Pawlet, Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Mr. Beal, and Sir Francis Knowles had been to them before: Yea the
greater part of them by such favor got into privileged peculiar places, or
little Chapells at least; Few Counties had not some Gentlemen that sheltred
them. The Earl of Huntington kept in Mr. Hildersham at Ashby, Mr. Slater and
Mr. Ash, even in the big Town of Bremicham, Mr. Mainwaring kept in Mr. Ball at
Whitmore; Mr. Knightley kept in Mr. Dod, Judge Bromley (and his humble holy
Lady) kept Mr. Brumskill at Sheriff Hales, and entertained many more (Mr.
Nicols etc.) Sir Richard Graves at Moseley had Mr. Pateman and diverse others,
seldom without a Nonconformist: One would think Doctor Stillingfleet should
know that his own Patron, under whose wing he lived, Sir Roger Burgonie was
seldom without a Nonconformist at Roxhall in Warwickshire: Mr. Hering had long
liberty at St. Mary's in Shrewsbery, Mr. Ford (who wrote on the Psalms) had the
School Lecture there, Mr. Atkins at (...), kept in to the last, even the Lord
Dudley, favoring him. Abundance such I might name, Mr. Barnet, at Uppington
(whom I often heard Catechize Dr. Allestree,) Mr. Tandy at Bewdley, Mr. Langley,
Mr. Paget, Mr. Hind, Mr. Lancaster, Mr. Roll, Mr. Nicols, Mr. Mather, Mr.
Rathband, Mr. Bar^^n, Mr. Gee, Mr. Wright, Mr. Smart, etc. had their liberties
for some time. And when one Bishop silenced them, the next often gave them
liberty (as Bishop Bridgman did after Bishop Mortons silencing some) and when
they were silenced, they went often into another Diocese, where they rubd out a
year or more, and then to another; And so were still in some hope of public
liberty.

And when silenced they used to keep private fasts; And where they lodged to
preach on pretense of expounding to as many as they could.

They obeyed the Bishops as Magistrates, but not as Pastors.

They knowingly broke the Law in their private and public Ministry: They
obeyed not the Canons; used not much of the Liturgy; And many of them did as
some do now, get into public Pulpits for a day and away, where they were not
known.

. 12. But yet there are more undeniable evidences of the falseness of what, he
says, he is certain of, as the judgment of All the Old Nonconformists. One is
the known judgment of the Scotch Reformers, and the common accusation of the
English, as being of their mind. He that will affirm that the Scotch
Presbyterians thought it unlawful to preach or hold Assemblies, when forbidden
by Magistrates or Prelates, will incur a very sharp censure from their own
Leaders, who have written so many Books, which charge them with the contrary,
and make them Rebels and Seditious for it: Such as Bancroft, Heylin, Beziers,
and multitudes both old and new; especially these last twenty years.

And though the Nonconformists in England did not justify all that the Scots
did (and they that took Knox, Buchanan, Melvin, and such other for very pious
men, yet thought some words and deeds too rash, especially Knox's public
opening the Queens faults in the Pulpit, and refusing her offer to come at any
time, and tell her of them privately) yet its known, that in the Rules of
Discipline, they were mostly of the same judgment: And they often joined in
defending the same Cause. See their several demonstrations of Discipline, and
the several Defenses of them, how little they differed, when Bancroft preached
against them at Paul's Cross, Feb. 8. 1588. An English man wrote a Brief
Discovery of his untruths, etc. And a Scoth man J. D. Bancrofts rashness in
railing against the Church of Scotland, printed 1590. And how little differ
they, if at all (and Dr. Reignolds wrote a Letter against it to Sir Francis
Knowles, printed with Sir Francis Knowles his account to the Lord Burleigh of
his Speech in Parliament, against the Bishops keeping Courts in their own
names, as condemned by Law.

And in many of their writings the English own the Scotch Discipline and
Church. And yet even these Scots have rejected Brown as a Schismatic, and the
English Confuter of Bancrofts Sermon tells him, Page 43, 44. Brown a known
Schismatic is a Fit man to be one of your Witnesses aagainst the Eldership:
His entertainment in Scotland was such as a proud ungodly man deserved to have:
God give him and you repentance. And Giffords, Pagets, Bradshaws, Brightmans,
Rathbands, Balls, etc. words against the Brownists proved not them to be
against their own doctrine and practice, no more than the Scots rejecting Brown
proved them against theirs.

13. And another proof is the common doctrine of the Nonconformists, of the
difference of the Magistrates, and the Churches Offices. The said confutation
of Bancroft has it, page 45 and forward, and abundance of their public
writings; viz. That the Magistrate only has the power of the Sword, and of
Civil Government, and to restrain and punish Ministers that offend by Heresy
or otherwise: But that as Preaching, Sacraments and the disciplinary use of the
Keys are proper to the Ministry, so the deciding of Circumstantial
controversies about them and about the due ordering of them, does primarily
belong to Ecclesiastical Synods. Therefore if these Synods were for their
Preaching, they were not for ceasing it merely in obedience to the Magistrate
that silenced them.

14. And it is proved by the many Volumes which they wrote against the Power of
our Diocesans, that it was not any Ecclesiastical Authority of theirs (which
they thought it a sin to disobey.)

15. And Mr. Fox, a Nonconformist and many more of them, own the Doctrine of
Wicliff and John Husse, and the Bohemians, for which the Synods of Constance
and Basil, condemned them, who affirm that it is a heinous sin to give over
Preaching, because men excommunicate us, and that such are excommunicated by
Christ.

16. And it is not nothing that the most Learned Conformists agree with them,
as I have often cited Bishop Bilsons words, that the Magistrate does not give us
our power, nor may hinder our use of it, but is appointed by God to protect and
encourage us, and if he forbid or hinder us, we are to go on with our work and
patiently suffer.

And even now I believe most of the Leading Clergy think that if a Synod bid us
preach and hold assemblies, and the King forbid it, we are to obey the Synod
rather than the King, Mr. Thorndike, and many others that write for the Church
thought so. And Mr. Dodvel thinks so even of a particular Bishop. The
difference then is but this: One party gives this power to a Synod of Bishops
(and Presbyters perhaps conjoined) and the other to a Synod of Parochial
Pastors, Doctors and Elders. But both agreed that the Magistrates prohibition
in that case is not to be obeyed. And the Conformists will not take it well if
I should say that the Nonconformist are more for obedience to Magistrates than
they: I still except the Erastians, and such as own Dr. Stillingfleets Irenicon.

17. There is a most considerable book called A Petition directed to her most
Excellent Majesty showing a mean how to compound the Civil Dissentions in the
Church of England, where the Author (I suppose some Lawyer) Page 23. tells us
what was the difference between the Papists and them that desired Reformation
(Nonconformists) about the power of Magistrates. And. 1. They give the Prince
Authority over all Persons Ecclesiastical whatsoever; The Papists exempt the
Clergy: 2. They hold that a Prince may depose a Priest, as Solomon did
Abiather, and accordingly they obey being silenced: The Papists deny it. 3:
They affirm, if the Priests make wicked decrees, the Prince may enforce them to
better. The Papists deny it. 4. They say Princes must and ought to make Laws
for the Church, but with the advice of Godly Pastors: The Papists deny it. 5.
They hold that if the Pastors be unlearned and ungodly, the Prince may of
himself without their advise, make Orders and Laws, for Ecclesiastical matters:
The Papists deny it. 6. They will subcribe in this point to the Articles of
Religion established by Law; to the Apology of the Church of England, to the
writings of Jewel, Horn, Nowel, Whitaker, Bilson, Fulk. They take the Oath of
Supremacy.

Here the second Article seems to be contrary to what I have said. But the
book whence he cites it ( de discipl. Eccles.) and all their writings show,
that it is but the same that I say, which they assert, viz. That Princes ought
to restrain or silence intolerable men, and such Us^pers or dilinquents as
give just cause. 2. That if they mistake and do it unjustly, we must leave
Temple and Tyths to their will. 3. Yea, and forbear our own public Preaching
when the public good on the account of order and peace requires it; but not
when the public good, and the necessity of Souls, and our own opportunities
require the contrary. And the silenced that submitted still, went on to
exercise their Ministry against Law in that manner as best conduced to its ends.

And what this Auother says of the Papists, I suppose many of the highest
Prelatists come nearer then the Nonconformists; and were the Prince against
them, would obey the Bishops before him.

And the same book describing the Nonconformists in twenty Articles p. 55. in
the 8th. thus expounds it [ They teach that neither the Mini^ters nor people
ought to make any general Reformation, with ^or^^ and arms, or otherwise of
their own authority change any laws made or ^^ ^^^shed for Religion by
Authority of Parliament: But they hold that the general Reformation does belong
to the Magistrates as Gods Lieutenant: and that for themselves they may and
ought in dutiful sort both Preach and Write, and sac to the Magistrates for
redress of Enormities, and also practice the ordinances of Christ which he has
commanded his Church to keep to the end of the World.

And Article 20. It is not all the unprepared Parish that they would have
brought under Discipline: But those of each Parish who are prepare: and
willing.]

. 8. In short the demonstration, the supplication, the humbe motion to the
Council, and almost all the Nonconformists writings show, that. 1. Their great
Cause was to set up Parish Discipline, under Superior Synods. 2. B^ing
themselves almost all in public Churches, at least per ^ices, and being still
in hope of public reformation, they were greatly against the Brownists
violence, that would break those hopes. 3. They held that Christ's Law was their
Rule, which commanded this Discipline, which no Magistrate could dispense with.
4. But that Magistrates must be obeyed in such ordering of Church matters as
belong to them. But not in forbearing such exercise of the Ministry as was
needful to its ends, the Churches good. And as its said, they practiced
accordingly.

I. The Brownists denied the truth of the Parish Ministry and Churches, and the
lawfulness of Communion with them. II. The Semiseparatists held it lawful to
hear them preach, but not to join in the Liturgy and Sacrament. And this is it
that Phil. Nigh. wrote for.

III. The Presbyterians and mere Norconformists thought it lawful, and meet in
those Parishes which had capable Ministers, to join in both Liturgy Sermons and
Sacraments, where sin was not imposed on them. But so (as though forbidden)
while they had public Churches, to do their best to practice Christ's Commands
and Discipline, and where they could have none to further the same ends as
effectually as they could, in the opportunities left them. But never took it
for their duty to leave all their Ministry or publik preaching merely in
obediene to the laws: much less to the Bishops.

When all this is so notorious, and when I knew the minds of many aged
Nonconformists about forty years ago as my familiar friends, who were all of
the same mind in this as I am, what history can I be more assured of, than, as
I said, that First, They took not praying publicly and gathering Assemblies to
be therefore sinful, because it was forbidden by the Law. 2. But to be a sin
against Prudence and the ends of their Ministry, when it was like to do more
hurt than good, by exasperating the Prince, and depriving themselves and others
of better advantages for those holy ends; 3. And that it was a duty when it was
like to do more good than hurt: 4. And therefore they broke Laws where they
could be endured, even in Chappells and Parish Churches.

5. And it is not inconsiderable that the reasons why Calvin, Bullinger,
Zanchy, Beza, said what they did for submissive forbearing public Preaching
and Church gathering, were First, Because as they saw that the Prince was
resolved not to suffer it, so Reformation was then but begun, and the Prince
and Magistrates were the pricipal means of it, and they had great hopes that
what could not be done at present to perfect it, might be done afterward at a
fitter time. King Edward was sain to quiet the seditious Papists by making them
believe that Latin and English, was the great difference between the former
Mass worship and the Liturgy: Aftertimes had no such necessity: and
tumultuously to disturb the Magistrate in his prudent progress of Reforming,
had been to serve the enemies of Reformation.

But in our times, Parliaments (who the Doctor S. says, are entrusted so
Consent for us) have these fifty years told the Kingdom that the Reformation
was growing backwards, and the increase of Popery by favor and public
tolleration designed, and much accomplished; and Plots threatened the restoring
of it: and if Parliaments deceived us, yet the chief Actors themselves were to
be believed: Doctor Heylin makes the syncretism and closure with them in the
bosom of the now indulgent Church, to be Archbishop Lauds very laudable
designs. Archbishop Brombal, says Grotius, was to have held some place among
us, as a Protestant, and was of the English Bishops mind, and he himself does
say the last; and I have showed in his own words that Grotius took Rome for the
Mistress of all Churhces, and that there was no way for the Union of
Protestants, but to join in Union with Rome, and that he owned the Doctrine of
the Councils even of Trent it self, requiring but the amending of the Clergies
lives, and the casting by the Schoolmens bold disputes, and the restraint of
the Popes Government to the Rule of the Canons, securing the rights of Kings
and Bishops, and this he says will content the peaceable: Vincentius wrote a
book called Grotius Papizans; Saravius in his Epistle upon speech with Grotius
laments it as too true: His friend Dion. Petavius told Mr. Ereskin an
honorable person attendant on the King, that Grotius resolved to have declared
himself for the Church of Rome, if he had returned alive from the Journey that
he dyed in. See Mr. Thorndikes just weights, what he was for.

And how far many Doctors of this Church, some yet living, have maintained that
Grotius principles are not Popery, and consequently what such mean by Popery
when they disclaim it, I need not tell you, while so many of them have
published it in print; And are not Mr. Thorndicks terms of Concord in Councils
till the eight hundredth year much like and much more in book aforesaid?

And surely there is great difference between such Preachings as were like to
be the ruin of the begun Reformation by exasperating a Reforming Magistrate,
and such Preaching as tends to stop the revolt of a reformed Nation, when
Parliaments and the Agents themselves of the revolt, proclaim the danger.

Its true that there was then a greater scarcity of Preachers than now: And
that was the Nonconformists argument with the Bishops when they pleaded for
public liberty: But its as true that they had far greater hopes of that
Liberty, which it had been folly to cast away, for less: But it is not so with
us; we are a greater number than they, and have new Laws to shut us out not
only of the Churches, but of Corporations, and Bishops that will give us no
such liberty.

6. And indeed so many were the unlearned Parish Priests, and so bad, in Queen
Elizabeth's days, being many of them lately silly Mass Priests, that the shame
of the Church and the cry of the Protestant people forced the Bishops to
tolerate most of the Nonconformists in some public Church, especially those
that were moderate and did not publicly oppose them. Dr. Humphery was allowed
Reigus Professor in Oxford: Dr. John Reignolds President of Corpus Chapter Col.
Mr. Perkins, Lecturer in Cambridge, Mr. Paul Bayne after him, so Dr. Chadeorto^
there, etc. some tell men that these were all Conformists, and of the Church;
And yet I am none that am of the same mind. The truth is, they were for
submitting to kneeling at the Sacrament, Surplice and most of the Liturgy,
rather than cease Preaching: But they were against subscription, and the
English sort of Diocesan Bishops and Government, and the imposed use of the
Cross, as it is in Baptism: As Tradition tells us, and as you may partly see in
Dr. Reynolds Letter to Sir Francis Knowles, in Mr. Baynes, Diocesans Trial, his
Letters, and in Fuller and other Histories, And Mr. Deering, Mr. Greenham, Mr.
John Fox, Mr. Marbury, Dudley, Fenner, Mr. Knewstubs, yea I think six or ten to
one, were endured in public Churches long, before they were hindered; And when
they were hindered, they spoke peaceablely and intreatingly, and were still in
hope of public Liberty, and were often petitioning or making great Friends to
the Bishops to that end much they long obtained and more they hoped for. How
long Mr. Travers was kept in at the Temple, is commonly known.

7. It is neither consistent with my leisure, nor the business now in hand, nor
I suppose the patience of most readers, that I should prove this further by a
Voluminous transcribing Histories already extant. If the Book which Dr. St.
cites called part of a Register be perused, he will find, 1. That the passage
cited by the D. was the reprehension of many Londoners taken at a meeting in an
open Hall of a Company, which meeting they avowed: Is this a proof that they
were against such public meetings, or for it? When for it they lay in many
Prisons.

2. That they professed that they forsook not the Public Churches, till their
Teachers were silenced and turned out: So little does silencing tend to union.

3. That yet these being ordinary Citizens, spoke many things weakly, crying
out too rashly of the Rags and Ceremonies of Antichrist: But he might have
found many things in the Register more worthy his communication: For instance.

1. The Letter of Dr. Wy: In the beginning. 2. Dr. Pilkington (after Bishop of
Du^ham) his Letter of weighty reasons against silencing the Nonconformists. 3.
Mr. Edward Deerings answer to the Articles put to him, twice: with sober and
Peaceable words. 4. Mr. Greenhams modest and peaceable Apology to the Bishop of
Eli, against Conformity, yet refusing to give his Reasons, lest they should
provoke till he were constreined (as I did seventeen years). All which show
that the Nonconformists then were mostly in poslesson of some public Churches,
or but newly turned out, and in hope of restoration. And what is all this to
our case of total and peremptory exclusion?

8. And methinks the Doctor should not desire to tempt the Reader that tries
his citations to read the rest of that Register: viz. 1. The harsh usage of Mr.
Johnson, who dyed in prison, driven into too sharp Language by their usage. 2.
The exceptions of Mr. Crane. 3. The Ministers complaint to the Councils; 4.
Especially the Councils Letter to the Justices on the b^balf of the Ministers,
worthy to be perused at this time. 5 A notable Treatise called a Letter to a
Londoner against the Legality of the Bishops proceedings. 6. The Commons
complaint for a Learned Ministry, showing what a shameful sort of men were kept
in by the bishops, while the Nonconformists were turned out and silenced. 7.
The practices of the Prelates. 8. The Petition to the Queen and that to the
Convocation. 9. Mr. Marburys conference with the Bishop of London, and his
Archdeacon. How the Bishop railed and swore at him, and reviled him for
desiring that all Parishes should have Preachers, as if Homily Readers were not
enough. And yet Mr. Marbury was so moderate that at last with liberty of
interpretation (like Chillingworths) he conformed. 10. Mr. Dudley Fenners
defense of the Ministers against Dr. Bridges slanders: Written but a month
before his death, whereas the said Fenner was far from unlearned (as his
Methodical Theologia shows) and was so moderate that Dr. Ames says he much
conformed at last; but it seems not enough: and he shows how the Bishops set
themseves against such Preachers. 11 Mr. Gawtons troubles. 12. Dudley Fenners
Counter-poyson, or certain form of Eccles. Government and its defense. 13. The
demonstration of of discipline. Does the Dr. believe indeed that these writings
signify that the Nonconformsts of those times thought it a sin to Preach eo
nomine because forbidden?

9. They wrote indeed a great deal more against separation than he cites, and
more than all the Conformists did. And yet they were not more against it than
Bishop Bilson, who says, If the Magistrate forbid us our work we must go on,
and patiently suffer. Mr. Hildersham was called Malleus Schismaticorum, and yet
he and I are Schismatics with these men: Mr. John Pagets Arrow against
separation, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Gifford, Mr. Ball, etc. have said enough. But he
that knows their controversy knows that it was none of the question,
whether it be lawful to Preach when the Magistrate forbids it, or whether our
Parish Churches and Diocesan be to be prefered before more Reformed Churches
when they may be had? But whether. 1. The Parish Churches be no true Churches?
2. Or such as it is unlawful to communicate with occasionally? 3. Or constantly
when no better can be had without greater hurt than benefit? 4. Whether it be a
duty to gather Churches or Preach publicly when it is like to do more hurt
than good, by the Magistrates opposition? 5. Whether we should not quietly bear
with that in a Church which we cannot reform, while no sin is put on us, and
the Communion of it is no worse than that of our Parish Churches? In all these
they were against the separatists; and so am I. 6. Yea they pleaded the duty of
obeying the Magistrate by forbearing to Preach when their Preaching was not
necessary: And so do I.

10. One would think they that take Homilies for Sermon^, should consess that
the Nonconformsts writing against the prohibition of the Law, was a Preaching,
or much more: as it is more public. And did the Nonconformists write when
forbidden, so much as Cartwright, Parker, Sandford, Fenner, Gilby, Ames, and
abundance more have done; yea and writ against Diocesanes and Conformity as
these and Bradshaw, Nichols, Brightman, Bayne, Travers, and abundance more
have, even many hundreds, as the Millinary Petition and the Country Complaints
etc. show; and yet did these men every one of them take it for sin to Preach,
because it was disobedience? But nothing will convince some men.

11. But I appeal to the reason and humanity of mankind, into what hands the
silenced and persecuted Ministers are fallen? Is it humane first to charge them
with resisting the Laws, by Preaching, gathering Churches, and administering
Sacraments, and making Canons and setting up new Discipline, and to publish
this to the land and world by such Authority as Arch Bishop Bancrofts, Doctor
Heylins etc. till it is become their Common Charge to render them suspected and
odious and till this be taken for undoubted truth: And yet when it may serve
for the silencing of us; to maintain it with Dr. St. as that which he is
certain of, that the old Nonconfor mists were against such Preaching and
assembling. At this rate we have been hitherto accused and confuted.

Yea upon the foresaid Accusations their Canons were formed against the
Nonconformists, forbidding their Assembling, Preaching, calling themselves a
distinct Church, and a great deal more such: and yet now the men that conform
to these Canons are certain that they were made upon safe suppositions, and not
one of the Nonconformists were so guilty.

But does not the Doctor thus grievously accuse the Church which he would
defend? Were they such men 1. that would so falsely accuse the Innocent 2. and
use them so cruelly on such false accusations, many of them dying in Prisons,
and many lay there long etc. 3. and to form Canons on such false suppositions?

12. And I do not think I shall prevail with him to tell me, whether he that
thinks their Case and ours was so much the same, does verily believe 1. That if
they had been in the Plague at London, and seen the forsaken people crowding
for instruction to prepare for death, the Nonconformists (such as Bradshaw,
Gifford, Hildersham, Greenham, etc.) would have refused to Preach to them.

2. And if the next year they had seen the Churches burnt, and the City in
ruins, and few Parish Ministers officiate, they would have thought i^ a sin to
Preach to the desolate City, to assemble them to worship God; and would have
let them under so dreadful judgments, live and dye like profane Atheists?

3. And if shortly after the King had Licensed them to assemble and Preach,
would they have refused it as a sin?

4. And if the Prelates had prevailed by such a Parliament against the Kings
License, and he still had showed the clemency of his mind by his conivence,
and Magistrates were loath to execute the rigorous Laws, and people would not
inform, and the informers repented, and thousands more called to the
Nonconformists for help, than did there when Popery stuck still in the peoples
hearts; would they have thought all this no alteration of the Case, to judge
whether their Preaching would do good or hurt?

13. He tells us of the fewness of Nonconformists in King Edward's days. And it
is a wonder that so many in so short a time, went so far in the Reformation as
they did. But so fast were they then in progress, that even the Reformation of
Church Laws then by the Commissioners agreed on was in many things so much
better than our Canons, as could we now but obtain the same, would go far to
heal us. Let me instance in some, and anticipate by it my answer to his after
discourse against Parish Discipline.

1. Cap. 18. de Here Is. They determine of the Salvation of the unbaptized
Infants of believers, the contempt only being damning.

2. They define the Church visible ( Cap 22,) to be the Congregation of all
believers in which the Sacred Scripture is sincerely taught, and the Sacraments
(at least in the necessary parts) administered according to Christ's institution]
But your Canons deny all such here to be true Churches, save theirs, as settled
by Law.

3. De Sacram. Cap, 5. None to be admitted to the Sacrament till in the Church
he have professed his faith. And de Div. Off. Cap. 7 They that will receive the
Communion must the day before come to the Minister that he may have time to
excusse their Consciences, and deal with them if they have done any thing
ungodly or superstitionsly, in which the Church is offended; and also may try
their faith, that so he may either correct their ignorance, or terrify their
Contumely, or confirm their doubting. For none ought to be admitted to the Holy
table of the Lord, that has not a perfect belief.] The words need a gentle
exposition: but we have no power now to try men's knowledge or belief thus.

4. Cap. 10. After evening prayers, the Parish Minister Deason and Elders with
the people, shall call those that have been publicly perverse, and scandalous
to confess their sins, and to be publicly corrected, that the Church may be
conformed by their wholesome correction. And the Minister and Deacon with some
Elders shall consult how the rest that are of vicious lives, may first by
brotherly love according to Christ's prescript in the Gospel, be dealt with by
sober men; whose admonitions if they receive, they shall give God thanks: But
if they go on in the Crime, they shall be sharply punished as the Gospel
prescribes.]

5. De Concion. Cap. 3. Preachers shall name no guilty person before the
multitude, unless such as have contemned Ecclesiastical Admonitions] such may
be named.

6. De ^xc. Excommunication for none but horrible Crimes, etc. Cap. 4. and
after often admonition. But you Excomunicate all Godly men that do but say your
Conformity is not lawful, ipso facto by your Canon.

7. Cap. 6. [ We permit not the power of Excomunication to be in any one
person: Though the consent of the wh^le Church be specially desirable, yet
because it is hard to gather and take it, let Excommunication thus proceed,
that the Archbishop, Bishop, or other lawful Ecclesiastical Judge, call one
Justice of peace, and the Minister of the place where the guilty person
dwells, or his deputy, and two or three other Learned and well man ^ered
Presbyters, in whose presence, when the matter has been most diligently
handled and gravely weighed, the sentence of Excommunication shall pass. Cap.
7. And be written.

Cap. 16 There is written a large pious form like a Sermon to be used at the
Reconciling of the penitent, and his form of confession, and petition to be
received, and then the Pastor of that Church is to ask all the flock, whether
they will forgive the offender and pray for him, and whether they will have him
received into their Congregation as a brother. And then the Pastor is to exhort
the penitent, and then absolve him ( A great and solemn work, most unlike your
Discipline). And then to give God thanks and pray for him and the Church.

Should we now but move for thus much in order to concord with the
Cconformists, we have reason to think no importunity could prevail for it; were
the consequents of our division as dismal as they are now by most proclaimed.
Yet verily we are most unexcuseable wretches, if we have learned no more to
this day than they did in so few years; or under full power and opportunity
will resist that good, which they that wanted such opportunity wished for; and
go back as fast as they went forward.

Sect. 14. To p. 8. [I never said that the troubles at Frankford were so much
about free or formal Prayer, as that the Presbyterians refused all forms.]

Sect. 15. p. 19. He confesses that [ Whittingham, Sampson, Gilby and others,
accepted of preferment and employment in the Church, the Bishop showing them
kindness for their forward zealous Preaching;] and this being without their
subscribing to conform, is it any wonder then that they gathered not Assemblies
elsewhere? Had the Bishops so tried us, we should never have put them to talk
so of our separation, (but might have done our best to build more Churches.)
Does none of all this difference their case and ours?

Sect. 16. p. 20. He confesses when [ they were silenced, they began to have
separate Meetings,] and yet were all the old Non-Conformists against such.

Sect. 17. As to Beza's Letter, have not I said more against Separation than he
does? Does the Dr. think the Reader so blind as not to see that Beza's words
are just of the same importance with the account I gave, and contrary to his,
viz. [ He trembles at the thoughts of their exercising their function against
the will of the Queen and Bishops, for such reasons as may be easily
understood, though we say never a word of them:] Its easy indeed to see what
he trembles at, and why he named them not, which he would sure in charity have
done, had it been because it is sinful disobedience to preach when forbidden:
It was easy to see what hurt it would have done in the ruin of Preachers and
hearers, and shaking all the begun Reformation: Its not so with us, Gualter and
Zanchy say not so much against Separation as I do, nor John Fox, nor Bullinger
whom he cites; we say the same.

Sect. 18. The same I say of Parker and Gifford, and I again tell him that he
may name many more; Hildersham, Paget, Ame, etc. I am of their judgment in
their opposition to the Brownists; but it is a notorious untruth ( page 33.)
that the force of all the Non-Conformists reasonings against Separation, lay in
two Suppositions. 1. That nothing could justify Separation from our Church,
but such corruptions which overthrew the being and constitution of it, etc. And
1. It must be remembered that Separation being a word of very many senses, they
held indeed that [ none ought to separate from a Church accusing it to be none,
but for that which proved it to be none.] 2. But did they deny that which all
the Christian World confesses? viz. 1. What if our English Divines gathered by
Bishop Hall against Burton, be in the right, that the Church of Rome is a true
Church, as a Thief is a true man, (though I think otherwise) must not such
Bishops or Conformists therefore separate from them?

2. What if a Church impose some Lie, false Oath, or Subscription, or some
actual Sin in Worship, as a condition sine qua non of her Communion; is it not
lawful to separate into better Assemblies?

3. What if they put down all preaching save reading some dry Homilies, and all
Discipline, is it not lawful elsewhere to serve God better? But of this more
after where he repeateth it. The Brownists case was quite other before
described.

Sect. 19. to p. 36, 37. We also hold that whosoever separateth from the Church
of England, 1. As having not that Preaching and Sacraments which are of
necessity to Salvation. 2. Or as not professing true saving Faith, does by
consequence separate from all Churches in the world; because they have all the
same Word, Sacraments, and Christian Faith. And to this Mr. Jacobs Argument is
good, p. 38. (though he was the man that answered Downam's Sermon for Bishops,
and esteemed one of the first Independents:) And Mr. Balls words to the same
purpose, and the second Supposition p. 39. we grant, and think verily that the
late Conformists have said more against the truth of the Church of England,
than we; yea, that we are the defenders of it against the Brownists and them,
Ball, Bradshaw, Gifford, Hildersham, etc. cited by him, defend it as we do, and
better than such as Dr. Heylin, Thorndike, Mr. Dodwel, and such others. Did he
think any of this concerned me?

Sect. 20. Yes, for p. 74. he says, [ We would blind the Reader by finding out
the disparity of some Circumstances; but not one of us can deny that it was
their judgment, that the holding separate Congregations for worship, where
there was an agreement in Doctrine and the substantials of Religion, was
unlawful and schismatical.]

Answ. Its pity so seeing a Dr. should tempt men to be so blind, 1. As to think
all the differences which I have named, inconsiderable. 2. And to go on to
abuse themselves and others, with the ambiguous word [ Separate] no better
explained. 3. And to think the other causes before and after named of some sort
of Separation, to be insufficient; and I am sorry for the Dr. if this be his
own Profession, that he would tell any lie, or commit any other sin, or forsake
any other part of Religion, rather than separate to other Assemblies, from a
Church that agreed in Doctrine and the substantials of Worship with him. The
Presbyterians then are sure of him, if they were but in possession; and it
seems in Moscovy he would forsake preaching. But what if the King licensed a
preaching Church, would he refuse the use of it for fear of separating from a
mere reading Church.

This Protean word [ separate] serves for many uses: I will put one case more
to the Dr. (not feigned.) A Conformist Gentleman was of the opinion that his
Parish Church was no true Church, because the Vicar was a Socinian, and another
because the Parson was ignorant of the essentials of Christianity; and they go
to the next Parish Church. A Nonconformist in the same Parish, goes to a
Nonconformists Chapel, but does not accuse the Parish Church as none, as the
other do; which of these separateth more? At Gloucester one took the Diocesan
Church for no true Church, because Bishop Goodman was a Papist, and the Bishop
is a constitutive part; and yet this man was for Diocesans: A Nonconformist
went to a Nonconformists Church, but would not say the Diocesan Church was
none: Which separated more? He separateth from his Parish Church against the
Canon, who goes from an ignorant scandalous Reader, to communicate with a
Preacher at the next Parish: He separateth from the Parish Churches, who
judges them true Churches, but having the Kings License, joyneth constantly
with the French, Dutch, or Nonconformists as better, still owning mental
communion where he has not local; and he separateth from the French, Dutch, or
Nonconformist Churches, who thus leaves them (as true Churches) to join with
the Church of England as better. Many and various are the sorts and degrees of
Separation, and not all lawful or all unlawful: None of these are the Brownists
separation, which the old Nonconformists confuted; which consisted in a denial,
1. That the English Ministers were true Ministers. 2. And their Churches true
Churches. 3. Or such as a Christian might lawfully live in communion with in
ordinary worship. 4. And therefore they were all bound to renounce them, and
set up others.

I doubt the Dr. is far more a Separatist than I, and such as I; for I am for
Communion with all Christians, as far as they separate not from Christ; and I
hate the false accusing of any Church as if it were none, or its Communion
unlawful. I can be but in one place at once, but in heart I join with all
Christians on earth except in sin; and locally I join where I see greatest
reason for it, preferring that which I judge most agreeable to Gods word, so
far as I may without greater hurt. But the Canonical Conformists, unchurch all
the Churches here but their own, and utterly refuse Communion with them, even
with those that refuse not Communion with them. And some think that forcible
silencing, fining, excommunicating, and imprisoning, is not the gentlest sort
of separating.

But does he in all his Book do any thing to satisfy any man's Conscience, that
would know from what Churches he may or may not separate? Not a word that I can
find, that decideth such a doubt. His two words here used are [ Agreement in
Doctrine, and substantials of Religion,] whereas 1. Religion is in Acts and
Habits, and has no proper substance, and what his term [ substance] means,
till he tells us, none can know. It must be either an essential part, or an
integral part, for an Accident I suppose it is not. If only an essential part,
what Christian dare say that I may sin against all the mere integrals of
Religion rather than go from the Church that imposes such sin upon me. If it
be all the integrals that we must agree in, then we differ in no one part of
Religion; for Accidents are not parts: And then who contradicts him? When men
differ in no part of Religion, they will not separate unless merely locally:
Are all the things named in my first Plea, no parts of Religion? It may be by [
Substance] he means only the greater sort of Integrals, but how shall we know
where to six our measures; what duty is so small that I may omit it, or what
sin so small that I may commit it for Communion.

2. And as for Doctrine, they that differ in any part of Religion, are supposed
to differ in the doctrine about that part. But can any man tell what Doctrine
it is that he makes our agreement in to be necessary, or the test of
Communion. If I should separate from all Churches from which I differ in any
the least doctrine, I know not where the Diocesan or National Church is that I
might hold Communion with: Do all the Conformists agree in all doctrines? If it
be in all that the Law imposes, how various, mutable, and uncertain is that.

I distinguish between Doctrine professed by the Church, and Doctrine imposed
on me to profess it. As to the first, I will communicate with a Church that
has twenty false Doctrines, consistent with the essentials of Christianity and
Church Communion. As to the second, I will not knowingly profess one false
Doctrine for Communion with any Church on Earth.

Did not the Nonconformists differ from the Conformists, in the Doctrine of the
sufficiency of Scripture for regulating Church Order and Worship; and about the
Divine Right of Diocesans and Elders, and about Parish Discipline. Do not we
now differ about the undoubted certainty of the salvation of all dying baptized
Infants? Will this warrant a separation?

Sect. 2, 1. p. 75. He tells us very confidently that diversity of
circumstantial pretenses for Separation, alter not the case: But 1. Its true
that if twenty men have twenty false pretenses for Separation, none of them are
thereby justified; but if one man have a just cause, it justifies him: I named
very many just and unjust causes in my Plea, and he gives no answer to it. 2.
Are they such circumstances before named: Oaths, Declarations, Subscriptions,
Doctrine, etc? 3. What if the Law should change, and allow of various Churches?
what if the King license them? These be but circumstances: What if the Plague
drive away the Parish Ministers? what if the Churches be burnt and the people
forsaken? will no such circumstances make other Assemblies lawful, because he
calls them separate.

Sect. 22. p. 78. His undertaking is repeated: [He is certain that preaching in
opposition to our established Laws, is contrary to the Doctrine of all the
Nonconformists of former times.] Answ. If I have not proved the contrary, I
cannot prove that they were English men.

But 1. he proves that they were all of that mind, by citing four of their
Books against Brownists; and were four or forty times four, all? But Mr.
Rathbands is said to be the Nonconformists. Does he believe that he meant that
all or the twentieth part of the Nonconformists wrote or subscribed it? One of
the Names to it is Mr. Simeon Ash, my intimate dear friend, whose judgment in
these matters was the same with mine, whom I was with even in his sickness
almost to the last hour of his life, and was buried Aug. 23. 1662. the day
before the Law had else silenced him, and he was to me a better Expositor of
his own mind, than the Dr. can be: He was so much for going on to preach, that
his Motto in his Funeral Ring was, [ I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ:]
I yet keep my Ring, and can show it you.

And as to old Mr. Langley, another of them, I heard him my self preach in
Albriton Church in Shropshire, a Thanksgiving Sermon for the hopes of
deliverance from the silencing Bishops, when the Law forbad him: And for old
Mr. Slater, I heard him preach at Trinity Church in Coventry when the Law
forbad him: And did they not understand their own Writings better than the Dr.
does?

Sect. 23. And I would I knew how to prevail with him to tell me, whether the
Law and Canon did not forbid all the Ministers in England to worship God
according to the Directory, and neglect the Common Prayer Book, which yet
almost all did for many years in the times of usurpation: And yet of nine
thousand or more of these, seven thousand since conformed to the Church of
England, and they say that this Dr. is one of them. If mere disobedience then
be the sin, all these lived so long in sin, and he with others.

Sect. 24. But all that can be gathered out of the four Books ^^^ed and such
others is but this, which is our judgment: 1. That Churches and Pastors are
under the Kings Government as well as other Subjects. 2. That it belongs to
him to punish them for evil doing, and encourage them in doing well. 3. That as
to this his own execution, he is the public Judge whether they do well or ill.
4. That if he justly forbid any to preach or assemble he must be obeyed. 5. And
if he mistake in particular cases, not destroying the ends of his Government,
the common good, he must not be resisted, nor in such a manner disobeyed, as
tends more to the common hurt than his mistake does; nor disabled to Govern
by their dishonouring him, much less by Rebellion or Confusion. 6. Nor are men
bound to cast away their great advantages for Gods service which they then had,
on pretense of doing better, when by accident it would do more hurt than good,
nor as Bradshaw says, to run on the Sword, or oppose Sword to Sword, or raise
Sedition, and ruin themselves in vain.

Their advantages were many: 1. Lawful Communion in the Parish Churches. 2.
Most of them either constantly or by sits, had public Churches or Chapels to
preach in, and were still in hope. 3. The Magistrate protected them and the
Reformation. 4. They hoped for a progress of it, whereas had they openly done
as the Brownists, they had endangered the Reformation by the exasperation, and
ruined themselves, and lost most of their labor: So that it is plain that
preaching in that imprudent manner which is like to do more harm than good,
they took to be a double sin, as hurtful and as disobedience; for obedience is
due in such a case. But in case the manner and circumstances be such as that
these evils are not consequent, but more good than hurt to be expected; they
thought the bare breach of the Law no sin.

Sect. 25. Which I yet further prove, 1. Because its agreed by all, that
Governing Order is a medium for the thing ordered; and never obliges when it
overthrows the end, power being given to Edification and not to Destruction:
None have power to forbid the necessary preaching of the Gospel, and probably
to damn Souls. 2. Because else the Nonconformists should be more against
preaching when forbidden than the Conformists; who say as Bishop Bilson, We
must go on with our work, and suffer: and as Bishop Andrews Tortur. Torti.
Cohibeat Regem Diaconus, etc. 3. Yea, the Papists who on pretense of Obedience
are tyrannical, yet mostly agree (as I have elsewhere proved) that humane Laws
bind not beyond the case of scandal, when they are against the common good: And
a Toletane Council decreed, that their Constitutions should not be taken to
bind ad p^c^atum, (to hazard Souls) but only ad poenam. 4. As I have said,
their own practice fully expounded their words, who constantly broke the Law
and Canon in preaching in Houses and in Chapels without, or contrary to the
Liturgy, or a part of it. So did Mr. Ball at Whitemore, Mr. Hind at Banbury,
Mr. Geree and Mr. Fox at Tewksbury, John Rogers at Dedham, Mr. Tailor, Mr.
Harvy, Mr. Bourne at Manchester, Mr. Gee, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Barlow,
Mr. Broxholme, Mr. Cooper, and abundance more, besides those mentioned before.

And now I leave it to the Dr.'s further thoughts, whether he spoke truly of
the sense of All the Nonconformists, and have proved what he undertook. To
abuse the Magistrate, or do his part for public Reformation, they were
against, and so are we.

Sect. 26. As to his question, Was there less necessity then or now? I answer,
1. There was then more necessity as there is of you or me in America, where we
cannot preach; the people, lately Papists, desired not their helps, nor
scrupled hearing others, as many thousands do now. 2. There was necessity then
and so there is now, but opportunity must join with necessity to oblige, which
they had more than we by connivence in Chapels, where was necessity, and they
had less than we in other places.

Sect. 27. As to the Answers of Mr. Sprint, on my knowledge the usual answer
was, That evil must not be done that we may have leave to do good, and that if
others hinder me because I will not sin, it is not my omission of any duty; yet
the disparity of the Apostles case and ours, may be mentioned to show the
difference of obligations.

Positive Precepts bind not ad semper, but Negatives do; and its too gross a
shift to turn a Negative to a Positive, and then pretend that the comparison is
between two duties: preaching is a duty when we can do it, but not when we
cannot do it, unless we will swear, subscribe, profess, or practice a forbidden
thing.

Sect. 28. I conjecture that to what I have proved of the practice of the
Nonconformists, it will be said that Their preaching in peculiar places,
Chapels, or Churches, though in a manner against Law and Canon, was but a
partial joining with the Church of England, and not a separation; and the
connivence of the Bishops was a kind of Toleration.

Answ. 1. And is not my case the same? We had more than connivence when we had
the Kings Licenses, and ever since experience tells you that his Clemency has
occasioned a restraint of the Bishops, and some connivence from them. 2. And if
it were the Temples that make the difference, let them allow us to preach there
and see whether we will refuse it: And sure the Conformists that preach in
Tabernacles are not Separatists; the Parish Teacher of St. Martins now
preaches in the same place which I built to have preached in, and for so doing
was by a warrant judged to prison. They had no more Law on their side than I
have, they usually read no more of the Liturgy but the Confession and the
Scriptures, and many not the first at all, and some more; so that its a full
proof that if breaking the Law had been all their stop, they would have still
preached.

Sect. 29. Dr. Ames tells us that he had preached without the Bishops consent
by this Story, fresh Suit, p. 409. describing an English Bishops Pastoral work,
he says. It would be ridiculous for a mean man to desire him to visit him, his
Wife, or Children, in sickness; he must have a Chaplain not only to do other
duties of Religion for him, but even to give thanks at his Table. I will not
here speak of [ draw up an Excommunication for him, take him Pursuivant, Jailer
see to your Prisoner;] but note one example of mine own experience, which many
others can parallel: I was once (and but once I thank God) before a Bishop, and
being presented to him by the chief Magistrates of a Corporation, to be
Preacher in their Town; the lowly man first asked them, how they durst choose a
Preacher without his consent: You (said he) are to receive a Preacher that I
appoint you, for I am your Pastor, though he never fed them: And then turning
to me, [How durst you, said he, Preach in my Diocese without my leave?] So that
without any other reason but mere Lordship, the whole Corporation and I were
dismissed to wait his leisure, which I have done now twenty years and more.

Much like the usage of holy Paul Bayne, Successor to Perkins, who being
commanded to preach a Visitation Sermon, and being sickly and in a sweat with
preaching, was fain to refresh himself instead of going presently to attend the
Bishop; and when he was sent for, having small Cuffs edged with a little blew
thread, says the Bishop: How dare you appear before me with those? and he
suspended him: And good Mr. Bayne would never more have to do with a Bishop,
but said, They are an earthly Generation, and savor not the things of God.

When Dr. Fulke (a half Conformist) went out of St. John's College in Cambridge
with his Pupils, hiring Chambers for himself and them in the Town, it was as
great a separation from the College (to avoid the Surplice which he after
submitted to) as we make from the Church. See Ames fresh suit, p. 473. And that
it was no conscience of obeying the Bishop, that Beza would have the Ministers
moved by, from assembling: Judge by these words, [ De notis Eccles. Ego
pontificiis -- ] I willingly leave to the Papists the whole degree of
Episcopacy, of which I openly say, the Holy Ghost was not the Author, but
humane prudence; which if we observe not that God has cursed, certainly we
even yet see nothing; and we nourish a viper in our bosoms, which will again
kill the Mother.

Sect. 30. I will conclude with the recital of the Letter sent to the Bishops
by Dr. Humphrey, Regius Professor in Oxford, who yet constrained, used the
Surplice after that: Our Dr. may note what sense they had then of these things,
premising only the words of John Fox, speaking of Blumfield a wicked
Persecutor, who threatened a godly man, Simon Harelson, for not wearing the
Surplice: [ Its pity, says he, such baits of Popery are left to the enemies to
take Christians in; God take them away from us, or us from them: for God
knows they be the cause of much blindness and strife among men. Dr.
HUMPHREY'S Letter to the BISHOPS.
YOur Lordships Letter, directed unto us by our Vice Chancellor, although
written in general words, yet has so hearted our Adversaries, that we are now
no more counted Brethren and Friends but Enemies; and ^ith the old Mass attires
be so straightly commanded, the Mass it self is shortly looked for. A Sword now
is put into the enemies hands of these that under Q Mary have drawn it for
Popery, and under pretense of good order, are ready without cause to bewreck
their Popish anger upon us, who in this will use extremity, in other laws of
more importance, partiality. I would have wished, my Lords, rather privy
admonition than open expulsion; yea I had rather have received wounds of my
Brother, than kisses of mine Enemy; if we had privily in a convenient day
resigned, then neither should the punisher have been noted of cruelty, neither
the offender of temerity, neither should the Papists have accused (in their
seditious Book) Protestants of contention. Religion requires naked Christ to
be preached, professed, glorified; that graviora legis, by the faithful
Ministry of feeding Pastors, should be furthered, and after that orders tending
to edification, and not to destruction, advanced; and finally the Spouses
friends should by all means be cherished, favored, and defended, and not by
counterfeit and false intruders, condemned and overborn, and defaced. But alas,
a man qualified with inward gifts for lack of outward shows is punished, and a
man only outwardly conformable and inwardly clean unfurnished, is let alone,
yea exalted: The painful Preacher for his labor is beaten, the unpreaching
Prelate offending in the greater, is shotfree; the learned man without his cap
is afflicted, the capped man without learning is not touched: Is not this
directly to break Gods laws? Is not this the Pharisees vae? Is not this to wa^^
the outside of the Cup, and leave the inner part uncleansed? Is not this to
prefer Mint and Annis to faith and judgment and mercy? Man's tradition before
the ordinance of God? Is not this in the School of Christ, and in the method of
the Gospel a plain disorder? has not this preposterous order a woe? That the
Catechism should be read is the word of God, it is the order of the Church, to
preach is a necessary point of a Priest, to make quarterly Sermons is law, to
see poor men of the poor men's box relieved, Vagabonds punished, Parishes
communicate, Rood lofts pulled down, Monuments of Superstition defaced, Service
done and heard, is Scripture, is Statute; that the Oath to the Q Majesty should
be offered and taken, is required as well by ordinance of God as of man. These
are plain matters, necessary, Christian, and profitable. To wear a Surplice, a
Coap, or a cornered Cap is (as you take it) an accidental thing, a device only
of man, and as we say a doubt or question in divinity. Since now these
substantial points are in all places of this Realm almost neglected, the
offender either nothing or little rebuked, and since the transgressors have no
color of conscience, it is sin and shame to proceed against us first, having
also reasonable defense of our doings: Charity my Lords, would first have
taught us, Equity would first have spared us, brotherliness would have warned
us, pity would have pardoned us, if we had been found trespassers. God is my
witness, who is the beholder of all faith, I think of your Lordships
honorably, esteeming you as brethren, reverencing you as Lords and Masters of
the Congregation: alas why have not you some good opinion of us? why do you
trust known Adversaries and mistrust your Brethren? We confess one faith of
Jesus, we preach one doctrine, we acknowledge one Ruler upon earth, in all
things (saving in this) we are of your judgment, shall we be used thus for a
Surplice? shall brethren persecute brethren for a forked Cap, devised
singularity of him that is our enemy? Now shall we fight for the Popes coat,
his head and body being banished? shall the controversy so fall out in
conclusion* that for lack of necessary furniture (as it is esteemed) laborers
shall lack wages? Churches preaching? shall we not teach? shall we not exercise
our Talents as God has commanded us, because we will not wear that which our
enemies have desired, and that by the appointment of Friends. Oh that ever I
saw this day that our Adversaries should laugh to see brethren fall together by
the ears: Oh that Ephraim should thus eat up Manasses, Manasses Ephraim. My
Lords, before this take place, consider the cause of the Church, the Crests and
triumphs of Antichrist, the laughter of Satan, the sorrow and sighs of a
number, the misery and sequel of the Tragedy. I write with zeal without proof
of my matter at this time present, but not without knowledge of it, nor without
grief of mind: God move your Spirit at this present to fight against Carnem,
Circumcisionem, immo Concisionem, against Literam and Legem, which principally
is now regarded and rewarded. Speak I humbly beseech you to the Queens Majesty,
to the Chancellor, and to Mr. Secretary and the rest, that those proceedings
may sleep, that England may understand your zealous mind toward the worship of
God, your love toward the poor welwillers, your hate toward the professed
enemies, your unity in true conformity, the other neither be needful now,
neither exacted in any good age: So shall the little Flock be bound to you, so
shall the great Shepherd be good to you.




An ANSWER to the false ACCUSATIONS and REASONINGS of the Dr.'s SECOND PART.
HEre the Dr. begins with the description of their principles whom he accuses
(I am one of them:) And the first sort are those [ that hold partial and
occasional Communion with our Churches to be lawful, but not total and
constant,] viz. [at some times to be present, and in some part of our worship,
and on particular occasion to partake of some acts of Communion with us; but
they apprehend greater purity and edification in separate Congregations, and
when they are to choose they think themselves bound to choose these, though at
certain seasons they may think it lawful to submit to occasional Communion with
our Church.] The second sort are ``Such as hold any Communion with our Church
unlawful: And he pretends to proceed with all possible clearness.]

Answ. I am sorry if more clearness and truth is become impossible to him. He
takes not me to be one of the second sort, and therefore describes me as of
the first: Its no presumption to say that I know my own mind and practice
better than he does, though he would seem to know the old Nonconformists minds
better than they did themselves.

Sect. 2. The matter of fact must first be notified: 1. I ever distinguished
the National, Diocesan, Parochial, and Segregate Churches: And the National as
supposed organized, or an Ecclesiastically political Society, from the National
as a Christian Kingdom, and as an agreeing Association of Churches, without any
Governor of the whole ( Single or Aristocratical.) And I distinguished
Diocesans that are as Archbishops over lower Bishops, and those that are like
ours, infimae speciei: and I distinguished Parish Churches that have true
Pastors, from those that have none but incapable men, through insufficiency,
heresy, malignity, or as usurpers are not truly called.

2. Accordingly I concluded, 1. That the Parish Churches in England that have
true Pastors, are true political governed Churches. 2. That though some would
make them none, by denying to the Pastors an essential part of their office,
and make the Bishop the sole Pastor, and the rest but his Curates, and the
Parishes no Churches as having no Bishop, but to be only as Chapels, part of
the lowest governed Church (Diocesan) and so give up the cause to the Brownists
called Separatists; yet truly such Parishes are true political Churches,
because the ordainer being but the investing Minister, the office is not
essentiated as he wills or says, but as God the Instituter wills and
says. As the power of the Husband over the Wife is not what please the Priest
that marryeth them, but what pleases God who gives it by his Law; and as the
Lord Mayor's power is not what please the Recorder, or he that gives him his
Oath or Insignia, but what the Kings Charter gives; and the Kings power is not
what he will that Crowns him and gives him his Oath, but what he has right
to by the constitution of the Kingdom; so that the truth of the Parish Churches
is soundly maintained by the Nonconformists, and overthrown by many of the
Diocesans: But if the Parish Minister himself consent not to the essentials of
his own office, his Ministry may be valid to others while he is in the place,
but he is, himself, no true Pastor.

3. All Parishes are no true governed Churches, whose Ministers want any thing
essential to a Pastor, nor must be owned as such if known.

4. But for the peoples sake they are true Churches, secundum quid, or
equivocally as a company of Christians may be so called that have no Pastor,
and as such may be so far communicated with.

5. I never spoke against a Diocesan or Archbishop, that has Parish Churches,
and true Pastors or Bishops under him, and takes on him no more than the
Apostles, did, excepting their work, properly Apostolical, viz. by the Word and
not the Sword, to oversee and instruct inferior Pastors.

6. When the Diocesans put down all lower Churches and true Pastors, I own not
that doing, nor them in that form; but I separate from them no further than
they do from Christ.

7. When they are but as good Archbishops taking care of many Churches,
whether their Diocese shall be called a Church as such, is but lis de nomine. I
find not that any Apostle as such, was the constitutive Head of a Diocesan or
Provincial Church, or made any such, above particular Churches: Nor do I find
in the New Testament any political Church form, but the Universal headed by
Christ, and particular ones governed by Pastors. The General is the
constitutive Head of his Army, and the Colonel of his Regiment, and the Captain
of his Troop, as distinct subordinate Bodies; but the Major General, General of
the Ordnance, Quartermaster General, etc. may be only under*Officers to the
whole, and the noblest integral parts, but as such no constitutive Head of any
Body of Men whatever: So that General Pastors prove no superior proper Church.
But because it was lawful in prudence for the Apostles to have taken several
Provinces, limited severally to each, so may men now; and if any call such
Churches, I strive not, so the matter be agreed on.

8. I ever owned a Christian Kingdom, and the agreeing Association of as many
Churches as can for mutual help and concord, and the King to be their Governor
by the Sword: And if any will call a Kingdom a Church, or an Association that
has no constitutive Government, a Church; as if he called a Diet or Assembly
of many Kings or Princes, a Kingdom or Republic, let him enjoy his
Equivocation, so we understand each other.

9. According to these Principles I own my self a Member of the universal
Church, of the Church of England, and of the Parish or particular Church where
for the time I am called to be; that is, as they are. But I think I may remove
from Parish to Parish as I have cause, as a dweller or a lodger may; and I take
not all the Parish to be the Church, and take Parish bounds to be no Divine
Institution, but a humane mutable point of order, convenient when by accident
it crosses not the end, nor does more harm than good.

10. I think if any Nobleman in London confine his ordinary communion to a just
assembly in his happel, or any that have a Minister utterly unsuitable to their
needs, do usually hold communion in the next Parish Church for better, he is
thereby neither Separatist nor Sinner.

11. According to all this, when I was silenced I ordinarily heard Dr. Wilkins
and Dr. Tillotson; and communicated in several places as I had best
opportunity; and quickly going to Acton, I there constantly morning and evening
joined at Common prayer and Sermon, communicating in the Sacrament where I had
best opportunity, (being loath for the Parson and Curates s^ke, to tell you why
it was not there,) once with Dr. Horton and often with Nonconformists. The
Plague driving me to Hambden, I constantly there joined in all the public
Worship and Sacrament: Returning to Acton, I did as before, and sometime
repeated Dean Rieve's Sermon, till he got me sent to Gaol for teaching some
willing ignorant people between the Church meetings in my house: Thence going
to Totteridge, I many years constantly twice a day joined in the public
worship, and took the Sacrament when administered as Mr. Parre will testify.
Thence removing to London, and licensed by the King to preach, I forbear some
time, and after chose only the Market house at St. James's, openly declaring
that we met not as separating from the public Churches, but for the need of
multitudes that went to no Church for want of room. Since then I have many
years joined in all the public worship, Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, with the
Parish Church, when able, since that I also sometime join with Nonconformists,
and preach my self Afternoons, and on Thursdays in the Nonconformists Chapels,
being not allowed to do it otherwise. In the Country in Summer, I have far off
got into some Parish Churches for a day, and tried near London, but could not
have consent, though I have Bishop Sheldon's License for that Diocese, I think
not yet invalidated. This is the matter of fact.

Now Reader, Qu. 1. Does the tenth part of those counted of this Parish Church,
hear and communicate so often as I do.

Q. 2. If not, what makes them and not me to be of that Church?

Q. 3. What is the constancy that this Dr. makes necessary to a member?

Q. 4. What are the parts of their worship which he says I join not in? Has
he named any?

Q. 5. Is this only occasional joining?

Sect. 3. I do maintain that 1. When, consideratis considerandis, we may choose
the purest Churches and most edifying Ministry, it is a duty so to do. And one
of his answers ( the Rector, etc.) has in the Epistle cited his own words, not
out of the retracted Irenicon, but his late Book against Popery, expressly
threatening us with damnation if we do not. To which I find no excuse made by
him, yea the Papist adversary grants the same.

2. I do maintain against those that separate from all Churches which they dare
not be stated members of, that its lawful to communicate occasionally, where we
may not do it statedly: But is this to deny all save occasional communion with
all their Churches?

3. I often say that there is so great difference of Parish Ministers, and of
Persons cases and opportunities, and Relations, (as Wives, Children, Servants,
under Parents, etc. of diverse commands, etc.) that to be constant Communicants
in their Parish Church, is to some a duty, to some a sin, and so is occasional
communion.

Sect. 4. As to the second sort, that hold all communion with them unlawful. 1.
I leave them to plead their own cause, and I meddle only with my own part. 2.
But I must say that if they mistake, those that wilfully give them the occasion
are unfit reprovers of them: And if men for worldly ends or by error, will
corrupt and defile a Church to the utmost that is consistent with lawful
Communion (or near it) they may make the question whether their Communion be
lawful, too hard for understandings. Every one cannot tell whether one in a
swoon be alive or dead, and some may bury him too hastily.

Stretch not my similitude beyond my meaning: If a Gentleman of the game should
by wilful sin, get the Lues Vener^^, and the case be disputed whether his wife
may separate from him, or if he beat her once a week; if she will not daily eat
that which makes her grievous sick, and he does it to exercise his Authority,
another may better plead against her departure than he: If it be a fault in her
so to save her self, what is it in him to destroy or abuse her?

If we be forbidden to take poison, and one will causelessly command us to take
a doubtful thing, as Nightshade, Hemlock, A^ripigmentum, etc. and then condemn
us as disobedient for refusing, he is the unfittest person to condemn us. If it
be lawful to avoid a house that has the Plague, a man is excusable that
mistakes the spotted Fever for it.

Were your Congregations but full of persons that had the scabs of the small
Pox not dried away, and one went to a sounder Congregation for fear of
infection, not at all condemning you, he might be born with. If in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when abundance of Papist Priests staid in
the Churches for their Benefices, a man had quietly gone from them to the
Nonconformists, I could not blame him; though he had not been sure that they
were not changed.

And I still say that if such err by too much care to avoid sin and save their
souls, 1. It is a far greater error to give them the occasion. 2. And in such
as you to say, that therefore they must be so far forsaken, as that none may
preach to them. If I may preach to no erring people, 1. I must preach to none.
2. Or be no Physician to any that are sick.

And I must say, that though I found no call to gather any together as a
Church, and give them the Sacrament; I cannot say that no other had such,
unless I had heard them all speak for themselves: yea I see such notorious need
in many places, that I dare not blame them.

Sect. 5. And now Reader, Qu. whether the Dr. has truly stated the case
between him and me; and whether you can expect truth and edification in his
handling of a false-stated case.

These are the questions which, as my accuser, (in his Book) he should have
handled, had truth been his design. 1. Whether for one that holds so much
Communion with their Churches as I have done, and here describe, it be sinful
separation to Preach in and Communicate with the Assemblies of Nonconformists,
or mixed ones, as I have done? 2. Whether to deny this to be sinful Separation (
or Separation as commonly taken for Schism) be disingenious* and worse than
theirs that openly renounce their Communion.

Sect. 6. Three things he says, p. 94. we cannot deny, 1. That there is no
reason of Separation because of the Doctrine of their Church.

Answ. 1. We distinguish of Separation: There is no reason to separate from you
as no Church, or further than we do; there is reason to deny our consent, 1. To
your foresaid Doctrine of all baptized dying Infants undoubted salvation, not
excepting those of Atheists and Infidels. 2. To your included Doctrine employed
in your Impositions, viz. That if a man have unlawfully made a Vow and Oath to
endeavor in his Place and Calling to reform some corruptions in
Church Government, yea or to repent of his sin and oppose Popery, Profaneness,
and Schism; there is no obligation on him from that Oath and Vow to do it.
These and such other Doctrines we separate from, so far as to reject them.

Sect. 7. His second supposed Concession is, [ That there is no other reason of
Separation because of the terms of our Communion, than what was from the
beginning of the Reformation.

Answ. 1. There are in my judgment no common reasons for going further from you
than we do, nor to justify that which is commonly known by the name of
Separation. But there are many and great reasons to justify our measure of
dissent and ministration; and to say that [ we grant there are no more reasons
now than were then,] is too bold an untruth. There is more reason, 1. From the
quality of the things imposed. 2. From the designs and drift of the Imposition.
3. From the effects. 4. From the aggravation of Conformity as in the Church
that we must communicate with. 5. From the things which give us a fuller cause
for our Preaching and Assemblies. viz. 1. The late general contrary Church
State and Engagement to it. 2. The Plague. 3. The burning of the Churches. 4.
The Kings License and Clemency. 5. The number and quality of them that seek our
helps. Of these briefly in order.

1. As to the things imposed now which were not then.

1. The Vestry Act was not then made, by which so considerable a part of your
Parish Churches as the Vestries, are to renounce all obligations to endeavor
any alteration of the Government of the Church, from the Oath and Vow called
the Covenant: So that all Reformation of Church Government as so sworn, was
thus renounced by them who in a sort represent the Parish Church.

2. The Act of Uniformity had not then imposed the same declarative
Renunciation of all such obligation on all the Ministers and Schoolmasters in
England, as it now does.

3. The Corporation Act was not then in being, which constituteth all the
Officers in power in all Cities and Corporations, of such only as declare, [
that there is no obligation from the said Oath at all,] not excepting so much
as the sworn duties of opposing Popery, Profaneness, and Schism, to repent of
sin and amend our lives. And if swearing and vowing against Schism, no whit
bind men (if the Oath were but unlawfully imposed, why should the Dr. make so
great a matter of it, and think that his reasonings should make men afraid of
Gods service, if he will but call it Schism.

4. None of these Acts then required men to profess and subscribe, that there
is from that Vow or Oath no such Obligation on any other person; and so to
become Vouchers for the Souls and Consciences of many hundred thousands whom we
never saw; even those Parliament men that were not forced to it, but imposed it
on others, when we know not in what sense they took it.

5. The Reordination of Ministers ordained by Presbyteries was not then
required, and made a necessary condition of their Ministration and Church
Relation, (even by them that confess Reordination unlawful, and therefore
plainly intimate the nullity of the first.)

6. The Act of Uniformity was not then made, which requires all Ministers
publicly to declare their Assent and Consent to all things contained in, and
prescribed by the Liturgy, Book of Ordination, (though part of this was in a
Canon.)

7. The false Rule for finding Easter Day was not then to be assented and
consented to, as a condition of the Ministry.

8. Nor the new Doctrine or Article of Faith, [ of the undoubted certainty by
Gods word, that baptized dying Infants are saved,] (without any exception of
the children of Atheists, etc.) For the old words at Confirmation (as many Drs.
of the Church have showed) only meant that nothing else was necessary on the
Churches part, that is, not Confirmation.

9. The word [ Pastor] as applied to Parish Ministers distinct from Curates,
was not then blotted out of most places in the Liturgy; nor the twentieth of
Acts, as applied to Presbyters, left out, ( Take heed to your selves and the
Flock, etc.) in plain design to alter the Office and Parish Churches.

10. The Oxford Oath was not then imposed, to banish Ministers above five miles
from all Cities, and Corporations, and Places, where they had of late years
preached; so that their old Flock or Friends (yea, Wives and Children that
could not follow them) might not so much as see or hear such Ministers in their
Families, or familiar converse that would have come to the public Churches:
And all Nonconformist Ministers that took not the Oath, were thereby forbidden
to come to the Parish Churches in all Cities, Corporations, or Places
aforesaid, though their example might have drawn many (as mine did where I was.)

11. Ministers and Corporations and Vestries, were not then bound to swear or
subscribe, that it is unlawful on any pretense whatsoever to resist any
commissioned by the King; when the Keeper of his Seal may sign Commissions to
seize on the Kings Forts, Garrisons, Navies, and Treasuries, to deliver up the
Kingdoms to Foreigners, to destroy Parliaments, Cities, and Laws: I am sure
Hooker, Bilson, or Archbishop Abbot, subscribed not this, nor were such
Conformists. Are all these no difference of case?

Sect. 8. There is 2. a great difference in the drift and tendency of the
Impositions. They were at first to quiet a Popish Nation, while the true
Doctrine took possession and rooting, and to avoid the cavils of those Papists
that charged the Reformers with forsaking all the Church: But what they have
been used for these last forty or fifty years, I leave the Reader to judge.

1. By the Complaints of all the Parliaments, since then, save one.

2. By the History of Archbishop Laud's Trial.

3. By Dr. Heylin's History of his Life.

4. By the writings of Divines, such as Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Parker, Dr. Pierce,
Archbishop Bromhall, and many more such; and by the Papists historical
collection out of such.

See Dr. Heylin's description of the Reconciling Plot, Anno 1639.

Arch Bishop Bromhal says, Vindicat. p. 19. etc. [ Whereas Mr. Baxter does
accuse Grotius as a Papist, I think he does him wrong, nay I am confident he
does him wrong. -- And I have read all that he alleges to prove it, but
without any conviction or alteration in my judgment. -- I will endeavor to
give some further light what was the Religion of Grotius: He was in affection a
friend, and in desire a true Son of the Church The new Church since Bishop
Laud's change.
of England: And on his Deathbed recommended that Church, as it was legally
established to his Wife, and such other of his Family as were then about him,
obliging them by his Authority to adhere firmly to it.

The said Bishop (though no Papist) says, page 81. Note that the Bishops Book
as against me, runs upon a mere fiction, p. 76. that I traduce him as a Factor
for Popery, when I had not a word to that purpose; yea expressly excepted him by
name, though I argued against his too near approach.
[I know no members of the Greek Church, who give them (the Papists) either
more or less than I do: (Compare this with the Council at Florence, and the
Patriarch Jeremiah's Writings, and the present sense of the Greek Church, and
we may know his mind:) But my ground is not the authority of the Greek Church,
but the authority of the Primitive Fathers, and General Councils, which are the
representative Body of the Universal Church. No such thing, but of the Churches
within the Empire then.
P. 82. [To wave their last four hundred years determinations, is implicitly to
renounce all the necessary causes of this great Schism. was there no necessary
cause till after, An. 1200?
And to rest satisfied with their old Patriarchal power and dignity, and
Primacy of Order, (which is another part of my Proposition) is to quit the
modern Papacy, name and thing. So then these Protestant Bishops give the Pope
Patriarchal Power, and Primacy of Order, and as much as the Greeks: But 1. They
had by Councils of old no Patriarchal Power over other Kingdoms out of the
Empire. 2. Obedience to the Pope as a Patriarch, is against the Oath of
Supremacy, and on the matter little differs our case from obe^ing him as Pope.


Page 84, 85. [That Christians may join together in the same public devotions
and service of Christ, -- 1. If the Bishop of Rome were reduced from the
Universality of Sovereign Jurisdiction, jure divino, to his principium
unitatis, and his Court regulated by the Canons of the Fathers, which was the
sense of the Councils of Constance and Basil, and is desired by many Roman
Catholics, as well as we. 2. If the Creed were reduced to what they were in
the time of the four first General Councils, with only necessary explications,
and those made by the Authority of a General Council. 3. And some things whence
offenses have been given or taken, be put out of the Divine Offices -- Whether
Christians ought not to live in holy Communion, and come to the same public
worship of God, free from all schismatical separations. So that this
Archbishop also was set on the pious design of joining with the Papists on
these terms, and may not we have leave to worship God on better terms?


Page 93. 1. That St. Peter had a fixed Chair at Antioch, and after at Rome, is
a truth. -- 2. That St. Peter had a Primacy of Order among the Apostles, is the
unanimous voice of the Primitive Church. -- 3. Some Fathers and Schoolmen who
were no sworn Vassals to the Roman Bishop, do affirm that this Primacy of Order
is fixed to the Chair of St. Peter.

P. 97. Though the Bishop of Rome had such a Primacy of Order by Divine Right
or Humane, it would not prejudice us at all, nor is worth the contending about.
But, 1. It is not by Divine Right in foro exteriore. 2. Nor elsewhere (
interiore) but executive according to the Canons. That is, 1. The Pope is not
to govern us arbitrarily, but by Canons, (Which what they are is hardly known.)
2. And all will be Schismatics, that so obey him not.


Whereas I said that Protestants that consent not to the Popes Patriarchal
Power over us in the West, will fall under the reproach of Schism; he says, p.
104. etc. [Must a man quit his just right because some dislike it? Their
dislike is but scandal taken, but the quitting of that which is right for their
satisfaction, should be scandal given. 1. Thus for union with Rome, all
Protestants must pass for self made Schismatics, that cannot obey the Pope as
Patriarch: And does this tend indeed to Concord? It would open Protestants
eyes, did I but tell you all that is in the Canons, which the Pope as our
Patriarch must rule us by, as these Doctors do desire.
If they be forced to fall under the reproach of Schismatics, it is by their
own wilful humors, or erroneous Conscience, other force there is none. 2.
Whether is the worse and more dangerous condition, to fall under the reproach
of Schism, or to fall into Schism it self? Whosoever shall oppose the just
power of a lawful Patriarch lawfully proceeding, is a material Schismatic at
least. -- P. 107. It Is unsound arguing to deny a man his just right for fear
lest he may abuse it, as a Patriarchal Power was the Bishop of Rome's just
right. They who made the Bishop of Rome a Patriarch were the Primitive Fathers,
not excluding the Apostles and Christian Emperors and Ecumenical Councils:
what Laws they made in this case we are bound to obey for Conscience sake, till
lawfully repealed by virtue of the Law of Christ. 1. If this Doctrine be true,
no wonder that Mr. Thorndike thought we could not justify our Reformation,
till we alter the Oath of Supremacy; then we are bound in conscience to a
Foreign Jurisdiction. 2. I have fully proved many great errors and sins to be
decreed by many of the Councils, by which the Pope, as Patriarch, must rule us
all. 3. Is it any easier to do evil In obedience to a Patriarch than a Pope? 4.
In my last Book against W. Johnson, alias Tenet, I have fully confuted all that
he says of the universality of Councils, and the Patriarchs power over the
Abassines, and others without the Empire, and showed they were then all but in
one Empire, as the Archbishop of Canterbury is in England.


Much more he has to this purpose, and p. 112. for uniting the Church
Catholic on humane terms, and p. 117. against the peoples liberty of reading
and interpreting Scripture; and after at large that concord must be on humane
terms, p. 122. [ Grotius judgment was, and mine is moderate,] but had not this
man been so owned by many now, I had not cited so much of his. And for Grotius,
I have over and over cited his own words, and shall not now repeat them: And
was this the drift of Conformity of old?

3. Sect. 9. Another difference is in the effects; for with us, things not
universally or absolutely determined by God, are to be used or refused as they
do more good or hurt. 1. Then open Preaching and gathering Assemblies by
Nonconformists, would have greatly offended the Prince; but our King at Breda,
and in his three first Declarations, and by his Licenses, and connivence,
showed such wisdom and clemency, as intimated less displeasure at our liberty.
2. It would have deprived most of the Nonconformists of their hopes of public
liberty in the Parish Churches, which most of them enjoyed; but we had neither
possession nor expectation of such a thing. 3. It would have hindered and
hazarded the progress of the Reformation, but our preaching has done more to
stop the progress of the Syncretism, or of Popery: Others know this whatever
you frivolously say against it. 4. Few of the most ignorant that needed them
would then have left the Parish Churches, to hear Nonconformists in private;
but now many will come to us that cannot get in to the Parish Churches: Other
different effects may be named.

Sect. 10. 4. And though I accuse you not, you that unjustly said before that I
made you seem a company of perjured Villains, seems to think your self that the
fore alleged causes make many of the people think little better of some; and a
Church thought to consist of such Pastors and Vestries, etc. (essential parts)
differ from those that do not. 2. And the multitude of Atheists and filthy
livers, and the thousands of Noncommunicants who are still taken for real
members of your Churches, have now stood out against so long means and
patience, that the reasons of longer waiting for Reformation, much differs from
theirs in the beginning. 3. The Canon at first did not ipso facto,
excommunicate all that do but profess themselves Nonconformists, as since it
did. 4. The Bishops and their Canoneers had not then cast out 2000, nor near so
many Preachers as now, and so did not so much tempt the people to flee from
them as persecutors, thorns, thistles, or wolves. 5. When one Bishop cast any
out, some other usually would endure them, but now it was not so. 6. The people
saw daily, that you bore with those as no Schismatics, that never communicated
nor used to hear you, even the greater half of many Parishes, and took them for
Church members as is said; and therefore they had reason to hope that they that
communicated somewhere with Protestants, especially that communicated also with
your own Churches, were as good Members, and by good Pastors, would be as well
endured.

Sect. 11. 5. Lastly, The forenamed causes of our preaching much differ. 1. We
saw the Kingdom (though under usurpers) engaged by Vow, Practice, and about
sixteen years possession and custom, to another way; and who could expect that
a Law should presently change them all, and assure them of absolution. 2. They
that conformed were the more averse, to see about six thousand Ministers that
had gone the other way, so suddenly change; as to declare assent and consent to
a Book which they never saw. 3. The case of the Plague, the burning of the
Churches, the Kings Licenses, etc. I named before, which verily made a great
difference. 4. And the numbers that call to us for help makes a great
difference, when then they that needed them most, did not desire it. These are
some differences.

Sect. 12. p. 95. He says, There is no reason of separation because of the
doctrine of our Church.] Answ. But now you have corrupted it, in the Article of
Infants undoubted salvation before described, (and before by the doctrines
about Prelacy, Godfathers power and duty, Impositions, etc. employed in your
practical Canons) there is great cause of Nonconformity.

P. 96. Repeateth that great mistake, that [ there are no alterations, in our
own judgment, which make the terms of Communion harder than before.] Answ. What
hope then of being understood? how far is this from truth? The terms are sar
harder to Ministers? and to the people they are easier in some things (as
amending some translations, etc.) but it is not to them a small matter to make
such a change of their Pastors, as in too many Parishes is made. The Bishop
promised them at Kiderminster, when he forbad me to preach, that they should be
no losers by the change: They said (and I had great reason to believe them)
that the Successor knew so little of the sense of the Creed, and preached so
rarely (four times a year) I am loath to tell you how, that they durst not be
guilty of encouraging him in undertaking the charge of Souls, nor durst take
him for their Pastor: And the great increase of buildings in London, shuts
thousands now out of such Parish Churches, who could have got in heretofore;
and some more differences are before employed. p. 97. As other Churches own your
Churches, so do we, though not your imposed sins.

Sect. 13. p. I was in hope to have met with some answer to my importunate
Question, [ What would you have the many score thousands do, that cannot come
within your Churches to hear?] But no importunity will prevail for so small a
matter with inexorable men. But he says, 1. that [ this is but a pretense.] 2.
And that [ no man denies that more places are desirable, etc.] Ans. 1. It is
me that he is now accusing! why does he barely say and not prove, that it is but
a pretense? I never set up a Meeting place, but in St. Martins Parish, where
are said to be forty thousand more than can come within the Church: And when
they would not suffer me to use it, I gladly left it to the use of the Parish
Minister. I preach now twice a week elsewhere, but both the places are in
Neighbourhoods, where many thousands cannot hear in the Parish Churches. What
if other men have other sufficient reasons (as the utter incapacity of some
Ministers, or the like) does it follow that my own case and prosessed reason is
a mere pretense? why then did I use no public preaching, while I lived in such
Villages where the people might go to Church? and why did I constantly twice a
day lead them thither, though some disliked it? 2. The question is not whether
more Churches are desirable? But where they are not, whether many thousands
must live like Atheists, without all public teaching or Divine Worship, for
fear of being called Schismatics. Is not this plainly to choose damnation? If
the Gospel be needless, why do we wish the Heathens had it? Why subscribe you
against men's hopes of being saved in all their several Religions? If Church
worship be needless, why is a Clergy to be so honored, and maintained at so
dear a rate? And why do you make such a stir with Separatists to bring them to
your Churches? Can men, not blinded by interest, choose but wonder, that so many
thousands in a Parish should be taken for Church Members, and live quietly,
that come not to any Church, or never communicate with any, and yet that godly
persons who hear and communicate with their old tried Pastors (yea with such as
communicate with you) should be preached and written against as Schismatics,
and judged to that which some endure. Did this Dr. think that to drop in the
case of other men, when he was at a loss, would make good his charge against
me, and such as I: Mr. Tombs and Mr. Williams preached other doctrine; do I do
so, and have you proved it?

But seeing he will needs bring the case to Kiderminster, whether I would
suffer Mr. Tombs to gather a Congregation, I must not balk it; but advise him
hereafter to keep himself at a greater distance, and not to put his own
followers, who are willing enough to believe him, upon utter impossibilities:
He sped better with them when he laid the scene an hundred years backward, or
as far off as New England; let him know then all these things in confutation of
his historical supposition. 1. That Kiderminster Parish has but about three
thousand or four thousand souls, and the Church so fit (with five Galleries)
that all may hear: But his Parish is said to have twenty thousand souls, of
which not four thousand can hear. 2. A considerable part of Kiderminster
Parish, called Ridnal, being at Bewdly Bridge end, and two miles from
Kiderminster, (and some Villages more) usually were Mr. Tombs his hearers at
Bewdley, and I never blamed them. 3. After him, they were Hearers and
Communicants to his Successor Mr. Oasland, and he took the Pastoral care of
them (that desired any;) and I was so far from blaming him, that I greatly
thanked him, and we were far from disagreeing. 4. Though Mr. Tombs and I
differed in the doctrine of Infant Baptism, I gave him leave (yea and the
Quakers too) in the public Church many hours together, to say all that they
could for their opinions in the hearing of my Auditors, and none of them ever
won one of them that I heard of, (yet the Dr. supposes some great danger of
their peoples seduction, if they hear such as I that never were accused of
false Doctrine. 5. But he has chosen an instance yet nearer our present case:
Another part of Kiderminster Parish is near three miles off, at a Village
called Mitton; where at the Chapel I found a Curate called Mr. Turner,
infamous for drunkenness, fighting, living on unlawful marriage, and for gross
ignorance: (I tried him, and perceived not that he understood much of the
Creed,) I sent them a worthy Preacher once a day first, and twice after, and
declared my utter dissent to Mr. Turner's Ministry; yet because some of the
Church of England would have him, and he would, against my will, read the
Common Prayer to them once a day, I hindered them not from their choice, but
they went on. 6. And the sequestered Vicar in the Town (Mr. Dance) was generally
taken to be as ignorant as he, so that when once a quarter he went into the
Pulpit, his own Wife, though of the Church of England, would for shame go out
of Church: Yet did I never forbid him to preach, and he often read the Common
Prayer at Sir Ralph Clares, and I suppose gave them the Sacrament. 7. I had
opportunity then to have hindered all this if I would have used Magistrates:
They were both by Proclamation to remove two miles off, but neither of them
once removed so much as out of their houses, nor did I desire it; but we are by
law driven five miles off. 8. Mr. Dance had forty pounds a year allowed him,
and Mr. Turner never had a groat of his ancient Salary diminished, when another
was put in, but the other paid otherwise; but we ask you nothing for assisting
you. 9. I had never one hundred pounds to my self, and therefore could maintain
no more help; (two Assistants I had) but have you no more to maintain
Assistants? Now judge how well your historical Instances serve your turn.

And besides the number of Souls, very many Parishes are so wide, that distance
forbids many to come to the public Parish Churches: Some Villages are five
miles, some four, and many three miles off; and how can Families, especially
Women, Children, and the aged, and especially in winter, go so far twice (or
once) a day: And must all these forbear to hear, or to worship God, for fear of
being counted Schismatics?

Because the Dr. appealeth to my self, I seriously profess that when I had a
Pastoral Charge, (which was but in one place) I would have been very thankful
to any one that dissered no more than the Dr. and I do, that would have
gathered a Congregation of such, as for number or distance could not have come
into the Parish Church; and the case of distance did occasion the honest
separation aforesaid, though the case of numbers did not: Yea when hundreds
desired Communion according to the Common Prayer, I never offered to hinder any
of them from taking it where and how they would.

Sect. 14. P. 99. He says [ This is Mr. Baxter's own Case -- when he is
pinched with the Point of Separation, thus he declares, that his hearers are
the same with ours; at least ten or twenty for one. -- If this be true, then
what such mighty help is this to our great Parishes, what color or pretense is
there from the largeness of them, that he should preach to the very same men
that come to our Church. -- Then how come they to be lawful when few or none of
those many thousands ever come. -- to speak softly this pretense is not
becoming Mr. Baxters Sincerity.

Ans. what hope of Justice from such Judges? Or what hope of profiting such
Readers by Dispute, as cannot answer such as this themselves. When I began to
preach at St. James's the neighbors assured me, that many of the hearers had
been at no Church of four years; but they were Members of the Parish Church,
and that some of them got into the Church, but rarely: and some liked it not so
well as to be forward seekers. When I was driven thence, I preached a while
where Mr. Wadsworth was in Southwark: There were some people that had adhered
to their old ejected worthy Pastor, and some that I knew not. Since then I
preach once on the Lords day in another man's Pulpit, as near St. James's as I
could, and the same persons that heard me there do (many of them) come hither,
and some others: of all whom I know very few, but by report. On Thursdays I
preach a Lecture in another man's Pulpit to persons of whom I know not many: but
report says, that some of them join not ordinarily with the Parish Ministers,
and some do, and most judge it lawful, and sometime, but seldom practice it:
And those are of two sorts: some that prefer the Nonconformists Ministry, and
some that finding the Parish Churches crowded, and many present are out of
hearing, do seldom go thither, though they are of the Parish Churches, and
dissent not from their Ministry or Worship: some say [ we have no Seats and
cannot stand:] some say [ we cannot hear the Minister:] some say, Thousands
stay away that can get no room, and will go no whither else, and when we can go
elsewhere, we will not crowd in first to keep them out, that so much need
Others must be out if we be in. These are your own Church Members: they hear
you sometimes, but seldom. Others that hear you constantly on the Lords days,
will think that a Sermon on the week days may be needful to them whatever you
think or say against it. And is it inconsistent with Sincerity here to plead
the peoples necessity. It Is well that our Sincerity is not to stand or fall to
your judgment. Did I say that my hearers are constant hearers in your Churches?
Can you persuade the World, while you deny not that half or a quarter of your
own Parish cannot hear you (much less many greater Parishes) that if some of
them do but sometimes crowd in, perhaps once in many months or weeks, by coming
with the first, and do but dwell in the Parish and own you, that they have no
need to hear or worship God publicly all the rest of the year, and to pretend
such need becomes not Sincerity.

2. And as to those that meet in lesser Parishes, you thought not meet to take
notice of my answer, assigning many Reasons, which I will not repeat, any
further than to tell you. 1. That many Churches there are unbuilt. 2. Many come
from the greater Parishes to them: and some have other Reasons.

Sect. 15. P. 102. He says [Mr. Baxter has a whole Chapter ( Plea p. 141.) of
Reasons against the Communion of Laymen with our Church.] Answ. You are unhappy
in History, though it be your strength. There Is not a word to prove it unlawful
for Laymen to have Communion with your Churches, but only the Matter of Fact
named, which is supposed to the Controversy; But it being cunningly worded by
you, it may be by [ Reasons against Communion with our Churches,] you meant but
as I did ( Reasons for Nonconformity in those particular Acts:) But do you not
your self all-along suppose and plead, that though we conform not, yet we
should hold Communion with you. Why call you then the Reasons of Nonconformity,
Reasons against Communion.

Sect. 16. P. 103. He adds [ in the same Books he says, it is Schismatical in
a Church to deny Baptism without the transient Sign of the Cross, or for want
of Godfathers, etc. or to deny Communion to such who scruple kneeling. Now if
the Church be Schismatical, then those who separate in these things are not.

Answ. 1. Say you so! Then we are not only quit, but further quit than we can
own our selves. I undertake to prove that it may be Schism to separate from a
Church that is guilty of some Schismatical Acts and Impositions. And it needs
no proof, but the plain History, and their Accusations of one another; that
there are few, if any Churches on Earth that are not guilty of somewhat that is
Schismatical, in East, West, North or South, in Africa, Asia, Europe or
America; Greeks, Muscovites, Jacobites, Abassines, Nestorians, Armenians,
Georgians, Mengrelians, Circassians, Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists,
Prelaticalls, Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, etc. And must we
separate from them all.

2. Verily Sir, denying Persons, Christendom and Church Communion are great
things. And if a Cross and a gesture forbidden by the Ancient Councils in
Adoration every Lords Day, be now matters so weighty; as for them to deny
Christendom and Communion, for shame call them Indifferent no more: one would
verily think that when you writ your Defense of Archbishop La^d you had been of
another mind, if words are any notifying Signs of your mind. 3. Other Pastors
may be used, in such instances without separating from you, Sir these are not
impossibilities to peaceable men. In both the places where I formerly preached,
a public Minister and a private lovingly join as assistants, one doing that
part which the other cannot. And they all live in peace.

Sect. 17. I am next assaulted Page 110. I say [ The Benefit of Christian Love
and Concord may make it best, for certain seasons, to join even in defective
Modes of Worship, as Christ did, etc. though the least defective must be chosen
when no such Reasons sway the other way.] Reader, is not this true? Will not
the denial of this drive us from the Parish Churches, and from almost all, or
require us causelessly to choose sins of omission. Would you not take him for a
separatist that is against this. But he says [ And hence we take notice 1.
That no Obligation to the Peace and Unity of this Church as they are Members of
it, does bring them to this occasional Communion with it; but a certain
Romantic Fancy of Catholic Unity by which these Catholic Gentlemen think
themselves no more obliged to the Communion of this Church, then of the
Arm^nian or Abissine Churches: Only it happens that our Church is so much
nearer.

Answ. 1. This is not true: For 1. we take this Church to be far less corrupt
than the Armenian or Abissine. 2. We have more Obligations to it from the civil
Magistrates, Laws and Protection, etc. 2. Is nearness such a trifle with you.
How much do you differ from Mr. Cheny. Tell us, why we should be of your Parish
Church rather than of one an hundred miles off, but for nearness and
Cohabitation; why else of old had each City its own Church? 3. Is Catholic
Unity become a Romantic Fancy. Is this the same man that wrote the Defense of
Archbishop Laud, we are not ashamed of the title of Catholic. 4. If I name one
Obligation to Communion with you, is it a learned Note to gather that I deny
all other? 5. When prove you that I am only for occasional Communion when I
have so long practiced constant Communion with you? These are reasons suitable
to your cause.

Sect. 18. He adds [ Ask him what Church he is a Member of: If he answer, he
could have occasional Communion with all tolerable Churches, but was a fixed
Member of none, would they (if he were at Jerusalem) take such a man for a
Christian? What? a Christian and a Member of no Church. And I much doubt
whether they would admit such an one to occasional Communion, etc. Answ. 1.
Wonderful! Who would have thought that this man had been so much for the
Principles of Separation (more than the Independants) In his defense of Laud he
maintains that the Power of the Keys is formally in the whole Church, and
given to Peter as their Representative (which is not true, for it was given
only to Pastors as such and not to the Laity.) And now he would make that man
no Christian that is no fixed Member of some particular Church. Let us examine
whether this be true.

CHAP. VI. Q. Whether he be no Christian that is not a fixed Member of a
particular Church?
Sect. 1. HE that is a true Member of the Universal Church, which is Christ's
Body, is a true Christian: But many are Members of the Universal Church, which
are no fixed Members of any particular Church. Ergo.

2. All that are rightfully Baptized are Christians, (for it is their
Christening.) But many rightfully Baptized are no fixed Members of any
particular Church. Ergo.

3. He that has all the Essentials of Christianity is a Christian: But many
that are no fixed Members of a particular Church have all the Essentials of
Christianity. Ergo.

4. A fortiore, They that are not so much as bound in Duty to be fixed Members
of a particular Church, though Baptized, are not unchristened for want of such
Membership. But many Baptized person are not so much as bound in Duty to be
fixed Members of a particular Church. Ergo. Instances.

1. The Eunuch baptized in his Travails Acts. 9 was only a Member of the Church
Universal. 2. Those that were converted by Frumentius and Edesius when there
was no particular Church: And all that are first converted in any Infidel or
Heathen Land before any Church be formed. 3. Those that by Shipwreck are cast
on heathen Countries where no Churches are. 4. Travelers that go from Country
to Countries (as Lythgow did nineteen years, and others many.) And I think he
unhappily named Jerusalem, where Travelers come that are of no fixed Church
(unless he in that also be a Superindependant, and think that men may be many
years Members of a Church many hundred miles off, which they have no personal
communion with.) 5. Merchants and Factors, who are called to dwell long among
Infidels where are no Churches. 6. Ambassadors who by their Princes are sent to
reside among such, much of their lives. 7. Wanderers that have no fixed
habitations; as many Pedlers and other poor wandering Tradesmen, and loose
Beggars that have no Dwelling. 8. Those thot live among Papists or any other
Christians who impose some sin as a condition of communion. 9. Those that live
among such Christians as have no true Pastors who are constitutive parts of
particular Churches. Some being incapable through insufficiency, some by
Heresy and some for want of a true Call: Such as by Mr Dodwells Doctrine most
of the Christian World are, for want of uninterrupted rrue Episcopal
Ordination. 10. Those who are subjects to such as permit them not to be fixed
Members: As Wives hindered by Husbands, Children by Parents, and some Subjects
violently hindered by Princes; who yet allow them transient Communion. And
verily a man would think by the writings of many Conformists, that they took it
for a Duty to obey a Prince in such a case. 11. Those who live where
Church-corruptions are not so great as to make transient Communion unlawful,
but so great as to make fixed communion seem to be a culpable consent: If I
come in travel to a Church of Strangers, I am not bound to examine what their
Discipline is, what their Lives be, or how their Pastors are called: But where
I am fixed I am more bound to know these, and if I find them exclude
Discipline, live wickedly* and have unlawful Pastors, I may in some cases be a
partaker of the sin if I fix among them. 12. They that live in a time and place
of Schism and distraction, striving who shall prevail, and condemning each
other, all following several Factions, and needing Reconcilers: It may for a
time become in prudence the duty of peacemakers, to own no Faction, nor to be
more of one Church than of another, while he sees that it will do more hurt
than good; And those that wait in hope as the Nonconformists now do, to see
whether their Rulers will restore them to reformed Parish Churches, may at once
in prudence find it needful, neither to fix as Members in some Parish Churches
till reformed (in the Teachers at least) nor to seem to be Separatists by
gathering new Churches. In none of all these cases is a man unchristened, nor
schismatical, for being no fixed member of any Church besides the Universal.
And as it is the ill hap of these men commonly to strike themselves, I doubt
they will prove Grotius himself no Christian, by this Rule, who for many years
before he died, they say joined with no particular Church, as a fixed member.
And I know not well what particular Church they make the King a Member of.

Sect. 2. To his Questions Page 3. [ Were we not Baptized into this Church, and
do you not Renounce Membership? This is scarce a civility. I answer, 1. This
Church! which Church do you mean? I was not Baptized into St. Giles's nor St.
Andrew's Parish Church, but into one above an hundred miles off, and yet my
removal made me no culpable Separatist. Or does he mean, This Diocesan Church?
No; I was Baptized in the Diocese of Lichfield. Does he mean This National
Church; as it is supposed a political body constituted of the Ecclesiastical
Governing and Governed Parts, he says there is no such Church of England; but
that It infers Popery to assert such. But if he equivocate here, and mean
not by a Church as in the rest, but either a christian Kingdom, or an agreeing
Association of many Churches, I am still a fixed member of such a Kingdom, and
of such an Association in all things necessary to Churches and Christian
Communion. 2. But Baptism as such entered me only into the Universal Church;
much less did it fix me in any other. I was Baptized where I was to stay but a
little while. And this phrase of [ being Baptized into our Church,] is to me of
ill sound or intimation. Bellarmine says that all that are baptized are
interpretatively thereby engaged to the Pope: I was baptized in a Parish, and
in a Diocese and in a Christian Kingdom; but not so into them, as to be obliged
to continue under that Priest or Bishop or in that Kingdom. And my Baptism I
hope did not oblige me to every Canon, Ceremony, Form, or Sin of the associated
Churches in England, abusively by him called one Church. 3. And unhappily it is
not mere Independancy that he is still pleading for, but some extremes which
the moderate Independants disclaim, viz. That a member of their Churches is so
tied to them, that they may not remove to another without their consent. And am
I so tied? to what, to Parochial, or to the Diocesan, or to the association of
English Churches. If it had been to the Species, I would fain know whether
their things called by them Indifferents specify them.

Sect. 3. P. 111, 112. He yet more pleads as for Separation [ why then above
once or twice? why should I so countenance defective Worship and not rather
reprove it by total forbearance of Communion,] etc. Answ. My Reasons I told
him, because the accidents may continue which made it a Duty, but I cannot
hinder others from yielding to his arguments: Let him make his best of them.
Only I must tell him yet 1. that if he lay his cause on this, that their
Parochial or Diocesan Churches are not defective. 2. Or that the defects cannot
by others be avoided, he will quite mar his matter, and undo all by overdoing.
3. And if he indeed think that all defective Churches must be forsaken, he will
be one of the greatest Schismatics in the World. But who can reconcile this
with the scope of his whole Book?

Sect. 4. P. 112. He says, Here are no bounds set to peoples Fancies of purer
Administrations. Answ. Have I so often and copiously named the bounds, and now is
the answer, [ Here are none.] Are there none in all the same Books he cites?
2. Scripture is their bounds, as he well opens in his desence of Bi^hop Laud.

Sect. 5. P. 114. He complains of my leaving out the best part of his argument,
viz. [ The people may go to the Anabaptists and Quakers.

Answ. Alas that such things should be the best to such a man! By [ May go] you
mean, 1. lawfully, 2. or eventually, 3. or for want of due hindering.] The
Reader may think that you by Calumny father the first on me, as if I said, that
so to go to the Quakers were no sin, whereas I still say that if they do but
leave your Churches by any culpable Error it is their sin. 2. And as to the
Event, many not only may but do, turn Quakers, Papists and Athiests, 3. And as
to the third, it is all the question here (not whether we should seek to save
them but) which is the true reasonable and allowed means, Whether it be the
Patrons choosing for all England the Pastors to whose care they must trust
their Souls, and laying them in Jail that will choose others? Or whether there
be not a righter way. And again I say, Kings and Patrons choose not men's Wives,
or Physicians, or Food, and every man has a charge of his Soul as well as of
his Life, Antecedent to the Kings or Patrons charge.

Sect. 6. But why ( says he P. 11. v. 115.) must the King bear all the blame,
if men's Souls be not provided for, etc? Answ. He that is the chooser must bear
the blame, the King for Bishops, and the Patrons for Parish Priests if they
mischoose. And do you think in your conscience that all the Patrons in England
of so various minds and lives, are like to choose only such, in whose pastoral
conduct all that care for their Souls should rest. Yea though the Bishops must
Institute them as they Ordained them. When we heretofore told them of the
multitudes of grossly ignorant, drunken Priest, their answers were, 1. Their
Chaplains examined them. 2. They had certificates. 3. A quare impedit lay
against them if they required higher knowledge than to answer the Catechism in
Latin. And now experience will not warrant us to know what such men are. P.
115. He asks How it is possible on these terms to have any peace or order in
an established Church. Answ. I have fully told him how in a whole Book of
concord, And has their way caused greater peace and order? Yes, to themselves
for the time. So Popery keeps some Order and Unity with them that hold to it:
But it kept not the Greeks or Protestants from forsaking them.

Sect. 7. P. 119. 120. He says, [ They only look on those as true Churches
which have such Pastors whom they approve. Answ. Equivocal words: 1. If they
approve not those whom they should approve, it is their sin. 2. Approving is
either of the necessaries ad esse, or only ad melius esse. They must not put
the later for the former. 3. Approving is by a Governing or but a discerning
private Judgment. The first they have not, but the later. In good earnest,
would he have all the people take those for true Pastors, who they verily think
are none. Can they at once hold contradictions? And if they must not judge as
dissenters, what means Mr. Dodwels and such men's Arguments to prove all no
Ministers that have not Succession of Episcopal Ordination? Must not the people
on that account disown them, by his way?

Sect. 8. p. 119. He brings in against us my words [ I take those for true
Churches that have true Pastors, and those for none, that have 1. Men incapable
of the Pastoral Office, 2. or not truly called to it, 3. Or that deny
themselves the essential Power. Answ. He knows that I speak not of equivocal
but proper political Churches. And is it possible that such a man should
dissent in this? 1. Can he be a true Pastor that is incapable of the Office?
Shall I abuse time to confute gross Contradictions? Or if he be a professed
Infidel, Can he be a Christian Pastor? 2. Is a Layman a true Pastor that is not
truly called to it? why then do they argue as Mr. Dodwell? or Re-ordain men. 3.
Can a man be a Pastor against his will, or that con^enteth not, but renounceth
it? or can that be a true Pastoral Church that has no Pastor? Verily we are
but upon low works, if these be the things which we must prove.

Sect. 9. He adds, [ And one or other of these he thinks must, if not all the
parochial Churches in England fall under.] Answ. I read these words of the Dr.
to a Papist, [ To speak mildly, this is a gross untruth.] Therefore I hope it
were no Rage for me to have said the like. How does he prove it? Nay in the
place cited by him I not only professed the contrary, but gave the Reason, p. 65.
[ Because I judge of their Office by Gods Word, and not by the Rule which
deprives them of an essential Part.] And 1. He cites my confession that those
that I hear preach well (and therefore are not incapable men.) 2. That their
Ordination has all essentially necessary, and all the worthy men that I know
have the communicants of the Parishes consent, though not Election, and
therefore are called, 3. And many of them (as he) thinks they have all
essential to the Office and disown it not, though I think others deny it them,
where there is the truth of what he says.

Sect. 10. p. 120. Because my practice disproveth him, he finds out a Subtilty,
that I join not with the Parish Churches as true Churches, but only as Chapels
or Oratories -- he accounts not our parochial Churches as true Churches, nor
does communicate with them as such -- a Subtilty beyond the reach of the old
Brownists. Answ. Deliberately to print such untruths seems tolerable in him,
but to say they are such would seem passion in me, and what other answer are
they capable of? -- What I expressly say of the three forementioned excepted
sorts, he feigneth me to say of all or most of the Parish Churches; and yet
dare not deny the truth of any one of the Exceptions. 1. Do not all those men
take the Parishes for no proper political Churches, but only for Parts of the
Diocesan Church, such as we call Curates Chapels, who say that a Bishop is a
constitutive Part of a true political Church and enters the Definition, and
that it is no Church that has no Bishop, and that Diocesan Churches are the
lowest political. And do I need to tell him how considerable these men are
among them. 2. Does he himself take any one of these for a true political
Church? When I was young, diverse Laymen by turns were our public Reading
Teachers: Among the rest one was after proved to counterfeit Orders. This man's
acts were no nullities to us that knew it not: but when we knew of such must we
take them for true Pastors, and it for a true Church?

Sect. 11. p. 221. He says, [ Any Parochial Church that has such a one (a
Bishop or Pastor over them that has the power of the Keys, and owns it self to
be Independent) he allows to be a true Church and none else.] Answ. More and
more untruths. 1. Where do I say [ that owns it self to be Independent,] as if
that were necessary to its being. 1. Does he not confess that I own general
Visitors or Archbishops and appeals? 2. That I own Associations which he makes
the state of the Church of England? 3. That I own Synods for obliging concord?
4. That I own the Magistrates Government of all? Is there no dependancy in any
of these, or all? what dependancy more does he assert? 2. As to the Power of
the Keys, dare he come into the light and tell us, whether any power of the
Keys, that is, of the Government of his particular Church be essential to the
Pastor of a true organized governed Church or not. If not, is it not a
contradiction to call it a governed Church? If yea then is he a Pastor that
wants what is essential to a Pastor? But if they will call a forcing Power, or
the present secular Mode of their Courts, by the name of the Keys, I never said
that these are essential to a Church, nor desirable in it, but am a
Nonconformist because I will not by Oath or Covenant renounce (just) Endeavors
to amend it.

Sect. 12. p. 121, 122. The next Accusation is, [ They leave it in the peoples
Power notwithstanding all legal Establishments to own or disown whom they judge
fit.] Answ. He tireth me with putting me on repetitions. 1. They can unjustly
judge of none and disown them without sin. It is not I that give men power to
sin, no more than Power to die, or be sick, which is but impotency: would I
could give them power against it. 2. It is not power to reject any chosen by
King or Patrons, from being public Teachers, or to have the Tithes and
Temples, nor to be a Pastor to others. But it is to have a discerning Judgment
whether one chosen by the Patron be a person to whom he himself ought to trust
the pastoral Conduct of his Soul. Either the Dr. thinks that Laymen have this
discerning power and duty or not. If yea, is it nothing to him to seem thus
seriously to plead against his conscience? If not, I ask him, 1. What meant
Christ and his Apostles to call men to beware of false Teachers, to avoid the
Leven of their Doctrine, to mark them and avoid them, and turn away from them,
and not bid them good speed? 2. What meant all the ancient Churches to forbid
Communion with Heretics? and even some Popes and Councils to hear Mass of
Fornicators? ^. What meant all those Fathers and Councils, that make him no
Bishop that comes not in with the peoples consent? if not Election. 4. Why
will he not be entreated to tell us in what Countries, or with what Limitations
the contrary Doctrine must be received? Must all the people trust only such
Pastors as the Prince or Patrons choose all over England? or also in Ireland,
France, Spain, Italy, Germany, among Lutherans, Calvinists, Greeks, etc.
supposing the Law be on that side? Must we all be of the Kings or Patrons
Religion? 5. Is this agreeable to his old Doctrine cited Chap. 1.

Sect. 13. p. 122. He adds, [Mr. Baxter speaks his mind very freely against the
Rights and Patronage, and the Power of the Magistrates in such Cases, and
pleads for the unalterable Rights of the people, as the old Separatists did.
Ans. Is this true? 1. What is it against the Right of Patronage or Magistrates
Power for me to choose who I will trust the guidance of my Soul with, while I
contradict not his power to choose public Teachers, and give the Tithes and
Temples, and confess that for order sake I ought to consent to such as he
chooses thus, unless he put on me a true necessity of a better choice? If the
King choose all the Hospital Physicians, what wrong is it to him, if I at my
own charge choose a better for my self when I think else ignorance or malice
will murder me? Does he that desires (as I ever do) that in so great a case
there may be many Locks to the Church Door, deny any one of them, viz. The
Ordainers consent, the Magistrates and Patrons, and the Peoples. Is this the
same that the old Separatists did? Should Glocesier take Goodman a Papist for
their Bishop because the King chose him? Abundance of Patrons in the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth's Reign presented Papists. It seems if they were imposed by Law,
and Patrons, you would have the people submit to those that cry down Bishops,
Liturgy and Ceremonies too. Father Paul Sarpi translated by Dr. Denton will
tell you how new a way this is.

Sect. 14. p. 122. He adds [ The People are made Judges of the Competency of
their Ministers.] Answ. They are discerning Judges. Does not your charge imply
that you think otherwise; and yet you dare not say so. Must they not judge when
Foreigners heretofore were set over them, whether they speak English or no? or
if a Socinian deny Christ's Godhead or the im* mortality of the Soul, whether he
be Competent or not? Or if they have an ignorant Curate, that when necessary
advice for the Soul is asked of him, will say no more but [ Trouble not your
head about such matters, but cast away care and live merrily.] If when the
blind lead the blind both fall into the ditch, must we not note the difference?
Alas how little would some men have a man care for his Soul, in comparison of
caring what Physic, what Food, what Wife, what Servant, what Trade he
chooses? Trust one to the conduct of such as all the Patrons of England will
choose for you, but not any of the other. As to the not causeless forsaking
former Pastors, he knows that it was the strict charge of the old Canons of
the Churches; and the Bishops themselves do hold the same. I thought they ought
not to be forsaken because men thrust them out. The Churches at Antioch,
Alexandria, and many more did often and long cleave to those Pastors whom the
Christian Emperors cast out, and reject those whom they imposed. When I have
proved this so fully in my first Plea and Church History, what an
unsatisfactory answer is it for such a Dr. to repeat it and say, This is plain
dealing. Is the Judgment and Practice of the Churches so light with him.

Sect. 15. p. 123. The next charge is, [ They give directions to the people
what sort of Ministers they should own, and what not.] Answ. We do so: And I
had thought all Christians had been of the same mind. It Is sad with the Church
when this Doctrine needs a public defense. Dare he say, that all imposed
must be owned? Then either Salvation is at the Magistrates will, or it is the
privilege of such Countries as have good ones, or a man may be saved in any
Country Religion contrary to the Article which they all subscribe.

Sect. 16. Next the Accuser falls on my general Rule, [ The Ministry that
tends to Destruction more than to Edification, and to do more harm than good,
is not to be owned,] and his bare recital is confutation. Ans. I must profess
that I am so confident of this, that a thousand such dissenting Drs. cannot
change me: And according to his excellent Rules of judging in the end of his
Discourse of Idolatry, which makes natural Verities most certain and
fundamental, me thinks it should to him be surer of the two than the Gospel it
self: viz. That all men should love themselves, and be unwilling to be damned,
and therefore should not own that Ministry of man which tends more to
Destruction than to Edification. And when he wrote that cited in my first Chap.
he was of that mind or he was a most gross dissembler. But must it be
otherwise? Is it our Salvation that we must sacrifice to Priests, Prelates or
Princes wills? If our Tithes would have served them, we had not gainsaid them.
If our Bodies and Estates might have satisfied them, we had not struck at it so
much. But when ( Destruction) signifies ( Damnation) it is a hard bargain? If
we should renounce our Christianity for them, we are never the nearer: for we
are still Men and therefore loath to be destroyed in Hell? If this be the
meaning of the Article which denies free will, I deny it freely: I have no
such free will. But O Reverend Fathers, be more impartial: Are you so loath to
lose your great Riches and Honor, yea or to have your Reputation so far
questioned, as to be contradicted, or have others live by you that preach
without your consent; and yet must all the people of England, so much deny
their own Salvation for you, as to submit to a destroying Ministry? Why then
did you before put ( agreement in Doctrine) among the requisites to our
Accusation? must we agree and not judge whether we agree or not? Why then must
not all Heretics, Papists, etc. be received, why then are all your volumnious
Accusations produced to prove us justly silenced? and Mr. Dodwels to prove us
no Ministers of Christ, if we want nothing but a human power to impose us on
the Churches, and a Patron to present us? But the best is, when you have talked
and written your worst, men will be unwilling of destruction; and till the
Bible be forbidden, men will read, ( Beware of false Prophets: Let no man
deceive you: prove all things: from such turn away: Mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned and
avoid them, and more, 2 Pet. 2. J. ^it. 3. 10. 2. J. 10, 11.

Sect. 17. He adds, ( That we may not think all this to be only a Romantic
Scheme, or Fiction,) he adds, ( that they are not able to confute the people in
too many places, who tell them that their public Priests are so defective in
their necessary Qualifications for their Office, as that they hold it unlawful
to own such for true Ministers, and to encourage them by their presence, and
commit the care of their Souls to such. Ans. 1. This is true: we are not able
to confute them: If you be rejoice in your Wisdom. 2. Either you would have us
believe that there are none such, or that no such are to be so refused. The
first you attempt not: If you did, I would repeat a Catalogue of my old
Teachers and Acquaintance: but I have named them to Mr. Hinkley. And as to the
second, I prove it (a sad task for such a one as you to put us on.) 1. Such as
are known to be no authorized Ministers of Christ, should not be owned as such:
But all those that want the necessary Qualifications for their Office are no
authorized Ministers of Christ. Ergo. If the Major were not true, Error or
Lying were a duty. The truth of the Minor is evident in the terms: necessartum
est sine quo res non esse potest. It is Qualifications necessary to the Office
in esse, and not only to the well performance that is mentioned. Forma nunquam
recipitur in materiam dispositione necessaria carentem. But here the Office is
the form, and the necessary disposition of the matter is supposed wanting.
Ergo. Again: All men are bound to avoid the apparent means of Damnation: To
trust the conduct of our Souls to men incapable for want of necessary
Qualifications, is an apparent means of Damnation (as excluding an ordinarily
necessary means of Salvation,) Ergo. Again: It is a great sin to encourage men
in the wilful damning of their own Souls, and hindering the Salvation of many
others: But to own an unqualified incapable man as a Minister of Christ, is to
encourage him in the wilful damnation of himself (by his profane undertaking)
and in hindering the salvation of many others, Ergo. I will not recite what
Zechary and other Prophets say of the usage of false pretenders to be Prophets,
lest you misapply it. Again: No man ought to consent to the profane subverting
of Christ's Church-Offices and Ordinances: But to consent to the Ministry of
unqualified incapable men, is to consent to the subverting of Christ's
Church-Offices and Ordinances. Ergo. Can your patience endure unqualified men
in the Ministry, and cannot endure such as us out of Jail, because we obey you
not in all your imposed Oaths, Words and Practices.

Sect. 18. Next he thus confuteth us, ( and directly contrary to the Principles
of the old Nonconformists, as appears at large by Mr. Ball saying (If Can's
meaning be that it is not lawful to communicate in the Worship of God with
Ministers not fitly qualified, disorderly called, or carelessly executing their
Office, it is directly contrary to the word of God, sound Reason, and consent
of all the Learned. Ans. Who would have thought that this worthy Doctor could
not or would not see a difference, between ( fitly qualified) as ad been esse,
and unqualified, or wanting the qualifications necessary ad esse, and between (
disorderly called,) and (not called, or consented to by the Flock at all) and
between ( careless executing the Office) and not having the Office as
uncacapable.) He will not strain at such gnats as these. And is there no
difference between ( lawful Communicating) and committing the conduct of men's
Souls to them as our stated Pastors. Mr. Ball lived not far from me: his
intimate Friend Mr. Ash well knew his mind. You may yet know it fully from Mr.
Cook of Chester, a silenced Minister bred up in his house and sometime one of
your old Patrons (Sr. Roger Burgone) Nonconformists, after many others at
Rockshal in Warwickshire. Mr. Ball was not such an enemy to distinguishing as
to confound Necessaries ad esse Officii and ad been esse.

Sect. 19. But p. 124. I am also brought as against my self for saying ( That a
Ministers personal faults do not allow people to separate from the Worship of
God. 2. nor all Ministerial faults, but only those that prove him and his
Ministration utterly intolerable. Ans. 1. A strong proof, that therefore the
intolerable may be received, because I say, no: I contradict my self by saying
the same things. Personal Faults I distinguished from Ministerial and tolerable
Ministerial from intolerable, then and now: and is this Contradiction? Do not
all do so too, till now? Yea in the place cited by him I 1. said, that as to
personal Faults, as Swearing, Drunkenness, etc. they should get a better man,
if lawfully they can. 2. And I named just as here the intolerable
insufficiencies, direct page 747. viz. 1. An utter insufficiency in knowledge
and utterance for the necessary parts of the ministerial Work. 2. If he set
himself to oppose the ends of the Ministry, etc. by Heresy, Malignity. And I
name the faults that necessitate not Separation.

Sect. 20. Next he cites my words against some men's Factious separating humor:
And does it follow that because many are unfit to judge aright, that the people
must take all obtruded Pastors, and not judge to whom to trust the conduct of
their Souls? How unfit are the ignorant to judge who is a meet Physician,
Lawyer, Arbitrator, yea or wife or husband for them: And yet judge they must as
well as they can: Do you not expect notwithstanding their unfitness, that they
judge your Books and arguing to be truer than mine? And is it by your bare
authority that they must so judge?

Sect. 21. But he much blames me for laying the Case far off, when it is the
London Separation which he questioneth where the Ministers are no such men.
Answ. Could any man have so far searched his heart as to know that he spoke only
against Separation in this one City? When there is no such Limitation in his
Book, And when the same Laws, the same Silencings, Fines, Imprisonments,
accusations of the Preachers are all over the Land. But I am glad for the peace
of the Nonconformists elsewhere, if it concern not them. 2. As to London, he
knows that I give the Preachers due honor, and that I justify not any
unnecessary Separation of the people from them, nor of the Conformists from the
Nonconformists. I gave him an account of my own Practice and the Reasons of it:
Let other men give account of theirs, I know very many of my mind. 3. And he
knows that I often told him that many things make good men's actions culpable in
some degree, that make them not criminalls, odious, or to be ruined. And that I
gave him many of their Extenuations. 4. Among the rest, verily (to use his own
Phrase) it looks somewhat odly by the Church Law or Canon ipso facto to
excommunicate many score thousands in the Land, merely for professing to take
some things imposed to be sin, and then to revile and prosecute them as
Schismatics, for not communicating with you. 5. And I told you that Laws and
the higher ground are not always the Terminus a quo of Schism: Some of them
were never of your Flocks, and therefore never separated from you, but as you
do from them (and somewhat less.) 6. And the Kings License first, and
proclaimed Clemency often, gave them some possession as the Law gives you. 7.
And Plague, Fire and thousands that cannot hear you, made it necessary. But
some Parish Churches are not full. Answ. I see none of those, I come in diverse
where many cannot hear the Preacher; and would you have more? And again I tell
you, 1. They keep meetings in lesser Parishes to receive those that come out of
greater. 2. If those come to you, they must keep out others. 3. When it is
commonly known that in their own great Parishes there is not room, it is hard
for Families to look about the City for room in uncertain places. 4. And all
persons that culpably dislike you are not therefore to be forsaken.

Sect. 22. But the same man that cites my Reprehensions of Separation asks
me, why I do not disown it; as if he presently forgot what he had written. I
disown Schism, and therefore the greatest in the sinful Church-tearers that
smite the Shepherds, and then cry out of the Flocks for being scattered: And I
disown the least, but not by Cruelty but in Charity.

Sect. 23. p. 127. He repeats the Incapacities named by me, ( viz. in Knowledge
and Utterance, by Heresy, etc.) and says, Of all these the people are judges,
and so many separate: Thus no settled Church can subsist, etc. Answ. 1. It Is a
hard case that in such a Volumn as this, he will not tell us his own Judgment,
further than the accusing of ours intimates it (which if we tell him of, he
can say, [ It was not his sense.] Will he openly say that the people have not a
private Judgment of discretion in order to their own practice, whether the
Preacher be an Heretic, Papist, Infidel, Idolater, or not? but must take him
for their Pastor be he what he will? I know he will not say it. What then would
he be at? Why does he accuse us for that which he dare not contradict? Does he
any where tell us, in what cases and how far they must judge? No, he shuns all
such Questions as tend to bring the cause into the light: put twenty and he
will answer few or none of them. If he did, perhaps we should be agreed whether
he will or not.

But (Reader, bear these tiring Repetitions as I must do) 1. He knows that it
is the Ordainers and not the people whom I make judges who shall be a Minister.
2. That it is the King and Patrons that I make the only Judges who shall be
tolerated, and maintained by them, and have the Tithes and Temples. 3. And that
though the Universal Church was many hundred years, for the peoples Election, I
plead ad esse relationis for no more as necessary but consent, who shall be the
Pastor, to whom they will trust the conduct of their Souls: And this is but
Judicium discretionis and privatum non publicum regentis, only guiding each
man's own obedience to God. 4. He knows (if he will know) that I. say and say
again, that the advantages of the Laws and Rulers Favor, and the Tithes and
Temples, and Parish Order, and national Association, are so great advantages to
the Service of God, that no man should be deprived of them, and go another way,
but upon necessity, and very great and urgent cause. But I intend God willing
further to prove to him that [ when 9000 Ministers are all required to sin or
cease their Ministry, a necessity is put upon them to exercise it against such
Prohibitions as far as they can without doing more hurt than good; And that
the sinful compliance of 7000 will not excuse the other 2000 for this duty.]
And this is the case which a friend of truth should have debated.

Sect. 24. p. 126. But (says he,) How shall a man escape being thought
Heretical by the people. Answ. 1. See his own answer here, Chap. 1. 2. How
shall one get all the world to be wise and good? If I knew, I cannot procure
it. But put the case within your sight? How will you escape being judged no
rightful Possessor of your Deanery, or Prebend, or the King's Chaplains place,
or the Parish Church of St. Andrews? I know not how: And yet if an Usurper
accuse you here, and say e. g. that the Church of St. Andrews is his and not
yours, must not the people judge which of you they will take for the Usurper,
and which they will join with and obey? In the times of Usurpation, many of the
people judged the Bishops to be none of their Pastors, nor the ejected
Ministers; must not the rest therefore judge that they were? Where Usurpers
deny the King's Right, ought not the people to judge him to have right, because
they may err? and what Prince or Prelate may not the people judge Usurpers?
What Landlord may not the Tenants deny? What Master the Servants? What Husband
the Wife? But must they not therefore be discerning Judges, who is their
Landlord, Master, Husband, What Schoolmaster may not unlearned men miscensure?
What Physician may they not vilisie? And yet they shall judge and choose for
themselves, and speed accordingly, who can help it? deny men a judgment of
discretion to guide their own choice and actions, and you contradict mankind,
and deny men to be men. What in the world is more abused than Reason and
Freewill? and yet men must act by Reason and Freewil. It Is unworthy a Divine to
cry out against a thing for such unavoidable Inconveniences, as humane darkness
and badness do necessitate, and to swallow Camels on the other side and take no
notice of the mischiess thereof* nor once to tell us how to escape both.

Sect. 25. He instanceth in men's censure of me for the Doctrine of
Justification and asks, Are men bound to separate from me? Answ. One would
think by many such words that the Doctor did seriously believe that I had
(...), that all men are bound to follow an (...) Judgment, and to separate when
they ^al^ly judge they ought.

If he think not that I said so, I would not name his fault lest I more offend
him: If he think I said so, I had hoped weaker Readers could have better
understood me. When I read in the Books of some Conformists yet living whom I
much honor, that to obey Conscience though it err is to obey God, I took it
for my duty often and copiously (especially in my Christ Direct.) to open that
case, and to prove that Conscience is no Lawmaker, but only a discerner of Gods
Law, and that an erring Conscience involveth a man in sin whether he follows
it or not; because God changes not his Law when we change our Judgments of it.
But yet there are some cases in which it is a far greater sin to go against
Conscience though it err than with it. The Dr. dare deny none of this. And does
ill if he would persuade men that I deny it: and that God makes it men's duty to
do ill whenever they judge it good, or forsake good, when they judge it evil.

Sect. 26. But the great offense is p. 130 that I insinuate that the whole Body
of the Church is guilty of great Faults, Conformity being a scandalous thing
with thirty tremendous Aggravations. -- And no wonder if men so judging prefer
others, etc. Answ. Again and again I say, 1. This is unrighteous dealing; To
impose all those things on us; To cast us out of the Ministry and Churches for
not obeying: To Fine and imprison us, and accuse us as Schismatics and
Seditions, To write and preach for the execution of the Laws against us, to our
Ruin: To aggravate our Crime because we tell them not our Reasons; To call us
to tell them what we stick at; To threaten to get the King to force us to give
our Reasons; To declare in Press and Pulpit that we wilfully keep up a Schism
and have nothing to say for it; To continue all this when we have been silent
seventeen years, as fearing that they could not bear it; And after all this
when we disavowed any Accusation of them, and only told them what we feared our
selves, to come upon us with this charge of deep accusing their Conformity, is
injustice if there be any in the World. Either it is sin or no sin which we
fear. If none, why are we not confuted? or invited yet to give our proofs? If
sin, who should be most offended? To be yet plainer with you, had the case been
in the times of the old Prophets and Priests, I question whether to let such a
Kingdom alone so long in that which we judge to be so great sins, would not
have been heavily charged on the Preachers: And I profess that my conscience is
more in doubt whether my so long forbearance was not my sin, than whether
saying at last what I did was sin: And I had nothing to satisfy it, but the
men that I ought to judge wiser than my self, persuaded me that it would have
done more hurt than good, and caused but our further rending, And I think the
Conformists should have been desirous to help them to try whether it were sin
or not, and to have been thankful for helping to save them from it, if it
proved such. But though hence I extenuate the too great withdrawings of some
men against their too deep accusations, he knows that notwithstanding all
these aggravations, I neither justified nor practiced proper Separation.

Sect. 27. p. 133. The next charge is that I make them Usurpers, viz, 1. All
that come into the place of the ejected Ministers, at least to the people that
consent not: But Law and Usurpation are contrary. Answ. 1. I never said that
all are Usurpers to all the people that consent not: If the body of the Church
consent the man is no Usurper, though some odd persons consent not. He is the
Churches Pastor, though not the refusers. 2. I never said that any that had the
Law for them, were Usurpers of the Tithes and Temples. 3. I never said that all
that succeed ejected Ministers are Usurpers; many of them have the Churches
after-consent, though not their Election. Yea I often said, 1. That it is the
peoples duty to consent to the change when it is for the Churches good. 2. And
that their constant Communion signifies their consent. But I will not believe
yet that the Law will prove a man no Usurper of the Pastoral Relation. And when
I have so largely proved the contrary to be true, and to be the judgment of the
ancient Churches, it is an unsatisfactory course to me, to leave it unanswered,
and suppose himself in the right. Not only the first 300 years, but even under
Constantius, Valens, Theodosius Junior, Zeno, Basiliscus, Anastatius,
Philippicus, Justinian, etc. even the Patriarchal Seats practiced the contrary,
keeping their chosen Pastors and refusing those imposed by the Emperors; and
other Bishops Seats the Emperors seldom meddled with as to the choice. Yea in
Arcadius's days Chrysostomes Joannites, in his imperial City were of another
mind. Is his Rule true only in England, or in France, Spain, Italy, Muscovy,
etc. also, or where, that the Law makes men true Pastors?

Sect. 28. But p. 132. he said [ that he detesteth the Principles that set man's
Laws above Gods, and that in stating the Controversy he supposed an Agreement
in all the Substantials of Religion between the dissenting parties of our
Church. Answ. Of all things you are the unhappiest in stating the Controversy.
The Instances here were 1. Insufficiency through Ignorance, 2. Heresy, 3.
Malignant oppugning the very ends of the Ministry, 4. No true calling. 1. Does
he agree with us in all the Substantials of Religion who knows not the very
essentials of Christianity? Ignorantis non est Consensus. 2. Does he agree with
us in all the substantials that is a Heretic? or if we falsely judge his
opinion Heresy, do we agree with him? 3. Is malignant opposing Godliness and
pleading for profaneness or ungodliness an agreement in all the Substantials?
4. What if we agree in all Substantials with an unordained Layman imposed on
us? is he therefore our true Pastor? 5. But how shall we know whether we agree
or not, if we are no judges of it? Do you not see your own Contradictions? who
shall judge whether the Pastors or People agree? shall the Prince or Patron? If
you know the Teachers heart, how know you the Peoples? Must we believe that we
agree, because you say so? If the people must judge whether they Agree, they
must judge of the things in which the Agreement is, that is, both the Pastors
Doctrine and their own minds. And is not this to judge whether he be a
Heretic, etc. or not? And who shall judge whether the disagreement be in
Substantials? It must be the agreers. And they must be wiser than I if they can
learn from you here, what is a Substantial, and how to know it.

Sect. 29. It may be he will say, that where Princes and Parliaments are
Orthodox, none are Usurpers, but true Pastors whom they impose. Ans. But does
not this make the people Judges whether Princes and Parliaments are Orthodox,
and is not that as dangerous as to judge of the Teachers? And Orthodox Princes
and Parliaments may impose Heretical Teachers: and may by Law enable Patrons
and Prelates to impose them. What more natural than to propagate what men like,
and oppose what they hate? If the many hundred Patrons in England be all
orthodox and pious, and free from Schism, etc. we are strangely happy: If not
we may expect that they choose accordingly. But the Bishops will secure us.
Ans. 1. They have not done. 2. They say they cannot by Law. 3. Would it be any
wonder if Bishop Goodman of Gloucester kept not out any Popish Teacher? Or if
such Fathers of the Church as Archbishop Bromhall let in such as would have the
Pope Govern us all by the Canons as Patriark and principium unitatis, and all
pass for Shoismaticks that consent not to such a foreign Jurisdiction,
contrary to our National Oaths.

Sect. 30. As to his instance of Solomon's putting out Abiathar, etc. I answered
it fully (and many more objections) in my first Plea, and will not write the
same again for him that thinks it not worth the answering or taking notice of.

Sect. 31. When p. 138, 139. he makes it the way to all imaginable Confusions,
to deny, 1. that the Kings Nomination of Bishops. 2. and the Patrons of Parish
Pastors proves them no Usurpers, but true Pastors, is he not an unreverend
dishonourer of Bishops himself, who makes them all that for a thousand years
held the same that I do, to be the authors of all imaginable Confusion? Is he
not unreverend to their Canons? and to antiquity? and to the universal Church
itself? Whatever in his third part he Cavils against it, he cannot be so
strange to Church History as not to know that they were commonly against him.

Sect. 32. The matter of the next accusation is p. 139, 140. having said Plea
p. 41. 42. [ If any make sinful terms of Communion by Laws or Mandate, imposing
things forbidden by God on those that will have Communion, and expelling those
that will not so sin] I add [ If any should not only excommunicate such persons
for not complying with them in sin, but also prosecute them with Malice,
Imprisonments, Banishment or other Persecution to force them to transgress,
this were heinous aggravated Schism.] Ans. And is not this true? or does his
bare repeating it disprove it? Is he a zealous Enemy of Schisin that takes all
this for none? I did not steal it out of his defense of Archbishop Laud, but
less than this is there made Schism. Yet he tells us that he sets not man's Laws
above Gods, nor pleads for Persecution. But lest the repeating of my words
should shame the Accuser he has two handsome devices 1. He puts [ complying
with them in sin, that is, Conformity,] as refused, instead of [ those that
will not so sin, in sinful terms of Communion forbidden by God, etc.] 2. He
forgeth an addition as mine [ and therefore it is no sin to separate from such]
when I have no such words, being only there telling what is Schism, and not
what is not. I confess it will sound odly to say [ It is Schism not to
communicate with those who excommunicate, imprison and banish me by Law, if I
will not do that which God forbids, and they make a Condition of my communion.]
For I must not sin: And in prison and Banishment under Excommunication they
deny me communion. And yet I say not that it is always faultless, For if they do
not execute their own Law, in some cases, where public good requires it, I
may best communicate with them as far as they permit me without the imposed
sin, till they do execute them. But this excuses not their Schism.

Sect. 33. p. 140. He blames me as charging him with the silencing design. Ans.
I did warn him in real desire of his safety: If defending the Church-Laws and
Endeavors for our restraint, in the words to which I refer the Reader: If
preaching and writing against our preaching as Schism, and all the rest in his
Books do signify no owning of our silencing, I am glad that he means better
than he seems: who could have thought otherwise that had read 1. his first Q.
whether it be not in the power of those that give orders to limit and suspend
the exercise of the ministerial Function. Q. 2. And whether the Christian
Magistrate may not justly restrain such Ministers from preaching, who after the
experience, do refuse to renounce those Principles which they judge do
naturally tend to involve us again in the like trouble. And Sermon. p. 42. the
Church of Englands endeavors after Uniformity is acquitted from Tyranny over
the Consciences of men, by the Judgment, etc.] And p. 54. condemning them as
hard thoughts of the Bishops that in cruelty they follow Ithacius, etc. And in
this new Book, more such might have deceived a man that judged by his words.
And his arguing that it is unlawful to preach to them because it is unlawful to
hear; What was the meaning of all this if not silencing us?

Sect. 34. p. 140. The next Crime is [ Plea p. 42. As long as they suppose the
terms of our Communion to be sinful, they say, The Schism does not lie on those
that separate, but on those that do impose such terms: and therefore they may
lawfully separate from such imposers.] Ans. It Is hard to know what words to use
to detect all these historical untruths without being thought passionate. 1. I
never said that ( supposing them sinful) will justify a false supposer, but
have often said the clean contrary ( their supposing) is of his forging. 2. I
said not ( the Schism does not lie on those that separate) but only that it is
Schism in the Imposers.) This also is his Fiction. 3. And I said not ( and
therefore they may lawfully separate from such imposers.) But all Readers will
not stay to find out his Forgeries. But how much of this he said once himself,
see in my Chap. 1.

Sect. 49. But here he comes to some closing distinction, which should have
gone before; [ Between terms of Communion plainly and in themselves sinful; and
such as are only fancied to be so through prejudice or wilful ignorance, or
error of conscience.] Ans. What a deal of labor might he have spared himself
and us, if he had here fixed the Controversy in the beginning; we thankfully
accept your late distinction: we ever desired here to put it to the Issue; If
it be through prejudice wilful Ignorance or Error that we judge Conformity a
sin, not only Separation but Nonconformity is a sin. If we do not prove some
parts of Conformity (for one is enough) to be plainly sinful, which are imposed
as Conditions of our Ministerial Communion, and somewhat imposed on the people
as conditions (...) all that part of your Communion, which I ever dissuaded
them from, let the blame be ours.

Sect. 35. He passes next to them that deal more ingenuously than I in owning
Separation, And then returns to me p. 151. and he over and over repeateth his
false accusation, [ that I think it lawful to communicate with them
occasionally, but not as Churches (as thinking they want an essential part,
viz. a Pastor with Episcopal Power) but as Oratories, and so that I renounce
Communion with their Churches as Churches.] Answ. If these untruths had been
made without evidence only, and not also against evidence, they had been the
more excuseable in a man of consideration: But now they are not so, when I have
so often declared that I take the Parish Churches that have true Pastors for
true governed Churches, and prove that they have true Bishops ( Episcopos
Gregis) whether the Diocesans will or not, because Gods Will and not the
Investers, instituteth their Office, and measures their power, and the people
show their consent by constant Communion.

Sect. 36. Then because [ I never gathered a Church, nor baptized any in 20
years, nor gave the Sacrament in 18,] he would know [ what Church I have been
of all this time,] and he supposes [ of no Church.] Ans. I thought he had done
with this before: but he thinks it an advantage not to be so easily let go.
Would he know. 1. What my Thoughts were? 2. Or my Church Covenant? 3. Or my
actual Communion? He shall know all. 1. I thought diverse Ministers where I
lived true Pastors, and the Churches true Churches: I cannot say so of every
Curate. 2. I made no Covenant with any of them: If I had Mr. Cheny would have
condemned me of Atheism, Infidelity, and what not. 3. With diverse of them I
went constantly to the Liturgy, Sermon and Sacrament, as with true Churches,
with some of them I only joined in prayer and hearing, I heard Dr. Rieves till
he caused me to be sent to Jail, and then I could not: And though I was accused
by many for hearing a swearer, I told them, he swore not in the Pulpit: I heard
his poor Curate constantly, when I was accused for hearing a Drunkard, and told
them that he was not drunk in the Pulpit. But I must tell you, I communicated
also with some Nonconformists. And now account me of a Church or no Church as
you please. I doubt you are renewing the Independent Questions with me, which I
am loath to dispute. 1. Qu. Whether an ordained Minister must be a private
Member of another man's Church? Q. 2. Whether when a Non-resident Dean leaves
his Parish to an ignorant drunken Curate, the Parish Church be essentiated by
its relation to the Resident Curate, or the Non-resident Dean? Q. 3. Whether a
Minister not degraded but silenced, living in such a Parish is bound to^ke that
Curate for one that has the Pastoral Charge of his Soul, and a^ the rest of
the flock to commit his Soul to his Pastoral Conduct in personal, private and
public Offices? 4. But I would ask the Dean himself, whether a man may not be
a fixed Member of two or three Churches at once? The Reasons of the Quaere, are
1. Because (by them) a man may be the sixed Pastor of two or three Parish
Churches at once: And an Integral Member of many is not so hard a case, as to
be a constitutive Regent Part of many. 2. Because a man may have two houses in
two Parishes at once; As many Londoners have half their Family at a near
Country house, and half at a City house, and are themselves part of the week or
day at one, and part at the other. And they make Covenants with neither, but
what actual Communion intimates. Q. ^. And if so why might not I at once be
judged a Member of two Churches at once, so far as I communicate often with both?
I therefore answer his question further, what Church I was a Member of? 1. I
was a Member of Christ's Universal Church? Is that none? and yet is in the
Creed? 2. I was a Member of the reformed Church if you will call that One
because associated in one Reformed Religion. 3. I was a Member of the Church of
England, both as a Christian Kingdom, and as the Churches in England agreeing
in the Christian Reformed Religion. 4: I was a Member of the Provincial Church
of Canterbury, so far as living peaceably in it, and submitting both to such
power as they had from the King as Magistrates and a mere general helping
instructing care of many Churches could make me. 5. So far also I was a Member
of the Diocesan Churches where I lived. 6. And I was a Member of some Parochial
Churches so far as constant Communion could make or prove me: And of others
(two at once) so far as partial and moveable Communion could prove me. If this
will not satisfy you, I have proved before (and often to some Independants) that
many men are under no obligation to be fixed Members of any Parish Church:
(whether the King be of any I know not.)

Sect. 37. But p. 152. he comes upon me, why I thought it not my duty all this
while to Baptize, Administer the Sacrament, was I not solemnly bound by
Ordination to one as well as the other? Presbyters of old were rarely allowed
to preach.] Ans. 1. You tell the World what measure we must expect from such as
you. If we had all forborne any Church gatherings, and Pastoral undertaking of
Flocks, and both Sacraments, etc. and only preached as loath to offend you more
than needs, our accusations had but been the greater? which incourageth your
more ingenious Dissenters to do what they also are accused of. 2. Do you not
know our Reasons? They are these: 1. Because we suppose there is a greater want
of our preaching, than of our administering Sacraments: And we would obey the
(...) in all things lawful; and go from you and offend you no further than
(...) will justify us. 2. Because a Ministers Relation to the Church-(...) and
to the world cease not, when his relation to a Parish Church may cease: And
we have not the same obligations to give the Sacrament to all the Christians or
World where we preach, as we have in a Parish Charge. Paul thanketh God that he
baptized not many Corinthians, because he was not sent to baptize but to preach
the Gospel; nor is the terrible charge 2 Timothy 4. 12. equal as to both. 3. Our
Ordination bound us to preach and administer Sacraments, when we are thereto
lawfully called: And we were so called to one, when we were not to the other:
nor were all of us so called alike. But when we know that this way does as much
offend you, we may go further in due time. And do you in one part of your Book
blame us for going further than the old Nonconformists (as you thought) and in
the second thus accuse us for not going further.

Sect. 38. He is again at his talk of only occasional Communion? And had his
mistake no Occasion? yes; he that reads my Books may see what: that is, 1.
When I have said that some Parishes having not capable or called Pastors I take
to be no true Political Churches; but yet can communicate with such as
Oratories or Chapels. 2. That some true Churches I communicate with in
transitu or occasionally as strangers, whose Discipline and Ministers Calling I
am not bound to take account of. 3. I tell those that withdraw too far and take
some true Churches for none, that were it so they might occasionally join with
them as Oratories, 4. And those that dare not commit their Souls to the
Pastoral Conduct of some weak and bad men, that yet they may occasionally
communicate with them upon great and urgent Reasons. And here he gathers his
often repeated untrue Reports.

Sect. 39. p. 156. He grants there is no Separation where there is no
Obligation. And he will prove us obliged to constant Communion with them. 1.
Because we must use all lawful means for Peace and Unity. Ans. 1. We are ready
to prove that our Conformity, nor our forbearing to preach the Gospel are no
lawful means. 2. Can you as well prove, 1. That it is not lawful for you to
join with us? 2. And to forbear silencing, excommunicating, fining and
imprisoning us? Was it no lawful means for Peace and Unity to have forborne
imposing all the Covenants, Professions, Subscriptions, Oaths and Practices, of
what you call indifferent and we think sunful? 3. And is it not lawful for
Parents to enter their own Children at Baptism in Covenant with God? 4. Is it
unlawful to Christen such as scruple your use of the Cross? 5. Or to receive
those to Communion that scruple your Gesture? 6. (...) forbear Canonical
Excommunicating all professed Nonconformi^ Land? 7. Or to let Lords and
Gentlemen choose any Nonconfo^ to be Tutors to their Children, whilst the
Papists may send theirs to Doway, St. Omers, etc. He says, he is [ persuaded
it is one of the provoking sins of the Nonconformists, that they have been so
backward to do, what they were convinced they might with a good conscience.
Ans. Woe to us, if we be not willing to know our sins. But 1. If you will tell
me of any one lawful thing that I have omitted, that tended to Peace, I will
thank you. 2. An indifferent thing is no means of Peace when it will do more
hurt than good. To cease the Ministry we durst not: To use some indifferent
forms in your Churches we could not, being cast and kept out. And to use the
same to those that are against them; when it will hurt them, and procure no
peace with you, and those have sped worst from you that have come nearest you,
and nothing will serve but all; what tendency has this to Unity? You know my
own case proves all this. I regarded not the censures of any that go too far,
so as to keep me from doing what I judged lawful: And did it tend to peace? No,
one sends me to Jail when I went twice a day to his Church: Others say, He is
like an Ape, that is so much the more ugly because he is like a man: Another
more sober says, [ I know not what to make of Mr. B. He communicates with us,
and he preaches to the Nonconformists: Like a man that will go one step on one
side the hedge, and another step on the other.] And this man is much in the
right: for I say still, [ It is the separating hedges in Christ's Vineyard that
I hate, and the enclosing hedge that I am for: I have Business, Friends,
Relations and great Duties on both sides the hedge, some with you and some with
others; And if your hedges would separate Parents from Children, Husband and
Wife, Christian Neighbors, etc. causelessly I will not be so separated, but do
my best to pull down that hedge. And again consider whose sin it is, that so
many lawful things are denied us for Unity. Hold but to your Rule here and we
are agreed. And he seems to consent. For,

Sect. 40. p. 176. Of the Rule Phil. 3. 16. he says, [ If I will but allow
that by virtue of that Rule men are bound to do all things lawful for the
preserving the peace of the Church, we have no further difference about this
matter. Ans. It Is well he will say so much of the Rule, we gladly consent. Then
all the question is, what is lawful on both sides? I add one Q. more. Is it not
lawful for peace to forbear forcing men to disoblige 1000? whom they never
knew, from being obliged by an Oath and Vow to that part of the matter which is
good? If it be the conjunction of some things bad, that disobligeth them, then
he that inserteth a bad thing is free from all obligations of his vow, even in
materia licita and necessaria. And if the (...) of imposing Power be made the
cause, whether is the Cor^ Oath imposed by a superior Power on the King, or is
it his own ^act? or is he therefore not obliged by it? Had it not been
requisite that you should have justified all that we stick at as unlawful,
before you charge us with crossing this Rule?

Sect. 56. p. 204, etc. My words in many Books against Schism are cited and
praised; Reader, he tells men the measure of their Charity and Church
Communion, viz. That men that do as much as I do, that forbore so long
Sacramental Administration, that gathered no Church, that held constant
Communion with diverse Parish Churches, that have wrote so much and earnestly
against Schism, shall yet be ejected, silenced, pay 40 ^, a Sermon and lie in
Jails unless I will do more. While Bishop Lauds design for widening the Church
doors to the Papists, is magnified by Heylin and others as a good work.

Sect. 13. First he finds but two justifiable Causes of Separation; but p. 213,
214. he has found three and no more. 1. Idolatrous Worship: 2. False Doctrine
imposed instead of true. 3. Making and imposing things indifferent as necessary
to Salvation. Ans. 1. Readers, do you remember how even now he exposed to
odium, the peoples judging whether the Pastors be Heretics? And now they may
separate for false Doctrine. 2. I entreat him to think again of these Cases
following. 1. What if the Worship be not Idolatrous, but Blasphemous, or
utterly Ridiculous, tending to contempt of God? 2. What if it be in an unknown
Tongue? 3. What if the Church have no true Minister? I am glad you are not for
separating for want of Episcopacy or Episcopal Ordination? 4. What if the
Church want half the Church-Worship? as to have Preaching and Prayer without
Sacraments? or Sacraments without Preaching or Prayer, or Preaching without
Prayer, etc. 5. What if the Church be but schismatical? Have you written all
this Book, to draw men to you from the Independent Churches, and do you now
tell us that the people may not separate from them, on the account of Schism?
6. What if a Church require me to tell or subscribe to one known Lie, or to
say, that I believe what I do not: or to justify thousands that I think
obliged by a Vow, if they break it? What if they impose any one sin on me
without which they will not receive me to Communion? 7. What if I remove for my
Edification from a drunkess ignorant Priest, to the Church of a wise and holy
Pastor? 8. Are we looser than Pope Nicholas that forbad men to hear Mass from a
Fornicating Pricst? 9. I would you had spoken to Edification and told men what
false Doctrine it is that will allow Separation, and whether it is false
Doctrine preached, or only imposed on the person to be owned? If the former, is
it all false Doctrine or but some, and what? Verily, if all, you are tenfold
more a Seperatist than I: For I look to hear sometimes some words of false
Doctrine in most Pulpits, even of Conformists? If it must be heresy it self, I
will not separate for once hearing it, if the Church profess it not. If it be
imposed Error that you mean, take heed lest you justify Separation from your
Church, by the new Article of Infants certain Salvation. And when both
Arminians and Anti-Arminians subscribe the 39 Articles, tell us whether those
Articles are true in both their senses, or whether the sense be not the thing
subscribed? or whether one half of them should separate. You are too unmerciful
to your self; but what kind of Churches should there be upon your terms? I find
no more in his second part which I am much concerned in.

CHAP. VII. The Reply to his Third Part: The beginning.
Sect. 1. IN his third Part I first find my self accused p. 242, etc. And that
is not only by insisting on a false accusation of my words, but adding a
confutation of himself, as if he discerned not that he did it. In Treat. of
Concord I say, [ If it holds that God instituted only Congregational or
Parochial Churches, as for present Communion, then none of the rest instituted
by man may deprive them of their privileges granted by Christ.] I put it but
with an (If it be so) because I told them my own doubt of it. After I say, [ To
devise new species of Churches without Gods Authority, and impose them on the
World; yea in his name, and call all Dissenters Schismatics, is worse
Usurpation than to make and impose new Ceremonies and Liturgies.] And can any
Christian deny either of these? But he says, [ This supposes Congregational
Churches to be so much the institution of Christ, that any constitution above
these is unlawful and unsupportable:] which is more than the Independent
Brethren do assert. And is any word of all this true? 1. The Independants much
insist on this? I refer him now but to Amesii Medul. de Eccl. Minist. 2. Do the
words suppose that which is plainly excepted in them? If it were granted. 1.
That the Congregational only are so instituted. 2. And that others are not set
over them by God, 3. And yet are obtruded in his name, without his authority.
4. And all Dissenters called Schismatics,] then I say they are unlawful. 5. To
coufute himself plainly he confesses that I say, The question is not whether
the Archbishops should be over the particular Churches, as Successors to the
Apostolical and General Overseers of the first Age in the ordinary continued
parts of their Office. Nor whether Patriarks, Diocesans, Lay-Chancellors as
Officers of the King, exercising Magistracy be lawful.] And yet he says that I
suppose the contrary. He next pretends to give my Reasons: And the chief is,
because it overthrows the species of Gods making; when I only say, That which
overthrows it is unlawful; which is not the Archbishops that are over the
lower Bishops, but those that put them all down, and governed the Carcasses of
the mortified particular Churches as the lowest Bishops of many score or
hundred such as themselves. And he says I am for the full exercise of
Discipline within the particular Church; while he confessed I spoke not against
Archbishops. And yet he says, This is a fair representation of my opinion.

Sect. 2. Coming to prove our Episcopacy the same with the Primitive he
pretends to confute me: That which I asserted was, 1. That by the first
Institution, and Constitution, every Church no bigger for number of Souls than
one of our great Parishes had a Bishop of their own, (one or more I disputed
not.) 2. Yea that for the first two hundred years if not more, no one Bishop
had a Church so big as some of our Parishes, at least except Alexandria and
Rome, and even of them it is not certain that they had more Souls. 3. That
after by degrees the case was altered: But yet after there were many Meetings
like Chapels, a while there was but one Altar. 4. After that those Chapels
had Altars; but so as that at certain times of the year, the people of the
Cities and next parts were all to communicate with the Bishop, and were no more
than could meet to choose the Bishops, and to be present as to the main body of
them, and disciplinary debates, to give consent. 5. In Cyprian's time at
Carthage (a place of greatness and great numbers of Christians) the Church was
grown very great, but not beyond the exercise of such personal Communion as I
described: And the Bishops there and round about being worthy men, kept up the
life of the former Discipline. And as great as their Church was, we would be
glad of such an Episcopacy, Order and Communion. For I often told you, that by
present Communion, I meant not that all must meet in one place at once, (For
the tenth part of some Parishes cannot:) But that as Neighbors and Citizens,
may have personal Converse and Meetings per vices, of some at one time and some
at another, as different from mere mental Communion, or by Synods or Persons
delegate, or as their Governors or Representatives, and this for mutual
Edification in holy Doctrine, Worship and Conversation. And that the footsteps
of this remained long, when worldly Reasons had made a change.

And all this I have proved so fully in my Treatise of Episcopacy besides
what is said in my Abstract of the Episcopal History, that till some man shall
confute the full Evidence of Antiquity there brought, I have no more in Reason
to do upon that subject. And though the Doctors History of this be the most
considerable part of all his Book, yet so far does he leave what I say
uncontradicted, that I find not one word that he says against any of my
Testimonies, nor any for his own cause, for the first two hundred years: But
when he should have proved the extent of the Churches at two hundred years, he
begins his historical Proofs at two hundred and fifty for three or four great
Cities in the World, and so proceeds to Augustine at above four hundred, and
Victor Uticensis about four hundred and ninety, Theodoret four hundred and
thirty, (where he supposes me to say that of his City, which I said of the
Diocese of that City:) And to confute all Impertinencies, and groundless
Suppositions, while my full proofs are unanswered, is but loss of time.

Sect. 3. His chief argument is, [ that no City how great soever was to have
more Bishops than one.] Ans. 1. He can prove no such Rule in the first two
hundred years. 2. See how well the defenders of Prelacy agree? Gracious ( and
de Imperio and in Anotat.) and Dr. Hammond I cited, who say that Cities at
first had two Bishops in each ( Rome, Antioch, etc.) one of Jewish Christians,
and one of Gentile Christians, and says D. H. Peter at Rome was Bishop of the
Jews, and Paul of the Gentiles, and they had two Successors; and says Gretius
The Churches were formed to the manner of the Synagogues, and there were diverse
Churches with diverse Bishops in the same City (in 1 Timothy 5. 17. and de Imp. p.
355, 356, 357.) 3. In the fourth Century a Council at Capua decreed that the
two Bishops with their several Churches at Antioch ( Flavian's and Evagrins)
should live together in Love and Peace. 4. This was a good custom while there
were in the Cities no more than one Bishop might take care of: And the custom
held when times altered the case and reason of it: And Possession and the
Desire to avoid division made it held up by good men. 5. I have at large in my
Treatise of Episcopacy confuted the opinion of appropriating Bishops to Cities;
and so did the old Churches that set up Chorepiscopos.

Sect. 4. p. 259. He says, [ In Cities and Dioceses under one Bishop were
several distinct Congregations and Altars.] Ans. 1. Yes, no doubt, after the
second Century, and perhaps in two Cities a little before; but in few in the
World till toward the fourth Century. 2. This is the same man who in the very
Sermon which he defends said [ p. 27. Though when the Churches increased the
occasional Meetings were frequent in several places, yet still there was but
one Church, and one Altar, and one Baptism, and one Bishop, with many
Presbyters assisting him: And this is so very plain in Antiquity, as to the
Churches planted by the Apostles themselves in several parts, that none but a
stranger to the history of the Church can ever call it in question.] But when I
told him how this would agree us, and hurt his cause, he will quickly fall
under his own censure, and became [ a stranger to the history of the Church]
asserting many Altars in one Church of one Bishop. This Sermon was written
since his Irenicon. And now he feigneth a distinction between [ An Altar taken
with particular respect to a Bishop: and for the place at which Christians did
communicare.] But what was the Altar that was taken with particular respect to
the Bishop? Was it not the material place of Communicn? And so the members of
the distinction are co-incident. Says Optatus lib. 6. Quid est Altar nisi
seeds and corporis and sanguimis Christi? Each Church had long but one of
these. The best Altars that were made after the chief Church Altars were not
for ordinary communion, but honorary of some Martyrs. The truth is, the phrase
of unum Altar was taken up when each Church had but one; but to set up Altar
contra Altar continued after to signify Anti-Churches. But I have fully
answered this in my Treatise of Episcopacy. His conjectures from the numbers of
Officers, etc. he may see there also sufficiently confuted and in Chapter Hist. And
the odd instance of Theodoret he does not at all make credible by his willing
belief of Metius and other Popish Feigners. And were that Epistle genuine a
Cipher is easily dropped in by Corrupters: It has need of better authority that
shall be so singular from the case of all other Churches. And I suppose he
knows that Cyrus was not a simple Bishopric, but a Metropolitan Seat, and
might have 800 Parish Bishops.

Yea whereas there were under Antioch seven Dioceses, and fifteen Provinces or
as others say thirteen, that yet had many Bishops under them, as Seleucia
twenty four. etc. that were more dependant on Antioch, Cyrus was one of the
eight Provinces or Metropolis that were per se subsistentes: And therefore when
Theodoret said how many Churches were under hands, it is like he meant Bishops
Churches and not mere Presbyters, and either a Cipher dropped in corrupted the
account (or else the Bishops had but single Congregations; But for my part as
the case so late concerns me not, so I see nothing to persuade me that that
Epistle is genuine and incorrupt. But I would not have a Diocese which then had
many Provinces, or a Province which had many Bishops Churches, be taken for a
single Church.

Sect. 5. The same I say of Carthage, which was the Metropolis of Africa, and
the first of six Provinces before Justinian, and of seven after, and
Proconsular, and the Church called Africae Caput as August. ep. 162. The sixth
and seventh Carthage Councils tell us of the distribution of the Provinces,
decreeing three Judges to be sent out of each Province, viz. Carthage, Numidia,
Byzacena, Mauritania, etc. Yea Leo 9. P. in Epist. ad Thom. etc. says that the
Bishop of Carthage was post Pont. Romans primus Archiepiscopus and totius Africae
maximus Metropolitanus, (Though yet Binnius truly say that in Cyprian's time he
was not an Archbishop, that is, no proper Governor of Bishops, because they
concluded in Council, nemo nostrum dicitur Episcopus Episcoporum; but he was
the chief of that great Province. And the Dr. himself out of Victor mentions
one Cresseus that had one hundred and twenty Bishops under him: He was
Metropolitan of Aquitana and a Diocese then having many Provinces; how many be
in a Diocese Victor there (...) you that the Bishop of Carthage in his own
Eugitane Province had one hundred sixty four Bishops. And how great were their
Churches then? and L. 2. when he lamenteth the great number of their banished,
Bishops, Presbyters and the Church Members were 4976. And one Parish here has
40000 if not more. He that considers that Cyrus was at most but 60 miles from
Antioch the Patriarchal Seat, and that a Carthage Council had sometimes 600
Bishops, and the Donatists perhaps had as many; and that as he says, Cresceus
had one hundred and twenty Bishops under him, and that Cyprian so often tells
us how Bishops were chosen by all the People, and how he managed his Discipline
in the presence of all his Plebs, (Laity) and by their consent; and how he
tells that it was the peoples duty to separate from the communion of a
sinning Bishop (which implies communion before) and how the Bishops in Council
put the question, When a Church wanted a Bishop, whether one of them that was a
Bishop and had perhaps but one or two or three Presbyters was bound to part
with one to that wanting Church to make a Bishop of? and considers the
circuit and distance of their Cities, and much more which I have elsewhere
named, may well believe large Provinces, and larger Diocesses, but will think
of their Bishops Churches as we must do of theirs in Ireland, when a late
converted Country had six hundred Bishops. Make but Christ's true discipline
practicable, and tie us not to swear or assent to your uncertain forms and we
should no further trouble you in this.

Sect. 6. As for the credit he gives to Syrmondu's copy of Theodoret's Epistle
or to the later Editions of his Works, I am not bound to be as credulous, nor
to take the last Editions for the best, when they come out of the Jesuits
hands: And can prove the Epistle to Joh. Antioch, which Bellarmine would
disprove, to be more credible than this: And it is one blot that he says
Theodoret's Epist. 6. mentions the Metropolitan he was under, when he was
under none, but was himself an Independent Metropolitan: For so the Notitiae
Episc. tells us, was Berytus, Heliopolis, Laodicea, Samasata, Cyros,
Pompriopolis, Mopsuestia and Adama. If his Province was as the Epistle cited
says forty Miles square, and the Christians so numerous as is said, and he
name none of the Bishops under him, but number the Churches, it is like they
were Episcopal Churches and very small. And that Villages had Churches it is no
wonder when there were many Chorepiscopi not only under the Metropolitanes but
the City Bishops. And why I must reject his long received Work if I question
his late found Epistles I know not. But again I say, this is nothing to our
cause, being so long after the ages I mentioned, and my contrary evidence being
not at all confuted

His confidence p. 260, 261. about some citations out of Theodoret, runs upon
false Insinuations: 1. That the question is not of the number of Churches, but
about the extent of the Episcopal Power, whether it was limited to one
Parochial Church, or extended over many: when he knows that I had no such
question; but whether those whose power was over many Churches in the first two
Centuries at least, had not as many Bishops under them over those Churches (if
such there were.) Or if the Bishops were of the lowest rank, whether those
under were not then denied to be Churches for want of Bishops, and were not
only parts of a Church? 2. And he feigneth me to bring Theodorets Testimonies
to prove that even then in Alex. and Antioch a Church was but one Congregation,
when I brought it only to prove, that even in that age they were so small, that
the footsteps of the ancient shape of them still appeared. Such Fictions may
deceive them that will not try what is said, but only read the answerer. But by
this citation I see he read my Treatise of Episc. before his Book came out. And
therefore I will pass by these niblings till he answer it.

Sect. 7. p. 262. He accuses me of [ Rage and Bitterness] for saying that [ if
he will plead for so much Presumption, Profanation of Gods name, Usurpation,
Uncharitableness and Schism, as to own their Churches to be new, and devised
without Gods Authority, and yet may in his name be imposed on the World, and
all Dissenters called Schismatics,] I leave him. And first he feigneth that I
charge him with this; which is untrue, unless he will charge himself with it.
But why do I put in [ If you will so plead.] Ans. Because he accused me for
saying the contrary, viz. [ that so to divise, and so to impose, is worse, etc.
But because I know not why he accused so plain a truth, I said [ If you do so.]
But he now tells me that he ( quoted it to show that I looked on all Churches
beyond Parochial, as Churches merely of man's devising,) which is another
untruth confessed by himself, who before had this up and cited my own words to
the contrary; viz. that I believe the Catholic Church and deny not National
associated Churches; nor Archbishops that put not down the particular Churches,
Pastors and Discipline: one mistake is his excuse for another. Had he meant as
aforesaid, had my words been Rage, or necessary confutation?

Sect. 8. Yea it is his business in the very next page 263 to confute his own
accusation of me by citing my own concessions. And p. 264. he gives me leave
to call our Bishops Archbishops. Ans. But 1. Archbishops have Churches with
their proper Bishops under them. But our Bishops say that there are no such
under them. 2. I told you before that as the Major General, Quartermaster
General, etc. of an Army constituteth not a distinct body from the Army and the
particular Regiments and Troops, so I am not certain that Apostles or
Evangelists or any general Preachers as such, did constitute any Church Form
distinct from the Catholic and the particular Bishops Churches: But if they
are supposed to have taken their several fixed Provinces (which I never saw
proved) I will not contend whether those Provinces may be called Churches. If
we agree about the thing, use the name as you see cause.

Sect. 9. And to your talk of our Bishops being of the same sort, I ask you
whether any of the Bishops for 300 years, or for long after save Cyril Alexand.
by violence, did ever use or claim any power over any Ministers or Christians,
besides mere fatherly Teaching, Persuading, urging Gods Word on them, and
applying it to the consciences of particular Persons by Admonitions, verbal
Censures and Absolutions? Did they meddle by Force, with Body or Purse? Let
your Bishops use no other force or way of constraint than the Apostles did, (if
they be their Successors) and not lay the excommunicate in Prisons and ruin
their Bodies and Estates, and valeat quantum valere potest. But Mr. Glanvile
and many of you tell us, how little you care for it without the Sword.

Sect. 10. If any man will but consider what I cited out of Greg. Nazianzen
that says Men unfit were so ambitious to be of the Clergy, that the Clergy was
in many Churches almost as many as the Laity; And that Presbyters then were
much like the Presbyterians Elders, save that they had the power of Word and
Sacraments though they seldom exercised Preaching in Cities, but left that to
the Bishop; and that the number of their Acoluthi, Exorcistae, Ostiarii,
Lectores, Subdiaconi, Diaconi, etc. made up the great body of them. And the
very Boys and Scholars that were bred up under them, yea or but for
Church-singing, are sometimes joined to make up the number, see Isidor. de
Offic. Eccl. L. 2. even all the Monks, are often numbered with them. And Victor
cited by him seems to number twice the Infantuli so bred up with the great
number of Readers, to the Carthage Clergy, I say he that considers all this,
will not judge of the number of people or Churches by the number of the Clergy,
as he would do now with us, where the great Parishes have but two or three
Priests.

Sect. 11. And as to the cause that I plead for, it is enough that I have
proved that even when the name of Bishop was confined to the Episcopi Pastorum,
yet the Presbyters had the power of the Keys, and were Episcopi Gregis, and
exercised this power in their distant Country assemblies, though under the
Bishop, and the Bishop was to exercise his with them as Assistants; so that the
particular Churches were not really unchurched.

Sect. 12. p. 265. He comes nearer our controversy, but first falsely stateth
the question, supposing that I say that ( the whole power of the Presbyters is
swallowed up by the Bishops.) And is the disputing of a question falsely stated
of any profit? I only said that the office of a Church-Pastor or Presbyter has
three essential parts, viz. the power of Teaching the Church, of conducting
them in Worship, and Governing the people by the use of the Keys. And that he
that destroys one part that is essential (though he swallow not up all the
power) alters the essence of the Office: and that so the English Diocesan
Form does, I have largely proved in my Treat. of Episcopacy which he does not
answer.

Sect. 13. 1. He tells us that the Presbyters are the lower house in the
Convocation, and so have their Votes in passing all the Rules of Discipline,
Articles of Doctrine and Forms of divine Service.] Ans. 1. According to his
description the Church of England has no one Ecclesiastical Government, either
Monarchical or Aristocratical or Democratical: And therefore the Acts of the
Convocation are no Acts of governing the Church of England, but mere
Agreements. Therefore this proves not the Presbyters power of governing it. 2.
If this be a part of Government it is the Legislative Part or the Executive.
The later it is not. The former the Lawyers say it is not; King and Parliament
only being Legislators. But if this be Legislation, we deny it to be any of the
power of the Keys, in question, which is but to judge who is fit or unfit for
Churchcommunion, to Admonish, Absolve or Excommunicate according to Christ's
Law; and is the execution of Christ's Law, and not the making of new Laws. 3. It
is lis sub judice whether the things here named be any part of true lawful
Church Government: Rules of Discipline Christ has made enough, except about
mere mutable Accidents. Articles of Doctrine man must not otherwise make, than
to declare what he believes Christ has made. Forms of Divine Service
commanded to all others, the Apostles never made, nor that we find appointed
any others to make them. If these be lawful by way of agreement of many
Churches, this is none of the Power we speak of. Yet he calls this [ one of the
greatest Rights of Government, viz. making Rules for the whole body; which he
denies to have any constitutive Government.

Sect. 14. He says, [ In this main part of Government our Church falls behind
none of the ancient Churches -- only there they were taken singly in every
City, etc. Ans. That is, 1. When the Ministers of a Diocese choose four, out of
whom the Bishops take two, And 2. This only to make agreements, without any
governing power over the Church of England. 3. And this only about general
Regulation. 4. In either unlawful or doubtful Impositions on others about mere
Accidents or Circumstances of Order; This is the same or as good as, when every
true Church has present Pastors personally to exercise the executive
Church Government called the Keys, by the Laws of Christ already made, in
judging the case of each particular Person, as to his Title to Church Communion
and the Kingdom of Heaven. For that is the thing which by us is pleaded for.

Sect. 15. Next he tells us of four that are to join in Ordinatiom and
Examination; when 1. It is not the making or governing of Pastors which I am
speaking of, but the Government of the Flocks. 2. He knows that it is no
strange thing for our Bishops to say, that both in Convocations and Ordination,
the Presbyters act only as the Bishops Council, and the Bishops only act by
governing authority. 3. I never disputed for Presbyters Power to ordain as
essential to them (nor did I ever meddle in any Ordination.) 4. If four
Presbyters have such power that proves not that four hundred have it, that
never exercise it, in the same Diocese. 5. If by all this you mean that really
Presbyters have the governing Power of the Keys, it condemns those the more
that give it to four and deny it to four hundred or one thousand. 6. When I was
ordained none examined us but the Bishops Chaplain, and two or three City
Ministers called by the Bishop that never saw us before, merely pro forma laid
hands on us with him. But it is well that you give such a power to ordain.

Sect. 16. Next p. 267. he comes to the point in question, whether they have
the Pastoral Power of the Keys over their own Flocks? And 1. He says, One
would think the objector had never read over the office of Ordination for them.
For the Epistle is read, the Charge given by St. Paul to the Elders at Miletus
Act 20, or the third Chapter of 1 Timothy concerning the Office of a Bishop. What
a great Impertinency had this been, etc? Ans. This is like the rest. I must not
suppose that he never read it himself. See Reader, whether any of this be true?
Indeed heretofore it was in the Book of Ordination; but we showed the Bishops
that thence Bishop Usher in his Reduction argued that the Presbyters have some
conjunct Power with the Bishops to govern their own particular Flocks, and some
true Pastoral Power of the Keys (I was one that often urged it on them.) And they
told us that the Bishop was the Pastor and they but his Curates, and to confute
us, put out both these parts of Scripture from the Book which he says are in
it; so that neither of them is there: And presently they also put out the very
name of Pastor given to Parish Ministers, in almost all places of the Liturgy.
Does not all this show their mind?

Sect. 17. Next he tells us of the Bishops Exhortation, calling them [ the
Messengers, Watchman, Pastors and Stewards of the Lord.] Ans. It was so in the
old Book, But the word ( Pastors) here also is purposely put out to show their
judgment. Is this just dealing, And does it not confute himself? 3. He tells us
of the Promise to Minister, Doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline.] Ans. The
truth is neither in the exhortation nor collation of Orders, is there any
mention of any power given him to govern, but only to administer the Word and
Sacraments: and thus far the people are called his charge: But in the question,
Discipline is named thus [ as the Lord has commanded, and as this Church and
Realm has received the same, according to the Commandments of God:] so that
1. The Priest hereby owneth that as it is received in this Church and Realm it
is according to Gods Commandments, and 2. Then promises so to use it: which is
1. To be an Accuser, 2. And as a Crier to publish the Bishops or
Lay-Chancellors Excommunication and Absolutions. This is the promise.

Sect. 18. And what if the name of Government or the Keys had been put in, when
it is denied in its essential part? I have proved out of Cousins Tables, Zouch,
and the Canons and actual Judgment and Practice of the Bishop., that Government
or Jurisdiction is denied to them: And instanced in many and most acts in which
it does consist, in my Treatise of Episcopacy. And this being my question,
(whether the English frame depose not the ancient Churches (which had every one
their own Pastor with the power of the Keys) and so the ancient Offices and
Discipline.) I am not now concerned about the General Archiepiscopal Power of
the Diocesans.

Sect. 19. p. 269. He says ( that while the Apostles lived it is probable
there were no fixed Bishops, or but few.) Ans. Mark this Reader. 1. If so, then
while they lived, there were but twelve or thirteen Bishops in the World, if
any. And were then no more Churches that had governing Pastors? 2. Then if it
cannot be proved that the Apostles were fixed Bishops, but ambulatory Apostles,
there were none in the World in their times. 3. Then the Angels of the seven
Churches were Apostles (reprehended by Christ) or mere Presbyters, or of the
few excepted Bishops. Why then does he himself elsewhere argue that there were
Bishops then, because these Cities were Metropoles? 4. See what concord is
between the chief Doctors of the Church of England. Dr. Hammond says that it
cannot be proved that there were any Presbyters but Bishops in Scripture times:
and supposes the Episcopal Party of his mind. This Dr. says, ( It Is probable
there were no fixed Bishops, or but few. And so they differ. 1. Of the sense of
the Texts that mention Presbyters and Bishops. 2. And about the guidance of the
Churches de facto in those times. 3. And if the Arpostles were not fixed
Bishops of single Churches, they have no Successors as such. If they were we
must have but twelve or thirteen Bishops as their Successors in the World. And
which be those Seats? and how prove they their claim?

Sect. 20. To prove the Parish Ministers Pastoral Power p. 272. he tells us of
that he is judge of the Qualification of those that are to be confirmed. Ans.
1. Had I ever taken a Parish Charge under them, I would have taken more
advantage from the new Rubrike about this, than any thing else, and then the
Bishops intended. But 1. There is not one of a multitude confirmed, and desire
of Confirmation proves not any understanding of Christianity. 2. And if the
Minister doubt whether they be Ready or capable, they may refuse to give him
any account. 3. He is to send in the names of such as he judges fit. But 1.
it is only when the Bishop Summons them. 2. And the Bishop is no way obliged to
confirm no more than the Priest approves of. To prove this, 1. Their ordinary
practice is to confirm without the Curates hands: 2. When the Kings Declaration
was debated at Worcester House 1661, before the K. Lords, Bishops and
Ministers, I labored almost only for this that day, to have got in the word
(Consent) of the Minister of the Parish for such as should be Confirmed,
supposing that one word would have partly restored the Parish Pastors power,
and so have made our Bishops tolerable Archbishops, that if possible we might
have been healed. But the Bishops rejected it with all their might, and got the
King to refuse it: But because I laid so great a stress on it, the Lords and
others that were to collect and publish the Concessions, when we were gone put
it in for that time, and at the Convocation the Bishops cast it all away. Did
they not tell us then their sense? And they call him only the Curate of the
Parish, and not the Pastor. And 4. If this were practicable some good men would
practice it, at least this Doctor himself: But I never heard of one that
pre-examined his Communicants whether they were ready and willing to be
Confirmed. 5. And if he did, he would keep away many fit Persons, that scruple
our sort of Confirmation. 6. And what is all this to the many thousand
Noncommunicants, who quietly remain members of your Churches?

Sect. 21. As to his words p. 275. of power to keep the scandalous from the
Sacrament, I have in so many books proved it next to none, and utterly
insufficient, that I will not wast time to repeat all here.

Sect. 22. He tells me that in Can. 26 is not in Reformatio Legum Eccles. Ans.
But I have before told him, how much more and better is, which would go far to
heal us could we obtain it. He says that [ any one that has seen them knows
it to be a mistake, to say it was published by John Fox. Ans. His Reader must
be a strong believer, and take much on his word; 1. I have seen them, and spoke
with men of great understanding that have seen them, that yet judge it no
mistake. 2. The Preface of the publisher is like his Style. 3. It is called
Praefatio I. F. And can every Reader know that I. F. means not John Fox? 4.
Ordinary Tradition says it was John Fox's: And what should I sooner believe in
such a case? Instead of proving that they have all a power (to their
condemnation) which we see they exercise not, let him procure a real power
declared and granted, and it will do more than these words.

Sect. 23. But when it comes to the question whether me may so much as call a
sinner to repentance by name before the Church, who rejects all more private
admonition, he puts the question, whether the obligation to admonish publicly
an offender, or to deny him the Sacrament if he will come to it, be so great as
to bear him out in the violation of a Law, made by public authority, etc. Ans.
The first question is whether Christ have not made his Church so different a
thing from the World, that they should be openly differenced, by a Communion of
Saints? 2. And whether he has not instituted an office to judge of this and by
Government execute it? And 3. Whether any man have authority to suspend this
Law or Office? And then 4. I shall grant that not only Discipline, but
Preaching and Prayer and Sacraments may be forborne hic and nunc in the present
exercise, when else the exercise would do more hurt than good. 5. But are these
Laws good that forbid it? and should we Covenant never to endeavor an
Alteration?

Sect. 24. He next tells us of the great difficulty of exercising true
Discipline, (which is most true) and seems thence to defend the forbearance of
it with us. Answ. I have in my Treatise of Episcopacy and often proved that it is
of great importance to Christ's ends, and that he would have it continued to
the last, and that the Communion of Saints is a practical Article of Faith; and
that making small difference between the Church and the World, tends to Church
destruction, and to the reproach of Christianity, and the utter undoing of
millions of Souls.

And though Pope and Prelates have abused it to captivate Princes and Nations,
the just use of it (he knows) is mentioned by the Universal Church, and
visibly recorded in the Canons of the several ages. Though some Erastians are
of late against it; And Jesuits and worldly Protestants can dispense with it
when it would hurt their worldly Interest, and turn it chiefly against Gods
Servants that displease and cross them.

Sect. 25. p. 284. He says, [ The want of Discipline in the Parish Churches
was never thought by old Nonconformists destructive to the being of them.

Answ. They did not confound the Power and the Exercise: Nor what the Ministers
office is indeed and from God, and what it is by the Bishops Mind and Rules of
Conformity. I say as they. 1. The Exercise may be suspended without nulling the
Power or Policy. 2. They are true Pastors and Churches by Gods will, against
the will of those that would degrade them.

Sect. 26. But supposing every man left to his own Conscience, for Communion.
1. He says the greatest Offenders generally excommunicate themselves.

Answ. 1. And is it your way to leave all the rest to their Consciences, and
yet to preach and write against, and lay in Jail dissenting godly People that
communicate not with you? 2. And are not all these Offenders still Members of
your Church? Albaspineus complains of their Roman French Church, that he
never knew any further cast out than from the Sacrament, and left still to
other parts of communion as Members; And so do you by thousands who are all
Sons of your Church; but we are none.

He is again at it, what Church I was of, and I have told him often enough.

CHAP. VIII. What the National Church of England is?
Sect. 1. ACcording to the Doctors Method we come now to the Explication of one
of the terms of our Controversy, so long and loudly called for, viz. what the
National Church of England is, which we must obey, and from which we are said
to separate, p. 287. And the answer is such as may tell Dr. Fulwood and him,
that it is time to give over wondering that I understood not what they meant by
it.

Sect. 2. Our question is of the Church Policy and Political Form. All writers
of Politics difference a mere Community, from a Political Body: This is
essentiated of the two constitutive Parts, the Pars Regens and Pars subdita:
the former is much like the Soul, and the later the Body. The Ruling Part is
called the Form by most, and the sorts ( Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Democratical or mixed) the form in Specie, as the rational or sensitive Soul to
Animals: But the Relative Form is the Union of both in their proper order. Such
a body Politic is a Kingdom, a City, a Church in the proper and usual sense.

But in a loose sense many other things may be called a Church. As 1. a
Community prepared for a governing Form, not yet received. 2. An occasional
Congregation about Religion (as Prisoners that pray together; Men that meet
about a Religious Consultation or Dispute, etc.) 3. Many Churches as under one
Christian Magistrate as an accidental Head. 4. Many Churches associated for
mutual help and concord, without any governing Head: Either of one Kingdom or
of many. 5. Many Churches as merely agreeing in Judgment and Love, in distant
parts of the World. None of these are Churches in the political Sense, but are
equivocally so called.

But Politically. 1. All the Christian World is one Church as formed by their
Relation to Christ the Head. 2. All single Churches that have Pastors to guide
them in the Essentials of the Pastoral Office, are true Churches, formed by
this mutual Relation. These two are undoubted.

3. The now Roman* Catholic Church is one by Usurpation, as informed by one
Usurping head.

4. A Patriarchal Church is one, as Governed by a Patriarch.

5. A Provincial Church is one as headed by the Metropolitan, or as mixed where
Aristocratically others are joined with him.

6. An Archiepiscopal or Diocesan Church that has particular Churches and
Bishops under it is one as headed by that Diocesane. ( Jure an injuria I
dispute not.)

7. A Diocesane Church of many score or hundred Parishes, having no Episcopus
Gregis, or true Pastors and Pastoral Churches under him, but only half Pastors
and Chapels that are but parts Ecclesia, is one, even of the lowest sort, in
their opinion, as headed by that Diocesane.

8. A Presbyterian Classical Church is one, as headed by the Classes.

9. A Presbyterian National Church is one, as headed by the General Assembly.

10. An Episcopal National Church is one, either as headed by one National
Bishop, or else by a Synod of Bishops Aristocratically; or else by a Synod of
Bishops and Presbyters Aristocratically. All these that are constituted of One
Regent and a subdite Part, are called Churches in a Political proper sense, and
not only equivocally.

Now the Question is, Of which sort is the National Church of England?

And the Doctor says, page 287. 1. That the Society of all Christians is
counted a true Catholic Church, from their Union and Consent in some common
things: and so is ours, etc.]

Answ. But in what common things? Not in one Bible, for so may Heretics, much
less in one Liturgy. If it be not a consent in one Governing Head, it makes no
proper Church.

2. He supposes an agreement in the same Faith, and under the same Government
and Discipline.

Answ. That Is right: But what Government is it, Civil, or Ecclesiastical? The
first is no essential part of a proper Church. If it be the later, is it one in
specie or in individu^ politico? Not the former; for a 100 Episcopal Churches
in several Nations may have one species of Government, as many Kingdoms may
have. It is therefore the later that is all my Question, which is the
Church-Head?

He says [ As several Families make one Kingdom, so several lesser Churches
make one National.

Answ. True, if that National Church have one Constitutive Head as a Family
has: It Is no Family without a Pater or Matter Familias. And no Governed proper
Church without Governors; and there is no Governor where there is no supreme
in his place and kind: For inferiors have all their power from the supreme:
There is no Universal supreme but God: but the King is subordinately the
supreme in his Kingdom in respect to inferiors, and so it is in other Governed
Societies.

He adds [ The name of a Church comprehended the Ecclesiastical Governors
and People of whole Cities, and so may be extended to many Cities united under
one Civil Government, and the same rules of Religion.

Answ. 1. If the question were only de nomine, we grant that Civil Courts even
of Heathens are usually by Writers called Ecclesia, and so is any Assembly. If
this be all you mean, speak out.

2. Many Nations may agree in the same Rules of Religion, yea, so all
Christians do: Does this constitute National Churches?

3. One Civil Government is of another species, and not essential but
accidental to a Church, and therefore does not constitute or individuate it:
One justice of Peace or Mayor in a Christian Corporation, does not make it one
Parish Church. But if this be all your meaning, speak out: we grant de re a
Christian Kingdom, and contend not de nomine if you call it a Church.

. 3. page 297. ^. As to the difference of a National Church and Kingdom, he
grants what we desire, confessing the difference. But asks [ whence comes
all this zeal now against a National Church?]

Answ. An untrue insinuation.

1. To desire to know what it is, is untruly called zeal against it.

2. And agreeing with you in the description is no zeal against it.

He adds [ The Presbyterians and Mr. Hudson write for it.

Answ. Mr. Hudson is a Conformist: And the Presbyterians tell you what they
mean, a Christian Nation of particular Churches Governed by One General
Assembly as the Supreme Ecclesiastical Government. Whether this be just or
unjust is now none of our question. I have often told what I think of it. Do you
also tell us which is your National Church Power and I have done? Are you loath
to be understood?

. 4. But page 299. He comes to his plain Answer, viz. 1. [ The National Church
of England diffusive is the whole Body of Christians in this Nation, consisting
of Pastors and People, agreeing in that Faith, Government and worship which are
established by the Laws of this Realm.] And now he [ continues his wonder at
those who so confidently say, they cannot tell what we mean by the Church of
England.]

Answ. Yea, your wonder may increase, that I less and less understand it, if
you did not after tell us better ^^an in this unhappy definition.

1. Is this called the Church diffusive one Governed body Politic? If not, it
is no Church in the sense in question, and I Will not stick with you for an
equivocal name.

2. Do you mean by [ Government agreed in. 1. The Civil Government. 2. Or the
Ecclesiastical Government of the particular Churches severally. 3. Or one
Government of all the National Church?

1. The first makes it no Church in the sense in question.

2. The second makes it no Church, but an Association of many Churches* such as
a thousand Independent* Churches may make, or the Churches of many Kingdoms.
Many Families Associated are no City or one ruled Society if they agree in no
Common Governors, but only their several Family Governors. Many Cities
associated are no Commonwealth if they agree not in one supreme power. It Is no
political body without one common Governor* Natural or Collective,
Monarchical, Aristocratical or Democratical.

And what is it of [ Worship established by Law] that individuates your Church?
If all th^^ the Law has established.

1. Your Church has often changed its very being, and may do at every Parliament.

2. And the Church is small and unknown, if all that differ in any point
established are no parts of it. But if it be not all established, who knows
by this definition what it is, and what is the very matter of your Church. So
that here is a definition which neither notifieth matter or form.

. 5. Next he answers the Question, How all the Congregations in England make
up this one Church?] and answers [ By Unity of Consent, as all particular
Churches make one Catholic.]

Answ. Consent to what? 1. If it be not to one common Government, it is no
Governed Church, as one. 2. Does he think that the Catholic Church consents
not to one Governing Head, Christ? And does any thing else make them formally
One Politic body or Church? This were ill Doctrine.

. 6. Question, How comes it to be One National Church? (Says he) I say because
it was received by the common consent of the whole Nation in Parliament, as
other Laws of the Nation are?]

Answ. Whether, [ How comes it?] Speak of the efficient cause, or the formal,
or what, it is hard to know, so singular are his Logical notions. But the first
is most likely.

And then, 1. The question is still unanswered, What is the One common
Governing power in the Church which this Parliament consent has ^^t up? He
knows this is the question.

2. And if it be by Parliament consent, how old is your Church? What Parliament
first made it? It Is not so old as Luther? Is it no older than the Liturgy or
Canons?

3. Does it die and live again as often as Parliaments change it? If the
corruption of one have been the generation of another, how many Churches of
England have you had?

4. The whole Nation did not consent by Parliament when the Lords and Commons
voted down the Bishops and Liturgy: was there then no National Church?

5. How shall we prove that the whole or half the Nation ever meant to put
their consent into the hand of the Parliament to make a new Church of England,
and to alter it?

6. What men make they may destroy. May not the Nation withdraw such consent?
and the Parliament unmake their creature*

. 7. Next, p. 300 he says [ The Representative Church of England i^ the
Bishops and Presbyters of this Church meeting according to the Laws of the
Realm, to consult and advise about (...) of Religion. -- The consent of (...)
Convocations (of Ca^^erbury and York Provinces) ^^ the Representative National
Church of England.

Answ. 1. So here we have a Diffusiv^ Church and its Representative, but no
Government of either, as a Church, mentioned, but the Civil.

2. And they can be no Governors merely as Representing those that are no
Governors themselves. Not as the peoples Representatives; for they are no
Church Governors (whatever elsewhere he says like a Brownist of the Keys
being given to Peter as representing the whole Church.). Not as the Presbyters
representatives; For, 1. They are denied Episcopal power, 2. And they are
Governors at most but of their particular Churches; and not of the whole. 3.
Not as the Bishops representatives, for 1. They are there themselves, 2. And
they are no Common Governors of the whole as such.

3. If he mean that the two Convocations when they consent become the One
Common Constitutive Governing Power of the National Church, this is
intelligible, but 1. He after denies any such; 2. And then their dissent would
dissolve the Church, and one Convocation not oblige it; (with much more such.)

. 8. But yet he perceives he has not answered me, and therefore comes to it,
page 300, saying, [ It Is a false supposition that wherever there is the true
notion of a Church, there must be a Constitutive Regent part, -- a standing
Governing power which is an essential part of it.]

Answ. A true notion, belongs to equivocals: The true notion, and the proper
political notion are words of various signification. I have granted you that
the true notion of a Church belongs to a Ship-full, a Prison full, a
House-full, of Christians as such; and to our Parliament, and to the
Common Council of the City: But not the notion now in question.

2. Is not Government essential to a Governed Church? Fixed Government to a
fixed Church, and transient temporary Government to an answerable Church? Deny
this and few will follow you.

. 9. He adds, [ Which I will prove to be false from Mr. B. himself. He asserts
that there is one Catholic visible Church, and that all particular Churches
headed by their particular Bishops or Pastors, are parts of the Universal
Church as a Troop is of an Army, and a City of a Kingdom. -- Then it will
unavoidably follow, that there must be a Catholic visible Head to a Catholic
visible Church. And so Mr. Bs: Constitutive Regent part of a Church has done
the Pope a wonderful kindness -- But there are some men in the world that do
not attend the advantages they give to Popery, so they may but vent their
spleen against the Church of England. But does not Mr. B. say, that the
Universal Church is headed by Christ; I grant he does: But the Question is of
the Visible Church of which particular Churches are parts: And they being
Visible parts, require a Visible Constitutive Regent Head, -- therefore the
whole Visible Church must have likewise a Constitutive Visible Regent part --
This is to make a Key for Catholics?

Answ. I am glad he speaks so intelligibly, in denying a Constitutive Regent
part* though sorry that he speaks so ill.

1. When I have written against Johnson, alias Terrae the Papist, two Books on
this subject; especially the later fully proving the Catholic Church headed by
Christ, to be that visible Church Catholic of which all particulars are
members; Can the Reader think I should write it over again, because this Doctor
will talk over a little of the same with that Priest, and take no notice of my
proof or answer?

2. Does he believe that the Kingdoms of the World are not visible parts of
God's Universal Kingdom? and yet God invisible?

3. Dare he say that all true Churches are not real parts of Christ's Universal
Church, as a Governed body? and yet are not they visible? Is it necessary then
that the Universal Head must be visible if the subordinate be so?

4. Does he not perceive that he turns the Controversy, from the necessity
of a Regent head, to the necessity of his visibility? As if our question had
not been, Which is the Regent part of the Church of England? but whether it
must be visible? Is this edifying?

5. All Christians are agreed that the Universal Church is Visible. 1. In its
parts and members on earth, and their profession. 2. In that Christ the Head
was visible on earth; 3. And has left Visible Universal Laws; 4. And has a
Body visible in Heaven; as the King is to his Courtiers but not to most of his
Subjects; 5. And will shortly visibly judge all the World. Thus far and no
further (save as seen extraordinarily to Paul, Stephen, etc.) is the Universal
Head Visible. And are we not agreed that this is a real and most excellent
Political Church* and that all other Visible Churches are parts of it?
Something besides spleen makes some men talk dangerously.

. 10. But really does he think that this does unavoidably set up the Pope? Why,
first is there a word of this that a sober Christian dare deny? or that the
Christian World does not commonly consent to? And do the certain Doctrines of
the Gospel and Church set up the Pope? Will he turn Papist if this be proved,
and the Christian World be not deceived? Is this our Champion against Popery
now? I thought no man but Mr. Cheny and some odd Papists had been of this
Opinion? But to Mr. Cheny and against Johnson I have confuted it, and therefore
thither refer the Reader. Far be it from me to resist Popery by denying, 1.
That Christ's Church thus far visible is one Political body headed by himself,
2. Or that all true visible Churches are parts of it. 3. Or that every
Political Governed body is constituted of the Regent and subdite parts.
Christians will reject me for the former, and Politicians deride me if I hold
the last.

. 11. He proceeds, [ 2. The plain resolution is, that we deny any necessity
of any such Regent Constitutive part, or one formal Ecclesiastical Head as
essential to a National Church: For a National consent is as sufficient to make
a National Church as an Universal consent to make a Catholic.]

Answ. No consent makes a Catholic Church, but consenting to one supreme
Head, Christ: But I am glad I understand you.

12. Says he, [ Quest. By what way this National consent is to be declared? By
the Constitutions of this Church the Archbishops, Bishops and Presbyters
summoned by the King's Writ, are to advise and declare their judgments in
matters of Religion, which received and enacted by Parliament there is as great
a National consent as to any Law. And all the Bishops, Ministers and People
make up this National Church.]

Answ. Now we are come to the bottom: And, 1. Our question is of the
Constitution of the Church, and the Doctor tells us the Administration makes
it. To consult and advise and make Laws are acts of Administration, and follow
the Constitution. Men must have Power before they use it, and must be a Church
before they act (...) Church.

2. Yea to Advise and Consult are not so much as acts proper to administering
Government, but belong to those that are no Governors also.

3. If they be no Laws till the Parliament make them such, then either the
Parliament are your Church Head, or you have none that is Ecclesiastical.

But having your plain Confession that you have no such Regent part, and so are
no Church Political, (save Civil) but a mere Association, I ask

. 13. 1. Why do you pretend that we are none of the Church of England, or that
we vent our spleen against it or deny it, who deny not Associated Churches in
England under one Civil Government?

2. How unhappily are the Church-Defenders and Conformists disagreed? Read Mr.
Dodwell and many such others that take the Church to be a Governed body
Politic and see what they will judge of you?

3. Are not you and I liker to be of one Church of England, who agree what it
is, than you and those Bishops and Doctors that speak of two different things,
and agree not so much as what it is?

4. Have you not brought your Defense of the Church of England to a fair issue,
by denying that there is any such Church, in the questioned political sense?

5. What made you before talk of being under one Government? If you meant only
Civil? Is your Governed Church as such only Civil, or a Kingdom only?

6. Do you not now absolve all men from the duty of obeying the Church of
England a^ such, and from all guilt of disobeying them? How can men Govern that
are no Governors? and how can we obey them? It Is only the Civil power then
that we herein disobey.

If you say that all the Bishops are Governors, and altogether govern the
whole; I answer, Yes per parts, but not as a whole or Church. If twenty
Families in a Village agree as Masters and Servants, to go one way as
Consenters, this* makes no one Government of the Village. If the Physicians of
London consent to one Pharmacopeia that makes them not a body Politic. If
twenty Sea Captains consent to go one Voyage by one rule, each one is a
Governor of his own Ship, but this makes no Government of the whole. All the
Justices and Mayors of England rule the Kingdom per parts, by the same Law:
But all together make not one Aristocracy to Govern the Kingdom as One whole.
Unless your Bishops, etc. are United in One persona Politica or Aristocracy,
they may rule their several Churches, but they make not one common Government
for the National Church as such. An agreement of the Emperor, Spaniard, and
other Confederates make not one Kingdom or body Politic.

7. How can they be Schismatics for disobeying them that are not their
Governors.

8. How come Dissenters bound by Parliament consent? If it never was in their
minds to trust them as Consenters for them? yea and declare their own dissent,
as most of the Nation did lately against Prelacy and Liturgy, yea and their
chosen representatives? Have such representatives more power to express our
consent than we our selves?

9. You unhappily err with Hooker in your popular Politics, if you think that
the Laws bind us only because we consent to them by our Representatives, or
that as such they make them. Whereas it is as by Consenting in the Constitution
they are made part of the Rullers or Legislators, and not merely as if we made
the Laws by them.

10. And as to Convocation consent, how binds it all those that never consented
to them? How is the City of London so bound to Conform, when they had not one
chosen Clerk (but only the Dignitaries) in the Convocation that made us our
Conformity (the two chosen by them being refused by the Bishops.)

11. Will not you pass for an asserter of the Principles of Independency, that
not only say, The Keys are given to the whole body, and the Convocation
represent the People, etc. but also that England is one Church but by consent,
without consenting to any one Constitutive Regent Church head. The Independants
are for a National Church merely by confederacy and consent, without National
Government of it.

12. You go further from the Episcopal Politics than the Presbyterians do: For
they make an Aristocratical Regent Part, but you make none.

13. I doubt some Statesmen will be angry with you, that say there is no power
of Church Government in England, but from the King as Head (as Crumpt^^ before
Cousins Tables, and others ordinarily.)

14. Do you make England in essentials any more one Church, than England and
any Foreigners agreeing are one? Did the Synod of D^rt make us one with them?
Do large Councils make many Nations one Church? Did the Heptarchy make England
one Kingdom, when seven Kings Governed the whole by parts, but none the whole,
as such?

15. I beseech you think what you have done against the Parochial, Diocesane
and Provincial Churches in England. Have none of these, have not each of these
a Regent Constitutive part? Are none of them true Churches in sensu politico?
You dare not say, No. If they are, You have said that visible Churches as Parts
unavoidably require a visible Head to the whole (by which I bring in the Pope,
because you think Christ will not serve the turn:) And do you not say that all
these Churches are parts of the Church of England? And if you deny it to have
one Regent part, do you not then either destroy the rest, or use the name
Church equivocally to these several sorts so heterogeneal?

16. I pray you tell us, from whom our Archbishops receive their power? If you
say from the Bishops, and so Inferiors or Equals may give power, why may not
Presbyters make Presbyters or Bishops, and generare speciem? If it must come
from Superiors, the Church of England has none such.

17. If the Peoples consent can make a National Church, why may it not make an
Independent or Presbyterian Church?

18. If the Nations consent, as such make the Church of England, it is not made
by Legislative power of King and Parliament.

19. Do the Clergy represent the King? or is he none of the Church?

20. How prove you that the Clergy represent the Laity in the Convocation?

21. By your Rule, if diverse parties of Christians agree to set up diverse forms
of Church Government, with mutual forbearance they would be one National
Church. And so would Episcopal, Presbyterians and Independants if the Law
allowed them all.

22. Was the Church of England the same thing in the days of H. 8. Ed. 6. Q.
Mary, Q. Eliz. etc.

23. Who makes National Churches in absolute Hereditary Monarchies, where are
no Parliaments to signify popular consent?

24. If every Law of Order be essential to your Church, few Conformists are of
it: If only the true essentials, why are not we also of it?

25. How ill agree you with Mr. Cheny* who makes it Atheism, Infidelity,
Blasphemy, Impiety, to assert Church-making consent or confederacies besides
Baptism?

26. But the best is you leave us in hope of Reformation; for if Parliaments
will but consent for us to take down Diocesanes lower, and to reform
Parish-Churches, and alter Liturgy, etc. we are the National Church still. And
one prevailing Vote may prove us all consenters; and make the Church quite
another thing.

. 14. Yet he says [ Page 299. By this description any one may see how easily
the Church of England is distinguished from the Papists on one side, and the
Dissenters on the other.]

Answ. I am one, and I cannot see it, nor so much as see how to know the Church
it self, nor who is a Member of it, nor how any man can know it: but he seems
to me to make it a Church invisible. But I see the Dissenters must be none of
it.

1. How was the Church of England known from Papists, in the beginning of H. 8.
or in the middle, or in the end? or how known when it began?

How was it known in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days, when the Papists
came to Church? or now as to Church-Papists? How shall we know to which Church
the late Bishop Bramhall and other Doctors belong, who would have the Pope
Govern* us according to the Canons as Patriarch of the West, and principium
unitatatis universalis, and all go for Schismatics that deny it. Some call
this the New-Church of England, differing from the old one which was before
Bishop Laud.

2. How shall one know how far consent is necessary to a Member, and dissent
unchurcheth him? Lately a Doctor was accused for saying he scrupled to call the
King according to the Liturgy, Our most Religious King: Mr. Jole of Sarral was
suspended for not oftener wearing the Surplice, and denying to pray in the
Litany for [ Our most Gracious Queen Katherine, and James Duke of York. But
these are small dissents; The sense is the Churches Law and Doctrine, and not
the sound of words in various senses: I have often showed in how many contrary
senses the Conformists take the 39 Articles, the Liturgy, the words of
Subscription and Declaration, and the Oaths imposed? How shall one know among
all these, who are, or are not of your Church? When you tell us that it is [
Agreeing in the Faith, Government and Worship which is established by Law] and
then speak so hotly against the need and being of any common Government, save
the Civil, at all established over the Church as a. National body, and never
distinguish any necessary parts of Faith, Government and Worship, from the
rest, nor tell us how to know them? And when Conformists dissent in so many
things; some from Lay Chancellours Government by the Keys, some in the sense of
the Articles, and the Noncon^o^^^ists say they consent to all that Scripture
requires, and the mere Circumstantials determined by Law, how shall you be
known? Either it is in the Essentials only, or the Integrals also, or also in
all the Laws de Accedentibus, that the Church of England by agreement is made
that One Church.

1. If it be only in Essentials, is there either Confession, Rubric, Canon, or
any Writer that has told us which be those, and all those, and only those
Essentials? I never met with man that pretends to know them, and therefore
never met with man that can thus tell, whether he be of the Church of England
or not? nor that can tell of others, and who is not?

2. To say it must be consent also in the Integrals that is necessary ad esse,
is a contradiction: and is to make Integrals Essentials. To say that it must be
consent in all Laws of Accidents also, is to make that an essential part which
is no part. Our loose confounding Disputers, when they have lost the truth in
such contradictions, may say as Mr. Dodwell does to me, that I Cavil: But will
that answer help down all absurdities with reasonable men? It Is plain that as
the Papists Doctrine of defining Church Members and Christians, by no Essential
Articles of Faith, but by Probable Proposal of more or less does make their
Church invisible, so does this definition of the Church of England by Doctor
Stillingfleet make theirs, and leave us uncertain who is of it. It makes me
think what I hear Oliver the Usurper said to a Bishop that now is (as I am
credibly told, [ Doctor how know you that you are a true Minister of Christ?]
who answered him on Mr. Dodwell's Principles, [ Because I have received
Ordination by uninterrupted successive conveyance from true Bishops, from the
Apostles:] Says he; Are you sure they were all true Bishops and the succession
uninterrupted? Doctor will you take your Oath that you are thus a true
Minister?] At which when he stuck, [ Come, come, Doctor, says he, there is a
surer and a nearer way.]

Certain I am, that if Agreement in the sense of the 39 Articles, or in all
Forms and Ceremonies be necessary to constitute a Member of the Church of
England, abundance that subscribe are none, that now go for such: But if not, I
pray tell us why such as I also are not Members of your Church. Do I more
differ from you than Doctor Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell, and in a word
than the party which adhered to Archbishop La^d, differed from the party which
adhered to Bishop Abbot, Whitgift, and the Parliaments of those and
aftertimes? If the Church of England as such a one, be constituted by no
supreme Church Government, we are all of it, so far as we consent to the
Association, and none as it is one Political body. And what then becomes of its
Laws, and all the Treatises of its Church-Policy?

. 15. But yet the Doctor stops not here: I unavoidably introduce Popery if I
make a Constitutive Regent Church power, necessary to a Church: for then the
Universal Church must have such.]

Answ. 1. It Is not necessary to an equivocal ungoverned Church, such as our
Worcestershire Association made: But to a Political Governed Church it is.

2. Mark here all you that go the Political Church way, that your Doctor
accuses you more than the Nonconformists, even of certain opening the door to
Popery. What if I had said so by you? Is it such men that thus make you agents
for a Pope?

3. Does this Political description of Parochial, Diocesane, Provincial,
Patriarchal Churches, also bring in Popery?

4. Then either our Archbishops have no power, or they have it from no
superior, or else they infer a Pope.

5. I again tell the Doctor as I did Mr. Cheny; It is disingenious to say this
to me, when I have written so much against Johnson the Priest, in my first, and
specially my second answer, which none replyeth to, without any confutation or
notice of it* I have fully proved that Christ's Catholic Church has himself
for an Essential Head, sometime visible on earth, leaving visible Laws, and now
visible to the Courtiers in Heaven, and coming visibly to judge all; and there
is no other. Indeed if the doctrine of Mr. Dodwell and many such hold, who deny
that the power flows immediately from Christ's Law or Charter to the Church,
and not from the Ordainers or Electors, who do but determine of the Receiver
and Invest him, then all the Doctors in England cannot answer the Digression,
Cap. 14. of the Book called [ The Catholic Hierarchy,] proving that such a
Prelatical subordination of Churches, infers a Pope: But I have fully showed
the vanity of that inference as to us.

But remember that the Doctor and I are agreed, that [ A Nation consenting in
an Association of particular Churches, may be called a National Church
(equivocally,) Though it can make no Laws unless its consent also set up a
Supreme Church Government. Meet Agreements are not Laws.

. 16. He next would make the unwary Reader think that he answers my Question,
1. What is the same Rule that all must walk by, viz. that the Scriptures are
the Foundation of our Faith. -- 2. But our Church requires Conformity to the
Rules appointed by it agreeable to the word of God.]

Answ. But it seems the Scripture then is not the whole rule, but part: the
fundamental part. 2. Which did Paul mean? Was your Churches Rule then made? 3.
Does your Church require this ad esse, or but ad melius esse? If the first, all
Canon-breakers are dismembered? And, is that according to God's word? If the
later, why am not I of your Church? 4. But how comes that Church to command and
bind, which has no such Ruling power?

CHAP. IX. Of the Peoples Consent to the Pastoral and Church-Relation.
. 1. PAge 307. Says the Dean, [ The next thing to be considered is the
interest and power of the People as to the choice of their Pastors, for want of
which great complaints are made, -- Mr. Baxter is very tragical on this
Argument, and keeps not within tolerable bounds of discretion in pleading the
Peoples Cause against Magistrates and Patrons and Laws.]

Answ. 1. That is tolerable to some men, which others cannot bear; Silken ears
must have soft words; The Land cannot bear all his words, was an old Complaint:
And [ Speak pleasing things, Prophecy deceit] was an old Mandate. It Is no
wonder if that sort of men, that must judge whether our Preaching, and
Worshipping God be tolerable, and must write us down the words which we must
say to God in Prayer, or not be tolerated, do also think themselves the meet
judges, whether our indiscretion be intolerable.

2. But let us try whether he state this Controversy any more Logically or
truly than the rest, and whether he intimate not hurtful though tolerable
untruth.

1. It Is a crooked insinuation, to put the word [ Power] instead of [ Right and
Liberty,] as if [ Power] of Consenting in the People, and [ Power of Rulers]
were univocal and not equivocal terms: But this is tolerable: For experience
has convinced me, how little Logical strictness is from this Doctor to be
expected: I doubt lest next, as some men instead of Learning maintain their
reputation by deriding it, we may expect some such defense of the Doctor^
Logic, to prove that he is none of the Disputers of this World, who deceive
men by vain Philosophy.

2. And the word [ choice] instead of [ consent] is somewhat more crooked: For
[ choice] usually includes the first nominating Vote; And he knows that I
pleaded for the necessity of no more, than the Churches consent, though it were
subsequent to the choice of Magistrates or Patrons.

3. But the next is worse, that [ I plead the Peoples Cause against
Magistrates, Patrons and Laws,] when I do but desire their Conjunction.

. 2. His repetitions call me tediously to repeat the state of the Controversy
(a business quite below him.)

I. I Have often said, that God has not made either Magistrates or People the
Judges who is fit to be, and shall be a Minister of Christ in general; but the
ORDAINERS and the PERSON himself conjunct. This is evident, 1. From Scripture
Instances of all that were Ordained: 2. From the nature of the thing.

1. Who is supposed so fit to judge as men and Seniors of the same Office? Who
but Physicians are fit to judge who is meet to be a Licensed Physician? And who
but Philosophers judge of Graduates and Professors in Philosophy?

2. And no man can make me a Minister against my will, nor know me to be fit,
if I know my self to be unfit.

. 3. II. I have often said that the Supreme Civil Governor is the Judge, whom he
must countenance, maintain and tolerate. The proof is easy, 1. Because to do
it is his work; and every man must be a discerning judge of his own work. 2.
Because it is a public act of Government, and he is the chief public Judge
therein.

. 4. III. I have often said that the Disposal of the Tithes and Temples is in the
power of the Prince, and Patron by his grant. But with these bounds.

1. His power is not Absolute, but Under Christ and limited by him, and
therefore he has no power against him, nor to cross his Laws or to contradict
his ends.

2. If the Tithes and Temples were given only for public Teachers of
Catechumens, or for mere Lecturers, the Magistrate must dispose of them to such
as are capable of that Office.

3. If the Tithes and Temples were given for the Pastors of the Churches, the
Magistrate is bound to give them to such as are lawfully called to be such
Pastors, and not by the advantage of his Trust, overthrow the way of entrance
instituted by Christ.

4. However if they were devoted to God, it is God who is the proprietor, and
it is sacrilege to alienate them. And an intolerable ill disposal is alienation.

. 5. IV. I have often said, that it being supposed that their Ancestors gift of
Tithes or Glebe and Temples is the reason of our common Patronage and
presenting power, the will of the dead Donors is to be observed, and their
gifts given to none but on the terms by them determined: But their gifts are
supposed to be for the Churches good and not against it: Nor had they any power
on pretense of beneficence, to destroy, or to take away more than they give:
But the Trusting of our Souls Conduct is a matter of more weight than Tithes
and Temples. If Tithes be proved not to be of Divine Right, all that can be
expected is, that if the flock cannot trust him whom the Patron chooses, they
let him give his Tithes and Temple to whom he please, and they will trust their
souls with such as they dare, and safely may. But if he will choose and offer
them one whom they can safely and comfortably accept, so as Tithes and Temples
shall preponderate in case of small difference in the men, prudence obliges
them to accept of the advantage. The same I say of the Magistrates countenance
and approbation. But if the difference be very great, it is better stretch our
purses to build new Temples and pay our Pastors than trust our souls on the
Pastoral Conduct of ignorant, malignant, unfaithful or heretical men.

. 6. V. I have often said, that mutual consent is necessary to the being of the
relation of Pastor and Flock. And though sometimes the Rulers imposition, and
the Patrons choice, may make it the Peoples duty in prudence to consent, when
the good preponderates the hurt, (not else) yet till they consent, the Relation
is not existent. As if Children were bound to take Wives and Husbands by the
Command and fore choice of Parents, yet it is no Marriage till they consent.

. 7. The common objection is from the inconvenience, if the several parties
agree not: To which I answer.

1. The mischief of the contrary way, is worse than that inconvenience.

2. There is nothing in this World without inconveniences where all things and
persons and actions are imperfect.

3. If Parents and Children agree not about their Marriage, it has great
inconveniences; And yet neither Parents Government, nor Childrens consenting
Liberty must be denied.

4. In so weighty a Case, diverse Locks and Keys keep the Churches treasure
safe. Prince, Patron, People and Ordainers, will not so often agree on a vile
person, as any one of them alone may do.

. 8. And now judge how Logically, how honestly the Doctor has stated the Case,
and made me Intolerably indiscreet and tragical against Magistrates, Patrons
and Laws. And try if you can understand what it is instead of this, that he
would have: I tell him again, that if he deny the necessity of the flocks
consent to the mutual relation, he notoriously opposes the judgment and
practice of Antiquity and the Universal Church, of Princes, Patriarchs,
Prelates, Councils and People, and fights against the full stream of Historical
evidence, for a new crooked way, that would make as many modes of Religion as
there are different Princes.

And here he wonders what he said, that occasioned such undecent passion. It
seems he felt some passion in reading it, and thought he must have the like
that wrote it. And so let any man obtrude any pernicious thing on the Church,
and he can easily prove the detector to have undecent passion, for giving a bad
Cause its proper name.

. 9. But he cannot find out the reason of my inference, that then Princes may
impose what Religion they please.]

Answ. Not understanding, with some men, goes for confuting: To put [ Religion]
for the mode of Religion is too little a slip of his to be insisted on. But is
not my inference necessary? I urged him to tell me, in what Countries, and
under what sort of Princes the Rule holds, that the People must not judge
whether the offered Pastors be Heretics, nor refuse them, if Prince and Patron
present them? He will not be entreated to tell me. I tell him, that if the Rule
be universal, when a Papist, Socinian, Anabaptist, Antiepiscopal, etc. Prince
and Patron present men of their own mind, and they are instituted, the People
must take and trust them as their Pastors: And is not this to set up in all the
Churches what modish Religion Prince and Patron please? Is this hard to be
understood? Yet he calls this Railing on him for suppositions of my own making.
And here he steps over to another man.

. 10. Before I come to his undertakings, I will repeat another railing and
undecent passion against his Cause; And I desire the Reader to note how well
the Doctors of the Church of England agree; and to learn which of them it is
that we must believe, both as to History and Right. It is Mr. Herbert Thorndike
in his Treatise of Forbearance of Penal. [ It is to no purpose to talk of
Reformation in the Church, to regular Government, without restoring the Liberty
of choosing Bishops and the privilege of enjoying them, to the Synods, Clergy
and People of each Diocese. So evident is the right of Synods, Clergy and
People in the making of those of whom they consist, and by whom they are to be
Governed, that I need make no other reason of the neglect of Episcopacy, than
the neglect of it.]

Yet these two are Doctors of one Church, but we are no Members of it.

. 11. I again say that either the Reader has read the Church History and
Canons, or not? If not, how can he tell who to believe that report them? the
Doctor or me? But if he have, I will no more dispute this Case with him, than I
would do whether English Parliaments used to make Laws. He is past my
conviction if he be not convinced.

. 12. And I will again say, that I will yet suppose the Doctor so humble as to
acknowledge himself much inferior to Paulus sarpi servita venerunt, in point
of Church History: At least I say to the Reader, peruse what he has said of
this Controversy and of the alteration of Church Government in his History of
the Council of Trent, and his Book of Church Benefices, lately translated by
Dr. Denton, and doubt if you can.

. 13. And in general I add: I. I suppose no man of such reading makes any
doubt of the first 300 years, whether any Bishops were made over any Church
without the free Election or Consent of the Flocks and the whole Clergy, and
the approbation of the Ordainers. I will not for shame stay to prove this,
having said so much of it in my first Plea for Peace, and Episcopal Church
History, which are unanswered.

II. And since the first 300 years, it is so notorious in History that it is a
shame to need proof of it, that the Christian Emperors confirmed the Churches
in this right and use, and for many hundred years after, permitted and ordered,
that Bishops should be chosen by the People, Clergy and Synods, and when the
Peoples Election was infringed, the necessity of their consent long continued:
And it was only in the choice of the five Patriarchs that the Emperors used to
meddle, and that not always, nor at all choosing them alone, but commending some
one to the People and Clergy to choose, or confirming some one that they had
nominated. And this held on till Popery sprung up.

III. And even then the Popes long continued it: But, 1. They strove (specially
in Hildebrand's days and after) against the Emperors negative voice in the
confirmation of Popes, 2. And his negative in Investing Bishops: But even in
this strife, the Election was confessed to be in the Clergy, the People choosing
or freely consenting, and no man to be made their Bishop against their will;
and it was but the Investiture per b^culum and annulum, as a confirmation which
the Emperors claimed.

. 14. I have formerly named elder Testimonies not denied: I will now recite but
some Canons of Councils.

1. The 9th and 10th Canons of the first great Nicene Council nullifieth the
very Ordination of scandalous incapable men: And in the Arab. Can. 4. Si populo
placebit, is made a condition of the Episcopal relation. And c. 5. in case of
the Peoples disagreement, the said People must take the most blameless.

2. The Roman Council said to be under Silvester of 275 Bishops says, [ No
Bishop shall Ordain any Clerk, nisi cum omni adunata Ecclesia, but with all
the Church united. If this Council be not certain, the very forgers show the
Antiquity of the Churches right and custom.

3. I before named a Council at Capua that decreed that the two Bishops at
Antioch chosen by their two Churches, should live in Love and Peace.

4. Chrysostom's Church of Joannites would rather separate than forsake their
chosen Bishop or his honor, though Emperor, Council and Patriarch was against
him: and though Cyril Alex. wrote that their breach of Canons was intolerable,
and to tolerate them (a few stubborn Nonconformists) would but discourage the
obedient.

5. Even the famous Pope Caelestine who helped Austin against the Pelagians
Decreed [ Let no man be given a Bishop to the unwilling: Let the sense and
desire of the Clergy, the Laity, and Magistracy (ordinis) be required (or
necessary.)]

6. How the people deposed Theodosius Bishop of Synada and chose another and
the change approved, I have elsewhere showed.

7. After Atticus death the Clergy at Constantinople were for Philip or
Proclus, but the people chose Sisinnius and prevailed.

8. Sisinnius sent Proclus to be Bishop at Cyzicum, but the people refused him
and chose another.

9. The Orleance Council, an. 540. Can. 3. decrees about Ordaining Bishops,
Qui praeponendus est omnibus ab omnibus eligatur: as of old, viz. Let him be
chosen by all, who is to be set over all.

10. An. 541. The Council. Avern. decree c. 2. That none seek the sacred Office
of a Bishop by Votes but by merit, nor seem to get a Divine Office, rebus sed
moribus: and that he ascend to the top of that eminent dignity by the election
of all, and not by the favor of a few: and that in choosing Priests there be
the greatest care, because, etc.

Therefore another Council at Orleance decreed that a Bishop must be ordained
in his own Church which he must oversee.

11. Another Orleance Council decree, c. 10 That none get a Bishopric by gifts
or seeking, but with the will of the King, by the election of the Clergy and
the Lay People. And Can. 11. And as the ancient Canons have decreed, Let none
be made Bishop to an unwilling People (or without the Peoples consent) Nor let
the People or the Clergy be inclined to consent, by the oppression of persons
in power (a thing not lawful to be spoken.) But if it be otherwise done, let
the Bishop be for ever deposed, etc.

12. I have formerly cited Pope Gregory I. his express Decrees herein.

13. Clodov^us his Council at Cabilone renewed the old Decree, That all
Ordination of Bishops be null, which was otherwise made than by the election of
the Com-Provincials, the Clergy and the Citizens.

14. The General Council called Quinosextum, an. 692. decreed Can. 22. That
Bishops and Priests Ordained with Money, and not by Examination and Election,
be deposed: Though the same Council by humane wisdom decreed, Can. 38. That
whatsoever alteration the Imperial power makes on any City, the Ecclesiastical
Order also follow it. The way by which Humane Order overthrew Divine Order and
Institutions.

15. And by the way you may conjecture of the Chusers by the Council of
Toletane, an. 693. under King Egica, where the King Preaching to the Bishops
(as was then needful) decrees, That every Parish that has twelve Families
have their proper Governor. But if it have less than twelve, it shall be part
of another's charge.

16. K. Pepin (who advanced the Pope to advance himself, and added the Sword to
Excommunication by mischievous decree, yet) altered not the common way of
Election, and decrees that every City (like our Corporations) have a Bishop,
and none meddle in another's Diocese without his consent.

17. The choice of Pope Constantine, the humiliation of Stephen, and many such
instances show that even at Rome still the People had the greatest hand in
choosing the Pope; and that to Communicate with a Bishop irregularly chosen, was
taken for a great sin. And when Charles Mag. was gratified as to the Papal
Chair, it was but by making him a necessary Confirmer.

18. The French Constitutions, l. 1. c. 84. objected about this by Baronius and
Binius, say, Not being ignorant of the sacred Canons, we consented to the
Ecclesiastic Orders, to wit, that Bishops be chosen by the Election of the
Clergy and People, according to the Statutes of the Canons, out of their own
Diocese, without respect of persons or rewards, for the merit of their life,
and their gift of wisdom, that by example and word they may every way profit
those that are under them.

19. The old Canons gathered by Pope Adrian and sent to Charles Magn. recorded
by Canisius, depose a Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon, guilty of Theft, Fornication
or Perjury. And Can. 28. A Bishop who obtains a Church by the secular power,
shall be deposed. And Can. 33. That no one pray with Heretics or Schismatics:
Ex conc. Sard. Can. 2. A Bishop that by ambition changes his seat, shall not
have so much as Lay Communion at his end: That no Bishop be above three weeks
in another City, nor above two weeks from his own Church. Can. 17. A Bishop
contradicted (by opposers) shall not after be ordained or purged by only three
Bishops, but by many.

And Can. 94. The people converted from Heresy by another Bishop, may be of
his flock, without removing their Parish dwelling where another is Bishop.

Amongst the other 80 Canons against oppression, as one is, That no Bishop
judge any Priest without the presence of his Clergy, it being void if not so
confirmed; So another is against all foreign Judgment, because men must be
judged by those that are chosen by themselves and not by strangers. And none of
the Clergy must be condemned till lawful Accusers be present, and the Accused
answer the Charge.

20. The second General Council at Nice, though by servility they were for
Images, held to the old Church-Canons for Elections, saying Can. 3. Every
Election of a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, which is made by Magistrates, shall
remain void, by the Canon which says, If any Bishop use the secular
Magistrates, to obtain by them a Church, let him be deposed and separated, and
all that Communicate with him.

How much more say these than my [ intolerable indiscretion?] I fear some will
think that all this binds them to more separation than I am for.

The 15 Can. forbids them to have two Churches.

Can. 4. condemns those to Lex talionis, as unsufferably mad, that faultily
drive any from the Ministry, and segregate them from the Clergy, or shut up the
Temples, forbidding God's worship.

21. By the way, a Council at Chalons under Charles Magn. finding some Prelates
setting on foot an Oath of Obedience to them, thus condemn it:

It is reported of some Brethren (Bishops) that they force them that they are
about to Ordain, to swear that they are worthy, and will not do contrary to the
Canons, and will be obedient to the Bishop that Ordains them, and to the
Church in which they are Ordained; which Oath, because it is very dangerous, we
all ordain shall be forbidden;] which other Councils after repeat, (yet our
Bishops rest much on such an Oath of obedience to them.)

22. What the Electing Churches were may be partly conjectured from the Council.
Regiaticin. in Canisius, Can. 6. That the Arch*Presbyters examine every Master
of a Family particularly, and take account of their Families and lives, etc.

A Council at Soisons about 852. (a Presbyter by the King's Command being
Ordained to the Church of Rhemes irregularly) Decree, That they that are made
Presbyters without examination by ignorance, or by dissimulation of the
Ordainers, when they are known shall be deposed, because the Catholic Church
defends that which is irreprehensible, etc.

23. An. 855. under Lotharius Rennigius Lugd. and others, at a Council decreed,
(because that bad King had by imposing corrupted the Clergy) That because
Bishops were set over the Cities that were untryed, and almost ignorant of
Letters, and unlike the Apostolic prescript, script, by which means the
Ecclesiastical vigor is lost, they will petition the King that when a Bishop
was wanting, the Canonical Election by the Clergy and the People may be
permitted, that men of tried knowledge and life, and not illiterate men, blinded
by covetousness, may be set Bishops over the Flocks.

24. An. 857. Pope Nic. 1. is chosen by the Emperor Ludovicus consent, and by
All the People. And he so far makes the People selfseparating judges, as to
decree, Tit. 11. c. 1. That none hear the Mass of a Priest whom he knows
undoubtedly to have a Concubine or sub-introduced Woman. And Can. 2. That by
the Canons he cannot have the honor of Priesthood, that is fallen into
Fornication.

25. An. 1050, (or thereabout) one of the worst of Popes at a Council at
Rhemes, was constrained to confirm the old Canon; That no man be promoted to
Church Government but with the election of the Clerks and the People, etc.

26. An. 1059. Again a Roman Council forbidding all men to join with a
fornicating Priest, makes them so far separating judges.

27. About An. 1077. A Council at Rome renews the Canon, nulling all
Ordinations made, aus pretio, precibus aut obsequio, or that are not made by
the common consent of Clergy and People; for such enter not by Christ, etc.

28. From hence the Popes grew to usurp most of the power in choosing Bishops to
themselves by degrees, till they got Councils to judge it Heresy for Emperors
to claim so much as a confirming investiture. Whence bloody Wars rose. And it is
greatly to be noted that yet these Emperors supposed the Bishops elected by
the Clergy and People, and claimed but the said investiture, as is seen in the
formula of Pope Paschals Grant of investitures to them.

29. When they made Princes Investiture Sacrilege (and entering by them) they so
far made the People judges of Priests and Communion, as in a Council at
Benevent. an. 1087. sub Vict. to decree, That if no Catholic Priest be there,
it is righter to persist without visible Communion, and to Communicate invisibly
with the Lord, than by taking it from an Heretic to be separated from God. For
what concord has Christ and Belial? And Simoniacks are Infidels.

30. But were good and bad Bishops in all Ages thus minded, or was it only
Popes? I next add that it was one of the Articles charged against Wickliffe the
Reformer (as before against Wecelo, who contemned their Excommunications) That
they that give over Preaching or hearing Gods word, for men's Excommunications,
are Excommunicate, and in the day of judgment shall be judged traitors to
Christ. Art. 13. in Conc. Constable.

Reader, are we not in a hard strait between Wickliffe and Dr. Stillingflect?

31. The same is one of the Articles against John Hus, That men must not for
Excommunications give over preaching. We grant that they mean unjust ones.

32. This became one of the great Controversies with the Bohemians, against
whom one of the four long Orations were made at Conc. Basil. They would never
yield that their chosen Ministers should obey the Silencers.

33. Lastly, the Romans themselves often deereed, That a simoniacal election even
of the Pope is plainly null, and conferreth no right or authority to the
elected (though this certainly overthrows the uninterruptedness of their own
Succession.) And how Popes were elected till the device of Cardinals, is well
known.

. 15. If all this be not enough to prove the constant consent of the Christian
Churches down from the Apostles for the necessity of the Flocks consent to the
relation of the Bishop and Pastors to them, Let him that would have more read
all that Blondel has produced, de jure plebis in regim. Eccles.

. 16. I shall next prove the said necessity from the nature of the thing, the
work and benefit, and the common nature, interest and reason of mankind, if
more light will not put out the eyes of some unwilling men, that are loath to
know what they cannot easily be ignorant of.

And 1. Propriety is in order of nature antecedent to Regiment, which supposes
it, and is to order the use of it for common safety and good.

2. As a man's propriety in his Members, Children, acquisitions, is antecedent
to Regiment, so much more in his soul which is himself.

3. Nature obliges all to care for their lives, but yet those must sometime be
hazarded for public good. But the obligation to please God and obtain
Salvation and escape Sin and Hell, is so great, that no man is to pretend
public good or the will of man against it.

4. Self-government (as to power and obligation) is antecedent to humane
public Government in order of Nature: And public Government does not destroy
it, but regulate it: And therefore is not for destruction but for edification.

5. The end of Self-government is so much to please God and save our Souls,
that no man on pretense of public Government can disoblige us from this.

6. God has in the fifth Commandment, which setleth humane Government and
obedience, chosen the name of Parents rather than Princes, because Parents
Government is antecedent to Princes, and Princes cannot take it from them, nor
disoblige their Children. But Selfgovernment is more natural than Parents, and
Parents and Princes must help it, but not destroy it.

7. When persons want natural capacity for Self-government (as Infants and
Idiots and madmen) they are to be governed by force as bruits, being not
capable of more.

8. Family Government being in order next to personal, Princes or Bishops have
no right to overthrow it, (at least except in part on slaves of whose lives
they have absolute power:) If the King impose Wives, Servants, and Diet on all
his Subjects, they may lawfully choose fitter for themselves if they can; and at
least may refuse unmeet Wives and Servants, and mortal or hurtful Meats and
Drinks.

9. Much more if Princes and Patrons will impose on all men, the Bishops and
Pastors, to whose charge, care and Pastoral conduct they must commit their
Souls, the people having the nearest right of choice, and strongest obligation,
must refuse (as discerning Self-governing judges) such whose heresy,
negligence, ignorance, malignity, or treachery, is like either apparently to
hazard them, or to deprive them of that Pastoral help which they find needful
for them, and they have right to as well as other men.

10. The gain or loss is more the Patients than the Imposers: It is their own
Souls that are like to be profited and saved by needful helps, or lost for want
of them: And therefore it most concerns themselves, to know what helps they
choose.

11. If all the Kings on earth command men to trust their lives to a Physician
who they have just cause to believe, is like to kill them, by ignorance,
error, or treachery, or to a Pilot or Boat-man that is like to drown them,
they are not bound to obey such mandates. Yea if they know an able faithful
Physician that is most like to cure them, they may choose him before an unknown
man, though the King be against their choice.

12. Scripture and experience tell us, that God works usually according to
the aptitude of means and instruments: and learned experienced Physicians cure
more than the ignorant, rash, and slothful; and good Scholars make their Pupils
more learned than the ignorant do. And skilful, able, experienced holy Pastors,
convert and edify much more than ignorant and vicious men: And means must
accordingly be chosen.

13. If the Pastoral work skilfully and faithfully done, be needful, it must
not be neglected whoever forbid it: If it be not needful, what is the Church of
England good for, more than Infidels, or at least than Moscovites? And for what
are they maintained by Tithes, Glebe, and all the dignities, honors and wealth
they have? And for what do men so much contend for them?

14. It is natural to generate the like; and for men to do and choose as they
are, and as their interest leads them. Christ tells us how hard it is for a
rich man to be saved, and how few such prove good. And the Clergy themselves do
not say that all the Patrons in England are wise and pious: Many Parliaments
have by our Churchmen been deeply accused: And most Parliament men, I think,
are Patrons: Others say, that most Patrons not chosen to Parliaments are worse.
Some Preachers complain of Great men for fornication, drunkenness, excess,
idleness, yea, Atheism or infidelity: If many or any be such, are they like to
choose such Pastors as all godly men may trust in so great a Case? Or would not
such Princes choose such Bishops?

15. Men are as able and as much obliged now to take heed to whose conduct they
trust their Souls, as they were in all former Ages of the Church, forecited.

16. The Laws and Bishops of England allow all men liberty to choose what Church
and Pastor, that Conformeth, they please; so they will but remove their
dwellings into the Parish which they affect. And in London thousands live as
Lodgers, and may easily go under whom they will choose; And if they like him
not, may shift as often as they please.

17. Parish bounds are of much use for Order: But Order is for the thing
ordered, and not against it: And Parish bounds being of humane make, cannot
justly be preferred before the needful edification and safety of men's Souls,
though such humane Laws bind, where there are no greater obligations against
them.

18. The Law of keeping to Parish-Churches where we dwell, and the Law that
gives Patrons the choice of all the Pastors, and Princes of Bishops, are of
the same efficient power and strength.

19. Casuists usually say (even Papists that are too much for Papal power) that
humane Laws bind not when they are against the end, the common good, especially
against men's salvation. And a Toletan Council decrees, that none of their
Canons shall be interpreted to bind ad culpam, but ad poenam, lest they cause
men's damnation. And many Casuists say, that Penal Laws bind only to do or
suffer, and bearing the penalty satisfies them, save as to scandal.

20. Yet we still acknowledge all the right in Princes and Patrons
beforementioned, and that Princes are bound to promote Learning and piety, and
so to see that due places, countenance and maintenance encourage faithful
Ministers, and that all the Subjects have meet Teachers, and submit to hear and
learn; And that they should restrain Heretics and Soul-betrayers, from the
sacred Office-work; and judge who are to be maintained, and who to be tolerated.

21. But this power is not absolute but bounded: And if on the pretense of it,
they would betray the Church and starve Souls (like the English Canon that
binds all from going to an able Pastor at the next Parish, from an ignorant
unpreaching vicious Reader,) men are not bound to obey it, but to provide
better for themselves (unless materially, not formally for some time, when not
obeying would do more hurt than good;) or as a man must forbear public
assemblies in a common Plague-time.

And so much to open the true reason of the case in hand. And Paul's words to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16. tell me, this care is not unnecessary, Take heed to thy
self and to the doctrine, and continue in them; for in doing this thou shall
both save thy self and them that hear thee.

. 17. * come now to the Doctor's words, who p. 312. undertakes to prove, 1.
That the main ground of the peoples Interest was founded on the Apostles Canon
[ A Bishop must be blameless.]

Ans. The word [ main] may do him service, but no hurt to my cause. [ Main]
signifies not [ Only:] who doubts but the People were to discern the Lives of
chosen persons? But (without coming to the Balance, among many causes which is
the main) I have proved that there were more; And among others, that Christ and
his Apostles bid them take heed how they hear: beware of false Prophets, and
their leaven: beware of the concision. A man that is an Heretic avoid. -- Bid
them not good speed: Let no man deceive you, -- Those that cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, avoid, -- from such turn
away. -- Is here no more than judging their lives?

. 18. Here he comes to prove this even by Cyprian's Epistle against Martial
and Basilides: I must not name his dealing with it, lest he say Irail. But I
may note, 1. that he says, [ the force of what Cyprian says comes at last
only to this giving Testimony.]

Answ. Only here is more than Main before. And though it was a matter of
scandal that was before them, and therefore it is no wonder if nothing else be
particularly spoken of; yet sure these words signify more than Testimony. [ By
public judgment and Testimony be approved worthy and meet.] And to be sound in
the faith, and apt to teach is some part of meetness. And [ because they
chiefly have power either to choose Priests that are worthy, or refuse the
unworthy.] A chief choosing power of the worthy is more than a mere testimony of
fact. Again, [ that by the suffrage of the whole fraternity the Episcopacy be
delivered to him.] Suffrage is more than testimony of fact. And [ All they do
sin who are defiled by the sacrifice of a profane and unjust Priest]
signifies a dissenting power, or else separation were no duty.

But he says, This is the strongest testimony in antiquity for the peoples
power.

Answ. A strange saying of so good an Historian, who may easily know that the
concurrent judgment of all the Churches, their practice, and their Canons,
making the Peoples consent (and usually Election) necessary, was a far stronger
testimony than one Epistle. But to weaken this he says,

1. It was in a case where a Bishop had voluntarily resigned.

Answ. 1. What Is that to the general rule here asserted? 2. Was it voluntarily
which they were adjudged to do? But I find no mention of Martial's voluntary
resigning, but only Basilides.

2. He says [ Another Bishop was put in his place, not by the power of the
people, etc.]

Answ. 1. This was before said [ that the people might give them power? No.] As
if he would have the Reader think that we hold the people give the power, which
I have so often disproved. But it is his advantage to talk to many men at once,
that he may say, some of you said it.

But if distinction were not a crime, I would distinguish between giving the
power, and concurring with other Causes to give a Receptivity to the person
that must have it: The peoples consent is a causa partialis, of capacity and
receptivity.

2. But what signify these words [ The Ordination of our Colleague Sabinus by
the suffrage of the whole fraternity, and by the judgment of the Bishops, etc.]
Is not this as much power as we plead for?

3. Are not you the Author of the Defense of B. Laud, and say, That Christ gave
the Keys to Peter as the representative of the whole Church? And have you now
said more against me or your self? I am not of that mind.

3. He says, They had the judgment of a whole Council for deserting him.

Answ. Yes, for deserting them both? And that Council told them God had
fore-determined in his word what men must or must not be Bishops, and it was
God rather than they that judged it and bound them to obey; and that the power
was chiefly in the people to choose and refuse etc.] Did you think you had helped
your cause by saying, It was a whole Council that was for what we say?

4. He says, It was for Idolatry and blasphemy by his own confession.

Answ. Which mean you by [ his] when they were two? neither of them were
otherwise Idolaters than as Libellaticks (who to save their lives suffered
other men to subscribe their names, thinking it was not their own deed; like
some that I have heard of, that thought Conformity Perjury, etc. but let a
Friend bribe an Officer to subscribe their names and give them a Certificate.)
And Baslides blasphemy was in his sickness in terror of Conscience and perhaps
frenzy.

5. He says all St. Cyprian's proof is, that the people were most concerned to
give testimony of life, etc. This is answered already.

. 10. His next is, The people on this assuming the power of Elections, caused
great disturbance and disorders in the Church; where he goes over some few of
the many instances, which I have at large recited, at Antioch, Rome,
Alexandria, etc.

Answ. 1. And yet for all these disorders, the Church deprived not the People
of their privilege.

2. But how fallaciously is this urged? I have fully elsewhere opened to the
Reader, how the aspiring Prelates seeking Patriarchates and Bishoprics became
as so many Captains at War, and gathered Monks, Clergy and People to strive and
fight for them; And now he lays this on the People? As if the common
Soldiers and not the Generals were the cause of the War? But of this I have
said enough.

. 20. He says, To prevent this many Bishops were made without the choice of
the People, and Canons made to regulate Elections.

Answ. Crastily said! He says not [ without the consent of the People,] but [
the Election.] And he says not that the Canons took away either consenting or
electing suffrages, but that they regulated them: Yes, they over and over
confirmed them.

. 21. He says, A^ Alexandria the Election belonged to the twelve Presbyters.

Answ. They are hard put to it when they are put to fly to that testimony which
makes Presbyters the makers of Bishops.

Hierome and Eutychius Alexand. tell you that the Presbyters chose and made the
Bishops as the Army does a General: which made Archbishop Usher tell King
Charles the First, That the Presbyters at Alexandria did more than Ordain
Presbyters, for they made Bishops (as he told me himself.) But 1. We never
denied that the Com-provincial Bishops ordinarily afterward Ordained them, 2.
Nor that the Presbyters chose them. Did the Doctor think this was to the
purpose? But 1. Does he think that the Presbyters choice excludes the Peoples
when it is a known thing that the Canons and Custom constantly conjoined them?

2. Will he conclude that when ever History names not the Peoples choice, they
are left out?

3. Will he persuade us when the People are not the chusers, that they are not
necessarily the consenters or refusers?

I will add one more proof to all beforementioned. It is impossible, ex natura
rei, that the Pastoral Office should be exercised on dissenters: Therefore
their consent is necessary.

A Patient may be drencht like a Horse, and crammed like fatted Fowl, and so may
have a Physician against his will. But a Soul cannot use Pastoral help
unwillingly. 1. He cannot unwillingly be baptized: 2. Nor unwillingly join in
public prayer and praise with the Church. 3. Nor unwillingly confess sin. 4.
Nor unwillingly crave or receive Ministerial counsel. 5. Nor unwillingly
receive the Lords Supper. 6. Nor unwillingly desire the Pastors visitation and
prayers in his sickness. 7. Nor unwillingly seek and receive absolution, etc. I
mean, he can do none of this that does not consent. And is he a Pastor to such
men that refuse all this? It Is a shame to think that learned men should bend
their wits to prove that the Sun is not light.

Did the Church at Alexandria ever after choose their Bishops, and not before?
All the Alexandrian Church History tells us that the people there indeed
exercised too great power, after this, no place on earth more tumultuous and
unruly: And yet no place where the Bishops were more secular, and more assumed
the power of the Sword: But the people chose them.

4. And if it had been true that the choice lay only and absolutely on the
Presbyters, how came they to have so long two Bishops and two Churches, besides
the Arians?

5. And he wisely overlooketh the Question, who chose those Pres byters that
were the chusers of the Bishop?

. 22. He next instanceth, ex Eusebius. l. 6. c. 10. in Germanion and Gordius
Ordained by the Bishops in Narcissus place at Jerusalem.

Answ. 1. His argument, if any, must be this: Eusebius says, the Bishops
Ordained them, not mentioning the peoples consent or choice: Ergo, their
consent or choice was not used. How easily might he have known that we would
deny the consequence? Does any of us deny that the Bishops were the Ordainers
of Bishops? 2. And even the words of Eusebius confute him, saying, That when
Narcissus showed himself again, the brethren (no doubt the Laity) entreated him
to enjoy his Bishopric again.

. 23. His next instance is, [Severus Bishop of Milevis, in his life time
appointed his successor, acquainting only the Clergy with it: And Augustine
prevented the peoples disturbance and got them to receive him.]

Answ. Thus it is some men's work to confute themselves. It Is a known thing that
the peoples right was so universally and unquestionably acknowledged, that the
Canons forbad any Bishop to nominate and choose his Successor, lest it should
forestall them and prejudice their choice. And why else was the peoples
resistance feared? And what did Austin but persuade them to consent? And why
does he mention that the People consented and received him, if they had no
consenting Vote, or right on just cause to dissent? It would be an odd argument
to prove, that a woman had no power of choice in Marriage, because one was put
to persuade her to consent? which proves the necessity of her consenting.

. 24. He next tells us of Austin's own nomination of his Successor Eradius.

Answ. More and more against himself. All that men do is in danger of
miscarrying by their faultiness: Wise men would do their best to prevent this,
and the peoples consent being of necessity, they sometimes will pre-engage
them; so Austin's predecessor thought it the craftiest way in his lifetime,
to take in Austin for his Coadjutor or fellow Bishop (two in a City) lest the
people should miss of so excellent a man: But this being against the Canons,
Austin confesses that he did it ignorantly, and disowneth it. Yet lest the
people (who grew more and more faulty) should mischuse, he in his life time
commends to them Eradius, that their love to him might procure their
acceptance. Does not this prove that their choice or consent was necessary?
Reader, if the Doctor can persuade thee that the Country have not the choice of
Parliament men, because some are commended or named to them, thy yielding is
too easy.

. 25. The next is the story of Paul the Novatian out of Socrat. l. 8. (who has
but seven) Paulus was advising his Clergy to choose his Successor; They told
him their fear of their own disagreement, and to prevent it, entreated him to
nominate one. He made them promise to stand to it, and named Mercianus in a
sealed paper. Does not this instance prove, that the Bishop had not power to
choose one of himself? And was not his fear of the disagreement of the Clergy?
And does any of this disprove the peoples consenting right? And would the
Doctor persuade us that even the Novatians excluded them.

. 26. He tells us, that the Greek Canonists think that the Council of Nice took
away all the power of election of Bishops from the people, and gave it to the
Bishops of the Province.]

Answ. 1. In all reason he should have cited those Canonists; for it is strange
that yet their following Customs and Canons should say the contrary. 2. There
is not a word in the Canon cited about election, but only ordination [that all
the Bishops in the Province should Ordain a Bishop; But when that cannot be,
there shall be at least three present, and three more consenting by writing.]
And what is this to the Case the Peoples election or consent?

. 27. Yet he brings more against himself, viz. Can. 18. Council. Antioch.
which is, That if one be Ordained Bishop and go not to the Parish, because the
people refuse him, he shall have the honor and Office of a Bishop, not
troubling the peace of the Church;] which plainly says what I have often said,
That the people have no power to hinder any from being Ministers or Bishops
indefinitely in the Church Universal, but only to judge whether he shall be
theirs: whereas the Ordainers have power in both cases; and usually were the
first chusers, though the people had a refusing or accepting power, as there
appeared cause.

. 28. Next he adds more for what I plead, that Basil Ordaining one first,
persuades the Senate and People to accept him: Adding [ Their way then was, if
the people did agree on a person to be Bishop, to petition the Metropolitan and
Synod, who had the full power to allow or refuse him.]

Answ. Is not this a strong proof that the people had no such agreeing or
choosing power, because the Metropolitan and Synod also had their vote? what
need Basil persuade them to accept him, when they had no power to refuse? Did
Basil or any Synod say, all people are bound to accept those whom we choose, be
they what they will, and not to try them and judge themselves.

. 29. And here I desire the Reader to remember, 1. That we take the chief trust
to be by Christ committed to the Ordainers for taking in fit men, and keeping
out the unfit: They being the only Judges (with the person himself) who shall
be a Minister of Christ in the Church Universal; And neither Magistrate or
People have a power to choose or refuse them.

2. That the Universal Church being one body of Christ, though Ministers have
not such a charge of each others flocks as the particular Bishops of them have,
yet are they bound to give them all the help they can (as neighbor families to
help each other:) And therefore to offer to vacant Churches the best they know,
and persuade them to accept them, when they are at a loss or need advice.

3. The people are bound to reverence the judgment of neighbor Pastors herein,
and not causlesly to oppose.

4. When the People have chosen (or they and the Clergy,) if the person were
not before Ordained, the Ordainers still are judges for their own act.

5. It was not usual to Ordain sine titulo, and the Ordainers did two things at
once, 1. Judge absolutely who shall be a Minister of Christ? 2. Judge with the
Church to which he was Ordained (Elders and People) who was fit for that
Church, and should be theirs: And a threefold lock was safe.

6. By all this it appears that all the Doctors talk against the peoples
unfitness to discern who are sound or Heretic, fit or unfit, is to no purpose:
And that if unmeet men are Ministers or Bishops, the fault is ten times more in
the Ordainers than in the People: seeing it is not the People but the Ordainers
that are trusted to take into the Ministry indefinitely, but only among many to
judge who shall be theirs, supposing them either before Ministers, or next to be
made such by the Ordainers. And does the Doctor think that the judgment of all
parties is not as sure as of one alone? or that my refusing a Physician is any
wrong to his Licensers or him?

. 30. The Laodicean Canon cited by him speaks for me as the rest: (Did he
think I wanted his help to cite more for my self?) Who doubts that the People
being not the sole judges, if they took in an un-Ordained or un-approved man
without the Synods consent, it was void? (By the way, do either Synods or
People (the old chusers) choose our Bishops or Priests?)

. 31. Yet more for me, he cites the Chalced. Council, turning out Bassianus
and Stephanus from Ephesus, two men that strove and sought for the Bishopric
unto blood in the Church, and both pleaded they were lawfully called by Clergy,
and People, (And yet had the People no right?) But they were both proved to be
violent Intruders, and another chosen. And who doubts but a great General
Council had the greatest power then?

. 32. Next he tells us of a Law of Justinian, that made the Clergy and better
sort of Citizens chusers. (And indeed Nazianzene once wished the more religious
sort were chusers:) but does not this prove still the peoples power, though so
long after by an Emperor the poorer were so restrained? I will not stay to
search the Book, but take it as he cites it.

. 33. But his next seems to be downright against us, Can. 13. Conc. Laodic.
But it is not so: Crab has two translations: The first says, Quod non sit
permittendum turbis electiones eorum facere qui sunt ad sacerdotium provehendi:
It is not sufferable to choose by tumults: ergo, not for the people to choose at
all, no nor dissent. I deny the consequence. To forbid disorder is not to
forbid choice or free consent.

. 34. His next proof is Nic. Conc. 2. c. 3. which he says, restrained the
election only to Bishops.

Answ. Such dealing tells us that Protestant Doctors are not to be taken for
infallible no more than Papists; I cited the Canon before: The doubt is whether
it drive us not to more separation than we are willing of, by nullifying our
Bishops and Priests calling. It is [ every election of a Bishop, Priest or
Deacon, which is made by Magistrates, shall remain void, by the Canon which
says, If any Bishop use the secular Magistrates to obtain by them a Church,
let him be deposed and separated, and all that communicate with him.] Does not
the Doctor unhappily choose his testimonies? Had it not been better to have past
over this Council? Where now is all the Church of England by this Canon, if
Bishops coming in by the King, and Parsons by the Patrons be all void and null,
and the people separated that communicate with them? Such events are the fate
of an ill cause. And the next Canon does not amend their matter, which calls
it madness for gain or any affection of his own, to drive any from the
Ministry, or segregate one of his Clergy, he shall have Lextalionis, and his
work shall fall on his own head.

. 35. He adds, [ Which was confirmed by following Councils in the Greek Church,
as Can. 28. Constable. against Photius, and the people are there excluded with an
Anathema, so far were popular elections grown out of request in the Eastern
Empire.]

Answ. 1. Had this been true, it would not much move me, that these two
Councils that set up Image Worship, and showed much wickedness, should
contradict the Apostolical and Catholic constitutions and practice. But, 1. I
thank the Bishops, I am not able to buy the French Volumes of the Councils, and
therefore what is there I know not: and my own Library is ruined to avoid their
Agents distraining it for my Preaching: And Doctor James and others have taught
me to prefer the oldest Editions of the Councils, and to take heed how I trust
the later and the Jesuits pretended Manuscripts. I have now none but Crab (who
medleth not with this) and Binnius; And in Binnius there are but 14 Canons in
the last Action, and 27 in the antecedent Fragmenta: and no such thing as a
28th Canon to be found: Nor is there in the 27th any such thing as the Doctor
cites.

2. But if there were, if it were but the confirmation of the 2. Nicene Canon,
it were much against the Doctor's cause, and nothing for him.

3. But unhappily here also he sends us to find out much against him. For
besides that the 8th Can. in Fragm. condemns requiring subscriptions to stick
to the Patriarch (though they were not yet oaths of obedience) the 12th Canon
is indeed the same with those forecited, viz. That the Apostolical and
Synodical Canons flatly forbidding promotions and consecrations of Bishops, by
the power and command of Princes, we concordantly define, and sentence, that if
any Bishop receive the consecration of such a dignity, by the craft and tyranny
of Princes, he shall be altogether deposed, as one that desired and consented
to have the gift of God by the will of carnal sense, and from men and by men.

I suppose this is the Doctor's Canon which deposes all the English Bishops,
unhappily cited. And the Can. 14. requiring Princes to honor Bishops, and
condemning the Bishops that debase themselves to go far from their Church to
meet a Prince, and that will alight to them from their Horses, and that will
basely kneel to them, or will come to their tables, unless with purpose freely
to reprove them] expounds both these Bishops hearts and words. And so does
Can. 17. which condemns such as come not to Synods because the Prince
forbids them, and says, That Princes have no right so much as to be
spectators of the matters which at Synods fall out among Priests. And here
indeed an Anathema is pronounced against the obstinately disobedient Bishops,
that will not obey their Patriarch before the forbidding Prince.] And does this
meddle with the peoples Recipient power? which is only levelled against Princes
and Lay Patrons Impositions, and deposes the English Clergy and Church?

The same is repeated, Can. 25. (which it is likely is that which he meant) viz.
That according to the old Canons the promotions and consecrations of Bishops be
made by the choice and decree of the College, and that no Lay Princes or men in
power (potentu^) do mix themselves in the election or promotion of Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, or any Bishop; lest hence there be inordinate confusion or
contention, specially seeing that it is not convenient that any Potentates or
other Lay men have power in such matters, but rather attend with silence. --
And if any secular Prince or Potentate (men in power) or Lay men of other
dignity, strive against the common and consonant and Canonical Election of the
Ecclesiastical Order, let him be anathema, till he consent and obey in this,
which the Church shall show its will in, in the Election and Ordination of its
Proper Bishops.

Here, 1. The Churches will is made the determiner of the Election and
Ordination of their proper Bishop. 2. The Canonical Order is established (which
ever required the Clergies and Peoples consent.) 3. Nothing of the Laity but
acts of Princes power and dignity is excluded: 4. And hereby our English Clergy
deposed. The Doctor had been better to have let alone his History and
Antiquities.

. 36. His 4th note is, Christian Magistrates did interpose in this matter as
they judged expedient.

Answ. Hitherto he has produced the Testimonies of Councils and Bishops
against Magistrates choice or medlings (mistakingly thinking it had been
against the Flocks Receptive power) And now he will prove that Magistrates
interposed, as you shall hear.

. 37. And first [ So Constantine did in the Church of Antioch. Soz. l. 2. c. 19.

Answ. What did he? He motioned a Bishop to end the difference; And who
opposes that?

. 38. Next [ Constantius put by two that the people strove about, and set up
Eusebius. Nicom.

Answ. An unhappy testimony: Socrates whom he cites thus relates it,
[Alexander dying commended Paulus to the chusers as the fittest; but if they
would have a man of prowess to choose Macedonius:] The people were divided in
the choice, and made a greater stir than formerly* But the Orthodox carried it
for Paulus against the Heretics that were for Macedonius. Constantius being
the first persecuting Arian Emperor, was offended, and got a Council to depose
Paulus, and he got in his great favorite Eusebius Nicomed. the head of all the
Arians. Does not this show, 1. That the people were chusers, 2. That the
Emperor deposed him not, but by a pack^ Council of Bishops (which we know had
a deposing power?) 3. That this is Recorded as an Act of two Heretics, a
Prince and Prelate, wronging the Church.

. 39. Says he, [ When Eusebius was dead, the Orthodox party again chose
Paulus, and Constantius sends Hermogenes to drive him out by force.

Answ. 1. I doubt he will next cite Valens, Gensericus, Hunnericus, etc. for
murdering and persecuting the Bishops. Was an Arians Tyranny, a note of right?

2. The story (in Socrates cited by him) is this: Eusebius. the Arian being dead,
the People again went to the choice, and chose as before: But some were killed
in the tumult. The Arian Emperor sends Hermogenes to force out Paulus the
chosen Bishop: The people tumultuously fight for their Bishop and privilege,
and set Hermogenes Lodgings on fire and kill him. The Emperor comes from
Antioch, amerceth the City, and puts Paul out, and yet is angry that Macedonius
was chosen by the other part without his advice; but consents to him.

1. Does not this show that the people were the chusers? 2. And even their
murderous tumult moved neither an Heretic Prince nor the Bishops to deny their
right of choice. 3. Murder and such violence was a fair color for more
severity. 4. Yet all this was by a Heretic noted as an act against the Church.
5. And all this was but about a Patriarch, and not an ordinary Bishop, and that
at his Imperial seat, where it concerned the Emperors to have most regard. 6.
And I told you that Princes are the Judges whom they should tolerate, whoever
have the choice.

. 40. He adds, When Athanasius was restored, Constantius declared it was by the
decree of the Synod and by his consent.

Answ. 1. If he meant here to intimate the exclusion of the peoples consent or
choice, he could scarce have named in History an instance more against himself,
than that of Athanasius, who thereby was brought in, upheld and often restored.
2. This History tells you the Arian Emperor was forced to this consent, to
avoid a threatened War from his brother. 3. This was not to make him Bishop, but
to call him to his flock from his banishment. 4. And does not all this confirm
what I plead for, as to the Peoples, Synods and Princes several parts?

. 41. Nectarius case is next, about whom Historians disagree, but the most
credible say, that the Council named Nectarius with some others in a paper, and
in honor to an excellent Emperor, bid him take which he would: But all this
excluded not the peoples part (who would not have left Gregory but by his own
request) and were glad to accept one from such a Council and Prince.

. 42. Next he says out of Sozomen, That the People and Clergy chose
Chrysostom, and Arcadius consented; and then he affro^teth Sozomen with
Palladius.

Answ. 1. Palladius denies nothing that I plead for, but only tells us of the
Emperors premotion and endeavors, (in his Royal City about a Patriarch) to
prevent the division of the people: Nor is Palladius credit to be equalled to
Sozomen's herein, much less preferred. 2. Socrates the most credible of all in
this, says, l. 6. c. 2. [ It seemed good to them to send for John Chrysostom. --
Wherefore not long after, Arcadius with the general consent both of Priests and
People sent for him.] And did not the Doctor think I needed help by such
Citations?

. 43. The choice of Nestorius was just such another* The people had no reason
to deny consent to one out of Chrysostom's Monastery, nominated by so good an
Emperor; who was judge whom to tolerate in his Royal City: But both he and
they after repented of the choice.

. 44. His last instance is Theodosius getting in Proclus before Maximianus was
buried.

Answ. Reader, 1. All this is a good Emperors care about one Patriarch of his
own City to avoid division, and nothing to the common choice of Bishops.

2. The true case Socrates (cited) thus describes: The people were the
chusers: They were for Proclus; but some adversaries objected a Canon, that a
Bishop might not be removed from one Church to another, and he being a Bishop
already they could not have him: Socrates pleads for the dispensableness of
this Canon; but the people were fain to take Maximianus. The Emperor being for
dispensing with that Canon, and gratifying the people that had before declared
themselves for Proclus, did not himself bring him in, but got Celestine Bishop
of Rome to write to Cyril of Alexand. John Bishop of Antioch and Rufus Bishop
of Thessalonica to satisfy them to do it; and so got Proclus in. What is this
against the peoples right? These be all the Doctor's instances on this point.

. 45. His 5th note is, [ On the alteration of the Government of Christendom
there was greater reason for the Magistrates interposing than before: Because
of Princes endowing Churches, the Royal assent was fit, -- though a Bishop was
chosen by the Clergy and People.]

Answ. Who would strive against so friendly a disputer, that goes on to say
the same as I? when I doubt his party will say that he Prevaricateth.

. 46. But he says, The Royal power overthrowing the Papal, reserved the power
of nomination of Bishops as part of the Prerogative: which being allowed in
frequent Parliaments, the consent of the people is swallowed up therein, since
their Acts oblige the whole Nation.

Answ. 1. I see we yet understand not how much of the Irenicon is retracted,
and whether he yet hold not that no Form of Church Government is of Divine
Institution; or we be not bound to be for that which King and Parliament are
for. But we undertake to prove the contrary, and have done it.

2. What if Parliaments gave the King power to choose all Folks Wives and
Husbands, Physicians, Tutors, Diet, Trade, etc. our Right were not swallowed up
by this, though it were called the King's Prerogative. Much less where Gods
Institution and the very Law of Nature have forestalled them, and neither God
nor Man gave them that swallowing power.

3. I often answered, that Tithes and Temples may be more in the Magistrates
power, than Pastoral relation and power of the Keys.

. 47. He says, p. 326. That the inferior right of Patronage is justly thought
to bear equal date with the settlement of Christianity in peace and quietness.

Answ. 1. It was scarce ever settled in peace and quietness to this day: Much
less during the Saxons Heptarchy. 2. I have proved that the Universal Church
was far from making Lay Patrons the chusers. 3. It is less lawful to sell our
Souls into slavery than our bodies: And if our Ancestors had said to some rich
men, You shall all choose our Pastors and we will stand to your choice, if you
will build us Temples and give them Lands; it would no more bind us to stand to
their bargain, than if they had said, Give us House and Land, and you shall
choose our Diet, Wives, Physicians, etc. we say if your kindness be turned to
our hurt, take your house and land, or give it to whom you will: we will not
sell our souls and Church-rights at such a price.

. 48. His 6th conclusion is, That things being thus settled -- there is no
ground for the people to resume the liberty of Elections.

Answ. 1. I need not over and over repeat the answer to his reasons. 2. If the
liberty of Election be not resumed (which was not that which I pleaded for, as
he would all along insinuate) yet the liberty o* free consent or refusal may be
necessary.

. 49. Reader, again, the true case is like this following: Parents have a
ruling power to choose Wives and Husbands for their Children: Guardians have
much power over Orphans in it.
Magistrates may make Laws to restrain unlawful Marriages. Children are bound
in these cases to obey Parents, unless they choose to their apparent hurt or
danger; and to obey Guardians and Magistrates in their proper Laws. But 1: It
is for all this no Marriage till both parties consent. 2. And all the said
power over them is limited, and but directive and not destructive to their own
consenting power.

Even so in our case; 1. The Ordainers are the first Judges, and have a power
like Parents, and none should be received against their wills, unless they
would betray the Church. 2. The Magistrates may make ordering restraining Laws,
that no unworthy person shall be tolerated: 3. A limited power of nomination
may be left to Patrons, as Guardians, who have power to help the Churches, but
none to hurt; much less to ruin them* 4. But it is not a Church related as
Pastor and Flock, till both consent. These things are evident truth, though
some would bury it in a heap of words.

. 50. I would also if I could have drawn the Doctor to resolve me this doubt;
Whether the power of Parents and Husbands, or of Patrons, yea or Princes be
greater, in the choice of Food, Physic, and so of a Tutor, a Pastor or a
particular Church Communion. And if a Parent or Husband say, I command you to
hear and Communicate with such a Pastor and Congregation, and the Patron say
the contrary, yea, or the Prince or Law, which is to be obeyed? And to whom
this Family Government most belongs? And why Father and Mother rather than
Prince and Priests are named in the Fifth Commandment?

. 51. p. 329. He recites my reasons, why Parliaments cannot take away our free
Receptive consent, and he again feigneth that I say all this for the peoples
choosing power, yet confesses I deny not the Magistrates or Patrons power of
their own Gift. (The Case of Sacrilege I leave to their Consciences.)

. 52. p. 330. But says he, Anabaptists, Quakers, and all may pretend a care of
their Souls, and so leave the Minister only the Temple and Tithes.

Answ. 1. And Anabaptists and Quakers will have a care of their Souls, when you
have said and done all you can against it: A prison will not overcome it.

2. So Turks, Socinians, Papists, (or Anabaptists if you will) when they get
into power, may pretend that they are fitter to be trusted with men's Souls,
than men with their own: And so Prelates may say: But is nothing true that men
can abuse and misapply?

And to me it is something, though it should be nothing to you, 1. That nature
obliges and disposes every man more to care for his own soul, than it does
the Patron to care for others. 2. That many hundred or thousand men are not all
so like to mistake and miscarry about their own Souls, as one Patron is that is
far from their hearts. 3. That it is a matter more dangerous to trust*
thousands in one hand than in many (as it would be in a storm to put all into
one boat.) If that man miscarry he endangereth multitudes: If another man
miscarry it is but for one.

3. To have a self-saving power, and to have a self-destroying power, differ
(with men that hate not distinction.) So little can a man know what we say by
this Doctors Answers, that a stranger would think by him that we were quite of
another mind. I never said Quakers or any others may have whom they will: If
they choose men incapable, the neighbor Bishops or the Clergy may admonish
them, and renounce his Communion; And the Magistrate may restrain him and
refuse to tolerate an intolerable man: And yet the people ought not to accept
an incapable man offered by Bishops or Patrons; no nor a man next to incapable
when they need and may have much better. Many Negatives are safe.

. 53. He says, The profane have right to their own souls, and to the care of
them, and therefore are equally concerned with others (to choose.)

Answ. It is sad with the Church when they need to be saved from such
reasonings of their great Teachers.

1. A Right to care for their Souls gives no man right to choose men for others
Souls, to do that which they will not have done for their own. The question is,
whether that man will Communicate with the Church on Christ's terms? He refuses
and will not (else he ought not to be refused.) And shall he that refuses
Communion choose one to give it others, because he has a Soul himself? Had the
neighbor Heathens and Heretics of old power to choose Bishops for the Church,
while they refused to be of the Church themselves? Shall he that will not be of
the Society choose for the Society?

2. We distinguish between what a man may be forced to, and what not. He may
not be forced to the great gift of Sacramental Remission and Communion, because
no unwilling person has right to it: But an ignorant person may be forced as a
Catechumen or hearer, to hear what can be said for his conviction: For truth
may conquer the unwilling. But none on this pretense can hinder the Church from
hearing its own Pastors, nor force men to be the ordinary Auditors of
Mahometans, Heretics or Heathens.

. 54. p. 331. He again tragically exclaims of me, on the old false supposition,
that I make the people the sole chusers, and not only plead for their free
Negative Vote (though choosing also, but not alone, was the old way;) And here
tells us of the tumults that would follow.

Answ. 1. So they would if the people chose in France, Spain, Italy: And yet I
would they did. No humane actions are free from inconveniences; which are not
to be cured with a mischief.

2. Let him name me ten places that have suffered so deeply by the peoples
choice, as I can tell him of ten thousand that have done by the choice of
Prelates, Patrons and Princes, and I will confess my error. It was not by the
peoples choice that all preaching was put down in Moscovy: It is not the people
that have this many hundred years chosen all the Popish Bishops, Mass-priests,
etc. in Italy, and most of the Roman Church, even in Spain, France, Bavaria,
etc.

3. I told him, but had no answer, that not only the Innes of Court, but also
Black friars, Aldermanbury, and such other places as have chosen their own
Teachers, have (peaceably) had as happy a succession of Learned, Godly, able
Pastors, as any place in London or in England.

4. It Is known by experience that Learning and great worth does as Light so
reveal it self to humane nature, that usually most of those that are loath to be
holy themselves, would have a Saint and an able man.

5. Does he think in his Conscience that all the Patrons in England are liker
to be judicious, and free from solicitations, favor and respect of persons,
than the majority of the Communicants of such Churches?

6. If the Parsons first admit great numbers of profane, and wicked men to be
Communicants, and then tell us how unfit these men are to choose: they do but
condemn themselves.

. 55. p. 333. He tells us we do but say, We judge, we think, etc. the things
unlawful, but for particular arguments to prove them unlawful, he finds none.

Answ. If this be true, then they that never found our arguments never answered
them. (If it be not true, it is not well.) Then you here, and Mr. Falkener,
Fulwood, Durel, etc. have not yet answered any of our arguments. Remember this.

2. Though I did not argue, but name the things in my first Plea, you and
others took it for arguing; and we ever craved leave to do it.

3. Is it true indeed, that there are no arguments, in our Writings, 1660. and
1661. with the Bishops, nor any in my Book of Concord, or Treatise of
Episcopacy, nor in my old Disputations of Church Government, nor in any other
men's Books these eighteen years? I doubt the angry Bishops will think that in
my Treatise of Episcopacy there is some sort of Argument; and that my Book
against Sacril. Desertion of the Ministry has some: and that an Apology for
our preaching (now in the Press) has some. But if there be none, accuse us of
none.

CHAP. X. Of the Imposed use of the Cross in Baptism, and denying Baptism to
the refusers.
. 1. PAge 343. He comes to our [ charge against the Church] (though he never
found any Arguments as aforesaid.)

And I. Why does he silently balk the chief things which I had named? will this
satisfy Conscience? will excusing some things make others lawful?

II. As to what he says for the Cross, I have so fully answered it twice to
Mr. Cheney, and once to the Impleader, that I am loath to repeat all again. In
short, 1. He says the Church intends it not [ for a sign of Immediate
dedication.]

Answ. 1. What is the Medium? 2. What if it were not Immediate? 3. Can it be
more Immediate than in the very present dedicating act, to use the sign and
expressing the dedicating signification? -- 4. The words of the Canon are, [ To
dedicate them by that badge to his service, whose benefits bestowed on them in
baptism the name of the Cross does represent.] And after [ the Church of
England accounts it an honorable badge whereby the Infant is dedicated to
the service of him that dyed on the Cross.] And the service is named
[Christianity in practice,] to fight under his banner, etc.

2. He says, [ In baptizing the Minister acts by Authority derived from
Christ, but at Crossing he speaks in the name of the Church, [ We receive this
Child, etc.]

Answ. 1. It Is meet it should be so, that Christ's Sacraments be used by
Christ's Authority, and men's by men's.

2. But I hope this is but a quibble; and that notwithstanding the word [ we,]
the Minister as Christ's Minister, and in his name says, [ we receive this
child,] when even the absolved are to be received by Christ first, and then by
the Church. I will not else aggravate the ill consequences.

. 2. He before says, [ Was the Cross a dedicating sign to God, or a
declarative sign to men?]

Answ. The Canon says expressly twice, [To dedicate them by this badge to his
service -- ] And [an honorable badge whereby the Infant is dedicated to his
Service.] And the Rubric which we must subscribe, refers us to the Canon for
the true sense and reason of the Crossing.

2. Is Baptism and the Lords Supper a sign to God, or to man? It is a sign to
man for God: God knows not by signs, but instituteth signs for humane use. It
is to dedicate them to God's service.

. 3. He says, [ It represents the duty and not the Grace.]

Answ. 1. The words are, [ to his service, whose benefits bestowed on them in
baptism, the name of the Cross does represent.] Are the benefits so bestowed no
Graoe? or is Representing no Representing? or shall we believe the Doctor
against the Church? or is this the kind of Conformity that he would teach us,
by denying what we subscribe to?

2. Sure the Cross of Christ with his dying on it, expressed also in the words of
the Canon, is Grace. To represent or signify Christ dying on the Cross (which
are the words and use) is immediately to represent or signify the very Grace
of Redemption it self.

3. To be listed under Christ as the Captain of our Salvation, and to be
received into the Congregation of Christ's flock, to fight under his banner,
etc. are all great Grace.

4. The moral operation on the soul which the preface of the Liturgy ascribes
to the Ceremonies, is Grace to be wrought by them.

5. To make a common symbol or badge of Christianity, solemnly obliging as a
Covenanting sign, by which they must be distinguished from Infidels, and this
even at our first Covenanting with Christ, is to make a Sacrament in the old
sense. What was the Soldiers Sacramentum Militare more, from which the Church
seems to have borrowed the name? The Oath was obliging; The colors or cingulum
was obliging and a signifying badge: The good received was the honor, relation
and hope of future pay or preferment upon performance. And is not all this in
ours?

6. If you have wit strong enough to justify all this humane addition to
Christ's great institution, must all men be compelled to practice as you and
such others judge, because you think they do not confute you? Who gave you or
such others right to silence, reject from Christendom, etc. all such as are not
herein of your mind; even when you deny what your Canon expressly says?

. 4. He says, It adds nothing to Baptism which is complete before.

Answ. What Is this to our question? It adds another Sacrament to Baptism: The
Lords Supper is another Sacrament of the same Covenant added to perfect Baptism
by Christ; and the Cross by men.

. 5. But all the difficulty is thus removed (he thinks) and by the foresaid
quibble of [ I baptize] and [ we receive.]

Answ. Difficulties are easilier removed with some men, than with others.

1. He dare not say that the Minister speaks not as from Christ, whenever he
says [ we] in the plural number.

2. Doubtless it is first Christ's act, and then the Churches to Receive the
Baptized into the flock of Christ: And the Minister herein first speaks
Christ's act and then the Churches.

3. The words [ we receive] him, goes before the Crossing and is named
especially as part of the Ministration of Baptism, being its immediate effect.
And what a dangerous invention is it to say that the Minister here speaks not
from Christ but the Church, in receiving in those dedicated to him?

4. And he will make us a hard task of it, to know when the Priest speaks as
God's Minister, and when as the peoples Minister or mouth?

. 6. He brings us the instance of one after Baptism, engaging himself in the
Independent Church Covenant by holding up his hand.

Answ. 1. It is supposed that the Covenant which he mentions is not the
Covenant of Christianity, but (that supposed) a consent or promise to live in
the relation and duty of a Christian member of that particular flock. And this
is much like a Covenant between a Christian Man and Wife, Tutor and Pupil: And
as men may make particular contracts, they may make particular signs of them,
(as is the Ring and taking hands in Marriage; the crowning of a Christian King,
etc.) But if you suppose the Independent Covenant to repeat also and contain
the Covenant of Christianity it self as the first part, then that which is
required is but signified consent: And as all Christians renew their consent at
each Eucharist Sacramentally, so do they frequently by word and deed, and all
due signification of consent. Nature and Custom of humane converse have made
words and gestures signifiers of consent: But Sacraments and solemn badges of
this nature signify by Institution of the inventer or imposer.

The sin lies in arrogating Christ's prerogative, and accusing his Laws of
insufficiency. If Christ (by his act and spirit) had not separated one day in
seven for the Commemoration of his Resurrection, he had not told us that this
is his own work as Legislator. But now he has separated one day, if man will
make a Law that another day also of the week shall be separated to the same
use, it is as much as to say, 1. We have authority to make such Laws as Christ
made. 2. And to amend his Law by this addition. For if it had been fit to be
made, there was the same reason then for Christ to have separated two days.

So is it in this case. If Christ had made no Sacraments, we might more have
doubted whether he took it for his proper work: But where he has made two, to
make more of the same nature, to me seems too bold: He could have made the
Sacrament of the dedicating Cross if he would have had it. If our Bishops
should command us to say we believe Christ's resurrection, or to stand up to
signify it, to avoid confused noise, we refuse it not: But if they would make
a Law that none shall be Christened that will not let the Priest put him into a
Coffin or Grave and take him out again to represent the Resurrection, I think
it fafest to deny obedience to such arrogant usurpation.

. 7. He confesses, It belongs to Christ only to appoint the means of conveying
his own grace.

Answ. I have before proved that the Cross is by this Church appointed as such
a means, and named the Grace and conveyance.

. 8. He says, [ Though it belong to the King to make the badge or symbol of
his own subjects, yet every Nobleman may give a distinct Livery without
treason.]

Answ. True: And this opens the Case. A badge of the Kings subjects is not the
same thing, with the badge of a subjects servant: But the Cross is not the
badge of a humane subordinate contract or relation (as City Covenants, or
Pastoral particular contracts, etc.) but of Christianity it self, and of the
subjects of Christ as such.

. 9. p. 353. He says, Is our worship directed to it or may we kneel before it,
as Mr. B. allows men may do before a Crucifix?

Answ. But if this be not true, or be a deceiving intimation, you should not
allow your self to write it. My words are in Christ. Direct. q. 113. p. 876.
When I had named 21 Cases in which an Image may not be used, (and among the
rest, when it is scandalous, or tempting to superstition, etc.) I named many
Cases in which an Image may be used; and say [ that it is not unlawful to pray
before or toward an Image, in a Room where they are placed only for Ornament,
etc.] Is this to say, (worship may be directed to it? or that we may kneel
before a Crucifix;) when I had before excepted the Images of God, Christ, etc.
in worship, on several reasons? Does any Protestant doubt of what I assert? My
Parlour has on all four sides the pictures of our living friends: must I not
pray in that room because my face will be still toward some of them? Does he
doubt of this? Or is not his citing one half of the words as he does, to
deceive his credulous Reader, if not worse?

. 10. He says, Kneeling before a Crucifix is lawful to him supposing the mind
be only excited by it.

Answ. A Calumny made up by setting together two scraps of remote sentences. 1.
Because I say it is lawful to pray in a room where pictures (not any) are before
me, for meet ornament, therefore he feigns me to say, It Is lawful to kneel
before a Crucifix. 2. And elsewhere I say, It is lawful to be excited to a good
thought by seeing a Deaths-head, or any of Gods works, and so it is by seeing a
Crucifix; (which no sober Christian doubts of) he feigns me to make it an
exciting sign to him that kneels before it.

. 11. Yea he makes so much use of his own calumny as p. 354. to prove me
strangely partial, Allowing it to be lawful to pray before a Crucifix as a
medium excitans, as an object that stirs up in us worshipping affections, and
so excuse all Papists from Idolatry that profess they use a Crucifix for no
other end.

Answ. Mere repeated forgery, not becoming his profession. I never spoke for
praying before it, much less as an object to stir up worshipping affections:
But only that I am not bound to fly at prayer from a room that has only
ornamental pictures; and that as in the Geneva Bible there be Historical
pictures, and few but Turks are against them, it is lawful (I say not kneeling
before them at prayer, but out of cases of scandal and danger) to be excited by
them to good affections, and indeed good affections are worshipping affections.
Dare any Christian say that it is a sin to think reverently of God when we see
his works, or see but a picture of Scripture History (as Abraham offering
Isaac, Christ dying and rising, etc.) Nonconformists have still taken them for
Liars that said they were against Historical pictures; and showed it in the
Geneva Bible. I have seen in many pious country Houses all the story of Dives
and Lazarus painted over their Tables, and never heard the good use of it
accused. But I desire the Reader to peruse my words, which he cites, Quest.
113. and judge with what honesty we are accused. I there say, 1. It is unlawful
to make any Image of God. 4. It is unlawful to make, place or use an Image as
is like to do more hurt than good, or to tempt to sin: -- And all such Images
of creatures as others use to give unlawful worship or honor to, when like to
tempt others to the like; as among the Papists the Image of the Crucifix, the
Virgin Mary and Angels may not be made, placed or used so as may tempt any to
worship them sinfully as they do. 11. It is unlawful to place Images in
Churches or in secret before our eyes when we are worshipping God, when it
tends to corrupt the mind -- which is the ordinary effect of Images. 12. It
is unlawful to use Images scandalously, as any of the aforesaid sinners use
them, though we do it not with the same intent: that is, so as in outward
appearance is the same with their use, Because so we shall dishonor God as
they do, and harden them in sin: Therefore Images in Churches or in Oratories
in those Countries where others use them sinfully, or near such Countries,
where the same may harden men in their sin, is evil. 21. I think it unlawful to
make an Image or any equal instituted sign to be the public common symbol of
the Christian Religion, though but a professing sign (as they make the Cross.)

Does this doctrine justify the Papists? And p. 876.. 14. I largly prove the
use of a Crucifix (as they do the Cross in baptism) to be unlawful: which he
answers not. Is it not consistent with all this that I say, [ That it is not
unlawful to pray before or toward an Image, in a room where Images are placed
only for ornament, and we have no respect to them as a medium or object of our
worship ( except as by accident it is made unlawful.) And that (not kneeling to
them, nor in prayer, but, in transient meditation,) it is lawful so to use them
historically as to stir up in us a worshipping affection.] If the Papists do no
more, no Protestant would call them Idolaters for it. But if they use them
Idolatrously, it makes our use of them unlawful, when even but outwardly it is
like theirs: And so I say of the Cross. This is the Doctors zeal against
Idolatry, that it seems would have us all used as his Books intimate, till we
dare use the Transient Image of the Cross much worse than he makes the Papists
to use Images and Crucifixes in particular. For to use them as a dedicating
common badge of Christianity, in our great Covenant with Christ, is more than
to use them historically and in meditation, or more than to pray in rooms
adorned with common pictures. But he knows that the Papists give more to
Images.

. 12. Obj. But what need had you to say all this of Images?

Answ. That men may understand it. I Will tell you that you may see the Candor of
our accusers. Dr. R. Coxe Bishop of Ely consulted with Cassander to have had
Images in our Churches. The Lutherans so use them. Our new Church of England
began to set up Crucifixes over Altars, and to plead more for Church-pictures
than heretofore. In 1642. the Parliament ordered the defacing all Images of any
Person of the Trinity in Churches or Churchyards, (before the King went from
them) Because I read this Order and the Churchwarden attempted to obey it, the
rabble of drunken swearing Journy-men, who were all for Conformity, rose in a
tumult with clubs, seeking to kill me and the Churchwardens, and knocked down
two Countrymen because they were our friends (who carried the hurt to their
death:) And the Conforming Clergy were so much for them, that one of them
indicted me at the Assizes, and I was forced to leave the Country. Such rage
for Images tempted some religious men that were against them, to be more
censorious against the Conformists than I would have them, and to run too near
the other extreme: And after it grew a dispute whether the Lutherans were not
Heretics (of which see Caspar Streso.) The remembrance of all this drew me to
say all the Truth which I thought useful to cure men's overmuch censuring the
Lutherans and the new Prelatists: And now the thanks they give me is to turn
the censure on my self for saying so much to excuse them.

Just so did Mr. Pierce by me: My religious neighbors scrupled Communion with
their neighbor Prelatists, saying, All the drunkards and swearers and ignorant
ungodly people that had no religion, were fierce for Bishops, Liturgy and
Ceremonies, and they durst not join with them while they profaned the
Sacrament. I was far from justifying them, but to abate their overmuch
censuring, I told them that in some Countries where custom had brought some
particular sin from under disgrace, we could not judge one graceless, whose
whole lives else were pious, temperate and just, for sometime committing that
particular sin; and it was hard to say how often this might fall out: As breaking
the Lords day in Geneva and Holland, some petty Oath in some Countries that use
it, and such like. For this charity to the Prelatists, what does Mr. Pierce but
turn the charge of favoring such gross sin against my self, as if I had been
compounding it with godliness?

I leave you all therefore hereafter, better to defend your selves.

. 13. About their appointing the Cross to work Grace morally, and that
Sacraments work it not physically, he says, I misrepresent or misapply both
the Popish and Protestant doctrine of Sacraments.] And for the first he says,
It overthrows all that I say that they all hold that Sacraments work grace, ex
opere operato, where there is no actual impediment, and it is heresy to say,
They are bare outward professing signs.]

Answ. Did he think that this is inconsistent with the opinion that they work
it morally? They distinguish between the Principal Agent, the instrumental
Operator, and the Receiver. And they say that the Sacrament conveyeth Grace by
the will of the Principal Agent (God) ex opere operato, and has not its effect
ex opere operantis; And that opus operantis is that which vim habet ex bonitate
and devotione ejus qui operatur, that is, from the Ministers goodness (And does
not the English Canon say the same?) But opus operatum is that which is
effectual, modo fiat sicut lex praescribit, whether the instrument be good or
bad: But it must be sicut lex praescribit: And when they come to the Receiver
they require in him more than the opus operatum to the effect: viz. that he
intend (as Aquinas speaks, 3. q. 68. a. 7.) to receive Baptism, which is the
beginning of a new life, and that he have faith, a. 8. c. ex part gratia quam
quis per baptismum consequitur, exigitur in suscipiente fides, ex part vero
Characteris non necessaria est. The Character is received without real Faith,
but Grace is not. And what that Character is how little they are agreed see at
large in Wotton de Reconcil. Peccat. Durandus, and the wisest say it is but the
Relation of one that has received the external tessera or badge of
Christianity (which none deny.) And ad 2. he says, [ the Church quantum in se,
non intendit dare baptismum nisi habentibus rectam fidem, sine qua non est
remissio peccatorum. Et propter hoc interrogat accedentes ad baptismum an
credant? And cites Austin, that without true faith it is not received to
salvation.

And Art. 9. he concludes that [ seeing God does not compel men to
righteousness, it is manifest that feigned comers obtain not the benefit of
baptism. And ad 3. inter ficte accedentes, he numbers them that come in mortal
sin, not willing to leave it and be conformed to Christ.

And your own words imply all this, that the Receiver must put no hinderance]
while they make the want of necessary intention, desire, true faith,
repentance, to be the hinderance, leaving the subject incapable of the Grace of
the Sacrament of Baptism.

. 14. It irketh me to repeat, but you constrain me: Scotus and Okam (and then I
need not say how many more) confute Aquinas at large for calling Sacraments so
much as instruments giving Grace, as he explaineth it; And so does Pet. Aliaco
Camera^. briefly in 4. q. 1. B. C. concluding that Sacraments are no Causes of
Grace properly, but improperly, because Deus in sacramentis ordinavit sic
agere, non quod ipsa sacramenta agant -- And that a sacrament neither by its
own virtue, nor by any virtue given it, is any proper efficient cause of any
disposition in the soul previous to grace, or of grace it self, but a condition
sine qua non, dispositiv, improperly called Causa dispositiva Moralis, non
effectiva sed receptiva: Yet they grant also a Moral objective causality, by
signification.

Brianson in 4. q. 1. fol. 6. concludes (1. doc.) sacramenta non sunt graliae
causa effectiva, sed solum per modum meriti per ea datur gratia, citing
Ricardus, Scotus, Aureolus, Franc. Perusius, etc. against Thom. and Alexand.
herein. Yet says [ Baptismus indiget fide, quae est dispositio and fundamentum
omnium sacramentorum, vel in se ut in adultis, vel in alio ut in parvulis.
Suarez de Legib. l. 9. c. 6. p. 748. Col. 2. de Circumcis. [ Nam etiam ipsa
fides parentum er at conditio necessaria and sine qua non; Et tamen de illa
dici non potest, Quod Gratiam daret Infanti ex opere operato, nec quod gratiam
contineret; etiam nec causa justificans parvulos dici potest; nisi late and
improprio modo, sicut dicitur de quolibet remedio vel condition sine qua non.

And Brianson also says in 4. q. 4. doc. 1. fol. 34 Quod ficte recipientes
baptismum non habent gratiam baptismi, dicunt Scholastici.

Yea even Hildebrand in one of his Roman Councils concludes, that the
Sacraments of Baptism and Penance give not pardon to the impenitent and
incapable.

Petrus a S. Joseph These. univers. de sacram. p. 93. says, [ Sacramentum est
signum sensibile divinitus institutum, longo tempore durans, sanctitatem
aliquam, saltem externam (that is, Relative separation to God, which is the
true Character with them) conferens, and veram significans.

And p. 101. [ Sacramenta novae legis conferunt gratiam, idque ex opere operato
and immediate: Duplicem scilicet, aliam respondentem dispositioni, aliam ipsi
sacramento: cum antiquae adultis nullam conferrent nisi ratione dispositionis
-- Sacramenta novae legis non producunt gratiam physice, sed tantum moraliter.]

But I must spare the Reader: By this he may understand, 1. That they hold not
to the opus operatum as efficient of Grace in the Sacraments of the old Law,
and so not to Sacraments as Sacraments: 2. That they put opus operatum against
opus operantis, and not against the necessary disposition of the Receiver,
which consists in Faith, Repentance, intention, etc.

3. That many of them deny all proper Sacramental causality of Grace. 4.
Specially Physical. (And Protestants make them not mere signs, but investing
signs.) 5. And ponere obicem is to want necessary moral qualification, and
action as aforesaid.

And now the Dr. had done well to tell me wherein I was very much mistaken.

. 15. He next says, [ The Cross is in no sense held to be an instrument
appointed for conveying Grace.]

Answ. 1. Not by God, for it is none of God's Ordinances. 2. But that by men it
is I have manifested; if a moral objective moving and teaching means may be
called an Instrument: If not, the word Instrument is noting to our case. 1. To
work on the soul of the adult by representation, signification, excitation (as
the word does) is to be an operative moral cause or means: And this the Church
ascribes to it (Pref. to Liturg. etc.) 2. The death of Christ, and the
benefits of it, and reception into the Church and State of Christianity, and
the sense of our Engagement to fight under Christ's banner, etc. are Grace;
some of which is given by excitation and some (the Relation) by investiture.

. 16. And now whether I have only invented these objections to amuse and
perplex men's consciences, and this Dr. has made all so plain that all may
venture on it, and he and all Ministers may deny them Christendom that dare not
venture, and cast out all from the Ministry that be not as bold as he, I leave
to consideration.

He next turns to Mr. A. about bowing, and so goes to their Excommunication

CHAP. XI. Whether the Excommunicating Church, or the Excommunicated for not
Communicating when Excommunicated be guilty of Schism?
. 1. THeir Canons excommunicate ipso facto all that say Conformity is unlawful,
and many such like. 1. He says [ The excommunication is not against such as
modestly scruple the lawfulness of things imposed; but those who obstinately
affirm it.

Answ. Reader, trust neither him nor me, but read the words. Can. 3, 4, 5, 6. [
Whosoever shall affirm that the Church of England by Law established under his
Majesty is not a true and an Apostolical Church, -- let him be excommunicated
ipso facto.

Whosoever shall affirm that the form of God's worship in the Church of England
established by the Law, and contained in the Book of Commonprayer -- is a
corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship of God, or contains ANY THING in
it that is repugnant to the Scriptures, let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored till, etc.

Whosoever shall affirm that any of the 39 Articles, are in any part
superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored till,
etc.

Whosoever shall affirm that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England
by Law established are wicked, antichristian, or superstitious, OR such as
being commanded by lawful authority, men who are zealously and Godly affected
may not with any good conscience approve them, use them, OR as occasion
requires subscribe to them, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not
restored till he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

Can. 7. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Government of the Church of
England under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and
THE REST THAT BEAR OFFICE IN the same, is antichristian, OR repugnant to the
word of God, let him be excommunicate ipso facto, etc.

Can. 8. Whosoever shall affirm that the form and manner of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons, contains ANY THING in it that is
repugnant to the word of God, -- let them be excommunicate ipso facto, etc.

Can. 11. Whosoever shall affirm -- that there are within this Realm, other
Meetings, Assemblies, or Congregations of the Kings born subjects, than such as
by the Law of this Land are held and allowed, which may rightly challenge to
themselves the Name of true and lawful Churches, let him be excommunicate ipso
facto, etc.

And now if the Reader will no more believe the Doctor, it is not long of me.
If all this be no more than to excommunicate them that [ obstinately affirm the
Ceremonies Antichristian, impious, or superstitious,] understanding them is not
possible.

. 2. But I confess they excommunicate not men for secret thoughts: We thank
them for nothing. It is but for telling their judgment. And Dissenters may have
many occasions to tell it. The Kings Commission once allowed some of us to tell
it: The Demands, Accusations, calumniating Books and Sermons, etc. may call
many to it.

. 3. He says, All Excommunication supposes precedent Admonition.

Answ. 1. They should do so: The worse is yours because it does not so: It only
allows admonition to repent for his restoration: which made M. Anton.
Spalatensis say so much against it.

2. If it did oblige you to admonish us, as you have done by your Books, you
know that this changes not our judgments: So that to be excommunicate before
the admonition and after comes all to one. But indeed when the Law ipso facto
excommunicateth, the Law it self is the admonition.

. 4. He adds [ General excommunications though they be latae sententiae, do
not affect the particular persons till the evidence be notorious, not only of
the bare fact, but the contumacy.]

Answ. Affecting is a word that signifies what you please. Ipso facto is [ for
and upon the fact proved, without any sentence of a judge.] While the fact only
is thus made the full cause, the contumacy need not be proved. It Is true, 1.
That the fact must be proved, 2. And then the Law is a sentence and Relatively
affects the person as sentenced; 3. But no persons else are obliged to avoid
him, till the fact be lawfully published. But the man is excommunicate. And 4.
Whether the man that knows the Law and his own Fact be not bound himself to
avoid the Churches Communion, is a great Controversy: And the plain truth is,
If it be a just Excommunication, he is bound to forbear Communion in obedience
to it: (As much as a silenced Minister is to forbear Preaching.) But if it be a
sentence unjust, and injustice be not so gross as to nullify it, still he must
forbear: But if it be so unjust as to be invalid, he may Communicate till he be
executively rejected: (As one so unjustly silenced may preach, if he can: for
the case is much like.)

The Reader would be displeased if I should cite him many Casuists in so plain
a case.

2. But no man doubts but the General sentence of the Canon speaks the
sense of the Church, and does all that Lawmakers can do, before judgment: And
the Law is norma officii and judicii, obliging Subject and Judge.

. 5. It Is true that Linwood says, that a Declaratory sentence, that is, A
Declaration that such a man is already sentenced by the Law, is necessary to
oblige any to the execution of it on others, or the person in foro externo. But
still the Church has done her part in Legislation, to oblige as aforesaid.

. 6. He says [ Persons excommunicate are to be denounced so every six months,
that others may have notice of them.]

Answ. 1. But are they not excommunicate then, before they are so often
denounced, yea or at all, as far as aforesaid?

. 7. He says [ I have fully answered my own Objection by saying, I am not
bound to execute the sentence on my self.]

Answ. 1. He would not say that he approves the answer: For if he do, he
confuteth himself, that would have us execute the silencing sentence on our
selves, and the sentence against public worship in any way but theirs.

2. My reason is, because I take the unjust sentence as invalid: else I were
bound in foro interiore.

3. But sure the Church at least relaxeth that man's obligation to present
Communion, by showing her will, if she did not oblige him to withdraw.

Read over the words of the Canon, and see whether they make them not as
unintelligible and flexible to what sense they please, as they do the words of
the Act of Uniformity and Liturgy.

. 8. As to his two cases in which the excommunicate may be schismatics for not
communicating, 1. We question not the first: Just excommunication excludes
none but the guilty. Here then indeed is the state of our Controversy. Had he
proved that in all the cases before cited, it is just to excommunicate us, he
had done somewhat, when now for want of it he betrayeth his cause.

2. His 2d. is [ If they form new Churches.]

Answ. 1. Is forming new Churches and not communicating with the old ones all
one? Our present question is of the later. So that this great Accuser seems
plainly to absolve all from being bound to Communicate with them, who are
unjustly excommunicate, and gather not new Churches.

2. But may not the unjustly excommunicate that cannot on just terms be
restored, worship God in some public Church? Does such a wicked sentence bind
men to live like Atheists till death? or deprive them of their right to all
God's Ordinances? even many Papist Doctors and Councils say the contrary. And
how else do you justify the Church of England against the Papists charge of
Schism?

. 9. p. 372. He still seems to think, that [ His own and others reasonings
may change all the truly honest Christians in the Land to hold all the things
imposed lawful.]

Answ. These thoughts of the Bishops in 1660. and 1661. have brought us all to
the pass that we are at; And if after 20 years so great experience of the
inefficacy of all their Disputes, yea and Prisons, and after the notice of the
nature and different cases of men, they still trust to bring us to Concord on
these terms, disputing with such men is in vain; The Lord deliver us from them.

CHAP. XII. Of the English sort of Sponsors, and the exclusion of Parents duty.
. 1. PAge 380. He says I [ several times mention this as one of the grounds of
the unlawfulness of the peoples joining in Communion with us: yea as the
greatest objection.]

Answ. Four places of my writings are cited, and all will testify to him that
will read them, the untruth of the Doctors words. This is an unhappy course of
accusations: I can find no word of [ The unlawfulness of the peoples joining in
Communion with you on this ground.] On the contrary, I have taught men how to
make this very action in them lawful, viz. By getting if possible credible
Sponsors of the old sort, and agreeing with them to be the Parents Representer,
and promise as in his name, or at least but as his second, undertaking the
Education of the Child if he die or apostatize (which was the old sort:) and
himself to be present and signify his consent by gesture, though he may not
speak.

But I have showed, 1. That this must be done besides the Churches order, that
has no such thing. 2. That subscribing to the Churches order herein is
unlawful: 3. That the Church which refuses the Child lawfully offered, ought
not to blame that person that cannot or will not make such shifts, but gets
another Pastor to Baptize him whom they sinfully refuse.

But this is not to prove it unlawful to have Communion with you. But it is
lawful to use better also when they can, being thus repulsed by you.

. 2. He says [ The Parents are to provide such as are fit to under take that
office.]

Answ. 1. No one is fit for it as used by the Liturgy, but an Adopter that
takes the Child for his own; For he undertaketh the Parents work. And it is lis
sub judice, whether any others undertaking besides a Parent or Owner can prove
the Child to be in the Covenant as offered, and have right to the seal and
benefits: Atheists and Insidels Children are unholy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

2. If any were sit, few Parents can get such, as will understandingly and
deliberately and credibly promise them to do all that Godfathers must by the
Liturgy undertake. I never knew one in my life that seemed to the Parent to
mean any such thing, much less to do it.

I have in my younger time been Godfather to three or four: But we before
agreed with the Parents to intend no more than to be Witnesses, and the Father
to be the Entitler and the undertaker.

I did in 1640. Baptize two by the Liturgy, (without Crossing) and never more
in 6. or 7. years after, because of the imposed corruptions. Mr. Kettilby the
Bookseller (unless his Father had another Child of the same name baptized the
same year) was one: But his Father gave him his name, and promised all his own
duty, and his Uncle and Aunt standing as Sponsors, we before agreed that they
should signify but Witnesses and friendly helpers in case of need.

2. But what if the Parents are bid provide such? that is no discharge of their
own part, nor are they bound to cast their duty on others.

. 3. He says (as to the Child's Right to Baptism) that the Godfathers stand in
a threefold capacity, 1. Representing the Parent in offering, 2. Representing
the Child in promising, 3. In their own as undertakers of his education, etc.

Answ. 1. I will not till he confute them repeat my proofs that in the Church
of England's sense the Godfathers are not the Parents representatives at all,
nor speak in their name.

2. If they were, then when the Parents both are Atheists, Infidels, Hobbists,
scorners at Godliness, Heretics, the Godfathers can represent them but as they
are, and their own faith entitleth not the Child, because they stand in the
persons of Atheists, Infidels, etc. your Church does not like this doctrine.

3. And as to their representing the Child, quo jure is the doubt. It cannot be
done without some representing power given them. And who gave it them?

4. And as to the third Person (in this multiform thing) the doubt is, whether
their undertaking to educate another man's Child be lawful, while he is bound to
do it himself? 2. And whether men use to be serious in such undertakings, which
I never knew one perform, nor seem to mean it, save such as take poor men's,
kinsmens or dead men's children to keep as their own. 3. And if it be done
without serious intention, Is it not to make perjury or perfidiousness, and
profane taking God's name in vain, to be the way of Christening and
Covenanting with Christ in order to salvation?

. 4. This is a great point, and he does well to handle it diligently: His
explication of it is this, p. 382. [1. The Church has the power of the Keys,
(True; but not as he and the Brownists say, The whole Church, but only the
Pastors.)

[2. They may baptize capable subjects.] No doubt of it.

[3. Infants are capable subjects.]

Answ. But what Infants? All, or some? Is this our satisfaction? If it be All
Infants, then how come the Heathens Infants to be baptizable and have right,
when the Parents have none? Then how great a deed of charity is it to bring an
Army among them to baptize their Children by force? When even Aquinas and other
Papists say, that Children may not be baptized against the Parents wills.

I have elsewhere at large proved, 1. That Baptism is but the sealing of the
Covenant, and the delivering of possession by Ministerial Investiture, and not
the first gift or condition of our right to Christ and his benefits.

2. That in the Adult faith and Repentance and heart-consent are the
Conditions, which Baptism after solemnly expresses.

3. That if a true penitent believing consenter die without Baptism, he is
saved; and if t^ptized adult die without faith, repentance and heart-consent,
he is damned.

4. That therefore all the adult must have an entitling condition, to give them
right, first initially, coram Deo, to pardon of sin, and then to be baptized
(which solemnly delivers their full right) before they can be lawfully
baptized.

5. That God deals not so differently with Infants and Adult, as to require
conditions of right in the later, and none in the former, as if they were all
born with right.

6. That the Covenant is made to the faithful and their seed, and that Infants
condition of right is that they be children of believers: And that if both
Parents be Infidels, the Children are unclean, but else they are holy. And God
that confounds not the Church and the World, confounds not their Childrens
case.

This I have fully proved in my Disp. of Original sin, and Treat of right to
Sacraments.

7. That Baptism seals and delivers to the qualified subject, the present
pardon of sin, and right to Christ and life as to adopted Children of God. And
therefore there must be some reason and proof of a right to it, more than all
Infants in the world have.

8. That it is not a man's bringing them to baptism and speaking feignedly in
their name, that gives them right to a sealed pardon and salvation: It must be
one that can prove himself entitled to represent the Child, which none can that
cannot say He is my own.

9. If it were otherwise, Atheists, Infidels, wicked men, though Baptized,
could give no right to the sealed pardon, or to the Investiture in a state of
life, to which they have no right themselves. And if they represent no better
Parents, as such they can give them no right, save coram Ecclesia when they are
not infideles judicati.

10. Nor does it suffice to an Infants right, that the Minister, or Church, be
Christians.

Therefore to tell us that Infants are right subjects, signifies nothing, till
either, 1. He tell us what Infants, 2. Or prove that all Infants have right;
which he can never do: And if he could, I would easily prove that all dying
Infants are saved, whether Baptized or not; As I can prove that true Christian
Infants are.

. 5. While he gives us not the least satisfaction of Infants Right, he tells us
of difficulties on the other side; if we lay it on Parents (or Owners) right.
And 1. He tells us of diverse men's Opinions; which the Reader will be loath I
should digress to try, having done it so largly in my Christ. Direct. and
Treat. of Right to Sacraments.

2. He names the qualification which I ^^^rt, [ A profession of the Christian
faith not invalidated] and says nothing to disable it, but that Others will
reject it. Others wild Opinions named, goes for my Confutation.

And now I desire the Reader to see the Catalogue of the things we account
sinful in Conformity in my first Plea for Peace, and try how many of them the
Doctor has so much as meddled with: And whether he think by these few touches
he has proved either our Conformity lawful, or our Preaching unlawful, or our
Communion with those Christians who are not of his mind herein unlawful.

If he say again, that he meddleth not with Ministers Conformity but the
Peoples, 1. Note, how he has passed by even the greatest things also in their
case. 2. Whether he meddle not with the Ministers case who seeks to prove
their preaching unlawful, and so persuades them to be silent* 3. Whether their
case should not be so far meddled with, as to prove the things which they think
sinful to be lawful, or their preaching unnecessary; before the endeavors used
against them (well known) be justified as needful to the Churches Peace.

CHAP. XIII. Of the three French Letters which he subjoyneth.
. 1. WHat advantage to the Drs. Cause the three Letters of the French Divines
annexed, can be to any that will not be decoyed by mere sounds and shows, I
know not: But could we know these things following, we might better understand
the judgment of the Writers.

Quest. 1. Whether he that sought their judgment did make them understand what
all our present Impositions and Acts of Conformity are? and what alterations
are made in the Church of England since the beginning of Bishop Lands power?

2. Whether he made them truly understand the difference between the ancient
Episcopacy, and the English Diocesan frame in all its parts?

3. Whether he did put the Case as about Subscribing ^^ Declaring, Covenanting
or Swearing, Assent and Consent to all things, and practicing accordingly? or
only of living in Communion with them which do such things?

4. Whether he put the case as of denying active Communion in the practice of
unlawful things; or as denying Communion in the rest which are lawful?

5. Whether he made them understand that we are ipso facto excommuncate by
their Canon for telling our judgment?

6. Whether he made them understand that it was about 2000 Ministers that were
silenced, and what men are in many of their places? and what claim their
ancient Flocks lay to many of them; and what men they are, and what they did to
prevent all our divisions?

7. Whether he made them understand what measure of Communion we still maintain
with the Church of England and the Parish Churches?

8. Whether he put the case to them, whether we that have Communion with them
are Schismatics, if we also have Communion with others whom they prosecute?

9. Whether he put the question to them, whether we are lawfully silenced? and
if not, whether rebus sic stantibus we are bound to forbear our Ministry?

10. Whether he made them know that all the Ministers of England as well as we
were forbidden to Preach, etc. unless they would Conform to that we are ready
to prove unlawful? And if it prove so, whether they should all either have
sinned or been silent in obedience?

11. Whether he made them understand how many thousands there be in London that
cannot have room in the Parish-Churches and the Nonconformists Churches set
together, but live like Atheists.

12. Whether he acquainted them that the question is, whether all godly
dissenters that are cast out, or cannot join in the Parish way of Liturgick
Worship, must (till their judgments change) give over all public worship of
God, and be forsaken of all Teachers?

13. Whether he acquainted them, how loud a Call we had to preach in London,
first by the Plague, and then by the burning of the Churches, the people being
deserted by the Parish Ministers in these sad extremities?

14. Whether he acquainted them with the Kings Licenses, and our being accused
of Schism, even when Licensed?

15. Whether he acquainted them with what we have said for ourselves lately in
diverse Books; or they judged us unheard?

16. Whether they be singular? or whether it be the judgment of the Protestant
Churches in France, that it is a sin for any to preach or publicly worship
God, when the King, Bishops and Law forbid them? And if so, How long it has
been their judgment? and why all their Churches ceased not when prohibited?

If not so, How to know that our silencing Laws and Bishops must be obeyed, and
not theirs?

There is no understanding their answers, till we know how the case was stated.

. 2. Mr. Clodes Letter is moderate, and it is like they took the case to be
about proper separation, and so say no more in the main than some
Nonconformists have said against the Brownists. But the Dr. has dealt too
unmercifully with Mr. Le Moine in publishing his Epistle, when it was so easy
to know how few, if any, would believe his story, but take it for a
confirmation, how incredible our accusers are? I mean his story that [ five
years ago he heard one of the most famous Nonconformists preach in a place
where were three men, and three or fourscore women: he had chosen a Text about
the building up the ruins of Jerusalem, and for explication cited Plinny and
Vitruvius a hundred times, etc.] I think I shall never speak with the person
that will believe him: sure I am, London knows that the Nonconformists are
the most averse to such kind of Preaching. And I know not one of them that I
can say ever read a quarter of Vitruvius: I confess I never read a leaf of him.
This Monsieur would do well to tell us yet the name of the man, that if living
he may be called to account: But I doubt he fell into some Tabernacle, of which
many are erected in place of the burnt Churches, and perhaps heard the
Conformist who had occasion to talk of architecture? But yet I will not believe
that either Conformist or Nonconformist would expose himself to common scorn by
an hundred or twenty such citations.

. 3. And his description of the men's horrible impudence to excommunicate
without mercy the Church, etc. imagining that they are the only men in England,
nay in the Christian world that are predestimated to eternal happiness, etc.
and then pronouncing them intolerable, shows that it is not us that he
speaks of, nor any company that is known to us, neither our Separatists here,
nor Anabaptists, nor so much as the very Quakers holding any such thing.

. 4. And though he says [ He was not at all edified by the Nonconformists
preaching, it follows not that no others are: Nor that none were edified in
England or Scotland, while public Preachers went the Nonconformists way.

. 5. But because the Doctor chooses this way, I will imitate him, though with
the Apology that St. Paul gloried, and give him notice of some Epistles of men
that judged otherwise of the Nonconformists.

CHAP. XIV. Epistles or Testimonies compared with the Doctors, And notes on Mr.
Joseph Glanvile's Book, called The Zealous Impartial Protestant, with a Letter
of his to the Author heretofore (and a Digression of Doctor L. Moulin.)
. 1. IN general, he that will read the Lives of many of the old Nonconformists
( Hildersham, Dod, and many such, and Bishop Hall's Character of Dr. Reynolds,
and the late published Lives of Mr. Joseph Allen, John Janeway, Dr. Winter, Mr.
Macham, Mr. Wadsworth, Mr. Stubbs, etc.) will see better what to judge of them,
than by our three French Epistles. Yea Thuanus gives a juster Character of
many abroad that were of their mind: And John Fox (one of them) of more.

. 2. And to our three Frenchmen, I will when it will be of more use than
seeming vanity, return you four French-mens Letters to my self, (Mr. Gaches,
Mr. Amyralds, Mr. Le Blanks, and Mr. Testards, (and if you will some Germans
too, Calvinists and Lutherans,) of a quite differing sense of us
Nonconformists. But Mr. Gaches being already in Print (by the Duke of
Lauderdales means) 1660. and joined with one of Mr. L'Angles, I leave the
Reader that desires to see both.

. 3. But because Mr. Jos. Glanvile was one of themselves here (though an
Origenist) a most triumphant Conformist, and not the gentlest contemner of
Nonconformists, and famous for his great wit, I will repay the Dr. with the
annexing one (among many since) of his Letters to my self; which yet indeed I
do not chiefly to balance the Drs. but to help the Reader to understand Mr.
Glanvile and his posthumous Book, which I think not meet to pass by without
some Animadversions.

Though I have great reason to hope that dying so soon after it and his
preferment, the experience of the Vanity of a flattering World might help to
save him from impenitence: As I have read in diverse credible writers, it was
with Dr. Matthew Sutliffe; that on his Deathbed he repented that he had written
so much against the Reformers called Puritans.

I perceive Dr. Stillingfleet marvelleth, that my own expectations of
approaching Death do not hinder me from writing what I do for the
Nonconformists; whereas the truth is, had not pain and weakness kept me from my
youth as in the continual prospect of the Grave and the next life, I had never
been like to have been so much against Conformity, and the present Discipline
of this Church (that is, their want of Discipline) as I have been; For the
World might have more flattered me and biased my Judgment, and my Conscience
might have been bolder and less fearful of sin; And, though I love not to
displease them, I must say this great truth, that I had never been like to have
lived in so convincing sensible experience of the great difference of the main
body of the Conformists from the most of the Nonconformists, as to the
seriousness of their Christian Faith, and hope and practice, their victory over
the flesh and world, etc. I mean both in the Clergy and Laity of mine
acquaintance! O how great a difference have I found, from my youth to this day?
Though I doubt not but very many of the Passive Conformable Ministers (to say
nothing of the Imposers) have been and are worthy pious men; and such as would
not persuade their hearers, that the Jesuits first brought in spiritual prayer:
And I had the great blessing of my Education near some such, in three or four
neighbor Parishes.

. 4. It grieved me to hear of Mr. Glanvile's death, for he was a man of more
than ordinary ingeny, and he was about a Collection of Histories of
Apparitions, which is a work of great use against our Sadducees, and to
stablish doubters, and the best man's faith has need of all the helps from
sense that we can get: And I feared lest that work had perished with him; But I
gladly hear that by the care of Dr. H. More (that worthy faithful man of peace,
who never studied preferment) it is both preserved and augmented.

And as for his Origenisme, as I like it not* so I confess in matters of that
nature, I can better bear with the venturousness of dissenters, than
hereticators can do.

But when I saw this Rag called a Letter left behind him, my grief for him was
doubled: And I saw what cause we have all to fear the snares of a flattering
world, and what cause to pray for Divine preservation, and for an unbyassed
mind, and a humble sense of our own frailty, that we may neither overvalue
prosperity, nor our own understandings.

I did not think that he that had wrote the Vanity of Dogmatizing could so soon
have come to persuade men in power, that dissenting from our Churches
dogmatizing and imposed words, forms and ceremonies was worthy of so severe a
prosecution of us, as he describes: and that all their danger is from the
forbearing such prosecution of us; and that (though for their own ends he could
abate us some little matters) the only way to settled peace is vigorously to
execute the Laws against us.

He that can think the silencing, and imprisoning of about 2000 such Ministers,
is the way to bring this Land to Concord, has sure very hard thoughts of them
in comparison of Conformists. And that you may see how little his judgment
against such should weigh with others, who is so lately changed from himself, I
will give you here one of several Letters which I had from him, and leave you
to judge whether he have proved that he was much wiser at last than when he
wrote this? or whether his character of me agree with his motion to silence and
ruin all such? I am so far from owning his monstrous praises, that I fear I
offended him with sharply rebuking him for them. But lest his wit and virulence
here do harm, I give it you to show the unconstancy of his judgment: or if he
would have excepted me from his severities, I must profess that I believe the
most of the Nonconformable Ministers of my acquaintance are better men than my
self; and therefore his excessive praise of me, is the condemnation and shame
of his persecuting counsel.

. 5. As to his praise of the Bishops Writings against Popery, I had rather
magnify than obscure their deserts: But I am not able to believe that the old
ones who write to prove the Pope Antichrist, etc. and the new ones who would
bring us to obey him as Patriarch of the West and principium unitatis
Catholicae, were of one mind, because both are called Protestants, and that
such as Bishop Bramhall and the rest of the defenders of Grotius, were of the
same judgment with Bishop Usher, Bishop Morton, Bishop Downame, etc. nor that
Grotius, who describes a Papist to be one that flattereth Popes as if all were
right which they said and did, did disclaim Popery in the same sense as the old
Church of England did. Two men may cry down Popery, while one of them is a
Papist or near one in the others sense.

As to the folly of calling that Popery which is not, I have said more against
it in my Cath. Theology than he has done.

And as to his excuse of an ignorant vicious sort of Ministers because no
better will take small Livings,] It is not true: The silenced Nonconformists
would have been glad of them, or to have preached there for nothing: The
tolerating of ignorant scandalous men were more excusable, if better were not
shut out that would have taken such places. But it is notorious that for the
interest of their faction and prosperity, they had rather have the ignorant and
vicious, than the ablest and most laborious Nonconformist: Bishop Morley told
me, when he forbad me to preach, that It was better for a place to have none,
than to have me; when I asked him, Whether I might not be suffered in some place
which no one else will take.] Most of the old Nonconformists were suffered by
connivance in small obscure places, which was the chief reason why they set not
up other meetings, which Dr. Stillingfleet thought they avoided as unlawful,
because forbidden.

. 6. And as to his excuse by blaming ill Patrons, I would know then by what
true obligation all men in England are bound to commit the Pastoral conduct of
their Souls to such men only as our English Patrons choose?

. 7. And when he so blames the tepidity and irreligiousness of the Members of
their own Church, I would know, 1. Whether all men that are more seriously
religious must be forsaken by us, and ruined by them, if they be not of their
mind and form? 2. And whether the numbers of the irreligious that are for their
way, and the numbers of the religious that are against it, should not rather
breed some suspicion in them, than engage them to ruin so many such men.

. 8. And when page 3. he confesses that the sword is their Churches strength
and Government, and how contemptible words, paper, Arguments and
excommunications are without force; does he not shame their whole cause, and
show that it is not the same Government which the Church used for many hundred
years, which they desire? and that their whole power of the Keys which they
talk so much for, seems to themselves a dead and uneffectual thing? while we
Nonconformists desire no coercive power, but to guide Consenters.

. 9. As to his project to save religion under a Papist King, if the Dean and
Chapter may but choose the Bishop, I leave it to other m^^^ consideration.

But I give you his Letter to me, because page 34. He ^aith, [ The greatest
part of th^se that now sc^t^r and run ^b^^^ do it out of H^ ^ancy, or Faction,
or Interest, or A^y* or desire of being c^ godly* (...) really out of
Conscience and Conviction of duty* and th^se the penalties duly exacted would
bring back (with much more sharp and cruel) As if he knew the consciences of
the most: But see how much otherwise he lately thought of some.

Agapetus Diacon. ad Justinian. Adhort. cap. 35. [ Episcopis vi and gladio
invitos regentibus quam Regibus magis congrua.]

NOMIZE (...) etc. Existima tunc regnare te tuto, cum volentibus imperas
hominibus. Quod enim invito subjicitur, seditiones molitur, capta occasion.
Quod vere vinculis benevolentiae tenetur, firmam servat ergatenentem
observantiam.

1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Elders which are AMONG you I exhort, who am also an
Elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the
Glory that shall be revealed; Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking
the oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly; Not for FILTHY LUCRE,
but of a ready mind: Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, b^^ being
ensamples to the Flock; And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.] See Dr. Hammond on the Text.
Mr. Glanviles Letter.
Reverend and most Honored Sir,
I Have often taken my pen in hand with a design to signify to you, how much I
love and honor so much learning, piety, and exemplary goodness as you are
owner of; And how passionately desirous I have been, and am, to be known to a
person with whom none has a like place in my highest esteem and value: But my
affections and respects still growing infinitely too big for mine expression, I
thought I should but disparage them, by going about to represent them. And when
I sat down to consider, how I might most advantagiously set forth my regards,
and high sense of your great deserts, I always found my self confounded with
subject. And the throng of mine affections, each of them impatient to be first
upon my paper, hindered one another's gratification. Great passions are
difficultly spoken: And I find my self now so pained with the sense that I
cannot write suteably to the honor I have for you, that I can scarce forbear
th^owing away my pen; being near concluding, that it is better to speak nothing
in such a subject, than a little. But when I consider you as a person that have
high affections for those excellent qualifications, which in the highest degree
are your possession, and suteably resent the worth of those that own them; I am
encouraged to think that you may conceive how I honor you (though my pen
cannot tell it you) by reflecting upon your own estimate of those, that are of
the highest form of learning, parts, and exemplary piety; or, more
compendiously, such in your judgment, as I take you for, Incomparable. And yet
I have a jealousy that that will not reach it; for though I think your
judicious esteem of such, cannot be surpassed; yet I am apt to think, that none
ever got such an interest, and hold upon your passions, as has the object of
my admiration, on mine. Nor yet can I rebuke them as extravagant, though at the
highest, since they take part with my severest judgment, and were indeed
inflamed by it. And I profess I never found my self so dearly inclined to those
of my nearest blood, or so affectionately concerned for my most beloved friends
and acquaintance, as for you, whom I had never the happiness to converse with
but in your excellent writings, nor ever often saw, but in the Pulpit. Yea, I
speak unfeignedly, I have always interessed my self more in your vindication
when your unreasonable prejudiced enemies have malign'd you, and delighted my
self more in your just praises from those that know you, than ever my self-love
or ambition could prompt me to do in any case of mine own. Sir, I hope you
believe that I speak my most real sentiments, and do not go about to complement
you. For I must be very weak and inconsiderate, did I think to recommend my
self to so much serious wisdom, by such childish fooleries. Therefore if my
expressions savor any thing above common respect, I beseech you to believe,
it is for that their cause is not common; but as much above ordinary, as their
object. I know your humility and remarkable self* denial will not bear to read,
what I cannot but speak, as often as I have occasion to mention your great
worth and merits. However I cannot choose but here acknowledge, how much I am a
debtor to your incomparable writings. In which, when you deal in practical
subjects, I admire your affectionate, piercing, heart-affecting quickness: And
that experimental, searching, solid, convictive way of speaking, which are your
peculiars; for there is a smartness accompanying your pen that forces what you
write into the heart, by a sweet kind of irresistible violence; which is so
proper to your serious way, that I never met it equaled in any other writings.
And therefore I cannot read them without an elevation, and emotions which I
seldom feel in other perusals. And when you are engaged in doctrinal and
controversal matters, I no less apprehend in them your peculiar excellencies. I
find a strength, depth, concinnity, and coherence in your notions, which are
not commonly elsewhere met withal. And you have no less power by your
triumphant reason upon the judgments of capable, free inquirers; than you have
upon their affections and consciences in your devotional and practical
discourses. And methinks there is a force in your way of arguing, which
overpowers opposition. Among your excellent Treatises of this nature, your
Rational confirmation of that grand principle of our Religion, the Sacred
Authority of Scripture; your solid dependent notions in the business of
justification, and your striking at the Root of Antinomianism in them, which I
look on as the canker of Christianity, and have always abhorred as the shadow
of death; And your excellent Catholic, healing endeavors; These I say,
deserve from me particular acknowledgments. I profess the loose, impertinent,
unsound, cobweb arguings of the most that I had met with in the Matter of the
Divine Authority of Scripture, had almost occasioned my stumbling at the
threshold, in my inquiries into the grounds of my Religion. For I am not apt to
rely on an implicit faith in things of this moment. But your performances in
this kind brought relief to my staggering judgment, and triumph't over my
hesitancy. As they did also to an excellent person a friend of mine, who was
shaken on the same accounts that I was. And we are both no less obliged by what
you have done in the other things formentioned. Which I profess I judge so
rational, that I cannot but wonder, almost to stupor, to behold the fierce,
though feeble onsets of your cankered fiery opponents; whose writings against
you (most of them) seem to me to be indicted by nothing but spleen and choler.
Nor have I been able to ascribe the engaging of so many virulent pens against
you, to any other cause than the endeavors of Satan to hinder the success
which your powerful pen has had against the Dark Kingdom. And the spirit that
I have perceived to animate some of their wild ravings has confirmed me in
that belief, that it was the great Abaddon that inspired their undertakings. I
thought e're this to have given you a more public specimen of mine affections
by endeavoring somewhat in your vindication against the calumnies, and feeble
arguings of some of those fiery Assailants; But collateral occasions, and other
studies have hitherto diverted me: Yet I shall not forget my obligations,
as soon as I can be master of convenient time and opportunities for the
performance. But I see my paper warns me; And though I should please my self by
a larger expression of my respects, and sense of your high deservings from
every one that has had the happiness to be taught by you, either from the
Press or Pulpit; yet I dare not be so rude in this first Address, as to be
troublesome and importunate. I know your occasions are such, as that they
cannot bear a long divertisement. I had several times designed at London to
have taken the boldness to have waited on you, but the consideration, how you
were constantly engaged in business, prevented the execution of those
intentions. And about three years since I came from Oxford on purpose to
Kederminster, to see you there, and hear you preach; both which I was happy in.
But you were then so busy in the company of several Ministers that were at
your house, that I could not gain an opportunity of making way for a future
acquaintance. If I were sure that you were less encumbered now, and that you
made any considerable stay in the Country, I would make a journey on purpose to
wait on you. I have with this sent you a small Discourse of mine own, of which
I desire your acceptance. For the subject and design, I know it will not
displease you. And for the management, I Am confident you will not quarrel with
it, because it is not so popular as it might have been, when you shall know,
that 'twas intended for those of a Philosophic Genius. I durst not (Sir) be
any longer troublesome, and therefore shall conclude with this profession, that
the freedom of your spirit, the impartiality of your inquiries, the
Catholickness of your judgment and affections, the peaceableness, and
moderation of your principles, the generosity and public spiritedness of your
disposition, the exact, uniform holiness of your life, and your indefatigable
industry for the good of souls, excellencies which I never knew so combined in
one; have so endeared you to me, that there is not that person breathing that
has such a share in the affections, and highest value of,

Most excellent Sir, one of the meanest, though most sincere, of your
affectionate lovers, and admirers, Jos. Glanvill.
Sept. 3. 61.



CHAP. XV. Some Notes on the Book called the Lively Picture of Dr. Lud. Moulin;
and his Repentance subscribed by Dr. Simon Patrick, Dean of Peterborough, and
Dr. Gilb. Burnet.
. 1. I Had taken no notice of this Book, had not the Author by citing my words
against Dr. L. Moulin as justifying his Character, made me a party. Therefore I
shall impartially speak my judgment of him and the accusation, lest I be
thought to own all that the Writer speaks of him, and so to be as guilty of
uncharitableness as he seems to me to be. I honor the name for the sake of
his famous Father, and his worthy Brother Peter, yet living, who by his Answer
to Philanax Anglicus, etc. has well deserved of all Protestants: And his
worthy Brother Cyrus, and his very worthy Son now dead: And I truly believe
that Dr. Lewis was a sincere honest-hearted man, though Dr. Stillingfleet seem
to dislike my giving him that title. And I will tell you why I think so.

. 2. I ever observed that his faults lay in his weakness, and not in
wickedness: 1. He was not a man of an accurate distinguishing head, and so was
apt to take verbal Controversies for real. 2. And it was no singular thing in
him, that hereby he was led by the authorities which he most valued, to think
that the differences between the Remonstrants and Contra*remonstrants were much
greater than they are, and Arminianism as it was called, to be a more heinous
thing than indeed it is. 3. And when he thought that God's Cause (as
Bradwardine called it) was so deeply engaged against such Opinions, who can
wonder if he was zealous against them? 4. And then he had a hasty rashness in
speaking what he thought was true and necessary, when sometimes it was not well
tried* and sometime it was in an imprudent manner and time: And so in his have
ran into the temerities and mistakes which Mr. Daille and I did blame him for.
But I never perceived that he had more passion (much less fury) than other
ordinary disputers, but a more ra^h and blustering way of uttering his mind,
sometimes and in some Cases, where he thought Religion much concerned. He h^^
so servent ^ love to truth* that he sometime rusht upon mistakes that wore the
vizor of it, and then truth (real or supposed) whatever it cost him he would
speak. 5. I ever observed it was in his too extreme opposition to some real
error or crime, that he was carried into his temerities. 6. And I never found
that he was a worldling, nor sinned by the preference of worldly interest; And
doubtless the love of worldly profits, honors and pleasures, are more
dangerously contrary to the love of God, than some rash uncharitable words and
censures in a Cause which he thought was Gods.

. 3. Yea I found him more patient of confutation, contradiction and reproof
than most men that ever I disputed with, his Zeal which you call fury being far
more for God than for himself. I began with him about 24 years ago, confuting
his Latin Book of Justification against his Brother Cyrus. I wrote a second
time against him in the Preface cited by his Picture-drawer, about Universal
Redemption, (and had said much more in a Book of Universal Redemption, going to
the Press, which I cast by because Mr. Dailles came then out, which had the
same testimonial part and more which I intended.) Yet I never heard that the
Dr. gave me any uncivil or uncharitable word, nor did he ever reply to either
of these Books; nor signified any abatement of his love. And I think this
showed a forgiving mind.

. 4. But it is intimated, that this was because we agreed in other things? I
answer, we disagreed also even about Church Government, which was the dividing
Controversy of those times. The Dr. was zealous for the Magistrates Power in
Erastus sense, and went rather further than Dr. Stilling fleet in his Irenicum:
And as I was before against him, so after this, about 12 years ago, I wrote
that Book against him about the Magistrates Power in Church Matters, in which I
called him My sincere friend, thinking sincere friendship consistent with such
a difference and an open Confutation. (And if the contrary must be repented of,
I hope such charity is no crime.) This third Book against him also he took
patiently, and without breach of Love.

And when I labored to persuade him to retract his Writings against
Excommunication, though he held still to his Conclusion, and thought that the
great work that God called him to in the World, was to discover the Papal and
Prelatical Usurpation of the Magistrates power under the name of
Ecclesiastical, yet I made him confess all the matter that I pleaded for, and
he made me see that his error lay most in mere ambiguous words, which he had
not ^ateness enough to explicate. All this patience signified not
uncharitableness, rage or fury. And I obliged him not by praise, but (...) him
for his eagerness for his own indigested conceptions; nor gave him any thanks
for his indiscreet and excessive praises afterward given me in his Patronus
bonae fidei. Upon all this I would put some questions to the sober thoughts of
the Author of his Picture.

1. Whether there be not as great signs of sincerity, humility and patience in
such a behavior, and in that great love which he had to all that he thought
Godly men, (though he too hardly judged of others for that which he thought
great error and sin) as in those that cannot bear a just defense of dissenters
against their unjust accusations, nor endure men to tell why they rather suffer
than Conform.

2. Whether he that makes him so very bad a man Page 22. A vain Writer and
malicious, if not mad and distracted. p. 11. he will magnify the very worst of
men, if they be of his mind, and vilify the best if they be of another. p. 27.
He has full liberty to vie with the Devil himself in his Calumnies: with more
such.
and incredible a liar for too rash censoriousness of dissenters, and some
untruths vented in rash zeal, do not tempt men to give as odious titles to
those Reverend persons who go very far beyond him in untruths and uncharitable
censures? And whether they that were for the silencing and utter ruining of
about 2000 Ministers, and called to Magistrates to execute the Laws against
them, and that unchurch all the Reformed Churches which have not a continued
succession of Diocesan Bishops, show not as much uncharitableness as he did
that described some too hardly? And whether most of the Books written against
me by Conformists, (such as the Bishop of Worcester's Letter, the Impleader,
Mr. Hinkley, and many more) be not much fuller of untruths in matter of fact
than the Drs? But yet I think it a sin to give them such a Character as this,
and render the persons as incredible liars, because error, interest and
faction made some so unadvised.

3. If it deserve such a Character to censure Arminians as dangerously
erroneous and befriending Popery? whether you do not consequently so stigmatize
the old Church of England, before Bishop Laud's time? Even Archbishop
Whitgift, Bishop Fletcher, and the rest who drew up the Lambeth Articles,
Archbishop Abbot and the Church in his time (except six Bishops, etc.) King
James, and the whole Church as consenting by six Delegates to the Synod of
Dort: And also that Synod and all the Foreign Reformed Churches that consented
to it? And is not this more than Dr. Moulin did?

4. And are they not then to be accordingly stigmatized, who on the other side
make the Calvinists as odious, accusing them of Blasphemy, Turcisme, and doing
as much against them as Dr. Heylin in the Life of Archbishop Laud tells us was
done in England on that account.

5. And if such hard thoughts of Arminians as furthering Popery deserve your
Character, whether by consequence you so brand not all those Parliaments who
voted against it accordingly, and made it one of the dangerous grievances of
the Land? And is not that as faulty as for Dr. Moulin too much to blame you?

6. Yea I doubt you stigmatize thus so great a part of Christians in all the
World as I am loath to mention: so rare is it to hear of any Country, where they
are not so much guilty of sects and factions, as by education and interest to
run in a stream of uncharitable censures of one another, speaking evil of more
than they understand, as I have proved in my Cathol. Theolog. about this
subject.

7. Seeing it is above 20 years since I wrote that against Dr. Moulin which you
cite, and he never found fault with it, nor justified his mistakes, may I not
think that he was convinced and repented? And you that praise his deathbed
repentance, should not Characterize him by failings twenty years repented of?

8. How do you know that the Dr. repented not of his too hard words of you till
his deathbed? You are mistaken? In his health I more than once blamed him, 1.
For his censure of Dr. Stillingfleet and the other particular persons, whose
worth was known, and had deserved well of the Protestant Churches; 2. For his
extending those censures to the Conformists and Church which belong to some
particular persons, and the most are not guilty of, And 3. For his Book of the
fewness of the saved, as presumptuous: And as far as I could then discern he
repented of them all, but laid the ill Title Page of the last on the
Bookseller: And he still thought of Causes and Parties as very different, he
owned not his harsh words or censures aforesaid. I found him not raging nor
impenitent.

9. Does not your own description of his great readiness to beg forgiveness,
and lothness to own any thing uncharitable, show a better spirit than your
picture does describe?

10. Is not he as like to be a sincere man who asks forgiveness of his faults
(rash censures and words) as he that repents of his former duties, his
Pacificatory principles and Writings. Surely to repent of evil is a better sign
than to repent of good.

11. Because you call us to acquit our selves by disowning Dr. Moulin, may we
not disown both his faults and our own, without disowning God's grace and men's
piety and worth? would you be so disowned for your own faults? 2. And how
should I disown his rashness better than to write what I wrote against him, and
say what I said to him? would you have a Synod called to reprove every rash
word?

12. Because you justly value men's repentance, I will be thankful to you to
further mine, and give me leave to further yours. Only I foretell you that your
words shall not offend me by their hardness, if they have but truth, and you
call me to repent of my sin and not of serving God. I do not repent of
defending Truth and Duty: nor of seeking to save the Reader from the infection
of false accusation and arguings which would destroy his charity and innocence,
by the fullest manifesting the falsehood and evil of the words and deeds which
are the Instruments. I take it to be a wrong to those that I would preserve, to
extenuate the danger of the snare or poison, on pretense of gentleness to the
Writer. But I deal with the Cause and desire none to hate the person: nor would
I diminish the honor due to him for his parts or virtues; but rather have all
men love and magnify all the good, while they dislike the evil; and would save
the Reader at as easy a rate to the Writer as I can: But that he should not be
related to his false or sinful words or deeds is not in my power to effect. But
though I repent not of necessary truth, if I any where mistake, or speak more
truth than is profitable, or in language by sharpness more apt to do hurt than
good, of this I repent, and ask forgiveness of God and man; As I do if I speak
so short of truth, as with Eli to make sin seem smaller than it is.

And now I hope you will love your own duty of Repentance better than another
man's, and will not be angry if I seek to help it.

1. Do you not perceive that while you paint the Dr. as an incredible raging
distracted liar, and praise his repentance for rash words of others, that you
commit the same rashness your self against him? If you cannot see your own
face, let any impartial Reader be your glass, and ask him whether you do not
that which you are condemning?

2. You seem to vindicate the Book called the Friendly Debate, I shall shortly
further tell you of somewhat in it to be repented of. And if partiality made
not repentance a very difficult work you would have no need herein of a
Monitor. But you may think me partial, though I acknowledge your civilities to
me: I can show you a Manuscript of one both impartial and truly judicious, even
the late Judge Hale, expressing so great dislike of that Debate and the Eccl.
Policy, as tending to the injury of Religion it self, that he wishes the
Authors would openly profess that they write for themselves, and no more so
abusively pretend it is for Religion.

3. You say in this Picture that [ If L. du Moulin had that honest zeal in him
to which he pretends, he would have handled Mr. Baxter as smartly, etc.

Answ. There may be other reasons than want of honest zeal: But do you not here
show that it is the persons more than his act that offended you in his reproof?
Could you judge it honest zeal had it been to others? page 16.

4. You say, p. 17. He has something of the Nonconformists in him, and for
that reason he spares him:

Answ. Do not Nonconformists differ from Erastians? Did not I write against his
opinion of Church Government? And did he not bear 22 years ago when Conformity
was not in our Controversies.

5. You say of [ the party that come nearest the doctrine of Calvinists and
Puritans, (though you say you mean such as D. M. your Reader must suppose you
mean the Nonconformists) that [ they are the true Causes of all our present
evils. -- For the late War was raised, -- by the very best of you, etc.] If you
mean, as you seem, it is somewhat extraordinary to persuade men to believe this
in the same Land and Age that the War was raised in; And for one to do this
that had the first General of the Horse in the Earl of Essex Army, his Patron a
few doors from him, and the Lord Hollis a Colonel nearer him till lately, and
the Lord President of his Majesty's Privy Council a Colonel not far off him,
and many more known Conformists, who could all quickly have satisfied him how
few Nonconformists were Members of Parliament or Commanders in the Army when
the War began, and that it was betwnen two parties of Conformists that the Wars
began, as I have proved against Mr. Hinkley, and can fullier do when there is
need. Which party is most obliged to repentance you may dispute with those that
are fit for it: But if your intimation be untrue, it is of another nature, and
degree than any of Dr. Moulins. I confess one party did in many Parliaments
before, and in that, accuse Bishop Laud and his new followers, 1. Of
Innovations, 2. Of Arminianism, 3. Of promoting absolute arbitrary Government
against the Subjects Property and Liberty, 4. And of promoting Popery. But if
this party were not Conformists of the Church of England, the Bishops, Clergy
and Gentry were not the Church in Archbishop Abbots days before Bishop Laud.

As to the Reasons of their accusations, and the publishing the Articles for
Toleration in order to the Sp. and Fr. Match, etc. I pass them by. But because
you may say some such think of me as you do of D. M. for what I say in my
search for the Schismatics, I only add, 1. That I hope we may transcribe men's
own words, 2. And may judge that there is some difference between the Bishops
that judged the Pope Antichrist, etc. and those that would have us as the way
to unity, to obey him as Patriarch of the West, and principium unitatis, and
the first 6 or 8 General Councils, and that say our concord must be in obeying
unum Collegium Pastorum, ruling the whole Church per literas formatas, and that
say the Roman Church is a true Church, but so are none of the Reformed that
have not Bishops, and a continued successive Ordination by such. A Copy of a
Letter written by Mr. Lewis Du Moulin to the Worthy Dr. Tho. Coxe; With the
Drs. Answer occasioned by some Reports that concerned Dr. Lewis Du Moulin.
Worthy Sir,
KNowing the natural inclination you have to oblige all men and the particular
experience I have of your unwearied goodness to my person and family did
encourage me to write both before and now; The occasion of both was the Reports
spread abroad of my Father, being informed you had made him the object of your
Care during his sickness, I rejoiced that Providence had ordered it so that a
Person of your approved worth and Integrity was concerned about him. I shall
not trouble you with the Relations Fame has brought into this Country, but
shall only desire to know how he died; Was there any advantage taken of his
weakness of body or mind; How far did his Reported Recantation extend? Reached
it to any material thing of his Tenets, or only in reference to personal
Reflections; This is what is humbly desired by,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble and obliged Servant, Lewis Du Moulin.
From my House at Malton in Yorkshire, October the 7th. 1680.

The Drs. Answer to Mr. Lewis Du Moulin.
Sir,
I Had not delayed to return an Answer to your first Letter, had I known how to
direct mine to you, which indeed I had forgotten how to do; This is therefore
to let you know that your Father (my honored Friend) Dr. Du Moulin, Dyed as he
had Lived, a truly pious man, a great hater of the Romish Superstition, and of
so much of the English Ceremonies as he thought approached those of Rome; He
loved all good men of what persuasion soever, agreeing in the Fundamentals of
the Protestant Religion. When some worthy and Learned men did on his Death bed
intimate to him that he had fallen too heavy upon many Pious and Learned men of
the Church of England: He professed himself never to have born any malice in
his heart against the Person of any of them, but that his intention was only to
blame them for having too much gratified the Enemies of the true Protestant
Religion, by their condescentions to them, and their too great compliances with
them: He never recanted nor retracted any thing material that he had Professed
and Printed of late years; if he had used any sharp expressions, or by any
reflections given any offense to any truly pious man, he heartily prayed their
pardon, and as heartily forgave all men, as he desired them to forgive him. And
this he had often before expressed to me both in public at my House, and in
private between himself and me, and also after that some worthy men had been
with him, which gave occasion to this discourse. This for your satisfaction is
with truth and sincerity attested by

Your Affectionate Friend Tho. Coxe.
London, October. 29.



POSTSCRIPT.
Five Additional Notices to the Reader.
THere are some things of which I thought meet to add this notice to the Reader.

I. That I am more alienated from Conformity in the point of Assent, Consent
and Use, in denying Christendom to all Children who have no Godfathers and
Godmothers, and excluding the Parents from that Office, by some late
Observations which my retiredness kept me unacquainted with: I am requested by
some poor People to Baptize their Children: I tell them the Parish Ministers
must do it. They answer me, That they cannot have them Baptized by the Parish
Ministers, because they are poor; and can neither pay the Curate nor the
Godfathers: I ask them, Cannot you get Godfathers without money: They say, No:
No body will be Godfather to their Children for nothing? Whereupon enquiring
into the case, I am informed, that among the poor it is become a trade, to be
hired persons to be Godfathers and Godmothers; and some that have not money
must leave their Children unbaptized, and till lately, Popish Priests Baptized
many. I am not willing to aggravate this Hiring, nor the causes of it, nor that
the same men that think Baptism necessary to Salvation, (or as Mr. Dodwell
speaks, to a Covenant right to Salvation) should yet shut out all that have not
money to hire such Covenanters; But I am not Conformable to such Church-Orders.

II. Whereas there is a great stress laid on Mr. Rathband's Book of the old
Nonconformists Doctrine against the Brownists, as if they thought that mere
obedience to the Law required them to forbear Preaching when they were
silenced, when indeed they only thought, 1. That it bound them to give up the
Temples and Tithes and public maintenance (which are at the Magistrates
dispose,) 2. And to forbear that manner and those circumstances of their
Ministry as no Law of God in Nature or Scripture do oblige them to, but will do
more hurt than good; I have now for fuller satisfaction, here added the
Testimony of his Son concerning his judgment and practice: who nineteen years
had his liberty in Lancashire to Preach publicly, in a Chapel, and after that
in Northumberland, and no wonder if the disorders of Brownism that would have
deprived them of all such liberty were opposed. I have perused Mr. Rathband's
Book (written by some others) and I find nothing in it that I consent not to,
but desire him that would understand it to read the Book it self.

Mr. Rathband's Letter to me is as follows. Reverend Sir,
WHereas Doctor Stillingfleet in a late Book of his has alleged a Book
published by my Father, to prove that Preaching contrary to our Established
Laws is contrary to the Doctrine of all the Nonconformists in former times, I
assure you, Sir, that my Father is not to be reckoned in that number; for he
exercised his Ministry, though contrary to the Law, for many years at a Chapel
in Lancashire, and after he was silenced he Preached in private, as he had
opportunity and the times would bear; of which I my self was sometime a
witness. Afterward, upon the invitation of a Gentleman, he exercised his
Ministry at Belsham in Northumberland, for about a year, and from thence he
removed to Owingham in the same County, where he Preached also about a year,
till being silenced there, he retired into private as formerly. This I thought
expedient to signify to you, and you may make what use of it you please, for
what is written here shall be owned by

SIR, Yours in all Christian respects, William Rathband.
London, April 2. 1681.



(He is a Grave and worthy Nonconforming ejected Minister, living usually in
High-gate.) His Father read part of the Common Prayer, and kept in as aforesaid.

And I thank Doctor Stillingfleet for so full a Vindication of such old
Nonconformists against the Accusations of their Prosecutors.

III. When my Book was almost Printed, I received the Manuscript of a faithful
Learned ejected Minister, in which, he manifests the fallacy of Doctor
Stillingfleet's Allegations of History for the Antiquity of Diocesan Bishops,
and fully proves that for the first three hundred years the Bishops were
Congregational and Parochial, and that with so full evidence, as that out of
Strabo and other Geographers he shows that many of their Seats were but about
four Miles from one another, as our Parish Churches are; and he confuteth what
is said against it. And he shows the Doctors gross abuse of History, to prove
that Bishops needed not the Peoples consent, and proves that the Peoples
choice or consent was necessary by the constant judgment of the Churches.

But this Book is of so great worth, that I will not dishonor it by making it
an Appendix to mine, but intend to make so bold with the Author, as to publish
it by it self.

1. As a fuller Confutation to Doctor Stillingfleet.

2. As a full Answer to Mr. Dodwell's Letters on that subject; And 3. As a
Confirmation of my full proof of the same things, in my Treatise of Episcopacy.

IV. And if any will receive that from a Conformist, which he will not receive
from such a one as I, he may read,

1. Our full and faithful Vindication by a Beneficed Minister, and a Regular
son of the Church, Called A Compassionate Consideration of the Case of the
Nonconformists: I am not so happy as to know the Author, but he confirms my
former Judgment, that a great part of the Passive Conformists are moderate
worthy men, with whom we should earnestly endeavor as near and fast a
coalition as is possible to be had by lawful means.

2. And either the same hand, or such another Conformist, has written
Reflections on Doctor Stillingfleet, in which the like candor and charity
appears, though with some excess of kindness to me.

V. With this Defense against Doctor Stillingfleet, I at once pubblish in
another Volume, An Apology for the Nonconfirmists Preaching, with an Answer to
a multitude of their Accusers, and Reasons to prove that it is the Bishops and
Conformists great Duty and Interest to seek their Restoration. Which is the
most material part of the Confutation of Doctor Stillingfleet, who would
persuade us that our Preaching is a sin, and make us guilty of silencing our
selves.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Nevil Simmons, ^^ the Three Cocks at the West and of
St. Paul's*
1. Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils abbreviated*
Including the Chief part of the Government of Christian Princes and Popes, and
a true account of the most troubling Controversies and Heresies till the
Reformation. Written for the use especially of them; 1. Who are ignorant or
misinformed of the state of the Ancient Churches. 2. Who cannot read many and
great Volumes. 3. Who think that the Universal Church must have one visible
Sovereign, Personal or Collective, Pope or General Councils. 4. Who would know
whether Patriarchs, Diocesans, and their Councils, have been, or must be the
Cure of Heresies and Schisms. 5. Who would know the truth about the great
Heresies which have divided the Christian World, especially the Donatists,
Novatians, Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians* Eutychians, Monothelites, etc.

2. A Treatise of Episcopacy; Confuting by Scripture, Reason, and the Churches
Testimony, that sort of Diocesan Churches, Prelacy, and Government, which
casts out the Primitive Church Species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline,
and confounds the Christian World by Corruption, Usurpation, Schism, and
Persecution. Meditated in the Year, 1640, when the Et-c^tera Oath was imposed.
Written 1671. and cast by. Published 1680. by the importunity of our
Superiors, who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity.

3. A Moral Prognostication, 1. What shall befall the Church on Earth, till
their Concord, by the Restitution of their Primitive purity, simplicity, and
Charity. 2. How that Restitution is like to be made, (if ever) and what shall
befall them thenceforth unto the End, in that Golden Age of Love. All three by
Rich. Baxter.

4. Memorabilia: or, The most Remarkable Passages and Counsels, Collected out
of the several Declarations and Speeches that have been made by the King, his
Lord-Chancellors and Keepers, and the Speeches of the Honorable House of
Commons in Parliament; since his Majesty's happy Restoration, Anno 1660. till
the end of the last Parliament, 1680. Reduced under four Heads; 1. Of the
Protestant Religion, 2. Of Popery. 3. Of Liberty and Property, etc. 4. Of
^^rliaments. By Edward Cooks, of the Middle. Temple, Esquire

READER,
I Must take this opportunity for the avoiding of mistakes to give thee notice,
that whereas against them that plead for the necessity of an uninterrupted
Succession of Episcopal ordination, I have in the Preface to my Book for
Universal Concord, and in the beginning of my Breviate of Church History, said
that our Northern English Episcopacy was derived from such as were no Bishops,
but Scottish Monks and Presbyters, and that Aidan and Finan, ( Tromhere,
Coleman) were such, lest I be misunderstood, I must further explain my meaning;
viz. 1. The Culdees that were no Bishops, first guided the Affairs of Religion
in Scotland, long before the coming of Palladius. 2. These Culdees chose
themselves for order sake some few to be as Guides and Governorus to the rest,
whom Writers called Scotorum Episcopos, but were no Bishops in our controverted
sense: but as an Abbot among Monks, and as the Presidents or Principals of
Colleges, rule those that are of the same office or order with them. Nor had
they any limited fixed Diocesses.

3. And if any will call these Bishops, and the question be but de nomine, let
them call them so and spare not: I contend not against them.

4. Afterward Palladius sent from Rome, began a higher sort of Bishops: But
the Culdees still kept up the greater part against him.

5. Columbanus his Monastery in the Isle of Hy restored the Culdees strength.
And the Monks out of that Island were the most prevailing Clergy of Scotland;
who had no proper Episcopal ordination: Or if you will call their ordainers
Bishops, they were not only ejusdem ordinis with the Presbyters, but also not
ordained by Bishops themselves, but made such by mission from the Monastery,
and bare election and ordination of Presbyters.

6. Out of this famous holy Monastery, was Aidan first, and Finan after, [and
Tromhere etc.] and Coleman after sent into Northumberland, where they aresaid
to be made Bishops. And they were the first Bishops that came thither; and so,
had no ordination in England from any Bishops that were there before: Nor is
there any probability that the Palladian Bishops did ordain them Bishops: But
that their own order of Senior Monks and Presbyters only ordained them.

7. Beda was such a votary to the Church of Rome, that his testimony runs more
for the Romish interest than most of the Scottish or English Historians of
those times: yet lib. 3. c. 5. says of Aidan but that his approbation was in
Conventu Seniorum, and sic illum ordinantes ad praedicandum miserunt. And c.
25. that Finan pro illo gradum Episcopatus a Scottis ordinatus and missus
acceperat, qui in insula Lindisfarnensi secit Ecclesiam Episcopali sedi
congruam; Quam tamen more Scottorum, uno de lapide, sed de robore secto totam
composuit, and arundine ^exit. Et defuncto Finano, qui post ipsum fuerit, cum
Colmannus in Episcopain suc^ederet, and ipse missus a Scotia, etc. And the King
Oswi himself was taught by the Scots, and was of their Language and for their
way. And Cedda was ordained by the Scots; And at a Synod three or four of these
kind of Bishops with the King and his Son, and Hilda a woman, Abbess, were the
Company that made it. c. 25. And c. 26. Tuda also was ordained by the Scots.
And c. 4. The Bishops themselves were under the Government of the Abbot, juxta
exemplum primi Doctoris, qui non Episcopus, sed Presbyter extitit et Monachus.

8. Li. 3. c. 28. he says that non erat tune ullus excepto Wini in tota
Britania Canoniee ordinatus Episcopus.

9. And as there is no word of proof that it was the Palladian Roman Bishops
that ordained these Northumbrian Bishops, so there is enough to the contrary,
in that all these foresaid Bishops continued the stiff enemies of the Roman
Power and order, which Palladius came to introduce. Insomuch that Beda often
mentions their utter aversion to the Roman party, and that the Brittons and
Scots, were all of a mind, and Daganus and the rest would not so much as eat
with the Romanists, no nor so much as eat in the same house or Inn with them,
lib. 2. c. 4.

10. And lastly even that sort of Episcopacy, which they took in
Northumberland, was but Equivocally so called as to that which we dispute
about, and not Ejusdem Speciei. For. 1. They never pretended to a distinct
order from the Presbyters. 2. They had but one poor Church made of Wood, and
thatcht with Reeds, and no possessions else: And from the^^e they went from
village to village to instruct, convert and pray with the people.

And that our English Episcopacy ^eri^eth its succession from these Scots and
the Brittaine^, and not from Rome by Augustine and Palladius, I refer the
Reader to Mr. Jones, and to the Preface before Knox his Church History.

Thus much I thought needful to prevent being misunderstood about the
Episcopacy of Aidan, (...) etc. Such an Episcopacy as the Bishop of Hereford
plead th for in his Naked Truth. I meet with few that are against; any more
than that the College of Physicians, or Philosophers, or Divines have ^
President.

FINIS.

