THE VAIN RELIGION OF THE Formal Hypocrite, And the mischief of an unbridled
Tongue (as against Religion, Rulers, or Dissenters) described, in several
Sermons, Preached at the Abbey in Westminster, before many Members of the
Honorable House of Commons. 1660.

AND The Fools Prosperity, The occasion of his destruction: A Sermon Preached
at Coven-Garden.

Both published to heal the effects of some Hearers misunderstandings and
misreports.

By Richard Baxter.

London, Printed by R. ^. for F. Ty^o^, at the three daggers in Fleet Street,
and Novel S^m^n ^ookseller at Kedenmaster. 1660. At ^^bo^nd

TO THE READER.
THough God be not the Author of sin, he knows why he permits tin the world.
He will be no loser and Satan shall be no gainer by it in the end. The malice
of the Devil and wicked men, is ordinarily the destruction of the cause which
they most desire to promote; and an advantage by accident to the cause and
persons which they would root out from the earth. Were there no more to prove
this, than the Instances of Joseph's brethren, of Pharaoh, and the murderers of
our Lord, it were enough. We usually lose more by the flatteries of Satan and
the world, than by their violence. If these hasty, course, unpolished Sermons,
shall prove beneficial to the souls of any, this also may come in among the
lower rank of Instances. If the Devil had let me alone, they (...) have been
cast aside, and no further molested him or his Kingdom, for ought I know, than
they did upon the Preaching of them. But seeing he will needs, by malicious
misreports, and slanders, kindle suspicion, and raise offense, against them and
the Author, let him take what he gets by it. He has never yet got much from
me, by violence, or by his foulmouthed slanderous instruments: No not when the
impudence or multitude of their slanders, have forced me to be silent, lest I
trouble the Reader, or misspend my time.

The first of these Discourses, being intended to undeceive the Formal
Hypocrite, and to call men from a Vain, to a Saving serious Religion, and to
acquaint them that cry out against Hypocrisy, where the Hypocrite is to be
found, it seems, provoked the Ignorant or the Guilty; in so much that the cry
went that I Preached down all Forms of Prayer, and all Government and Order in
the Church: when there is not a Syllable that has any such sense: But it seems
what I spoke against the Carcass, was interpreted to be spoken against the Body
of Religion.

The words of Mr. Bolton and other Divines, which I have cited against the
Reproachers of serious piety, are added since the Preaching of the rest, as
being more fit to be presented here to the eye, than in the Pulpit to the ear.

The petulancy of men on both extremes, constrained me to add, The Bridle for
their tongues.

The second Discourse I understand offended some few of the Gallants, that
thought they were too roughly handled; let them here peruse it, and better
concoct it, if they please.

I only add this Observation to the Heirs of Heaven, that are above this world,
and live by Faith.

Few rich men are truly Religious: It is as hard for them to be saved, as for a
Camel to go through a needles eye. Yet rich men will every where be the Rulers
of the world, and so (as to outward protection or opposition) the Judges in
matters of Religion. Judge therefore whether Dominion and earthly reign, be the
portion of the Saints (as Jewishly some of late imagine): and what usage we
must ordinarily expect on earth! and what condition the Church of Christ is
like to be in to the end. As his Kingdom, so ours, is not of this world. A low,
despised, suffering state, is it that Behevers must ordinarily expect, and
prepare for, and study to be serviceable in. If better (may I call it better)
come, take it as a Feast, and grudge not when the table is withdrawn; and look
not it should be our every days fare. But yet value the more highly those few
of the Rich, and Great, and Rulers, that are above this world, and devote their
power and riches to the Lord, and are Holy and Heavenly in the midst of so
great temptations and impediments,

The Lord teach us to use this transitory world as not overusing it, that we
may never hear, Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things,] Luke 16. 25. How shortly will they find themselves everlastingly
undone, that made not sure of a more enduring portion! Reader, that thou may
savingly remember these common, but necessary, though much neglected truths, is
the end of these endeavors, and shall be the matter of my hearts desire and
prayers, while the Lord continneth me

His servant for the promoting the increase and edification of his Church, Nov.
15. 1660, R. Baxter.

Postscript.
REaders, meeting (in his consideration of the Liturgy) with these following
words of Reverend D. Gauden [I cannot but commend the Candor, Justice, and
Integrity of M. Baxter, who lately professed to me, that he saw nothing in the
Liturgy, which might not well bear a good construction, if men looked upon it
as became Christians, with eyes of Charity,] I was sensible of the great
respects of this Learned and Reverend man; but lest you misunderstand both him
and me, I think it best to tell you more fully what were my words. Speaking for
reformation of the Common prayer Book, and an addition of other forms in
Scripture phrase, with liberty of choice, etc. I said, That for the Doctrine of
the Common prayer Book, though I had read exceptions against diverse passages, I
remembered not any thing that might not receive a good construction, if it were
read with the same candor and allowance, as we read the writings of other
men.] So that it was only the Truth of the Doctrine that I spoke of; against
which I hate to be peevishly quarrelsome, when God has blessed this Church so
wonderfully, with a moderate and cautelous, yet effectual Reformation in matter
of Doctrine: The more pity is it, that the very modes of Worship and
Discipline should be the matter of such sharp and uncharitable discords, which
must one day prove the grief of those that are found to have been the causes of
it, and of the sufferings of the Church on that occasion.

The Contents.
THe Introduction. Page 1. etc. Dict There is a seeming Religiousness which is
but self-deceiving, and will prove in Vain. Ten particulars that constitute the
Hypocrites Vain Religion 11. to 20. Ten things that are yet wanting to the
Hypocrite, that prove his Religion Vain. 20. to 34. By what means and method
the Hypocrite makes shift to deceive himself by his Religion. 34. to 49. What
moves the Hypocrite to this self-deceit, and what are the reasons and uses of
his Vain Religion. 49. In what respects the Hypocrites religion is not Vain. 80
In what respects his religion is Vain. 92 Use 1. Why a seeming outside
Hypocritical religion is so common, in comparison of serious faith and
godliness. 95 Why Popery has so many followers. 100 Use 2. To awaken the
self-deceiving Hypocrite. 108 Ten infallible marks of grace, which are in all
that are sound believers, and set together, describe his state: premised to
prevent the misapplication of what follows, and groundless troubles of the
sincere. iii Terror to the self-deceiver. 1. His religion being Vain, his hopes
and comforts are all Vain. 118 2. It will deceive him in his extremity. 129 The
detection of the Hypocrite, by his contradicting all the parts of his Christian
profession: showing that all the ungodly among us that profess to be true
Christians, are Hypocrites. 148. to 173 The Hypocrites unbridled tongue. 175
Sins of the tongue. 177 What the text means. 179 Three sorts especially
reproved. 180 1. The deriders, scorners, revilers or opposers of serious
godliness; Their terror in the aggravation of their sin. 181. to 198 2. Those
that uncharitably reproach each other, for lesser differences in religion. 198
Of the common malicious use of the nicknames, Puritans, Precisians, Zealots,
etc. 205 Bishop Downames testimony of the use of the word Puritan in his time.
210 The testimony of Dr. Rob. Abbot Regius Professer of Divinity in Oxford, and
Bishop of Salisbury. 211 Mr. Robert Boltons testimony at large. 212 His further
description of the Formal Hypocrite. 217 Bishop Halls Character of an
Hypocrite. 226 3. The sinfulness of passionate reproachful speeches against
superiors, when we suffer by them for religions sake; Proposed to the
consideration of suffering tempted Christians, how sincere soever. 231 How far
we may mention such sins of others. 247 Two causes of men's frowardness of
speech. 250 Who is indeed the Hypocrite. The impudency of our common Hypocritus
that take serious godliness for hypocrisy. If we will be Christians indeed, we
must be content to be 10, though we are not thought to be so; and to be
accounted Hypocrites, when we have done most to approve our hearts and ways to
God. 251 Eight directions to the Hypocrite to save him from a Vain religion.
261 The prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1 32, 33. Proved by
Scripture; and the impiety of such. 278 How it destroys them. 306 The ill
uses of this truth, to be avoided. 315 The right uses urged. 317 A hint of
comfort to the obedient souls; that they shall dwell in safety, and be quiet
from the fear of evil: even when evil seems to prevail against them. 336
THE VAIN RELIGION Of the Formal HYPOCRITE.
Jam. 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain.
BEloved hearers, I may suppose that we are all come hither to day, for the
great end of our lives; and to labor in that work for which we are created,
redeemed, preserved, instructed, and furnished with the helps and means of
Grace: even to prepare for death that is coming to arrest us, and for the
presence of our Judge, who stands as at the door; and to make our Calling and
Election sure, that the glory of the Saints may be our lot, when the world of
the ungodly are cast into endless misery and despair. And I hope I may suppose
that in order to this end, you would gladly be acquainted with the causes of
damnation, that you may avoid them; with your greatest dangers, that you may
escape them; and with the hindrances of your salvation, that you may overcome
them. When we read in the Gospel, that salvation is to be offered unto all, and
no man is excepted or shut out, but such as shut out and except themselves; and
yet read that there are but few that find the strait gate, and the narrow way,
and that the flock is little that shall have the Kingdom, and that many shall
seek to enter that shall not be able, (Matthew. 7. 13, 14. Luke 12. 32. and 13.
24.) we must needs conclude that some powerful enemy stands in the way, that
can cause the ruin of so many millions of souls: But when we go further and
find what rich preparations God has made, and what means he has used, and
what abundant helps he offers and affords to bring men to this blessed
state of life, it forces us to admire that any enemy can be so strong, as to
frustrate so many, and such excellent means. But when we yet go further, and
find that salvation is freely offered, and that the purchase is made by a
Savior to our hands, and that hearty consent is the condition of our Title,
and nothing but our wilful refusal can undo us; when we find that salvation is
brought down to men's wills, and also what motives and convincing helps, and
earnest persuasions are appointed and used to make men willing; we are then
surprised with yet greater admiration, that any deceiver can be so subtle, or
the heart of man can be so foolish, as to be drawn (in despite of all these
means) to cast away the immortal crown, that else no enemy could have taken
from him. And now we discern the quality of our enemy, of our snares, of our
danger, and of our duty: It is not mere Violence but Deceit that can undo us:
not force but fraud that we have to resist. And were not the mind of a carnal
man exceeding brutish, (while he seems wise for carnal things) it were a
thing incredible that so many men, could by all the subtilty of hell be drawn
in the daylight of the Gospel, deliberately and obstinately to refuse their
happiness, and to choose the open way of their damnation, and leave their
friends lamenting their calamity, that might have mercy, and cannot be
persuaded to consent.

That Satan is the great Deceiver, and lays the snare, and manageth the bait,
we are all convinced: that the world and all our fleshly accommodations are the
instrumental Deceivers; the snare, the bait, which Satan uses, is also a thing
that we all confess. But that beside the Devil and the World, a Reasonable
Creature should be his own Deceiver, and that in a business of unspeakable,
everlasting consequence, and that Religion it self, (a seeming Religiousness
that indeed is Vain,) should be made by himself the means of his Deceit, this
is a mystery, that is opened to you in my Text, and requires our most careful
search and consideration.

When Satan and the World have wounded us by their Deceits, Religion is it that
helps us to a cure. He that is Deceived by pleasures, and profits, and the
vainglory of the world, must be undeceived and recovered by Religion, or he
must perish. But that Religion it self should become his deceit, and the remedy
prove his greatest misery, is the most stupendous effect of Satan's subtilty,
and a sinners fraudulency, and the saddest aggravation of his deplorable
calamity. And yet, alas, this is so common a case, that where the Gospel is
Preached, it seems to be Satan's principal game, and the highway to hell. There
is no other Name by which we can be saved, but by Jesus Christ, the only
Mediator, between sinful man, and the offended Majesty: and yet what is there
in all the world, that is more abused to the deceiving of men's souls, then the
Name and Grace of Jesus Christ? Men that might be saved by an effectual Faith,
are cheated and destroyed by false Faith and presumption. The merciful nature
of God, is the groundwork of all the comforts of the godly: and yet there is
nothing that is more abused, to the deceiving of men's souls; that will profess
that they trust in the mercies of God, while they are laboring to be
miserable, by the refusing and resisting the mercy that would save them. The
free promises of the Gospel do support true believers; but are abused to the
deceiving of the presumptuous world. And so the Apostle tells us that many do
by their Religion: They will have a Religion to deceive themselves; but not to
save them.

It is the Hypocrite that is the subject in my text, who is described by this
double property. 1. That he seems to be Religious. 2. That his obedience
answers not this seeming or profession: the instance is given in the bridling
of his tongue, because that was the point that the Apostle had some special
reason to insist on, with those to whom he immediately directed his Epistle.
Though its plain in ver. 22, 23, etc. that it is the whole work of obedience
that he implies, where he instanceth in this particular. The sin of the tongue
which he specially intends to reprove, was the bitter reproaching of their
brethren, upon the account of their differences in matters of Religion, and the
vilifying of others, and uncharitable passionate contendings and censures, upon
pretense of knowing more then others; as appears in the third Chapter
throughout.

The Predicate is double: one by way of supposition; viz. that this hypocrite
does but deceive his own heart: The other by way of assertion; viz. that his
Religion is vain.

Whether (...) and (...) be fetched as far as from Orpheus the Thracian, as
Erasmus and many others imagine, is of no great moment to our understanding of
the text, it being evident that it is the worshipping of God, that is here
meant by [Religion]; and it is men addicted to his worship, that are called
Religious. The seeming here spoken of, refers both to himself and others: he
that seems to himself to be Religious, or is judged so by other men. By
bridling the tongue, is meant, restraining it from evil speech. By deceiving
himself, is meant, the mistake of his judgment concerning the sincerity, and
acceptableness, and reward of his Religion, and the frustrating of his own
expectations hereupon. His Religion is said to be [in Vain] in that it shall
not attain the ends of an unfeigned true Religion, of which more anon. The
sense of the Text then, is contained in these two Propositions.

1. There is a seeming Religiousness, which is but self-deceiving, and will
prove in Vain.

2. Where sincere obedience does not accompany the profession of Religion, and
in particular, when such men bridle not their tongues, their Religion is but
Vain and self-deceiving.

These two being contained in the text, the former comprised in the latter, I
shall handle them together, and show you, 1. What this seeming Religion is, and
how it differs from true Religion. 2. Wherein this self-deceiving by a
seeming Religion does consist. 3. Whence it is that men are so prone to this
self-deceit. 4. In what respects this Religion is Vain, and why. 5. And then we
shall consider how to improve these truths by a due application.

1. Concerning the first, I must show you, 1. What this seeming Religion is
made up of. 2. And what it wants, which makes it delusory and vain.

In general, This Vain Religion, is made up sometimes, of all that, 1. A
laudable nature or temperature of body, 2. And good education and excellent
means, 3. Assisted by the common workings of the Spirit, can produce.

More particularly, 1. A Vain Religiousness, may have a great deal of
superficial opinionative knowledge: and so may have the truest Religion for its
object: the true doctrines of Faith, may be believed by a Faith that is not
true: the hypocrite as to the (...) Creed may be (...) ignorance a bound^^
(...) be a knowing man, and (...) ignorance of others: when errors abound, he
may be of the right opinion in Religion, and speak much against the errors of
the times, as one that is wiser then the giddy heretical sort of people: He may
[Know the will of God, and approve the things that are more excellent, being
instructed out of the Law, and be confident that he himself is a guide of the
blind, a light of them which are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a
teacher of babes, which has the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the
Law,] Romans 2. 18, 19, 20. He may know as much materially as the upright may,
and be able to convince gainsayers, and be a notable Champion for the defending
of the truth, against the many adversaries that oppose it: and so may be
eminently useful in his generation.

2. He that is but Religious in Vain, may be frequent in the worshipping of
God; and may seek him daily, and delight to know his ways, and to approach
him, and ask of him the Ordinances of justice, as if he were one of the people
that did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God, Isa. 58.
1, 2. He may be often in fasting, and punctual in keeping holy days and
ceremonies, as verse 3. Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. Luke 18. 11, 12, 13. and
exercise much severity on himself, [after the commandments and doctrines of men
in things that have a show of wisdom, in Will Worship, and Humility, and
neglecting of the body not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh,] Col.
2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Though he be slow paced in the right way, he is swift in his
mistaken paths. Though he likes not preciseness, zeal, and forwardness, in the
spiritual works that God prescribes; yet when it comes to his own, or other
men's inventions, he will be religious and righteous overmuch, Eccles. 7. 16.
and forward to offer the sacrifice of a fool, that considers not that he is
but doing evil, while he thinks to please God with the sacrifice of his
services, though he turn away his ear from an obedient hearing the word that
should direct him, Eccles. 5. 1, 2. Prove. 28. 9.

3. He that is but Religious in Vain, may see the evil of discord and
divisions, and inveigh much against schismatics, and see the excellency of
unity and peace; and therefore may join himself with the visible Catholic
Church, and with the Christians and Congregations that are most for unity.
There have always been Hypocrites in the most orderly peaceable societies of
believers, and still will be.

4. The self-deceiving Hypocrite, is oft-times very sensible of the evil of
vertiginous mutability in Religion; and therefore he may be much resolved to
continue what he is, and may cast many a jeer at the weather-cocks of the
times, and the unconstancy and levity of ignorant, or temporizing men: and may
stand to his party, and profession, against much opposition, as glorying in his
constancy, and being ashamed to be thought a changling, or such a turn-coat as
others whom he merrily derideth.

5. An Hypocrite that has no other Religion but delusory and vain, may observe
the weaknesses of persons that are of lower education and parts, and may loath
their indiscretion in conference and behavior, and their unhansome expressions
in prayer and other duties, and shake the head at them, as silly, contemptible,
self-conceited fellows; and his heart may rise against their disorder,
tautologies and affectations: And its like enough, that hereupon he will jest
at conceived prayer, or extemporate (as they call it;) and bless himself as
safe in his Parrot-like devotions, because the same spirit teaches not fine
words, and rhetorical language, to all that it teaches to pray with
unutterable sighs and groans, Romans 8. 26, 27. though the searcher of hearts
(who is not delighted with complements and set speeches) does well understand
the meaning of the spirit.

5. The self-deceiving Hypocrite does frequently pretend to be a man of
moderation in matters of Religion, as distasting the hairbraind zealots, as he
counts them, that cannot be content to have their faith and Religion to
themselves before God, and to live and talk as others do, but must be singular,
and make a stir with their Religion, and turn the world upside down. The true
zeal of the godly is usually distastefull to him; and the corrupt zeal of
Schismatical persons, does cause him to bless himself in his lukewarmness, and
to take his most odious indifferency, and want of fervent love to God and his
holy ways to be his virtue.

6. This self-deceiving Hypocrite does frequently pretend to an exceeding great
Reverence in the managing of the outward part of worship; and to an
extraordinary zeal about the Circumstantials of Religion. He accounts them all
schismatical and profane, that place not as much of their Religion as he does,
in gestures and forms, and other accidents of worship, acquainting us that the
Pharisaical temper in religion is natural, and will still continue in the world.

7. If the temptation of the Hypocrite lie on the other side, he can withdraw
himself into some small or separating society, and place his Religion in the
singularity of his opinions, or in the strictness of the way and party that he
owneth; and in his conceited ability in his conceived or ready expressions in
prayer; and can cry out as much upon the Formalist, as the Formal Hypocrite
upon him: and glory in his zeal, as the other in his moderation. It is in the
Heart that Hypocrisy has its throne; from whence it can command the outward
acts into any shapes that are agreeable to its ends: and can use materials of
diverse natures, as the fuel and nutriment of its malignity. And what ever
party such are joined to, and what ever way they have been trained up to,
whether Formality, or schism, or more regular, sober, equal ways, in all of
them their Religion is but Vain, and they do but deceive themselves by all.

8. The Religion that is but delusory and Vain, may be accompanied with much
Alms, and works of seeming Justice, and Charity, Mat. 6. 1, 2. Luke 18. 11, 12.
He may have many virtues called moral; and be a man of much esteem with others,
even with the best and wisest, for his seeming Wisdom, and piety, and justice.
He may be no extortioner, unjust, adulterer, but as to gross sins seem
blameless, Luke 18. 11, 12. Phil. 3. 6. and be much in reproaching the
scandalous lives of others, and thank God that he is none such, Luke 18. 11.

9. He that has but a vain Religion, may in his judgment approve of saving
grace, and like the more zealous, upright, self-denying, heavenly lives of
others: and wish that he might but die their death; and wish himself as happy
as they, so it might be had on his own terms: And he may have some counterseit
of every grace; and think that it is true. Numb. 23. 10. Jam. 2. 14, etc. 1
Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Mark 6. 20.

10. None will be more forward to call another Hypocrite, then the Hypocrite:
nor to extol sincerity and uprightness of heart and life. And thus you see
what this Vain Religion is made up with.

2. IF you marvel what the Hypocrite yet wants, that makes his Religion
delusory and Vain, I shall now tell you I hope to your conviction and
satisfaction.

1. For all his forementioned Religion, he wants the Spirit of Christ, to dwell
as his sanctifier within him; And [if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
the same is none of his] Romans 8. 9. But because this is known by the effects, I
add,

2. He wants that spiritual new birth, by which he should be made spiritual, as
his first birth made him carnal, John 3. 5, 6. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. He is born of
the will of the flesh, and of man, but not of God, John 1. 13. Form the first
man Adam he is become a living soul; but by the second man, Christ, the Lord
from heaven, he is not yet quickened in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 46. He is not
born again of the incorruptible seed, the word of God, that lives and abides
for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. He is not yet saved by the washing of Regeneration (
save only as to the outward baptism) and by renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
is shed by Christ on all his members, that being justified by his grace, they
should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life, Tit. 3. 5, 6. They
are not new creatures, old things being not past away, and all things, with
them become new: and therefore it is certain that they are not in Christ, 2
Cor. 5. 17. They have not put off the old man with his deceitful lusts, and
deeds, nor have put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness, Ephesians. 3. 22, 23, 24. Col. 3. 9, 10. They have but patcht up
the old unsanctified hearts, and smoothed over their carnal conversations, with
civility and plausible deportment, and so much Religion as may cheat themselves
as well as blind the eyes of others. But they are strangers to the life of God,
Ephesians. 4. 18. and never were made partakers of the Divine nature which all the
children of God partake of, 2 Pet. 1. 4. nor of that Holiness, without which
none shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

3. Though he make a slight and customary confession of his sins, unworthiness
and misery, yet is he not kindly humbled at the heart, nor made truly vile in
his own eyes, nor contrite and brokenhearted; nor emptyed of himself, as
seeing himself undone by his own iniquities; crying out Unclean, and loathing
himself for all his abominations; weary of his sin, and heavy-laden, as all
must be that are fit for Christ. Read Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 2. Psalm. 51. 17. and
34. 18. Lev. 13. 44, 45. Ezekiel. 36. 31. and 20. 43. and 6. 9. Matthew. 11. 28.
Romans 7. 24.

4. This man's Religion must needs be Vain; for he wants the life of faith it
self, and heartily believes not in Christ. He has but an opinion of the truth
of Christianity, through the advantage of his education and company; and
thereupon does call himself a Christian, and heartlesly talk of the mystery of
Redemption as a common thing. But he does not with an humbled broken heart,
betake himself to Christ as his only refuge from the wrath of God and
everlasting misery, as he would lay hold on the hand of his friend, if he were
drowning: The sense of the odiousness of sin, and of the damnation threatened by
the righteous God, has not yet taught him to value Christ, as he must be
valued by such as will be saved by him. These hypocrites do but talk of Christ,
and turn his name, as they do their prayers, into the matter of a dry and
customary form. They fly not to him as the only Physician of their souls, in
the feeling of their festring wounds: they cry not to him as the Disciples in
the tempest, Save Master, we perish. They value him not practically (though
notionally they do) as the pearl for which they must sell all, Matthew. 13. 44,
45, 46. Christ does not dwell in his heart by faith: nor does he long with all
the Saints to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18,
19. He counts not all things loss for Christ, and the excellency of his
knowledge, nor does he count them as dung, that he may win Christ, and be found
in him, not having his own righteousness, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. nor can he truly say, that he desires to know
nothing but a crucified Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2. and that the life that he now
lives in the flesh, he lives by the faith of the Son of God that loved him,
and gave himself for him,] Gal. 2. 20. He is not taken up with that admiration
of the love of God in Christ, as beseems a soul that is saved by him from the
flames of hell, and that is reconciled to God, and made an heir of life
everlasting. He has not understandingly, deliberately, seriously, and
unreservedly given up himself and all that he has to Christ: and thankfully
accepted Christ and life, as given on the Gospel terms to him. This living
effectual faith is wanting to the Hypocrite, whose Religion is Vain.

5. This Vain Religion does never practically show the soul the amiableness and
attractive goodness of God, so far as to win the heart to a practical
estimation of him, and adhering to him above all; nor so far as to advance him
above all the creatures in the practical judgment, will and conversation: nor
does it cause the soul to take him for its portion, and prefer his savor
before all the world, and devote it self and all unto his interest and will,
and give him the superlative and sovereign honor, both in heart and life: Psalm
63. 3. and 30. 5. and 4. 6, 7. and 16. 5. and 17. 14. Mat. 10. 37.

6. This Vain Religion is always without that serious belief of the life to
come, which causes the soul to take it for its happiness and treasure, and
there to set its desires and its hopes, and to make it his principal care and
business to attain it; and to make all the pleasures, and profits, and honors
of the world to stoop to it, as preferring it before them all, Matthew. 6. 20,
21. and ver. 33. Luke 18. 22, 23. and 14, 33. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Phil. 3.
18, 19, 20. The Hypocrite takes heaven but for a reserve, and as a lesser evil
then hell, and seeks it but in the second place, while his fleshly pleasures
and interest have the pre-eminence, and God has no more but the leavings of
the world; and he serves him but with so much as his flesh can spare.

7. This Vain Religion consists principally in external observances: If he be
a Formalist that has it, his Religion lies in his beads and prayer books; in
going so often to Church, and keeping holy days and fasting days, and saying
over such and such words, and using such and such gestures and ceremonies, and
submitting to Church orders, and crying down Sectaries and preciseness, and
jearing at the simplicity of plain hearted Christians, that never learnt the
art of dissimulation. Their Religion is but a pack of Complements, a flattering
of God, as if they would mock him with cap an knee, (who will not be mocked,)
Gal. 6. 7. while they draw near him with their lips, their hearts are far from
him, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. They wash the outside, and pay tithe of all; and give
some alms, and forbear disgraceful sins, which would make them be esteemed
ungodly among men, Mat. 15. 2, 3. Mar. 7. 4, 8. Matthew. 23. 25, 26, etc. Mat. 6.
1, 4, 6. etc Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. Isa. 58. 1, 2. But these self-deceivers
are strangers to the inward spiritual work of holiness: Their hearts are not
busy in the worship of God, by fervent desire, and exercise of other graces,
while their tongues are put into an artificial pace, and they are acting the
part of men that seem to be Religious.

If they be cast into the Sectarian mold, they place their Religion in the
strictness of their Principles and Parties, and in contending for them, and in
their affected fervor, and ability to speak and pray ex tempore. But the
humble, holy, inward workings of the soul toward God, and its breathings after
him, and the watch that it sets over the heart, this hypocrite is much a
stranger to.

If he be brought up among the Orthodox in well ordered Churches, he places
his Religion in the holding of the truth, and taking the right side, and
submitting to right order, and using Gods ordinances: but the most of an
upright man's employment is at home, within him; to order his soul, and exercise
grace, and keep down sin, and keep out the world, and keep under the flesh, and
carnal self, and do the inward part of duty: And he is as truly solicitous
about this, as about the outward works: and contenteth not himself to have said
his prayers, unless indeed his heart have prayed; nor to have heard, unless he
have profited, or heard with obediential attention: And he makes conscience of
secret duties, as well as of those that are done in the sight of men: But this
the hypocrite comes not up to, to trade in the internal spiritual part.

8. The Religion that is Vain, is without an universal hatred of known sin, and
an actual conquering of it, so far as to live out of gross sin, (which some
call mortal) and to be weary of infirmities, and to be truly desirous to be rid
of all; and to be willing to use Gods means against it. Thus it is with the
sincerely Religious; but not with these hypocrites that deceive themselves,
Joh. 3. 19, 20. Romans 7. 24. Luke 13. 3, 5. Romans 8. 1. to the 14. Gal. 6. 7, 8.
The hypocrite has not only some particular sin, which all his Religion makes
him not willing to see to be a sin, or to forsake; but his very state is sinful
in the main, by the predominancy of a selfish carnal interest and principle:
And he is not willing of close plain dealing, much less of the diligent use of
means himself to overcome that sin: because he loves it.

9. This Vain Religion is not accompanied with an unseigned Love to a life of
holiness, which every true believer has, delighting to meditate in the Law of
God, with a practical intention to obey it; and delighting in the inward
exercise of grace, and outward ordinances as advantages hereunto; desiring
still more of the grace which he has tasted, and grieving that he knows, and
trusts, and loves, and fears, and obeys God so little, and longing to
reach higher, to know, and love, and fear him more, Psalm. 1. 2. and ^19. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 9, 10 etc. Heb. 12. 14. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Matthew. 7. 13, 14. But the
self-deceiver either has a secret dislike of this serious diligence for
salvation, and loving God with all the soul, and might, (because he is
conscious that he reaches it not himself,) or at least he will not be brought
to entertain any more then will stand with his carnal ends.

10. A Vain Religion does not so far reveal the excellency of Christ's image in
his servants, as to cause an entire Love to them as such; and to delight in
them above the most splendid and accomplished persons that are strangers to the
life of grace; and so far to love them, as when Christ requires it, to part
with our substance, and hazard our selves for their relief. Thus do the truly
Religious, Psalm. 16. 2. and 15. 4. 1 John 3. 14. Matthew. 10. 40. 11. 42. and 25.
34, 35, 40, 42, 45, 46. But the hypocrice either secr^tly hates a heavenly
holy life, and consequently the people that are such, (because they seem to
condemn him by overgoing him, and differing from him) or at least he only
superficially approves of them; but will forsake both Christ and them in
trial, rather then forsake his earthen God. I have now showed you what the
self-deceiver wants, in which you may see sufficient reason why his Religion is
but Vain.

II. WE are next to show you, How these Hypocrites do deceive themselves, and
wherein their self-deceit consists. It may seem strange that a man of reason
should do such a thing as this, when we consider that truth is naturally the
object of the understanding, and that all men necessarily love themselves, and
therefore love what they know to be simply good for them: How then can any man,
that has the use of reason, be willing to be deceived, yea and be his own
deceiver, and that in matters of unspeakable consequence! But it is not as
falsehood, nor as deceit that they desire it: but as it appears necessary to
the carnal ease and pleasure which they desire.

The way by which they deceive their own hearts, consists in these following
degrees.

1. The hypocrite resists the Spirit of grace, and rejects the mercies
offered in the Gospel, and so by his refusal, is deprived of a part in Christ,
and of the life of grace, and the hopes of glory, which were tendered to him.

2. But withal, he is willing of so much of this mercy as consists with his
sinful disposition, and carnal interest: He is willing enough to be happy in
general, and to be saved from hell fire, and to be pardoned, and to have such a
heaven as he has framed a pleasing imagination of.

3. And therefore he makes him up a Religion of so much of Christianity as
will stand with his Pleasures, profits and reputation in the world, that so he
may not be left in despair of being saved, when he must leave the world that he
must loved. The cheap and the easy parts of Christianity, and those that are
most in credit in the world, and that flesh and blood have least against, these
he will cull out from among the rest, and make him a Religion of, passing by
the dearer, and more difficult, and spiritual parts.

4. Having gone thus far, he persuades his own heart, that this kind of
Religion which he has patcht up and framed to himself, (...) Religion, the
Faith, the Hope, the Charity, the Repentance, the Obedience, to which Salvation
is promised. And that he is a true Christian, notwithstanding his defects; and
that his spots are but such as are consistent with grace, and that his sins are
but pardoned infirmities: and that he has part in Christ, and the promises of
life, and shall be saved, though he be not of the preciser strain. When he
commits any sin, he confidently imagines, that his confession and his
wishing it were undone again (when he has had all the p^easure that sin can
give him) is true repentance: and that as a penitent he shall be forgiven. And
thus while he thinks himself something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself, Gal. 6. 3. He has a counterfeit of every grace of God. A counterfeit
Faith, and Hope, and Love, and Repentance, and Zeal, and Humility, and
Patience, and Perseverance: and these he will needs take to be the very life
and image of Christ, and the graces themselves that accompany salvation.

5. Having got this Carcass of Religion without the soul, he makes use of all
those things to confirm him in his deceit, which are appointed to confirm true
Christians in their Faith and Hope. When he reads or thinks of the infinite
Goodness, Love and Mercy of God, he thinks God could not be so good and
merciful, if he should refuse to save all such as he. When he reads of the
undertaking and sacrifice of Christ, and how he is a propitiation for the sins
of the whole world, he confidently hence concludes, that a Savior so
gracious, that has done and suffered so much for sinners, cannot condemn all
such as he. When he reads of the extent and freeness of Grace, in the
promises of the Gospel, he concludes that these promises belong to him, and
that Grace could not be so free and so extensive, if it did shut out all such
as he. When he observes the Mercies of God upon his body, in his friends, and
health, and credit, and prosperity, he concludes, that surely God loves him
as a child, in that he deals so Fatherly with him. If he suffer adversity, he
thinks that it is the Fatherly chastisement of God, and therefore proves him
to be his son, and that he shall have his good things in the world to come,
because he had his evils here. If he suffer any thing for a good cause, (or a
cause that he takes to be good) he takes himself to be a Confessor, and
marked out for life eternal. If he give any considerable alms, he applies all
the promises to himself that are made to those that are truly charitable,
though he gives but the leavings of the flesh, and gives but on common
compassions, or for applause, or for some common end, and not as to Christ whom
he honors in his members, as one that has resigned all unto him. If he
pray, from the lips only, or only for pardon and such other mercies as flesh it
self would be glad to have, without the unexpressable groans of the spirit, for
spiritual mercies ( Romans 8. 26) he presently applies all the promises to
himself that are made to the upright that call upon God. And thus Love, Mercy,
and Christ himself are abused by him to this damning work of self-deceit.

6. Moreover, he makes use of all the ordinances of God, to the deceiving of
his own heart. The outward part of Baptism, persuades him that he is inwardly
regenerate. He receives the Lords supper, that he may confirm his presumption,
and increase his self-deceit, as the godly receive it to confirm and increase
their saving faith. He joyneth with the Church in those prayers and praises
that are fitted to the true believers state, that he may thence more
confidently deceive his own heart, with the conceit that he is a true believer.
And thus he turns the bread of life, and all the helps and means of grace, to
the strengthening of his sin, and the furthering of his perdition.

7. Moreover, this miserable self-deceiver, does usually get into such company
as may further his self-deceit, and makes use of them to that end. If he get
into any holy well-ordered Church of Christians, it is that by his outward
communion with the Saints, he may seem to himself to have inward communion with
them. If he get among able godly Ministers and other judicious Christians, and
finds that he is well esteemed of by them, he is confirmed hereby in his
presumption and self-deceit: when alas, we must in charity judge of men as they
profess and seem, and leave the infallible judgment of the heart to God.
Usually this self-deceiving hypocrite does associate with some carnal or
factious men, with whom he makes himself a party: and such will smooth him up,
and make a Saint of him, either because they are as bad themselves, and dare
not condemn him, lest they condemn themselves; or because they are flatterers
and dawbers, or men that were never themselves acquainted with those saving
operations of the Spirit which he wants, or because they are partial to one of
their own faction. And thus a formal hypocrite may be stroaked by Formalists,
and a Schismatical Hypocrite may be soothed up by those of his own Sect (as
lamentable experience tells us that such do) to the increase of their
pernicious self-deceit.

Yea more then so; if these hypocrites fall in company with the notoriously
profane, from them they will fetch some confirmation of their self-deceit:
when they hear them swear, and curse, and rant, and see them drunk, they
secretly with the Pharisee rejoice, and say, I thank thee Lord that I am not as
this Publican. And this is one reason why such hypoorites are well content to
have some servants in their families, or some neighbors or company about them
that are notoriously profane, that their deluded consciences, considering that
they are more civil and religious themselves, may hence gather comfort, that
they are the servants of God, and in a state of grace.

Hence also it is, that those of them that go on the Schismatical side, do
purposely go into separated societies, that by withdrawing from so many, and
(as they speak) coming out from among them, they may seem to themselves to be
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and to be of the little flock that shall have
the Kingdom. This is the use that self-deceivers make of their companions.

8. Moreover, the Hypocrite confirms his self-deceit, by observing the great
numbers of ungodly persons worse then he, that are in the world: This makes him
think that God should be unmerciful, and heaven be empty, if all such as he
should be shut out: the damnation of so many seems so incredible to him, that
it much increases his confidence and selfdeceit.

9. And he deceives himself also by a misobserving and misapplying the falls
and infirmities of the servants of the Lord, and the scandalous lives of many
Hypocrites like himself. When he reads of Noah's drunkenness, and Lots
drunkenness and incest, and David's adultery and murder, and Peter's denial of
his Master with cursing and swearing, he considers not how much these
singular actions were contrary to the scope of their lives, nor by what serious
repentance they did rise, and do so no more; but he hence concludes that sure
he is in a state of grace, that has no such heinous sins as these: though
indeed he has more heinous continually within him, (even a love of the world
and pleasure above God, a secret root of unbelief, a servitude to the flesh,
etc.) when he sees any about him that profess the fear of God, prove
Hypocrites or Apostates, or fall into any scandalous sin, he strengthens his
presumption by it, and concludes that this profession of greater holiness then
he himself has, is but Hypocrisy; and that he is as good as those that seem
more devout, though he make not so much ado with his religion: or at least that
such as he shall be saved, when those are so bad that are accounted better: If
there be but a Cham in the Ark and Family of Noah, an Ishmael in Abraham's
house, an Esau in Jacobs, an Absalom in David's, a Judas among the Disciples of
Christ, these selfdeceivers will thence fetch matter for their own delusion and
perdition, as if the rest were all as bad, or sanctification were not necessary
to salvation.

10. The self-deceiver also is confirmed in his presumption, by taking to
himself the comforts that Ministers hold forth, for truly humbled upright
souls, that are apt to be too much disquieted and cast down. Our Congregations
are mixed of godly and ungodly, and brokenhearted and hard-hearted, dejected
and self-confident sinners (besides all those that are well settled in their
spiritual peace.) And as we cannot tell how to tell the wicked of their misery,
nor open the Hypocrites self-deceit, but the self-suspecting humbled souls will
misapply it to themselves, and be more dejected by it, and say, It is thus with
me; so we cannot tell how to comfort the distressed, and clear up the evidences
of a drooping soul, but the presumptuous Hypocrite will lay hold upon it, and
think that it belongs to him. Every comfortable Book or Scripture that he
reads, and every comfortable Sermon or discourse which he hears, is abused
to increase his self-deceit.

11. It increases the Hypocrites self-deceit, when he finds some partial
reformation in himself, and that he has mended many things that were amiss:
This he takes for a true conversion, and thinks that the civilizing and
smoothing of his life, the change of his opinion, and the taking up a form of
godliness, are true Sanctification; and that he is not the man that once he
was; and therefore is in a safe condition: Though alas he has never yet known
by experience, the new heart, the new ends, the new resolutions, affections,
and conversation of a Saint.

12. Lastly, he deceives himself by misunderstanding the nature of hypocrisy.
Because he perceives not that he is a gross dissembler, but means as he
speaks, so far as he goes, therefore he thinks he is no Hypocrite: Whereas
besides the gross Hypocrite that knows he does dissemble, and only deceives
others, there are also close Hypocrites, that know not they are Hypocrites, but
deceive themselves. And these are they that my Text here speaks of, when it
says [He deceives his own heart.] It is Hypocrisy [to seem better then one
is, and to profess to be a sincere Christian when he is none,] though he
confidently think that he is what he professes himself to be.

III. BUt what is it that can move a Reasonable creature to be wilfully guilty
of such self-deceit in the daylight of the Gospel, when he has so much help
to see his way?

Answ. 1. The are first acceived by the vanities of the world, and the
pleasures of sin, before they deceive themselves by their Religion. Their
Religious self-deceiving is but subservient to their fleshly servitude, and the
worlds deceit. They are carnal from the birth: (for that which is born of the
flesh only, is but flesh, Joh. 3. 6.) and custom in sinning fixes and
increases their sinful disposition. Their hearts are engaged to their worldly
accommodations, and to their vainglory, and the things that please the flesh:
They are willing slaves to their con^upiscence. And therefore they cannot admit
of that Religion which would deprive them of that which they most dearly love.
Christ speaks too late to them. They tell him they are promised already. Their
affections are preengaged: sin has taken up the chiefest rooms: And the heart
that loves sensuality and prosperity best, cannot love God best too: for it
can have but one best. The (...) of true Sanctification is to (...) the darling
of a carnal (...) and to cross it in its dearest loves, and to lay that at our
feet that before was as our treasure, and to tame that body, and bring it into
subjection, which before was in the throne. The motions of such a change will
not be acceptable, till they are made so effectual as to cause that change: The
command will be unpleasant, till the heart be suited to the nature of the
command. He that sees what care and labor there is to gather a worldly
treasure, and what a stir is made in the world about it, can never expect that
all this should be vilified and despised at a word, and that any doctrine (how
true and heavenly soever,) can be welcome to these worldly men, that would
debase their glory, and embitter their delights, and make their Idol seem but
dung. The doctrine of Christ would take the old heart out of their bodies: and
they will not easily leave their hearts. It does not only command the drunkard
to live soberly, and the glutton temperately, and the lascivious filthy sinner
chastely, and the proud person humbly, and the covetous to live contentedly and
liberally; but it commands the hearty forsaking of all, for the sake of
Christ, Luke 14. 33. and the accounting them but as loss and dung that we may
win him, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. and mortifying of that flesh which before we daily
studied to please, Col. 3. 4, 5. and the crucifying of its affections and
lusts, Gal. 5. 24. and the denial even of our selves, Luke 9. 23, 24. And for a
carnal mind to love and yield to such commands, were no other then to cease to
be a carnal mind. All this is largely expressed by the Apostle, Romans 8. 1, etc.
They that are in Christ Jesus, walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
-- For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: but they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit: For to be carnally-minded
is death, but to be Spiritually minded is life and peace. Because the carnal
mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God. -- For if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if through the Spirit ye mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live.]

You see here why it is that the self-deceiver will not entertain the power of
godliness, nor be Religious seriously according to the true intent of the
Gospel, and the nature of Christianity, even because he is engaged to a
contrary object, and has another game in chase, which he will not leave, and
which true Religion requires him to leave, and will not give him leave to
follow. And therefore he parts with the Religion which would have parted him
from that which he will not part with.

2. But withal, he is all this while under the threatenings of the Law of God,
and conscience is ready to bear witness against him; and betwixt Law and
Conscience, the poor wretch is as the corn between two Milstones; he would be
ground to powder, and tortured with terrors before his time, if he had not some
opiate or intoxicating medicine, to ease him by deceiving him, and to abate his
fears, and quiet his conscience as long as a palliate cure will serve turn. So
that here are two things for which the self-deceiving Hypocrite is fain to fall
into his Vain Religion: The one is, that it may be a cloak to the sin which he
will needs keep: The other is, that it may save him from the terrors and
disquietments, that for this sin his conscience would else afflict him with. A
belief that he may be saved, for all his sin, is the relief that he has
against the terrors of the Law of God. He therefore chooses out such parcels
of Religion as may serve him for this use, and yet will not separate him from
the sin that he delights in. The power of godliness will not consist with his
covetous, proud or fleshly life: but the form and outside will. And therefore
this regeneration, and mortification, and self-denial, and subjection to the
whole will of God, and this heavenly mindedness, and watching the heart, and
walking with God, and living above the trifles of this world, and making it the
chief business to prepare for another; this kind of Religion, which is Religion
indeed, he cannot (because he will not) entertain. This is the strait gate, and
narrow way, that few men find. Here he must be excused. God is no God for him,
upon these terms, (And he cannot and will not be his God on any other terms.)
Christ is no Christ for him, unless he will excuse him from this trouble, and
bear with him in his carnal course; that is, unless he will be indeed no Christ
to him. Heaven is no heaven for him, unless he may pass to it through
prosperity, and sin; and unless he may have it without the trouble of a holy
life; that is, unless God will be unjust or false, and heaven cease to be
heaven, and God cease to be God.

But yet these men are convinced that God is their rightful Governor, and that
indeed they should love him and serve him with all their heart and might, and
that without true Religion and godliness there is no salvation. To be
irreligious and profane they know is a state that can afford no comfort, or
shelter from the wrath of God; and therefore some Religion they must have: They
are not able to endure the thoughts of lying under the curse of God. To
conclude themselves to be utterly graceless, and the children of the Devil, and
in a state of condemnation, is so terrible, that they are not able to endure
it: Then every Sermon they hear would torment them, and every Chapter they read
would torment them; and their pleasures would all be imbittered to them, and
nothing that they enjoy in all the world, would quiet and content them. (No,
nor shall do long) And therefore they must needs take up some Religion, to
quiet them for a little while, and to make them hope, that for all their sins,
they are not so bad, nor in so dangerous a case as Preachers tell them; some
Religion they must needs have for fear of being damned: A sound and serious
Religion they will not have, because they love the world and sin, which it
would deprive them of: And therefore they patch up a Vain Religion, composed of
so much truth and duty as will stand with their prosperity and beloved
pleasures: which will not save them, but suffices to deceive them.

Two parts make up this self. deceiving frame, as consistent with their sins:
The one is the formal, outward, easy, cheap part of duty to God and man, in
their practice; leaving out the spiritual, inward, difficult, dear,
self-denying part. The other is, the strictest parts of Religion in bare
opinion and notion; while they shut it out of their hearts and lives. For both
these may stand with a sensual, worldly, selfish life. He may read or say his
prayers, and be a worldling still: He may come to Church, and with the greatest
ceremony and seeming reverence receive the Sacrament, and bow before the Lord
his Maker, and yet be sensual or a worldling still. And he may be of the
strictest party or opinion, and notionally condemn all sin, and justify the
most holy life, and yet be sensual and worldly still. And therefore this much
he may be persuaded to take up, to save himself from the lashes of his
conscience. And so the use of the Hypocrites Religion is to be a skreen betwixt
him and the flames of wrath, that would scorch him too soon, if he were of no
Religion: and to be to him as a tent or pentise, to keep off the storms that
would fall upon him, while he is trading for the world, and working for the
flesh. His Religion is but the sheath of his guilty conscience, to keep it from
wounding him, and cutting his fingers, while they are busy in the brutish
service of his lusts. It is but as a glove, to save his skin, when he has to
do with the nettles and thorns of the threatenings of God, and the thoughts of
vengeance, that else would rack his guilty soul. It is but as his upper
garment, to save him from a storm, and then to be laid by as an unnecessary
burden, when he is at home. The Hypocrites Religion is but as his shoe: he can
tread it in the dirt, so it will but save his foot from galling. As a man that
has an unquiet scolding wife, is fain to speak her fair by flatteries, lest he
should have no rest at home; or as a thief is fain to cast a crust to the dog
that barketh at him, to stop his mouth; so is an ungodly sensual person, fain
to flatter his conscience with some kind of Religiousness, and to stop its
mouth with some kind of devotion and seeming righteousness, that may deceive
him into a belief that he is the child of God. Religion is the Sovereign in a
gracious soul, and the Master in an upright conscience, and rules above all
worldly interests. But with the unregenerate, it is but an underling and
servant, that must do no more then the flesh and the world will give consent
to; and is regarded no further then for mere necessity; and when it has done
the work which the Hypocrite appointed it, it is dismissed and turned out of
doors. God is acknowledged and loved by the Hypocrite; but not as God. Christ
is believed in and accepted; but not as Christ; but as an underling to the
world; and a journy-man to do some job of work for a distressed wrangling
conscience; or as an unwelcome Physician to give them a Vomit when they have
taken some extraordinary surfeit of sensual delights. When they have fallen into
great affliction, or into any foul disgraceful sin, then perhaps they take up
their prayer books, or call upon Christ, and seem devout and very penitent. But
their piety is blown over with the storm. The effect cease with the cause. It
was not the Love of God, or of his holy ways and service, that set them upon
their devotions; but some tempest of adversity, or shipwreck of their estates,
or friends, or consciences: and when the winds are laid and the waves are
still, their devotion cease with their danger.

3. Add hereunto, (to show you the reason of the Hypocrites selfdeceit) that he
is one that never practically saw the amiableness of holiness in it self; and
never had a heart that was touched with the love of it by the Spirit of
holiness: and therefore he takes it but for mere necessity: and therefore he
takes up no more then he thinks is of necessity to save him from damnation,
when he can live in the pleasures of the world no longer. God never had his
heart. He had rather be about his sports or worldly business, if he durst, and
thought he could be so excused. He loves a pair of Cards, or Dice, or a
Harlot, or his ambitious designs and honors, better then he loves the holy
Scriptures, and the heavenly discourse or contemplation of the life to come.
And therefore he will have no more Religion then needs he must, because he
takes it not for love but need. The matters of the world and the flesh are his
diet, and his extraordinary successes and prosperity are his feast: and
therefore he will take as much of them as he can and dare: But Religion is but
his Physic: and therefore he will take it as little and seldom as he dare. Had
he but seen the face of God by faith, and had he but the heart of a true
believer, that is suited by holiness to the holy works that God commands, as
the heart of a true friend is suited to the will of him whom he loves, he
would then be no longer Religious against his will, and consequently in Vain;
but he would think the most pure and heavenly mind, and life, and the highest
degree of love and holiness, to be the best and most desirable state for his
soul, as every true believer does. Had this Hypocrite any true love to God, as
he deceitfully pretends to have, he would love his Image, and Word, and ways;
and then he would love best that kernel and marrow of Religion, that life and
soul of worship and obedience, which now he savoureth not, but shifteth^off as
a needless, or tedious, or unattainable thing.

The nature and use of these Hypocrites Religion, is to save them from
Religion: They carry an empty gilded scabberd, accusing the sword of a
dangerous keenness, as a thing more perilous, then necessary to their use.
When they seem most zealous, they are but serving God that they may be excused
from serving him; and they worship him, of purpose to shift off his worship.
They offer him the lips, that the heart may be excused: and complement him with
cap and knee, that they may excuse themselves from real holiness: They offer
him the empty purse, for payment; and tender him a sacrifice of husks and
shells, and lifeless carcasses: They will abound in the shadow and ceremony,
that they may be excused from the spiritual life and substance. Alas, that dead
hearted hypocrite that sits there and hears all this, is so great a stranger
to the opening of the heart, and the deep entertainment of saving truth, and to
the savoury relish of the searching, healing, quickening passages of holy
doctrine, and to the thankful wellcoming of an offered Christ, and to the
lookings and longings of the soul after God, and to the serious desires, and
hopes, and labors of a gracious soul for life eternal, that he is idle,
asleep, and dead, as to all this spiritual work; and if he had not some
customary service to perform, and some ceremonies or external task to do, and
some bodily worship to be employed in, he would find little or nothing to do in
the Assemblies, but might sit here as a bruit, or as one of a strange language,
that comes but to see and to be seen. And therefore if there be not somewhat
more suitable to him then power and spirituality, it seems as no worship to
the formal hypocrite: It is the pretty jingles and knacks of wit, and the merry
jears at the preciser sort, or some scraps of Greek and Latin Authors, or
shreds of Fathers or Philosophy, or at best an accurate well set speech, that
makes the Sermon good and acceptable to this hypocrites ears. It is not spirit
and life within him, that brought him hither; nor is it spirit and life that he
savoureth and that he came for. And therefore it is that this sort of
hypocrites, are usually most impatient of a misplaced word, or of a worship
performed in the primitive simplicity. If a man deliver the Lords Supper but as
Christ did, and receive it but as the Apostles did, or serve God but as the
Churches in their days, he will seem unreverent, and slovenly and sordid to
these self-deceiving Formalists. They are set upon excess of ceremonies,
because they are defective in the vital parts, and should have no Religion if
they had not this. All sober Christians are friends to outward decency and
order: But its the empty self-deceiver that is most for the unwarrantable
inventions of men, and sticks in the bark of Gods own Ordinances: that takes
the garments for the man, and uses the worship of God but as a Masque or
Poppet play, where there is great doings, with little life, and to little
purpose. The chastest woman will wash her face; but its the harlot, or wanton,
or deformed that will paint it. The soberest and the comelyest will avoid a
nasty or ridiculous habit, which may make them seem uncomely, when they are
not: But a curious dress, and excessive care, does signify a crooked or
deformed body, or a filthy skin, or which is worse, an empty soul, that has
need of such a covering. Consciousness of such greater want, does cause them to
seek these poor supplies. The gawdiness of men's Religion, is not the best sign
that it is sincere. Simplicity is the ordinary attendant of sincerity. It has
long been a proverb. [The more ceremony, the less substance; and the more
complement, the more craft.]

And yet if it were only for want of inward true Religion, that the hypocrite
sets up his shows, it were (bad enough, but) not so bad, as with most of
them, or all, it is. For it is an enmity to Religion that accompanyeth their
Religion. As in lapsed man, the body that was before the souls obedient
attendant, is become its Master, and the enemy of its perfection and felicity:
so in the carnal Religion of the Hypocrite, the outside, which should be the
ornament and attendant of the inward spiritual part, has got the Mastery, and
is used in an enmity against the more noble part which it should serve: and
much more are his humane inventions and mixtures thus destructively employed.
His bellows do but blow out the candle, under pretense of kindling the fire. He
sets the body against the soul, and sometime the clothing against both. He
uses forms to the destruction of knowledge, and quenching of all seriousness
and fervor of affection. By Preaching he destroys Preaching; and prays
till prayer is become no prayer, but the image or carcass of prayer at the
best: And uses his words to the destruction of the due Principle, sense and
ends. Having still his carnal self for his end, he preaches, and prays, and
serves God, in a manner that seems most suitable to his end, so that it is not
Gods means that he uses, when he uses them, but his own: Nor does he indeed
worship God, while he seems to worship him; nor is indeed Religious, but seems
Religious. It is materially (perhaps) Gods work that he does, and his means
that he uses, but Formally they are his own, and not Gods at all; when we meet
with abundance of our people that are most nimble in their accustomed forms,
that know not what Religion, or Christianity is, nor who Christ is, nor almost
any of the substance of the Gospel, it assures us that its easy to be Infidels
with Christian expressions in their mouths; and that its easier to teach a
Parret to speak, then to be a man. As their bodies are but the prisons, or
dungeons of their souls, so their formal words and ceremonies are used to be
the prison, and dungeon, or rather the grave of true devotion. Their Religion
is excessively laced; but so scant of cloth, that it covers not their
nakedness, nor keeps them warm. Its always winter with the hypocrite in his
formal lifeless services; and yet sometime his leaf does never fall. He is like
the Box-tree that knows no fruit, and yet its leaves are always green.
Wherever his heart is, the Formalists prayers are always ready: For his
prayer book or memory is still the same: He can say them between sleeping and
waking in his bed; and as he is dressing or washing him; and the interposition
of a friend or some intervenient word or business, is so small a rub, that it
seldom puts him out of his way. Though he cannot make Spiritual his common
business, he can make his Spiritual business common. Though he have not the
art, the heart, to manage his trade or worldly business, with a holy and a
heavenly mind; yet he can manage his holiest businesses, with such a mind as he
does his trade. If you would know whether he be praying or playing* Preaching
or prating, serving God, or himself and the flesh, you must not search deep for
an internal difference, but must discern it by the show and sound of words. He
is not one of them that are above ordinances, as turning every day into a
Sabbath, and every thought into a prayer, and every morsel into a Sacrament:
But he can turn every Sabbath into a common day, and every prayer into common
thoughts, and every Sacrament into common food: and therefore that which is
holy to others, is to him unclean. Hypocrisy is a natural Popery: It fills
the places of worship with Images. Instead of prayer, there is the Image of
prayer: and instead of preaching, hearing, praising God, and other parts of
worship, there is the Image of worship: and instead of Christians, Believers,
Saints (and I was going to say, of men) there are so many Images of these.
Church-images are usually handsomely adorned, and placed in a posture of
reverence and devotion; and so are they. But life they have none, but merely
natural. They are seeing, hearing, speaking Images: but Images they are. They
have eyes, but see not; ears, but hear not; hearts, but understand not.

And they are enemies to the life and power of Religion, in others as well as
in themselves. The Publicans were not so bitter persecutors of Christ, as the
Scribes and Pharisees were. He can hate and reproach the faithful by the
spirit, though he cannot or will not pray by the Spirit: For he has the spirit
of malignity, though not the Spirit of supplication. He can rail without book,
though he cannot pray without book. Were it as natural and easy to be a Saint
as to scorn a Saint, and to worship God in Spirit and in truth, as to hate such
worship, the man might become a Saint yet before he dies. But his Vain Religion
changes not his nature, and therefore destroys not his serpentine enmity,
against the holy nature and practice of Believers: (though perhaps the times
may stop his hissing, or hinder him from putting forth his sting.) These
Spiritual worshippers, and heavenly diligent sort of Christians, that make it
the main business of their lives, to honor God and save their souls, are
usually the greatest eyesore of the Formalist. Many a disdainful thought he
has of them; and many a bitter gird the gives them: (forgetting that their
Redeemer hears all; who is coming with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jud. 14. 15.) The
humble, Spiritual, Heavenly Believers, are they that condemn the Hypocrite by
their lives: were it not for them, he could easily believe that he is a Saint
himself, and shall undoubtedly be saved. He looks on the openly ungodly, but
as the beauty-spots of the Assemblies, that serve to set out the piety of such
as he. If he saw no better then himself, he could easily take himself for one
of the best. Every doted post and glowworm, would be more resplendent and
observable, in the absence of all greater lights. They hate the sun for making
their candle to be but a scarce-discerned fume. The life of a holy heavenly
person, does as much gall the conscience of the Hypocrite, and proclaim his
misery, and bear a terrible witness against him, as a searching powerful Sermon
does. And therefore as it is a vexation to him to live under such a searching
Minister, as is always rubbing on the galled place, and causing conscience to
torment him before his time; so is it a trouble to him to live among these
heavenly believers, and to be daily condemned by their lives, and galled by
their reproving practices.

By this time you may see the reason and use of the Hypocrites Religion: The
self-denying part of Religion he cannot abide: The life and power of it is
above him and seems against him: The fears of hell and gripes of conscience he
cannot abide: some hopes of heaven he must have a while to keep him from
despair: And therefore he must have some Religion to deceive his heart, and
maintain his hopes. And therefore he fitteth his Religion to these uses, and
takes up with so much as will not much trouble him, or undo him in the world,
or absolutely forbid his sinful pleasures. And though sometime he be afraid
lest the power and life of godliness will prove necessary to his salvation; yet
he revives his fainting hopes, by running for comfort to his lifeless form. The
rest he has no mind to; and therefore will hope to be saved without it, till
his deceit have brought him to the place of desperation, where there is no
hope. As the Merchant in a storm is loath to cast his goods into the sea, and
therefore hopes he may save himself and them, till he and they are drowned
together; or as a Patient that abhors his Physic, or loves some forbidden
thing too well, is hoping still that he may escape though he use the thing he
loves, and forbear the medicine which he loathes, till he be past remedy, and
he consents too late; so is it often with the self-deceiving Hypocrite: he
loves not this strict, and holy, and heavenly, and self denying life: and
therefore he will hope that God will save him without it, as long as he is
Religious in a way that he accounts more wise, and safe, and moderate, and
comely, and suited to the nature and infirmity of man; These are his hopes, and
to deceive his heart, by maintaining these, it is that he is Religious: till
either Grace convert, or Justice apprehend him, and his hopes and he are
swallowed up, by convincing flames and utter desperation.

IV. WE are next to show you, in what respect it is that this Religion is
called Vain. And first Negatively, it is not Vain to his own carnal ends, but
to the true ends of Religion.

1. He intends by it the quieting of his own accusing conscience; and the
keeping up his hopes of salvation, and keeping off the terrors of the Lord, and
so consequentially the deceiving of his own heart; and to these ends its not in
Vain. Here he sits as quietly as if all were well between God and him; and
hears the threatenings as securely as if they concerned not him at all; and
applies the promises as boldly as if he were one of the heirs of promise: you
would little think that this man must shortly be cast into utter darkness, from
the presence of the Lord, and have his portion with Hypocrites, Matthew. 24. 51.
His everlasting horrors appear not now, to himself upon his heart, nor to
others in his face: what sign can you see of the curse of the Law, or the wrath
of God in that man's countenance? what sign of his spiritual captivity and
slavery, and of the load of sin that lies upon his soul, unless it be that he
feels it not? what sign of a man in so great danger, of eternal torment, unless
it be that he little fears it? Does he sit there like a man that is within a
step of hell, and shall shortly be there with the Devil and his Angels, as sure
as he is here, unless he be saved by that grace and holiness which he now
resists? No* he is as confident to be saved as the precisest of you all: he is
as little troubled with the fears of hell, or the wrath of God, as those that
are discharged from it by Justification; and perhaps much less. For all this he
is beholden to his Vain Religion, that in the point of self-deceiving is not
Vain. As solid evidences promote the com^orts of true believers; so this
superficial kind of Religion promoteth the present peace of the presumptuous.

2. This Religion is not Vain as to the frustrating of all the means of grace,
and hindering the conversion and Salvation of the Hypocrite. This is his armor
of defense against the sword of the Spirit, that would pierce his heart, and
let out his close corruption, and separate him from his beloved sin. What tell
you him of Repentance and Conversion? He thinks he needs no Conversion, or is
converted long ago! what! is he not a Christian, a Protestant, a Religious man?
Tell swearers, and cursers, and drunkards, and extortioners, and cruel
Landlords, and fornicators, of Conversion: tell these that they are slaves of
Satan, and under the wrath and curse of God, that are indeed so, past all
controversy: but tell not him of it, that makes no doubt but he is a member of
Christ, a Child of God, and an heir of heaven. He loves to hear a Minister
rouse up the profane and grossly sensual offenders, and seems in pity to
wish for their conversion, and perhaps will exhort them to turn and mend their
lives himself. But he little thinks that he is faster in the prison of Satan
then they, and that he is himself in the same condemnation.

Do you go about to tell him of the necessity of the fear of God, and of loving
him above all, and of trusting him, and serving him as our only Lord? Why, all
this he will confess, and perhaps is as forward to say as you, and verily
thinks that he is one that does it: you may as soon make him believe, that he is
not an English man, as that he is not a Christian: and that he loves not
himself, as that he loves not God: even while he lives not to think of him,
to speak of him, to call upon him, to obey* him; while he loves not his word,
his ways or servants; or while he loves the world and the pleasures of sin
more heartily, and seeks them more eagerly, and cleaves to them more
tenaciously; yet if you would persuade him that he has not a heart as true to
God as any of you all, you will lose your labor. Do you tell him of
hypocrisy? he will tell you that its the thing he hates: who speaks against
it more then he? And because the world shall see he is no Hypocrite, he will
call them all Hypocrites that are faithful to God and to their souls, and will
not sit down in his truely-hypocritical Vain Religion, but will be more holy
and diligent then he. What can you say to such a man in order to his
conversion, which his self-deceiving Religion will not frustrate? Do you tell
him of hell fire, and of the wrath of God against the ungodly? All this he can
hear as calmly as another man; for he thinks that he is none of the ungodly, he
has escaped the danger; let them be afraid of it whom it does concern. If you
tell him of his sins, he can tell you that all men are sinners; we are here
imperfect; and you shall never persuade him that his reigning deadly sins, are
any other then such humane frailties and infirmities as may stand with grace.
Do you put him upon the inward practice of Religion, and the fuller devoting of
his soul to God, and the life of faith, and a heavenly mind? He Will tell you
that in his measure, he does all this already; though none of us are so good as
we should be: And his heart being unseen to you, he thinks you must believe
him. Do you blame him for his slightness and Formality in Religion, and put him
upon a more serious diligent course, and to live as one that seeks heaven
with all his heart, and soul, and might? why he thinks you do but persuade him
to some self-conceited over-zealous party, and draw him from his moderation, to
be righteous overmuch; and to make too much ado with his Religion. Unless he be
an Hypocrite that falls into the Schismatical strain: and then he will make a
greater busle with his opinions and his outside services, then you can desire.
So that one with his mere book-prayers, forms and ceremonies; and the other
with his mere extemporate words, and affected outside seeming fervor; and both
of them by a mere Opinionative lifeless carnal kind of Religion, subjected to
their fleshly ends and interests, do so effectually cheat their souls, that
they are armed against all that you can say or do, and you know not how to get
within them, or fasten any saving truth upon their hearts.

3. This Vain Religion is not Vain as to the preserving of his reputation in
the world. It saves him from being numbered with the filthy rabble, and from
being pointed at as notoriously vicious, or branded with the disgraceful
characters of the scandalous. Men say not of him, There goes a drunkard, a
swearer, a curser, a fornicator, or a profane ungodly wretch. He may be
esteemed civil, ingenuous, discreet, and perhaps Religious, and be much
honored by wise religious men: Though most commonly his formal, or
opinionative, heartless kind of Religion, is discerned or much suspected by
experienced judicious Christians, by his sapless, unexperienced, common and
carnal kind of discourse and duty, sticking most in opinions, parties, or some
outside things, and by his temporizing, and reserved, and uneven kind of
conversation; yet it is not always so; but sometime he is as far unsuspected
as the best: perhaps he may be esteemed a Reverend Preacher, or a discreet
Religious, well accomplished Gentleman, and may be set in the head of Church or
Commonwealth, as a leader of the Saints on earth, that shall be thrust into the
place of Hypocrites, and not come near the meanest of the Saints in heaven.

4. Lastly, (but better then all this) his Religion is not Vain as to the good
of others. He may by the perfume and odor of his gifts, be kept from stinking
to the annoyance of others, while he is dead in sin. He may be very serviceable
in the Church of God: a judicious, earnest expounder of the Scripture, and
Preacher and defender of the truth: In his place as a Magistrate, or Master of
a family, he may be a severe corrector of profaneness, and promoter of
godliness; it being much easier to drive others from their sin, then to forsake
their own, and to drive on others to a godly life then to practice it
themselves: And by their owning godliness, and disowning sin, they persuade
themselves the more effectually, that they are truly godly. The Church cannot
well spare the gifts and services of Hypocrites, and many ungodly men. As, bad
or sick Physicians may be Gods instruments to cure our bodies, and a wicked
Carpenter may make a good house; so a wicked Minister may well expound and
apply the Scriptures; and he that refuses the grace of Christ, may prevail
with others to accept it: The sign post that stands out of door it self, may
invite others into the house: and the hand upon a post that goes not one step
of the way, may point it out to others. There Is more self-denial* required to
the forsaking of their own sins, then to persuade others to forsake theirs: A
covetous man cares not how liberal others be; nor a glutton, drunkard, or
fornicator, how temperate and chaste his neighbors be. And hence it is that
many of these, that refuse a holy life themselves, are willing their children
or servants should embrace it. The end of the balance that goes down it self,
does cause the other to go up. Other men's souls are more beholden to Hypocrites
then their own. They are like the common Mariners, that enrich the Merchant by
fetching home his treasure, when they have nothing but a poor maintenance
themselves: Or like Tailors that make garments for others which they never wear
themselves: Or like Carpenters that build fair houses which they never dwell
in. Or like the Cook that dresseth meat which he eats not. God gives
Hypocrites their useful gifts, for the service of the Church more then for
themselves. He sometimes makes those to be nursing Fathers to his Church, that
are butchers of their own souls: and makes those his instruments to undeceive
others, that deceive themselves. And thus far their Religion is not Vain.

But 1. It is Vain as to Gods special acceptance. True Religion pleases God:
but the self-deceivers Religion he abhors. He has no pleasure in fools,
Eccles. 5. 4. He asks such, To what purpose is the multitude of their
sacrifices? Isa. 11. 11. and says, he is full of their burnt-offerings, and
delights not in them? when they come to appear before him, he asks them, Who
required this at their hands, to tread in his Courts? and bids them bring no
more vain oblations; incense is an abomination to him: the calling of their
assemblies he cannot away with, and their solemn meetings are iniquity, ver.
12, 13. Their appointed feasts his soul hates; they are a trouble to him; he
is weary to bear them. When they spread forth their hands, he will hide his
eyes; when they make many prayers, he will not hear; because they do not
forsake their sins, ver. 14. Because they turn away their ear from he^ring his
law, their prayer is abomination to him, Prove. 28. 9. and 15. 8. and 21, 27.
When they have sinned, instead of repenting and forsaking it, they think to
please God by their Religion, and stop the mouth of Justice with their
services; when as they do but provoke him more, by adding Hypocrisy to
iniquity. Were they truly willing to let go their sins, and to please God by
universal obedience, he would willingly accept them, and be pleased with their
services. But when men's Religion, their prayers and other duties, are not used
against their sins, but for them, nor to kill them, but to cover them, nor to
overcome them, but as it were to bribe God to give them leave to sin, because
they are not willing to forsake it, this is the self-deceiving Religion of
Hypocrites, that is in Vain.

2. And this Religion is in Vain, as to any promoting of a work, of
Sanctification upon his soul. It weaneth him not from the world: It crucifieth
not the flesh, with its affections and lusts: It does not further his
self-denial; nor drives him to Christ, by a faith unfaigned: It never raises
him to a heavenly life; nor kindles the love of God within him: It is dead and
uneffectual, and cannot produce these high effects. Yea on the contrary, it
hardens him in sin and self-deceit: it hinders his repentance: it
emboldeneth him in his fleshly worldly life: and quieteth him in the neglect of
Christ and heaven.

3. Moreover this kind of Religion is in Vain as to any solid peace of
conscience. It affords him none of the well-grounded, dureable comforts of
the Saints: But on the contrary keeps out solid comfort, by feeding him with
aerie delusory conceits; and makes him to be but his own comforter, upon
fancies and confidence of his own, when the Spirit of Christ is not his
comforter, nor does the Word of God speak any peace at all unto him.

4. Lastly, his Religion is in Vain as to his Salvation. As he had but an image
of true Religion, so he shall have but an image of Heaven. Some dreams and
self-created hopes of happiness, may accompany him to the door of eternity: but
there they will leave him to everlasting horror.

V. Use. 1. FRom what has been said, you may see the reason why an outside
formal seeming Religiousness, is a thing so common in the world, in comparison
of the life and power of godliness. It is an easier thing to bring men to the
strictest opinion, then to bring them to the affectionate and deep reception
and practice of the truth. A strict opinion may be held without any great cost
and trouble to the flesh. It is the practice that bereaveth a sinner of the
pleasure of his sin. It is the common trick by which most Hypocrites cheat
their souls, to turn to the side and opinion, and assemblies and company which
they think to be the best; that so they may persuade themselves the more
easily, that they are as good as those opinions and that company does import,
and that they are truly such as those they join with. As men are taken by
others for such, as those they correspond with; so hypocrites take themselves
for such. As if it would prove that a man is sound, because he dwells with
them that are so? Or as if it would prove a man rich or honorable, that he
converseth with such? As God will not save any Nations on earth, because they
are such Nations; nor will he save men because they are of such or such a
trade, or because they are skilled in this or that art or science; no more will
he save men for being of this or that party or Sect, in matters of Religion.
One thinks, when he has lived a fleshly life, that he shall be saved for
hearing or saying the Common Prayer, or because he is for Prelacy and
Ceremonies: another thinks he shall be saved, because he can pray without a
book, or form of words, or because he frequenteth the private meetings, of
those that more diligently redeem their time, for spiritual advantages then
others do: another thinks he shall be saved because he is mocked as a Puritan
or as too strict, as others are that are serious believers, and diligent in the
things of God: and another thinks that he shall be saved because he is
rebaptized; or because he joyneth with some separating Congregation, which
pretends to be more strict then others. But none shall be saved, on any such
account as these. Cain could not be saved, for being the first born in the
family of Adam: Cham could not be saved for being in the Ark and family of
Noah: Nor Esau for being in the house of Isaac: Nor Absalom for being the son
of David: Nor Judas for being a Disciple in the family of Christ. Even Mary
that brought him forth, could not have been saved by him, if she had not had a
better title; and had not bore him in her heart, Mark. 3. 34, 35. when they
talk to him of his Mother and his brethren, Christ looked upon those that sat
about him, and told them that Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is
his Brother, his Sister, and his Mother. It is no outward badge and livery, but
a heart-title, that must prove you the heirs of heaven. You may be snatched out
of the purest Church on earth, and from the purest ordinances, and out of the
arms of the most upright Christians, and cast into hell, if you have no better
evidences then such, to show for your salvation. If ever you be saved, it must
not be because you are Papists, or Protestants, Lutherans, or Calvinists,
Arminians, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Independents, Presbyterian, or Prelatical;
formally and merely as such: But because you are true Christians, that have the
Spirit of Christ, ( Romans 8. 9.) and are conformed to him, in his sufferings,
death and resurrection, and live in sincere obedience to his will. But
Hypocrites that want the inward life and power of Religion, and are conscious
of their wilful sins, would fain borrow something from the parties which they
join with, or the opinions which they take up, or the formal outward worship
which they perform, or the alms which they give, to make up the want, and cheat
their souls with a self-created confidence, that they shall be saved.

But more specially you may hence observe, the reason that Popery has so many
followers, and that it is so easy a thing to make an Infidel, or whoremonger,
or drunkard, to turn a Papist, when yet it is not easy to bring them to faith,
and chastity, and temperance, much less to the unfeigned love of God, and to a
holy heavenly life. Though I doubt not but there are many sincere-hearted
Christians among the Papists, yet Popery it self is of an hypocritical strain,
and is notably suited to the Hypocrites disposition. It is revived Pharisaisme:
I marvel that they tremble not when they read themselves so lively
characterized by Christ, with the addition of so many terrible woes, as in
Matthew. 23. and other places frequently they are: [Woe to you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites.] They bind heavy burdens of external observances, to lay
upon the consciences of their Proselytes: They make broad their Phylacteries;
and in variety of holy vestures, they make ostentation of such a Religion, as a
Peacock may have when he spreads his tail. They contend for superiority and
titles, to be called Rabbi, Pope, Cardinal, Patriarck, Primate, Metropolitan,
Archbishop, Diocesane, Abbot, Prior, Father, etc. to the great disturbance of
all the Nations of the Christian world. They must needs be the Fathers and
Masters of our faith: They shut up the Kingdom of heaven against the people,
forbidding all to read the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue, without a special
license from their Ordinary: and commanding them to worship God in a strange
tongue which they do not understand: By the numbers of their Masses and prayers
for the dead, they delude the souls, and devour the Patrimony of the living. In
Temples, and Altars, and Images, and Ornaments consists no small part of
their Religion: They make more of tything mint, anise and cummin, then of
judgment, mercy, and faith, the weightier matters of the Law. The outside they
make clean, and appear as beautiful to men, as ceremonies and outward pomp can
make them. They make it a part of their Religion to murder the living Saints,
and keep holy days for the dead: They build the Tombs of the Prophets, and
garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say, If we had lived in the days
of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets. Thus Matthew. 23. is their description. They have their Touch not,
^aste not, handle not, after the commandments and doctrines of men, their
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, and other rudiments of the
world, and things that have a show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and
neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh, Col.
2. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. How easy a thing is it to bring an ungodly man to be of
a Religion that consists in such things as these? in eating fish on certain
days in stead of flesh; in saying over so many Pater Nosters, and Ave Mary's,
and naming so often the name of Jesu: in worshipping a piece of consecrated bread
with divine worship; in bowing and praying before an Image: in praying to the
souls of such as the Pope tells them are Saints in heaven: in crossing
themselves, and being sprinkled with holy water, and using agnus dei's, and
consecrated grains and amulets: in dropping of beads: in saying such words as a
prayer at such a canonical hour, and such words at the next canonical hour: in
hearing a Mass in Latin; and saying a Latin prayer: in being anointed with
hallowed oil; and burning hallowed candles on the Altars by daylight: in going
so many miles to the Chapel of a Saint in Pilgrimage: in carrying about them a
bone, or some other supposed relict of a supposed Saint. In confessing their
sins so often to a Priest, and doing penance, if he impose it on them. And so
while they live in whoredom, or drunkenness, or swearing, or lying, or all
these, and many other such, it is but confessing and doing penance, and to it
again; on which account (whatever some of them say for the necessity of
contrition) it is usual with them, to venture upon the sins of whoredom,
drunkenness and the rest, because they have so easy and cheap a remedy at
hand. And therefore I wonder not that among Infidels (who after Baptism,
Apostatize to deny the holy Scriptures, and the immortality of the soul, and
the life to come,) and among common swearers, and cursers, and whoremongers,
and drunkards, the Papists find their labors most successeful, and that no
fish will so easily take their bait: Nor do I wonder that it is a point of the
Popish faith, that none but the Children of the Devil, that are void of the
love of God, and are unjustified, can possibly turn Papists. (For they tell us
that all are such till they are Papists: saving that they are many of them for
the salvation of heathens.) A poor wretch that is captivated to his odious
lusts, and goes under a galled accusing conscience, will be content to take a
Popish cure, and quiet his soul with a few complements and formalities. But to
bring one of these men to a through conversion, to a true humiliation, to a
deep hatred of all sin, and a love of holiness, to close with Christ as his
only refuge from the wrath of God, and to give up himself without any
reservation, and all that he has, to the will and service of the Lord: to love
God as his portion, and the infinite transcendent good; to take all the honor
and riches of the world as loss and dung, and use all in due subserviency to
everlasting happiness; to crucify the flesh, and mortify all his earthly
inclinations, and live a life of self-denial, and to walk with God, and serve
him as a Spirit in spirit and in truth, and to keep a watch over thoughts,
affections, words and deeds; to live by faith upon a world and happiness that
is to us unseen; and to live in preparation for their death, and wait in hope
to live with Christ; this is Christianity and true Religion; and this is it
that they will not so easily be brought to. Its easier to make an hundred
Papists, then one true regenerate Christian. Children can make them a baby of
clouts: And the statuary can make a man of Alabaster or stone: But none can
give life, which is essential to a man indeed, but God. There needs the
Spirit of the living God, by a supernatural operation, and a kind of new
creation, to make a man a real holy Christian. But to bring a man to make such
a congee, or wear such a vesture, or say such and such words, and make to
himself a mimical Religion, this may be done without any such supernatural
work. O therefore take heed of cheating your souls by hypocritical formalities,
instead of the life and power of Religion.

Use 2. ANd now, O that the Lord of life, would help me so to apply this truth,
and help you so to apply it to your selves, that it might be as a light set up
in the Assembly and in all your consciences, to undeceive the miserable
self-deceivers, and to bring poor Hypocrites into some better acquaintance with
themselves, and to turn their seeming Vain Religion, into that which is real
and serious and saving!

And now I am to search and convince the Hypocrite, I could almost wish that
all the upright tender souls that are causelessly in doubt of their own
sincerity, were out of the congregation, lest they should misapply the
Hypocrites portion to themselves, and think it is their case that I am
describing: as it is usual with ignorant patients, especially if they be a
little melancholy, when they hear or read the description of many dangerous
diseases, to think that all or some of them are theirs, because they have some
symptoms very like to some of those which they hear or read of. Or lest their
fearful souls should be too much terrified, by hearing of the misery of the
Hypocrite; as a fearful child that is innocent, will cry, when he sees another
whipped that is faulty. But if thou will stay and hear the Hypocrites examination,
I charge thee, poor humbled drooping soul, that thou do not misunderstand me,
nor think that I am speaking those things to thee, that are meant to the
falshearted enemies of the Lord! and do not imagine that thou art condemned in
his condemnation; nor put not thy self under the strokes that are given him:
but rejoice that thou art saved from this state of self-deceit and misery. And
that thou may have some shelter for thy conscience against the storm that
must fall on others, look back on the foregoing description of the Hypocrite,
and thou may find that thou have the saving graces, which I there discovered
him to want. Let these at present be before thine eyes, and tell thee, Thou art
not the person that I mean.

1. Thou art humbled to a loathing of thy self for thy transgressions.

2. Thou art willing to give up thy self to Christ, without reserve, that as
thy Savior, he may cure thy miserable soul, upon his own terms.

3. The favor of God is dearer to thee then the favor of the world, or the
pleasures and prosperity of sinners: and thou longest more to love him better,
and to feel his love, then for any of the honors or advancements that flesh
and blood desire.

4. It is the life to come that thou take for thy portion, and preferest
before the matters of this transitory life.

5. Thy Religion employeth thee about thy heart, as much as about the out side
and appearing part: It is heart-sins that thou observest and lamentest, and a
better heart that thou daily longest, and prayest, and labourest for.

6. Thou live not in any gross and deadly sin; and thou have no infirmity but
what thou longest and labourest to be rid of; and go on in the use of
Christ's holy means and remedies for a cure.

7. Thou dislikest not the highest degree of holiness, but love it and
longest after it, and had rather be more holy then be more honorable or more
rich.

8. Thou unfeignedly love the image of Christ on the souls of all his
servants where thou can discern it; and see a special excellency in a poor
humble heavenly Christian, though never so low or despicable in the world,
above all the pomp and splendour of the earth; and thou love them with a
special love; and the holier they are, the better do thou love them.

9. Thou love the most convincing searching Sermons, and would fain have
help to know the worst that is in thy heart; and come unto the light that thy
heart and deeds may be made manifest.

10. All this is the bent and by as of thy soul; thy habituated, ordinary case;
though there be not always the same opportunity for the acts, nor the same
degree of life in acting: It is not only a good mood that thou art frightened
into by some affliction, and then returnest to thy carnal course of life again:
But thou heartily continuest thy consent to the Covenant which thou have made
with Christ, and would not turn back to a worldly, carnal, or a formal life,
nor change thy Master, nor forsake the holy course which thou art engaged in
for all the world.

This is the truth of thy case, poor doubting troubled Christian: Thou can
not deny it without much injury to thy self and God. And therefore-be not now
troubled at that which I shall say to the self-deceivers.

And now I am to speak to the self-deceiver, I perceive my task to be exceeding
difficult: To get within him that is so guarded: and to pierce his heart that
is so armed: and to open his eyes that is willing to be blind: and to undeceive
him that has been so long deceived, and that studyeth to deceive himself, and
is engaged in that unhappy work, by such subtle enemies that further his
deceit, and by so many allurements, and such strong corruptions, and by a
seeming necessity for the quieting of his conscience; all this is not an easy
work. But we must attempt it, and leave the success to grace.

And first let me solemnly profess before you all, (for the removing of your
prejudice, and the calming of your resisting hearts) that it is none of my
desire by the discovery of your hypocrisy, to shame you before others, or to
make you seem more miserable then you are, or to disturb and grieve you any
more then is necessary to the escaping of your exceeding danger, and then your
own salvation and comforts do require. But when we know that Religion is your
business in the world; and that an endless world shall presently receive you;
and that Christ is coming; and your souls are ready to quit their residence,
and take their leave of your flesh till the resurrection; and when we know that
hypocrisy and self-deceit, is the thing that you are most in danger of, and
that you must be saved from it, or be in hell for ever; and that the enemies of
your souls will do all they can, to keep their possession in peace, and to
continue your deceit till you are past remedy; what would you have us do in
such a case? would you wish us to be silent, and betray your souls, and damn
our own, for fear of disquieting and displeasing you? How hard are your hearts,
if you would wish us to do thus!

Be awakened therefore O all ye self-deceivers, and know that Hypocrisy as the
Harlots paint, is but a base and borrowed beauty, that will vanish away when
you draw near the fire; and that self-deceit will quiet you so short a time,
that it is as good let go your delusory peace and comfortable dream to day as to
morrow: And its better now begin and examine your selves, then stay till the
dreadful Judge examine you, who is even at the door! The discovery of your case
is the one half of your cure: And as you have been your own deceivers, let us
in Justice find you so equitable to your selves, as to be willing of the light
that must undeceive you; and to go along with us into your consciences, and
help us in the search, and impartially pass a preventing judgment, that Christ
may not pass a condemning judgment.

And in order to your conviction and recovery, I shall first acquaint you with
your misery, that so it may awaken you to look about you, while there is time
and hope. If it were Gods way to work by ocular demonstrations, and the
Christian life were a life of sense, and you had heaven and hell this hour open
to your sight, how little need should I have to plead this cause with you any
further? you would then see and hear that vengeance that would awake you; and
make you presently fly into your hearts, and charge conscience to deal
impartially with you, lest self-deceit should bring you to those flames. But
its a life of faith that we are to call you to, and a word of faith that we
have to preach; but of things that are as sure as if you saw them.

And, 1. If thy Religion be Vain, thy hopes and comforts that are built upon
it, are all but Vain. How Vain is that hope that will vanish when the enjoyment
is expected, and will end in endless desperation? what though thou sit here
with so great hopes and confidence of salvation, as makes thee even scorn the
man that questions it? Art thou ever the better when death awaketh thee, and
thy confident dream is at an end? when thou art dying, will thou hope? perhaps
thou may: But when thou art burning, will thou hope? when thou art tormented,
will thou hope? Desperation will then be essential to thy misery. The Devils
that now feed thy hope by their deceits, will then as readily keep awake thy
conscience, and exasperate thy despairing soul. If now thou will hope under the
threatenings of God (that thou may be saved in thy present state) will thou
then hope under his execution? Thy flatterers and prosperity may cherish thy
deceitful hopes for a time; but who will maintain them, when God commands
desperation to torment thee? Job 27. 8, 9 [For what is the hope of the
Hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? will God hear
his cry, when trouble comes upon him?] As Sands turns it.

What hope has the prevailing Hypocrite,
When God shall chase his soul to endless night?
Will God relieve him in his agonies?
Or from the depth of sorrows hear his cries?
His worldly glory will then desert him, and leave him to the fruit of his
deserts: His fruition will perish with his hopes, Job 27. 22, 23. [For God
shall cast upon him and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand. Men
shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place: Or as Sands
turns it; God shall transfix him with his winged dart:
Though he avoid him like the flying Heart.
Men shall pursue with merited disgrace:
Hiss, clap their hands, and from his Country chase.


Hopes that are built by self-deceit, have no foundation, but sand and waters,
and in trial they will fall, and their fall will be great and terrible, Matthew.
7. 23, 24. Job. 8. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. [Can the rush grow up without mire? can
the flag grow without water? whilst it is yet in its greenness, and not cut
down, it withers before any other herb: So are the paths of all that forget
God; and the hypocrites hope shall perish: whose hope shall be cut off, and
whose trust shall be a spiders web. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall
not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure,] Or, Can bull-rushes
but by the rivers grow?
Can flags there flourish where no waters flow?
Yet they, when green, when yet untoucht, of all
That cloth the spring, first hang their heads, and fall.
So double-hearted Hypocrites; so they
Who God forget, shall in their prime decay.
Their aerie hopes, as brittle, as the thin
And subtle webs, which toyling spiders spin.
Their houses full of wealth and riot, shall
Deceive their trust, and crush them in their fall, etc.


Job 36. 13. [The Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he
binds them.] Or as the Paraphrase, For the deluder hastens his own fall,
Nor will in trouble on the Almighty call.
Who on the beds of sin supinely lie,
They in the summer of their age shall die.


And what we say of the Hypocrites hope, we may say also of all his pleasures
and delights. He may now be as merry as the most righteous of his neighbors;
and seem the most happy, because the most jocund; and abound with medicines
against melancholy and all wise and sober consideration; even his business, his
cups, his wantonness and uncleanness, or at least his less disgraceful
pleasures and recreations, which fortify his mind against the fears of death
and judgment, and all the threatenings of God; As sleepy Opium fortifies the
brain,
Against the sense of sicknesses and pain.


And if this mirth could always last, how happy a man were the self-deceiver?
But says Solomon, Eccles. 7. 6. As the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is
the laughter of the fool.

As thorns beneath a Caldron catch the fire,
Blaze with a noise, and suddenly expire;
Such is the causeless laughter of vain fools;
This vanity in their distemper rules.
And as Job 20. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. [Knowest thou not this of old since man was
placed upon earth, that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of
the Hypocrite for a moment? Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and
his head reaches to the clouds; yet he shall perish for ever like his own
dung; they which have seen him shall say, Where is he? He shall flee away as a
dream, and shall not be found; yea he shall be chased away as a vision of the
night. The eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall his
place any more behold him:] Or as the foresaid Paraphrase, This is a truth
which with the world began,
Since earth was first inhabited by man;
Sins triumph in swift misery concludes,
And flattering joy the Hypocrite deludes.
Although his excellence to heaven aspire;
Though radiant beams his shining brows attire;
He as his dung shall perish on the ground;
Nor shall the impression of his steps be found;
But like a troubled dream shall take his flight;
And vanish as a vision of the night.
No mortal eye shall see his face again,
Nor sumptuous roofes their builder entertain.


Thus as the Hypocrites Religion is Vain, so all his hopes and joys will be
vain, and will deceive him as he deceived himself. As Zophar concludes of him,
Job 11. 20. [But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape:
and their hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost.]

Poor soul, thy Religion is already so vain, that it gives thee no solid
satisfaction or delight: Thou art fain to go to thy lands, or friends, or
pleasures, or carnal accomodations for delight: Thy Religion, which should let
thee into heaven, and there refresh thee with the fore^asts of everlasting
pleasures, and should daily fetch thee fresh delights, from the face of God,
alas is an impotent lifeless thing; acquainted with shadows, but strange to the
invisible substance; acquainted with formal shows and ceremonies, but
unacquainted with God: acquainted with the letter, but not with the Spirit;
familiar with the orders of the Churrh, but strange to the fore^asts of heaven.
If thou had no other comfort. but what thy dead Religion brings thee from the
face of God, thy pensive heart would be better to consideration and recovery,
then it is. If thou had a faith that brought thee in any solid stablishing
conten^, what needst thou be hunting abroad the world, among thy crowd of
vanities and deceits, to beg or borrow some short delight, which thou must
return with griping usury? And what need thou so many pitiful shifts to
muzzle thy conscience, and to keep that peace a little longer, which will end
in sorrow, and will part with thee as the devil went out of the possessed
person, Mark 9. 26. that rent him, and left him as a dead man. That Religion is
certainly vain, that is not sufficient to acquaint the soul with matter of
solid comfort and content, but leaves that felicitating work, to worldly
transitory things, while it self is used only as a skreen, to keep hell fire
from scorching the conscience, or as childrens rackets to quiet them when they
are apt to cry.

2. But the vanity of a superficial Religion, will most appear in the hour of
extremity; when their help as well as their hope and comfort will to them prove
vain. Prosperity will not always last: As sure as winter follows summer, and
as the darksome night succeeds the day, so sure will adversity take its turn:
sickness will follow the longest health; and death succeed the longest life;
and your house of darkness in the dust, will hold you longer then your present
habitations. And then, when thou see all things fail, O what would thou
give for a hope and help that will not fail, that thou might be received
into the everlasting habitations? The conscience that is now asleep, will be
shortly awakened in such a manner, that it will be utterly past the skill and
power, of thy self and all the friends thou have, to cast it asleep or quiet it
again. And then, what would thou not give, for a lenitive to pacify it! No
wonder if thou sit here as senseless as if no harm were near thee: It is now in
thy power not to believe that there is a hell for hypocrites, or that it is thy
own inheritance: But the day is near (if a supernatural change prevent it not)
when it shall no more be in thy power: but sight and feeling shall convince
thee whether thou will or no. Now we must entreat thy own consideration, and
solicit thee for thy own consent, to know thy grievous sin and misery, and yet
leave thee unconvinced, because thou art unwilling to know the truth, and
because we cannot show thee heaven and hell while we are speaking of them: But
then God will not ^^ave, but force thy consideration: nor will he ask thy
consent to feel thy misery: but the less thou art willing, the more have thou
to feel. And which way then will thou look for help? which way ever it be, it
will be all in vain, because thy Religion was but vain; will thou look to thy
duties and supposed honesty, whose sincerity now thou art so confident of?
(...) this is the vain Religion, that this deceive thee, but cannot sin^ thee.
Thou art like a man Re^ falling house, that has nothing to lay hold on, but
that ^^ch is falling, and is it that will (...) him unto death. Or like a (...)
^owning man that has nothing ^ut a handful of water to lay hold upon; which is
it that will choke him, but is vain to save him. It is thy superficial
hypocritical complemental services, that will fall with thee, and fall upon
thee, that will thus both deceive thee, and choke thee, in the time of thy
distress. To be told now that thy Religion is vain, is a thing that thy dead
unbelieving heart can too easily bear: But to find then, when thou look for
the benefit of it, that its Vain, is that which is not born so easily, but will
overwhelm the stoutest heart with terrors. If thou were a man of no Religion,
and so had none to deceive and quiet thee, (...) could scarcely keep off
thy (...) now: If thou had not (...) hollow-hearted prayers, thy (...) zeal,
or forms, and shows, (...) tasks of duty, thy profession, (...) its secret
exceptions and reserv^ (...) thy smoothed outside, with the good conceit thou
have of thy self, and the good esteem that other men have of thee, if thou
had not these to flatter thy conscience, and cloak thee from the storms of
threatened wrath, thou would perhaps walk about like another Cain, and be
afraid of every man thou see, and tremble at the shaking of a leaf, and still
look behind thee as afraid of a pursuit. But, alas, it will be ten thousand
times more terrible, to find thy confidence prove deceit, and thy Religion
vain, when God is judging thee, when hell is before thee, and thou art come to
the last of all thine expectations! Nay then to find not only that thy
superficial Religion was vanity, and lighter then vanity, nothing, and less
then nothing; but that it was thy sin, and that which will now torment thee,
and the remembrance of it be to thee as the remembrance of drunkenness to the
drunkard, and of fornication to the unclean, and of covetousness to the
worldling, the rust of whose money will eat his flesh, and burn like fire: O
what a doleful plight is this! when the sentence is ready to pass upon thee,
and hell is gaping to devour thee, and thou look for help to thy vain
Religion, and cryest out [O now, or never help: help me, or I am a firebrand
of unquenchable wrath: help me, or I must be tormented in those flames: help me
now, or it will be too late; and I shall never, never more have help] Then to
have thy self-deceit discovered, and thy seeming Religion condemn thee and
torment thee, instead of helping thee, what anguish and confusion will this
cast thy hopeless soul into? such as no heart can here conceive. Thy guilty
soul will be like a hare among a company of dogs: which so ever of thy duties
thou flyest for help to, that will make first to tear thee and devour thee.
Like a naked man in the midst of an army of his deadly enemies: which so ever
he flies to for pity and relief, is like to be one of the first to wound him.
Poor self-deceiver what will thou then do, or whither will thou betake thy soul
for help? The reason why thou can now make shift with a lifeless shadow of
Religion, is, because thou have thy sports or pleasures, thy friends and
^latterers, thy worldly business to divert thy thoughts, and take thee up, and
rock the cradle of thy security; and thy piety is not yet brought unto the
fire, nor thy heart and duties searched by the all discovering light: But when
the light comes in, and when all thy fleshly contents are gone, and when thou
come to have use for thy Religion, and see that if it prove unsound, thou
art lost for ever, O then it is not shadows, and shows, and complements that
will quiet th^e. That will not serve turn then, that serves turn now. Thou will
find then that it was easier deceiving thy self then God, Gal. 6. 3, 4, 5, 7.
[For if a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself: But let every man prove his own work -- For every man shall bear his
own burden. Be not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
everlasting life.]

But perhaps thou will say, It is not any duties but Christ that I must trust
to: he will be my help, and he is sufficient, and will not deceive the soul
that trusts him.

Answ. Undoubtedly he is sufficient, and will not deceive thee. But does he
deceive thee, if he give thee not the salvation which he never promised thee?
He never promised salvation to an Hypocrite (without conversion) It is the
upright soul devoted to him, that takes him for the absolute Master of his
life, and for his only portion and felicity, to whom Christ has promised
salvation: And his promise shall be made good, and the sincere shall find that
Christ deceives them no^. But where did he ever promise salvation to a
superficial Pharisee? to such a seeming Christian as thou? show such a promise
from him if thou can; and then trust it and spare not. But thou do not
trust him, but thy own deceit, if he have given thee no such promise to trust
on. Nay rather, should he not deceive all the world, if he should save such
superficial hypocrites, when he has professed in his word that he will not
save them? and if he should not condemn such heartless Formalists, when he has
so often told us that he will condemn them? Surely he that breaks his word is
liker to be a deceiver, then he that keeps it. Be it known to thee therefore
(and O that thou would know it while there is a remedy at hand) that if thou
trust that Christ should save an unsanctified fals-hearted person, whose soul
was never renewed and revived by the Holy Ghost, and absolutely given up to
God, and that sets not up God and his service above all the interest of the
flesh, and the commodities and contentments of the world, thou do not then
trust Christ, but thy own deceits and lies: and it is not Christ that is the
deceiver, but thou art a deceiver of thy self, that make thy self a false
promise, and trustest to it; and when thou have done, say, thou will trust to
Christ: yea trustest thy self against Christ, and trustest that he will break
his word, and not that he will make it good. See whether he resolve not to
condemn all such, Matthew. 10. 37, 38. Luke 14. 27, 33. Matthew. 7. 26, 27. Jam. 2.
14. Heb. 12. 14. Romans 8. 9. with the texts before cited, and abundance such.
Christ will be a Savior; but he is the Savior of his body, and not of the
affixed hypocrites, Ephesians. 5. 23. And his body is the Church which is subject to
him, ver. 24. He will save to the utmost: but whom? even all that come to God
by him, Heb. 7. 25. but not those that make the world their God, and would put
God off with a few running heartless words and duties. It is the living
fruitful branches that he will save: but the withered branches he casts
forth, to be burned in the fire, Joh. 15. 2, 6, 7. No man can serve God and
Mammon: nor live both to the Spirit and the flesh: he that has two hearts,
has none that is acceptable unto God: he that has two faces (a face of
devotion in his formal customary services, and a face that smiles on the world
and fleshly pleasures when he has done) has none that God will ever smile
upon. The leaves of the barren fig tree, saved it not from the curse of Christ,
Matthew. 21. 18, 19. Hew it down and cast it into the fire, shall be the sentence
of the most flourishing tree that is fruitless, Luke 13. 7. [The earth that
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: but that which bears
thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh to cursing, whose end is to be
burned,] Heb. 6. 7, 8. So that if thy Religion be vain, the blood of Christ,
and all the treasures of his grace, will be vain to thee, that are saving unto
others. An Infidel may then as well expect to be saved by the Christ whom he
rejected, as thou. Nay it is Christ himself that will condemn thee: It is his
own mouth that will say to such as thee, Depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
And though thou could say, [Lord, Lord, I have Prophesied, or cast out
devils, or done many wonderful works in thy Name] he [will profess to thee that
he never knew thee] or owned thee, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. If crying would then
serve, I know thou would not spare thy cries. But he must so pray as to be
accepted and heard on earth, that looks to be accepted and regarded then; when
the miserable soul with endless horrors in its eye, is looking round about for
help, and finds none; when all the creatures say, We cannot, and he that can
shall say, I will not; who can apprehend the calamity of such a soul? What soul
so sleepy and regardless now, that will not then cry, [Lord, Lord open to us]
when the door is shut, and it is too late? Matthew. 25. 10, 11, 12. Then if thou
roar in the anguish of thy soul, and cry out to him that saves others [Condemn
me not O Lord, but save me also! Now Lord have mercy on a miserable sinner!
save me, or I am lost for ever: save me, or I must burn in yonder flames: Turn
not thy heart against an undone perishing soul, [If thou cast me off, I have no
hope!] A thousand such cries would be in vain, because thou had but a vain
Religion, Prove. 1. 24, etc. [Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity: I
will mock when yonr fear comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you:
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me: -- Therefore they shall eat of their own way, and
be filled with their own devices] says the Lord.

And when hell has once taken thee into its possession, if thou cry and roar
there ten thousand millions of ages, it will be all in Vain. Thy strongest and
thy longest cries, cannot procure thee a drop of water, to cool thy tongue
tormented in those flames, Luke 16. 24, 25, 26.

In a word, if thy Religion be Vain, all is Vain to thee. Thy life it self is
Vain, Eccles. 6. 12. thou walk in a Vain show, Psalm. 39. 6. Thou disquietest
thy self in Vain, in all thy labors, Psalm. 39* 6. and 127. 1, 2. and vanity
and vexation is all that thou shall possess, Eccles. 1. 2, 14. Prove. 22. 8. And
if conscience, when thy day of grace is past, shall force thee upon the review
to say, My piety was but seeming and self-deceit, and all my Religion was Vain;
it will be the voice of utter desperation, and will stab the heart of all thy
hopes. This and no better being the self-deceivers case, is not conscience now
at work within you? and asking as each of the Disciples did, Mat. 26. 24, 25.
Is it I? If thou have a heart within thee, beseeming a reasonable creature, by
this time thou art afraid of self-deceit, and willing to be searched, and to
know thy hypocrisy, while it may be cured. For my part, I shall pronounce no
one of you personally to be an hypocrite, as knowing that hypocrisy is a sin
of the heart, which in it self is seen by none but God and him that has it:
But my business is only to help such to know and judge themselves. Could I name
the man to you in the Congregation, that had none but a seeming vain Religion,
I am persuaded you would all look upon him as a most unhappy deplorable wretch.
Alas, sirs, Hypocrites are not so rare among us, as some imagine. There are few
or none, but Saints and Hypocrites in this Assembly, or in most of the
Assemblies in the land. I think here are none that make not a profession of the
Christian faith, and of love to God: All therefore that have not this faith and
love, must needs be Hypocrites, as professing to be what they are not. In your
baptism you engaged and professed your selves the Disciples of Christ, and gave
up your selves in solemn Covenant to God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: This
Covenant you will say you stand to yet: and none of you will be known to have
renounced your Christianity: As Christians you use to come to these Assemblies,
and here to attend God in the use of his Ordinances: and some of you to renew
your Covenant with him, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. I meet with none
that will say [I am no Christian, nor a servant of the God of Heaven: I am an
Infidel, and Rebel against the Lord.] I think there is none of you, but would
take it ill, if I should call you such, or should deny you to be Christians,
and men fearing God.] If therefore you are not such indeed, you must needs be
Hypocrites. What say you? Is there any of you that profess your selves to be
ungodly, unbelievers, and servants of the Devil, and will take this as your
current title, disclaiming the love and service of the Lord? I think you will
not. If you are such as you profess, you are all Saints, and shall be saved. If
any of your be not such, they can be nothing else but Hypocrites.

Seeing therefore that you are all either Saints or Hypocrites, come now to the
bar, and refuse not a trial, that may prevent the errors of another kind of
trial, that you cannot refuse.

And here let me set before you your Profession, and then try your selves,
Whether you are such as you profess your selves to be or not? And I think I may
take it for granted, that the Articles of the Creed, and the B^ptismal
Covenant, is the least that every one of you do profess; and that the desires
employed in the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, you all profess to be your own
desires; and that you take the (...) Command^ments for part of the rule of your
obedience* Let us peruse them briefly in the several parts.

1. Do you not all say that you Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of
Heaven and earth, and that you will have no other gods but him? and are you not
accordingly engaged in Covenant with him? you will not deny it. And what is the
meaning of this much of your profession? It is no less then to take God for the
only infinite good, to be loved with the chiefest love, and to take him for
your absolute Lord and Governor, the Owner of you and all you have, to whom
you owe universal absolute obedience; and that you are truly willing to love
him above all, and fear him, and trust him and obey him accordingly, though
your flesh and all the world should be against it. He that means not all
this, does dissemble or lie when he says, he takes God to be his God. For to
be God, is to be this much to us.

And really is it thus with you, as you profess? speak but as men that dare not
lie before the Lord that knows your hearts? Do you indeed Love God as God? with
your superlative love: Are your hearts set upon him? Do you make it your
principal care to please him? Is it your delight to do his will? Is it sweeter
to you to think and speak of him, then of the world? Does it grieve you most to
offend him? In a word, you are not such strangers to Nature, but you know what
love is. And you are not such strangers to your own hearts, but you know what
it is, to love your pleasure, your profit, your honor and your friend; can
conscience say before the Lord, that you love him better then all these? if not
more passionately, yet more deeply, effectually and resolvedly; with a love
that will cause you to deny and part with all for him? If you thus truly love
him as God; (and above all) how comes it to pass that you seek the world more
carefully, and eagerly then him? and that you are more pleased with worldly
thoughts and speeches and employments, then with divine? were not the Hypocrite
justly blinded, and a wilful stranger to himself, he could not but know that
he loves not God as God, and above all. And to love him in subordination to
your flesh and its contents, is not at all to love him as God: As it is no
degree of conjugal love, to love a wife but as a servant; nor no degree of the
love due to your Sovereign, to love him as an equal, or as a slave.

And if really you take God for your absolute Lord and Governor, why is it
then that you take no pleasure in his Laws; but count them too strict and had
rather be at your own dispose? why is it that you obey your fleshly desires,
before and against the God whom you acknowledge? why will you not be persuaded
to that holiness, justice and charity which you know his Law commands you?
why do you wilfully continue in those sins, which conscience tells you God
forbids? will you live in wilful disobedience, and love your sins, and loath
your duty, and obstinately continue thus, and yet profess that you take God for
your God, and consequently for your Lord and Governor? and yet will you not
confess that you are dissembling Hypocrites?

2. Do you not all profess that you believe in Jesus Christ? and have you not
in Covenant taken him for your Savior and Lord? And do you so indeed, or do
you not play the Hypocrites? If you believe in Christ, and take him for your
Savior, you then take your sins for the disease and misery of your souls, and
you are so grieved for them and weary of them, and humbled in the apprehension
of your lost estate, that you fly to Christ as your only refuge, from the wrath
and curse of the offended Majesty, and value his justifying and healing grace
before all the riches of the world; and you are willing to take his bitterest
medicines, and use the means appointed by him, for the destruction of your sin,
and the perfecting of his graces. And is it thus with you, that have unhumbled
hearts, that never felt the need of Christ, as condemned miserable men must do?
and that love the sin that he would cure, and are unwilling to be mortified and
sanctified by his grace? Unless a carcass be a man, such Hypocrites as these
are no true Christians, and have but a seeing self-deceiving faith.

3. Do you not all profess to believe in the Holy Ghost? and are you not
engaged to him in Covenant as your Sanctifier? And do you not grossly play the
Hypocrites here? If not, how comes it to pass that you stick in your natural
state, as if you had no need of sanctification? and live as quietly without any
acquaintance with true Regeneration, and the Spirit to dwell and rule within
you, as it you needed no such change? Or else that you take up with a Formal,
an affected, or a forced kind of Religion, in stead of Sanctification and
spiritual devotion? And how comes it to pass that you distaste the highest
degrees of holiness? and that you will not be brought to the mortification,
self-denial, and unreserved obedience, which are the essence of sanctification?
As for the more deboist profane sort of Hypocrites, that make a common mock of
godliness, and scorn at the very name of Holiness and Sanctification, and
deride at all that pretend to have the Spirit; I had rather tremble at the
thought of their misery, then now stand to reprove that notorious hypocrisy,
which professes to believe in the Holy Spirit which they deride; and
Covenanteth with the Sanctifier, while they hate and mock, or at least do
obstinately refuse sanctification. When God himself tells us, Romans 8. 9. [That
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.] And
therefore to deride a man for professing that he has the Spirit, is to deride
him for professing to be a Christian.

4. Do you not all profess to [Believe the Holy Catholic Church] that is, that
Christ has a people dispersed through the world, that are sanctified by his
Spirit, and made a holy peculiar people, whom he loves as his Spouse and as
his own Body, of which number you must be if you will be saved? And yet at the
same time, the members of this Church, you contemn; the holiness of it you
secretly hate; and the faithful Pastors in it you despise and disobey. Is not
this Hypocrisy?

5. You all profess to [Believe the Communion of Saints:] that is, that the
true members of the Catholic Church are all Saints, that have one and the same
Spirit, and walk by the same holy Law or Rule, and in holiness must converse
together, and join in Church order, for the public worshipping of God,
according to his own institution: and must purely and fervently love each
other, with such a charity as shall make one as ready to relieve another, when
God calls for it, as if our riches did belong in Common to the Saints.] This is
the meaning of this Article of your Creed. And do I then need to ask you
Whether those that profess this, are not Hypocrites, if they hate the Saints,
and their inward spiritual Communion, and if they love them but with that
lifeless charity that James describes? Jam. 2. 14, 15, etc. Or if they despise
or hate the Discipline, Ordinances and Holy Communion of the Church? And if
they live in Communion with drunkards, with harlots, with worldlings, or
sensual, vain, or ambitious men, and fly from the Communion of Saints? what
do thou, when thou say [I believe the Communion of Saints] but say [I am a
dissembling Hypocrite] if it he thus with thee?

6. You all profess to [Believe the forgiveness of sins;] that is, that through
the blood of Christ all true repenting and believing sinners, shall be
forgiven, and are not shut up under remediless despair. And also I think you
all profess that you do Repent your selves, that Forgiveness may be yours. And
yet you love your sin: you love not to be told of it: you will not believe it
to be sin, as long as you can strive against conviction; and when you must
needs confess it, you will not forsake it; but while you seem to reform by
parting with so much as you can spare, your dearer sins, which pleasure and
honor and profit are much engaged in, you will not forsake: though repentance
do consist in turning from sin to God; and Christ has assured you, that except
you repent, you shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. Is not this therefore palpable
hypocrisy, to profess repentance for remission of sin, and still keep the sin
which you say you repent of, as if you thought to mock God with names and shows?

7. You all profess to [Believe the Resurrection of the body; and that Christ
shall come again to judge the quick and dead.] But do you live as men that
believe indeed, that they are passing unto such a judgment? If you seriously
expected to be judged for your lives, for the words you speak, the deeds you
do, the time you spend, the means of grace which you neglect or use, and for
all that you receive and do, is it possible you could so waste your time, and
neglect the means of your salvation, and sin so boldly and obstinately as you
do?

8. You all profess that you [Believe the life everlasting] that the Righteous
shall go into their masters joy, and the rest into everlasting punishment in
hell, Matthew. 25. and 13. But do you not play the Hypocrites? Can you heartily
believe that you stand so near to heaven or hell, to everlasting joy or
torments, and make no greater a matter of it, nor make no better preparation
for it, nor bestir your selves no more in a case of such unspeakable weight? If
you believe sincerely the glory of heaven, you set your hearts on it, more then
upon earth, and take it for your portion and most desirable felicity. But do I
need to tell the worldly fleshly Hypocrite how far he is from this?

9. You profess (as the sum of the ten Commandments) that you Love God above
all, and your neighbors as your selves.] But does not your selfishness and
quarreling with your neighbors, when they do but stand in the way of your
honor or commodity, convince you of hypocrisy in this profession?

10. In the use of the Lords prayer, what word do you speak that is not in
hypocrisy? Do you first and principally desire the hallowing of Gods name, the
coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of his will?] when you are far more tender
of your own names then of Gods, and more regardful of your own honor? And when
you care more for your own prosperity then for the prosperity of the Church and
Gospel; and do your selves become the hinderers of his Kingdom and Government
in the Church and in the souls of men? And when you cannot abide to do his
Will, when it crosses the interest of your flesh, but dislike it as too
strict, and had rather the Word and Will of God were agreeable to yours, then
you will conform your own to his?

Do you only desire [Your daily bread, and that in subordination to the honor,
and Kingdom, and will of God.] Or rather do you not play the Hypocrites in
saying so, when it is not [daily bread] that will content you; but plenty and
prosperity is sweeter to you then holiness?

When you pray for [The forgiveness of your sins, as you forgive others] you
intimate that you are weary of your sins, and hate them, and would forsake
them; and that you forgive all that have wronged you, out of the sense of your
own transgressions, and of the love of Christ: but is all this so, or is it
mere dissembling, when you forsake not your sin, nor are willing to forsake it,
and when your consciences know that there be some that you forgive not?

You pray against [being led into temptation] and yet you love it and cast your
selves into it. Into tempting company, and tempting talk, and tempting
employments: And for recreation, meat, drink, apparel, houses, attendants,
estate, reputation, and almost all things else, you love and choose that which
is most tempting.

You pray to be delivered from evil:] when the evil of your pride, flesh
pleasing, and worldliness, you so love, that indeed you would not be delivered
from them. What can you say to excuse all this from palpable Hypocrisy?

To conclude, you pretend to all that necessary to salvation; but have you that
in reality which you pretend to?

1. You think your selves wise enough to be saved. But is it not folly that
goes under the name of wisdom? When you should be converted and lead a holy
life, you are wise enough to give reasons for the contrary, and wise enough to
confute the Preacher, and prove him a fool, instead of obeying the call of God.
You are wise enough to prove the Physician to be ignorant, and to cast away the
medicine that should heal you. And what if no body could deal with you in
subtilty of argument, but you could say that against the necessary means of
your own salvation, that none can answer? when you die by your wisdom; and have
disputed your selves out of the reach of mercy, will you not bewail it then as
folly? Is he wiser that being hungry eats his meat, or he that gives such
reasons for his refusing it, and pleads so learnedly against eating and
drinking, that none can answer him? Is the condemned man wiser that makes
friends for a pardon? or he that with unanswerable subtilty reasons against
it, till the ladder be turned? such is your vain and seeming wisdom. You are
not wise enough to be cured, but to give reasons why you should continue sick.
In the issue it will prove, that you were not wise enough to be saved, but
notably wise to resist salvation, and plead your selves into hell.

2. You pretend that you have a saving faith, when your hearts refuse that
salvation from sin, and that rule of Christ which is the object of faith: and
when you will not believe the doctrines, precepts or threatenings that cross
your own conceits; and when your belief of heaven will not carry your hearts
from earth, nor work you to a holy heavenly life.

3. You pretend to Repentance (as I said before) while you hold fast the sin,
and give not up your selves to God: when as if your neighbor, or Master, or
Husband should but beat one of you, and tell you when he has done that he
repents, and do this as often as you commit your willful sins, and say you
repent, I am confident you would not take it for true repentance. You repent,
but will not confess when it is to your disgrace, as long as you can hide your
sin. You repent, but will not make restitution or reparation of injuries to
your power. You repent, but your heart rises against him that reproves you.
You repent, but you had rather keep your sins then leave them. What Is this but
to deceive your own hearts, and to mock your selves with a seeming vain and
mock-repentance?

4. You pretend to love God above all, (as was before said) when you love not
his Image, ways or communion: but love that which he hates, and still prefer
the world before him.

5. You pretend that you have true desires to be godly and what God would have
you be: But they are such desires as the sluggard has to rise, and as the
slothful has to work: that is, if it could be done with ease, and without
labor: you lie still, and use not the means with diligence, for all your
desires. When you can fit and have your work done with wishes, and your
families maintained, and your necessities all supplied with wishes, you may
think to come to heaven with wishes: The good desires that the poor may be
warmed and clothed, that James speaks of, Jam. 2. 15. did neither relieve the
poor, nor save the wisher. [The desire of the slothful kills him, because his
hands refuse to labor, Prove. 21. 15.] Up and be doing according to thy
desires, or else confess that thy wishes are hypocritical, and that thou
deceivest thy own heart by Vain desires.

6. You also pretend to be sincere worshippers of God. You pray, and you read
the Scripture and good books, and you hear the Word, and receive the Lords
Supper. But I have before showed you your hypocrisy in these* you pray against
the sin that you love and would not leave: you pray for holiness, when you hate
it or desire it not, in any degree to cross your flesh: you serve God with mere
words (whether of your own conceiving, or of others prescribing,) with some
forced acknowledgement of that God that has not your hearts or lives. Let
Christ pass the sentence on you, and not I, Matthew. 15. 7, 8, 9. [Ye hypocrites,
well did Esaias Prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips: but their heart is far from me:
But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men] You like that teaching that sooths you in your own opinions, and galleth
not your consciences in the guilty place: A Ministry you would have, that
should stand like an adorned Idol that hurts no body, and touches not your
sores: or that is but instead of a pair of Organs, or a tinckling Cymbal, to
tickle your fancy, and make Church-worship to be as a kind of religious
stage play to you. But a true Minister of Christ, to open to you the doctrine
of the Kingdom, and roundly to awake you from security in sin, and to call you
up to the most serious holy heavenly life, and follow you and let you take no
rest, till you yield and practice it; and to call you to open confession of
your open scandalous sins, that you may make such reparation to the wronged
honor of God and souls of men, as you are capable of, and accordingly to
absolve you, or to bind you over to answer it at the bar of God, and charge the
Church to avoid communion with you, if you are impenitent and incorrigible;
such a Ministry as this (which is the Ministry of Christ's appointment) you
abhor; at least, when they come to touch your sores. Then you are too proud to
be taught and ruled by such as these, though you hypocritically profess to be
ruled by Christ, who rules his Church by his Spirit, Word and Ministers
conjunct. Then you say, who gave you authority to do thus and thus by me? As if
you knew not that Christ in Scripture has described, confirmed and limited the
Ministerial office. Like condemned Traitors, that should say to him that
^^^ngeth them a pardon [Who (...) you authority to make so (...) me?] or like a
man that has the plague or leprosy, that asks the Physician [Who gave you
authority to tell me that I am sick, and put me on such medicines as these?] or
as the Israelite to Moses, Exodus 2. 14. [Who made thee a Prince and a Judge
over us?] not understanding that God by his hand would deliver them, says
Stephen, Act. 7. 25. Or as the Jews to Christ, when he was teaching men the way
to heaven, Matthew. 21. 23. [By what authority do thou these things, and who
gave thee this authority?] so because you hate the way of your recovery, you
will not be saved without authority, nor be satisfied of their authority that
would save you, but are like a beggar that should proudly refuse a piece of
gold, and ask, By what authority do you give it me? A Ministry that agrees
with Gods d^scription* you cannot abide, Act. 20. (...) 36. Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1
Cor. 4. (...) 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5^ 17. 20. and 2 Timothy 4. 1. So that
indeed it is but a mock-minister, a mock-sacrament, a mock-prayer, and so a
seeming vain Religion which you desire.

7. Lastly, you pretend also to sincere obedience: If we ask you, whether you
are willing to obey God? you will say, God forbid that any should deny it. But
when it comes to the particulars, and you find that he commands you that
which flesh and blood is against, and would cost you the loss of worldly
prosperity, then you will be excused: and yet that you may cheat your souls,
you will not professedly disobey; but you will persuade your selves that it is
no duty, and that God would not have you do that which you will not do. Like a
Countrymans servant, that promises to do all that his Master bids him: but
when he comes to particulars, threshing is too hard a work, and mowing and
reaping are beyond his strength, and plowing is too toylsome; and in the
conclusion, it is only an idle life with some easy charres, that he will be
brought to. This is the Hypocrites obedience. He will obey God in all things,
as far as he is able, in the general: But when it comes to particulars, To deny
himself, and forsake his worldly prosperity for Christ, and to contemn the
world, and live by faith, and converse in heaven, and walk with God, and
worship him in Spirit and truth, to love an enemy, to forgive all wrongs, to
humble our selves to the meanest persons, and to the lowest works; to confess
our faults with shame and sorrow, and ask forgiveness of those they have
injured, these and other such works as these, they will not believe to be parts
of obedience, or at least, will not be brought to do them.

Poor souls, I have stood here a great while to hold you the glass, in which,
(...) you were willing, you might see your selves. (...) you will yet wink and
hate the light, if you perish in your self-deceiving, who can help it?

Briefly and plainly, be it known to thee again, whoever thou art that hear
this, that if thou have not these five characters following, thy Religion is
all but vain and self-deceiving.

1. If Gods authority, as he speaks by his Spirit, Word and Ministers, be not
highest with thy soul, and cannot do more with thee, then Kings and
Parliaments, and then the world and flesh, Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10.

2. If the (...) ^^^ing glory, be not practically more esteemed by thee, and
chosen, and sought, then any thing, or all things in the world, Mat, 6. 21.
Col. 3. 4. Joh. 6. 27. 2 Timothy 4. 8, 9. Matthew. 22. 5. Luke 18. 22, 23. Phil. 3.
20.

3. If thou see not such a loveliness in holiness, as being the image of God,
as that thou unfeignedly desire the highest degree of it, Matthew. 5. 20. Psalm.
119. 1, 2, 3, etc. Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

4. If any sin be so sweet and dear to you, or seem so necessary, that you
consent not, and desire not to let it go, Mat. 19. 22. Phil. 3. 8. Psalm. 66. 18.

5. If any known duty seem so costly, dangerous, troublesome and unpleasant,
that ordinarily you will not do it, Mat. 16. 24, 25, 26. Psalm. 119. 6.

In a word, God must be loved and obeyed as God, Christ must be entertained as
Christ: Heaven must be valued and sought as Heaven; and Holiness loved and
practiced as Holiness: Though not to the height of their proper Worth (which
none on earth is able to reach) yet so, as that nothing be preferred before
them.

BUt yet there is one more discovery which if I pass by, you will think I bawk
a chief part of my text.

An unbridled tongue in a Professor of Religion is enough to prove his
Religion vain.

By an unbridled tongue is not meant all the sins of our speech. [If any man
offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the
whole body. But in many things we offend all] Iam. 3. 2. Every unwarrantable
jest, or angry word, or hasty rash expression, is not enough to prove a man's
Religion to be in vain. Though Christ say that we shall answer for every idle
word, he does not say, we shall be condemned for every idle word: But when the
tongue is unbridled, and is not kept under a holy Law, but suffered to be the
ordinary instrument of wilful known sin, or of gross sin which men might know
and will not, this proves the person void of holiness, and consequently his
Religion vain.

Its true; every Hypocrite has not an unbridled tongue: some of them have the
bridle of moral precepts, and some of Religious education, and some of the
presence and awe of persons whom they esteem: common knowledge, with natural
mansuetude and moderation does bridle the tongues of many an Hypocrite: But as
every wicked man is not a drunkard, or fornicator, and yet every drunkard or
fornicator (that lives in it) is a wicked man; so every Hypocrite has not an
unbridled tongue (his vice may lie some other way); but every man that has an
unbridled tongue is an Hypocrite, if withal he profess himself a Christian.

The sins of the tongue are of three sorts. 1. Such as are against piety. 2.
Such as are against Justice. 3. Such as are against Charity.

1. Against Piety, that is, directly against God, are, Blasphemy, Perjury, rash
swearing, swearing by creatures, light and unreverent using of Gods Name, and
attributes, and Word and works: pleading for false doctrine, or false worship:
disputing against truth and duty: scorning at godlines^ ^ or reasoning against
it. These and such impieties of the tongue, (...) the evidences of profaneness
in the speakers heart; though some of them much more then others: and if the
tongue be not then bridled, all is in vain.

2. Sinful speeches against Justice and charity are these: reproaching
Parents, or Governors, or neighbors: railing and reviling: cursing: provoking
others to do mischief, or commit any sin: disputing against, and dissuading men
from truth and duty; and hindering them by your speeches from a holy life, and
the means of their salvation: calling good, evil, and evil, good: lying;
slandering; false witness-bearing; backbiting: extenuating men's virtues, and
aggravating their faults beyond the certain apparent truth: receiving, and
reciting, and carrying on evil reports, which you know not to be true:
endeavoring to cool men's love to others, by making them seem bad, when we
cannot prove it: mentioning men's faults and failings without a call and just
occasion, unchaste, immodest, ribald speeches: cheating and deceitful words to
wrong others in their estates: with other such like.

But undoubtedly that sin of the tongue which the Apostle here had particular
respect to, was the reproaching of Fellow Christians, especially upon the
occasion of some differences of judgment and practice in the smaller matters
of Religion: The Judaizing Christians gave liberty to their tongues, to
reproach those that refused the use of those ceremonies, which they used
themselves, and placed much of their Religion in: The quarrel was the same that
was decided by the Apostles, Act. 15. and by Paul, Romans 14. and 15. and
throughout the Epistle to the Galathians. And this is the Religion that James
calls vain here, which was much placed in ceremonies, with a pretense of
highest knowledge, and a censorious vilifying of all that would not do as they.

There are especially three sorts that use to reproach each other about the
matters of Religion. 1. Those that are hardened to that height of impiety, as
to make a mock at seriousness and diligence in the practice of Christianity it
self, hating and reproaching them that dare not sell their souls at as base a
price as they.

2. Those that have so far extinguished charity by faction and self-conceit, as
to confine their love and honor to their party, and to speak evil of those
that are not of their own opinions.

3. Those that give liberty to their tongues unseasonably, unmeasurably or
unwarrantably to speak hardly of those that they suffer by upon Religious
accounts; though perhaps they are their superiors whom they are bound to
honor.

1. The first sort are arrived at such a measure of maliciousness and misery,
that they are, as mad men, the objects of compassion to all men save
themselves. Their sin and misery is so notorious, that I need not say any thing
to discover it to others, that have any thing of reason and true Religion: And
for themselves, being so far forsaken of God, as to hate and reproach the means
of their salvation, no wonder if (...) they are given over to tha^ blindness as
not to understand (...) words that should (...) them* and neither to (...)
their (...) the light that would (...): and to such Impen^^^^^, as not to feel
or fear the wrath and threatenings of the Almighty; but boldly to rage on, till
Hell has brought them to their wits. Prove. 14. 16. A wise man fears and
departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident. Yet this much
briefly I shall say to these, if any of them be this day my auditors, that I
may not leave them as utterly past hope.

1. Thou art one of the most self-condemned stigmatized slaves of Satan in the
world. Thou bear openly so undoubted a brand of wickedness, that there is no
room for any rational Hope in thy self, or any of thy friends, that ever thou
should be saved, if thou die in such a state: Some Hope is left that yet thou
may be converted; but none, that thou should be saved without conversion.
It is possible with God that can do all things, that yet thy wilful blindness
may be cured, and thy tongue may unsay all that thou have said; and thou may
cry out of thy folly, and cry shame against thy self, for that which now thou
gloriest in. It is possible for God of such a stone, to make a child of
Abraham! and to melt that hardened heart of thine, and lay it bleeding at the
feet of Christ, and make thee wish with tears or groans, that such thoughts had
never entered into thy heart, nor such words of malice proceeded from thy mouth.
And happy art thou, if God will have so much mercy on thee, that have derided
mercy, as to vouchsafe thee such a change. And pray for it, and pray hard, and
pray again, if thou love thy soul: For this is thy Hope: and thou have no
other. For that ever such a wretch as thou should be saved, in the state that
now thou art in, is as impossible as for God to lie; and as impossible as for
the Devils to be saved. I wonder (but that such a forsaken soul, is a senseless
block, and as a lifeless carkaise) that thou do not quake with the fears of
Hell, which way ever thou go; and that thou art not still thinking whither
thou art going, and how the Devils are ready to take thy soul, as soon as Death
has opened the door and let it out, into Eternity! As carelessly or scornfully
as thou sit here, I wonder that thou do not tremble to consider, where it
is that thou must shortly be, and where thou must abide for ever? It is one of
the most notable discoveries of the powerful craft of Satan, that he is able
to keep such a Garrison as thy heart in so much peace, and to quiet a poor
wretch, that is uncertain to be one hour out of Hell! That thy sleep is not
broken with terrible dreams, and that thou do not eat thy meat in terrors;
and that ever a smile should be seen in thy face! That thy business, or
company, or sports, or pleasures, should once put out of thy mind thy endless
misery. While I am speaking, and thou art hearing, Hellfire is burning, and
the Devils are waiting, and thy blinded soul is posting on, and for ought thou
know, may be there this night. Poor sinner, for my part, I know thee not!
and therefore cannot justly be suspected to bear thee any ill will, or to speak
these words with a desire of thy hurt. I know this is language that the guilty
do not love to hear. But I must tell thee, that reproachest or deridest a
serious holy life, that except the Blasphemers of the Holy Ghost, there is few
in the world in more certain misery then thou. Other sinners, though miserable,
may have some more cloak to hide their misery. Though the drunkard shall not
enter into Heaven, he may flatter himself with the remembrance that Noah was
once overtaken with that sin. Though the Fornicator or Adulterer shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God ( Ephesians. 5. 5.) he may cheat himself awhile, with
the remembrance of David's guilt. Though the false-hearted, temporizing,
self-saving Hypocrite, shall not be saved, he may deceive himself by the
instance of Peter's denying his Master, and his dissimulation, Gal. 2. But what
cloak have thou to hide thy misery! Did ever any true Disciple of Christ,
either hate or reproach his servants and his ways! What godly man has made a
mock at godliness, (unless it were when he was ungodly.) If any should think,
that an act of drunkenness, or fornication, might consist with grace; no man
that understands himself can think, that a scorner at an Holy life, has
himself the Holiness which he scorneth! I would not for a world be in the case
of that wretch, that speaks well of Holiness in others, while he lives in
fornication, luxury or worldliness himself, though he think that he cuts scores
by daily crying to God for mercy. But I would much less for a thousand worlds
be in the case of him that neither is godly, nor can speak well of it: that is
not only void of the Spirit of Christ, but speaks against it: that is not only
void of the Holy Image of God, but hates it, and reproacheth it in others. O
rather let me have no tongue to speak, no soul to think, then ever I should
speak or think thus maliciously of the Image, and ways, and servants of the
Lord! I had rather be a dog or a toad, then one of those men that use to mock
at serious diligent serving of the Lord, or that maliciously reproach his
servants, and bend their wits and tongues against them; so legibly is the mark
of the Devil upon them, that I must needs tell you that are true Believe's, you
are much to be blamed that you look not on them with more compassion, and weep
not for them, as for men that are within a (...) of He^^, when you hear them
rail at the Laws or servants of the Lord. I mean those of whom the Apostle
says, [For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ (that is, to the
self-denying mortified state of Christians, and following him even through
sufferings) whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory
is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. that not only do
wickedly, but teach men so to do, Matthew. 5. 19. and have pleasure in them that
do it, Romans 1. 32. and think it strange that we run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of us; who shall give account to him that is
ready to judge the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5

2. Thou bear most eminently the image of the Devil, and most expressly
speak his mind, and art most openly employed in his works. What is the
Devil, but an apostate spirit, filled with enmity against God and his servants,
and hating Holiness, the malicious Accuser of the Brethren, slandering and
reproaching them, and seeking their destruction! And shall a malicious, lying
sinner live, that imitateth Satan in his enmity to God! O that thou knew
whom thou servest! and that thou knew whom thou speak against! Woe be to
him that striveth with his Maker, Isa. 45. 9. Its hard for thee to kick against
the pricks, Acts 9. 5. Who ever hardened himself against him, and has
prospered? Job 9. 4. If Satan were to speak with open face, what would he say,
but as the tongues of the malicious enemies of holiness do; even to speak evil
of the ways and servants of the Lord? Might he appear and speak himself in the
Assemblies and Councils of the great ones of the earth, he would speak against
the same men, and to the same purpose, as those that I have described. Your
tongues are his instruments. You speak what he secretly suggesteth, as verily
as if he had written you your instructions, and you had read it in his words:
He hates holiness, and therefore he tempts you to hate it. He would bring it
into hatred in the world, and therefore he speaks disgracefully of it by your
tongues. His will is your will. And your words are his words: and the
pleasant'st music that you could make him. O how it pleases him to make a
reasonable creature reproach the Word and ways of his Creator! How eager was
he to have got Job to have spoken evil of God!

3. Be it known to thee, thou reviler, that if ever thou be saved thy self, it
must be in that way that thou revilest. Thy hope lies in it. As sure as thou
live, there is no other way to life eternal. Without holiness none shall see
God, Heb. 12. 14. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matthew.
5. 8. When thou have all done, thou must come ^ack, and go that way thy self or
burn for ever. Either thou must be such as those that thou do speak against,
or thou art everlastingly undone. And if thou think to be such a one thy self,
and to come to heaven by the very way that now thou do revile, can thou yet
revile it! And if thou perish in hell for want of holiness, thou shall then
have enough of thy rebellion. Then thou shall cry out against thy own malicious
reproaches a thousand times more, then ever thou did against the servants of
the Lord. Though the very distinction between the Godly and Ungodly be now thy
scorn, yet I shall be bold to tell thee in the words of Henoch, yea of God,
Jud. 14. 15. [Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.] Now you have your
day, and judgment must begin at the house of God! and if it first begin at us,
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God! and if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1
Pet. 4. 17, 18. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful! But his delight is in the Law of the Lord; and in his Law does he
meditate day and night. -- The ungodly are not so; but like the chafe which
the wind drives away: therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous: For the Lord knows the way
of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 1. This is
Scripture distinction; which God will make good.

I make no question, but the worst of-you will put by all this in your
self-deceit, and say, It is not holiness that we speak against, but its
Hypocrisy, or Schism, or some such accusation that malice shall suggest, will
be your mask. But will you answer me these few Questions.

Quest. 1. Why then do you not imitate them so far as they do well! why are you
not as much in works of holiness, as they! in reading, and meditating on the
Word of God, in holy conference, and secret prayer, and instructing your
families etc? and then leave them and spare not where they do amiss.

Quest. 2. Why do you not hate as much the sins of the notoriously ungodly, who
show them without shame? Nay why do you make such men your companions?

Quest. 3. Why go you to the heart, that is unseen, and arrogate the
prerogative of God, to censure men of Hypocrisy and such secret sins that are
out of your discerning? If you know your heart by outward actions, insist upon
your proofs.

Quest. 4. Why speak you not of their good as well as of the supposed evil? why
are you not more in speaking well of what is well, then in speaking ill of what
is ill?

Quest. 5. Why is it that you speak of men that you know not? and of others
that are innocent, for the sakes of those that you imagine to be guilty? and
why do you so greedily snatch at any matter of reproach, and take it by hearsay
from the most ignorant, rash, or malicious mouths?

Quest. 6. If it be Hypocrisy or other vice that you so hate; why do you not
hate them in your selves? why live you so viciously, while you profess
obedience to the Lord? and why do you take on you to believe a heaven and hell
hereafter, and to give up your selves in Covenant to God, and live so contrary
to that professed belief and Covenant?

Quest. 7. Do you not feel that it is partly malice, and partly the
recriminations of a guilty galled conscience, that fain would steal a little
peace by thinking others to be as bad as you?

I shall dismiss this unhappy sort of men with these two requests. 1. You are
the men that of all others have the most notable advantage for your conviction,
of the misery of your present state: and therefore I beseech you take that
advantage. One would think it should be the easiest matter in the world, for
such as you to know that you are ungodly, that hate godliness and oppose it?
you have no plausible pretense for self-flattery or self-deceit. And therefore
confess your misery, and look out to Christ, for help and pardon, while there
is hope and time.

2. For the time to come, will you but try a serious holy life before you speak
against it any more? For shame speak not evil of the things you know not, as
those bruits described, Jud. 10. And holiness was never well known but by
experience. O that you would be entreated but to yield to this most equal
motion. Away with your worldly fleshly lives; and live in faith and holiness, a
just, a spiritual and heavenly life, but one year, or one quarter, or one
month, and then if by experience you find just cause for it, reproach a holy
life, and spare not.

II. TO the second sort, (that speak evil of men upon differences of opinion,
especially while they profess the same Religion, in all the essential necessary
parts,) I shall propose these aggravations of their sin, for their humiliation.

1. Consider, can you think it agreeable to the Law of Christ, to reproach men
behind their backs, and unheard, for that which you never soberly and
Christianly told them of to their faces? Did you lovingly first admonish them,
and impartially hear what they can say for themselves? what is your end in
speaking against your brother? Is it to do him hurt, or good? If hurt, be sure
you do him Justice; and backbiting is not the way of Justice. If good, you
cross your own intention. For what good can it do him, that another hears him
evil spoken of?

2. If you are Christ's Disciples, it must be known to all men by your special
love to one another, Joh. 13. 35. And is reproach and evil-speaking the fruit
or evidence of such love? can you talk so of the friends that are most dear to
you, or that you love indeed? how do our hearts rise against that man, that
speaks reproachfully of our dearest friends? Love would scarce suffer you to
endure such abuse of Christians in another, without a serious reprehension:
much less to be the abuser of them your selves.

3. Your evil speaking of your brethren destroys love in others, as it proves
the want of it in your selves. And to destroy their love, is to destroy their
souls. You do your worst to quench the love, both of him that you speak evil
of, and of them to whom you speak it. Good is the object of love: and therefore
to speak of men, and manifest them to be lovely, is the only way to make them
loved. Evil is the object of hatred: and therefore to speak evil of them, is to
make them seem hateful, and draw men to the guilt of hating them. To praise a
man will do more to make him loved, then if you only entreat another to love
him. And to dispraise a man will do more to make him hated, then if you
directly persuade another to hate him. And what service you do the Devil, and
what disservice unto Christ, by destroying love, and sowing hatred among his
servants, were you impartial, you might easily discern.

4. Is it not shame and pity, that the followers of Christ should imitate the
Devil, and ungodly men, as by detraction and reviling words they do? you
aggravate your brethrens faults, and find faults where there are none; and so
do Satan and ungodly men. You have a secret desire to make them seem
contemptible and vile; and so have Satan and ungodly men. And hereby you seem
to justify the wicked, and encourage them in their reproaching. They think
they may boldly speak such language of you all, as they hear you speak of one
another. O what pity is it to hear the professed children of the Lord, to use
the hell-bred language of his enemies, as if they had gone to school to Satan!

5. Are there not tongues enough sharpened against us in the world, but we must
wound each other with our own? Is it not enough, if we are the seed of Christ,
that every where the serpents seed do hate us; and that all manner of evil is
falsely spoken of us, and that we are made as the scorn and the offscouring of
all things, but we must also hate and reproach each other? Have you not load
enough from the world? Have you not enemies enough to do the work of enemies,
but friends must do it? And has not Satan instruments and tongues enough of
his own, but he must use those that are Christ's against himself?

6. If thou hate thy brother, yet sure thou do not hate thy self. Why then
do thou hurt and shame thy self? His hurt is but to be defamed, which is
little, if any thing at all (for it is much in himself whether it shall hurt
him.) But thy hurt that do it, is to provoke God against thee, and incur his
wrath, and wound thy soul by the guilt of sin. And if another hurt thee, in the
heel, will thou therefore stab thy self to the heart? If another be bad, will thou become so by unjust defaming him? And how do thou cross thine own
intentions? The stone that thou castest at him, flies back in thy face. Thou
proclaimest thy own transgressions and shame, when thou art uncharitably
proclaiming his. Is not a backbiter, a reviler, if not a malicious calumniator,
a worse name (which thou take to thy self) then that which thou can fasten
on him whom thou do reproach?

7. Thy uncharitable speeches are a dangerous sign of an unhumbled and
unpardoned soul. If thou can not forgive, thou art not forgiven. Did you know
your selves, it would teach you to deal more compassionately with others. You
would have the act of Oblivion as extensive as you could, if you knew what
danger you are in your selves. Do you not know as much by your selves as you
have to reproach your brother with? Do you not then invite both God and man to
take you at the worst, and use you as you use your brother? methinks you should
rather be desirous of a more tender and indulgent way, as knowing what need
your selves have of it.

If you say, [O but he has done thus and thus against me] Let conscience say
what you have done your selves against God and others. If you say, He is a
Schismatic, an Hypocrite, or this or that; remember, that malice is blind, and
never wants matter of accusation or reproach, and innocence is no defense
against it: else Christ and his Prophets and Apostles had been better used by
the world. And ask conscience whether more then you can truly say of him, may
not be said against your selves. If all such must be defamed, how infamous will
you be?

8. If you will speak ill, you must hear ill. You teach men how to use you. [Si
mihi pergit quae vult dicere, quae non vult audict.

Benedictis si certasset, audisset bene] says the Comaedian. And God usually
in justice suffers it so to be. And as those that by violence trample down
others, when they feel themselves on the higher ground, do often live to be
trampled on themselves; so those that take their advantages to insult, and
defame others, do usually live to be defamed. For with what measure you mete,
it shall be measured to you again, Matthew. 7. 1, 2. Judge not therefore, that ye
be not judged.

TO which of these two former ranks you should refer the common names of scorn
that religious persons have been most loaded with among us, you must judge by
the particular occasion and person. It is not my intention on or desire to
plead for any faction, disobedience, irregularity, or hypocrisy; much less to
palliate heresies or odious crimes that are cloaked with the name or profession
of Religion. It is the Hypocrite that I am all this while detecting. But I must
say that it has been the highest brand or character of Hypocrisy and impudent
profaneness conjunct, and one of the most crying transgressions of this Land,
that men baptized into the Name of Christ, have made a scorn at the diligent
serving of him, and lived in the hatred of that Religion in the life and
practice, which themselves profess. And that if upon some small circumstantial
differences, any of their superiors have but encouraged them, to use any
nickname of reproach against their most conscientious brethren, they have been
glad of the occasion, and used those reproaches against the serious practice of
Religion, which others pretend to use only against men's different opinions,
which they account their exorbitancies or mistakes. How the names of [Zealots,
Precisians, Puritans,] and such like, have been used in this Land; and what
sort of people have been made thereby (and by the discountenance of those that
should have cherished a diligent holy life) to be the common scorn; and how
great a hindrance this has proved to the salvation of many thousand souls, is
a thing that is much more sad to mention, then difficult to prove. And when one
nickname is grown out of use, the serpentine enmity watches for the
opportunity that is afforded by differences and discountenance of the times, to
take up another that may have a sharper sting. The dead form of Religion, and
as much as you will of words and shows, they can reverence or endure: But Life,
and Seriousness, and Practice is the thing they hate. Just like a Bear or other
ravenous creature, that will let their prey alone while it seems dead and stirs
not: but if it stir, they leap upon it, and tear it into pieces. And therefore
it is that the diligent zealous exercise of Religion, among the Papists, by
Images, and Tautologies, and lifeless Ceremonies and forms is not half so much
hated or reproached by the vulgar, as the serious exercise of unquestionable
duties, that all are in words agreed in, is here with us. To pray in our
families; to instruct our children and servants in the necessary points of
faith and duty; to exhort a drunkard, a swearer, a covetous person, or other
ungodly ones to repent and to give up themselves to a holy life; to take up any
serious speech of death and judgment, and the life to come, and the necessary
preparations thereto; these and such like are the odious marks of a Zealot, a
Precisian, or Puritan with the ungodly rabble* so that serving the great and
glorious God is with them become a matter of scorn; while serving the Devil is
taken for their glory, if they can but do it in the plausible less disgraceful
mode.

But because some of the chief accusers of the Brethren, would needs persuade
men, that the ordinary usage of the forementioned Nicknames has been less
impious and more justifiable, against a sort of people only whom they feign to
be unfit for humane society, I shall only appeal now to the Godly Bishops and
conformable Ministers that mention it.

Bishop G. Downame ( who though he has written so much for Bishops, has
written as much to prove the Pope to be the Antichrist) in his Sermon called,
Abraham's Trial, p. 72. says [And even in these times, the godly live among
such a generation of men, as that if a man do but labor to keep a good
conscience in any measure, though he m^d^le not with matters of state, or
Discipline, or Ceremonies; (As for example, if a Minister diligently Preach, or
in his Preaching seek to profit, rather then to please, etc. -- Or if a private
Christian makes conscience of swearing, sanctifying the Sebb^th, frequenting
Sermons, or abstaining from the common corruptions of the time) he shall strait
way be condemned for a Puritan, and consequently be less favored, then either
carnal Gospeller or a close Papist, etc.] Such were the times then.

Dr. Robert Abbot, public Professor of Divinity in Oxford, and after Bishop of
Salisbury, in a Sermon on Easter- day, 1615. says; [The men under pretense of
truth, and Preaching against the Puritans, strike at the heart and root of
faith and Religion now established among us: that this Preaching against the
Puritans was but the practice of Parsons and Campians Counsel, when they came
into England to seduce young Students: And when many of them were afraid to
lose their places if they should professedly be thus, the Counsel they then
gave them was, that they should speak freely against the Puritans, and that
should suffice,] etc. so he.

Of Archbishop Lauds tract of Doctrinal Puritanism, drawn up for and presented
to the Duke of Buckingham, see Prin in his Trial, p. 156. Diverse Bishops have
affirmed that the Jesuits were the masters of this nickname here in England,
and the promoters of it.

But of the common sense of this word, and the use of it, I shall now call in
no more witnesses but Mr. Robert Bolton, a man that frequently publishes his
judgment for conformity to Prelacy and Ceremonies; In his Discourse of Hap. p.
193. he thus speaks.

I am persuaded there was never poor persecuted word, since malice against God,
first seized on the damned Angels, and the graces of heaven dwelt in the heart
of man, that p^ssed through the mouths of all sorts of unregenerate men, with
more distastfulness and gnashing of teeth, then the name of Puritan does at
this day; which notwithstanding as it is now commonly meant ( N. B.) and
ordinarily proceeds from the spleen and spirit of profaneness, and good
fellowship, is an honorable nickname, that I may so speak, of Christianity and
grace. And yet for all this I dare say, that there is none of them all, but
when they shall come unto their beds of death, and are to grapple immediately
with the painful terrors of the King of fears, and to stand or fall to the
dreadful tribunal of the living God, -- then (except the Lord suffer them to
fall into the fiery lake with senseless hearts and seared consciences,) would
give ten thousand worlds, were they all turned into gold, pleasures and
imperial crowns, to change their former courses of vanity, etc. into a life of
holy preciseness, strictness, sincerity and salvation. Oh! when the heavens
shall shrivel together like a scroll, and the whole frame of nature flame about
their ears; when the great and mighty hills shall start out of their places
like frighted men, and the fearful reprobate cry and call upon this mountain,
and that rock, to fall upon him; when as no Dromedary of Egypt, nor wings of
the morning, shall be able to carry them out of the reach of Gods revenging
hand: no top of Carmel, no depth of sea, or bottom of hell, to hide them from
the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb;
no rock nor mountain, nor the great body of the whole earth, to cover them from
that unresistible power, that laid the foundations of them; no arm of flesh, or
armies of Angels, to protect them from those infinite rivers of brimstone,
which shall be kept in everlasting flames by the anger of God, when their poor
and woeful souls shall infinitely desire, rather to return into the loathed
darkness of not being, and to be hid for ever in the most abhorred state of
annihilation, then now to become the everliving objects of that unquenchable
wrath, which they shall never be able to avoid or to abide, and to be chained
up by the omnipotent band of God among the damned spirits, in a place of flames
and perpetual darkness, where is torment without end and past imagination: I
say, at that dreadful day (and that day will come) what do you think would they
give for part in that Purity which now they persecute? and for the comforts of
true-hearted holiness that now they hate? and yet without which (as it will
clearly appear, when matters are brought before that high and everlasting
Judge) non shall ever see the Lord or dwell in the joys of eternity. Nay I
verily think there are no desperate despisers of godliness or formal opposites
to grace, which do now hold Holiness to be Hypocrisy, Sanctification
singularity, practice of sincerity too much preciseness, -- but when the pit of
d^struction has once shut her mouth upon them, and they are sunk irrecoverably
into that dungeon of fire, would be content with all their hearts, to live a
million of years as precisely as ever Saint did upon earth -- to redeem but one
moment of that torment] so p. 159. [The common conceit of these men is, that
civil honest men are in the state of grace, and that formal professors are very
forward, and without exception; but true Christians indeed are Puritans,
Irregularists, exorbitants, transcendents to that ordinary pitch of formal
piety, which in their carnal comprehensions they hold high enough for heaven:
They either conceit them to be Hypocrites, and so the only objects for the
exercise of their Ministerial severity, and the terrors of God; or else though
the Lord may at last pardon perhaps their singularities and excesses of zeal;
yet in the mean time they dissweeten and vex the comforts and glory of this
life, with much unnecessary strictness and abridgement.]

[Now of all others, such Prophets as these, are the only men with the Formal
Hypocrite; exactly fitted and suitable to his humor: for however they may
sometime declaim boysterously ( N. B.) against gross and visible abominations,
(and that is well) yet they are no searchers into, nor censurers of the state
of Formality: and therefore do rather secretly and silently encourage him, to
sit faster upon that sandy foundation, then help to draw him forward to more
forwardness, etc.]

See also his description of a Puritan, p. 132.

So in his Direct. for walking with God, p. 172. [Good-fellow meetings and
Alehouse revellings are the drunkards delight: but all the while he sits at
it, he is perhaps in a bodily fear of the Puritan Constable.]

Many such Passages tell you how the word [Puritan] was commonly interpreted in
Oxford, Northamptonshire, and wherever Learned and Holy Mr. Bolton was
acquainted.

And having mentioned his testimony of the use of that word, I shall add
somewhat of his discovery of this spirit of malignity and detraction that
works in the Antipuritans. In his Disc. of Hap. p. 190, 191. he says,

The reverence and respectful carriage to godly Ministers, which may sometimes
be found in the Formal Hypocrite, does grow toward distaste and disaffection,
when they press them by the powerful sense, and piercing application of some
quickening Scriptures, to a fervency in spirit, purity of heart, preciseness in
their walking, supernatural singularity above ordinary and moral perfections,
excellency of zeal, and a sacred violence in pursuit of the Crown of life: to
an holy strictness, extraordinary striving to enter in at the strait gate, and
transcendent eminency over the formal righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, to a nearer familiarity with God by prayer, daily examination of
conscience, private humiliations, meditation upon the endless duration in a
second life; to a narrow watch over the stirrings and imaginations of the
heart, and expression of holiness in all the passages of both their callings,
etc. -- Points and ponderations of which nature are ordinarily to him so many
secret seeds of indignation, and many times breed in his formal heart and cold
affection exasperation and estrangement, if not meditations of persecution and
revenge. Sanctification, preciseness, purity, holiness, zeal, strictness, power
of godliness, spiritual men, holy brethren, Saints in Christ, Communion of
Christians, godly conferences, conceived prayers, sanctifying the Sabbath,
family exercises, exercise of fasting, and mortifying humiliations, and such
like, are commonly to men of thus temporising temper, and lukewarm
constitution, terms of secret terror and open taunting. -- And sometimes they
villanously sport themselves with them, and make them the matter of their
hateful and accursed jeasts, that so they may keep under as much as they can,
in disestimation and contempt, the faithful Professors and Practisers thereof,
whom naturally they heartily hate, and also seem thereby to bear out the
heartless stourishes of their own formality with greater bravery. Hereupon it
is that if they take a child of God but tripping in the least infirmity,
(against which too perhaps he strives and prays with many tears, etc.)
slipping only in some unadvised precipitant passage of his negotiations, etc.
-- they take on unmeasurably! then they cry out, These are your men of the
spirit; these are the holy brethren; these are your precise fellows; these are
they which make such show of Purity and forwardness! you see now what they are,
when matters come out, and their dealings are discovered, when it comes to the
trial indeed, or to a matter of commodity, etc. Are not they proud? are not
they malicious? are not they hard-hearted and covetous as well as others, etc.
When by the mercies of God (in their sense) they are neither so nor so; but
such censures as these are very often the mere evaporations of pure malice, and
the bitter ebullitions and overflowings of their gall,] etc.

And p. 164. [The ordinary conceit which unregenerate men entertain of these
(experimental Ministers) is -- that they are troublers of Israel, Preachers of
terror, transgressors of policy, unfit to Prophecy at Court, or in the Kings
Chapel, pestilent fellows, Seditioners, Factionists, born only to disquiet the
world, and vex men's consciences. -- In these days of ours especially, which
are strangely profane and desperately naught, in what man soever the power of
grace, undaunted zeal, resolute sincerity, are more working, eminent, and
remarkable, ordinarily the more and more implacable, outrageous and inflamed
Opposites shall that man find, wheresoever he lives.]

And p. 10. The formal Hypocrite is moved to think his state good, and the way
of his life to be right, from a prejudice which he conceives from the
imputations which the world lays upon the children of God; such as are Pride,
Hypocrisy, singularity, melancholy, simplicity, etc.]

Page 38. [His form of godliness, in his conceit is the only true state of
Salvation: Whatsoever is short of him is profaneness; whatsoever is above him is
preciseness. But when upon his deathbed he awaketh. -- ]

And Direct. for Walk. p. 131. [The more forward he is in the narrow way, the
more furiously is he persecuted by the spite of tongues: The most resolute for
Gods glory, and in good causes, is ordinarily most railed against, and reviled.
The foul spirit of good fellowship, as they call it, is still foaming out
against Gods chiefest favorites the foulest censures: that they are
Hypocrites, Humorists, Factionists, Traitors, Pestilent fellows, and all that is
naught. -- There is no creature that ever God made, not Satan himself excepted,
which is more maliciously set against and censured then good men. Neither
should any have so bad a name as they, could the hellish mists of virulent
tongues obscure and stain the glory of their reputation.]

And p. 43. [At this day professors of the gracious way, be in greatest
disgrace with the most, and a drunkard, and swaggering good fellow, an Usurer,
a son or daughter of Belial, shall find more favor, applause, and approbation
with the world, then a man which makes conscience of his ways, etc. -- ]

Page 350. [They cry, These forward Professors will all turn fantastical,
Familists, Anabaptists, Arrians, any thing: which cry awakes the eye of State
jealousy, and so by an unworthy consequent, draws upon those who are true of
heart, even Gods best servants, and the Kings best subjects, discountenance,
suspicions, if not molestations, unnecessarily, causelessly.]

And p. 351, 352. out of Austins Epist. 137. he shows, that it was so in his
time, [They every way, and infinitely labor, that when some Professors of
holiness have foully fallen indeed, or be only so slandered, the world would
believe that they are all such: Do you not think in his time the world did thus
exult and exclaim, or in the like manner upon Lots fall! Here now you see
Puritan Lot, who could not endure the good fellowship of the Sodomites, he is
now himself seized on by incest: They are all such I warrant you] citing du
Bartas translat. by Silvester, p. 412.

Base, busy stranger! come thou hither thus
Controler-like, to prate and preach to us?
No Puritan, thou shall not here do so, etc, Thus you hear from a conformable
Divine, how men calling themselves Christians, and being (some of them)
Formally Religious, do prove themselves self-deceiving Hypocrites, by their
unbridled tongues, in reviling at those as Puritans and too precise, that will
not be self-deceiving Formalists as well as they. I shall only add some of
Bishop Halls characters of an Hypocrite, that you may see what Formality is in
the judgment of knowing men.

Page 169. Walking early up into the City, he turns into the great Church, and
salutes one of the pillars on one knee; worshipping that God which at home he
cares nor for, while his eye is fixed on some window, or some passenger, and
his heart knows not whither his lips go. He rises, and looking about with
admiration, complains on our frozen charity, commends the ancient -- with the
superfluity of his usury, he builds an Hospital, and harbors them whom his
extortion has spoiled; so while he makes many beggars, he keeps some. He
turns all gnats into Camels, and cares not to undo the world for a
circumstance. Flesh on a Friday is more abomination to him, then his neighbors
bed. He abhors more not to uncover at the name of Jesus, then to swear by the
name of God.] etc. So Bishop Hall.

But, perhaps you will say, These persons whom you describe, that will make a mock
of godliness it self, are not to be numbered with Hypocrites, but with the
openly profane.

To which I answer, 1. Even these profess themselves to be Christians, and
therefore are Hypocrites when they are not what they do profess. 2. They
persuade themselves that they are as truly godly as those that they reproach:
and do not think that it is godliness indeed for which they do reproach them:
But for engrossing the name or reputation of Godliness to themselves, and for
some differing manner or way of worship. For this is one of the most notable
cheats, by which the devil undoes the empty Formal Hypocrite: Finding that this
man does own Christianity, in his Opinion, but is void of the true Spirit, and
power, and life of Christian Religion, he raises some controversies between
the serious Christian and the Hypocrite, about some controvertible points of
doctrine, or about some modes or circumstances of Discipline and external
worship: and when they fall into two sides, the Hypocrite thinks that it is but
in these controversies that the difference lies: The question, (thinks he) is
not whether men should be regenerate, godly and Religious: But whether my way
of Religion or the Puritans and Precisians be better!] And presently he hence
concludes, that indeed it is he that is the more truly Religious: [For (says
he) my judgment is sound, and the Puritans is erroneous: I am of the judgment
of the Church, which he is against: The Reverend Prelates, or Doctors are more
of my side then on his: I am for order, and he is for confusion, and
unreverence, and follows the humors and fancies of his own brain.] And thus
the Devil turns his eye from the main difference, and makes him believe that
it is these controversies that are all that sets them at a distance. But alas
man, thou overlookest the point that thy life and soul lies on. Agree first in
the serious hearty entertainment and practice of the substance of that holy
truth, which you are both in point of Opinion agreed in, and do not condemn thy
self in the things which thou allowest; contradict not thy Creed and profession
by thy fleshly, worldly, negligent, careless and ungodly life; but love God
with all thy heart and might; and first seek his Kingdom and his Righteousness;
(which thou confessest thou should do) and then the principal difference is
healed, and thou have escaped the principal danger of thy soul: and then it is
not a few circumstantial differences that will divide your hearts, or divide
you from each other in the life to come. Men that differ about Bishops, and
ceremonies, and forms of prayer, may be all true Christians, and dear to one
another and to Christ, if they be practically agreed in the life of godliness,
and join in a holy heavenly conversation. But if you agree in all your opinions
and formalities, and yet were never sanctified by the truth, you do but agree
to delude your souls, and neither of you will be saved for all your agreement.

III. THE third sort to be spoken to, is those that let out their passion in
hard speeches, against superiors or others that they think do wrong or
persecute them on a Religious account. At this time I will suppose the injury
be real, and the complaint be just; It yet beseems not Christians to revile.

1. Consider, how contrary this is to the example of our Lord. And that he left
us his example in this particular, with a special recommendation for our
imitation. When he was falsely accused, and the high Priest urged him to answer
for himself, Matthew. 26. 62, 63. he was silent, to show that he could bear a
false accusation, without so much as vindicating his innocence by a just
defense. O learn both the lesson and motives recommended to you, 1 Pet. 2. 18.
to the end. [Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear; not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: For what glory is it
if when ye are buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for
us; leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not
again: When he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that
judges righteously.] Here is the description of your duty, and your example.
Are you used worse then Christ was used? [Isa. 53. 7, 8* He was oppressed, and
he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before his sh^arers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth.] And if you will come to him and be his Disciples, you must [Learn of
him to be meek and lowly in heart, that you may find rest unto your souls]
Matthew. 11. 28, 29.

2. Consider, as our Kingdom is not of this World, so we are not to strive for
worldly pre-eminence, nor with carnal weapons, but must know that our greatness
here is in being the least, and our dignity in being the servants of all; and
our gain is by our loss, and our honor by evil reports, and by disgrace, and
our advancement by our debasement, and our preferment by being kept from
worldly honor, and our joy by sorrow, and our exaltation by humiliation: And
therefore it is contrary to our state of faith, to murmur at them that deprive
us of the pleasures of sense, or the ease and privileges of the flesh. Mark
the description of Christianity in the Gospel, and see how much of it
consists in contempt of the esteem and honors of the world, and of all the
accommodations and pleasures of the flesh, because of the expectation of the
unseen eternal pleasures; and in the forsaking all, and taking up our cross
and following a crucified Christ: and in patience, and meekness, and forbearing
and forgiving: and rather then seek either verbal or actual revenge, to give
the cloak also to him that takes away our coat, and turn the other cheek to him
that smites us. Unmortified passion, and untamed nature, will not give some
men leave to understand these passages of Christ; but they search for some such
figure to expound them by, as shall annihilate the plain and proper sense.
Self-love so blinds men, that when they read these Gospel precepts, they feel
not their consciences touched and bound by them; but they read them as if they
read them not, and retain no more, then if it were nonsense which they read.
Had the commands aforesaid (of patience, forbearing and forgiving) but as much
force and efficacy upon the souls of most professors, as the commandments have
that are against swearing, and cursing, and drunkenness, and fornication, we
should have much better maintained our innocence, and our peace, and have more
honored our profession, by showing the world Christianity exemplified, in its
proper genuine nature and effects.

3. Consider, it is not oppression, persecution, or hard usage that will exempt
us from the obligation of the fifth Commandment, which requires us to honor
our superiors, (our Natural, and Civil, and Ecclesiastical Fathers.) It is the
evil and froward, and not only the good and the gentle that we must honor and
obey. And the reason is plain from their Original and end. It is not as our
Trustees, or agents, or friends only, that our rulers must be honored: but as
the Officers of the God of heaven: nor is it only as they do good to us: but as
they preserve order and justice in the world, and are the pillars of the
Commonwealth. If Magistrates should deal never so hardly with you and me; yet
still their office is of necessity to the common good: And if their office be
necessary, their honor is necessary: I or when they are dishonored and
despised, they are disabled. And therefore for the common good we must be
careful to keep up the honor of our Governors, even when we suffer by them
our selves. Princes were none of the best when the Apostles commanded the
Churches to honor them, and obey them, and this not only for fear of their
penalties, but for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. O^ (...) it was ^hey that walked
after the flesh, in the l^st of uncleanness, that were presumptuous and
self-willed, and despised Government, and were not afraid to speak evil of
dignities: whereas the Angels that are greater in power and might, bring not
(...) accusations* against them before the Lord] 2 Peter 2. 10, 11. Jude 8. 9.

4. Consider, that reviling is a tongue-revenge: and revenge is Gods, and he is
engaged to repay, and has commanded us not to avenge our selves. As we must
not step into the Judges tribunal when ever we think he is negligent in his
administrations; so much less must we accuse God of negligence or injustice, by
stepping into his throne. And though the Railers of these times, excuse their
sin with the name of Justice, they must show their Commissions for the
executing of that Justice, before it will pass in heaven for an excuse. Is not
God severe enough? will not his judgment be terrible enough? would you wish
men to suffer more then he will inflict on the impenitent? what! more then
hell? and will it not be soon enough? are you so hasty for so dreadful a
revenge, can you not stay when the Judge is at the door? Mark both the usage
and remedy of believers, in Jam. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. To the rich and great ones of
the world he says [Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye
have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter: Ye have condemned and
killed the just, and he does not resist you.] There Is your usage. [Be patient
therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord] There Is the remedy. But must we
stay so long? he thus repeateth his advice. [Be ye also patient: stablish your
hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.] Let your moderation be known
to all men: the Lord is at hand] Phil. 4. 5. [Shall not God avenge his own
elect, that cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell
you, that he will avenge them speedily] Luke 18. 7, 8. There Is no contradiction
between crying long and avenging speedily.

5. Consider, what compassion, rather then reproach, you owe to those by whom
you suffer. They do themselves much more hurt then they do you. Are they great?
they have the more to answer for, and their fall will be the greater, Jam. 5.
1, 2, 3. If you are your selves believers, go into the Sanctuary, and ask the
Scriptures what will be their end? and then deny them compassion if you can.
Alas, consider, they are at the worst, but such as you were formerly your
selves, as to the main. Paul makes a sad confession of his own persecution of
the Church, when he was before Agrippa, and does not complain that he was
himself so hardly used. [I verily thought, says he, with my self, that I ought
to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus. -- (...) of the Saints I shut
up in prison (little thinking that they were Saints) I gave my voice against
them. I punished them often in every Synagogue. -- And being exceedingly mad
against them, I persecuted them. -- Acts 26. 9, 10, 11, 12. He would not tell
Agrippa that he was mad, but he might speak more freely of himself. O sirs,
pity poor men that have the temptations of worldly greatness and prosperity,
and must go through a Camels eye if they will come to heaven: who stand so high
that sun and wind have the greatest force upon them; Who see so much vanity,
and little serious exemplary piety: who hear so much flattery and falsehood, and
so little necessary truth, says Seneca, [Divites cum omnia habeant, unum illis
deest; scilicet, qui verum dicat: si enim in client^^am falicis hominis
potentumque perveneris veneris, aut veritas, aut amicitia perdenda est.] If you
were in their places, you know not how far you might be prevailed against your
selves. If little temptations can make you miscarry in your places so often and
foully as you do, what would you do if you had the strongest baits of the
world, and allurements of the flesh, and the most dangerous temptations that
Satan could assault you with? Have you not seen of late before your eyes, how
low some have fallen from high professions, and how shamefully the most
promising persons have miscarried, tha were lifted up, and put to the trial of
such temptations of prosperity, as they had never been used to before? O pity
those that have such dangerous trials to pass through, and be thankful that you
stand on safer ground; and do not cruelty envy them their perils, nor reproach
them for their falls, but pray, and daily pray for their recovery.

6. Consider, this speaking evil of those by whom you suffer, has too much of
selfishness and corrupted nature in it, to be good. If another suffered as you
do, and you were advanced as another is, would you not speak more mildly then?
Or if not so, yet the proneness of nature to break out into reviling words,
though it were for Religion and for God, does intimate to you that it has a
suspicious root. Do you find it as easy to be meek and patient, and forgive a
wrong, and love an enemy? Take heed lest you serve Satan in vindicating the
cause of God. Its an unfit way of serving God, to do it by breaking his
Commands. Read seriously the description of a contentious, hurtful,
soul-tongued zeal, in Jam. 3. and then tell me what thanks Christ will give you
for it. The two great Disciples James and John thought it would have notably
honored Christ, and curbed the raging Spirit of the ungodly, if he would have
let them call for fire from heaven, to consume a Town that refused to receive
him. But does Christ encourage their destroying zeal? No: but he tells them, Ye
know not what spirit ye are of.] They little knew how unlike to the tender
merciful healing Spirit of Christ, that fiery hurting spirit was, that provoked
them to that desire! nor how unpleasing their temper was to Christ. This is the
very case of many thousand Christians, that are yet young, and green, and
harsh, and have not attained to that mellowness, and sweetness, and measure of
charity, that is in grown experienced Christians. They think their passions,
and desires of some plagues on the contemners of the Gospel, are acceptable to
God, (and blame the charitable as too cold:) when they little know what spirit
it is that raises that storm in them, and how unlike, and unacceptable it is
to Christ. Were you as zealous to serve all others in love, and to stoop to
their feet for their salvation, and to become all things (lawful) to all men,
that you may win some, this saving zeal would be pleasing to your Lord, who
comes to do the work of a Physician, and not of the Soldier, to save and not
to destroy, and therefore most approves of those that serve him most diligently
in his saving work.

7. Lastly, consider your passions and evil speakings will but increase your
suffering, and make it seem just, if otherwise it were unjust. If you are not
meek, you have not the promise of inheriting the earth, Matthew. 5. 5 If you
honor not your Parents or superiors, you have not the promise that your days
shall be long in the land. And your evil speaking will make men conclude, that
you would do evil if you could and durst. As its said to be Zoilus answer when
he was asked, why he spoke evil of Plato and such worthy men [Quoniam malum
facere cum velim non passum] Because I would do them hurt and cannot] Give not
occasion for such a charge.

[Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another: love as
brethren: be pitiful: be courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing
for railing; but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a blessing; for he that will love life and see good
days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, -- 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. But if
ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye: and be not afraid of their
terror, nor be troubled, ver. 14.

But I suppose you will here say, Is it not lawful to call a spade a spade? Is
not a woe against them that call evil good? may not a man speak of the hurtful
crimes of others? I answer. 1. Yes, when as a Magistrate, a Minister, or a
brother, you have a just call to tell them of it lovingly, though plainly, to
their faces, in order to their recovery. 2. And when you have a just call to
speak of it to others, either in seeking justice, or in charity and mercy, for
the preservation of those that else will be more hurt by the silencing of men's
faults, then you do hurt by mentioning them.

But, 1. You may not slander men as guilty of what indeed they are not.

2. You may not make men's faults seem worse then they are.

3. You must endeavor the good of the person as much as you can, while you
blame the sin.

4. You must not mention men's faults without a call: unless the good of himself
or others do require it.

5. You must not do it with a revengesul mind, for personal injuries.

6. You must manifest love and compassion in all.

7. You must difference between reigning sins, and humane frailties: and
between a course of sin, and an unusual fall: and between a sin repented of,
and not repented of: and must censure but as you find God censure in his Word.

8. You must be more ready to speak of the good that is in the same men as you
have a call, then of the evil: and not maliciously stick only in the galled
place.

9. Let it be as far as may be to his face.

10. Let it be according to the common rule of equity. [Do as you would be done
by.] Not measuring out duty to others, by a corrupt impatience of bearing such
your selves: but speaking nothing for matter or manner to another, which you
would think unmeet to be spoken to you, if you were in his case.

11. And especially be tender of the honor of superiors, yea though they were
evil, and do you wrong.

12. And foresee the consequents, whether your words are not like to do more
hurt then good.

And if still you think that sufferings will justify reviling, contumelious
complaints, consider these two causes of your mistake.

1. You make a Great matter of a Little one. As there is not so great good in
the prosperity of the flesh, as worldlings think; so neither is there so great
evil in the loss of it: what great harm is poverty, imprisonment, reproach or
death? Nay, you have a promise that all shall work together for your good, Romans
8. 28.

2. You make a strange matter of that which is the ordinary condition of
believers: To be hated of all men; to have all manner of evil spoken falsely of
you: to be persecuted from one City to another: to be killed all the day long,
and counted as sheep to the slaughter. Do these seem strange matters to you?
did you never read or hear the Gospel? nor know the terms of Christ till now?
did you never read of forsaking all for Christ, if indeed you would be his
Disciples? did you never count what it must cost you to be saved? did you not
renounce the world and the flesh in your Baptismal (often renewed Covenant,) 1
Pet. 4. 11, 12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if
some strange thing happened to you: But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers
of Christ's sufferings.] And will you think so strange of smaller matters, as to
think they excuse your impatience, and evil speeches?

BY this time you may see, if you are willing to see, that all among us that
are not real Saints, are Hypocrites, if they profess themselves Christians and
the servants of God: and that miserable ungodly souls, that call such
Hypocrites as are more diligent then themselves for their salvation, do but
discover their ignorance and malignity, and condemn themselves in bewraying
their hypocrisy, while they reproach the practice of the same Christian
Religion, which themselves profess; and the obedience to that Scripture, which
they confess themselves to be the Word of God. All the profane, and
unsanctified among us, that call themselves Christians, are certainly
Hypocrites. And for the godly, it is the very same Religion, that is professed by
them and you: It is the same engagement and Vow that you all made to God in
baptism: And suffer but reason impartially to tell you, when two men have
entered the same Covenant, and one never minds it so as to keep it; and the
other makes it his chiefest care; which of these is liker to be the dissembler
in his Covenant? When two men profess themselves the servants of God, and such
as place their hopes in heaven, and one of them makes a jest of sin, and
serves the flesh and the world which he has renounced, and hates those that
diligently serve the Lord; and the other makes it the principal care and
business of his life to serve and please him, insomuch as he is reproached for
it, as making more ado about it then needs; which of these are Hypocrites, and
which are serious, in the performing of their Covenants, and living according
to their profession? If two servants promise to do your work, and one labor as
hard as he can, and the other sit down and deride him for making so much ado,
which was it that played the Hypocrite in his promise? If diligence in Gods
service be a sign of hypocrisy, then promise-keeping is hypocrisy, and
promise-breaking is sincerity; And then you may transfer the case to God (who
will be the rewarder of them only that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.) and
say that it is his faithfulness to break his promises, and his unfaithfulness
to keep them. But who will spend words on such impious absurdities? so gross,
that the Devil would have showed himself a fool to vent them, if he had not
made his followers such fools as to believe them. But for the faithful servants
of the Lord, let them know, that they must serve him on such terms: They must
live above the judgment and reputation of this world; and be content that God
the searcher of hearts shall be their Judge, who knows both sincerity and
hypocrisy; and will bring forth their righteousness as the light. Christians,
you must not only be sincere* but also patiently expect to be accounted
hypocrites, and pointed at as the only dissemblers of the world: You must not
only be honest, but patiently expect to be accounted dishonest: you must not
only bewise and sober, but patiently expect to be accounted fools and mad men.
You must not only be liberal, charitable, and contemners of the world, but
patiently expect to be called covetous, even though you give away all that you
have. You must not only be chaste and temperate; but also patiently expect to
be defamed as incontinent and licentious, and as Christ was called, a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. A Minister must not only lay
out himself wholly for the saving of men's souls, and spend himself and all that
he has on his Masters work; but also patiently expect to be accounted
unfaithful, covetous, and negligent, and murmured at by almost all whose
unreasonable desires he does not answer, and be censured by almost all, whose
wills and humors he does not fulfill; and that is, most, that have a self that
rules at home, and therefore they think should be the Idol of others, as it is
their own: and that are but unacquainted with the reasons of those things that
do displease them. Its little comfort to us to do good, if we cannot bear the
estimation of doing evil, and cannot lose all the observation, acknowledgement
and applause of man, as if we had never done the good at all. It is far from
Christian perfection to be honest, and godly, and sincere, if we must needs be
accounted to be as we are, and cannot patiently be esteemed dishonest, ungodly,
and hypocritical; and be judged worst, when we are best; what have the servants
of Christ lost their lives for in flames, and by other sorts of torments, but
for the best of their service, and greatest of their piety and fidelity? When
dogs bark at passengers, commonly it signifies but two things, viz. that they
are persons that they know not, or that they hate: but it is no sign that the
persons are bad, or poor, or sick: For be they never so bad and miserable, if
they know them, and love them* the dogs will not bark at them. See that thou be
not an Hypocrite, and then it must be accounted a small matter by thee, to be
called an Hypocrite: yea if persons that fear God themselves shall so esteem
thee, it is no other affliction but what thou must be armed for, and patiently
undergo. Even from the godly through mistake, we often suffer most for our
greatest duties, and are censured most for that which God and conscience most
approve us for; and lose our reputations for that which God would be greatly
offended with us if we did otherwise. As ever then you would not prove your
selves Hypocrites, see that you look not for the Hypocrites reward, as Christ
calls it, Matthew. 6. 2. which is, to be approved of men; be they good or bad
men, their overvalued applause may be but the Hypocrites reward. To be content
and patient in doing well, and being judged to do ill; and in being good, and
being judged to be bad, is the property of him that is sincere indeed:
therefore to be unthankfully requited, and reviled, and spit upon, and
buffeted, and shamefully used and put to death, even by those whose lives and
souls he had with greatest care and condescension, pitied, this was the
pattern of love and self-denial that was set us by our Lord. And though we
cannot reach his measure, and distempered Christians find much struggling before
they can bring themselves to patience, under such ingratitude and unworthy
usage from the world, especially from their mistaken froward brethren, yet in
some prevailing measure, it must be done. For he that cannot serve God without
the Hypocrites reward, is but an Hypocrite. If he will not be a Christian,
obedient, charitable, diligent, faithful, for heaven and the pleasing of God
alone, he is not a Christian indeed. And, alas, what a pitiful reward is it,
to be thought well of, and applauded by the tongues of mortal men? How few,
were ever the more holy by applause? but thousands have been hurt, if not
undone by it. Thou give all thou have to the poor: thou spendest thy self
wholly, and all that thou have for the service of God, and the good of others:
Its well: it must be so. But after all thou art censured, slandered, vilified
and unthankfully, and unmannerly used. And what of that! what harm do thou
fear by it? what advantage thy pride and selfishness might have taken, even by
due applause and thankfulness, its easy to perceive: But now, the temptation
is taken out of thy way: thou art secluded from all creature comforts; and so
art directed and almost forced to look up to the love of God alone: Now thou
have no other reward before thee, its easier to look singly on the Saints
reward. When God has no competitour, to whom else then can thou turn thy
thoughts? when all others abuse thee, it is easiest to have recourse to him.
When earth will scarce afford thee any quiet habitation, thou wilt surely look to
heaven for rest.

Thus much I thought meet to interpose here for the confirmation of the
sincere, on occasion of the worlds unjust accusations; and so to persuade them
to be satisfied in the portion of the sincere. I now return again to the
self-deceiver.

ANd here I shall conclude all with these two requests to you, which as one
that foreseeth the approaching misery of self-deceivers, I earnestly entreat
you, for the sake of your immortal souls, that you will not deny me. The first
is, that you will be now but as willing to try your selves, as I have been to
help you; and as diligent and faithful when you are alone, in calling your own
hearts to a close examination, as I have been to hold the light here to you. O
refuse not; delay not, to withdraw your selves sometimes from the world, and
set your selves as before the eye of God, and there bethink your selves whether
you have been what you have vowed and professed to be! and whether that God has
been dearest to your hearts, and obeyed in your lives, and desired as your
happiness, who has been confessed and honored with your lips? Consider there,
that God judges not as man; nor will he think ever the better of you, for
thinking well of your selves: and that there must go more to prove your
approbation with God, then commonly goes to keep up your reputation in the
world. The Religion that serves to honor you before men, and to deceive your
selves, will never serve to please the Lord and save your souls. And the day is
at hand when nothing but God can give you comfort, and when self-deceivers will
become everlastingly self-tormentors. O therefore go willingly and presently to
the Word, to your lives, and hearts, and consciences, and try your selves, and
try again, and that with moderate suspicion, that in so great a business you
may not be deceived, and be self-deceivers.

2. My second request is, that if you do discover, or but justly suspect your
selves of hypocrisy and self-deceit, you would stick there no longer, but
presently change your vain Religion, your seemings and formalities, for the
power of godliness, and sincerity of heart.

But I suppose that some of you will say, There lies the difficulty. O that we
could do it? But how should it be done?

I answer; If thou be really willing to be above Hypocrisy, and a vain
Religion, the cure is half wrought at least. And I will not tire thee now with
many, but help and try thee by these few directions.

In general; Be but what thou have promised and vowed to be in thy Baptism, and
what thou still do profess to be as a Christian, and it will serve the turn:
what that is, I have told you before.

More particularly. Direct. 1. Deliberately renew thy Covenant with God: and
with a grieved heart, bewailing that thou have been a Covenant-breaker, give up
thy self presently to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as thy Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, thy Owner, thy Ruler, and thy Father.

2. Renounce sincerely the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and be at a point
with all below; and quit all conceits and hopes of felicity or rest on earth:
And absolutely devote and resign thy self, and all thou have to the will and
service of thy Lord, without any secret exceptions or reserves. This is the
property and plague of Hypocrites, that secretly they have exceptions and
reserves in giving up themselves to God. They will follow him, except it would
disgrace them or undo them in the world: he shall have all, provided the flesh
may not be too much pinched: that is, in plain English, they take him not for
God, but for a second to themselves and the world, and will give him but what
the flesh can spare.

3. Fix the eye of a lively faith upon God and upon the everlasting joys, and
there take up thy whole reward, and look for no other. Quit all expectations of
a reward from men. Let it seem a small thing to thee, what any mortal man shall
think or speak of thee; unless as Gods honor or interest is concerned in
thine. I have told you before, that he is an Hypocrite that will not be godly
without the Hypocrites reward; and that can sail no further then he is moved by
the wind of man's applause, or of some other worldly end.

4. Stick not in any externals of Religion, nor in notions and barren
uneffectual opinions. So far art thou Religious, as thy soul is engaged unto
God, and thy life employed for him: And so far thou do truly worship him as
thy heart is drawn up to him in love, and as thou do fear him, admire him,
trust him, and take thy pleasure in him. Think not, that it is a saving
Religiousness, to be of such or such an opinion, or such a party, or such a
Church, or to say over so many words of prayer, or to keep a task of outward
duties; or to be of a ready voluble tongue, in Preaching, Prayer or Discourse.
Religion lies in the Heart and Life.

5. Indulge not thy self in one known sin. Retain no gross or wilful sin:
Plead for no Infirmity, but make it the business of thy life to extirpate the
relicts of the body of death. Be willing of the most searching Word, and of the
plainest reproof, and of all the help thou can get against so dangerous an
enemy.

6. Stint not thy self in any low degrees of holiness; but love, and long, and
strive after the highest. If thou bear a secret core of distaste against those
that outgo thee, it is a mortal sign. Thou must be perfect in desire, or thou
art not sincere.

7. Walk always as in the presence of the holy, dreadful, heart-searching God:
Remember that he sees thy ends, thine affections, and all thy thoughts. Be the
same therefore in secret as thou art in public, sincerely search the Word of
God, and know what it is that he would have, and that resolve on, if all the
world should be against it. Unresolvedness is hypocrisy: and temporizing or
following the greater side, for the security of the flesh, is no better. Never
think thou can be too holy, or too obedient. But make it thy study to do God
all the service that thou can, whatever suffering or cost it put thee to. Be
not ashamed openly to own the cause of Christ. In the presence of the greatest,
remember that thy master is so much greater, that they are worms and vanity to
him. Take heed of culling out the easy and cheap part of Religion, and laying
by the difficult and dear. Thy Religion must be as the heart in thy breast,
which is always working, and by which thou live; which cannot stop long, but
thou will die. But the Hypocrites Religion is like the H^t upon his head, for
ornament and shelter from the weather, and not for life: in the night when none
sees him he can lie without it; and in the day he can put it off for the sake
of a friend, and perhaps stand bare in the presence of a greater person that
expects it. So can the Hypocrite too often dispense with his Religion.

8. Be hearty and serious in all thou do. Hear, and read, and pray as for thy
life. Sincerity consists much in seriousness. Remember thou art almost at
another world! while I am speaking and thou art hearing, we are both hasting to
our endless state. O how should men live on earth, that must live here for so
short a time, and must live for ever in heaven or hell: These things are true,
and past all question: and therefore for your fouls sake lose not heaven by
trifling. Pray not in jest, and serve not God in jest, and resist not sin in
jest, least you be damned in good sadness. When you are at work for eternity,
its time to do it with all your might. O what unconceivable mercies are now
offered you! O what an excellent price is in your hands! and nothing is so
likely to deprive you of the benefit, as dreaming and dallying, when you should
be up and doing; as if this were not your business, but your play; and
salvation and damnation were matters of sport. O do but set your selves to the
pleasing of God, and the saving of your souls with all your might, and ply it
with diligence as your chiefest work, and then you are out of the danger of the
Hypocrite. But if still you will give the world the pre-eminence, and your
flesh must be pleased, and your prosperity secured, and God must have but
complements, or the leavings, your misery is at hand, and vengeance shall
undeceive those hearts that would not be undeceived by the Word. And you shall
remember to the increase of your anguish, that you were told this day, that
your seeming trifling Religion would prove vain. But I beseech you, as you are
men, as you love your souls, dismiss us with some better hopes; and now resolve
to be downright Christians. Which as I have begged of you, I shall now beg of
God.

THE Fools Prosperity.

A SERMON Preached at Coven-Garden: published upon occasion of some offense and
misreports.

By R. B.

Printed in the year, 1660.

Prove. 1. 32, 33. For the turning away of the simple shall sl^y them, and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But who so hearkeneth unto me, shall
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.
THE bounteous offers and vehement exhortations of Christ here in this Chapter,
were accompanied with a foresight and prediction of their rejection, by many:
ye^ does not that prevent ^he offers and exhortations: but occasion the
pred^ction of the c^^^mity of the refusers, God will not go out of his way,
because the ungodly will not walk with him. He will do the part of a righteous
Governor, though he foresee that men will not do the part of obedient
subjects. But his primary end shall be attained upon the Righteous, in the
successes of his grace, as his secondary end shall be upon the Disobedient, in
the honor of his vindictive Justice. This is the sense of the words which I
have now read to you. Which 1. Describe the ungodly. 1. By their present way of
sin. 2. And by their future state of misery. Their sin is described by, 1. The
occasion. 2. The act. 3. The habit. Prosperity and ease is the occasion:
turning away from God, and rejecting his counsel is the act: And folly or
simplicity is part of the habit. Simplicity is here taken for sinful
foolishness, and not as it is often for commendable sincerity. Whether you read
it [The turning away] or [the ease] of the simple, it is all one as to the
scope and use that I shall now make of it, both being included as to the sense
in the other words. Folly is mentioned both as the cause of their abuse of
prosperity, and as the effect of prosperity so abused. Because they are fools,
they turn Gods mercies to their own destruction: And because they prosper, they
are confirmed in their folly.

2. The words describe the godly. 1. By their obedience; they [hearken unto
Christ.] 2. By their privilege or reward: they [shall dwell safely, and be
quiet from fear of evil.]

We shall begin with the first and show you. 1. That it is so, that [the
prosperity of fools destroys them.] 2. How folly and prosperity concur to
their destruction: or how prosperity befooleth and destroys them. 3. How we
should all improve this truth to our best advantage.

I. Scripture and experience concur in proving the truth of the conclusion.

1. Though God tell us in his Word of a difficulty that all must conquer that
will be saved, yet it is a greater extraordinary difficulty, that he tells us
of as to the rich and prosperous in the world; such a difficulty as is
pathetically expressed by this interrogation, Luke 18. 24. [How hardly shall they
that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God?] such a difficulty as is
expressed by this proverbial comparison, ver. 25. [For it is easier for a Camel
to go through a needles eye, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God] such a difficulty as ^^st he hearers into admiration, and made them ask,
v. 26. [Who then can be saved?] such a difficulty as is to man an
impossibility, v. 27. and leaves only this hope, that [Things are possible to
God, that are impossible to man.]

2. And though its said of men indefinitely that it is but few that shall be
saved; yet is it noted of the rich and prosperous that its few of them among
those few, or few in comparison of other sorts of men, that shall be saved,
Joh. 7. 48. [Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?] 1 Cor.
1. 26. [For ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of
the wor^^, and things which are d^spis^d, has God chosen; yea and things that
are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
presence.] And therefore Scripture speaks in such general language, as if
salvation had been almost appropriated to the poor, and the rich had been
excluded, because of the rarity of their salvation, Luke 6. 24, 25. But woe unto
you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation: woe unto you that are
full, for ye shall hunger: woe unto you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and
weep.] Jam. 2. 5, 6. [Hearken my beloved brethren: has not God chosen the poor
of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised
to them that love him? but ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress
you, and draw you before the judgement-seats? Do they not blaspheme that worthy
name by which you are called?] And therefore when Christ would describe a
wicked miserable man, he does it in these words, Luke 16. 19. [There was a
certain rich man which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day.] And Luke 12. 16, 19. [The ground of a certain rich man
brought forth plentifully, etc.] And when he would describe a godly happy man,
he does it under the name of a Lazarus, Luke 16. 20. Judge now by the success,
as it is discovered in the Scriptures, what good prosperity does to fools?

I might turn you to David's observations in Psalm. 37. and 73. and mind you why
it is that Christ himself went before us in a state of chosen poverty, 2 Cor.
8. 9. and why his Disciples followed him in this tract; and why he called them
so much to deny and forsake the riches of the world, and tried them so often by
selling all, and following him in hopes of a heavenly reward. Bu^ the point is
evident in wh^^'s said in my text, and these annexed testimonies.

2. But yet to make you more apprehensive of it, I shall adjoyn the testimony
of Experience. And tell me whether prosperity be not the destruction of (...),
when you have noted the ^ruits of it in these few observations.

1. Where do you find less serious ^ure (...) salvation, then among the
prosperous great ones of the world? what abundance of them are de^d-hear^ed,
senseless, disregarders of everlasting things? what abundance o^ them are of no
Religion, but the custom of their Country, and the will of their superiors,
which are their Bible, their Law, and Gospel, and their Creed! what abundance
of them are addicted to that worship which Christ pronounces vain, which is
measured by the traditions of men, and consists merely in ceremonious (...)!
How few of them are ac^^^^ted with the spiritual worship (...) that God who
being a Spirit can accept no worship but what is spiritual! Alas poor souls,
they drown their reason in sensuality, and are fed as for the slaughter, and
think not seriously whether they are going, till prosperity has ceased to
deceive them, and Satan is content to let them see that they have lost, and he
has w^n the game. They are of the Religion described by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.
5. that takes gain for godliness: But if godliness must go for gain, they will
have none. To oppress their tenants, and devour widows houses, and cloak it
with a long pharisaical lip-service, or wipe their mouths with some customary
complemental prayers, and offer God to be a sharer in the prey, this is the
commonest Religion of the rich. But they cannot endure to be so pure, as to
devote themselves to God in that pure and undefiled Religion which visits the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and keeps men unspotted from the
world,] Jam. 1. 27. What houses or company can you go into, where Religion is
more bitterly derided, more proudly vilified, more slanderously reproached, or
more ingeniously abused and opposed, then among the rich and full-fed
worldlings?

And if there be here and there a person fearing God among them, he passes for
a rarity or wonder! And a little Religion goes a great way, and is applauded
and admired as eminent sanctity, in persons of the higher rank. If a poor man
or woman dwell as it were in heaven, and walk with God, and think, and speak,
and live by rule, its scarce regarded; poverty, or want of a voluble tongue, or
the mixtures of unavoidable frailties, or some imprudent passages that come
from the want of a more polishing culture and education, does make their piety
but matter of jeasting and reproach to the Dives'es of the world: But if a
Lord, or Knight, or Lady have but half their piety, humility and obedience to
God, how excellent are they in their Orbs! Nay, if they do but countenance
Religion, and befriend the servants of the Lord, and observe a course of cold
performances, with the mixture of such sins for which a poor man should be
almost excommunicate, what excellent religious persons are they esteemed?

2. What families are worse ordered, and have less of serious piety then the
rich? If our splendid gallants should be desired to call their families
constantly to prayer, to instruct them all in the matters of salvation, to
teach them the Word of God with that diligence as is commanded, Deuteronomy. 6. and
11. and to help them all in their preparations for death and judgment; to
catechize them, and take an account of their proficiency, to curb profaneness,
and excess, and to say with Joshua 24. 15. As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord; how strange and precise a course would it seem to them? should
they purge their families of ungodly servants, and imitate David, Psalm. 101.
that would not let the wicked dwell in his sight; should they spend the Lords
days in as serious endeavors for the spiritual benefit of their families and
themselves, as poor men do that fear the Lord, what wonders of piety would they
seem?

3. In their entertainments, visitations, and converse, how rare is serious
holy conference among them? How seldom do you hear them remembering their
guests and companions of the presence of the holy God, of the necessity of
renewing, confirming and assisting grace; of the riches of Christ revealed in
the Gospel; of the endless life of joy or misery which is at hand! How seldom
do you hear them seriously assisting each other in the examining of their
hearts, and making their calling and election sure, and preparing for the day
of death and judgment? A word or two in private with some zealous Minister or
friend, is almost all the pious conference that shall be heard from some of the
better sort of them. Should they d^scourse as seriously of the life to come,
and the preparation necessary thereto, as they do about the matters of this
life, they would mar^ the mirth, and damp the pleasure of the company, and be
taken for self-conceited hypocrites, or men of an unnecessary strictness and
austerity, inconsistent with the jocund lepidity and sensual kind of delight
wherewith they expect to be entertained. The honest, heart-warming, heavenly
discourse that is usual among poor serious Christians, would seem at the tables
of most of our great ones, but an unseasonable interruption of their more
natural and acceptable kind of converse.

4. What men do more carelessly cast away their precious time, then these
Dives'es do? They think they have a license to be idle and unprofitable,
because they are rich: that is, to abuse or hide their talents, because they
have more then other men: Forgetting, that to whom much is given, of them shall
much be required. Because they have no poverty or family-necessities to
constrain them to a laborious life, they think they may lawfully take their
ease, and live as droans on other men's labors, as if they owed nothing to God
or the Common wealth, but all to their own flesh. Their morning hours which are
most seasonable for meditation and holy addresses unto God, and the works of
their calling, are perhaps consumed in excess of sleep: The next are wasted in
long attiring and curious adorning of their flesh: from thence they pass to
vain discourse, to needless-recreations, to eating and drinking, and so to
their vain talk and recreations again, and thence to the replenishing of their
bellies, and so to sleep: And thus the words of the fool that Christ describes
in Luke 12. 19. are turned by them into deeds, and it is the language of their
sensual lives. [Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine
ease, eat, drink and be merry.] Sleeping and sporting, and jeasting; and idle
talking, and eating and drinking, and dressing and undressing, with worldly
cares and passions intermixed, are the very business and employment of their
lives. Thus contemptuously do they waste their precious hours, while God stands
by, and time makes haste, and death draws near, and their miserable souls are
unprepared, and heaven or hell are hard at hand; and this is all the time of
preparation, that ever shall be allowed them. O do but look on these distracted
piteous souls, that have but a short uncertain life to provide for a life that
has no end, and see how they forget or senslesly remember the matters of
infinite concernment! see how they trifle away that time that never will
return! how they sport and prate away those hours which shortly they would
recall, were it possible, with the lowdest cries, or recover with the dearest
price! When they know not but in a laughter-or a merry jest, their breath may
be stopped by an arrest from heaven, or justice may surprise their miserable
unready souls with the cards in their hands, or the cup at their mouths, when
they have not the least assurance of being out of hell an hour, and yet can
sell this time for nothing, and basely cast it away on toys, which is all that
ever they shall have to prevent everlasting misery, or to procure everlasting
joy: stand by a while, and hearken to the discourse of sensual gallants, and
mark how days and weeks are spent, and then tell me whether the prosperity of
such fools be not made the occasion of befooling and destroying them?

5. What men in the world do live so sensual a life as rich and prosperous
worldlings live? The difference between the sanctified and the unsanctified,
the children of God and of the Devil, is, that one of them lives after the
Spirit, and the other lives after the flesh, as in Romans 8. to ver. 14. you may
read at large. And how few of these Dives'es do think the damning sin of
flesh-pleasing to be any sin in them at all? If they do not eat till they are
sick, or drink till they are drunk, their consciences scarce control them in
their voluptuousness: They never well understood the meaning of such passages
as these, [Rom. 13. 14. Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
(desires or) lusts thereof. Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall
dye.] 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body and bring it into subjection, etc.]
They understand not how far the flesh is their enemy; or else (as they have
verbally renounced it) they would use it as an enemy.

6. In their prosperity these fools have not the wit to love or bear the means
of their preservation or recovery. They have the sorest maladies, and are most
impatient of the remedies. They are in the stream of temptations, and have
greater need of help then others; and yet there is none that reject it with
more contempt and pride. Plain-dealing Preachers which honest humble souls
delight in, do seem intolerable saucy fellows to these sons of pride. If we
tell them but of the sin that God has most plainly condemned in his Word, or
of the judgment which he has there denounced, and make the most prudent and
modest application of it unto them, we seem to wrong them, and stir up their
pride and enmity against us, and provoke them to slanderous recriminations or
revenge. It troubles them not to commit it, or to keep it, but to hear of it:
And they take us to be more faulty for admonishing them of it, then themselves
for being guilty of it. Though we are by office the Messengers of Christ, that
will tell them of it shortly to their faces, and fears not the proudest son
of Belial, yet are they too stout to be admonished by such as we, but reject
our message with hatred and disdain. And indeed it is a wonder of mercy that
the prevalency of this impatient guilt and malice, has not ere this turned
plain and faithful preaching into some toothless formalities or homilies, and
silenced the Preachers for the security of the offenders; and expelled the
Physicians lest they displease the sick. The Lord still prevent it. If we tell
them with the greatest caution but of the necessary truths, without which a
sinful soul is never like to be humbled or saved, we are taken to be turbulent,
and injurious to the ease or honor of these auditors. They must hear of the
necessity of regeneration and holiness, and of the weight and worth of things
eternal: and yet they cannot bear to hear it. They must have heart-searching,
and heartbreaking truths, in a searching, awakening manner brought home to
them, if ever they will be saved by them: but they cannot endure it. The
Surgeon is intolerable that would search their sores: and yet there is no other
way to heal them. Alas the heart of man is so hard, that all the skill and
industry of the Preacher can scarce sufficiently sharpen and set home the truth
that it may enter: But nothing that is sharp can be endured by these tender
souls. Such language as Christ and his Prophets and Apostles used, does seem
too rough for silken ears. Their honor must not be blotted with the mention
of their odious sins, and deplorable misery. To be a glutton, or a drunkard, or
a wanton, or filthy f^rnicator, or a malicious Cain, they can endure: But to be
told [Thou art the man] though it be in secret, and with love and tenderness,
they cannot bear. The Minister is thought to wrong them that shall secretly and
faithfully admonish them, and tell them truly what will be the end: But Christ
will execute all his threatenings, and make them feel what now they hear, and
yet constrain them to confess that he does not wrong them. We wrong them now,
if we tell a Gentleman of his impiety, and sensuality, and pride, and of his
vilifying precious time, and casting it away on cards, and idleness, and
unprofitable talk: yea though he be so far forsaken of common grace and reason,
as to hate and deride the serious practice of his own profession, and the way
that the God of heaven has prescribed as flatly necessary to salvation, yet
cannot he endure to hear of his enmity against the Lord, nor to be told that he
bears the image of the Devil, while he is against the image and Laws of
Christ. Should we but privately read a text to them that condemns them, they
are as angry with us as if we made the Scripture which we read; and it were not
the Word of God, but ours. If we tell them that [Without holiness none shall
see God,] Heb. 12. 14. and that [Except they be regenerated, converted, and
become as little children (in humility beginning the world anew) they cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 18. 3. Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. that [If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his,] Romans 8. 6. or that
[Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge,] Heb. 13. 4. and that [The
unrighteous, the fornicators, effeminate, covetous, extortioners, drunkards, or
revilers, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,] 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 5.
3, 4, 5, 6. they think we talk too precisely or presumptuously to them. You
would think by their proud contempt of his threatenings, and their boldness and
carelessness in sin, that these silkworms did imagine they had conquered
heaven, and the righteous God were afraid to meddle with them; or that he would
reverse his Laws and pervert his judgment for fear of dishonouring or
offending them. Little do they think how many Dives'es are now in hell. But
methinks they might easily believe, that their honorable flesh is rotten and
turned to common earth; and that death will make bold to tell them also, when
their turn is come, that they have been pampering but a piece of clay; and that
it was not worth the loss of heaven, nor the suffering of hell, to spend so
much time and care and cost to feed up a carcass for the worms. We must now
submissively ask their leave, to tell them what God has said against them. But
God will not ask them leave to make it good upon the highest, the proudest and
securest of them all; [For God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses,] Psalm. 68. 21.
[He is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness; neither shall evil dwell
with him. The foolish shall not stand in his sight: he hates all the workers
of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 3, 4. The ungodly (that delight not in the Law of the
Lord) are like the chafe that the wind drives away: They shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners [in the assembly of the righteous, Psalm. 1.] The wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17.]
Cannot you endure to hear and consider of these things? How then will you
endure to feel them? God will not flatter you. If all your greatness enable you
not to repulse the assaults of death, nor to chide away the gout or stone; and
all your honor or wealth will not cure a fever, or ease you of the toothake;
how little will it do to save you from the everlasting wrath of God? or to
avert his sentence which must shortly pass on all that are impenitent? And yet
prosperity so befooleth sensual men, that they must hear of none of this: at
least not with any close and personal application. If you speak as Christ did
to the Pharisees, Mat. 21. 45. that they perceived that he spoke of them, they
take you for their enemy for telling them the truth, Gal. 4. 16. and meet our
doctrine as Ahab did Elijah, 2 King. 21. 20. Have thou found me O mine enemy!
and 1 King. 18. 17. Art thou he that troubles Israel? or as the same Ahab of
Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 8. There is one man (Micaiah) of whom we may enquire of
the Lord: but I hate him; for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but
evil.] Or as Amaziah the Priest said of Amos to King Jeroboam, [He has
conspired against thee: the land is not able to bear all his words,] Amos 7.
10. And ver. 13. Prophecy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the Kings
Chapel, and it is the Kings Court.] They behave themselves to faithful
Ministers, as if it were a part of their inviolable honor and privilege, to
be mortally sick without the trouble of a Physician, and to have no body tell
them that they are out of their way, till it be too late, or that they are in
misery till there be no remedy: and that none should remember them of heaven
till they have lost it; nor trouble them in the way to hell, nor seek to save
them, lest he should but torment them before the time. And thus prosperity
makes them willingly deaf and blind, and turn away their ears from the hearing
of the Law, and then their prayers for mercy in their distress are rejected as
abominable by the Lord, Prove. 1. 24. to 33. and 28* 9.

7. Yea if there be any persecution raised against the Church of Christ, who
are the chief acters in it, but the prosperous, blinded, sensual great ones of
the world? The Princes make it their petition against Jeremy to the King, [We
beseech thee let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of
the men of war -- and the hands of all the people in speaking such words unto
them: for this man seeks not the welfare of his people but the hurt, Jer. 38.
4. It was the Presidents and Princes that said of Daniel, [We shall not find
any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the
Law of his God, Dan. 6. 5.] Were it not lest some malicious hearer should
misapply it, and think I sought to diminish the reputation of Magistrates,
while I show the effects of the prosperity of fools, I should give you
abundance of such lamentable instances, and tell you how commonly the great
ones of the world have in all ages set themselves and taken counsel against the
Lord and against his Christ, Psalm. 2. and stumbled upon the cornerstone, and
taken no warning by those that have been thus broken in pieces before them. How
ready is Herod to gratify a wanton dancer with a Prophets head? In a word, as
Satan is called the Prince of this world, no wonder if he rule the men of the
world, that have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14. and can command his
armies, and engage them, and enrage them against the servants of the Most High,
that run not with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. And as James
says (as aforecited) [Do not the rich oppress you, and draw you before the
judgment seats? Do they not blaspheme that worthy name by which you are
called? Jam. 2. 6, 7.

8. And in all this sin and misery how senseless and secure are these
prosperous fools? as merry within a year, or month, or week of hell, as if no
harm were near. How wonderful hard is it to convince them of their misery? The
most learned, wise or godly man, or the dearest friend they have in the world,
shall not persuade them that their case is such as to need a conversion and
supernatural change. They cannot abide to take off their minds from their
sensual delights and vanities, and to trouble themselves about the things of
life eternal, come on it what will; they are resolved to venture, and please
their flesh, and enjoy what the world will afford them while they may, till
suddenly God surprizeth them with his dreadful call, [Thou fool, this night
shall thy soul be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou
have provided?] Luke 12. 20. [So is he that lays up riches for himself, and
is not rich toward God,] ver. 21.

II. I Should next show you how it is that prosperity thus destroys fools.
Briefly, 1. By the pleasing of their sensitive appetite and fancy, and so
overcoming the power of reason. Perit omne judicium cum res transit in
affectum. Violent affections hearken not to reason. The beast is made too
headstrong for the rider. Deuteronomy. 32 15. [Jesurun waxed fat and kicked -- then he
forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.] 2.
The friendship of the world is enmity to God: and if any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him, Jam. 4. 4. 1 John 2. 15. And undoubtedly
the more amiable the world appears, the more strongly it does allure the soul
to love it. And to the prosperous it appears in the most entising dress.

3. And hereby it takes off the soul from God. We cannot love and serve God
and Mammon. The heart is gone another way when God should have it. It is so
full of love, and desire, and care, and pleasure about the creatures, that
there is no room for God. How can they love him with all their hearts, that
have let out those hearts to vanity before?

4. And the very noise and busle of these worldly things, diverts their minds,
and hinders them from being serious, and from that sober consideration that
requires some retirement and vacancy from distracting objects.

5. And the sense of present ease and sweetness, does make them forget the
change that is near. Little do they think what is necessary to comfort a departing
soul, when they are in the heat of pride or lust, or taken up with their
business and delights. In the midst of bravery and plenty, feasting and
sporting, and such other entertainments of the senses, its hard to hold
communion with God, and to study the life to come in such a College or Library
as this. Prosperity and pleasure make men drunk: and the tickled fancy sports
it self in abusing the captivated mind. And these frisking Lambs, and fattened
beasts, forget the slaughter: they think in Summer there will be no Winter; and
their May will continue all the year. Little do they feel the piercing,
griping, tearing thoughts, that at death or judgment must succeed their
security and mirth. O how hard do the best men find it, in the midst of health
and all prosperity, to have such serious lively thoughts of heaven, and of the
change that death will shortly make, as they have in sickness and adversit,
when death seems near, and deluding things are vanished and gone! The words of
God have not that force on a sleepy soul in the hour of prosperity, as they
have when distress has opened their ears. The same truths that now seem
common, lifeless inconsiderable things, will then pierce deep, and divide
between the joints and marrow, and work as if they were not the same that once
were laughed at or disregarded. Eccles. 7. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the
house of mourning, then to the house of feasting; (do you believe this?) for
that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart. Sorrow is
better then laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth.] I beseech you take patiently your character
and name here from the Word of God.

6. Moreover these fools are by prosperity so lifted up with pride, that God
abhors them, and is as it were engaged to abase them. For [The Lord will
destroy the house of the proud,] Prove. 15. 25. [Every one that is proud in
heart is an abomination to the Lord: though hand join in hand, he shall not be
unpunished,] Prove. 16. 5. [He scatters the proud in the imagination of their
hearts: He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low
degree: He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent
empty away,] Luke 1. 51, 52, 53. [In the things wherein they deal proudly, he
is above them,] Exodus 18. 11. [For every one that exalts himself shall be
abased: and he that humbles himself shall be exalted, Luke 18. 14.] For God
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5.]

7. But no way does their prosperity so desperately precipitate them, and make
them the scorn of heaven, and the football of Divine contempt, as by engaging
them in opposition to the word, and ways, and servants of the Lord. When it
has drawn them to those sins which God condemns, and his Ministers must
reprove, and has puffed them up with pride, which makes them impatient of his
reproofs, and has increased their worldly interest and treasure, and fleshly
provision, which he commands them to deny, this presently involveth them in a
controversy with Christ, before they are aware, and casts them into the
temptation of Herod when he was contradicted in his lust; and they think they
are necessitated to stop the mouths that dare reprove them, and to keep under
the people, and doctrine, and discipline of Christ, that are so contrary to
them, and cross them, and dishonor them in their sin: and to pluck away this
thorn out of their foot, and cast it from them. And thus their prosperity and
carnal wisdom that is employed to secure it, engages the earthworms in a war
with Christ: and then you may conjecture how long they can endure to kick
against the pricks, and irritate the justice and jealousy of the Almighty, and
presume to abuse the apple of his eye; and who will have the better in the end?
The stubble is more able to resist the flames, and a fly to conquer all the
world, then these daring lumps of walking clay, to conquer God, or escape his
vengeance. Isa. 27. 4. [Who would set the briars and thorns against me in
battle? I would go through them: I would burn them together.] Isa. 45. 9. [Wo
to him that striveth with his Maker: let the potsherds strive with the
potsherds of the earth.] Job 9. 4. [Who has hardened himself against him and
has prospered?] They all imagine a vain thing, that set themselves and take
counsel together against the Lord, and his anointed, to break his bonds, and
cast away his cords from them. He that sits in heaven will laugh, the Lord
will have them in derision: then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure. -- He shall break them with a rod of iron, and
dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings! be
instructed ye Judges of the earth: serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling: kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his
wrath is kindled, but a little; blessed are all they that put their trust in
him, Psalm. 2.] They think it is but a few contemptible or hateful men that they
set themselves against; forgetting Act. 9. 4, 5. Luke 10. 16. 1 These. 4. 8.
that tell them all is done to Christ. And Mat. 18. 6. [Who so shall offend one
of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drawned in the depth of
the sea,] Mat. 21. 44. [And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken;
but on (...) it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.] I will conclude this
with A^^aziah's case, 2 Chr^n. 25. 16. [A^^ thou made of the Kings counsel^
f^rbear: why should thou be smitten? Then the Prophet forbear, and said, I
know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and
have not hearkened, etc.]

III. BEfore I tell you what use to make of the Doctrine of this text, I shall
first tell you by way of caution, what use you should not make of it.

1. Though the prosperity of fools destroy them, do not hence accuse God that
gives them prosperity. 2. Nor do not think to excuse your selves. 3. Nor do
not think that riches are evil: for the things are good, and mercies in
themselves, and being rightly used, may further their felicity. But it is the
folly and corruption of their hearts, that thus abuses them, and makes good
an occasion of evil. I may allude to Paul's words concerning the Law, Romans 7. 7,
13. [Are they sin? or is that which is good made death to them? God forbid. But
sin, that it may appear sin, works death by that which is good: because they
are carnally sold under sin.]

4. Nor must you cast away your riches, or refuse them when offered by God. But
take them as a faithful steward does his Masters stock, not desiring to be
overburdenced or endangered with the charge, but bearing what is imposed on
you, resolving to improve it all for God. Not loving nor desiring wealth,
authority or honor, nor yet so lazy, timorous or distrustsul as not to accept
the burden and charge, when God may be served by it. To cast away or hide your
talents, is the part of an unprofitable servant.

5. Take heed lest under pretense of contemning riches and prosperity, you be
tempted to contemn your Governors, or to speak evil of dignities, or diminish
the honor of those that are set over us, whose honor is necessary to the ends
of Government, and therefore to the peoples good. Though James reprove the
Church for partiality in over-honouring a man for a gold-ring or gay apparel,
yet does he not go about to abate the honor of authority. Magistracy, and
riches must be here distinguished.

6. Take heed lest while you declaim of the misery of the rich, you think to be
saved merely for being poor. For poor or rich, if you be ungodly, you must turn
or die. God does not condemn men for their riches, but their sin: Nor save any
for their poverty, but their faith and piety (through Christ.)

But the Uses you should make of the Text are these.

1. Grudge not at the prosperity of ungodly men, but compassionate them in
their danger and misery.

2. Be not afraid of the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 49. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Its they that should be afraid, that have so low to fall.

3. Take heed that you desire not riches or prosperity: unless you desire that
the way ot heaven should be made harder to you, that is so hard already. Be
contented with food and raiment. Desire but your daily bread, unless as it is
needful for your Masters service, and the relief of others.

4. Honor those ever with a double honor, that are great and godly, that are
rich and religious; not because they are rich, but because they are so strong
and excellent in grace, as to overcome such great temptations; and to be
heavenly in the midst of earthly plenty, and to be faithful stewards of so
much. Religious faithful Princes and Magistrates cannot easily be valued and
honored too much. What wonders are they in the most part of the earth! what a
blessing to the people that are ruled by them! Were they not strong in faith,
they could not stand fast in such a stormy place. Where is there in the world a
more lively resemblance of God, then a holy Prince or Governor, that lives no
more to the flesh then the poorest, for all his abundance of fleshly
accommodations, and that devoteth and improveth all his power, and honor, and
interest, to the promoting of holiness, love and concord?

5. Let great men have a double interest in your prayers. They have a double
need of grace and help; and we have a double need that they should be gracious.
O think how hard it is to save their faith, their innocence, and their souls,
and to save the Gospel and the public peace in the midst of so many and great
temptations. And therefore pray hard, where prayer is so needful.

And O that I were now able to speak such enlightening and awakening words to
you, as might show you at once your worldly prosperity, and the heavenly glory,
in their proper value! and that God would now open your eyes and hearts,
accordingly to esteem and seek them. Gentlemen, will you give this once an
impartial hearing, to one that envyeth not your wealth, but foreseeth the end
of it, and how it will forsake you, and in how deplorable a case you will then
be found, if you have not laid up a treasure in heaven, and secured the
everlasting riches. I grudge you not your prosperity: for God does not grudge
it you: yea the Devil himself can afford it you for a time, while you serve him
by it, and are captivated to his will in these golden fetters. And say not that
it is I, that call such fools: you see here it is God, that knows what he
says, and fears not to speak it. But let me with due submission propound to
your sober consideration, these Questions which your consciences are concerned
to resolve.

Quest. 1. Can any thing prove him truly wise that directly contradicts the
wisdom of the Lord? and valueth most the things that are most vilified by the
doctrine and example of Christ and his Apostles? and vilifieth that which
Christ extolleth?

Quest. 2. Can any thing prove that man to be wise, that is not wise enough to
be saved? surely it alters the case but little, whether Satan be served in
English, or in Latin, Greek or Hebrew, in Spanish, Italian or French! or
whether you go toward everlasting woe, in leather or in silk; and whether a
miserable unsanctified soul do dwell in a comely or deformed body; and in a
stately building or a smoaky cottage; and be titled a Lord, a Knight, or a
Plowman; and whether he feed on the most delightful or the coursest food.
Alas, all this will soon be nothing. The belly for meats: and meats for the
belly: but God will destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. It is the endless
life that puts the estimate upon all things here.

Quest. 3. Is he wise that prefers a feather to a Kingdom? an hour to
eternity? earth to heaven? If you say you do not so, let your thoughts, your
desires, your delights, your cares, and your labor and diligence be the
witnesses: and conscience, and God shall finally judge. A man of reason should
never make such a matter of nothing, as if there were so great a difference
between riches and poverty, honor and dishonor; and a man's life or happiness
consisted in his abundance! As its usually the badge of empty, childish
brainsick women, to value a curiosity of attire, and to have mind and time for
so many toys, and to make ostentation of their pride and folly, by their
curled, spotted, gaudy vanity, as if they were afraid lest any should be
unacquainted with it, and should think them wise; so is it but a more plausible
deliration in those, that are more taken up with names, and titles, and
commands, with houses and lands, and pompous attendance; and yet more brutish
where lust, and sport, and meats, and drinks are taken for felicity; while God
and heaven stand by, neglected: and men forget that they are called Christians,
and that they are men.

Quest. 4. Is it wisdom to esteem men by their prosperity and pomp? and to
admire a gilded post, or an ignorant adorned wanton: and yet to overlook the
divine and heavenly nature of the sanctified, and the beauty of holiness, and
the image of God upon an humble gracious soul? when that which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15.

Quest. 5. Is it wisdom to be feasting, and playing, and dancing, while the
soul is under the wrath of God, and in the gall of bitterness, and bonds of its
iniquity? and by the noise, and business and pleasures of the world, to be
diverted and hindered from the speedy settling and securing your everlasting
state? should not a man of reason without delay, the first thing he does, make
sure of his title to eternal happiness, when he is not sure of another hour,
and if he miscarry in this, he is undone for ever? should that time be laughed
and played away, that hastes so fast, and is all so short for so great a work,
as the securing our salvation? should men and women be courting, and
complementing, and fooling away their precious time, when the work is undone
for which they were born into the world, and for which they have their lives,
and all their mercies?

Quest. 6. Should all this be done by those that sin against their knowledge,
and confess all this while that the world is vanity, and know how it will leave
them, and that all this is true?

O sirs, it must needs be the grief of a foreseeing man, to think, when you
forget it, what a change is coming, and what a sad preparation you are making,
and how little a while the music, the feast, the cards and dice, the filthy
lusts and wanton dalliance will continue? and what a damp of self-tormenting
desperation will seize upon those careless scornful hearts, that now will not
be wakened and warned, nor understand any further then they see or feel! In
compassion to those that are passing hence to another world, I beseech you
sometime withdraw your selves from sensual divertisements, and soberly bethink
you, whether this be the place and company that you must be with for ever? how
long this merry life will last! and whether this be the work that the God of
heaven did send you about into the world? and whether it would be more
comfortable to your review when time is gone, to think of your days of sensual
delight, or of a holy, and humble, and heavenly conversation! and to hear with
Dives, Luke 16. 25. [Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, and Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented.] O then you would wish that you had never heard those aerie titles,
and never possessed those sumptuous houses; nor never tasted those delicious
feasts; nor never worn that gay attire; nor never known that deceiving company;
nor been polluted and brutified with those beastly lusts! Then conscience will
force the now befooled Dives to cry out, [O that I had been the most despised
man on earth, while honor did befool me? O that I had lain in medicinal
poverty and rags, when I took this mortal surfeit of prosperity? O that I had
lain in tears and sorrow, when I was infatuated by fleshly mirth and pleasure!
and that I had been among the Saints that foresaw and provided for this day,
when I drowned the voice of Christ and conscience, with the laughter of a fool,
and the noise of worldly business and delights!] O then how revengefully will
you befool your selves, that had time and knew no better how to use it! And how
sensibly will you justify the wisdom of believers, that bent their care for
things eternal! I am ashamed of my heart, that melts not in compassion in the
foresight of your woe! and that I beg not of you with tears and importunity, to
prevent it, and to have mercy on your selves. Paul had a better heart then I,
that ceased not to war^ every one day and night with tears, Act. 20. 31. and
speaks thus of such as you [Phil. 3. 18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, the enemies of the Cross of
Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is
in their shame, who mind earthly things.] When the conversation of believers is
in heaven, from whence they look for the Lord their Savior.

I suppose you are afraid of the austerities of Religion; and the Devil would
persuade you, that it is but a self-tormenting, or hypocritical life, that we
commend to you under the name of godliness: especially when you see the sadness
of some honest souls, that are abused by Satan through the advantages of
melancholy. But I must prosess, it is sorrow that I call you from and would
prevent: It is no unnecessary grief that I would persuade you to, but to a life
of heavenly peace and joy. If Satan have abused any servants of Christ, by
darkening, and troubling, and discomforting their minds (which is his ordinary
endeavor, when he can no longer keep men quiet, and careless, and presumptuous
in their misery;) this is clean contrary to the nature of Religion, and the
commands of Christ, that charge them always to rejoice. Do you think that I
cannot have more solid joy with my daily bread, in the apprehensions of the
love of God, and the belief of his promises of eternal life, then foolish mirth
comes to, that is likened to the crackling of thorns in the fire? Eccles. 7. 6.
you are for mirth; and we are for mirth: but its a hearty, solid, spiritual,
grounded, lasting mirth that we invite you to: and its a beastly sensual
pleasure that ungodly men desire. For my part, its almost half my work, to
promote the joys of true believers, and to dissuade them from such causeless
despondencies and troubles as would rob them of their comforts, and God of
their love, and thanks and praise. Had you but tasted once the difference
between this inward feast, and yours, I should need no more words with you, to
persuade you that godliness is a life of joy. Dare any of you say and stand to
it, that there is not greater matter for joy in the love of Christ, then in the
love of a harlot? in the assurance of salvation, then in lands and Lordships?
in the foresight of heaven, then in the company of lightheaded voluptuous
people, that have not wit enough to be serious, nor says enough to foresee
that which will so sadly and speedily spoil the sport? To be foolishly merry in
the midst of misery, does but make you the objects of greater compassion. Be as
merry as you can, so it be grounded, and durable, and caused by that which God,
and faith, and solid reason will approve; and does not tend to greater sorrows.
Bethink you well whether Christ and his Apostles lived not a more comfortable
life then you? And imitate them in their way of mirth and spare not.

But if you are unsanctified sensual worldly men, lay by your mirth till you
are fitter for it; and take your portion from the Apostle James 5. 1, 2, 3, 5.
[Go to now ye rich men; weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the
last days. -- Ye have lived in pleasure on earth, and been wanton: ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.]

What pity is it to see men destroy themselves with the mercies of the Lord!
what pity is it to see them so eager for prosperity, and so regardless of the
proper use and benefit of it? O be not like the Be that is drowned in her own
honey. And do not so greedily desire a greater burden then you can bear: and to
have more to answer for, when you have been so unfaithful in a little! And if
you believe Christ that tells you how hardly rich men come to heaven, and how
few of them are saved, long not for your danger, and grudge not if you have not
these exceeding difficulties to overcome. You would be afraid to dwell in that
air where few men escape infection: or to feed on that diet that most are killed
by. Its evident by the effects that prosperity befooleth and undoeth the most;
we find you on your sick beds in a more tractable frame.

1. Then a man may speak to you about the case of your immortal souls, with
less contempt then now we meet with. You look not then for laced speeches, but
will more patiently hear our plain discourses of eternal life. 2. Then you will
seem serious your selves, and speak almost like those that you called
Pr^cisians and Puritans, for remembering you of these things in your prosperity.
3. Then you have some better relish of truth and duty; and judge better of the
matter and manner of exhortation and prayer then you do now. 4. Then you have
more charity and (...) to others; and are (...) engaged to the destroying of
those that are not of your opinions in all your formalities. 5. You would then
shake the head at him that should offer you cards, or dice, or fleshly
vanities; and you would tell others that its wiser to be delighted in the Law
of God, and meditate in it day and night. 6. Then you will speak as
contemptuously of the honor, and pleasures, and profits of the world, and of
pleasing men before the Lord, as we do now. 7. And then you will confess the
preciousness of time: the folly of mispending it; and that one thing is
necessary, for which we can never (regularly) do too much. And why are you not
now of the mind that you will be at death or judgment, but that your solly
does turn your prosperity to your bane? Once more I beseech you for the Lords
sake, retire from the deceiving world to God: And if you care where you live to
all eternity, choose your abode; and now set your heart upon it, and seek it as
your happiness. If all these warnings are refused, conscience shall tell you
when you would not hear it, that you were warned.

HAd time allowed it, I should next have delivered my message to the humble
upright souls. All you [that hearken to the Lord, shall dwell in safety, and be
quiet from the fe^r of evil.] Isa. 3. 10. [Say to the righteous, it shall be
well with him. -- Woe to the wicked; it shall be ill with him.] Eccles. 8. 12.
Though a sinner d^ evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
surely I know it shall be well with them that fear God.] Psalm. 73. 1. Truly God
is good to Israel; even to such as are of a clean heart.] Psalm. 37. 5, 28, 34,
37. Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust in him and he shall bring it to pass.
For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints: they are preserved
for ever -- wait on the Lord and keep his way -- and when the wicked are cut
off, thou shall see it. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the
end of that man is peace.]

If you say, How are they safe that are so tossed by sufferings? I answer. 1.
Is he not safe that has the promise of God for his security, and is related to
him as his child, and has Christ for his Head and Savior? 2. Is he not safe
that is delivered from the wrath of God, and the flames of hell, and dare look
before him to eternity with hope and comfort? and shall live with Christ in joy
for ever? 3. Is he not safe that has no enemy, but what is in his Fathers
power. 4. And that has no hurt but what shall certainly procure his good? 5.
Nor any, but what he may rejoice in: and is sure shall be the matter of his
thanks when it is past? that shall lose nothing but what he has already
forsaken, and esteems but as dross and dung? How often have we told God in our
prayers, that we had rather have the light of his countenance in adversity,
then be strange to him in prosperity? and that we would not refuse that state
of suffering, that should be blessed to the destruction of our sins, and the
furthering our communion with God, and our assurance of salvation, and in which
we might most serve and honor him, in the world. Did we live by sense, we
should misjudge of our estate: but seeing we live by faith, and in the way can
see the end, we can say we are safe in the thickest of our enemies, and will
not fear what man can do, while the Almighty is our rock, and fort ress: well
may we be quiet from the fear of evil, when we are saved from the great
everlasting evil! No evil shall follow us into heaven; no malice shall there
defame us; nor virulent tongue blaspheme our holy profession or our Lord; for
the mists of hellish blasphemies shall never ascend to blot the glory of Christ
or of his Saints. Who then shall take us out of his hands? who shall condemn
us? it is he that justifies us! not only against the calumnies of malice, but
also against the accusations of Satan for our sin. How say and quiet are those
millions of souls, that are now with Christ? How little are they annoyed, or
their joy or melody interrupted, by all the race of earth or hell? The glory of
the sun may sooner be darkened or ble^ished by obloquy, then their celestial
glory: For they are glorified with the glory of their Lord; and rejoice with
his joy, and live because he lives. Be of good cheer, Christians: the haven is
within the sight of faith: we are almost there: Adversity is our speediest and
surest passage. And then let sin, and rage, and malice, do their worst.

FINIS.

