A TESTIMONY TO THE FREE and UNIVERSAL LOVE of GOD IN JESUS CHRIST TO THE SONS
of MEN: IN True Love sent forth (more especially) to the Inhabitants of
Colchester and Parts adjacent; For them to read over, and weigh with due and
serious Consideration, in the blessed Fear of the LORD.

By THOMAS BAIL.

Hear Counsel, and receive Instruction, that thou may be Wise in thy latter
end.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1675.

THe Universal Love and free Grace of God to man kind, is again, (after a sad
and deplorable night of darkness) revealed and showed unto thousands, who have
waited upon him in his holy Light, and Heavenly manifestation in their hearts
and consciences; and testified of, and born witness unto, in this our age and
generation; for to enjoy which, what sighing, what breathing for, and
soul-traveling after, (in a holy hunger and thirst, in deep exercise and travel
of Spirit, in a holy faith and fear in the Lord) has there been by many in
former days and times, some yet living are able to give some testimony
thereof: And this happy and blessed appearance of the Lord, to the call and
restitution of mankind, to this his great kindness in Jesus Christ, has been
sounded forth in this place and parts; and that truly I may say, according to
the Nature of it, which is free, and universal, and plentious, from the God and
Father of it; and that very largly, with clearness and certainty, by his
Servants, his Messengers and Ministers, who here in this Town and County have
labored, for several years by past, both by word and writing: And the Lord
has given them fervencie of Spirit, zeal and courage, and also utterance in
judgment and understanding, that sinners might be converted unto him, and
people come again, to partake of that heavenly blessed life (which in the true
light which now shines is made manifest) which the Saints and people of the
Lord partaked of in the primitive times; and notwithstanding this certain and
infallible testimony, which has been held forth in this place for these 20
years past, in kindness, tenderness, and love unfeigned, with freeness, to
bring Souls home to the Lord, yet what darkness, security, and insensibility of
heart and mind is there remaining in the Consciences and Spirits of the
generality of you, as if there were no such thing as Religion in truth and
righteousness to be minded, as if the Lord God had forsaken the habitable parts
of the earth for man to live in the perverse ways of his own heart, and as if
you had outlived that belief, which formerly was as a standing Principle or
Faith in peoples minds, of comeing to Judgment for the deeds done in the body,
both the quick and the dead, the good and the bad (as the Scriptures testify
of) and that there is no such thing to be as punishment unto the evil doer,
tribulation, anguish and pain upon every soul that does evil; nor reward of
life eternal to them that do well. And this great evil (which is false hearts,
ease and security in the flesh) abounds very much amongst you, even in and
amongst you my Neighbors, Townsmen and Acquaintance; and the consideration
thereof with grief and sorrow of heart have I seriously weighed within my self;
and certainly can conclude nothing but a sad and woeful destruction from God
Almighty, to be rewarded in flames of Fire from Heaven, into the bosoms of all
such as persevere therein, until their departure hence, and be no more seen.

And therefore this is a warning and charge unto you, into whose hands it may
come, that you break off your sins by timely repentance, and seek the Lord
whilst he may be found, and that in discharge of my Conscience in the sight of
God, that the Testimony of the truth of our God may be kept up over the heads
of all disobedient gainsayers; and that that holy heavenly Principle, the Light
of Christ Jesus, in the Consciences of all people, may have its place and due
Authority in your hearts and lives, to the eternal Honor and Praise of so
gracious and bountiful a giver; and to your blessedness and great felicity here
in this life, and hereafter, when time with you shall be no more.

And God Almighty (the sercher of our hearts) knows to whose righteous,
eternal, and everlasting Judgment, we shall all shortly stand, and for ever be
concluded, that my end and intent herein is Gods glory and your salvation; this
is my sole and alone end and intent in this matter: And therefore bear with me
a little in patience and quietness of your Spirits; and let not your hearts be
like a boiling pot, because I write unto you whom men despise, and am by Scorns
called a Quaker; for be it known unto you, that if so you entertain my lines,
and that innocent love which draws my heart in gentleness to visit you, that
you will be left in the hardness of your hearts the more to fill up the measure
of your iniquity, that Judgment may come upon you for all your evil deeds.

And now concerning what I have to write, or chiefly intend hereby, I shall
write it as to two sorts of men, or as in two states and conditions, although
they have different branches, yet springing from one and the self same root of
evil, and not all sinners according to one similitude; and these I call
Profane and Professor: And by Profane I intend such as make not a Profession
of Godliness, no more indeed, than those that never heard of such a thing, or
as men without God in the world, as such there are amongst you, their lives
testify unto me herein; and are such as live in wildness, ignorance, disorder
and confusion; and cry, tush, who sees? such, whose natures are given way
unto, which are not civil, but rude: And this ought not to be, and it is time
for such, not to walk as in the days that are past, wherein fear that is holy,
humility, sobriety and chastity were set at naught, for to possess and live in
bad things, as lying, stealing, whoredom, wrath, drunkenness, swearing, and
many wicked things more; which is a shame to any people, and a burden to the
Creation of God, vexing the just and the righteous: And oh you untoward people,
the sound of these things, and the evil effects thereof, how do I and many more
pass through the streets and lanes, with the nauseous smell and burden of them
falling upon us, for which we cannot but cry unto the Lord our God, under the
heavy oppression of; And for these things, the cries ascend up from the
innocent souls against you, and the Lord is weary of iniquity, and would rid
his Adversary out of his way, and destroy him by the brightness of his coming,
who works great evil in you, great sin and transgression against God, and
against your own souls; and I ask you, what good does your drunkenness or your
swearing do you, or any other of those evils which you accustom your selves
unto? I am sure you are deprived thereby of comfort, peace, and content here;
and which is more, if not repented of, and that your repentance be before it be
too late, will certainly end in your ruin and destruction for ever more.

And therefore repent, repent of these your abominations, and live no longer in
the lusts of your own evil hearts, but be ye considerate of your ways and
doings, of the tendency and end of them; for you are not wholly wrapped up in
ignorance, the knowledge of sin and evil (in some measure) you have enough to
condemn you, if you repent not, if you put not away the evil of your doings,
and learn soberness, justness, truth, and those things which the Lord requires
of you: for I have showed thee, O man (says the Lords Prophet) what the Lord
requires of thee: and the Lords Prophet, (which he has raised up) says the
same to you now; this knowledge and understanding (as I said) in some measure
you have; for you your selves know, you should not swear, nor lie, nor steal,
nor be drunk, nor violent (as lately some to their shame showed themselves) and
where will you hide you? and what cloak will you take upon you (for Christ
Jesus the Judge is come) to cover you from his all-seeing eye, from whom in his
light you have seen these things to be evil, to be bad, to be against him, and
that you cannot stand by them, but are condemned in your selves for them, and
cry out, God forgive me, I should not swear, or be drunk, or the like: but why
then do you? are you altogether ignorant, that they that know their Masters
will and does it not, are worthy to be beaten with many stripes? no not
ignorant wholly, or altogether, for if so, then no crying to God for
forgiveness would proceed from you; for where there is no Law, there is no
transgression; but it seems here is Law with you, and Transgression with you;
and therefore you cry out to the Lord (whom you know you have sinned against)
for forgiveness: so this you well know, and are not ignorant of.

And thus you lie in great desolation, and take ye heed, lest it prove a
desolation for ever, and that your scattered broken state you never witness the
true Shepherds Crook to pull you out of it into that holy power which would
(if you would submit thereto) keep and preserve you from that spirit of
darkness, ignorance and profaneness which now you are possessed and so filled
with, and overcome by, as that no escape or deliverance is by you known or
sought after, but he the evil one, which has ruled in your members, in a sad
and woeful night of transgression, still reigns and rules, as if you were made
for his service, and he as of right the just Lord and Ruler over you.

Now you may understand that he that made you, made you for another purpose,
and for another end, as that which should be profitable unto you, and of great
advantage (as namely, a Crown of Glory upon your heads, and that is that you
should serve him that made you, which is reasonable, even that heavenly bright
and holy spirit of Wisdom and power which formed you, and gave you being, and
understanding, and knowledge beyond the Beasts of the field, or the most
excellent earthly Creatures and Bodies which you see moving upon the face of
the Earth; and that service which he expects from (accepts, and receives of)
his Creatures, Man and Woman, is performed in and by a pure, holy, contrite,
humble heart and spirit, and that it may be the fruit and product thereof, and
not that which springs from a corrupted heart and root; and to that end, the
Lord God has bestowed upon mankind universally (without respect to persons) a
measure of holiness and purity, which is of his own nature and purity, and does
proceed from him the Father of Lights, to gather man again out of the state of
Darkness and death (where you are who walk in the lusts of the flesh) into a
state of glory, a renewed state, where all things are become new, clear and
pure, to walk in the Light thereof, and glorious shinings in their hearts: And
to this largely testify the holy Scriptures, which I doubt not but some of you
at some time or other have read somewhat of; wherein it is said, That the grace
of God which brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, (if to all men, then
to you) teaching us (who were they) they that believed in it and obeyed it, to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and it would do the same for you, and teach
you as well as they, to live soberly and righteously in this present evil
world, if you would bring your deeds to it, if you loved not darkness rather
than light, if you would bow down in heart and conscience in obedience and full
submission to it; for it is work, and the very end of its being given (by the
good giver of it) is to reprove, convince, instruct, guide and rule in
righteousness; and therein is it to be found and enjoyed, and the benefit that
comes thereby, and not where you are in disobedience, gainsaying, and
rebellion; for never any enjoyed it, or its teachings and leadings in such a
state (although it knocks often, and calls to forsake death) but by submission
to its pure holy teachings and requirings: and this is the Lords Messenger, and
Angel of his holy Power, by which he calls unto man to hearken unto him, (to
forsake death and live) that so to him does call to return: And this voice,
it is said is behind man, who is gone forth from it, (through the subtilty of
that Serpent, who at first did, and still does deceive man, through man's
hearkening unto him) calling upon him to go back again, and to go home to the
Fathers house, and not to go forth, for no teacher is like unto him, as all who
have come to his teaching, in this age, and in all ages past, have constantly
born witness.

But now you must be willing and obedient, if you would enjoy this innocent
life, this Pearl of great price, this hope of Glory, than which, there is none
besides; you must receive it according to the Counsel of his own will: his
Testimony is, I am come, not to send Peace on the earth, but a Sword; Fallen
man cannot put forth his own hand to take of the Tree of Life and live, for
there is a Sword, a flaming Sword put into the hand of Cherubims, which turns
every way, to keep him from it; of this you may have read: Thus was Adam in his
transgression stopped; and be you assured this Sword is not taken down, but still
turns against you: I believe many of you at times feell the turning, or
shaking of it against you; which makes you to fear, to tremble, to be afraid;
and some to feel such horror, torment, and perplexity of spirit within you,
when the thoughts or consideration of death comes near you, and who in your
weakness of body, on your sick beds cry out, O that the Lord would spare me
this time, I would take warning, and become a new Creature, and live a more
holy, self-denying life than ever I did; and thus often times the flamingness of
it, and the sharpness of it comes near you, yea very near you, even into your
bosoms; but the way to get to the tree of life is not by a few false words and
promises, uttered on a sick or dying bed, from an impenitent deceitful heart,
which being in torment would have some cool water poured upon it: for I have
sometime known, when some such have been spared, (and let these my words enter
into your hearts consideration, who are concerned herein) they have soon forgot
God that smot them, and have returned with more greediness to that evil
conversation, for which the just hand of God was lifted up in smart rebuke
against them: therefore take heed to watch over your ways and doings, whilst
you have time: but this is the way, O Man and Woman, to this tree of life
spoken of; return, return from the evil of your ways and doings, and kiss the
Son, (that is to say) embrace him, hearken diligently in all bowedness of
Spirit and humility of Soul upon this his inshining ingr^f^ed word, which is
able alone to save your souls, and none other, nor nothing else; and here the
soul that sins must dye, and the judgment must be executed, and the flaming
Sword have its place, and do its work, which is quick and sharp, and divides
between joints and marrow, soul and spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart: can any thing come more near to a man? feel ye this,
have ye felt, or do ye feel this sharpness, this quickness, (for it is to be
felt) this dividing Sword of the Lord; which divides between a man and his
lovers, and know your selves to be redeemed from that Spirit of transgression
which has ruled in your hearts, and yet does and has the dominion there, and
know the Adversary is destroyed by the brightness of his comeing, who comes to
finish transgression, and to make an end of sin: It Is time for you this to
learn and know, and happy shall you be, if now you come forth to the help of
the Lord against the mighty, and keep not back your lusts, pleasures, nor
sinful sports and pass-times, but deny your selves in those things, and be
willing and obedient, take the yoke of Christ upon you, and learn of him, who
says, hold that fast which thou have, that you may eat the good of the good
Land, the promised Land of Rest to your souls, which flows with Milk and Honey:
but as Israel of old, could not go on, in hope to possess the Land of Canaan,
but by passing from Egypt, through the Red Sea, and a vast and weary
Wilderness, wherein great exercises, trials and sorrows were, no more can ye
inherit substance (the inheritance of the Saints in Light) and possess that
peace, which the world can neither give nor take away, but by taking up the
daily Cross, and following him, who said unto the woman that asked him to have
her two Sons to sit, the one at his right hand, and the other at his left hand
in his Kingdom: Can ye be Baptized with that Baptism that I shall be Baptized
with? can ye drink of that Cup that I shall drink of? are you willing to suffer
with him, and to be made like unto him, who was a man of sorrow, even like unto
his death, and to bear about in your bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that
so through the dying, and the death, you may come to know life, and the
quicknings of it, and its virtue and holy opperation, to fashion and mould you,
to fit and prepare you for that Kingdom, for that Crown and weight of Glory,
which is laid up in store for all them that believe in Jesus Christ, and follow
him through the Regeneration: for through the being made in fellowship with him
in his sufferings, and raised unto life by that eternal Spirit which raised up
Jesus from the dead, thou may reign with him in his Glory, in his
blessedness, and eternal life world without end.

But ye my Neighbors and Acquaintance, I have often seen and taken notice of a
Spirit and Life in you altogether contrary hereunto, as being disorderly, a
scoffing mocking Spirit, of Ishmaels nature abounding amongst you, against the
Spirit of the Lord, and its teachings, and movings, against the holy Light of
Jesus Christ within, and the Professors and Witnesses of it, which has and
does tend greatly to the grief and burden of Gods holy Spirit, which is
teaching; and if you have not the Spirit of Christ, you are none of his; and
this your unchristian carriage and behavior the Lord will require it into your
bosoms, in the day wherein he will enter into Judgment with you, and then it
will be unutterable sad for you; and then you will find your selves as far from
an excuse for your so doing, as the man was who was speechless, when it was
said unto him, Friend, how came thou hither, not having on the Wedding
Garment? this will be your state then; for I tell you, there is no excuse now
to be made, no pleading of Ignorance now, no saying (although many foolish
ignorant people will now so say) when the Lord gives grace, or when the Lords
time is come, and when the Lord please to give us power, then so and so: but
take ye notice, and let it be a warning unto you, and an information; the Grace
of God is given, the true Light now shines, by which thou may see, and know,
and understand the things that belong to thy peace; and therefore shut not
thine eyes, stop not thine ears, fold not thy arms and cry, Yet a little more
sleep in sin, and in the lusts of this world, lest God in Judgment leave thee
to be past feeling, and thou be shut up, and sealed up in utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and wailing for ever more: Does not Wisdom cry? does not
Understanding utter her voice? blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my gates, and giving attendance at the posts of my doors; for he that
finds me, finds life; and she is ready to receive those that wait for her,
and prevent those that early seek her, by first showing her self unto them: so
be not ye dull of hearing, shut not your eyes from beholding Wisdoms ways, be
not careless in your Spirits and presumptuous, trifling away your precious time
in a light mocking, scoffing Spirit, for such walk after their own ungodly
lusts, but learn wisdom (which is the fear of the Lord) whilst you may, and to
redeem the time that you have misspent; have ye a watchful careful mind and
Spirit in the Lord, least also that little time which remains unto you, be
likewise spent in vain, and you pass away speedily into the pit, with the
workers of iniquity, out of which there is no Redemption; for man's life soon
passes away, it is said to be swifter than a Weavers Shuttle, the swift passing
away of which, many of you have a certain knowledge of; and swifter than a
Post, that tarrieth not: and what, know you who shall live until tomorrow? it
is said, today, whilst it is called today, the time present is only ours, all
flesh is grass, and the glory of man as the flower of the field; and does not
the grass soon wither, and the flower soon fade away? even such is this present
certain-uncertain state and life of ours; but the word of the Lord (which David
said he hid in his heart, that he might not sin against him) endures for ever;
hide it likewise in your hearts, that ye may have it for your friend in the
most needful time, which is at hand, and cannot, nor must not be delayed.

And now my mind is turned (in tender love) toward you. O ye the people of
Profession, that make profession of God and Christ, the holy Spirit and
Scriptures of truth, O that ye were found in the possession and inheritance of
these things that so much barrenness of soul, heaviness of Spirit, and dullness
of sight and hearing might not abound amongst you as there does; for instead of
a garden dressed by the hand of a skilful Husbandman, you are as a field of a
Forest, where the hedge is broken down, and where the beasts of the Forest
have their repose; O that I could say of you that ye are as a watered garden,
as a fruitful Land which the Lord has blessed, and that his dew, dew from
heaven, is distilled plentuously into your souls, that thereby your hearts are
revived and made to leap for joy: but I see you like many fenced Cities laid
waste, and like a fruitful Land turned into barrenness, for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein: For, Friends, if to the Line you be brought,
crookedness and perverseness does appear, and the Ax must come upon you, before
you will be squared for the Lords heavenly building; and when you are weighed
in the balance of the Sanctuary, you are found too light; so that assuredly,
the hand writing upon the wall is as certainly against you, as it was against
Belshazzer, and the Kingdom will be taken from you: and therefore I, your
Neighbor and Friend, do counsel and advise you, as one who has received great
mercy and kindness of the Lord, to return and come from those things, wherein
you have exercised your selves, and have a life in, things without substance,
life or virtue, unto him that searches your hearts, that stands at the door
and knocks; why should he not be let in? for he speaks on this wise, if any
man hear my voice, and opens the door to me, I will come into him, and sup with
him, and he with me; and is not this encouragement enough to satisfy your
souls, and to answer his desire, in letting him in, for his presence gives
life, and at his right hand are pleasures for ever more: he shows unto man his
thoughts, and makes manifest what is reprovable; I say, at the door he stands
and knocks, open ye unto him, and in the humility of your hearts, and let not
his wooings be any longer slighted by you: yea, be ye open, ye everlasting
gates, that the holy one may enter in, and despise not his lowly appearance,
but sit ye down under his shadow, and his fruit will be sweet to your taste:
come, come away from the barren Mountains, where the pasture of life is not
enjoyed, and come taste with me and many thousands more, how good he is, and
see and behold how lovely he is, and beautiful altogether; for I must tell you,
that your Forms, your Ordinances and Observations, which you have set up to
worship the Lord in, are lifeless sapless things, empty and void of the Spirit
of Life, yea empty sounds and notions; so that your withering is seen, the
covering wherewith you cover your selves is not of the Spirit of the Lord, and
your nakedness does appear, your darkness is felt, in which you grope after
that (namely eternal life) which you cannot attain unto therein the life is
^^^ified, the holy one is ascended over it all, and his cry is unto man, and
unto the sons of men, Worship God, give glory and honor unto his Name, who
made the heavens and the earth; for he seeks such to worship him, and in the
spirit and in the truth it must be performed: therefore cease ye from the works
of your own hands, and cease ye from the man whose breath is in his nostrils,
for wherein is he to be accounted of? truly my Friends, not at all, I have
tried them; I have tried them in the day of my distress, when the heart-sercher
found me out, and when he arose to Judgment, who pleads with all flesh by
burning and devouring fire, then my iniquity became my burden, and my soul
wanted a Savior, and a thousand worlds (had I had them) would I have parted
with for the bosom of this beloved; I tried first one, and then another, and
found them short of giving food to my soul, or Physicians of value, the best of
them so accounted of; then said I unto the Lord, Lift up thou the light of thy
countenance upon me; Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of
death: and whilst I read the Scriptures I did clearly see, that I was short of
that blessed life, in which the righteous obtained the Promises; and I a poor
miserable captive (whose captivity had been long and grievous) cried out before
the Lord, in distress which is unutterable, and said, Surely thy love, in
sending Jesus Christ into the world to save sinners, is in vain as to me, for I
have not the benefit thereof* a sad time it was, mourning and sorrow was as my
daily food, and in distress and grief I mourned out many of my days and nights
before the Lord, who alone knew my sorrow, and unto whom alone my soul cried
for relief, and at length he was pleased to shorten those days, and satisfy
my soul (in the daily waiting upon him) with his goodness. --

And now, Friends, in the holy sense and blessed effect thereof, does my soul
thus labor for you, that you also may be encouraged to trust alone in the Name
of the Lord revealed, which is not afar off but near you, and in you, to work
your works for you, that he may deliver your souls from the pit, and pluck your
feet out of the mire and clay, where they stick fast whatever you think, and
will stick fast, if not unto him you answer whilst he calls, who does enlighten
you; that so through his heavenly shinings into your hearts, you may thereby in
him believe and be saved, with an everlasting salvation.

And, Friends, you pretend to Reformation, and to Separation; but from what,
and to what? the voice and cry of the Holy One (who is going forth to slay with
the Sword of his mouth, those his enemies, that will not that he should reign)
is, Come out of Babylon my people, be not partaker with her in her sins, lest
ye also partake with her in her Judgments; and be ye separated, and touch no
unclean thing (mark that word, no unclean thing) and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people: now is it thus with you, are you in such a Separation? are
you thus come out from amongst them? or in what does your Separation and
Reformation consist? can you before the Lord, the Searcher of your hearts, in
his holy fear answer yea, or are not you rather at a stand in your selves, as
knowing that it is not thus with you indeed, but are drawing near with your
lips, and your hearts in the mean time far removed from him; trusting in the
thoughts of your own hearts, and in the Arm of flesh, (vain man) who dawb with
untempered Mortar, who can be removed into a corner, and who to feed their own
bellies, starve their souls, keeping you from the true Bishop and Shepherd of
them; if it be not thus with you, and that whilst you Profess a Separation from
the world, you intend not from the evil of the world, but live in the Love and
Friendship of the world, (which is enmity against God) and set thereby at
naught him, who has the power, and calls unto you to separate you by his Light
and Grace in your Consciences, Why are you so Conformable to this present evil
world, as you are, in its Fashions, Customs and Delights? and ought you not
rather to be transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what
is the good will of God, and learn a bridle to your tongues, (those unruly
members) which set the whole course of nature on fire; and so set a watch
before the door of your mouths, that you may not offend in your words, but be
slow to speak, and swift to hear him that speaks from heaven; and slow to speak
before him who ought of right to have the pre-eminence in all things in you:
The marks of Christ Jesus, do they appear in your foreheads, or his
lovely-lowly self-denying Image, who is meek and lowly in heart, and said, My
Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my
Servants fight: Consider well of this, least yours be of this world, and that
your portion be in this life.

But my Friends, much might be writ and brought to your view and consideration,
but the sum, and that which concerns you to know and experience is, there ought
to be a daily watching in the light of the Lord Jesus Christ, against every
appearance of evil; a daily taking up the Cross to self; a daily dying, and a
daily mortifying; yea, and a daily quickening, and a daily renewing, and a daily
growing and increasing in the grace of God, that mortification may be known,
and lived in, of the lusts and vile affections, and a being born again, and a
daily putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and a daily walking not after the flesh
but after the Spirit, if so be that ye would come to the inheritance of the
Saints in Light, and to know what it is to be born again not of mortal seed,
but of immortal; and to know that bread, and to eat of it, which comes down
from Heaven; and to drink of that water which they that drink of thirst no
more; for it is in such as do, a well of living water, springing up into
everlasting life; and so a conformity to his holy will you ought to witness,
who is the salvation of God, prepared before the face of all people, a Light
(as good old Simeon said) to lighten the Gentiles, to lighten their feet out of
the Darkness, and to be the glory of his people Israel; who believe in his
name, who walk in his Light, who pass their sojourning here in his fear, and in
his wisdom; whose conversations show that they seek for a City whose maker and
builder is God; these are they who walk in the Light of the Lord, and do not
reject it, nor stumble at it, putting Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness; with whom the secrets of the Lord are, to whom he shows forth his
Covenant, and brings to his Mercy-seat; feeds with his daily bread, waters with
his holy dew from above, watches over for good; directs by his eye, leads on
by his Spirit through all temptation, persecutions and afflictions; and finally
Crowns with his Crown, his life and Glory, in the Kingdom of his Father.

And therefore buy the Truth, and give all for it without grudging; for what is
to be compared to it? neither Silver, Gold, nor precious Stones: and consider
ye, let understanding have place in you, for it is said, hoe every one that
thirsts come, buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price; and who
will, let him take of the water of life freely. And now remember ye the young
man and his case, who came (it is said) running to Jesus, and said, Good
Master, What shall I do that I may inherit eternal Life? and Jesus said unto
him, thou know the Commandments, and he answered, all these things I have
observed from my youth, and Jesus loved him, and said, one thing is lacking
unto thee, go and sell all that thou have, and come follow me, and take up the
Cross; here Jesus came near unto him: now here is something, which may be said
to be, and is your case, as to the one thing lacking; the selling of all,
following Jesus, and taking up the Cross; the want of which is the cause of
that woeful darkness, worldlyness and ignorance that is amongst too many of you,
and hard it is to make you to believe it: but it is said, that the young man
who came running to Jesus, had great Possessions, and so was sad, at what was
said unto him, and went away sorrowful; and so have you, but your Possessions
and his differ much, and yet how unwilling are you to come to Jesus, sell all,
take up the Cross and follow him; but the man that sold all to buy the field
wherein was the Pearl was a wise man, and well instructed in the things which
belonged to his eternal peace; and you shall do well to buy Eye Salve that you
may see, and find white Raiment, that your nakedness may be covered, of Jesus
Christ whilst he says, I counsel thee to buy of me, lest ye remain in
blindness and nakedness, until no eye pitties you.

And so this is a certain living Testimoy, unto the universal Love of God in
Jesus Christ, to the Souls of all men; which I counsel you to consider of in
secret, or in your Closets before the Lord, who searches the heart, that so
your souls may have a place to rest in, which is true, and in truth, and abides
and remains over all imaginary, false, and insecure hideing places, which now
you are short of, in uncertainties, doubts sometimes, and fears, your own
thoughts and vain hopes, which will prove at last as void and empty of soul
satisfaction, and assurance unfailable in the hour of need and great distress,
which hastes swiftly, upon you, as sparks of your own kindling, which those
that kindle them, notwithstanding, must lie down in sorrow.

And is likewise my souls desire in the Lord, in his Love, in tenderness and
plainness unto you, that you trust no longer your precious Souls short (or
without) that great salvation which is everlasting, in the Lord Jesus Christ,
who inlightens you, that all these that believe in him, might not perish, but
have everlasting life; and remember what is written, whilst you have the light,
believe in the Light, that you may become children of the light, wherein no
occasion of stumbling is; and I hope, as concerning some of you, my love herein
shall not altogether be as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again; for is there not an honest heart that will consider? a
breathing soul that wants peace with the Lord, that will consider? a thirsty
wounded spirit, that wants true balm, that will consider? or a blind man that
wants his sight, that will consider these things, will seriously ponder these
things, to seek and to search, that they may attain unto the truth, that will
not be as the stony ground, where no true entrance can be had; nor as Subjects
of the Prince of the Air, from whom these things may flee away as the wind,
which no man knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so inconstant and
unsettled is the minds of such; but rather make diligent search, and seriously
examine, what is here in true kindness sent unto them, and offered to their due
and weighty consideration, and wherein Gods witness answers in your hearts and
consciences, to the truth, necessity and kindness thereof, so receive ye, so
believe and walk; that in all things, which you put your hands unto, his
heavenly, holy, immaculate appearance in you, may be by you eyed, believed in,
and constantly obeyed, in a holy steadfast faithfulness, and diligence, to walk
before him in the Light, as Children of the Light, whereunto you are called,
and exhorted; until you have made your calling and election sure, and wrought
out your Salvation with fear and trembling: for know ye, that our God is a
consuming Fire, and will in no wise acquit the wicked and ungodly, but render
Tribulation and Anguish to every soul that does evil. --

Solomon prayed for Wisdom to the Lord, and was heard in that which he prayed;
and in his Proverbs he thus says; I passed by the Field of the Sloathful, and
by the Vineyard of the Man destitute of Understanding, and so it was all grown
over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof, and the Stone Wall
was broken down: Then I beheld and considered it well, I looked upon it and
received Instruction: Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little folding of
the hands to Sleep: So thy Poverty comes as one that Travelleth by the way,
and thy Necessity like an Armed Man.

THE END.

