A SERMON OF Judgment, Preached at Paul's before the Honorable Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of the City of London, Dec. 17. 1654. And now enlarged

By Rich. Baxter.

Romans 14.12. Every one of you shall give account of himself to God.

John 5.28, 29. The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: They that have done good, to the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of
Damnation.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kidderminster, 1655

TO The Right Honorable Christopher Pack, Lord Mayor of London; with the Right
worshipful Aldermen.
Right Honorable
Being desired to Preach before you at Paul's, I was fain to preach a Sermon,
which I had preached once before to a poor ignorant Congregation in the
Country, having little leisure for study in London. I was glad to see that the
more curious stomachs of the Citizens did not nauseate our plain Country
Doctrine, which I seemed to discern in the diligent attention of the greatest
Congregation that ever I saw met for such a work: But I little expected that
you should have so far esteemed that discourse, as to have thought it meet for
the view of the world, as I understood by a Message from you, desiring it may
be Printed. I readily obey your will, when it gives me the least intimation of
the will of God. Its possible some others may afford it the like favorable
Acceptance and entertainment. I am sure the subject is as Necessa^y as common;
and the Plainness makes it the fitter for the ignorant, who are the far
greatest number, and have the greatest need. I have added the 9, 10, 11, and
12. Heads or Common-places, which I did not deliver to you for want of time,
and because the rest are too briefly touched (as contrived for an hours work) I
have enlarged these; though making them somewhat unsuitable to the rest, yet
suitable to the use of those that they are now intended for: The Directions
also in the end are added.

Blessed be the Father of Lights, who has set up so many burning and shining
lights in your City, and has watered you so plenteously with the Rivers of his
Sanctuary, that you have frequent opportunities for the refreshment of your
souls, to the joy of your friends, the grief of your enemies, and the glory of
that Providence which has hitherto maintained them, in despite of
Persecution, Heresies and Hell! It was not always so in London: It is not so
in all other places, or famous Cities in the world: Nor are you sure that it
will be always so with you. It does me good to remember what blessed Lights have
shined among you, that now are more gloriously shining in a higher sphere:
Preston, Sibbes, Stoughton, Tayl^r, Stock, Randal, Gouge, Gataker, with
multitudes more that are now with Christ! It did me good to read in the Preface
to Mr. Gatakers funeral Sermon, by one of your Reverend and faithful Guides,
what a number of sound and unanimous Laborers are yet close at work in that
part of Christ's Vineyard! And it did me good in that short experience and
observation while I was there, to hear and see so much of their Prudence, Unity
and Fidelity.

Believe it, it is the Gospel of Christ that is your Glory: and if London be
more honorable then other great and famous Cities of the earth, it is the light
of Gods face, and the plenty and power of his Ordinances and spirit that does
advance and honor it. O know then the day of you visitation!

Three things I shall take leave to propound to your Consideration, which I am
certain God requires at your hands. The first is, that you grow in knowledge,
humility, heavenlyness and Unity, according to the blessed means that you
enjoy. In my eyes* it is the greatest shame to a people in the world, and a
sign of barbarousness, or blockishness, when we can hear and read what famous,
learned powerful Minister such a place, or such a place had, and yet see as
much ignorance, ungodlyness, unruliness, and sensuality, as if the Gospel had
scarce ever been there. I hope it is not thus with you: but I have found it so
in too many places in England: We that never saw the faces of their Ministers,
but have only read their holy Labors, have been ready to think, sure there are
but few ignorant or ungodly ones in such a Congregation! Sure they are a people
rich in Grace, and eminently qualified above their brethren, who have lived
undersuch Teaching as this! At least, sure there can be none left that have an
enmity to the fear of God! But when we have come to the Towns where such men
spent their lives, and laid out their labors, we have found ignorant, sott^sh
worldlings, unprofitable or giddy unstable Professors, and some haters of
godliness among them. O what a shame is this to them in the eyes of wise men!
and what a confounding aggravation of the^r sin before God! Thrive therefore
and be fruitful in the Vineyard of the Lord, that it may not repent him that he
has planted and watered you.

The second is this; Improve your interest to the utmost, for the continuance
of a faithful Ministry among you: and when any places are void, do what you
can to get a supply of the most Able men. Your City is the Heart of the Nation:
you cannot be sick but we shall all feel it. If you be infected with false
Doctrines, the Countries will ere long receive the Contagion. You have a very
great influence on all the Land, for good or evil! And do you think the
undermining enemies of the Church have not a special Design upon you in this
point? and will not promote it as far as is in their power? Could they but get
in Popish or Dividing Teachers among you, they know how many advantages they
should gain at once! They would have some to grieve and trouble your faithful
Guides* and hinder them in the work, and lessen that estimation which by their
Unity they would obtain: And every Deceiver will hope to catch some fish, that
casts his Net among such store. We beseech you, if there be Learned, Holy,
Judicious men in England, that can be had for supply on such occasions, let
them be yours; that you may be fed with the Best, and Guided by the Wisest, and
we may have all recourse to you for advice: and where there are most Opposers
and Seducers, there may be the most Powerful, Convincing helps at hand: Let us
in the Country have the honest raw young Preachers, and see that you have the
chief Fatherspunc; and Pillars in the Church. I speak it not for your sakes
alone, but because we have all Dependence on you.

The third thing which I humbly Crave, is, that you will Know them which Labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake; and be at Peace among your selves. 1
These. 5.12, 13. And that you will instead of grieving or rejecting your Guides,
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch
for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13.17.7. Encourage
your Teachers, for their work is great, their spirits are weak they are but
frail men; the enemy is more industrious against them then any men; and their
discouragements are very many, and the difficulties which they must encounter
are very great. Especially, Obey, Submit and Encourage them in the work of
Government and Exercise of Christ's Discipline, and managing the Keys of the
Kingdom which he has put into their hands. Do you not perceive what a strait
your Teachers are in! The Lord Jesus requires them to exercise his Discipline
faithfully and impartially: He gives them not empty Titles of Rule, but lays
upon them the burden of ruling: It is his work, more then their Honor that he
intends: and if they will have the Honor, it must be by the work. The work is,
as to Teach the ignorant, and convince the unbelieving and gainsaying, so to
admonish the disorderly and scandalous, and to reject and cast out of the
Communion of the Church the Obstinate and Impenitent; and to set by the
Leprous, that they infect not the rest; and to separate thus the precious from
the vile, by Christ's Discipline, that dividing separations, and soul-destroying
Transgressions may be prevented or cured. This work Christ has charged upon
them, and will have it done whoever is against it. If they obey him and do it,
what a tumult, what clamours and discontents will they raise! How many will be
ready to rise up against them with hatred and scorn! though it be the undoubted
work of Christ, which even under persecution was performed by the
Church-Guides. When they do but keep a scandalous untractable sinner from the
Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, what repinings does it raise! But,
alas, this is a small part of the Discipline: If all the apparently obstinate
and impenitent were cast out, what a stir would they make! And if Christ be not
obeyed, what a stir will conscience make? And it is not only between Christ and
men, but between men and men, that your Guides are put upon such streights. The
Separatists reproach them for suffering the Impenitent to continue members of
their Churches, and make it the pretense of their separation from them; having
little to say of any moment against the authorized way of Government; but only
against our slackness in the Execution. And if we should set to the close
exercise of it, as is meet, how would City and Country ring of it, and what
Indignation should we raise in the multitude against us! O what need have your
Guides of your Encouragement and best Assistance in this straight! God has set
them on a work so ungrateful and displeasing to flesh and blood, that they
cannot be faithful in it, but twenty to one they will draw a world of Hatred
upon themselves, if not men's fists about their ears. Festred sores will not be
lancht and search with ease: Corrupted members are unwilling to be cut off, and
cast aside: Especially if any of the great ones fall under the censure, who are
big in the eyes of the world and in their own. And yet our Sovereign Lord must
be obeyed; and his house must be swept, and the filth cast out, by what names
or Titles soever it be dignified with men: He must be pleased, if all be
displeased by it. Withdraw not your help then from this needful work. It is by
the Word, Spirit and Ministry, that Christ the King of his Church does Govern
it: Not separatedly, but jointly, by all three: To disobey these, is to disobey
Christ: and subjection to Christ is Essential to our Christianity. This well
thought on might do much to recover the Unruly that are Recoverable. You may
conjecture by the strange opposition that Church Government meets with from all
sorts of carnal and corrupted minds, that there is somewhat in it that is
eminently of God. I shall say no more but this, that It is an Able, Judicious,
Godly, Faithful ministry, not barely heard and applauded, but humbly and
piously submitted to, and obeyed in the Lord, that musst be your truest present
glory, and the means of your everlasting Peace and Joy.

So testifies from the Lord, Your servant in the faith of Christ. Rich. Baxter.

To the Ignorant, or Careless Reader.
SEeing the Providence of God has commanded forth this plain Discourse, I
shall hope (upon experience of his dealing in the like cases, with me) that he
has some work for it to do in the world. Who knows but it was intended for the
saving of thy soul by opening thine eyes and awaking thee from thy sin, who art
now in Reading of it! Be it known to thee, it is the certain Truth of God, and
of high concernment to thy soul that it treats of; and therefore requires
thy most sober Consideration. Thou have in it (how weakly soever it is managed
by me) an advantage put into thy hand from God, to help thee in the greatest
work in the world, even to prepare for the great approaching Judgment. In the
name of Go^, I require thee, cast not away this advantage: Turn no away thine
ears or heart from this warning that is sent to thee from the living God!
Seeing all the world cannot keep thee from judgment, nor save thee in
Judgment: let not all the world be able to keep thee from a speedy and serious
prepartion for it. Do it presently, lest God come before thou are ready! Do it
seriously, lest the Temepter overreach thee, and thou should be found among
the foolish self-deceivers, when it is too late to do it bttter. I entreat this
of thee on the behalf of thy soul, and as thou tendrest thy everlasting Peace
with God, that thou would afford these matters thy deepest Consideration.
Think on them, whether they are not True, and weighty: Think of them lying down
and rising up. And seeing this small Book is fallen into thy hands, all that I
would beg of thee concerning it, is, that thou would bestow now and then an
hour to read it, and read it to thy family or friends as well as to thy self:
and as you go* Consider what you read, and Pray the Lord to help it to thy
heart, and to assist thee in the Practice, that it may not rise up in Judgment
against thee. If thou have not leisure at other, take now and then an hour on
the Lords days, or at a night to that purpose, and if any passage through
brevity (specially near the beginning) seem dark to thee, Read it again, and
again, and ask the help of an Instructor, that thou may unders^and it. May
it but help thee out of the snares of sin, and promote the saving of thy
Immortal soul, and thy comfortable appearance at the great day of Christ, I
have the thing which I intended and desired. The Lord open thy Heart, and
accompany his Truth with the Blessing of his Spirit! Amen.

A SERMON Of Judgment, Preached at Paul's before the Honorable Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of the City London, Dec. 17. 1654
2 Cor. 5.10, 11. For we must all Appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body; according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord
we persuade men.


IT is not unlikely, that some of those wits that are taken more with things
New then with things Necessary, will marvel that I choose so common a subject,
and tell me that they all know this already* But I do it purposely upon these
following Considerations. 1. Because I well know, that it is these common
Truths that are the great and necessary things which men's everlasting happiness
or misery does most Depend upon. You may be ignorant of many Controversies and
Inferior points, without the danger of your souls, but so you cannot of these
Fundamentals. 2. Because its apparent by the lives of men, that few know these
Common Truths savingly, that think they know them. 3. Because there are several
degrees of knowing the same Truths, and the best are imperfect in degree. The
principal growth in knowledge that we should look after, is not to know more
matters then we kne^ before, but to know that better, and with a clearer light
and firmer apprehension, which we darkly and slightly knew before. You may
more safely be without any knowledge at all of many lower Truths, then without
some further degree of the knowledge of those which you already know. 4.
Besides it is known by sad experience, that many perish who know the Truth, for
want of the Consideration of it, and making use of what they know, and so their
knowledge does but condemn them. We have as much need therefore, to teach and
help you to get these Truths which you know into your hearts and lives, as to
tell you more. 5. And indeed, it is the impression of these great and
master-Truths, wherein the vitals and essentials of Gods Image upon the soul of
man does consist: And it is these Truths that are the very Instruments of the
great works that are to be done upon the heart, by the spirit and our selves.
In the right use of these it is, that the Principal part of the skill and holy
wisdom of a Christian does consist: and in the diligent and constant use of
these lies the life and trade of Christianity. There is nothing amiss in men's
hearts or lives, but it is for want of sound knowing and believing, or well
using these fundamentals. 6. And moreover, me thinks, in this choice of my
subject, I may expect this advantage with the hearers, that I may spare that
labor that else would be necessary for the proof of my doctrine: and that I
may also have easier access to your hearts, and have a fuller stroke at them,
and with less resistance. If I came to tell you of any thing not Common, I know
not how far I might expect belief from you. You might say, these things are
uncertain to us, or all men are not of this mind: But when every hearer
confesses the Truth of my Doctrine, and no man can deny it, without denying
Christianity it self, I hope I may expect that your hearts should the sooner
receive ^he Impression of this Doctrine, and the sooner yield to the duties
which it directs you to; and the easier let go the sins which from so certain a
truth shall be discovered.

The words of my text, are the reason which the Apostle gives both of his
persuading other men to the fear of God, and his care to approve to God his own
heart and life. They contain the Assertion and Description of the great
Judgment, and one use which he makes of it. It assures us, that Judged we
must be; and who must be so Judged, and by whom, and about what, and on what
terms, and to what end.

The meaning of the words, so far as is necessary, I shall give you briefly. We
all, both we Apostles that Preach the Gospel, and you that hear it, must,
willing or unwilling, there is no avoiding it, Appear, stand forth or make our
appearance, and there have our hearts and ways laid open, and appear as well
as we. Before the Judgment seat of Christ; i.e. before the redeemer of the
world, to be Judged by him as our Rightful Lord. That every one, even of all
mankind which are, were, or shall be, without exception; May receive, that is,
may receive his sentence adjudging him to his due; and then may receive the
execution of the sentence; and may go away from the bar with that Reward or
Punishment that is his due according to the Law by which he is Judged. The
things done in his body, that is, the due Reward of the works done in his body:
or as some copies read it, The things proper to the body, i.e. due to the man,
even body as well as soul. According to what he has done, whether it be good
or bad: i*e. This is the cause to be tried and Judged, whether men have done
well or ill whiles they were in the flesh, and what is due to them according to
their deeds. Knowing therefore, etc. i.e. Being certain therefore that these
things are so, and that such a Terrible Judgment of Christ will come, we
persuade men to become Christians and live as such, that they may then speed
well when others shall shall be destroyed: or as others, Knowing the fear of
the Lord, that is, the true Religion, we persuade men.

Doct. 1. There will be a Judgment. Doct. 2. Christ will be the Judge. Doct.
3. All men shall there appear. Doct. 4. Men shall be then Judged according to
the works that they did in the flesh, whether good or evil. Doct. 5. The end of
Judgment is, that men may receive their final due by Sentence and Execution.
Doct. 6. The knowledge and consideration of the terrible Judgment of God,
should move us to persuade, and men to be persuaded to careful preparation.

The ordinary method for the handling of this subject of Judgment should be
this. 1. To show you what Judgment is in the General, and what it does
contain: and that is, 1. The persons. 2. The cause. 3. The Actions. 1. The
parties are, 1. the Accuser. 2. the Defendant. 3. Sometime Assistants. 4. The
Judge. 2. The cause contains, 1. the Accusation. 2. the Defense. 3. With the
Evidence of both. 4. and the Merit. The Merit of the cause is, as it agrees
with the Law and Equity. 3. The Judicial Actions are, I. Introductory. 1.
Citation. 2. Compulsion if need be. 3.Appearance of the Accused. II. Of the
Essence of Judgment, 1. Debate by ^ the Accuser, 2. Defendant, called the
Disceptation of the cause. 2. By the Judge. ^. Ex:ploration. 2. Sentence. 3. To
see to the Execution: But because the Method is less suitable to your
capacities; and has something humane, I will reduce all to these following
heads.

1. I will show what Judgment is.

2. Who is the Judge; and why.

3. Who must be Judged.

4. Who is the Accuser.

5. How the citation, constraint and appearance will be.

6. What is the Law by which men shall be Judged.

7. What will be the cause of the day: what the Accusation, and what must be
the just Defense.

8. What will be the Evidence.

9. What are those frivolous insufficient excuses by which the unrighteous may
think to escape.

10. What will be the sentence: who shall dye and shall live; and what the
Reward and Punishment is.

11. What are the Properties of the Sentence.

12. What and by whom the execution will be. In these particular heads we
contain the whole doctrine of this Judgment, and in thi^ more familiar method
shall handle it.

1. FOR the first, Judgment as taken largely, comprehends all the
forementioned particulars; As taken more strictly for the Act of the Judge, it
is the Trial of a Controverted case. In our case not these things following.

1. Gods Judgment is not intended for any Discovery to himself of what he
knows not already: he knows already what all men are; and what they have
done; and what is their due. But it is to discover to others and to men
themselves the ground of his sentence, that so his Judgment may attain its
end; for the glorifying his grace on the Righteous, and for the convincing the
wicked of their sin and de^ert, and to show to all the world the Righteousness
of the Judge, and of his Sentence and Execution, Romans 3.4.26. and Romans 2.2.

2. It is not a Controversy therefore undecided in the mind of God that is
there to be decided; but only one that is undecided, as to the knowledge and
mind of creatures.

3. Yet is not this Judgment a bare Declaration, but a Decision, and so a
Declaration thereupon: the cause will be then put out of controversy, and all
further expectation of Decision be at an end; and with the justified there will
be no more Accusation, and with the condemned no more hope for ever.

II. FOR the second thing, who shall be the Judge, I answer, the Judge is God
himself by Jesus Christ.

1. Principally, God as Creator.

2. As also, God as Redeemer; the humane nature of Jesus Christ having a
derived subordinate power. God lost not his right to his creature either by
man's fall, or the Redemption by Christ, but by the latter has a new and
further right: but it is in and by Christ that God Judges: For as mere Creator
of innocent man, God judges none, but has committed all Judgment to the Son,
who has procured this right by the redeeming of fallen man, John 5.22. But as
the Son only does it in the nearest sense, so the Father as Creator does it
remotely and principally.

1. In that the power of the Son is derived from the Father, and so stands in
subordination to him as Fountain or Efficient.

2. In that the Judgment of the Son (as also his whole Mediatorship) to bring
men to God their maker as their ultimate end, and recover them to him from whom
they are fallen, and so as a means to that end, the Judgment of the son is
subordinate to the Father.

From hence you may see these following Truths worthy your consideration.

1. That all men are Gods creatures, and none are the workmanship of themselves
or any other; or else the Creator should not Judge them on that right.

2. That Christ dyed for All, and is the Redeemer of the world, and a sacrifice
for All; or else he should not Judge them on that Right. For he will not Judge
wicked men as he will do the Devils, as the mere enemies of his Redeemed ones,
but as being themselves his subjects in the world, and being bought by him, and
therefore become his own, who ought to have glorified him that bought them, 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Cor. 6.^9, 20. 1 Ioh. 2.2. Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6, 7.

3. Hence it appears that all men were under some Law of Grace, and did
partake of some of the Redeemers mercy. Though the Gospel came not to all, yet
all had that mercy which could come from no other Fountain but his Blood, and
which should have brought them nearer to Christ then they were, (though it were
not sufficient to bring them to believe:) and which should have led them to
Repentance. Romans 2.4. For the neglecting of which they justly perish; and not
merely for sinning against the Law that was given man in innocence: Were that
so, Christ would not Judge them as Redeemer, and that for the abuse or
not-improvement of his Talents, as he tells us he will do, Mat. 25. per totum.

4. If God will be the Judge, then none can expect by any shifts or indirect
means escape at that Day. For how should it be?

1. It is not possible that any should keep out of sight, or hide their sin and
the evil of their actions, and so delude the Judge: God will not be mocked now,
nor deceived then, Gal. 6.7. they grossly deceive themselves that imagine any
such thing: God must be Omniscient and All-seeing, or he cannot be God. Should
you hide your cause from men and from Devils, and be ignorant of it your
selves, yet cannot you hide it from God. Never did there a thought pass thy a
heart, or a word pass thy mouth, which God was not acquainted with: and as he
knows them, so he does observe them. He is not as Imperfect man, taken up with
other business, so that he cannot mind All. As easy is it with him to observe
every Thought, or Word, or Action of thine, as if he had but that one in the
world to observe: and as easy to observe each particular sinner, as if he had
not another creature to look after in the world. He is a fool indeed that
thinks now that God takes no notice of him, Ezekiel. 8.12. and 9.9. or, that
thinks then to escape in the crowd: He that found out one Guest that had not
on a wedding Garment, Mat. 22.12. will then find out every unholy soul, and
give him so sad a salvation as shall make him speechles, Job 11.11. For he
noweth vain man; he sees wickedness also, and will he not consider it?

2. It is not possible that any should escape at that Day by any Tricks of with
and false Reasoning in their own Defense. God knows a sound Answer from an
unsound, and a Truth from a Lie. Righteousness may be perverted here on earth,
by out-witting the Judge; but so will it not be then: To hope any of this, is
to hope that God will not be God. It is in vain then for the unholy man to say
he is holy; or extenuate his sin: To bring forth the counterfeit of any Grace,
and plead with God any shells of hypocritical performances, and to think to
prove a Title to heaven by any thing short of Gods Condition; all these will be
vain attempts.

3. And as impossible will it prove by fraud or flattery, by persuasion or
bribery, or by any other means, to pervert Justice, by turning the mind of God
who is the Judge: Fraud and flattery, bribery and importunity may do much with
weak men; but with God they will do nothing: Were he changable and partial, he
were not God.

4. If God be Judge, you may see the Cavils of Infidels are foolish, when they
ask, How long will God be in Trying and Judging so many persons, and taking an
Account of so many Words, and Thoughts, and Deeds? Sure it will be a long
time, and a difficult work. As if God were as man, that knows not things till
he seek out their Evidence by particular signs. Let these fools understand, if
they have any understanding, that the infinite God can show to every man at
once, all the thoughts, and words, and actions that ever he has been guilty
of. And in the twink of an eye, even at one view, can make all the world to see
their ways and their deservings. Causing their consciences and memories to
present them all before them in such a sort, as shall be equivalent to a verbal
debate, Psalm. 50.21, 22. he will set them in Order before them.

5. If Jesus Christ be the Judge, then what a comfort must it needs be to his
members, that he shall be Judge that loved them to the death, and whom they
loved above their lives: and he who was their Rock of hope and strength, and
the desire and delight of their souls!

6. And if Jesus Christ must be the Judge, what confusion will it bring to the
faces of his enemies, and of all that set light by him in the day of their
visitation? to see Mercy turned against them, and he that dyed for them, now
ready to condemn them: and that blood and grace which did Aggravate their sin,
to be pleaded against them to the increase of their misery, how sad will this
be!

7. If the God of Love, and Grace, and Truth be Judge, then no man need to fear
any wrong. No subtilty of the Accuser, nor darkness of Evidence: no prejudice,
or partiality, or whatsoever else may be imagined, can there appear to the
wrong of your cause. Get a good cause and fear nothing; and if your cause be
bad, nothing can deliver you.

III. FOR the third point, Who are they that must be Judged?

Answ. All the rational creatures in this lower world. And it seems, Angels
also, either all or some: But because their case is more darkly made known to
us, and less concerns us, we will pass it by. Every man that has been made or
born on earth (except Christ, who is God and man, and is the Judge) must be
judged. If any foolish Infidel shall say, Where shall so great a number stand?
I answer him; that he knows not the things invisible: either the nature of
spirits, and spiritual bodies: nor what place contains them, or how; but
easily he may know, that he that gave them all a Being, can sustain them all,
and have room for them all, and can at once disclose the thoughts of all, as I
said before.

The first in Order to bejudged, are, the Saints, Mat. 25. and then with Christ
they shall Judge the rest of the world, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. not in an equal
Authority and Commission with Christ, but as the present Approvers of his
Righteous Judgment. The Princes of the earth shall stand then before Christ,
even as the Peasants; and the honorable as the base; the rich and the poor
shall meet together, and the Lord shall judge them all, Prove. 22.2. No man
shall be excused from standing at that Bar, and giving up their Account, and
receiving their doom. Learned and unlearned; young and old; godly and ungodly;
all must stand there. I know some have vainly imagined, that the righteous
shall not have any of their sins mentioned, but their graces and duties only;
but they consider not, that things will not then be transacted by words as we
do now but by clear discoveries by the infinite Light; and that if God should
not discover to them their sins, he would not discover the Riches of his Grace
in the pardon of all these sins: Even then must they be humbled in themselves,
that they may be glorified; and for ever cry, Not unto us Lord, but unto thy
name be the glory.

IV. FOR the fourth particular; Who will be the Accuser?

Answ. 1. Satan is called in Scripture the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10.
and we find in Job 1. and other places, that now he does Practice it even
before God, and therefore we judge it probable that he will do so then. But we
would determine of nothing that Scripture has not clearly determined.

2. Conscience will be an Accuser, though especially of the wicked, yet in some
sense of the righteous: for it will tell the truth to all: and therefore so far
as men are faulty, it will tell them of their faults. The wicked it will accuse
of unpardoned sin, and of sin unrepented of; the godly only of sin repented of
and pardoned. It will be a Glass wherein every man may see the face of his
heart and former Life, Romans 1.15.

3. The Judge himself will be the Principal Accuser; for it is he that is
wronged, and he that prosecutes the cause, and will do Justice on the wicked;
God judges even the Righteous themselves to be sinners, or else they could not
be pardoned sinners; But he judges the wicked to be impenitent, unbelieving,
unconverted sinners. Remember what I said before, that it is not a verbal
Accusation, but an opening of the Truth of the Cause to the view of our selves
and others, that God will then perform.

Nor can any think it unworthy of God to be men's Accuser by such a disclosure,
it being no dishonor to the purest light to reveal a dunghill, or to the
greatest Prince to Accuse a Traitor. Nor is it unmeet that God should be both
Accuser and Judge; seeing he is both absolute Lord, and so far beyond all
suspicion of Injustice. His Law also does virtually accuse, John 5.45. but of
this by it self.

V. FOR the fifth particular, How will the sinners be called to the Bar?

Answ. God will not stand to send them a Citation, nor require him to make his
Voluntary Appearance; but willing or unwilling he will bring them in.

1. Before each man's particular Judgment, he sends death to call away his
soul: A surly Sergeant, that will have no Nay; How dear so ever this world may
be to men, and how loath soever they are to depart, away they must, and come
before the Lord that made them; Death will not be bribed. Every man that was
set in the Vineyard in the morning of their lives, must be called out at
evening to Receive according to what he has done; then must the naked soul
alone appear before, its Judge, and be accomptible for all that was done in the
body; and be sent before till the final Judgment, to remain in happiness or
misery, till the body be raised again and joined to it.

In this appearance of the soul before God, it seems by Scripture, that there
is some Ministry of Angels; for Luke 16.22. it is said, that the Angels
carried Lazarus, that is, his soul, into Abraham's bosom: What local motion
there is, or situation of souls, is no fit matter for the enquiry of mortals;
and what it is in this that the Angels will do, we cannot clearly understand as
yet; But most certain it is, that as soon as ever the soul is out of the Body,
it comes to its account before the God of Spirits.

2. At the end of the world the bodies of all men shall be raised from the
earth, and jo^ned again to their souls; and the soul and body shall be judged
to their endless state; and this is the great and general Judgment, where all
men shall at once appear. The same power of God that made men of nothing, will
as easily then New make them by a Resurrection; by which he will add much more
perfection, even to the wicked in their Naturals, which will make them capable
of the greater misery; even they shall have immortal and incorruptible bodies,
which may be the subjects of immortal woe, 1 Cor. 15.53 John 5.28, 29.

Of this Resurrection, and our Appearance at Judgment, the Angels will be some
way the Ministers: As they shall come with Christ to Judgment, so they shall
sound his Trumpet, 1 These. 4.16. and they shall gather the wicked out of Gods
Kingdom; and they shall gather the Tares to burn them, Mat. 13.39*40, 41. in
the end of the world the Angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from
among the just, and shall cast them into the Furnace of fire, Mat. 17.49, 50.

FOR the sixth particular, What Law is it that men shall be Judged by?

Answ. That which was given them to live by: Gods Law is but the sign of his
will, to teach us what shall be due from us and to us: Before we fell he gave
us such a Law as was suitable to our perfection: when we had sinned and turned
from him, as we ceased not to be his creatures, nor he to be our Lord, so he
destroyed not his Law, nor discharged or absolved us from the duty of our
obedience. But because we stood condemned by that Law, and could not be
Justified by it, having once Transgressed it, he was pleased to make a Law of
Grace, even a new remedying Law, by which we might be saved from the deserved
punishment of the Old. So we shall be tried at Judgment upon both these Laws,
but ultimatly upon the Last. The first Law commanded perfect Obedience, and
threatened Death to us if ever we disobeyed; the second Law finding us under the
Guilt of sin against the first, does command us to Repent and Believe in
Christ, and so to return to God by him* and promises us pardon of all our sins
upon that Condition, and also if we persevere, everlasting Glory. So that in
Judgment, though it must first be evinced that we are sinners, and have
deserved Death according to the Law of pure nature; yet that is not the upshot
of the Judgment. For the enquiry will be next, whether we have accepted the
remedy, and so obeyed the Law of grace, and performed its Condition for pardon
and salvation; and upon this our Life or Death will depend. It is both these
Laws that condemn the wicked, but it is only the Law of grace that justifies
the righteous.

Obj. But how shall Heathens be judged by the Law of grace, that never did
Receive it?

Answ. The express Gospel some of them had not, and therefore shall not
directly be judged by it; but much of the Redeemers mercy they did enjoy, which
should have led them to repent and seek out after Recovery from their misery,
and to come nearer Christ, and for the neglect and abuse of this, they shall be
judged; and not merely for sinning against the Law that was given us in pure
innocence: So that Christ as Redeemer shall judge them as well as others:
though they had but one Talent, yet must they give an account of that to the
Redeemer, from whom they received it. But if any be unsatisfied in this, let
them remember, that as God has left the state of such more dark to us, and the
terms on which he will Judge them; so does it much more concern us to look to
the terms of our own Judgment.

Obj. But how shall Infants be judged by the Gospel, that were incapable of it?

Answ. For ought I find in Scripture, they stand or fall with their parents,
etc. on the same terms; but I leav each to their own thoughts.

VII. FOR the seventh Head, What will be the cause of the day to be enquired
after? What the Accusation, and what the Defense?

Answ. This may be gathered from what was last said. The great Cause of the Day
will be to enquire and determine, who shall dye and who shall live; who ought
to go to heaven, and who to hell for ever, according to the Law by which they
must then be Judged.

1. As there is a twofold Law by which they must be Judged, so will there then
be a twofold Accusation. The first will be, that they were sinners, and so
having violated the Law of God, they Deserve Everlasting Death according to
that Law; If no defense could be made, this one Accusation would condemn all
the wo^ld; for it is most certain that all are sinners, and as certain that all
sin deserves Death. The only defense against this Accusation lies in this
Plea: Confessing the charge, we must plead that Christ has satisfied for sins,
and upon that consideration God has forgiven us; and therefore being forgiven,
we ought not to be punished; To prove this we must show the pardon under Gods
hand in the Gospel. But because this pardoning Act of the Gospel does forgive
none but those that Repent and Believe, and so return to God, and to sincere
Obedience for the time to come; therefore the next Accusation will be, that we
did not perform these Conditions of forgiveness; and therefore being
Unbelievers, Impenitent and Rebels against the Redeemer we have no right to
pardon, but by the sentence of the Gospel, are liable to a greater punishment,
for this contempt of Christ and Grace. This Accusation is either true or false;
where it is true, God and Conscience who speak the truth may well be said to be
the Accusers: Where it is false, it can be only the work of Satan the malicious
adversary; who, as we may see in Jobs case, will not stick to bring a false
Accusation.

If any think that the Accuser will not do so vain a work, at least they may
see that potentially, this is the Accusation that lies against us and which we
must be justified against. For all Justification implies an Actual or
Potential Accusation.

He that is truly accused of final Impenitency, or Unbelief, or Rebellion, has
no other Defense to make, but must needs be condemned.

He that is falsely accused of such nonperformance of the condition of Grace*
must deny the Accusation, and plead his own personal Righteousness as against
that Accusation, and produce that Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience and
Perseverance by which he fulfilled that Condition, and so is Evangelically
Righteous in himself, and therefore has part in the blood of Christ which is
instead of a Legal righteousness to him* in all things else, as having procured
him a pardon of all his sin, and a right to everlasting glory.

And thus we must then be Justified by Christ's satisfaction only, against the
accusation of being sinners in general, and of deserveing Gods wrath for the
Breach of the Law of works: But we must be justified by our faith, repentance
and sincere Obedience it self, against the accusation of being Impenitent,
Unbelievers, and Rebels against Christ, and having not performed the Condition
of the promise, and so having no part in Christ and his Benefits.

So that in sum you see, that the cause of the day will be to enquire, whether
being all known sinners, we have accepted of Christ upon his terms, and so have
right in him and his benefits, or not? Whether they have forsaken this vain
world for him, and loved him so faithfully, that they have manifested it, in
parting with these things at his Command. And this is the meaning of Mat. 25.
Where the enquiry is made to be, whether they have fed and visited him in his
members, or not? That is, whether they have so far loved him as their Redeemer,
and God by him, as that they have manifested this to his members according to
Opportunity* though it cost them the hazard or loss of all: Seeing danger, and
labor, and cost, are fitter to express Love by, then empty Complements and bare
Professions.

Whether it be particularly enquired after, or only taken for granted that men
are sinners, and have deserved Death according to the Law of works, and that
Christ has satisfied by his death, is all one as to the matter in hand, seeing
Gods enquiry is but the Discovery and Conviction of us. But the last Question
which must decide the Controversy will be, whether we have performed the
condition of the Gospel?

I have the rather also said all this, to show you in what sense these words
are taken in the text, that Every man shall be Judged according to what he has
done in the flesh, whether it be good or bad. Though every man be Judged worthy
of Death for sinning, yet every man shall not be Judged to dye for it: and no
man shall be Judged worthy of Life for his good works: It is therefore
according to the Gospel, as the rule of judgment, that this is meant. They
that have Repented and Believed, and returned to true, though imperfect
Obedience, shall be Judged to everlasting Life, according to these works; not
because these works Deserve it, but because the free Gift in the Gospel,
through the blood of Christ, does make these things the condition of our
possessing it: They that have lived and dyed Impenitent, Unbelievers and Rebels
against Christ, shall be judged to everlasting punishment, because they have
deserved it, both by their sin in general against the Law, and by these sins in
special against the Gospel. This is called the Merit of the Cause, that is,
what is a man's due according to the true meaning of the Law; Though the due may
be by free gift. And thus you see what will be the cavil of the Day, and the
matter to be enquired after and decided, as to our Life or Death.

VIII. THE next point in our method, is, to show you, What will be the Evidence
of the Cause?

Answ. There is a five fold Evidence among men* 1. When the fact is notorious.
2. The knowledge of an unsuspected Competent Judge. 3. The parties Confession.
4. Witness. 5. Instruments and visible effects of the action. All these
Evidences will be at hand, and any one of them sufficient for the conviction of
the guilty person at that day.

1. As the sins of all men; so the Impenitency and Rebellion of the wicked was
notorious, or at least will be then. For though some play the hypocrites and
hide the matter from the world and themselves, yet God shall open their hearts
and former lives to themselves, and to the view of all the world. He shall set
their sins in order before them so, that it shall be utterly in vain to deny or
excuse them* If any men will then think to make their cause as good to God as
they can now do to us, that are not able to see their hearts* they will be
foully mistaken. Now they can say they have as good hearts as the best: then
God will bring them out in the light; and show them to themselves and all the
world, whether they were good or bad. Now they will face us down that they do
truly Repent, and they obey God as well as they can, but God that knows the
Deceivers, will then undeceive them. We cannot now make men acquainted with
their own unsanctified hearts, nor convince them that have not true Faith,
Repentance or Obedience; but God will convince them of it; They can find shifts
and false answers to put off a Minister with; but God will not so be shifted
off. Let us preach as plainly to them as we can and do all that ever we are
able to acquaint them with the impenitency and unholyness of their own heart,
and the necessity of a new heart and life, yet we cannot do it; but they will
Believe whether we will or not, that the old heart will serve the turn; But how
easily will God make them know the contrary? We plead with them in the dark;
for though we have the candle of the Gospel in our hands when we come to show
them their corruption, yet they shut their eyes, and are wilfully blind. But
God will open their eyes whether they will or not, not by holy Illumination,
but by forced conviction; and then he will plead with them as in the open
light. See here thy own unholy soul, can thou now say thou did love me
above all? can thou deny but thou did love this world before me? and serve
thy flesh and lusts, though I told thee if thou did so thou should dye?
Look upon thy own heart now, and see whether it be a holy or an unholy heart; a
spiritual or a fleshly heart; a heavenly or an earthly heart? Look now upon all
the course of thy life, and see whether thou did live to me, or to the world
and thy flesh? Oh how easily will God convince men then of the very sins of
their thoughts, and in their secret Closets, when they thought that no witness
could have disclosed them! Therefore its said, that the Books shall be opened,
and the dead Judged out of the books, Rev. 20.12. Dan. 7.10.

The second Evidence will be the knowledge of the Judge. If the sinner would
not be convinced, yet it is sufficient that the Judge knows the Cause; God
needs no further witness; he saw thee committing adultery in secret, lying,
stealing, forswearing in secret. If thou do not know thy own heart to be
unholy, it is enough that God knows it. If you have the face to say, Lord,
when did we see thee hungry? etc. Mat. 25.44. yet God will make good the charge
against thee, and there needs no more Testimony then his own. Can foolish
sinners think to lie hid or escape at that day, that will now sin wilfully
before their Judge? that know every day that their Judge is looking on them
while they forget him, and give up themselves to the world, and yet go on even
under his eye, as if to his face they dared him to punish them?

3. The third Evidence will be, the sinners Confession. God will force their
own Consciences to witness against them, and their own tongues to confess the
Accusation. If they do at first excuse it, he will leave them speechless, yea
and condemning themselves before they have done.

Oh what a difference between their language now and then! Now we cannot tell
them of their sin and misery, but they either tell us of our own faults, or bid
us look to our selves, or deny or excuse their fault, or make light of it; but
then their own tongues shall confess them, and cry out of the wilful folly that
they committed, and lay a heavyer charge upon them then we can now do. Now if
we tell them that we are afraid they are unregenerate, and least their hearts
are not truly set upon God; they will tell us they hope to be saved with such
hearts as they have; But then, Oh how they will confess the folly and falsness
of their own hearts! You may see a little of their case even in despairing
sinners on earth, how far they are from denying or excusing their sins. Judas
cries out. I have sinned in betraying Innocent blood, Mat. 27.4. out of their
own mouth shall they be Judged. That very tongue that now excuses their sin,
will in their torments be their great Accuser. For God will have it so to be.

4. The fourth Evididence will be the witness of others. Oh how many thousand
witnesses might there be produced, were there need, to convince the guilty soul
at that day!

1. All the Ministers of Christ that ever preached to them, or warned them,
will be sufficient witnesses against them: we must needs testify that we
preached to them the truth of the Gospel, and they would not believe it. We
preached to them the goodness of God, yet they set not their hearts upon him*
we showed them their sin, and they were not humbled. We told them of the danger
of an unregenerate state, and they did not regard us: we acquainted them with
the Absolute Necessity of holiness, but they made light of all: We let them
know the deceitfulness of their hearts, and the need of a close and faithful
examination, but they would not bestow an hour in such a work; nor scarce once
be afraid of being mistaken and miscarrying. We let them know the vanity of
this world, and yet they would not forsake it, no not for Christ and the hopes
of glory: We told them of the everlasting felicity they might attain, but they
would not set themselves to seek it.

What we shall think of it then, the Lord knows; but surely it seems now to
us a matter of very sad consideration, that we must be brought in as witnesses
against the souls of our neighbors and friends in the flesh. Those whom we now
unfeignedly love, and would do any thing that we were able to do for their
good, whose well fare is dearer to us then all worldly enjoyments: Alas, that
we must be forced to testify to their faces for their condemnation! Ah Lord,
with what a heart must a poor Minister study, when he considers this, that
all the words that he is studying must be brought in for a witness against many
of his hearers! with what a heart must a Minister Preach, when he remembers
that all the words that he is speaking must condemn many, if not most of his
hearers! Do we desire this sad fruit of our Labors? No: we may say with the
Prophet, Jer. 17.16. I have not desired the woeful day, thou know: No, if we
desired it, we would not do so much to prevent it: we would not study, and
preach, and pray, and entreat men, that if it were possible we might not be put
on such a task* And doubtless it should make every honest Minister study hard,
and pray hard, and entreat hard, and stoop low to men, and be earnest with men
in season and out of season, that if it may be, they may not be the condemners
of their peoples souls. But if men will not hear, and there be no remedy, who
can help it? Christ himself came not into the world to condemn men, but to save
them, and yet he will condemn those that will not yield to his saving work: ^od
takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent, and
return, and live, Ezekiel. 18.23.32. and yet he will rejoice over those to do them
hurt, and destroy them that will not return, Deuteronomy. 28.63. And if we must be put
on such work, he will make us; like-minded. The holy Ghost tells us, that the
Saints shall Judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. and if they must Judge, they will
Judge as God Judges; you cannot blame us for it sinners: we now warn you of it
before hand, and if you will not prevent it blame not us, but your selves. Alas!
we are not our own Masters. As we now speak not to you in our own names, so
then we may not do what we list our selves, or if we might, our wills will be
as Gods will. God will make us Judge you, and witness against you: Can we
absolve you, when the righteous God will condemn you? when God is against you,
whose side would you have us be of? We must be either against God or you. And
can you think that we should be for any one against our Maker and Redeemer? We
must either condemn the Sentence of Jesus Christ, or condemn you: and is not
there more reason to condemn you then him? can we have any mercy on you, when
he that made you will not save you, and he that formed you, will show you no
mercy? Isa. 27.11. Yea when he that dyed for you, will condemn you, shall we be
more merciful then God? But alas* If we should be so foolish and unjust, what
good would it do you? If we would be false witnesses and partial Judges, it
would not save you; we are not Justified if we Absolve our selves, 1 Cor. 4.4.
how unable then shall we be against Gods Sentence to Justify you? If all the
world should say, you were holy and penitent, when God knows you were unholy
and impenitent; it will do you no good. You pray every day that his will may be
done, and it will be done: It will be done upon you, because it was not done by
you. What would you have us say, if God ask us, Did you tell this sinner of the
need of Christ, of the glory of the world to come, and the vanity of this?
Should we lie, and say we did not? what should we say if he ask us, Did not you
tell them the misery of their natural state; and what would become of them if
they were not made new? would you have us lie to God, and say we did not? Why
if we did not, your blood will be required at our hands, Ezekiel. 33.6. and 3.18.
and would you have us bring your blood upon our own heads by a lie? Yea, and to
do you no good, when we know that lies will not prevail with God? No, no,
sinners; We must unavoidably, testify to the confusion of your faces. If ^od
ask us, we must bear witness against you, and say; Lord, we did what we could
according to our weak abilities, to reclaim them: Indeed our own thoughts of
everlasting things were so low, and our own hearts so dull; that we must
confess we did not follow them so close, nor speak so earnestly as we should
have done: we did not cry so loud, nor lift up our voice as a Trumpet to awaken
them, (Isa 58.1.) we confess we did not speak to them with such melting
compassion, and with such streams of tears beseech them to regard, as a matter
of such great concernment should have been spoken with; We did not fall on our
knees to them, and so earnestly beg of them for the Lords sake, to have mercy
upon their own souls* as we should have done. But yet we told them the Message
of God: and we studied to speak it to them as plainly and as peircingly as we
could. Fain we would have convinced them of their sin and misery, but we could
not: Fain we would have drawn them to the admiration of Christ, but they made
light of it, Mat. 22.5. We would fain have brought them to the contempt of this
vain world, and to set their mind on the world to come. but we could not: Some
compassion thou know Lord we had to their souls* many a weeping or groaning
hour we have had in secret, because they would not hear and obey; and some sad
complaints we have made over them in public: We told them that they must
shortly dye and come to Judgment, and that this world would deceive them, and
leave them in the dust; we told them that the time was at hand when nothing but
Christ would do them good, and nothing but the favor of God would he
sufficient for their happiness; but we could never get them to lay it to heart.
Many a time did we entreat them to think soberly of this life, and the life to
come, and to compare them together with the Faith* of Christians, and the
reason of men; but they would not do it: many a time did we entreat them, but
to take now and then an hour in secret to consider who made them, and for what
he made them, and why they were sent into this world; and what their business
here is; and whether they are going, and how it will go with them at their
latter end; But we could never get most of them to spend one hour in serious
thoughts of these weighty matters. Many a time did we entreat them to try
whether they were Regenerate or not? whether Christ and his Spirit were in
them, or not? Whether their souls were brought back to God by Sanctification?
but they would not try: We did beseech them to make sure work* and not leave
such a matter as everlasting Joy or Torment to a bold and mad adventure: but we
could not prevail: We entreated them to lay all other businesses aside a little
while in the world, and to enquire by the direction of the word of God, what
would become of them in the world to come; and to Judge themselves before God
came to Judge them, seeing they had the Law and the rule of Judgment before
them: but their minds were blinded, and their hearts were hardened and the
profit, and pleasure, and honor of this world did e^ther stop their ears, or
quickly steal away their hearts, so that we could never get them to a sober
consideration, nor ever win their hearts to God.

This will be the witness that many a hundred Ministers of the Gospel must give
in against the souls of their people at that day. Alas, that ever you should
cast this upon us! For the Lords sake, Sirs, pity your poor Teachers, if you
pity not your selves. We had rather go a 1000. miles for you; we had rather be
scorned and abused for your sakes: we had rather lay our hands under your fe^t,
and beseech you on our knees with tears were we able, then be put on such a
work as this. It is you that will do it if it be done* We had rather follow you
from house to house, and teach and exhort you, if you will but hear us, and
accept of our exhortation. Your souls a^e precious in our eyes, for we know
they were so in the eyes of Christ, and therefore we are loath to see this day;
we were once in your case, and therefore know what it is to be blind, and
careless* and carnal as you are, and therefore would fain obtain your
Deliverance. But if you will not hear, but we must accuse you and we must
condemn you; The Lord Judge between you and us; For he can witness that it was
full sore against our wills. We have been* faulty indeed in doing no more for
you, and not following you with restless Importunity; (the Good Lord forgive
us;) but yet we have not betrayed you by silence.

2. All those that fear God, that have lived among ungodly men, will also be
sufficient witnesses against them. Alas! they must be put upon that same work
which is very unpleasant to their thoughts, as Ministers are: They must witness
before the Lord, that they did as friends and neighbors admonish them: that
they gave them a good example, and endeavored to walk in holiness before them;
but alas! the most did but mock them, and call them Puritans and precise fools,
and thought they made more ado then needs for their salvation: They must be
forced to testify, [Lord we would fain have drawn them with us to hear the
word, and to read it, and to pray in their families, and to sanctify thy holy
day, and take such happy Opportunities for their souls; But we could not get
them to it; we did in our places what we were able, to give them the Example of
a Godly Conversation, and they did but deride us; they were readier to mark
every slip of our lives, and to observe all our Infirmities, and catch at any
Accusation that was against us* then to follow us in any work of holy
obedience, or care for our everlasting peace;] The lord knows it is a most
heavy thing to consider now, that poor neighbors must be fain to come in
against those that they love so dearly and by their Testimony to Judge them to
perdition* Oh heavy case to think of, that a master must witness against his
own servant. Yea a husband against his own wife, and a wife against her
husband; yea parents against their own children, and say, [Lord, I taught them
thy word, but they would not learn. I told them what would come on it, if they
returned not to thee; I brought them to Sermons, and I prayed with them and for
them. I frequently* minded them of these everlasting things* and of this
dreadful day* which now they see. But youthful lusts and the temptations of the
flesh and the Devil led them away, and I could never get them thoroughly and
soundly to lay it to their hearts*] Oh you that are parents, and friends, and
neighbors, in the fear of God bestir you now* that you may not be put to this
at the day of Judgment* Oh give them no rest take no nay of them till you have
persuaded their heart from this* world to God, lest you be put to be their
condemners: It must be now that you must prevent it, or else never; now while
you are with them, while you and they are in the flesh together, which will be
but a little while: Can you but now prevail with them, all will be well, and
you may* meet them Joyfully before the Lord.

3. Another witness that will testify against the ungodly at that day, will be
their sinful companions; those that drew them into sin, or were drawn by them,
or joined with them in it. Oh little do poor drunkards think, when they sit
merrily in an Alehouse, that one of them must bear witness against another,
and condemn one another* If they thought of this, me thinks it should make them
have less delight in that company: Those that now join with you in wickedness,
shall then be forced to witness, [I confess Lord I did hear him swear and
curse; I heard him deride those that feared the Lord, and make a jest of a holy
life: I saw him in the Alehouse when he should be hearing the Word of God, or
reading, or calling upon God, and preparing for this day: I joined with him in
fleshly delights, in abusing thy creature and our own bodies.] Sinners; look
your companions in the face the next time you are with them, and remember this
that I now say; that those men shall give in Evidence against you, that now are
your associates in all your mirth: Little thinks the fornicator and lustful
wanton, that their sinful mates must then bear witness of that which they
thought the dark had concealed, and tell their shame before all the world. But
this must be the fruit of sin. Its meet that they who encouraged one another in
sin, should condemn one another for it. And marvail not at it; for they shall
be forced to it whether they will or no; Light will not then be hid: They may
think to have some ease to their consciences, by accusing and condemning
others. When Adam is questioned for his sin, he presently accuses the woman,
Genesis 3.12. when Judas his conscience was awakened, he runs to the Pharisees
with the money that drew him to it, and they cast it back in his own face, and
say, See thou to it, what is that to us? Mat. ^7.4, 5, 6. Oh the cold comfort
that sinners will have in one another at that day! and the little pleasure that
they will find in remembering their evil ways! Now when a fornicator or a
worldling, or a merry voluptuous man is grown old, and cannot act all his sin
again, he takes pleasure in rem^mbring and telling others of his former folly;
what he once was; and what he did; and the merry hours that he had; but then
when sinners are come to themselves a little more, they will remember and tell
one another of these things with another heart. Oh that they did but know now
how these things will then affect them*

4. Another witness that will then rise up against them, will be the very
Devils that tempted them: They that did purposely draw them to sin, that they
might draw them to Torment for sin: They can witness that you harkned to their
Temptations, when you would not harken to Gods Exhortations; They can witness
that you obeyed them in working Iniquity. But because you may think the
Accusers Testimony is not to be taken, I will not stand on this. Though it is
not nothing, where God knows it to be true.

5. The very Angels of God also may be witnesses against the wicked: Therefore
are we advised in Scripture, not to sin before them, Eccl. 5.6. 1 Cor. 11.10. 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before the Elect Angels, etc. They can testify that
they would have been ministering Spirits for their good, when the wicked rather
chose to be slaves to the Spirit of malitiousness. The holy Angels of God do
many a time stand by you when* you are sinning* They see you, when you see not
them. They are employed by God in some sort for your good, as well as we: And
as it is the grief of Ministers, that their labors succeed not, so may we
suppose that according to their state and nature it is theirs. For they that
Rejoice in heaven at the Conversion of one sinner, may be said to sorrow, or to
lose those joys, when you refuse to be converted. These noble Spirits, these
Holy and Glorious attendants of Christ, that shall wait upon him to Judgment,
will be Witnesses against Rebellious sinners, to their Confu^ion. Sirs, you
have all in you naturally a fear of Spirits, and invisible powers: Fear them
aright: least hearkening to the deceiving Spirits, and refusing the help of the
Angels of God, and wilfully sinning before their faces, you should cause them
at that day, to the terror of your souls, to stand forth as witnesses against
you, to your Condemnation.

6. Conscience it self will be a most effectual witness against the wicked at
that day. I before told you it will be a Discerner, and force them to a
Confession: But a further office it has, even to witness against them. If none
else in the world had known of their secret sins, conscience will say, I was
acquainted with them.

7. The Spirit of Christ can witness against the ungodly, that he often moved
them to Repent and Return, and they rejected his motions: that he spoke to
their hearts in secret, and often set in with the Minister, and often minded them
of their case, and persuaded them to God; but they resisted, quenched and
grieved the Spirit, Act. 7.51. As the Spirit witnesses with the Spirits of the
righteous that they are the children of God, Romans 8.16. so does he witness with
the conscience of the wicked, that they were children of Rebellion, and
therefore are justly children of wrath. This Spirit will not always strive with
men; at last being vexed, it will prove their enemy, and rise up against them,
Genesis 6.3. Isa. 63.10. If you will needs Grieve it now, it will Grieve you then.
Were it not a Spirit of Grace, and were it not free mercy that it came to offer
you, the Repulse would not have been so condemning* nor the witness of this
Spirit against you so heavy at the last. But it was the Spirit of Jesus, that
came with recovering Grace, which you resisted: And though the wages of every
sin is death, yet you will find that it will cost you somewhat more to Reject
this salvation, than to break the Creators Law of works Kindness, and such
Kindness, will not be rejected at easy rates.

Many a good motion is now made by the Spirit to the Heart of a sinner, which
he does not ^o much as once obse^ve; and therefore does not now Remember them.
But then they shall be brought to his Remembrance with a witness. Many a
thousand secret motions to Repentance, to Faith, to a Holy Life, will be Then
set before the eyes of the poor, unpardoned, trembling sinner, which he had
quite forgotten: And the Spirit of God shall testify to his Confusion, [At
such a Sermon I persuaded thy heart to Repent, and thou would not; At such a
time I showed thee the evil of thy sin, and persuaded thee to have forsaken it,
but thou would not; I minded thee in thy secret thoughts, of the neerness of
Judgment, and the Certainty and Weight of everlasting things, of the need of
Christ, and faith, and holiness, and of the Danger of sinning: but thou did
drown all my motions in the cares and pleasures of the world* Thou harkenedst
rather to the Devil than to me: The sensual inclinations of thy flesh did
prevail against the strongest Arguments that I used: Though I showed thee
Reasons, undeniable Reasons, from thy Creator, from thy Redeemer, from nature,
from grace, from heaven, and from hell, yet all would not so much as stop thee,
much less turn thee, but thou would go on; Thou would follow thy flesh,
and now let it pay thee the wages of thy folly; Thou would be thy own
guide, and take thine own Course* and now take what thou gettest by it.]

Poor sinners, I beseech you in the fear of God, the next time you have any
such motions from the Spirit of God, to Repent, and Believe, and Break off your
sins, and the Occasions of them, consider then what a mercy is set before you;
and how it will confound you at the day of Judgment, to have all these motions
brought in against you, and that the Spirit of Grace it self should be your
Condemner! Alas, that men should choose their own Destruction, and wilfully
choose it! and that the foreknowledge of these things should not move them to
relent.

So much concerning the witness that will be brought in against the sinner.

5. The fifth Evidence that will be given in against the sinner, will be, The
Instruments and Effects. You know among men, if a man be found murdered by the
highway, and you are found standing by him with a bloody sword in your hand;
especially if there were a former dissension between you, it will be an
Evidence that will prove a strong presumption, that you were the Murderer: But
if the fact be certain by other Evidence, then many such things may be brought
for aggravation of the fault.

So a twofold Evidence will be brought against the sinner from these things.
One to prove him guilty of the fact: the other to Aggravate the fault, and
prove that his sin was very great.

For the former. 1. The very creatures which sinners abused to sin, may be
brought in against them to their Conviction and Condemnation. For though these
creatures shall be consumed with the last destroying Fire, which shall consume
all the world, yet they shall have a Being in the memory of the sinner (an esse
Cognitum.) The very Wine or Ale, or other liquor which was abused to
drunkenness, may witness against the Drunkard. The sweet morsels by which the
Glutton did please his Appetite, and all the good creatures of God which he
luxuriously devou^ed, may witness against him, Luke 16.19, 25. He that fared
deliciously every day in this life, was told by Abrah^m when he was dead, and
his soul in Hell, [Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented.] Though their sweet morsels and cups are past, and gone, yet must
they be Remembered at Judgment and in Hell. [Remember, Son] says Abraham: Yea,
and Remember he must, whether he will or no: Long was the Glutton in sinning,
and many a pleasant bit did he taste: and so many Evidences of his sin will lie
against him, and the sweetness will then be turned into gall.

The very clothing, and ornaments by which Proud persons did manifest their
Pride, will be sufficient Evidence against them* as his being clothed in
Purple and fine linen, is mentioned, Luke 16.19.

The very lands, and goods and houses of worldlings, will be an Evidence
against them: Their Gold and Silver, which the covetous do now prefer before
the everlasting Riches with Christ, will be an Evidence against them, Jam. 5.1,
2, 3, 4. Go to now, ye Rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments moath-eaten; Your
Gold and Silver is cankered, and the Rust of them shall be a Witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire; Ye have heaped Treasure
together for the Last days. Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have
reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and the
cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; Ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter. Oh that worldlings would well
consid^r this one Text; and therein observe, whether a life of earthly
pleasure, and fullness, of worldly Glory, and Gallantry, be as desirable as they
imagine* and to what Time, and Purpose they now lay up their Treasures; and how
they must hear of these Things hereafter; and what effect the review of their
Jovial days will have upon their miserable condemned souls.

2. The very circumstances of Time, Place, and the like, may Evidence against a
sinner to his Condemnation. The drunkard shall Remember, In such an Alehouse I
was so often drunk, and in such a Tavern I waste my time; The Adulterer and
Fornicator shall Remember the very Time, the Place, the Room, the Bed, where
they committed wickedness. The Thief and Deceiver will Remember the Time,
Place, the persons they wronged, and the Things which they robbed or deceived
them of. The worldling will Remember the business which he preferred before the
service of God; the worldly matters which had more of his heart than his Maker
and Redeemer had: the work which he was doing when he should have been Praying,
or Reading, or Catechizing his Family, or thinking soberly of his latter end. A
thousand of these will then come into his mind, and be as so many Evidences
against him to his Condemnation.

3. The very effects also of men's sins will be an Evidence against them. The
wife and children of a Drunkard are Impoverished by his sin: His family and the
neighborhod is disquieted by him. These will be so many Evidences against him.
So will the abuse of his own Reason: The enticing of others to the same sin,
and hardening them by his example.

One covetous unmerciful Landlord does keep a hundred, or many hundred persons
or families in so great necessities, and care and labor, that they are tempted
by it to overpass the service of God, as having scarce time for it, or any room
for it in their troubled thoughts; All these miserable families, and persons,
and all the souls that are undone by this Temptation, will be so many Evidences
against such Oppressors.

Yea, the poor whom they have neglected to relieve, when they might; the sick
whom they have neglected to visit, when they might, will all witness then
against the unmerciful, Matthew. 25.

The many ignorant, worldly, careless sinners*, that have perished under an
idle, unfaithful Minister, will be so many witnesses against him to his
Condemnation! They may then cry out against him to his face, [I was ignorant
Lord, and he never did so much as teach me, catechize me, nor tell me of these
Things; I was careless, and minded he world, and he let me go on quietly, and
was as careless and worldly as I, and never plainly and faithfully warned me,
to waken me from my security.] And so their blood will be required at his
hands, though themselves also shall perish in their sin, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8.

2. And as these Evidences will convince men of sin, so there are many more
which will convince them of the Greatness of their sin. And these are so many
that it would too much lengthen my discourse to stand on them. A few I shall
briefly touch.

1. The very mercy of God in Creating men, in giving and continuing their Being
to them, will be an Evidence for the Aggravation of their sin against him.
What? will you abuse him, by whom it is that you are men? will you speak to his
dishonor, that gives you your speech? will will you live to his dishonor who
gives you your Lives? will you wrong him by his own creatures? and neglect him
without whom you cannot subsist?

2. The Redemption of men by the Lord Jesus Christ, will be an evidence to the
exceeding Aggravation of their sins. You sinned against the Lord that bought
you* 2 Pet. 2.1. When the Feast was prepared, and all things were Ready, you
made light of it, and found excuses, and would not come, Mat. 22.4, 5, 6. Luke
14.17, 18. Must Christ Redeem you by so dear a price from sin and misery, and
yet will you continue the servants of sin, and prefer your slavery before your
freedom, and choose to be Satan's drudges, rather then to be the servants of
God? The sorrows and sufferings that Christ underwent for you, will then prove
the increase of your own sorrows. As a neglected Redeemer, it is that he will
condemn you. And then you would be glad that it were but true Doctrine, that
Christ never d^ed for you, that you might not be condemned for refusing a
Redeemer, and sinning against him that shed his blood for you. How deeply will
his wounds then wound your consciences! You will then Remember, that to this
end he both d^ed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and
the Living? And that he therefore dyed for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose
again; Romans 14.9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. You
will then understand that you were not your own, but were bought with a price,
and therefore should have glorified him that Bought you, with your Bodies and
Spirits, because they were His, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. This one Aggravation of your
sin will make you doubly and remedilesly miserable, that you Trod under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith you were
sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. and crucified to your
selves the Son of God a fresh, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6.5, 6.

3. Moreover; All the personal mercies which they received, will be so many
Evidences for the condemnation of the ungodly. The very earth that bore them,
and yielded them its fruits, while they themselves were unfruitful to God: The
Air which they breathed in: the food which nourished them* the clothes which
covered them, the houses which they dwelt in, the beasts that labored for
them, and all the creatures that dyed for their use: All these may rise up
against them to their condemnation. And the Judge may thus expostulate with
them, [Did all these mercies deserve no more Thanks? should you not have served
him that so liberally maintained you? God thought not all these too good for
you, and did you think your hearts and services too good for him? He served you
with the weary labors of your fellow creatures: and should you have grudged to
bear his easy Yoke? They were your slaves and drudges, and you refused to be
his free servants and his sons? They suffered Death to feed your Bodies, and
you would not suffer the short forbearance of a little forbidden fleshly
pleasure, for the sake of him that made you and redeemed you.]

Oh how many thousand mercies of God will then be reviewed by those that
neglected them to the horror of their souls, when they shall be upbraided by
the Judge with their base requital! All the deliverances from sickness and from
danger; all the honors, and privileges, and other commodities, which so much
contented them, will then be Gods Evidences to shame them and confound them. On
this supposition does the Apostle reprove such, Romans 2.4* 5, 6. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his Deeds.

4. Moreover, All the means which God used for the Recovery of sinners in the
day of their visitation, will rise up against the Impenitent souls, in
Judgment to their condemnation. You can hear Sermons carelessly and sleepily
now; but O that you would consider, how the review of them will then awake you!
You now make light of the warnings of God and man, and of all the wholesome
advice that is given you: but God will not then make light of your contempt. Oh
what cutting Questions will they be to the hearts of the ungodly, when all the
means that were used for their good, are brought to their remembrance on one
side, and the temptations that drew them to sin on the other side, and the Lord
shall plead his cause with their consciences, and say, [Was I so hard a Master,
or was my work so unreasonable, or was my wages so contemptible, that no
persuasions could draw you into my service? was Satan so good a Master, or was
his work so honest and profitable, or was his wages so desirable, that you
would be so easily persuaded to do as he would have you? Was there more
persuading Reason in his allurements and deceits, then in all my holy words,
and all the powerful Sermons that you heard, or all the faithful admonitions
you received, or all the good examples of the righteous, or in all the works of
God which you beheld? Was not a reason fetched from the love of God, from the
evil of sin, the blood of Christ, the Judgment to come, the glory promised,
the torments threatened, as forcible with you; and as good in your eyes, to draw
you to holiness, as a Reason from a little fleshly delight, or worldly gain, to
draw you to be unholy?]

In the name of God, sinners, I entreat you to bethink your selves in time, how
you will sufficiently answer such Questions as these. You should have seen God
in every creature that you beheld, and have read your duty in all his works;
what can you look upon above you, or below you, or round about you, which might
not have showed you so much of the wisdom, and goodness, and greatness of your
Maker, as should have convinced you that it was your duty to be Devoted to his
will? And yet you have his written word that speaks plainer then all these? And
will you despise them all? will you not see so great a Light? will you not hear
so loud and constant calls? shall God, and his Ministers speak in vain? And can
you think that you shall not hear of this again, and pay for it one day? You
have the Bible, and other good books by you: why do you not read them? You have
Ministers at hand* why do you not go to them* and earnestly ask them* Sir, What
must I do to be saved? and entreat them to teach you the way to life; You have
some neighbors that fear God: why do you not go to them, and take their good
advice, and imitate them in the fear of God, and in a holy diligence for your
souls? Now is the time for you to bestir your selves; Life and Death are are
before you. You have gales of Grace to further your voyage: There are more for
you then against you. God will help you: his Spirit will help you: his
Ministers will help you: every good Christian will help you; the Angels
themselves will help you, if you will but resolvedly set your selves to the
work; And yet will you not stir? Patience is waiting on you; Mercies are
enticing you; Scourges are driving you; Judgment stays for you; the Lights
of God stand burning by you to direct you; And yet will you not stir, but lie
in darkness? And do you think you shall not hear of this? Do you think this
will not one day cost you dear?

IX. THE ninth part of our work, is to show you, What are those frivolous
excuses by which the unrighteous may then endeavor their defense?

Having already showed you what the Defense must be, that must be sufficient to
our Justification.

If any first demand, Whether the Evidence of their sin will not so overwhelm
the sinner, that he will be speechless and past excuse? I answ. Before God has
done with him, he will be so; But it seems, at first his dark understanding,
and partial corrupted conscience will set him upon a vain Defense. For Mat.
7.22, 23. Christ tells us, that [Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and
in thy name have done many wonderful works? And then will I profess to them, I
never knew you, Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity.] And in Mat. 25.11. The
foolish Virgins cry, [Lord, Lord, open to us.] And verse. 44. [Then shall they
also answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, or thirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick* or in prison, and did not Minister unto thee?] And
verse. 24, 25. They fear not to cast some of the cause of their neglect on God
himself. [Then he which had received the one Talent came and said, Lord I knew
thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in
the earth; lo, there thou have that is thine.]

It is clear then, that Excuses they will be ready to make, and their full
Conviction will be in order after these Excuses (at least as in their minds, if
not in words); But what the particular excuses will be, we may partly know by
these* Scriptures which recite them, and partly by hearing what the ungodly do
now say for themselves. And because it is for their present benefit that I now
make mention of them, that they may see the vanity of all such Excuses, I will
mention them as I now meet with them in the mouths of sinners in our ordinary
discourse. And these Excuses are of several sorts; some by which they would
Justify their estate; some excuses of particular Actions; and that either in
whole, or in part; some by which they would put by the penalty, though they
confess the sin; some by which they lay the blame on other men; and in some
they would cast it upon God himself. I must touch but some of them very
briefly.

The first Excuse. I am not guilty of these things which I am accused of. I did
love God above All, and my Neighbor as my self; I did use the world but for
Necessity, but God had my heart.

Answ. The All-seeing Judge does know the contrary; and he will make thy
conscience know it. Look back man, upon thy heart and Life How seldom and how
neglectfully did thou think of God? how coldly did thou worship him, or
make any mention of him? how carelessly did thou serve him? and think much
of all that thou d^dst therein? Thou rather thoughtest that his service was
making more ado than needs, and did grudge at those that were more diligent
than thy self; But for the world, How heartily, and how constantly did thou
seek and serve it. And yet would thou now persuade the Judge that thou did
Love God above all? He will show thee thy naked Heart, and the course of thy
former life, which shall convince thee of the contrary.

The second Excuse. I lived not in any Gross sin, but only in small
Infirmities. I was no Murderer, or Adulterer, or Fornicator, or Thief; nor did
I deceive or wrong any, or take any thing by violence.

Answ. Was it not a Gross sin, to love the world above God, and to neglect
Christ that dyed for thee? and never do him one hours hearty service, but
merely to seek thy carnal self, and live to thy flesh? God will open thine eyes
then, and show thee a thousand Gross sins, which thou now forgettest or make
light of. And it is not only Gross sins, but All sin, great or small that
deserves the wrath of God, and will certainly bring thee under it for ever, if
thou have not part in Christ to relieve thee: woe to the man that ever he was
born that must answer in his own name for his smallest offenses.

The third Excuse. I did it Ignorantly: I knew not that there was so much
required to my salvation. I thought less ado might have served the turn: and
that if I looked to my body, God would take care of my soul: and that it was
better to trust him what should become of me hereafter, then to trouble my mind
so much about it. Had I known better, I would have done better.

Answ. If you knew not better, who was it long of but your self? Did God hide
these things from you? Did he not tell them you in his word as plainly as the
tongue of man can speak, That except you were Regenerate and born again, you
should not enter into the Kingdom of God? John 3.3, 5. That without holiness
none should see God, Heb. 12.14. That you must strive to enter in at the strait
Gate; for many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. That if
you lived after the flesh you should dye; and if by the Spirit you mortified
the deeds of the body* you should live, Romans 8.13. That if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9. And to be carnally minded
is death: but to be spiritually minded is life and peace, Romans 8.9. That you
must not lay up for your selves a treasure on earth, where rust and moths do
corrupt, and thieves break through and steal, but must lay up for your selves a
rreasure in heaven, where rust and moths do not corrupt, and thieves do not
break through and steal, Mat. 6.19, 20. That you must seek first the Kingdom of
God and the Righteousness thereof, Mat 6.23. and not Labor for the food that
perishes, but for the food that endures to everlasting life, which Christ
would have given you, John 6.27. That if you be risen with Christ, you must
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God* and not the things that are on earth, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Yea your very
Conversation should be in Heaven, Phil. 3.19.20, 21.

What say you, Did not God tell you all this and much more? and plainly tell it
you? Turn to your Bibles, and see the words, and let them witness against you.

2. And could you think with any Reason, that your souls being so much more
precious then your bodies, you should yet do so much more for your bodies then
your souls? Could you think all the labor of your lives little enough for a
frail body, that must he shortly in the dirt; and that your Immortal souls
should be no more regarded? Could you think with any Reason, that you should do
so much for a life of a few years continuance and do no more for a life that
shall have no end?

3. And whereas you talk of trusting God with your souls, you did not trust
him: You did but on that pretense, carelessly disregard them. If you trust God,
show any word of Promise that ever he gave you to trust upon, that ever an
Impenitent, Carnal, Careless person shall be saved? No: he has told you enough
to the contrary And could you think that it was the will of God, that you
should mind your bodies more then your souls, and this life more then that to
come? Why, he has bid you strive, and run, and fight, and labor, and care,
and seek, and use violence, and all diligence for the safety of your souls, and
for the life to come: But where has he bid you do so for your bodies? No, he
knew that you were prone to do too much for them; and therefore he has bid
you, [Care not, and Labor not] that is, Do it as if you did it not: and let
your Care and Labor for earthly things be none in comparison of that for
heavenly things. You know God can as well maintain your lives without your care
and labor, as save your souls without it: And yet you see he will not, he does
not: You must plough, and sow, and reap, and thresh, for all Gods Love and Care
of you, and not say, I will let all alone and trust God. And must you not much
more use diligence in much greater things? If you will ^rust God, you must
trust him in his own way, and in the use of his own means.

The fourth Excuse. I was never brought up to learning, I cannot so much as
read: Nor did my Parents ever teach me any of these things, but only set me
about my worldly business, and provide food and raiment for me: but never once
told me that I had a soul to save or lose, and an everlasting life to provide
and prepare for. And therefore I could not come to the knowledge of them.

Answ. The greater is their sin, who thus neglected you* But this is no
sufficient Excuse for you. Heaven is not prepared for the Learned only: nor
will Christ ask you at Judgment, whether you were good Scholars, or not, no
nor so much as whether you could write or read. But consider well! was not Gods
word so plainly written, that the unlearned might understand it? Did he not put
it into the most familiar style, though he knew it would be offensive to the
proud Scholars of the world of purpose that he might fit it to the capacities
of the ignorant? And if you could not read, yet tell me, Could not you have
learned to read at 20, or 30 years of age, if you had been but willing to
bestow now and then an hour to that end? Or at least, did you not live near
some that could Read? and could you not have procured them to read to you, or
to help you? And did you not hear these things read to you in the Congregation
by the Minister? or might have done if you would? And if your Parents did
neglect you in your youth, yet when you came to a fuller use of Reason, and
heard of the matters of salvation from Gods Word, did it not concern you to
have looked to your selves; and to have redeemed that time which you lost in
your youth* by doubling your diligence when you came to riper years? The
Apostles gathered Churches among Heathens that never heard of Christ before;
and converted many thousand souls that were never once told of a Savior, or
the way to salvation, till they had past a great part of their lives. If you
loitered till the latter part of the day, it behoved you then to have bestirred
your selves the more: and not to say, Through the fault of my Parents, I lost
the beginning of my life, and therefore I will lose all: they taught me not
then, and therefore I will not learn now. Have you not seen some of your
neighbors, who were as ill educated as your selves, attain to much knowledge
afterward by their Industry? And why might not you have done so, if you had
been as industrious as they? May not God and Conscience witness, that it was
because you cared not for knowledge, and would not be at the pains to get it,
that you knew no more? Speak truth, man, in the presence of thy Judge, was thy
heart and mind set upon it? Did thou pray daily for it to God? Did thou use
all the means thou could to get it? Did thou attend diligently on the word
in public, and think of what thou heardest when thou came home? Did thou
go to the Minister, or to others that could teach thee, and entreat them to
tell thee the way to salvation? Or did thou not rather carelessly neglect
these matters; and hear a Sermon as a common tale, even when the minister was
speaking of Heaven or Hell? It was not then thine unavoidable Ignorance, but
thy negligence.

Yea further, answer as in the presence of God: Did thou Obey so far as thou
d^dst know? Or did thou not rather sin against that knowledge which thou
had. Thou ^newest that the soul was better then the body, and everlasting
life more to be regarded, then this transitory life? But did thou regard it
accordingly? Thou sure knew that God was better then the world, and Heaven
then earth; at least, thou wast told of it? But did thou according^y value
him, and love him more? Thou knew sure that there was no salvation without
Faith, and Repentance, and newness of life, and yet they were neglected. In a
word, many a thousand sins which were committed, and duties that were omitted,
against thy own Knowledge and Conscience, will mar this Excuse.

The fifth Excuse. I lived not under a powerful Minister to tell me of these
things; but where there was no Preaching at all.

Answ. And might you not have gone where a powerful Minister was with a little
pains? Yea did not the very plain word which you heard read, tell you of these
things? And might you not have had a Bible your ^elves, and found them there?

The sixth Excuse. I was a servant, and had no time from my labor to mind
these matters: I l^ved with a hard master, that required all his own work of
me, but would allow me no time for the service of God. Or else, I was a poor
man, and had a great charge to look after, and with my hard labor had much ado
to live, so that I had no time for heavenly things.

Answ. 1. Who should be first served? God or man? what should be first sought
after, Heaven or Earth? Did not Christ tell thee, One thing is necessary, Luke
10.41, 42. was it not as needful to see that you escape Damnation, and get safe
to Heaven when this life is ended, as to see that you had food and raiment for
your selves, and yours?

2. Did you spend no time in Recreation, nor Idleness, nor vain talking? why
might not that at least have been spent about heavenly things?

3. Could you have taken no time from your rest, or eating or at other
intermissions? Man's body will not endure so great labors as have no
Intermission? And why then might not godlyness have been your ease and
recreation?

4. Or might you not have minded these things, even when you were about your
labor, if you had but a heart to them?

5. At least you might have spent the Lords own Day in hearing, reading, and
pondering of these matters, when you were forced to forbear your worldly
labors, even by the wholesome Law of the Land: These therefore are all but vain
Excuses: and God will shortly make thee speak out, and plainly confess, It was
not so much for want of Time, or Helps, or warning, as for want of a heart to
use them well. I should have found some Time, though it had been when I should
have slept, if my heart had been but set upon it.

The seventh Excuse. Little did I think to have seen this Day: ^ did not
Believe that ever God would be so severe: I thought his Threatenings had been
but to keep men in awe: and I suspected either that the Scripture was not his
word, or else I thought he would be better than his word. I thought all that I
heard of another life had been uncertain; and therefore was loath to let go a
certainty for an uncertainty, and lose my present pleasures which I had in
hand, for the hopes of that which I never did see.

Answ. He that will not know his misery by believing to prevent it, shall know
it by feeling to endure it* You were told and told again what your unbelief
would bring you to. Did Gods word make Heaven and Earth? Does it support them,
and secure them* And is not his word sufficient security for you to have
trusted your souls upon? Did you know where was any better security to be had?
and where was any surer ground for your confidence? And did you think so basely
and blasphemously of God, that he would falsify his word, lest such as you
should suffer? and that he was fain to rule the world by a Lie? Did God make
the world so easily? and can he not Govern it by true and righteous means* what
need God to say that which he will not do, to awe sinners? Can he not Awe them
by Truth? Is it not just that those should eternally perish, that will
entertain such despe^ate thoughts of God, and then by such wicked imaginations,
encourage themselves in sin against him?

And for the Truth of Scripture, God did not bid you believe it without
Evidence. He stamped on it the Image of his own Purity and Perfection, that you
might know it by that Image and superscription, if you had eyes to see them: He
sealed it by uncontrouled multitudes of Miracles: He delivered it down to your
hands by Infallible witnesses: so that he left you no room for rational
Doubting.

And you knew that the matters of this world were not only uncertain, but
certainly vain and transitory, and would shortly come to nothing and leave you
in distress. If it had then been uncertain whether there were a Glory and
misery hereafter* (as it was not) should not Reason have taught you to prefer
the least probabilities of an everlasting unspeakable happiness, before that
which is certainly perishing and vain? These vain Excuses will but condemn you.

The eighth Excuse. I was so enticed and persuaded by sinners to do as they
did, that I could not deny them. They would never let me rest.

Answ. 1. And were you not as earnestly persuaded by God to forsake sin and
serve him, and yet that would not prevail with you? You could not deny the
Devil and fools, but you could deny God and all his Messengers. Were not
Ministers as earnest with you every week to repent and amend? What did men
entice you with? with a little deluding fleshly pleasure for a few days? And
what did God entice you with? with the Promise of endless unconceivable
felicity! And if this were a smaller matter in your eyes then the other, then
you have had your choice, be content with it, and thank your selves. In your
life time you had the good things which you chose, and preferred before heaven,
and therefore cannot expect to have heaven besides.

The ninth Excuse. I lived among ungodly persons, that derided all that feared
God; so that if I had not done as they did, but had made any more ado to be
saved, I should have been the very scorn of the place where I lived.

Answ. And was not Heaven worth the enduring of a scorn? Is not he worthy to go
without it that thinks so basely of it? D^d not Christ tell you, that if you
were ashamed of him before men, he would be ashamed of you before his Father
and the Angels of heaven, Mark 8.38. He suffered more then scorns for you: and
could not you suffer a scorn for him and your selves, seeing you chose rather
to endure everlasting Torment, than a little derision from ignorant men, take
that which you made choice of. And seeing so small a matter would drive you
from heaven, and part God and you as a mock, as the wind of a man's mouth, No
wonder if you be commanded, to Depart from him into everlasting fire.

The tenth Excuse. I had ungodly persons to my Parents, or Masters, or
Landlord, or Governors, who threatened to undo me, if I had addicted my self to
so strict a life, and if I would not believe and do as they did.

Answ. What if they threatened you with present Death? Did not God also threaten
you with everlasting Death, if you were not ruled by him? And whose threatening
should you have chiefly feared? Is man more dreadful than God? Is death more
terrible then Hell? Did not Christ bid you* Fear not them that can kill the
body, and after that can do no more; but fear him that is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell fire; yea I say unto you, fear him. Mat. 10.28. Luke
12.4, 5. and Isa. 51.7. Fear ye not the Reproach of men, neither be afraid of
their revilings: For the moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool: but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my
salvation from Generation to Generation. Seeing therefore you have chosen
rather to suffer from God for ever for your sin, then to suffer small matters
for well-doing for a moment, you must even bear your own choice. Christ told
you before hand, that if you could not forsake all the world and your own lives
for him, you could not be his Disciples, Matthew. 10.37, 38, 39. And seeing you
thought his terms too hard, and would needs seek you out a better service, even
take what you have chosen and found.

The eleventh Excuse. I saw so many follow their pleasures and their worldly
business, and never look after these higher things, and so few go the other
way, that I thought* sure God would not damn so great a part of the world; and
therefore I ventured to do as the most did.

Answ. God will make good his word upon many or few. Did you doubt of his will,
or of his power? For his will, he has told it you in his word. For his power,
he is as able to punish many as one man. What is all the world to him, but as a
drop of a Bucket, as the dust of the balance; He told you before hand that the
gate was strait, and the way to heaven was narrow, and few did find it, and the
gate to destruction was wide, and the way was broad, and many did enter in at
it, Mat. 7.13, 14. And if you would not Believe him, you must bear what your
unbelief has brought you to. What if you had twenty children, or servants, or
friends: and the greater part of them should prove false to you, and seek your
destruction, or prove disobedient, and turn to your enemy? would you think it a
good excuse, if the rest should do the like, because of their example? will you
therefore wrong God, because you see others wrong him? would you spit in the
face of your own Father, if you saw others do so? God warned you, that you
should not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. And if yet you will do as
most do, you must even speed as most speed. You should not so much consider,
who they be, as what they do, and whether they go, and who they forsake, and
what they lose, and what strength is in the Reasons that move them to do this.
And then you would find, It is God they forsake, it is sin they choose, it is
heaven they lose, it is hell they run into, and it is no true reason, but
Satan's delusion, and sensual inclinations that lead them to it. And should men
be imitated, be they many or be they few, in such a course as this?

The twelfth Excuse. I saw so many faults in those that were accounted Godly,
and saw so much Division among them, that I thought they were as bad as others;
and among so many opinions, I knew not what Religion to be of.

Answ. 1. A spot is soonest seen in the fairest cloth. And the malicious world
uses to make such far worse then they are.

2. But suppose all were true that malice says of some, you could not say the
like by others.

3. Or if you could, yet it was Gods Law, and not men's faults, that was made
the Rule for you to live by: Will it excuse you that others are bad?

4. And for their diverse opinions, you should have taken counsel at Gods word,
which was right: Did you first search the Scripture impartially, as willing to
know the Truth, that you might obey it? and did you pray daily that God would
lead you into the Truth? and did you obey as much as you knew? Did you join
with the godly so far as they are all agreed? They are all agreed in the
Fundamental Articles of Christianity, and in all things absolutely necessary to
a holy Life, and to salvation: that all known sin is to be forsaken, and all
known duty to be done. Why did you not so far then agree with them? Alas, the
imperfections of the godly, and the false Accusations of the malicious world,
will prove but a poor cover for your wilful ungodliness, and Christ will
convince you of the vanity of these Excuses.

The thirteenth Excuse. The Scriptures were so dark, that I could not
understand them. And I saw the wisest men differ so much in the exposition of
them, that I thought it was in vain for me to trouble my self about them. If
God would have had us live according to the Scriptures, he would sure have
written them plainly, that men might understand them.

Answ. 1. It is all plainly written according to the nature of the subject: But
a prejudiced, disaffected, yea or but untaught, disused soul cannot at first
understand the plainest Teaching. The plainest Greek or Hebrew Grammar that can
be written, will be utterly obscure to him that is but newly entered the English
School: yea after many years time that he spends in learning. Did you study
hard, and pray for Gods teaching, and enquire of others, and wait patiently in
Christ's School, that you might come to further knowledge by Degrees? and were
you willing to know, even those Truths that called you out to self denial, and
that did put you on the hardest flesh displeasing duties? Had you done thus*
you would have admired the Light of the Holy Scripture, and now have rejoiced
that ever you saw them, and not have quarreled at its seeming Darkness. This
word might have made you wise to salvation, as it has done others, Act. 20.32.
2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. This Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the
Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord
are Right, Rejoicing the heart: the Commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes, Psalm. 19.7, 8.

2. So much as is of Necessity to salvation, is as plain as you could desire.
Yet if you be Judged by these, you will be condemned: For you did not obey that
which was most plain. What darkness is in such words as these, Except ye
Repent, ye shall All perish, Luke 13.3, 5. Love not the world, nor the things
in the world: if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
1 John 2.15. He that will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. Matthew.
16.24.

3. If there had been nothing that seemed difficult to you, would you not have
despised its simplicity, and have thought your selves wise enough at the first
Reading and needed no more?

The fourteenth Excuse. There were so many seeming Contradictions in the
Scripture, and so many strange improbable things, that I could not believe it.

Answ. The contradictions were in your fancy, that did not understand the word
which you read. Must the raw unexperienced Learner despise his book or Teacher,
as often as in his ignorance he thinks he meets with contradictions? Did you
think God was no wiser then you, and understood not himself, because you
understood him not? Nor could reconcile his own words, because you could not
reconcile them? You would needs be a Judge of the Law, instead of obeying it,
and speak evil of it, rather then do it, Jam. 4.11.

2. And those things which you called improbable in the word, were the wonders
of God, of purpose to confirm it. If it had not been confirmed by wonders, you
would have thought it unproved: and yet now it is so confirmed, you will not
believe the Doctrine, because the witness seems incredible. And that is,
because they are matters above the power of man: As if they were therefore
above the power of God! You shall at last have your eyes so far opened, as to
see those seeming contradictions reconciled, and the certainty of those things
which you accounted Improbable: that you may be forced to confess the folly of
your Arrogance and Unbelief: and then God will Judge you in Righteousness, who
presumed unrighteously to judge him and his word.

The fifteenth Excuse. It seemed so unlikely a thing to me, that the merciful
God should damn most of tht World to everlasting fire, that I could not believe
it.

Answ. 1. And did it not seem as unlikely to you, that his word should be false?

2. Should it not have seemed as unlikely that the Governor of the world should
be unjust, and suffer his Laws to be unexecuted, and the worst to speed as well
as the best! and to suffer vile sinful dust to despise his mercy, and abuse his
patience, and turn all his Creatures against him, without due punishment?

3. Did you not feel pain and misery begin in this life?

4. You saw Toads and Serpents which had never sinned: And you would rather
live in any tolerable suffering, then to be a Toad. And is it not Reason, that
it should go worse with contemptuous sinners, then with those creatures that
never sinned?

5. Could you expect that those should come to heaven, that would not believe
there was such a state, but refused it, and preferred the world before it? And
to be out of heaven is to be out of all Happiness? and he that is so out of all
happiness, and knows that he lost it by his own folly, must needs Torment
himself with such Considerations, were there no other Torments. And as man is
capable of greater felicity than bruits, so must he needs be capable of more
misery.

The sixteenth Excuse. The things which God promised in heaven, and threatened
in Hell, were all out of my sight: and therefore I could not heartily believe
them. Had I but once seen them, or spoke with one that had seen them, I should
have been sati^fied, and have contemned the things, of the world.

Answ. W^ll you not believe till you see or feel? was not Gods word sufficient
Evidence? would you have believed one from the dead that had told you he had
seen such things? and would you not believe Stephen that saw them, Act. 7.5^.
Or Paul that heard and saw them, 2 Cor. 12.3, 4. Nor Christ that came purposely
from heaven to reveal them? why flesh and blood cannot see them. You see not
God: will you not therefore Believe that there is a God? Indeed, whatever you
imagine, if you would not Believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, neither would you have bel^^ved though one had risen from the dead.
For ^ods word is more credible then a dead man's: and Christ did rise from the
dead to attest it. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believed. Noah
saw no rain when he was preparing the Ark: but because he believed, he made
ready and escaped, Heb. 11.7. when the world that would not Bel^eve, did perish
But seeing Gods word was of no more weight with you, and no knowledge would
serve* your turn, but by seeing and feeling; you shall see and feel
everlastingly to your sorrow.

The seventeenth Excuse* It was so strict a Law that God would have Ruled me
by, and the way to Heaven was so strait and difficult, that I could not endure
it. I was not able to deny my flesh, and live such a life.

Answ. 1. You were not Able, because you were not Willing. What was there but
your own wicked hearts that should make such a life seem grievous to you? Every
thing is hard and grievous to him who loathes it, and whose heart is against it.
The chief thing that God called you to, was to Love him, and make him your
Delight. And are Love and Delight such grievous things? It was not grievous to
you to love your meat, or drink, or money: It was no hard matter to you to love
a friend that loved you* no nor to love your sin, which was your enemy: And
what should make it seem hard to Love God, but a wicked heart? Is not he
Better, and more Lovely then all these? And had you but Loved him, all the rest
of his service would have seemed easy to you. To think of him, to speak of
him, to pray to him* to praise him, yea, to deny all and suffer for him, would
have been sweet and pleasant to you, so far as you had Loved him. It was not
God therefore, but your own naughty hearts, that made his work seem grievous to
you, and the way to heaven seem hard. He told you truly* that his yoke was
easy, and his burden light, and his Commandments were not grievous* Mat.
11.29. 1 John 5.3. They that tried them, found them the very Joy and Delight of
their souls, and why could not you do so?

2. But what if the way to heaven had been harder then it was? was not heaven
worth your labor? were you afraid of being a loser by it? Could not God requite
your labor or sufferings? Does any Repent when they come to Heaven* that it
cost them so dear to come thither? And is not hell worse then the hardest way
to heaven? seeing you have chosen hell to save you a labor and suffering in
this life, you must have your choice. And seeing you thought not everlasting
life to be worth so much as God required, that is, the Accepting thankfully,
and minding, and seeking, and preferring it before this life, you have none to
blame for the loss of it but your selves.

The eighteenth Excuse. It was God that made me of a sensual nature: he gave me
an Appetite to Meat, and Drink, and Ease, and Lust; He gave me that flesh which
ruled me: How then can he condemn me, for living according to the nature which
he gave me?

Answ. He gave that Appetite to be exercised moderately under the rule of
reason, for the preservation and propagation of mankind. But did he not also
give you Reason to govern that Appetite? and the Revelation of his will to
guide that Reason? He gave you your flesh, to be a servant, and not a master
Your beast has fleshly Appetite without reason; and therefore God has put him
under you who have Reason that you should Rule him. Will you let your beast do
what he list* and madly run upon whom he list, and say, you do but let him live
according to his nature, which ^od has given him? Why God that gave him such a
nature did intend him to be Ruled by a higher nature, even by the Reason which
he gave to you: And so he did also by your flesh, and sensual Appetite.

The ninteenth Excuse. But I lived among so many baits, which enticed this
flesh, that I could not resist them. My meat was a snare to me, my drink a
snare, my clothes, my house, my land a snare, every beauty that I saw was a
snare: and the better all these were the stronger was my snare. If God would
not have had my heart ensnared and drawn from him, he should not have put so
many baits in my way. Yea and they were so Near to me, and Daily with me, that
though I was resolved to forbear them before, yet when they were brought to my
hand, I could not forbear.

Answ. Is this the thanks that God has for his mercies? He s^nt you all these
as favors from his own hand: He wrote his own name upon them, that in them you
might see his power, and wisdom, and goodness, and so be led up to the
Consideration of him, that you might fall in love with himself, who was the
fountain, the life, the end of all* And do you overlook God in the creature,
and live as without him in the world, and dote upon that which should have
drawn you to himself* and then lay the blame on God? If he send a Suitor to
speak to you in his name, and write you a love Letter with his own hand, will
you fall in Love with the Messenger, or the Letter, and neglect the Sender, and
then blame him that wrote his letter on so fair a paper, or in so neat a hand,
or that sent it by such a comely Messenger? Certainly, these Excuses are too
gross, to take with the wise and righteous God, or to seem suffi^ient to a
well-informed Conscience.

2. And whereas you speak of the power of these objects, was there not much
more in God, in Christ, in the promised glory, to have drawn your heart another
way? why then did not these take as much with you as the other? You could not
choose, forsooth, but be enticed with such baits as were fitted to your sensual
Appetite, and such things as a dog or a swine may enjoy as well as a man* But
you could choose, when Christ and glory were offered you: yea you did choose to
refuse the offer, and tread them under feet by your neglect! When Satan set
your Cups, and your harlots, and your profits before you, on one side; did not
God set his favor and everlasting happiness on the other side? And was it wise
or equal dealing to pref^rr your lusts before that glory?

3. Moreover, it was not in the power of any of those baits to force your will,
or to necessitate you to chose them: They could be but Baits to entice you; and
it was still in your own choice, whether you would yield to the enticement, and
choose them or not. Shall every man be false to God, that has any bait to
entice him from him? will you excuse your child or friend, if he would be false
to you, upon as great enticements as these? If a cup of drink, or a where, or a
little gain, could draw him more then all your love and interest, I do not
think you would hold him excused.

4. And whereas you speak of the Ne^rness and Continuance of these allurements,
I would fain know, was not God as Near you, and Continually near you, to draw
you to himself? Faith might have seen him, though flesh and blood cannot. Did
he not stand by you when you were in your cups, and lustful Pleasures? Did he
not tell you of the danger, and offer you far better things, if you would obey
him and despise those baits? But you would hearken to none of this; You should
have remembered that he stood over you, and was looking on you; and you should
have said as Joseph, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? You had also Scripture near you, and Reason near you, and
Conscience near you, as well as the bait was near you. And therefore this is a
vain Excuse.

The twentieth Excuse. It was God that let loose the Devil to Tempt me; and he
was too subtle for me to deal with: and therefore what wonder if I sinned, and
were overcome?

Answ. 1. He did not let loose the Devil to constrain you to sin. He could but
entice, and you might choose whether you would yield. The Devil could neither
make you sin against your will, nor yet Necessitate you to be willing.

2. You were a sure friend to Christ that while, that would forsake him as often
as you were tempted by the Devil. Is that a friend or a servant worthy to be
regarded, that will disobey you, or betray you as often as he is tempted to it?

3. Will you excuse your servant, if he leave your work undone, and follow
cards, or dice, or the Alehouse, and say, I was tempted to it by one that was
cuninger then I? shall every Murderer or Thief escape hanging, because the
Devil was too cunning for him in his Temptations? would you have the Jury or
the Judge to take this for a good excuse?

4. And why did you not hearken to God that ent^ced you the other way? You
forget what helps he afforded you to discover the wiles of Satan, and to
vanquish the Temptation? He told you it was an enemy that tempted you: and
would you hearken to an enemy? He told you it was a dream, a shadow, a painted
pleasure, a gilded carcass, a lying promise, and deceitful vanity by which you
were tempted; And yet would you regard it before your God? He told you that it
was your God, your Savior, your hopes, your everlasting happiness that the
Tempter would begu^le you of* And yet would you be beguiled? He told you, and
plainly, and often told you, that the Tempter would lead you to eternal fire,
and undo you everlastingly before you were aware; and that a fatal hook was
covered with that bait: And yet would you swallow it?

5. It is plain by all th^s, that it was not your natural weakness of faculties
that caused you to be overcome by the subtilties of the Devil, as a silly child
is deceived by a crafty fellow that overwits him: But it was your carelessness,
inconsiderateness, your sensual inclinations, and vicious disposition, that
drew you to a wilful obeying of the tempter, and rejecting the wholesome advice
of Christ. This therefore is a frivolous Excuse of your sin.

The one and twentieth Excuse. But I hope you will not say that all men have
Free Will! And if my will were not free, ^ow could I choose but sin?

Answ. Your will was not free from Gods Rule and Government; nor was it free
from its natural inclination to Good in general; for either of these were more
properly slavery. 3. Nor was it free from the Influence of a dark
understanding. 4. Nor free from its own contracted vicious Inclination. 5. Nor
freed from the Temptations of the flesh, the world and the Devil.

But it was 1. Free from any natural Determination to evil, or to any thing
that was doubtful. 2. And free from the Coaction or Violence of any. 3. And
free from an irresistible Determination of any exterior cause, at least,
ordinarily. So that naturally, as men, you have the power or faculty of
determining your own wills, and by your wills* of Ruling your inferior
Faculties in a great measure; yea of Ruling the senses and the Fantasy it
self, which does so much to dispose of our Understanding. And if your wills
which are naturally free, are yet so habitually vicious, that they incline you
to do evil, that is not an excuse, but an Aggravation of your sin. But of this
more, under the next.

The two and twentieth Excuse. But I have not Power of myself to do any thing
that is good: What can the creature do? without Christ we can do nothing. It is
God that must give me Ability, or I can have none: and if he had given it me, I
had not been an Unbeliever or Impenitent. I can no more Believe of my self,
than I can fulfill the Law of my self.

Answ. 1. These are the vain Cavils of learned folly, which God will easily
answer in a word. The word [Power] is taken in several senses. Sometime, and
most commonly and fitly, for a faculty or strength by which a man Can do his
duty if he Will. This Physical Power you have, and the worst of sinners have
while they are men on earth. Were they Actually willing, they might Acceptably
perform sincere obedience; And were they Dispositively willing, they might
Actually Believe and will. And thus the ungodly have Power to Believe.

2. Sometime the word [Power] is taken for Authority, or Leave; for legal or
civil Power. And thus you have all not only Power or Liberty to Believe; but
also a Command, which makes it your Duty, and a Threatening adjoined, which will
condemn you if you do not.

3. Sometime the word [Power] is taken Ethically and less properly, for a
Disposition, Inclination, Habit or Freedom from the contrary habit or
disposition. And in this sense, its true, that none but the effectually called
have a Power to Believe. But then observe, 1. That this is but a moral less
proper, and not a Physical proper Impotency: And therefore Austin chooses
rather to say, that all men have power to believe, but all have not a Will, or
Faith it self; because we use to difference Power from willingness; and
willingness actuateth the Power which we had before. And therefore our Divines
choose rather to call Grace a Habit, when they speak exactly, then a Power; and
Dr. Twiss derides the Arminians for talking of a Power subjected in a Power. 2.
Note that this Impotency is but the same thing with your unwillingness and
wilful blindness, in another word. 3. Note that this Impotency is long of our
selves as to the Original, and much more as to the not-curing and removing of
it. Has God given you no means toward the cure of this disability, which you
have neglected? 4. Note that this Impotency is no just excuse, but an
Aggravation of your sin. If you were willing to be the servant of Christ, and
yet were not Able, either because he would not accept you, or because of a want
of natural faculties, or because of some other natural difficulty which the
willingest mind could not overcome; this were some Excuse: But to be Habitually
wilful in refusing Grace, is worse then to be merely Actually unwilling. If a
man have so accustomed himself to murder, drunkenness, stealing, or the like
wickedness, so far that he cannot leave it, will you therefore forgive him, or
will any Judge or Jury hold him excused? Or rather think him the more unfit for
mercy? 5. Note also that the want of a supernatural Habit, no nor the presence
of the contrary Habit, do not Efficiently determine the will to particular
acts: much less take away its natural Freedom. 6. And that till Habits attain
an utter predominancy, (at least) there is a Power remaining in the will to
resist them, and use means against them. Though Eventually the perverse
Inclination may hinder the use of it.

The three and twentieth Excuse. I have heard from learned men, that God does
determine all Actions Natural and Free, as the first efficient Physical
Immediate Cause; or else nothing could Act. And then it was not long of me that
I choose forbidden Objects, but of him that irresistibly moved me thereto, and
whose Instrument I was.

Answ. This is a trick of that wisdom which is foolishness with God, and to be
deceived by vain Philosophy.

1. The very principle it self is most likely to be false, and those that tell
you this, to err. Much more, I think, may be said against it then for it.

2. I am sure it is either false, or reconcilable with Gods Holiness, and man's
liberty and culpability; so that its a mad thing to deceive your selves with
such Philosophical uncertainties, when the Truth which you oppose by it is
infallibly certain. That God is not the Author of sin, but man himself, who is
justly condemned for it, is undoubtedly true: and would you obscure so clear a
Truth, by searching into points beyond humane reach, if not unsound, as you
conclude them?

The four and twentieth Excuse. But at least, those learned Divines among us
that doubt of this, do yet say that the will is necessarily and infallibly
Determined by the Practical Understanding, and that is as much unresistibly
necessitated by Objects: and therefore whatever act was done by my
understanding or will, was thus necessitated, and I could not help it. They
say, Liberty is but the Acting of the faculty agreeably to its nature: And it
was God as Creator that gave Adam his faculties: and God by providential
dispose, that presented all Objects to him, by which his understanding, and so
his will were unavoidably necessitated.

Answ. This is of the same nature with the former; uncertain, if not certainly
false. Were this true, for ought we can see, it would lay all the sin and
misery of the world on God, as the unresistable necessitating Cause; which
because we know infallibly to be false, we have no reason to take such
principles to be true, which infer it. The understanding does not by a
necessary efficiency Determine the will, but morally; or rather is regularly a
Condition or necessary Antecedent, without which it may not Determine it self.
Yea the will by commanding the sense and fantasy, does much to determine the
understanding. As the eye is not necessary to my going, but to my going right,
so is not the Understandings Guidance, necessary to my willing (there the
simple Apprehension may suffice) but to my Right willing. There are other ways
of Determining the will. Or if the Understanding did Determine the will
Efficiently and Necessarily, it is not every act of the understanding that must
do it* If it be so, when it says, This must be don, and says it importunatly;
yet not when it only says, This may be done, or you may venture on it; which
is the common part which it has in sin.

I am not pleased that these curious Objections fall in the way, nor do I
delight to put them into vulgar heads; but finding many young Scholars and
others that have conversed with them, assaulted with these Temptations; I
thought meet to give a touch, and and but a touch, to take them out of their
way; As Mr. Fenner has done more fully in the Preface to his Hidden Manna, on
this last point, to which I refer you. I only add this;

The will of man in its very Dominion does be are Gods Image. It is a self
Determining Power, though it be biased by Habits, and needs a Guide. As the
Heart and Vital Spirits by which it acts, are to the rest of the Body, so is
It to the soul. The Light of Nature has taught all the world, to carry the
Guilt of every crime to the will of man, and there to leave it; Upon this all
Laws and Judgments are grounded. From Ignorance and Intellectual weakness, men
commonly fetch. Excuses for their faults; but from the Will they are
Aggravated. If we think it strange that man's will should be the first cause, so
much as of a sinful mode, and cannot answer all occuring Objections; It may
suffice that we are certain the Holy Majesty is not the Author of sin; and he
is able to make all this as plain as the Sun, and easily answer all these vain
Excuses, though we should be unable. And if we be much ignorant of the frame
and motions of our own souls, and especially of that high self determining
principle, Free Will, the great spring of our Actions, and the curious Engine
by which God does Sapientially Govern the world, it is no wonder; Considering
that the soul can know it self but by Reflection, and God gave us a soul to use,
rather than to know it self; and to know its qualities and operations, rather
then its Essence.

The five and twentieth Excuse. No man can be saved, nor avoid any sin, nor
believe in Christ, but those whom God has predestined thereto. I was under
an irreversible Sentence before I was born: and therefore I do nothing but what
I was predestined to do, and if God decreed not to save me, how could I help
it.

Answ. 1. Gods Judgments are more plain, but his Decrees* or secret purposes
are mysterious; And to darken certainties, by having recourse to points
obscure, is no part of Christian wisdom. God told you your Duty in his word,
and on what terms you must be Judged to Life or Death; Hither should you have
recourse for direction, and not to the unsearchable mysteries of his mind.

2. God decrees not to Condemn any but for sin. Sin, I say, as the Cause of
that Condemnation, though not of his Decree.

3. Gods Decrees are acts Immanent in himself and make no change on you, and
therefore do not necessitate you to sin, any more then his foreknowledge does.
For both cause only a necessity of Consequence, which is Logical, as the
Divines on both sides do Confess. And therefore this no more caused you to sin,
then if there had been no such Degree. And its a doubt whether that Decree be
not negative; A willing suspending of the Divine will, as to evil; or at most*
A purpose to permit it.

The six and twentieth Excuse. If it be no more, yet does it make my perdition
unavoidable; For even Gods foreknowledge does so; For if he foreknow it, all
the world cannot hinder it from coming to pass.

Answ. Must God either be Ignorant of what you will do, or else be the cause of
it? If you foreknow that the Sun will rise tomorrow, that does not cause it to
rise. If you foreknow that one man will murder another, you are not the cause
of it by foreknowing it. So is it here.

The seven and twentieth Excuse. God might have hindered my Sin and Damnation if
he would*

Answ. And will you wilfully sin, and think to escape because God does not
hinder you? The Prince that makes a Law against murder, could lock you up, and
keep you from being a Murderer! But are you excusable if he do not? We are
certain that God could have hindered all the sin and death, and confusion, and
misery, that is in the world: And we are as certain that he does not hinder it,
(but by forbidding it, and giving men means against it): And we are certain
that he is Just, and Good, and Wise in all; and not bound to hinder it: And
what his Reasons are, you may better know hereafter: In the mean time, you had
been better have looked to your own Duty.

The eight and twentieth Excuse. How could I be saved if Christ did not dye for
me? He dyed but for his Elect: and none could be saved without his Death.

Answ. He did dye for you, and for more than his Elect, though he Absolutely
purposed only their salvation. Your sins crucified him, and your debt lay upon
him; and he so far ransomed you, that nothing but your wilful refusal of the
benefits could have condemned you.

The nine and twentieth Excuse. It was Adams sin that brought me into this
Depravedness of will, which I can neither cure, nor could prevent.

Answ. 1. If Adam cast away his holiness, he could no more convey that to us
which he cast away, then a Nobleman that is a Traitor, can convey his lost
Inheritance or Honors to his son.

2. You perish not only for your Original sin, but for Rejecting the Recovering
mercy of the Redeemer: you might have had Christ and Life in him, for the
Accepting.

The thirtieth Excuse. God will require no more than ^e gives. He gave me not
Grace to Repent and Believe, and without his gifts I could not have it.

Answ. 1. God will justly require more than he gives; that is, The improvement
of his G^fts, as Mat. 25. shows. He gave Adam but a Power to persevere, and not
Actual perseverance: Yet did he justly punish him for want of the Act; even for
not using by his own will, the Power which he had given him.

2. It is long of your self if God did not give you Grace to Believe: It was
because you wilfully refused some preparatory Grace. Christ found you at a
great distance from him, and he gave you Grace sufficient, to have brought you
nearer to him than you were; you had grace sufficient to have made you better
than you were, and restrained many sins, and brought you to the means when you
turned your back on them: Though this were not sufficient to cause you to
Believe, it, was sufficient to have brought you nearer to Believing; and
through your own wilfulness, became not Effectual: Even as Adam had sufficient
grace to have stood, which was not Effectual. So that you had not only Christ
offered to you, if you would but Accept him; but you had daily and precious
helps and means, to have cured your wills, and caused you to Accept him: for
neglect of which, and so for not believing, and so for all your other sins, you
Justly perish.

The one and thirtieth Excuse. Alas man is a worm, a dry leaf, Job 13.25 a
silly foolish creature: and therefore his Actions be not regardable, nor
deserve so great a punishment.

Answ. Though he be a worm, and as nothing to God, and foolish by sin, yet is
he naturally so noble a creature, that the Image of God was on him, Genesis 1.26.
and 5.1. Jam. 3.9* and the world made his servants, and Angels his attendants
Heb. 1.14. so noble, that Christ dyed for him, God takes special care of him;
He is capable of knowing and enjoying God; and heaven is not thought too good
for him if he will obey. And he that is capable of so great Good, must be
capable of as great Evil, and his ways not to be so overlooked by that God
that has undertaken to be his Governor: When it tends to Infidelity, the
Devil will teach you to Debase man, even lower than God would do.

The two and thirtieth Excuse. Sin is no Being: and shall men be damned for
that which is nothing?

Answ. 1. It is such a mode as deformeth Gods creature. It is a moral Being, It
is a Relation of our actions and hearts to Gods will and Law.

2. They that say, sin is nothing, say Pain and Loss is nothing too. You shall
therefore be paid with one nothing for another. Make light of your misery, and
say, It is nothing, as you did of your sin.

3. Will you take this for a good Excuse from your children or servants, if
they abuse you? Or from a Thief or Murderer? shall he escape by telling the
Judge that his sin was Nothing? Or rather have death, which is nothing, as the
just Reward of it?

The three and thirtieth Excuse. But sin is a Transient thing. At least it does
God no harm, and therefore why should he do us so much harm for it.

Answ. 1. It hurts not God, because he is above hurt: No thanks to you, if he
be out of your reach. 2. You may Wrong him, when you cannot Hurt him. And the
wrong deserves as much as you can bear. If a Traitor endeavor the death of
the Prince, in vain, his endeavor deserves death, though he never hurt him.
You despise Gods Law and Authority; you cause the Blaspheming of his name, Romans
2.24. He calls it A pressing him as a Cart is pressed with sheaves, Amos 2.13.
and a grieving of him.

3. And you wrong his Image, his Church, the public good, and the souls of
others.

The four and thirtieth Excuse. But Gods nature is so Good and Merciful, that
sure he will not damn his own creature.

Answ. 1. A merciful Judge will hang a man for a fault against man: By
proportion then what is due for sin against God?

2. All the death and calamity which you see in the world, comes from the anger
of this merciful God: why then may not future misery come from it?

3. God knows his own mercy better then you do; and he has told you how far
it shall extend.

4. He is infinitely merciful; but it is to the Heirs of mercy: Not to the final
Rejecters of his mercy.

5. Has not God been merciful to thee, in bearing with thee so long, and
offering thee Grace in the blood of Christ, till thou did wilfully reject it?
Thou will confess to thy everlasting woe that ^od was merciful; Had he not been
so merciful, thou would not have been so miserable for rejecting it.

The five and thirtieth Excuse. I would not so Torment mine enemy my self.

Answ. No reason you should. Is it all one to wrong you, and to wrong the God
of Heaven? God is the only Judge of his own wrongs.

The six and thirtieth Excuse. All men are sinners; and I was but a sinner.

Answ. All were not Impenitent, Unbelieving, Rebellious sinners; and therefore
all are not unpardoned condemned sinners. All did not live after the flesh, and
refuse to the last, to be converted, as you did. God will teach you better to
difference between sinners and sinners.

The seven and thirtieth Excuse. But if Christ have satisfied for my sins, and
dyed for me, then how can I justly suffer for the same sins? will God punish
one sin twice?

Answ. 1. Christ suffered for man in the Nature of man; but not in your person,
nor you in him: It was not you that provided the price, but God himself; Christ
was not man's Delegate in satisfying, and therefore received not his
Instructions from us, nor did it on our terms, but his own. It was not the same
thing which the Law threatened, that Christ underwent: for that was the
Damnation of the sinner himself: and not the suffering of another for him, it
cannot therefore be yours, but on Christ's own terms. He dyed for thy sin, but
with this intent, that for all that, if thou Refuse him, thou shall dye thy
self. It is therefore no wrong to thee to dye, for it was not thou that dyedst
before: And Christ will take it for no wrong to him: For he will Judge thee to
that Death. It is for refusing a Christ that dyed for thee, that thou must
perish for ever.

The eight and thirtieth Excuse. But I did not Refuse Christ. I believed and
trusted in him to the l^st; and Repented of my sins, though I sometime was
overtaken with them.

Answ. Had this been True, thy sin would not have condemned thee. But there is
no mocking God. He will show thee then thy naked heart, and convince thousands
that thought they Believed and Repented, that indeed they did not. By thy works
also will this be discovered, that is, by the main bent and scope of thy life,
as Matthew. 25. throughout; and Jam. 2.

The nine and thirtieth Excuse. I did many Good Works; and I hope God will set
those against my evil works.

Answ. Thy good works were thy sins, because indeed they were not good, being
not done in sincerity of heart for God. The best man's works have some
infirmity, which nothing can cleanse but the blood of Christ, which thou have
made light of, and therefore have no part in. If all thy life had been spent in
perfect works except one day, they would not make satisfaction for the sins of
that day; For they are but part of thy Duty. Woe to him that has no better a
Savior at Judgment, then his own good works.

The fourtieth Excuse. I lived in poverty and misery on earth, and therefore I
hope I have had my suffering here, and shall not suffer in this world, and
another too.

Answ. 1. By that Rule all poor men, and murderers, and thieves that are
tormented and hanged, should be saved. But as Godlyness has the promise of
this life and that to come, so Impenitency and Wickedness has the Threatening
of this life, and that to come.

2. The Devils and the damned have suffered much more than you already: and yet
they are never the nearer a deliverance. When thou have, suffered ten thousand
years, thy pain will be never the nearer an end. How then can a little misery
on earth prevent it? Alas poor soul, these are but the foretasts and beginnings
of thy sorrow. Nothing but pardon through the blood of Christ could have
prevented thy Condemnation, and that thou rejectedst by Infidelity and
Impenitency: His sufferings would have saved thee, if thou had not Refused
him: But all thine own sufferings will yield thee no Relief.

So much for the answering of the Vain Excuses which poor sinners are ready to
make for themselves. Wherein I have been so large, as that this part I confess
is disproportionable to the rest: but it was for these two Reasons.

1. That poor careless souls might see the vanity of such Defenses; and
consider, if such a worm as I can easily confute them, how easily and how
terribly will they be all answered by their Judge?

2. I did it the rather, that godly Christians might the better understand how
to deal with these vain Excuses when they meet with them; which will be daily,
if they deal with men in this sad Condition.

X. WE have done with that part of the Judgment which consists in the
exploration or trial of the cause: we now come to that which is the Conclusion
and Consummation of all: and that is, to show you, What the Sentence will be,
and on whom?

And for this, we must go strait to the word of God for our light, it being
impossible for any man to have any particular knowledge of it, if Christ had
not there revealed it unto us. Indeed almost all the world do acknowledge a
life after this, where it shall go well with the good, and ill with the bad.
But who shall be then accounted Righteous, and who Unrighteous, and on what
terms and grounds, by whom they shall be Judged, and to what Condition, they
know not.

The Sentence in Judgment will be, 1. Either on those that never had means to
know Christ. 2. Or on those that had.

1. For the former, as it less concerns us to enquire of their case, so is it
more obscurely revealed to us in the Scripture. ^t is certain that they shall
be Judged according to their Use of the means which they had, Romans 2.11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. and the Talents which they received, Mat. 25. But that it ever
falls out that he that has but the One Talent of natural helps does improve
it to salvation, or that ever they who knew not Christ, are Justified and saved
without that knowledge (being at age and use of reason) I find not in the
Scriptures. I find indeed, that [As many as have sinned without Law, shall also
perish without Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be Judged by
the Law, Romans 2.12. But not that any are justified by the works of nature, such
as are here said to be without Law. I find also, that [They have the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their Thoughts the mean while Accusing, or else Excusing one another, in the
day when God shall Judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ, according to the
Gospel] Romans 2.15, 16. And I believe it is a just Excuse, and not an unjust
which is here meant. But it will be but an Excuse so far as they were
guiltless* and that will be but in tanto, and not in toto, in part only; and so
not a full Justification. A Heathens conscience may excuse him from those sins
which he was never guilty of; but not from all. But no more of them.

2. The case of those that have had the Gospel, is more plainly opened to us in
Gods word. Their Sentence is opened in many places of Scripture, but most fully
in Matthew. 25. whence we will now collect it.

There we find that Jesus Christ the Redeemer, as King of the world, shall sit
in Judgment on all men at the last; and shall separate them one from another,
as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and so shall pass the final
Sentence. This Sentence is twofold, according to the different Condition of
them that are Judged. To them on the right hand, there is a Sentence of
Justification, and Adjudication to everlasting glory; To them on the left hand,
here is a Sentence of Condemnation to everlasting Punishment.

The Sentence on each of these contains, both the state which they are Judged
to, and the reason or cause of the Judgment to that state. For as God will not
Judge any to Life or Death, without just cause, so he will publish this cause
in his sentence, as it is the manner of Judges to do; If you say, Christ will
not use a voice; Let it satisfy, that though we know not the manner, yet if he
do it but by mental discovery, as he shows men what shall everlastingly befall
them, so he will show them why it shall so befall them.

1. The Sentence on them on the Right hand, will contain, 1. Their
Justification and Adjudication to Blessedness, and that both as generally
denominated, and as particularly determined and described. 2. And the cause of
this Judgment.

1. In general they shall be pronounced Blessed. Satan would have had them
cursed and miserable; the Law did curse them to misery; Many a fearful thought
has possessed their own breasts, lest they should prove at last accursed and
miserable; But now they hear the contrary from their Judge. All the Promises in
the Gospel could not perfectly overcome those their fears; all the comfortable
words of the Ministers of the Gospel could not perfectly subdue them; all the
tender mercies of God in Christ did not perfectly subdue them; But now they are
vanquished all for ever. He that once has heard his Redeemer in Judgment call
him Blessed, will never fear being Cursed more. For he that Christ Blesses,
shall be Blessed indeed.

The Description of their Blessedness follows, Come inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And also they are called
Blessed Of the Father. Here is the fountain of their Blessedness; The Father,
and the state of their blessedness in Being the Fathers: For I suppose they are
called the Blessed of the Father, both because the Father Blesses them, that
is, makes them Happy, and because these blessed ones are the Fathers own. And
so Christ will publish it to the world in Judgment, that he came to glorify
the Father, and will proclaim him the Principal Efficient and Ultimate end of
his work of Redemption, and the blessedness of his Saints, and that himself is
(as Mediator) but the way to the Father. It is the Father that prepared the
Kingdom for them, and from the foundation of the world, prepared it: Both for
[them] as chosen ones, and for them as future Believers, and Righteous ones. It
is called a Kingdom, partly in respect to God the King, in whose glory we shall
partake in our places: and partly Metaphorically from the Dignity of our
Condition. For so it is that our selves are said to be made Kings, Rev. 1.6.
and 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.9. and not that we are properly Kings, for then we must have
subjects who must be Governed by us.

Thus we see their Blessedness in the Fountain, end and state of Dignity: As to
the Receptive Act on their part, it is expressed by two words; one signifying
their first entrance on it, Come: the other their Possession, Inheritance: that
is, possess it as given by the Father, and Redeemed by the Son, and hold it in
this Tenure for ever.

The true Believer was convinced in this life, that indeed there was no true
Blessedness, but this enjoyment of God in the Kingdom of heaven. The Lord
revealed this to his heart by his Word and Spirit: And therefore he contemned
the seeming Happiness on earth, and laid up for himself a Treasure in heaven,
and made him friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, and ventured all his
hopes in this Vessel. And now he finds the wisdom of that choice in a rich
return* God made him so wise a Merchant as to sell All for this Pearl of
greatest price: and therefore now he shall find the gain. As there Is no other
true Happiness, but God in glory; so is there nothing more suitable and welcome
to the true Believer. O how welcome will the face of that God be, whom he
loved, whom he sought, whom he longed and waited for! How welcome will that
Kingdom be which he lived in Hope of! which he parted with All for! and
suffered for* in the flesh! How glad will he be to see the Blessed face of his
Redeemer, who by his manifold Grace has brought him unto this! I leave the
believing soul to think of it, and to make it the daily matter of his
Delightful Meditation. What an unconceivable Joy in one moment, this Sentence
of Christ will fill his soul with. Undoubtedly it is now quite past our
comprehension: though our imperfect forethoughts of it may well make our lives
a continual Feast.

Were it but our Justification from the Accusations of Satan, who would have us
Condemned either as sinners in general, or as Impenitent, Unbelieving Rebels,
against him that Redeemed us, in special, it would lift up the heads of the
Saints in that day: After all the fears of our own hearts, and the slanderous
Accusations of Satan and the world, That we were either Impenitent Infidels, or
Hypocrites, Christ will then Justify us and pronounce us Righteous. So much
for the Condition to which they are Judged.

2. The Reason or Cause of this Justification of the Saints, is given us* both
1. In a general denomination, and 2. In a particular Description. 1. In
General, it is because they were Righteous, as is evident, Mat. 25.46. The
righteous shall go into life Everlasting. And indeed it is the business of
every just Judge, to justify the righteous, and condemn the unrighteous. And
shall not the Judge of all the earth judge righteously? Genesis 18.25. God makes
men Righteous, before he Judges them so: and Judges them Righteous Because
they are so. He that abominateth that man who says to the Righteous, thou art
wicked, or to the wicked, thou art Righteous, who Justifies the wicked, and
Condemns the Righteous, will certainly never do so himself.

Indeed he will Justify them that are sinners, but not against the Accusation
they that are sinners: but against the Accusation, that they are guilty of
Punishment for sin: but that is, because he first made them just; and so
Justifiable, by pardoning their sin through the blood of Christ.

And its true also, that he will Justify those that were wicked, but not those
that are wicked; But Judgment finds them as Death leaves them: and he will
not take them for wicked, that are sanctified and cleansed of their former
wickedness. So that Christ will first pardon them, before he justify them
against the charge of being sinners in general: and he will first give men
Faith, Repentance and new Obedience, before he will Justify them against the
charge of being Impenitent, Infidels or Hypocrites, and consequently
unpardoned, and doubly guilty of damnation. This twofold righteousness, he will
first Give men, and so constitute them Just; before he will Declare it, and
Sentence them just.

2. The Reason of the Sentence, particularly Described, is from their Faith and
love to Christ, expressed in their Obedience, self-denial and forsaking all for
him. For I was hungry and ye fed me; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was
a stranger and ye took me in: Naked and ye cloa^hed me: I was sick and ye
visited me; I was in prison and ye came to me: Verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it
unto me, Mat. 25.35. to 41. Here is 1. The causal conjunction for. 2. And the
Cause or Reason it self.

Concerning both which, Observe, 1. How it is that man's Obedience and
self-denial is The Reason and Cause of his Justification. 2. Why it is that God
will have the Reason or Cause thus Declared in the Sentence.

For the first; observe, that Its one thing to give a Reason of the Sentence,
and another thing to express the Cause of the Benefit, Given us by the promise,
and Judged to us by the Sentence. Man's Obedience was no proper Cause why God
did in this life Give pardon of sin to us, or a Right to glory: much less, of
his Giving Christ to dye for us. And therefore as to our Constitutive
Justification at our Conversion, we must not say or think that God does
Justify us, For or Because of any works of our Obedience, Legal or
Evangelical. But when God has so Justified us, when he comes to give a Reason
of his Sentence in Judgment, he may and will fetch that Reason, partly from
our Obedience, or our performance of the Conditions of the New Covenant. For as
in this life, we had a Righteousness consisting in free pardon of all sin
through the blood of Christ, and a Righteousness consisting in our personal
performance of the Conditions of the promise which gives that pardon, and
continues it to us: so at Judgment we shall accordingly be justified And as
our Evangelical personal Righteousness, commonly called Inherent, was at first
only in our Faith and Repentance, and Disposition to obey: but afterward in our
Actual sincere Obedience, in which sense we are Constitutively Justified or
made Righteous here by our works, in James his sense, Jam. 2.24. so accordingly
a double Reason will be assigned of our sentential Justification; One from our
pardon by Christ's blood and merits; which will prove our Right to Impunity and
to Glory. The other from our own Faith and holy Obedience, which will prove our
Right to that pardon through Christ, and to the free Gift of a Right to glory:
and so this last is to be pleaded in subordination to the former. For Christ is
become the Author of Eternal salvation to all them that Obey him, Heb. 5 9. He
therefore that will be saved, must have a Christ to save him as the Author, and
an Obedience to that Christ, as the Condition of that salvation; and
consequently both must be declared in the Judgment.

The Reason why the Judge does mention our Good works, rather then our
Believing, may be because those holy self-denying expressions of Faith and Love
to Christ, do contain or certainly imply Faith in them, as the life of the tree
is in the fruit: but faith does contain our works of Obedience but only as
their cause. These works also are a part of the personal Righteousness which is
to be enquired after, that is, we shall not be judged righteous, merely because
we have Believed, but also because we have added to our Faith virtue; and have
improved our Talents, and have loved Christ to the hazard of all or his sake.
For it is not only or principally for the goodness of the work considered in it
self, or the good that is done by it to the poor: but it is as these works did
express our Faith and Love to Christ, by doing him the most costly and
hazardous service; that by Faith we could see Christ in a poor beggar or a
prisoner; and could love Christ in These better then our worldly goods or
liberties; which we must part with or hazard by the works that are here
mentioned.

2. The Reasons why Christ will so publicly Declare the personal righteousness
of men, to be the Reason or Cause of his Justifying sentence, it is because It
is the business of that day, not only to glorify Gods mere Love and Mercy, but
eminently to glorify his Remunerative Justice; and not only to express his
love to the Elect as such, but to express his love to them as Faithful and
Obedient, and such as have denied all for Christ, and Loved God above all; And
to show his justice to the men, and faithfulness in fulfilling all his
promises, and also his holinss in the high estimation of the holiness of his
people. I shall express this in the words of a Learned Divine (Dr Twiss,
against Mr. Cotton, page 40.) Was there no more in Gods intention when he
elected some, then the manifestation of the riches of his glorious grace? Did
not God purpose also to manifest the Glory of his Remunerative Justice? Is it
not undeniable that God will bestow salvation on all his Elect (of ripe years)
by way of reward and Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will
give? 2 Timothy 4. 2 These. 1. It is great pity this is not considered, as usually
it is not: Especially for the momentous Consequence thereof in my Judgment. So
far he.

So much of the Sentence of Justification which shall be passed by Christ at
Judgment upon the Righteous.

2. We are next to consider of the Sentence of Condemnation which shall then by
Christ be passed on the unrighteous. Which is delivered to us by Christ, Mat.
25. in the same order as the former.

This Sentence contains; 1. The Condemnation it self. 2. The Reason or Cause
of it.

The Condemnation expresses the misery which they are judged to. 1. Generally,
in the Denomination, Cursed. 2. Particularly by Description of their Cursed
state.

To be cursed, is to be a People destinated and adjudged to utter unhappiness;
to all kind of misery without remedy.

2. Their Cursed condition is described in the next words, Depart from me into
Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

1. Depart! From whom? from the God that made them in his Image. From the
Redeemer that bought them by the price of his blood, and offered to save them
freely, for all their unworthyness, and many a time entreated them to Accept
his offer that their souls might live. From the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier and
Comforter of the faithful, who strove with their hearts, till they quenched and
expelled him. O sad Departing! who would not then choose rather to Depart from
all the friends he had in the world, and from any thing Imaginable; from his
life, from himself, if it were possible, then from Christ? Depart! from what?
why, from the presence of the Judge; from all further Hopes of salvation for
ever: from all possibility of ever being saved, and living in the joyful
Inheritance of the Righteous. Depart! Not from Gods Essential presence, for
that will be with them to their everlasting misery, but from the presence of
his Grace, in that measure as they enjoyed it. Depart! Not from your fleshly
pleasures, and honors, and profits of the world: These were all gone and past
already: and there was no further need to bid them Depart from these: Houses
and Lands were gone* Mirth and Recreations were gone. Their sweet morsels and
cups were gone: All the Honor that men could give them was gone, before they
were set at Christ's bar to be Judged. But from all expectations of ever
enjoying these again, or ever tasting their former delights; from these they
must Depart: Not from their sin, for that will go with them: But the liberty of
committing that part of it which was sweet to them, as Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Idleness, and all Voluptuousness; from these they must Depart. But
this is Consequential: It is Christ and the Possibility of salvation, that they
are Sentenced to Depart from.

But Whither must they Depart? 1. Into fire. 2. Into that fire which was
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 3. Into everlasting fire.

1. Not into a Purifying, but a Tormenting fire. Whether Elementary or not;
whether properly or Metaphorically called sire, let us not vainly trouble our
selves to enquire. It is enough to know, that as fire is one of the most
grievous Tormentors of the flesh, so grievous will be those infernal Torments
to the whole man, soul and body. Such as is most fitly represented to us under
the notion of fire, and of burning. Its easy for a secure unbelieving soul to
read and hear of it! but woe, and ten thousand woes to them that must endure
it. In this life they had their good things, when it went harder as to the
flesh with better men; but now they are tormented, when the Godly are
comforted, as Luke 16.25.

2. But why is it called a fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels? 1. What
is this Devil that has Angels? 2. Who are his Angels? 3. When was it prepared
for them? 4. Was it not also prepared for wicked men? To these in order.

1. It seems by many passages in Scripture, that there is an Order among
Spirits, both Good and Bad; and that there is one Devil that is the Prince over
the rest.

2. It seems therefore that its the rest of the evil Spirits, that are called
his Angels. And some think that the wicked who served him in this life, shall
be numbered with his Angels in the life to come. Indeed the Apostle calls him,
The God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. as is ordinarily Judged by Expositors: and
the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. And he calls false seducing Teachers, The
Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.15. But that wicked men are here meant as part of
his Angels, is not clear.

3. If it be the preparation of Gods Purpose that is here meant, then it was
from Eternity; but if it be any Commination of God as Ruler of the Angels, than
was this fire prepared for them Conditionally, from the beginning of that
Commination, and was Due to them at their fall.

4. It seems that the Reason why here is no mention of preparing Hellfire for
the wicked, but only for the Devils, is not because indeed it was not prepared
also for the wicked; but to note, that it is the Torment which was first
prepared for, or assigned to the Devils, thereby showing the greatness of the
misery of the wicked, that the Devil and his Angels must be their Compan^ons.
Though some think, as is said before, that the reason why wicked men are not
mentioned here, is because they are part of the Angels of the Devil, and so
included. And some think it is purposely to manifest Gods ^eneral Love to
mankind, that prepared not Hell for them, but they cast themselves into the
Hell prepared for the Devils. But the first seems to be the true sense.

And how apparently Righteous are the Judgments of the Lord! that those men
who would here entertain the Devil into their hearts, and daily familiarity,
should be then entertained by him into his place of Torments, and there remain
for ever in his society! Though few entertained him into Visible familiarity
with their bodies as Witches do, who so make him their Familiar; yet all wicked
men do entertain him into more full and constant familiarity with their souls,
then these witches do with their bodies, How familiar is he in their thoughts,
to fill them with vanity, lust, or revenge* How familiar is he in their hearts
to fill them with coveteousness, malice, pride or the like evils? and to banish
all thoughts of returning to God, and to quench every motion that tends to
their recovery? How familiar is he with them* even when they seem to be
worshipping God in the public Assemblies; stealing the word out of their
hearts, filling them with vain and wandering thoughts, blinding their minds
that they cannot understand the plainest words that we are able to speak to
them, and filling them with a proud rebellion against the Direction of their
Teachers, and an obstinate refusal to be ruled by them, b^ the matter never so
necessary to their own salvation? How familiar ar^ these evil Spirits in their
houses, filling them with ignorance, worldliness, and ungodliness, and turning
out ^ods service, so that they do not pray together once in a day, or perhaps
at all? How familiarly does Satan use their tongues, in cursing, swearing,
lying, ribaldry, backbiting, or slandering? And is it not just with God to make
these friends their familiars in Torment, with whom they entertained such
familiarity in sin? As Christ with all the Blessed Angels and Saints will make
but one Kingdom or family, and shall live altogether in perpetual Delights: so
the Devil and all his He^^ish Angels and wicked men shall make but one
household, and shall live altogether in perpetual misery. O poor sinners! you
are not troubled now at his presence* and power your hearts, but will you not
then be troubled at his presence, and tormenting power? As long as you do not
see him, let him do what he will with you, it grieves you little or nothing at
all: but what will you say when you must see him, and abide with him for ever?
Oh Sirs, his name is easily heard, but his company will be terrible to the
stoutest heart alive. He shows you a smiling face when he tempts you, but
he has a grimmer face to show you, when temptations have conquered you, and
torments must succeed! As those that write of Witches, say* he appears at
first to them in some comely tempting shape, till he have them fast tied to
him; and then he beats them, and affrights them, and seldom appears to them but
in some ugly hew. Believe it, poor sinners, you do not hear or see the worst of
him, when you are merry about your sinful Pleasures, and Rejoicing in your
Hopes of the Commodities or Preferments of the world: he has another kind of
Voice which you must hear, and another face to show you, that will make you
know a little better, whom you had to do with! You would be afraid now to meet
him in the dark; what will you be to live with him in everlasting darkness?
Then you will know who it was that you entertained and obeyed, and played with
in your sins.

3. And as the Text tells us, that it is a fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. So it tells us, that is An everlasting fire. It had a beginning: but
it shall have no end. If these wretches would have chosen the service of God,
they would have met with no difficulty or trouble, but what would have had a
speedy end: Poverty and Injuries would have had an end: scorns and abuses would
have had an end; fasting, humiliation sorrow for sin, watching, and fighting
against our spiritual enemies, would all have had an end. But to avoid these,
they chose that ease* that pleasure, which has brought them to that torment
which never will have end. I have said so much of these things already in my
Book called the Saints Rest, that I will now say but this much. It is one of
the wonders of the world, how men that do believe, or think they do believe
this word of Christ to be true, that the wicked shall go into Everlasting fire,
can yet venture on sin so boldly* and live in it so fearlessly, or sleep
quietly till they are out of this unspeakable Danger! Only the Commonness of
it, and the known wickedness of man's heart, does make this less wonderful. And
were there nothing else to convince us, that sinners are Mad and Dead as to
spiritual things, this were enough; That ever the greatest pleasures or profits
of the world, or the most enticing baits that the Devil can offer them, should
once prevail with them to forget these endless things and draw them to reject
an Everlasting Glory, and cast themselves desperately into Everlasting fire;
Yea, and all this under daily warnings and Instructions; and when its told them
before hand by the God of Truth himself! For the Lords sake, Sirs, and for your
souls sakes, if you care not what Ministers say, or what such as I say, yet
will you soberly read now and then this 25. Chapter of Matthew, and Regard what
is told you by him that must be your Judge! and now and then bethink your
selves soberly whether these are matters for wise men to make light of? and
what it is to be Everlastingly in Heaven or in Hell fire.

2. We have seen what is the Penalty contained in the sentence against the
ungodly: The next thing that the Text directs us to* is the Cause or Reason of
the Sentence* verse. 42, For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. The
Reason is not given expressly either for their sin against the Law of works,
that is, Because they were sinners, and not perfectly Innocent: Nor yet from
their unbelief, which is the great sin against the Law of Grace: But it is
given from their not expressing their Faith and Love to Christ in works of
mercy and self-denial. And why is this so?

1. We must not suppose that these words of Christ, do express the whole
Judicial process in every point; but the chief parts. It is supposed that all
men are convicted of being sinners against the perfect Law of the Creator, and
that they are guilty of Death for that sin: and that there is no way but by
Christ to obtain deliverance. But because all this must be acknowledged by the
righteous themselves, as well as by the wicked, therefore Christ does not
mention this, but that only which is the turning point or cause in the
Judgment. For it is not all sinners that shall be finally Condemned* but all
Impenitent, Unbelieving sinners, who have Rebelled finally against their
Redeemer.

2. And the reason why Faith it self is not expressed, is, 1. Because it is
clearly employed, and so is Love to Christ as Redeemer: in that they should have
Relieved Christ himself in his members: that is, as its expressed, Matthew.
10.42. they should have received a Prophet in the name of a Prophet; and a
Disciple in the name of a Disciple; All should be done for Christ's sake: which
could not be unless they Believed in him, and Loved him. 2. Also because that
the bare Act of Believing is not all that Christ requires to a man's final
Justification and Salvation: But holy self-denying Obedience must be added. And
therefore this is given as the Reason of their Condemnation, that they did not
so obey.

We must observe also, that Christ here puts the special for the general:
that is, one way of self* denying Obedience, and expression of Love, instead of
such Obedience in general! For all men have not ability to relieve those in
misery, being perhaps some of them poor themselves. But all have that Love and
self-denial, which will some way express it self. And all have hearts and a
Disposition to do thus, if they had ability; without such a Disposition, none
can be saved.

It is the fond conceit of some, that if they have any love to the godly or
wish them well, it is enough to prove them happy. But Christ here purposely
lets us know, that whoever does not Love him at so high a rate, as that he can
part with his substance or any thing in the world, to those uses which he shall
require them, even to relieve his servants in want and sufferings for the
masters sake, that man is none of Christ's Disciple, nor will be owned by him at
the last.

XI. THE next point that we come to, is to show you the Properties of this
Sentence at Judgment.

When man had broken the Law of his Creator at the first, he was liable to the
Sentence of Death, and God presently sat in Judgment on him, and sentenced
him to some part of the Punishment which he had deserved: But upon the
Interposition of the Son, he forbore the rest, resolving on a way that might
tend to his Recovery: And Death is due yet to every sinner for every sin which
he commits, till a pardon do acquit him. But this Sentence which will pass on
sinners at the last Judgment, does much differ from that which was passed on
the first sin, or which is Due according to the Law of wor^s alone: for,

1. As to the Penalty, called the Pain of Loss, the first Judgment did deprive
man of the favor of his ^reator; but the second will deprive him of the favor
both of the Creator and Redeemer: ^he first Judgment deprived him of the
benefits of Innocence: The second deprived him of the Benefits of Redemption;
The loss of his hopes and possibility of a pardon, of the Spirit, of
Justification and Adoption, and of the benefits which Conditionally were
promised and offered him; these are the Punishments of the last Judgment,
which the Law of work^ did never threaten to the first man, or to any, as it
stood alone.

Also the loss of Glory as Recovered, is the proper penalty of the viol^ted Law
of Grace: which is more than the first loss. As if a man should lose his Purse
the second time, when another has once found it for him: Or rather as if a
Traitor Redeemed by another, and having his life and honors offered him, if he
will Thankfully Accept it and come in, should by his Refusal and Obstinacy,
lose this Recovered Life, which is offered him: which is an addition to his
former penalty.

Besides that the Higher degree of Glory will be lost, which Christ would
bestow on him, more then was lost at first. The very work of the Saints in
heaven* will be to Praise and Glorify him that Redeemed them: and the Father
in him: which would not have been the work of man if he had been innocent.

2. As to the Pain of sense, the last Judgment by the Redeemer* will Sentence
them to a far sorer Punishment then would have befaln them, if no Savior had
been offered them, Heb. 10.29. The conscience of Adam if he had not been
Redeemed, would never have Tormented him for Rejecting a Redeemer, nor for
refusing or abusing his gracious offers, and his mercies; nor for the
forfeiting of a Recovered Happiness; nor for refusing the easy terms of the
Gospel, which would have Given him Christ and salvation for the Accepting; nor
for neglecting any means that tended to Recovery: No nor for refusing
Repentance unto Life, nor for disobeying a Redeemer that bought him by his
blood. As all these are the penalties of the Redeemers Law and Judgment, so is
it a sorer penalty then Conscience would have inflicted merely for not being
perfectly Innocent; and they will be far sorer gripings and gnawings of the
never-dying worm for the abuse of these Talents, than if we had been never
trusted with any after our first forfeiture. Yea and God himself will
accordingly proportion his Punishments. So that you see that Privatively and
Positively, or as to their Loss and their Feeling, the Redeemer will pass on
them a heavyer doom then the Creator did, or would have done according to the
first Law to perfect man.

3. Another Property of the Judgment of Christ, is, that It will be final,
Peremptory, and Excluding all further hopes or possibilities of a Remedy. So
was not the first Judgment of the Creator upon fallen man. Though the Law of
pure Nature knew no Remedy, nor gave man any hope of a Redeemer; yet did it not
exclude a Remedy; nor put in any bar against one; but God was free to Recover
his Creature if he p^eased. But in the Law of Grace he has Resolved, that
there shall be no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of
Judgment and fire which shall devour the Adversary, Heb. 10.^6, 27. and that
the fire shall be Everlasting, the worm shall not dye, and the fire shall not
be quenched, Mat. 25. last, Mat. 13.42, 50. John 5.27. Mat. 5.26. Mat. 3.12.
and Luke 3.17. Mark. 9.4^, 44, 45, 46, 48. He that now breaks that pure Law
that requir^th perfect innocence (as we have all done) may fly to the Promise
of Grace in Christ, and Appeal to the Law of Liberty, or deliverance, to be
Judged bv that. But he that falls under the penalty of that Law which should
have saved him, as all final Unbelievers; and Impenitent, Ungodly persons do,
has no other to Appeal to. Christ would have been a Sanctuary and Refuge to
thee from the Law of works, had thou but Come in to him: But who shall be a
Refuge to thee from the wrath of Christ? The Gospel would have freed thee from
the Curse of the Law of works, if thou had but believed and obeyed it: But
what shall free thee from the Condemnation of the Gospel? Had there no
Accusation lain against thee, but that thou wast in general a sinner, that is,
that thou wast not perfectly Innocent, Christ would have answered that charge
by his blood. But seeing thou art also guilty of those special sins which he
never shed his blood for, who shall deliver thee from that Accusation? When
Christ gave himself a ransom for sinners, it was with this Resolution both in
the Father and himself, that none should ever be Pardoned, Justified or Saved
by that Ransom, that did not in the time of this life, sincerely return to God
by Faith in the Redeemer, and live in sincere obedience to him and persevering
herein. So that he plainly excepted final Infidelity, Impenitency and Rebellion
from pardon: He never dyed for the final nonperformance of the Conditions of
the New Covenant. So that his Judgment for these will be peremptory and
remediless. If you say, Why cannot God find out a remedy for this sin, as well
as he did for the first? I say, God cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. He must be True and
Faithful, as necessarily as he must be God, because of the Absolute perfection
of his nature; and he has said and resolved that there shall be no more remedy.

Many other Properties of Gods Judgment in general there are, as that
Righteousness, Impartiality, Inflexibility, and the like, which because I would
not make my Discourse too long, I will pass over, contenting my self with the
mention of these which are Proper to the Judgment of the Redeemer, according
to his own Laws in special.

XII. THE twelfth and last thing which I promised to unfold, is, The Execution
of this Judgment. Here I should show you both the Certainty of the Execution,
and by whom it will be, and how; but having done all this already in the third
Part of the foresaid Book of rest, I shall now only give this brief touch of it.

No sooner is the dreadful Sentence past, Go ye cursed into Everlasting fire,
but away they must be gone: There is no delay; much less any Reprive to be
expected: and yet much less is there any hope of an Escape. If the Judge once
say, Take him Jailer; and if Christ say, Take him Devils, you that Ruled and
Deceived him, now Torment him; all the world cannot rescue one such soul. It
will be in vain to look about for help! Alas, there is none but Christ can help
you, and he will not, because you refused his help: Nay we may say, He cannot:
not for want of Power: but because he is True and Just; and therefore will make
good that word which you believed not. It is in vain then to cry to hills to
fall on you and the mountains to cover you from the presence of him that
sits on the Throne. It will be in vain now to Repent, and wish you had not
slighted your salvation, nor sold it for a little pleasure to your flesh. It
will be then in vain to cry Lord, Lord, open to us; O spare us; O pity us; O
do not cast us into these hideous flames! Do not turn us among Devils! do not
Torment thy Redeemed ones in this fire! All this will be then too late.

Poor sinner, whoever thou art that read or hear these lines, I beseech
thee in Compassion to thy soul, Consider, How fearful the case of that man will
be, that is newly doomed to the Everlasting fire; and is haled to the Execution
without Remedy! and what mad men are those that now do no more to prevent such
a misery, when they might do it on such easy terms, and now have so fair an
Opportunity in their hands?

The time was when Repentance might have done thee good: but Then all thy
Repentings will be in vain. Now while the day of thy Visitation lasts, had
thou but a heart to pray and cry for mercy, in faith and fervency, through
Christ thou might be heard. But then Praying, and Crying will do no good!
should thou roar out in the extremity of thy horror and amazement, and
beseech the Lord Jesus but to forgive thee one sin, or to send thee on earth
once more, and to try thee once again in the flesh, whether thou would not
love him and lead a holy life, it would be all in vain. Should thou beseech
him by all the mercifulness of his nature by all his sufferings and bloody
death, by all the merciful promises of his Gospel; it would be all in vain*
Nay, should thou beg but one days reprival, or to stay one hour before thou
were cast into those flames, it would not be heard; it would do thee no good.
How earnestly did a deceased Gentleman, Luke 16.24. beg of Abraham for one drop
of water from the tip of Lazarus's finger, to cool his tongue, because he was
tormented in the flame! And what the better was he? He was sent to Remember
that he had his Good things in this life; and that Remembrance would torment
him more. And do not wonder or think much at this, that Christ will not then be
entreated by the ungodly. You shall then have a Remember too, from Christ or
Conscience. He may soon stop thy mouth, and leave thee speechless, and say,
Remember, man, that I did one day send thee a Message of peace, and thou
would not hear it. I once did stoop to Beseech thee to return, and thou
would not hear. I besought thee by the tender mercies of God; I besought thee
by all the Love that I had showed thee; by my holy Life; by my cursed Death; by
the Riches of my Grace; by the offers of my Glory; and I could not get thee to
forsake the world, to deny thy flesh to leave one beloved sin, for all this! I
besought thee over and over again! I sent many a Minister to thee in my name: I
waited on thee many a day, and year; and all would not do; thou would not
Consider, Return and Live: And now it is too late: my sentence is past, and
cannot be recalled: Away from me, thou worker of Iniquity, Matthew. 7.22, 23.

Ah Sirs, what a case then is the poor desperate sinner left in! How can I
write this, or how can you that read or hear it without trembling once think of
the Condition that such forlorn wretches will be in! When they look above them,
and see the God that has forsaken them, because they forsook him first; when
they look about them, and see the Saints on one hand whom they despised, now
sentenced unto Glory; and the wicked on the other hand, whom they accompanied
and imitated, now Judged with them to everlasting misery; when they look below
them, and see the flames that they must abide in, even for evermore; and when
the Devils begin to hale them to the Execution; Oh poor souls! Now what would
they give for a Christ, for a promise, for a time of Repentance, for a Sermon
of mercy, which once they slept under, or made no account of! How is the case
altered now with them! who would think that these are the same men, that made
light of all this on earth, that so stoutly scorned the reproofs of the word,
that would be worldly, and fleshly, and drunk, and proud, let Preachers say
what they would; and perhaps hated those that did give them warning. Now they
are of another mind; but all too late. Oh were there any place for Resistance,
how would they draw back, and lay hold of any thing, before they would be
dragged away into those flames! But there is no resisting; Satan's Temptations
might have been Resisted, but his Executions cannot Gods Judgments might have
been Prevented by Faith and Prayer, Repentance and a holy life; but they cannot
be resisted when they are not prevented. Glad would the miserable sinner be, if
he might but turn to nothing, and cease to be; or that he might be any thing
rather than a reasonable creature: but these wishes are all in vain. There is
one Time, and one Way of a sinners Deliverance; If he fail in that one, he
perishes for ever: all the world cannot help him after that, 2 Cor. 6 2. I
have heard thee in a time accepted; and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee: Behold now is the Accepted time: behold now is the day of
salvation. Now he says, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; If
any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me. But for the time to come hereafter, hear what he
says, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye Refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I also will laugh at your Calamity; I
will mock when your fear comes: when your fear comes as Desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you;
then shall they call upon me, but I will not Answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord; They would none of my counsels; they despised all my
Reproof* therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices; for the Turning away of the simple shall slay them, and
the Prosperity of fools shall destroy them; But who so hearkneth to me, shall
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil. I have recited all these
words, that you may see and consider, whether I have spoke any other thing than
God himself has plainly told you of.

Having said this much of the Certainty of the Execution, I should next have
spoke somewhat of the manner and the Instruments, and have showed how God will
be for ever the Principal Cause, and Satan and their own Consciences the
Instruments, in part; and in what manner Conscience will do its part, and how
impossible it will be to quiet or resist it. But having spoke so much of all
this already elsewhere, as is said before, I will forbear here to repeat it,
leaving the Reader that desires it, there to peruse it.

The Uses.
Use 1.

BEloved hearers, it was not to fill your fancies with news that God sent me
hither this day; nor to tell you of matters that nothing concern you; nor by
some terrible words to bring you to an hours amazement and no more; But it is
to tell you of things that your eyes shall see, and to foretell you of your
danger while it may be prevented; that your precious souls may be saved at the
last, and you may stand before God with comfort at that day; But because this
will not be every man's case, no nor the case of most, I must in the name of
Christ desire you to make this day an enquiry into your own souls, and as in
the presence of God let your hearts make answer to these few Questions which I
shall propound and debate with you.

Qu. 1.

DO you soundly Believe this Doctrine which I have preached to you? What say
you Sirs? do you verily Believe it as a most certain Truth, that you and I, and
all the world must stand at Gods bar and be Judged to Everlasting Joy or
Torment? I hope you do all in some sort Believe this: but blame me not if I be
jealous whether you soundly believe it, while we see in the world so little of
the effect of such a Belief. I confess I am forced to think that there is more
infidelity then faith among us, when I see more ungodliness then godliness
among us: And I can hardly believe that man that will say or swear that he
believes these things, and yet lives as carelessly and carnally as an Infidel.
I know that no man can love to be damned; yea I know that every man that has a
reasonable soul, has naturally some love to himself, and a fear of a danger
which he verily apprehends; he therefore that lives without all fear* I must
think lives without all apprehension of his danger. Custom has taught men to
hold these things as the Opinion of the Country; but if men soundly believed
them, surely we should see stranger effects of such a faith, then in the most
we do see. Does the sleepy soul that lives in security, and follows this
world as eagerly as if he had no greater matters to mind; that never once
trembled at the thoughts of this great day; nor once asked his own soul in good
sadness, My soul, How do thou think then to escape? I say, does this man
Believe that he is going to this Judgment? Well, Sirs, whether you believe it
or not, you will find it true; and believe it you must before you can be safe.
For if you do not Believe it, you will never make ready. Let me therefore
persuade you in the fear of God to consider, that it is a matter of undoubted
Truth.

1. Consider that it is the express word of the God of Truth; revealed in
Scripture as plainly as you can desire. So that you cannot be unbelieving
without denying Gods Word, or giving him the lie, Mat. 13.38, 39, 40, 41, 42,
43, 49, 50. Mat. 25. throughout* Romans 2.5* 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16, and 1.32. John
5.28, 29. The hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation. Heb.
9.27. It is appointed to all men once to dye, and after this, the Judgment.
Romans 14.9.12. So then every one of us shall give Account of himself to God.
Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead, small and great stand before God: and the Books
were opened: and another book was opened, which is the Book of life: and the
dead were Judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according
to their works. Mat. 12.36, 37. But I say unto you, that every idle word that
men shall speak, the shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment: For by
thy words thou shall be Justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.
Many more most express Texts of Scripture do put the Truth of this Judgment
out of all question, to all that believe the Scripture, and will understand it.
There is no place left for a Controversy in the point: It is made as sure to
us as the Word of the living God can make it: And he that will question that,
what will he Believe? What say you Sirs? Dare you doubt of this which the God
of Heaven has so positively affirmed? I hope you dare not.

2. Consider, it is a master-part of your faith, if you are Christians, and a
fundamental Article of your Creed, that Christ shall come again to Judge the
quick and the dead. So that you must Believe it, or renounce your Christianity,
and then you renounce Christ and all the hopes of mercy that you have in him.
Its impossible that you should soundly Believe in Christ* and not believe his
Judgment and Life Everlasting; because as he came to bring Life and
Immortality to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. so it was the end of his
Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, to bring you thither; and its part of his
honor and office which he purchased with his blood, to be the Lord and Judge
of all the world, Romans 14.9. Joh. 5.22* If therefore you believe not heartily
this Judgment; deal plainly and openly, and say you are Infidels and cast away
the hypocritical vizor of Christianity, and let us know you, and take you as
you are.

3. Consider that it is a Truth that is known by the very light of nature; that
there shall be a happiness for the Righteous, and a misery for the wicked after
this life: which is evident*

1. In that we have undeniable natural reason for it. 1. God is the Righteous
governor of the world, and therefore must make a difference among his subjects,
according to the nature of their ways; which we see is not done here, where
the wicked prosper, and the good are afflicted; therefore it must be hereafter.

2. We see there is a necessity that God should make promises and threatenings
of everlasting happiness or misery, for the right governing of the world; for
we certainly perceive that no lower things will keep men from destroying all
humane society, and living worse then bruit beasts; and if there be a necessity
of making such threats and promises, then there is certainly a necessity of
fulfilling them. For God needs no lie or means of deceiving, to rule the
world.

2. And as we see it by Reason, so by certain experience, that this is
discernable by the light of nature; for all the world, or almost all do believe
it. Even those nations where the Gospel never came, and have nothing but what
they have by nature even the most Barbarous Indians acknowledge some life after
this* and a difference of men according as they are here: Therefore you must
believe thus much, or renounce your common Reason and humanity, as well as your
Christianity. Let me therefore persuade you all in the fear of God to confirm
your souls in the belief of this, as if you had heard Christ or an Angel from
heaven say to you, Oh man thou art hasting to Judgment.

Qu. 2.

MY next Question is, Whether you do ever soberly consider of this great day?
Sirs, do you use when you are alone to think with your selves* how certain and
how dreadful it will be? how fast it is coming on? and what you shall do? and
what answer you mean to make at that day? are your minds taken up with these
considerations? Tell me, is it so, or not?

Alas Sirs! Is this a matter to be forgotten? Is not that man even worse then
mad* that is going to Gods Judgment and never thinks of it? when if they were
to be tried for their lives at the next Assize, they would think of it, and
think again, and cast 100 times which way to escape. Me thinks you should
rather forget to go to bed at night, or to eat your meat, or do your work, then
forget so great a matter as this.

Truly I have often in my serious thoughts been ready to wonder that men can
think of almost any thing else, when they have so great a thing to think of.
What! forget that which you must remember for ever! forget that which should
force remembrance, yea and does force it with some, whether they will or not! A
poor despairing soul cannot forget it: He thinks which way ever he goes he is
ready to be Judged. Oh therefore Beloved, Fix these thoughts as deep in your
hearts as thoughts can go. Oh be like that holy man, that thought which way
ever he went, he heard the Trumpet sound, and the voice of the Angel calling to
the world, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment, You have warning of it from
God and man, to cause you to Remember it; do not then forget it. It will be a
cold excuse another day, Lord, I forgate this day, or else I might have been
ready: you dare not sure trust to such excuses.

Qu. 3.

MY next Question to you, is* How are you affected with the Consideration of
this day? Barely to think of it will not serve: To think of such a day as this
with a dull and senseless heart, is a sign of fearful stupidity. Did the knees
of King Belshazzar knock together with trembling, when he saw the handwriting
on the wall? Da^. 5.6. How then should thy heart be affected that sees the
handwriting of God as a summons to his bar?

When I began to preach of these things long ago, I confess the matters seemed
to me so terrible, that I was afraid that people would have run out of their
wits with fear; but a little experience showed me, that many are like a dog
that is bred up in a forge or furnace* that being used to it, can sleep though
the hammers are beating, and the fire and hot Iron flaming about him* when
another that had never seen it, would be amazed at the sight. When men have
heard us 7 years together, yea 20 years, to talk of a day of Judgment, and
they see it not, nor feel any hurt* they think it is but talk, and begin to
make nothing of it. This is their thanks to God for his Patience: Because his
Sentence is not executed speedily therefore their hearts are set in them to do
evil, Eccl. 8.11. As if God were slack of his Promise, as some men Account
slackness, 2 Pet. 3.9. When one day with him is as a 1000. years, and a 1000.
years as one day. What if we tell you 20 years together that you must dye, will
you not believe us, because you have lived so long and seen no death coming?

Three or four things there be should bring any matter to the heart. 1. If it
be a matter of exceeding weight. 2. If it concern not others only, but our
selves. 3. If it be certain. 4. If near.

All these things are here to be found, and therefore how should your hearts be
moved at the Consideration of this great day!

1. What matter can be mentioned with the Tongue of man of greater moment? For
the poor creature to stand before his Maker and Redeemer, to be Judged to
Everlasting Joy or Torment? Alas! all the matters of this world are plays, and
toys, and dreams to this: Matters of profit or disprofit are nothing to it:
Matters of credit or discredit are unworthy to be named with it: Matters of
temporal life or death are nothing to it. We see the poor bruit beasts go every
day to the slaughter, and we make no great matter of it, though their life be
as dear to them as ours to us. To be Judged to an Everlasting death or torment;
this is the great danger, that one would think should shake the stoutest heart
to consider it, and awake the dullest sinner to prevent it.

2. Its a matter that concerns every one of your selves, and every man or
woman that ever lived upon the earth, or ever shall do: I am not speaking to
you of the affairs of some far Country, that are nothing to you, but only to
marvail at; which you never saw, nor ever shall do: no; It is thy own self man
or woman that hear me this day, that shall as surely appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, as the Lord lives, and as he is true and faithful;
and that is as sure as thou live on this earth, or as the heaven is over
thee. That man that hears all this with the most careless blockish heart,
shall be awakened and stand with the rest at that day; that man that never
thought of it, but spent his time in worldly matters, shall leave all, and
there appear; that man that will not believe these things to be true, but make
a jest of them, shall see and feel what he would not Believe, and he also shall
be there: The godly that waited in hope for that day, as the day of their full
Deliverance and Coronation, they shall be there. Those that have lain in the
dust these 5000. years, shall rise again and all stand there. Hearer, whoever
thou art, believe it, thou may better think to live without meat, to see
without light, to escape death, and abide for ever on earth, then to keep away
from that Appearance. Willing or unwilling, thou shall be there. And should not
a matter then that so concerns thy self, go near to thy heart, and awake thee
from thy security?

3. That it is a matter of unquestionable certainty, I have partly showed you
already, and more would do, if I were Preaching to known Infidels. If the
careless world had any just reason to think it were uncertain, their
carelessness were more excusable. Me thinks a man should be affected with that
which he is certain shall come to pass, in a manner as if it were now in doing.
1 These. 5.2. Ye perfectly know that the day of the Lord so comes, etc. says
the Apostle.

4. This day is not only certain, but it is near; and therefore should affect
you the more. I confess, if it were never so far of, yet seeing it will come at
last, it should be carefully regarded: But when the Judge is at the door, Jam.
5.9. and we are almost at the bar, and it is so short a time to this Assize,
what soul that is not dead will be secure?

Alas Sirs! what is a little time when it is gone? how quickly shall you and I
be all in another world, and our souls receive their particular Judgment, and
so wait till the body be raised and judged to the same Condition? It is not a
100. years in all likelihood, till* every soul of us shall be in heaven or
hell: and its like, not half or a quarter of that time, but it will be so with
the greater part of us: and what is a year or two, or a 100? how speedily is it
come? how many a soul that is now in heaven or hell, within a 1000 years dwelt
in the places that you now dwell in, and sat in the seats you now sit in? And
now their time is past, what is it? Alas; how quickly will it be so with us:
You know not when you go to bed, but you may be Judged by the next morning: or
when you rise, but you may be* judged before night: but certainly you know that
shortly it will be; and should not this then be laid to heart? Yea the General
Judgment will not be long: For certainly we live in the end of the world.

Qu. 4.

MY next Question is, Whether are you ready for this dreadful Judgment when it
comes, or not? Seeing it is your selves that must be tried, I* think it
concerns you to see that you be prepared. How often has Christ warned us in
the Gospel, that we be always ready; because we know not the day or hour of
his coming, Mat. 24.44.42. and 25.13. 1 These. 5.6. and told us how sad a time
it will be to those that are unready, Mat. 25.11, 12. Did men but well know
what a meeting and greeting there will be between Christ and an unready soul,
it would sure startle them, and make them look about them. What say you Beloved
Hearers, are you ready for Judgment, or are you not! Me thinks a man that
knows he shall be Judged, should ask himself the Question every day of his
life; Am I ready to give up my Account to God! Do not you use to ask this of
your own hearts? unless you be careless whether you be saved or damned, me
thinks you should; and ask it seriously.

Qu. But who be they that are ready? how shall I know whether I be ready or not?

Answ. There is a twofold readiness. 1. When you are in a safe case. 2. When
you are in a comfortable case, in regard of that day. The latter is very
desirable, but the first is of absolute necessity: this therefore is it that
you must principally enquire after.

In General, all those, and only those are ready for Judgment, who shall be
justified and saved, and not condemned when Judgment comes; They that have a
good cause in a Gospel sense. It may be known before hand who these are; for
Christ Judges, as I told you, by his Law. And therefore find out whom it is
that the Law of grace does justify or condemn, and you may certainly know whom
the Judge will Justify or Condemn; for he Judges righteously.

If you further ask me who these are; remember that I told you before, that
every man that is personally righteous by fulfilling the Condition of Salvation
in the Gospel, shall be saved, and he that is found unrighteous, as having not
fulfilled them, shall perish at that day.

Q1. Who are these?

Answ. I will tell you them in a few words, lest you should forget, because it
is a matter that your Salvation or Damnation depends upon.

1. The soul that unfeignedly repents of his former sinful course, and
turns from it in heart and life, and loves the way of godliness which he
hated, and hates the way of sin which he loved, and is become thoroughly a New
creature, being born again and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, shall be
Justified: but all others shall certainly be condemned.

Good news to repenting converted sinners, but sad to Impenitent, and him that
knows not what this means.

2. That soul that feeling his misery under sin, and the power of Satan, and
the wrath of God, does believe what Christ has done and suffered for man's
Restoration and Salvation, and thankfully accepts him as his only Savior
and Lord, on the terms that he is offered in the Gospel, and to those ends,
even to Justify him, and sanctify and guide him, and bring him at last to
everlasting glory; that soul shall be Justified at Judgment: and he that does
not, shall be condemned.

Or in short, in Scripture phrase, He that believes shall be saved, and he
that Believes not shall be condemned, Mar. 16.16.

3. The soul that has had so much knowledge of the goodness of God, and his
love to man in Creation, Redemption, and the following mercies, and has had so
much conviction of the vanity of all creatures, as thereupon to Love God more
then all things below, so that he has the chiefest room in the heart, and is
prefered before all creatures ordinarily in a time of trial: that soul shall be
Justified at Judgment, and all others shall be condemned.

4. That soul that is so apprehensive of the absolute Sovereignty of God as
Creator and Redeemer, and of the Righteousness of his Law, and the Goodness of
his holy way, as that he is firmly Resolved to obey him before all others, and
does accordingly give up himself to study his will, of purpose that he may obey
it, and does walk in these holy ways, and has so far mortified the flesh, and
subdued the world and the Devil, that the Authority and Word of God can do more
with him, then any other; and does ordinarily prevail against all the
persuasion and interest of the flesh, so that the main scope and bent of the
heart and life is still for God; and when he sins, he rises again by true
Repentance; I say, that soul, and that only, shall be Justified in Judgment,
and be saved.

5. That soul that has such Believing thoughts of the life to come, that he
takes the promised blessedness for his portion, and is resolved to venture all
else upon it, and in hope of this glory, does set light comparatively by all
things in this world, and waits for it as the end of his life, choosing any
suffering that God shall call him to, rather then to lose his hopes of that
felicity, and thus persevereth to the end: I say that soul, and none but that,
shall be Justified in Judgment, and escape Damnation.

In these five marks I have told you truly and briefly, who shall be justified
and saved, and who shall be condemned at the day of Judgment. And if you would
have them all in five words, they are but the Description of these five Graces,
Repentance, Faith, Love, Obedience, Hope.

But though I have laid these close together for your use, yet lest you should
think that in so weighty a case I am too short in the proof of what I so
determine of* I will tell you in the express words of many Scripture Texts, who
shall be Justified, and who shall be condemned.

[ John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see God. Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Acts 26.18. I send thee to open their
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance among the
sanctified by Faith that is in me. John 3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Whoever believes
in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life: he that believes on him,
is not condemned; he that believes not is condemned already, because he has
not Believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God: and this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light, because their deeds were evil, John 5.28, 29. The hour is coming in
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth,
they that have done good to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil to the Resurrection of damnation. Mat. 25.30. Cast the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Luke
19.27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me. Mat. 22.12, 13. Friend, how came* thou
in hither, not having on a wedding garment? And he was speechless. Then said
the King to the servants: Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast
him into outer darkness, etc. Mat. 5.20. For I say unto you, that except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 7.21. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord* shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the
w^ll of my Father which is in Heaven. Heb. 5.9. He is become the Author of
eternal salvation to all them that obey him. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that
do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in by the Gate into the City Rom 8.1, 13. There is then no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Romans 8.9. If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Gal. 5.18. But if ye be Led
of the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived: God is
not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap for he that
sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption: but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting. Matthew. 6.21. For where
your Treasure is, there will your heart be also.] Read Psalm. 1. and many other
Texts to this purpose, of which some are cited in my Directions for Peace of
Conscience: Dir. 11. p. 115, 116.

And thus I have told you from Gods Word, how you may know whether you are
Ready for Judgment; which is the fourth thing that I would advise you to
enquire after.

O Sirs, what shift do you make to keep your souls from Continual Terrors, as
long as you remain unready for Judgment? How do you keep the Thoughts of it
out of your mind, that they do not break your sleep, and meet you in your
business, and haunt you every way you go, while Judgment is so near, and you
are so unready? But I shall proceed to my next Question.

Qu. 5.

AND in the last place, to those of you that are not yet Ready, nor in a
Condition wherein you may be safe at that day; my Question is, How are you
resolved to prepare for Judgment for the time to come? Will you do no more
than you have done hitherto? Or will you now set your selves with all your
might, to make preparation for so great a day? me thinks you should be now past
all demurrs, delays, or further doubtings about such a business; and by the
consideration of what I have said already, you should be fully Resolved to lose
no more time, but presently to awake, and set upon the work. Me thinks you
should all say, We will do any thing that the Lord shall Direct us to do,
rather than we will be unready for the final doom! O that there were but such
hearts in you, that you were trully willing to follow the gracious Guidance of
the Lord, and to use but those sweet and reasonable means which he has
prescribed you in his Word, that you may be ready for that day! Alas, it is no
hard matter for me to tell you, or my self, what it is that we must do, if we
will be happy; and it is no very hard matter to Do it, so far as we are truly
willing; but the difficulty is, to be truly and thoroughly willing to this work.
If I shall tell you what you must do for preparation, shall I not lose my
labor? Will you resolve and promise in the strength of Grace, that you will
faithfully and speedily endeavor to practice it, whoever shall gainsay it?
Upon hope of this I will set you down some brief Directions, which you must
follow, if ever you will with comfort look the Lord Jesus in the face at the
hour of Death, or in the Day of Judgment.

THE first Direction is this, See that your souls be sincerely established in
the Belief of this Judgment and Everlasting life: For if you do not soundly
believe it, you will not seriously prepare for it. If you have the Judgment
and belief of an Infidel, you cannot have the Heart or the Life of a Christian.
Unbelief shuts out the most of the world from heaven, see that it do not so by
you! If you say, You cannot Believe what you would: I answer, Feed not your
unbelief by wilfulness, or unreasonableness; Use Gods means to overcome it, and
shut not your eyes against the light, and then try the issue, Heb. 3.12, 13,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

THE second Direction. Labor diligently to have a sound understanding of the
nature of the Laws and Judgment of God. On what terms it is that he deals
with mankind: and on what terms he will Judge them to Life or Death: and what
the Reward and Punishment is* For if you know not the Law by which you must be
Judged* you cannot know how to prepare for the Judgment. Study the Scripture
therefore, and mark who they be that God promises to save, and who they be
that he threateneth to Condemn. For according to that Word will the Judgment
pass.

THE third Direction. See that you take it as the very business of your Lives,
to make ready for that day. Understand that you have no other business in this
world, but what does necessarily depend on this. What else have you to do, but
to provide for everlasting? and to use means to sustain your own bodies and
others, of purpose for this work, till it be happily done? Live therefore as
men that make this the main scope and care of their Lives: and let all things
else come in but on the by. Remember every morning when you awake, that you
must spend that day in preparation for your Account, and that God does give it
you for that end. When you go to bed, examine your hearts, what you have done
that day in preparation for your last Day: And take that time as lost which
does nothing to this end.

THE fourth Direction. Use frequently to think of the Certainty, neerness and
dreadfulness of that day, to keep Life in your Affections and Endeavors; lest
by Inconsiderateness your souls grow stupid and negligent. Otherwise, because
it is out of sight, the heart will be apt to grow hardened and secure. And do
not think of it slightly as a common thing, but purposely set your selves to
think of it, that it may rouse you up to such Affections and Endeavors as in
some measure are answerable to the nature of the thing.

THE fifth Direction. Labor to have a lively feeling on thy heart, of the evil
and weight of that sin which thou art guilty of, and of the misery into which
it has brought thee, and would further bring thee if thou be not delivered,
and so to feel the need of a Deliverer. This must prepare thee to partake of
Christ now: and if thou partake not of him now* thou can not be saved by him
Then. It is these souls that now make light of their sin and misery, that must
then feel them so heavy, as to be pressed by them into the infernal flames. And
those that now feel little need of a Savior, they shall then have none to save
them, when they feel their need.

THE sixth Direction. Understand and Believe the sufficiency of that Ransom and
Satisfaction to Justice, which Christ has made for thy sins and for the world,
and how freely and universally it is offered in the Gospel. Thy sin is not
uncurable or unpardonable, nor thy misery remediless: God has provided a
remedy in his Son Christ, and brought it so near thy hands, that nothing but
thy neglecting, or willful refusing it, can deprive thee of the Benefit. Settle
thy soul in this belief.

THE seventh Direction. Understand and Believe that for all Christ's
satisfaction, there is an Absolute Necessity of sound Faith and Repentance to
be in thy own self, before thou can be a Member of him, or be Pardoned,
Adopted, or Justified by his blood. He dyed not for final Infidelity and
Impenitency as predominant in any soul. As the Law of his Father which
occasioned his suffering, required perfect Obedience, or suffering: So his own
Law, which he has made for the conveyance of his Benefits, does require yet
true Faith and Repentance of men themselves, before they shall be pardoned by
him; and sincere Obedience and Perseverance before they shall be glorified.

THE eighth Direction. Rest not therefore in an unrenewed, unsanctified state;
that is, till this Faith and Repentance be wrought on thy own soul, and thou be
truly broken off from thy former sinful course, and from all things in this
world: and art Dedicated, Devoted, and Resigned unto God. Seeing this change
must be made, and these graces must be had, or thou must certainly perish: in
the fear of God, see that thou give no ease to thy mind till thou art thus
changed. Be content with nothing till this be done. Delay not another day. How
can thou live merrily, or sleep quietly in such a Condition, as if thou
should dye in it, thou should perish for ever? Especially when thou art
every hour uncertain whether thou shall see another hour, and not be presently
snatch away by death? Me thinks while thou a^t in so sad a case, which way ever
thou art going, or what ever thou art doing, it should still come into thy
thoughts, Oh what if I should Dye, before I be Regenerate, and have part in
Christ!

THE ninth Direction. Let it be the daily care of thy soul, to mortify thy
fleshly desires, and overcome this world; and live as in a continual Conflict
with Satan, which will not be ended till thy life do end. If any thing destroy
thee by drawing away thy heart from God, it will be thy carnal self, thy
fleshly desires, and the allurements of this world, which is the matter that
they fed upon. This therefore must be the earnest work of thy life, to subdue
this flesh and set light by this world, and resist the Devil, that by these
would destroy thee. It is the common case of miserable hypocrites, that at
first they list them selves under Christ as for a fight, but they presently
forget their state and work; and when they are once in their own conceit
Regenerate, they think themselves so safe, that there is no further danger; and
thereupon do lay down their Arms, and take that which they miscall their
Christian Liberty, and indulge and please that flesh, which they promised to
mortify, and close with the world which they promised to contemn, and so give
up themselves to the Devil whom they promised to fight against. If once you
apprehend that all your Religion lies in mere Believing that all shall go well
with you, and that the bitterness of death is past, and in a forbearance of
some disgraceful sins, and being much in the Exercise of your Gifts, and in
external ways of Duty, and giving God a Cheap and plausible obedience in those
things only which the Flesh can spare; you are then fallen into that deceitful
hypocrisy, which will as surely condemn you, as open prophanness, if you get
not out of it. You must live as in a fight, or you cannot overcome. You must
live loose from all things in this world, if you will be ready for another. You
must not live after the flesh, but mortify it by the Spirit, if you would not
dye but live for ever. Romans 8.13. These things are not indifferent, but of flat
necessity.

THE tenth Direction. Do all your works as men that must be judged for them. It
is not enough (at least in point of Duty and Comfort) that you Judge this
preparation in General to be the main business of your lives, but you should
also order your particular Actions by these Thoughts, and measure them by their
Respects to this approaching day. Before you venture on them, enquire whether
they will bear weight in Judgment, and be sweet or bitter when they are
brought to trial? Both for matter and manner, this must be observed. Oh that
you would Remember this when Temptations are upon you. When you are Tempted to
give up your minds to the world, and drown your selves in earthly cares, will
you bethink you soberly whether you would hear of this at Judgment? and
whether the world will be then as sweet as now? and whether this be the best
preparation for your Trial? When you are Tempted to be Drunk or to spend your
precious time in Alehouses, or vain unprofitable company, or at Cards or Dice,
or any sinful or needless sports; bethink you then, Whether this will be
comfortable at the Reckoning? and whether time be no more worth to one that is
so near eternity, and must make so strict an account of his Hours? and whether
there be not many better works before you, in which you might spend your time
to your greater advantage, and to your greater comfort when it comes to a
Review? When you are tempted to wantonness, fornication, or any other fleshly
intemperance, bethink you soberly, with what face these Actions will appear at
Judgment, and whether they will be then pleasant or displeasant to you^? So
when you are tempted to neglect the daily worshipping of God in your families,
and the Catechizing and Teaching of your children or servants, especially on
the Lords Day, bethink your selves then, what account you will give of this to
Christ? when he that entrusted you with the care of your children and servants,
shall call you to a reckoning for the performance of that trust?

The like must be Remembered in the very manner of our Duties; How diligently
should a Minister study? how earnestly should he persuade? how unwearyedly
should he bear all oppositions and ungrateful returns? and how carefully should
he watch over each particular soul of his charge (as far as is possible) when
he Remembers that he must shortly be Accountable for all in Judgment? And how
importunate should we all be with sinners for their Conversion, when we
consider that themselves also must shortly be Judged? Can a man be cold and
dead in prayer, that has any true apprehension of that Judgment upon his
mind, where he must be accountable for all his prayers and performances? O
Remember, and seriously Remember, when you stand before the Minister to hear
the word, and when you are on your knees to God in prayer, in what a manner
that same person, even your selves must shortly stand at the Bar of the
dreadful God! Did these thoughts get thoroughly to men's hearts, they would waken
them out of their sleepy Devotions, and acquaint them that it is a serious
business to be a Christian. How careful should we be of our thoughts and words*
if we believingly remembered that we must be accountable for them all! How
carefully should we consider what we do with our Riches, and with all that God
gives us, and how much more largely should we expend it for his service, in
works of Piety and Charity, if we believingly remembered that we must be Judged
according to what we have done, and give account of every Talent that we
receive? Certainly the believing consideration of Judgment, might make us all
better Christians then we are, and keep our lives in a more innocent and
profitable frame.

THE eleventh Direction. As you will certainly renew your failings in this
life, so be sure that you daily renew your Repentance, and fly daily to Christ
for a renewed pardon, that no sin may leave its sting in your souls. It is not
your first pardon that will serve the turn for your latter sins. Not that you
must Purpose to sin, and Purpose to repent when you have done as a Remedy: for
that is an hypocritical and wicked purpose of repenting, which is made a means
to maintain us in our sins: But sin must be avoided as far as we can; and
Repentance and Faith in the blood of Christ must remedy that which we could not
avoid. The righteousness of pardon in Christs*blood, is useful to us only so
far as we are sinners; and comes in where our Imperfect Inherent Righteousness
does come short; but must not be purposely chosen before innocence: I mean, we
must rather choose as far as we can, to obey and be innocent, than to sin and
be pardoned, if we were sure of pardon.

THE twelfth Direction. In this vigilant, obedient, penitent course, with
confidence upon God as a Father, Rest upon the Promise of Acceptance and
Remission through the Merits and Intercession of him that Redeemed you: Look up
in hope to the Glory that is before you, and believe that God will make good
his Word, and the patient expectation of the righteous shall not be in vain:
Cheerfully hold on in the work that you have begun: and as you serve a better
master than you did before your change, so serve him with more willingness,
gladness and delight. Do not entertain hard Thoughts of him or of his service,
but rejoice in your unspeakable happiness of being admitted into his family and
favor through Christ. Do not serve him in drooping dejection and
discouragement, but with Love, and Joy, and filial fear. Keep in the Communion
of his Saints, where he is cheerfully and faithfully praised and honored, and
where is the greatest visible similitude of heaven upon earth; especially in
the celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, where he seals up a Renewed
pardon in his blood, and where unanimously we keep the Remembrance of his Death
until he come. Do not cast your selves out of the Communion of the Saints, from
whom to be cast out by just Censure and Exclusion, is a dreadful emblem and
forerunner of the Judgment to come, where the ungodly shall be cast of the
presence of Christ and his Saints for ever.

I have now finished the Directions, which I tender to you for your preparation
for the Day of the Lord: and withal my whole Discourse on this weighty point.
What effect all this shall have upon your hearts, the Lord knows; it is not in
my power to determine If you are so far blinded and hardened by sin and Satan,
as to make light of all this, or coldly to commend the Doctrine, while you go
on to the end in your carnal worldly condition as before; I can say no more,
but tell thee again, that Judgment is ne^r, when thou will bitterly bewail all
this too late. And among all the rest of the Evidence that comes in against
thee, this Book will be one, which shall testify to thy face before Angels and
men, that thou wast told of that Day, and entreated to prepare.

But if the Lord shall show thee so much mercy as to open thy eyes, and break
in upon thy heart, and by sober Consideration turn it to himself, and cause
thee faithfully to take the warning that has here been given thee, and to obey
these Directions, I dare assure thee from the word of the Lord, that this
Judgment which will be so dreadful to the ungodly, and the beginning of their
endless terror and misery, will be as joyful to thee, and the beginning of thy
glory. The Savior that thou have believed in and sincerly obeyed, will not
condemn thee. Psalm. 1.5, 6. Romans 8.1. John 3.16. It is part of his business to
Justify thee before the world, and to glorify his merits, his Kingly power,
his holiness, and his rewarding Justice in thy Absolution and Salvation. He
will account it a righteous thing to recompense Tribulation to thy Troublers,
and Rest to thy self; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with
his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power; Even then shall he come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe, in that day; Even because his servants
Testimony, and his Spirits among them was believed, 2 These. 1.6, 7* 8, 9, 10.
That day will be the great marriage of the Lamb, and the Reception of thee and
all the Saints into the glory of thy beloved, to which they had a Right at
their first Consent and Contract upon earth: And when the Bridegroom comes,
thou who art Ready shall go in to the Marriage: when the door shall be shut
against the sleepy negligent world; and though they Cry, Lord, Lord, open to
us, they shall be repulsed with a Verily I know you not, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12,
13. For this day which others fear, may thou long, and hope, and pray, and
wait, and comfort thy self in all troubles with the remembrance of it. 1 Cor.
15.55, 56, 57, 58. 1 These. 4.17, 18. If thou were ready to be offered to death
for Christ, or when the time of thy departing is at hand, thou mais^ look back
on the good fight which thou ha^t fought, and on the course which thou have
finished, and on the Faith which thou have kept, and mai^t confidently conclude
that henceforth there is laid up for thee a Crown of Righteousness, which The
Lord the Righteous Judge shall give thee at that day: and not to thee only, but
unto all them also that Love his Appearing. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. Even so, Come
Lord Jesus. Rev. 22.20.

FINIS.

