THE TRUE AND ONLY WAY OF CONCORD Of all the Christian Churches: The
desirableness of it, and the detection of false dividing Terms.

Opened by RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock at the Three Bibles in Popes-head-alley, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1680.

Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden than these necessary things.

Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: for he that in these things serves Christ
is acceptable to God and approved of men.

2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, Preach the
word, be instant in season and out of season.

Act. 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken to you more
than unto God, judge ye.

1 These. 2. 15, 16. They please not God and are contrary to all men, forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved; to fill up their sin
always: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

Mr. Jones of the (...) Sovereign, p. 344. Id fit quod jure fit: (...) but
great Lords of Nullities, by the exemption of the Will and soul from, and the
frown of Heaven upon all brutish injustice and force.

Read him also p. 23.

THE PREFACE; To the Honorable and Reverend Dr. George Morley, late Lord
Bishop of Worcester, and now of Winchester: and Dr. Peter Gunning, Lord Bishop
of Ely.
IT is now about eighteen years since you and many others were appointed by his
Majesty's commission with diverse of us who desired some Reformation of the
Church Discipline and worship, to consider what Alterations of the Liturgy were
necessary and expedient for the satisfaction of tender consciences, and the
restoring and continuance of peace and Unity to the Churches under his
Majesty's protection and government. His Majesty's Gracious Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, had before showed so much of his Wisdom and care to
attain this Unity, as we thought had almost done the cure; the differences
about Church Government and most of the rest being thereby as we hoped fairly
ended: As (with the help of the Reverend Dr. Sparrow now Bishop of Norwich, and
Dr. Pierson now Bishop of Chester) you maintained that no Alteration was
necessary to these ends, so I with others endeavored to prove the contrary:
But since, the said Declaration being dead, such Alterations were made as
greatly increased our Impossibility of Conforming: we never treated with you
for Presbyterian Government, or Independent, but for Unity and peace; Nor did
we herein offer you any worse than Archbishop Vshers Form of the Primitive
Episcopal Government, (which I had declared my judgment of before in print);
And I never heard of the name of Episcopal Presbyterians, or Presbyterian
Archbishops till of late. And we thankfully accepted much less than that Form,
as granted in his Majesty's foresaid Declaration. As I doubt not but you still
think that your way was best for the healing of the Church and Land; so I know
that I have greatly incurred both your displeasures for what I have said and
done against your way. One of you showed it in a Printed Letter long ago, which
when I had answered I cast that aside for Peace, (believing that the opening of
so many mistakes in matter of fact, would not be easily born:) The other of you
since told me, that he would Petition authority that we might be compelled to
give our Reasons; as if we kept up a Schism and would not tell why! I rejoiced
at the motion, and offered to beg leave on my knees to do it. Since then your
Mr. Walton in his Life of Bishop Sanderson has called me by name to remember
our debate aforesaid. I know not of any two men living, that I am now more
obliged to give an account to of my continued dissent, than unto you. My
judgment is not in my own power nor in yours. Many are dead who were in that
consultation: You and I by Gods great mercy are yet alive, and may review our
actions before we come to the Bar of God, which is like to be speedily to me,
and to you it cannot be far off, especially to the elder of you; so that I
suppose that all three of us are really beyond the motives of any personal
worldly interest: what is this world to us who are taking our farewell of it for
ever? All the doubt then remaining is, whether your terms or those desired by
us, are the true way of Love and Concord? and which are the true causes of
Schisms, and the attendant evils.

I doubt not but you still think that the good which you have done does far
weigh down all the direct and accidental hurt. What that Good is, you know
better than I: Dr. Heylin in the Life of Archbishop Laud tells us what some
accounted then most desirable; And how much more desirable it is to open the
Church doors so wide as that moderate Loyal Romanists may come in, as they did
in Queen Elizabeth's first years, and to reconcile them by nearer approaches or
concessions, rather than to go further from them to unite with a few
inconsiderable Puritans, whose principles are against the Power and Wealth of
the Church, we have often heard from others: As also that the ejection of the
near two thousand nonconforming Ministers, was the Churches deliverance from
them that would have done more hurt within, than they can do without. The
converted Priest Mr. Smith, in his Narrative of the Popish Plot, dedicated to
the King, names more reasons, which I will not name, which some were moved by.

For my part, as with fear I foresaw, so with grief I see, so many hundred
Ministers under the restraints and penalties which you know of, of whom I have
better thoughts than you have: believing from my heart, by the acquaintance
which I have had with very many, that notwithstanding the faulty former actions
of some few of them, and the unjustifiable scruples of others, you cannot name
that Nation under heaven out of our Kings Dominions, which has this day so
many Ministers, more sound in doctrine, heart and life, and liker to further
men's salvation, than those that in England have been silenced and cast out.
Name that country if you can! And I believe that Christ has given us no
supernumeraries of such useful men; but if all faithful Ministers Conformists
and Non-conformists were employed and encouraged, they would be still too few
to do the work upon the ignorant, ungodly and vicious which is to be done. And
considering how many souls a faithful Minister may hope to edify and save, I
consider then how many thousands are like to be losers where such are lost and
wanting. It grieveth my soul to see what advantage Satan has got in England,
against that Christian Love which is the life and character of Christ's
disciples, and to cause wrath, envy, hatred and strife, when God says, He that
hates his brother is a murderer, and no murderer has eternal life in him, 1 John 3. 15. It grieveth me to see preachers against preachers, and Churches
against Churches, and in Press and Pulpit, Learning and Oratory employed to
render brethren odious, and keep up a heart war against each other, and all
this (O fearful) as in the name of Christ, and as for the safety of the Church
and Kingdom. To see families against families, and father against son, and as
Guelphes and Gibelines Cities and Countries in their ordinary discourses (at
the least) accusing, contemning, and reproaching one another! It grieveth me to
think how much first the honor, and then the success of the Ministry on both
sides is hereby hindered, and what temptations some have to further injuries
which I am loath to name: And how by all this the wicked and Infidels are
hardened, the weak are scandalized, the Papists are encouraged to despise us
all, and many turn to them, scandalized by our discord, sects are advantaged,
the Church and Kingdom by divisions weakened, and the King denied the comfort
which he might have in a loving, united and concordant people.

I believe that you dislike all this as well as I: All the question has been
and still is, which is the true way of Cure. And one would think that 1. the
nature of the thing, and 2. the experience of all the Christian world, 3. and
our own new experience these seventeen or eighteen years, might resolve men of
lower parts than ours! Is there no better way to the Churches concord, than
that which must cast out either such men as you or I, and that so many? Can a
wise Physicion (a true Peacemaker) find out no remedy which may better avoid
the foresaid evils? O what a loss had England in the removal of such healing
men, as Bishop Usher, Hall, Davenant, Brownrig, etc. Far was I and am I from
liking any former injury to such men, by Covenant or abuse. But it has been
ever the just misery of the persecutors of worthy men, to have the stone fly
back on their own heads, and to be themselves undone by striving to undo
others, while they first make, and then stir up a multitude of enemies for
their own defense, who else would be friends and live in peace.

I am fully persuaded that in this book I have told you a righter way of
Christian Church concord; more divine, sure, harmless, and comprehensive,
fitted by Christ himself, to the interest of all good men, yea of the Church
and all the world. I offer it first to you, that you and posterity may see what
it was that I desired; and that if I here err you will faithfully detect my
error, that I may repent before I die, and may leave behind me the recantation
of this and all my other mistakes and miscarriages, as I intend to do upon just
conviction. But do it quickly or else I am not like to see it: And I purpose
not to provoke you by any confutation, but to improve your evidence for my self.

And to answer the earnest demand of our Reasons by you the Lord Bishop of Eli,
I have also published an Historical Narrative of our case and judgment in
another Book called, The Non-conformists Plea for Peace.

If (much contrary to my expectation) you should be convinced that These Terms
of Unity and Concord, are righter than those which you (above all men that I
know) have effectually helped to bring us under, I humbly crave that you will
use as much earnestness and diligence to procure the Churches concord by
promoting them, as you did for that which you then thought righter. I have here
opened those reasons which made me believe that the fourteenth and fifteenth
Chapter to the Romans decideth our controversy; and is to be understood as I
then maintained.

If it prove the necessary Truth which is here offered you, I beseech you see
that prejudice resist it not. It would be a happy work could we procure the
reviving of Christian Love, Unity and Concord, that all Christ's servants might
strive together for the hallowing of Gods name, the promoting of his Kingdom
and the doing of his will with Love and Concord as it is done in Heaven. And
when instead of worldly wealth and grandeur we are contented with our daily
bread, and instead of cruelty to the innocent or weak, we bewail our own sins,
and forbear and forgive one another, and instead of tempting men to the evil of
wrath, and making battering Cannons and tearing engines of Schism, we cease to
be over-wise in our own conceits, and to judge, despise and ruin others, then
we shall be in a hopeful way to this: we shall then receive him that is weak
even in the faith, (much more about our lesser matters) even as Christ received
us, and not to doubtful disputations; and he that pleases God by that in which
his Kingdom does consist, will be also approved by us; and we shall better
learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, and that none of
our Church power is given for destruction but for edification; and so we shall
not condemn the guiltless, nor smite the Shepherds and scatter the flocks, and
then hunt them about as Schismatics, and see the mote of dissent from a
formality, ceremony or word, in their eye, while we see not this great beam in
our own. How joyfully should we die, might we leave behind us by our endeavors
a healed Church and Nation, and see first this desired unity, which would be
the strength, ease and joy of Ministers and people, King and Subjects, and a
hopeful pattern to the divided Churches abroad to imitate. If you will not
contribute your help hereto, those will who shall have the honor and comfort
of being the blessed instruments of our concord, if God have so much mercy for
us.

I once more repeat to you the pacificators old despised words, Si in
Necessariis sit Vnitas; in non-necessariis Libertas,
In utrisque Charitas, optimo certe loco essent res nostrae.


Pardon this freedom, and accept this Account of the reasons of all his former
and later dissent from your judgment, words and way, to

Nov. 15. 1679. Your unfeigned well-willer, RICHARD BAXTER.

A Premonition.
Reader,
UPon the review of this book I find some things, which may be to some an
occasion of offense, if this premonition prevent it not.

I. Some may think when I say [Diocesan Prelacy, Archbishops and Patriarchs
are not to be made necessary to Universal, or subordinate Church Concord, as
being incapable terms or means thereof] that I speak against the Lawfulness of
all Episcopacy, when I speak but against such necessity of that sort. Know
therefore 1. that I meddle not with the question, Whether every particular
Church (of Pastor, and people associate for personal Church Communion, such as
Ignatius describes) should have a Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons.

2. Nor with the question whether these should have Archbishops over them, as
successors to the Apostolical and other general Overseers of the first age, in
the ordinary continued parts of their office.

3. Nor whether Patriarchs, Diocesans and Lay Chancellours as officers of the
King, exercising under him such Government of the Church as belongs to Kings
(according to our Oath of Supremacy) be lawful, to which in such exercise all
subjects must for Conscience sake submit.

4. Nor whether it was well done (or of Divine appointment) that about temporal
matters as well as Church Controversies, the Bishops were chosen arbitrators by
the ancient Christians, and so did that which Christian Magistrates now must
do, till upon the conversion of Princes and States the said Power of externals
circa sacra fell into their hands.

5. Nor yet if Diocesans become the sole Bishops ( infimi ordinis) over many
hundred Parishes, all the Bishops and Parish Churches under them being put
down, and turned into Curates and Chapels ( parts ecclesiae infimae speciei),
whether a Minister and every Subject ought yet to live quietly and peaceably
under them. It is none of these that are the questions which I decide.

II. In my confutation of Mr. Dodwell, some may mistake me, as if I denied that
our Religion had come down to us by a continued succession from the Apostles,
or that the ministerial office in specie, or that the Universal Church had ever
been without a true Ministry or Religion: I have proved where our Church was in
all ages before Luther, in my second book against Johnson alias Terret: Nor do
I say what I do, to avoid deriving our Ministerial succession from Rome: For
History puts me out of doubt, that the multitude of incapable Popes and Schisms
will prove a far greater interruption of Canonical and Legitimate succession at
Rome, than can be proved of England, and perhaps than has happened to almost
any other Church in the world. And I am fully satisfied that the present Church
of England as National, deriveth its succession from the ancient British and
Scottish Church, and not from Rome; and that Christianity was the Religion of
England long before Gregory, or Augustine the Monks days; and that
notwithstanding Gildas his smart reproofs, when the British and Scottish
Clergy and people disclaimed all obedience to the Pope, and would not so much
as eat or lodge in the same house with Gregory's Clergy, the persons were
better, or at least their doctrine and Religion more sound, than that which
Rome did afterward obtrude. And as the blood of this nation though called
English, will upon just consideration be found to be twenty, if not an hundred
fold, more British than either Roman, Saxon or Norman, so the Ordination of the
Bishops is derived so much more from the Britains and Scots than from Rome, as
that Augustine the Monks successors were afterward almost quite extinct, only
one Wini a Simonist being left in anno 668. the rest of the Bishops being all
of British ordination: All which with much more of great importance is so
fully proved (after Usher) by M. T. Jones of Oswestree late Chaplain to the
Duke of York, in an excellent Historical Treatise hereof, called [ Of the Heart
and its right Soveraign] that I am sorry that book is no more commonly bought
and read.

But withal I must say that this our certain succession disproveth the Papists
and Mr. Dodwells plea, for the necessity of their sort of Episcopal Canonical
uninterrupted succession: For (as the Bishops of Denmark have their succession
but from Bugenhagius Pomeranus a Presbyter his ordination, so) Aidan and Finan
that came from Scotland out of Columbanus Monastery, were no Bishops as Beda
and others fully testify: And after Beda and others, Mr. Jones has cleared
it, that it was not only the Northern Bishops that were ordained by Aidan and
Finan and Dhuma, but that the Bishops of the whole land had their ordination
derived from them and such as they, and those whom they ordained: so that the
denying of the Validity of the Ordination by Presbyters, shakes the succession
of the Episcopal Church of England; and proves it on that supposition,
interrupted: And if they derive it from Rome, it will be as much shaken.

III. In perusal I find that I have more than once mentioned some things in
this treatise, and the repetition may be an offense to some. To which I say, 1.
That this is usual in controversies, where several objections and occasions
call for the same material answer. 2. But I confess it is the effect of my have
and weakness: And it is my judgment while I think that I write no needless
books, that I should rather write any one that is truly useful with such
imperfections of manner and style as only so far disgrace the author, than for
want of time, to leave it undone, to the loss of others: But if it be needless,
it is a greater fault to write it, than to write it no more accurately.

My dear friend, and judicious brother Mr. John Corbett has newly published a
small book to the same purpose with this, of the true state of Religion and
Interest of the Church, with a discourse of Schism, which I commend to the
Reader as much worthy of his perusal, and which if written on the hearts of
Rulers, and Teachers and people according to its certain truth and weight,
would heal us all. The Lord forgive our heinous sins which deserve that he
should excommunicate and forsake us; and save England from English men, and
save us all from our selves, our most dangerous enemies, and Christians and
Pastors and friends from one another. For as Mr. Jones his Welsh Proverb says,
Though thy dog be thy own, trust him not when he is mad.

IV. I hear some say of my book that comes out with this (of the case of the
Non-conformists) and may say of this, that 1. It is unseasonable to mention our
own differences when we are called to unite against the Papists: 2. And that
too hard-accusations of conformity are intimated.

I answer to the first, 1. That it is never more seasonable to write for Unity
than when we are most obliged to unite: Though indeed it can never be
unseasonable. And to take Non-conformists for heinous Schismatics and call on
Magistrates to silence and imprison and ruin them, is not the way to unity;
nor consisteut with it; and therefore to deprecate such unpeaceable ways, is
the necessary work of a Peacemaker. 2. I have waited in vain these seventeen
years for a fit season; And with me in likelihood it must be Now or Never: for
there is no doing it in the grave; and I dare not die, and leave it undone on
pretense that it was not seasonable.

To the second I say 1. I have professed that I write not to accuse
Conformists; but if men accuse us as enemies to order, obedience and peace, and
as fit for silencing and utter ruin, and tell the world falsely that it is but
Things Indifferent that we deny obedience to, and call on us to tell them what
it is that we fear if we conform; and when we tell them, they make this also
our crime because they think themselves accused, what remedy have we against
such men? 2. I love and honor all good and pious men that Conform; For I
consider how variously the same thing is represented to and apprehended by men
of various educations, converse, and advantages; so that the same sin
materially heinous may formally be much less in some than in others; As was
Paul's ignorant unbelief and persecution: Or else, says the Papist Answerer of
the three books for the Jesuits Loyalty, Most Princes must be most heinous
sinners that make wars against each other, in which multitudes are killed, when
both sides cannot have a just cause, unless the supposition that their cause
was good by mistake, excuse them.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Part. THe Reasons for Christian Unity and Concord, after the nature
of it described: and how much may be hoped for on earth.
Chap. 1. The Text opened: The Doctrines named: The method proposed. page 1
Chap. 2. The Nature of Unity: and this Unity of the Spirit opened. p. 10. Chap.
3. The necessity and benefits of this Unity and Peace to all men. p. 30. Chap.
4. The Unity of the Spirit is the welfare of the Church. p. 45. Chap. 5. This
Unity is for the good of the World (without the Church). p. 67. Chap. 6. It is
due to the honor of Christ and amiable to God. p. 71. Chap. 7. What
obligations are on all Christians to avoid sinful divisions and discord, and to
promote this unity and peace. p. 75. Chap. 8. What sort and measure of Union
may or may not be hoped for on earth. p. 79. Chap. 9. That Christ who commanded
our Union has himself prescribed the terms. p. 98. Chap. 10. No humane terms
not made by Christ or his Spirit extraordinarily given to the Apostles are
necessary to the Being of particular Churches, but diverse humane Acts are
necessary to their existence. p. 100. Chap. 11. The danger of the two extremes:
And first of despairing of Concord, and unjust tolerations. p. 114. Chap. 12.
The sin and danger of making too much necessary to Union and Communion. p. 119.
Chap. 13. To cry out of the mischiefs of Toleration and call for sharper
execution, while dividing snares are made the terms of Union is the work of
ignorant, proud and malignant Church destroyers. p. 125.
The Second Part. THe Terms of Concord.
Chap. 1. In General, what are the true and only terms of Church Concord, and
what not. p. 135. Chap. 2. Instances of Gods description of these terms in
Scripture. p. 143. Chap. 3. The true terms of Catholic Union and Concord more
particularly described, as the chief means of hope for the Churches peace. p.
162. Chap. 4. What are the terms necessary for the continuance of this
Communion; and what are the causes of abscission and excommunication. p. 177.
Chap. 5. What are the terms necessary to the office and exercise of the Sacred
Ministry. p. 200. Chap. 6. What is necessary to the Constitution,
administration and Communion of single Churches. p. 228. Chap. 7. What are the
necessary terms of Concord of those single Churches with one another, in the
same Kingdom, or in diverse. p. 243. Chap. 8. What is necessary to the Civil
peace and Concord of Christians, and what is the part of the Christian
Magistrate about Religion, as to his promoting or tolerating men's doctrines or
practices therein. p. 248. Chap. 9. Objections answered about Toleration
especially. p. 267. Chap. 10. A draught or Specimen of such Forms as are
mentioned for Approved and Tolerated Ministers. p. 279.
The Third Part. Of Schism.
ESpecially the false dividing Terms of Union, and other Causes of Schism.
Chap. 1. What SCHISM is: and what are its Causes and effects. p. 1. Chap. 2.
The true Preventions and Remedies of Schism. p. 16. Chap. 3. More of the same:
Twenty things necessary hereunto. p. 26. Chap. 4. The Catholic Church will
never unite in the Papacy. p. 29. 1. What the Papists opinion is of the Terms
of Union. 2. The fifth Monarchy opinion of Campanella de Regno Dei, and some
other Papists, That it is really an Universal Kingdom which is claimed by the
Pope. 3. The Christian world will never unite in one Pope. Chap. 5. The
Catholic Church will never unite in Patriarchs or any humane Church officers
or forms of Government. p. 41. Chap. 6. The Catholic Church will never unite
in General Councils, as their Head, or necessary center or terms of Concord. p.
52. Chap. 7. The Catholic Church will never unite in a Multitude of pretended
articles of faith not proved certainly to be Divine, nor in subscribing to or
owning any unnecessary doubtful opinions or practices. p. 60. Chap. 8. The
Catholic Church will never unite by receiving all that is now owned by the
Greek or Latin Church, the Abassine, Armenian, the Lutherans, or Calvinists,
or in a full Conformity to any divided party which adds to the primitive
simplicity in her terms of Concord. p. 68. Chap. 9. The pretended necessity of
an uninterrupted successive ordination by Diocesan Bishops will never unite the
Churches (but is Schismatical) Mr. Dodwells book hereof confuted. p. 73. Chap.
10. None of these terms will unite a National Church, associated Churches, nor
well any single Church: Though by other means a competent Union may be kept in
some Churches, notwithstanding some such Schismatical inventions, as lesser
diseases destroy not nature. p. 104. Chap. 11. The severity and force of
Magistrates denying necessary Toleration, and punishing dissenters from
uncertain unnecessary things, will never procure Church Union and Concord, but
division. p. 107. Chap. 12. Excommunicating and Anathematizing in such cases
will not do it. p. 112. Chap. 13. Any one unlawful uncertain doctrine, oath,
Covenant, profession, subscription or practice so imposed, will divide. p. 116.
Chap. 14. Unlimited Toleration will divide and wrong the Church. p. 118. Chap.
15. The Catholic Church will never unite in a reception and subscription to
every word, verse or book of the holy Scripture as in our Translations, or any
particular Copy, nor otherwise known, but some will still doubt of the Divine
authority of some parts. p. 134. Chap. 16. The Church will never unite in any
men's Commentaries on the Bible. p. 137. Chap. 17. A summary recital of the true
terms of Concord, and of the Causes of Schism. p. 139.
-- Id quod natura remittit
Invida jura negant.
Ovid. ERRATA.
In the First and Second Parts.
Page 17. line 19. for more read as, p. 19. for affects r. asserteth, p. 26.
l. 11. dele with, p. 45. l. 17. for in r. is, p. 58. l. 13. r. above, p. 96. l.
7. r. to their, p. 130. l. 2. r. Placeus, p. 225. l. 2. r. condemn.

In the Third Part.
Page 4. line 25. read sin, p. 5. l. 11. r. Ariminum, Sirmium, l. 26. for faith
r. force, p. 8. l. penult. for me r. men, p. 11. l. 10. for mutual r. mental,
p. 24. l. antip. r. Wotton, p. 38. l. 25. r. Councils, p. 44. l. 14. r.
Saravia, Spalatto, l. 17. r. Didoclave, p. 5. l. 2. r. Pope, p. 55. l. 7. r.
Persidis, p. 59. l. 8. for the r. de, p. 64. l. 2. for no r. not, p. 119. l.
30. r. Rulers, p. 132. l. 12. for that r. the, p. 143. l. 9. for it r. is.

The First Part.
The Reasons for Christian Unity and Concord: What it is: And how much may be
hoped for on Earth.
CHAP. I.
The Text opened, and the Doctrines and Method proposed.

EPHESIANS. 4. 3. (...).

Endeavoring (or carefully or diligently studying) to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace.


HAD not the distempers of the minds even of Religious persons, and the long
and sad divisions and distractions of Christians assured me that this Text is
not commonly understood and regarded, as the Apostles vehement Exhortation, and
the importance and reason of the matter do bespeak; yea had not the long
bleeding wounds of the Church, made by its Pastors and most zealous members,
still cried out aloud for pity and help, I had not chosen this subject at this
time. But after the complaints, and exhortations and tears of the wisest and
best men since the days of Christ, after the long miseries of the Church and
the long and costly experience of all ages, the destroying Spirit of division
still possesses the most, and makes some of the possessed to rage and foam
and tear themselves and all that are in their power; it haunteth the holy
assemblies and disquieteth the lovers of unity and peace, and by the scandals
which it raises it frighteneth children and unstable persons out of their
religion and their wits. And therefore after the many books which I have
written for Unity, Love and Peace, and the many years preaching and praying to
that end, I find it yet as necessary as ever to Preach on the same Subject, and
to recite the same things, and while I am in this Tabernacle which I must
shortly put off, to stir you up, that after my decease you may have it in
remembrance (2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14.) And could I persuade the Churches of Christ
to seek by fasting and fervent prayer, the dispossessing of this distracting
Spirit, (by which only this evil kind goes out) our languishing hopes might
yet revive.

If Paul found it necessary to cry down division, and plead for Unity so
frequently and so vehemently as he does, to those new planted Churches of Rome,
Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, Philippi, Thessalonica, etc. which had been founded
by the means of miracles, and had so much of the spirit of Unity and Community,
and had Apostles among them to preserve their peace: what wonder if we that are
much ignorant of the Apostles minds, and of the Primitive pattern, and have
less of the Spirit, have need to be still called upon to study to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace? They that preach Twenty or an hundred
Sermons for Purity, and scarce one with equal Zeal for Unity and Peace, do not
sufficiently discern that Purity and Peace are the inseparable fruits of the
wisdom from above, Jam. 3. 17.
which live and die together, and with them the souls and societies of
believers.

This famous Church of Ephesus is it which Paul Act. 20. had so long laid out
his labors in; even publicly and from house to house, night and day with
tears: which was famous for its greatness, Act. 20. 28, 29, 30, etc.
and the open profession of Christ; Act. 19. 19.
where even the price of the vain unlawful books which they openly burnt came
to fifty thousand pieces of silver. See Beza's Conjecture of the sum, in loc.
This is the Church that first of the seven is written to by Christ, Rev. 2.
Whose works, labor and patience, even without fainting, were known and praised
by the Lord Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
; which proved and disproved the false Apostles; which hated the deeds of the
Nicolaitans: And yet Paul saw cause, Act. 20. 30. to foretell them
prophetically of their temptations to division; that they should be tried by
both extremes as other Churches were and are; that on one side grievous Wolves
or Church tyrants should enter not sparing the st^ck, and on the other side, of
themselves should men arise speaking perverse things to draw away disciples (by
Schism and separation) after them. And to this excellent Church he sees cause
here to urge the Persuasives to the vigilant* preservation of Unity, in this
Chapter.

Having in the three first Chapters instructed them in the high mysteries of
Election, Redemption and the fruits thereof, and magnified the riches of Grace
in Christ, and the spiritual knowledge thereof, that we may know what Use he
principally intended, he here begins his application, 1. With a moving
reason from his Person and Condition, v. 1. [ I the Prisoner of the Lord] As if
he should say [ As ever you will regard the doctrine and counsel of your
Teacher, and Christ's Apostle, now I am in bonds for the doctrine which I
preach] 2. With words of earnest request [ I beseech you] 3. With the matter of
his request, 1. In general, that [ they walk worthy the calling wherewith they
were called] Beza need not have avoided the vulgar and proper translation of
(...), and put quod convenit for worthy; for worthiness can signify nothing
but moral congruity. 2. Specially this worthiness consists in the holy and
healthful constitution of their souls and the exercise thereof: In their inward
disposition, and their answerable practice.

1. The inward qualifications are 1. [ All lowliness] 2. [ Meekness] 3. [ Love.]

2. The fruits of these are, 1. Long-suffering: 2. Forbearing one another: 3.
And Studying to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace:] Which Unity
is particularly described in the Terms and reasons of it which are seven. 1.
One Body. 2. One Spirit. 3. One hope. 4. One Lord. 5. One faith. 6. One
Baptism. 7. One God and Father who is above all and through all and in them
all] But negatively, not in an equality of Grace in all the members; for that
is various according to the measure of the gift of Christ, the free Benefactor.

I must pass by all unnecessary explication, and the handling of the many
useful Lessons which offer themselves to us in the way: such as these following.

Doct. 1. It should not depreciate the counsels of Christ's Ministers, that they
are sent or written from a prison or bonds, but rather procure their greater
acceptance: when they are not imprisoned for evil doing, but for Preaching or
obeying the Gospel and Law of Christ, it is their honor, and the honor of
that doctrine which they suffer for: why else keep you days of thanksgiving and
Commemoration of the Martyrs? On the persecutors part Christ is evil spoken of
or blasphemed, but by the sufferers he is glorified, and therefore he will
glorify them. 1 Pet. 4.
I was once blamed for dating a book [out of the Common gaol or prison in
London] as if it reflected on the Magistrate: But I imitated Paul, and
mentioned nothing which the Rulers took for a dishonor, as their actions
showed.

Doct. 2. Beseeching is the mode and language of wise and faithful Pastors, in
pleading for Unity and against Schism in the Church. For they are not Lords
over the flocks, but helpers of their faith: They have no power of the sword,
but of the word. They rule not by constraint, but willingly, nor such as are
constrained by them, but Volunteers: It is not the way to win Love to God, to
Pastors or to one another, to say, Love me or I will lay thee in a gaol:
stripes are useful to cause fear and timorous obedience, but not directly to
cause Love. And hated Preachers seldom prosper in Converting or Edifying souls,
or healing disordered, divided Churches.

Doct. 3. Though Grace find us unworthy, it makes men such as walk worthy of
their high and heavenly calling: that is, in a suitable conversation,
answerable to the principles of their faith and hope. Christianity were little
better than the false Religions of the world, if it made men no better. If
Christ made not his disciples greatly to differ from the disciples of a mere
philosopher, he would not be ^hought greatly to differ from them himself: The
^ruits of his doctrine and spirit on our hearts and lives are the proofs and
witness of his truth: we wrong him heinously when we live but like other men:
And we weaken our own and other men's faith, by obscuring a great evidence of
the Christian Verity. And those that are of eminent holiness and righteousness
of life, are the great and powerful preachers of faith, and show men by proofs
and not only by words that Christ is true.

Doct. 4. Lowliness is a great part of Christian worthiness, and a necessary
cause of Christian Unity and peace. This (...) is but the same thing which Paul
elsewhere ( Act. 20. 19.) tells this same Church, that he practiced toward
them exemplarily himself. Lowliness of mind contains both low and humble
thoughts of our selves, and low expectations as to honor and respect from
others; with a submissive temper, that can stoop and yield, and a deportment
liker to the lower sort of people, than to the stout and great ones of the
world. As Mat. 5. to be poor in spirit is to have a spirit fit for a state of
poverty, not in Love with riches, but content with little, and patient with all
that poor men must endure; so Lowliness of mind, is a disposition and
deportment, not like the Grandees of the world, but suited to Low persons and
Low things, condescending to the lowest persons, employments and indignities or
contempt that shall be cast upon us, A proud high-minded person, that is
looking for preferment and must be somebody in the world, is of a spirit
contrary to that of Christianity, and will never lie even in the sacred
Edifice, nor be a healer, but a troubler of the Church of Christ, and must be
converted and become as a little child, before he can enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 18. 3. And indeed only by selfishness and pride have come the
divisions and contentions in the Church, even by those that have made it the
means of their domination to cry down division, because they must have all to
Unite in them, in Conformity to their opinions, Interests and wills. A humble
soul that can be content to follow a Crucified Christ, and to be made of no
reputation ( Phil. 2. 7. Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3.) and to be a servant to all, and a
Lord of none, and can yield and stoop and be despised, when ever the ends of
his office do require it, is a Christian indeed and fit to be a healer.

Doct. 5. Meekness or Lenity is another part of Christian worthiness, and a
necessary cause of Unity and Peace.

Though in some this has extraordinary advantage or disadvantage in the
temperature of the body, yet it is that which persons of all tempers may be
brought to by grace. A boisterous, furious or wild kind of disposition, is not
the Christian healing spirit. If passion be apt to stir, wisdom and grace must
repress it, and Lenity must be our ordinary temper: we must be like tame
creatures, that familiarly come to a man's hand, and not like wild things that
fly from us as untractable: otherwise how will such in Love and peace and
sociable concord, ever carry on the work of Christ?

Doct. 6. Love to each other is a great part of Christian worthiness, and a
most necessary cause of Unity and peace. Of which I hope to say so much by it
self (if God will) as that I shall here pass it by. It being the very Heart and
Life of Unity.

Doct. 7. Long suffering or a patient mind not rash, or hasty, is another part
of Christian worthiness, and a necessary Cause of Unity and peace.

(...) has more in it than many well consider of: I know it is commonly taken
for restraint of anger by patient long-suffering: But I think that it chiefly
signifies here and elsewhere in Paul's Epistles, that deliberate slowness and
calmness of mind which is contrary to passionate haste and rashness: When a
passionate man is hasty and rash and cannot stay to hear another speak for
himself nor to deliberate of the matter and search out the truth, nor forbear
revenge while he thinks whether it will do good or harm, or what the case
will appear in the review; this Longanimity will stay men and compose their
minds, and cause them to take time before they judge of opinions, practices or
persons, and before they venture to speak or do; lest what they do in haste,
they repent at leisure: It appeaseth those passions which blind the judgment
when wrath does precipitate men into those conceptions, words and deeds, which
they must after wish that they had never known. Hasty rashness in judging and
doing, for want of the patience and lenity of a slow deliberating mind, is the
cause of most errors, Heresies and divisions, and of abundance of sin and
misery in the world.

Doct. 8. Bearing, supporting and forbearing one another in Love, is another
part of Gospel worthiness, and needful means of Unity and peace.

Doubtless to forbear each other patiently under injuries and provocations is a
great part of the duty here meant; But both Beza who translated it [
sustinentes] and the Vulgar Latin which translateth it [ supportantes] seemed
to think that (...) signifies something more. While we are imperfect sinful
men, we shall have need of mutual support and help, yea we shall be injurious,
provoking and troublesome to each other: And when Christians (yea Church
Pastors) are so far from supporting and sustaining the weak, that they cannot
so much as patiently bear their censures, neglects, or other effects of
weakness, Unity and peace will hardly prosper, much less if their spiritual
Nurses become their chief afflicters.

Doct. 9. Unity of the spirit is most necessary to the Church of Christ and to
its several members, though their measures of Grace be diverse.

Doct. 10. The bond of Peace must preserve this Unity.

Doct. 11. This Unity consists in these seven things; 1. One body, 2. One
spirit, 3. One Hope, 4. One Lord, 5. One Faith, 6. One Baptism, 7. One God.

Doct. 12. This Unity must be studied carefully, and diligently endeavored and
preserved, by all the faithful members of the Church.

These last Doctrines being the subject which I design to handle, I shall speak
of them together in the following Order.

I. I shall tell you, What the Unity of the spirit is which is so necessary.

II. I shall tell you, What necessity there is of this Unity, and what are its
happy fruits.

III. I shall open the seven particulars in which it does consist; and defend
the sufficiency of them to the use here intended in the Text.

IV. I shall open the nature and terms of counterfeit Unity.

V. I shall open the Nature and mischiefs of the contrary (Division.)

VI. I shall show you what are the enemies and impediments of this Unity.

VII. I shall show you, What are the study and endeavor, and the bond of
peace, by which this Unity must be kept.

VIII. I shall conclude with some directions for Application, or Use of all.

CHAP. II.
The Nature of Unity, and this Unity of the spirit, opened.

1. WHat UNITY in General is, and what This Unity of the spirit in special, I
shall open in these following connexed propositions.

1. I must neither here confound the ordinary Reader by the many Metaphysical
difficulties about UNITY; nor yet wholly pass them by, lest I confound him for
want of necessary distinction.

2. UNITY is sometimes the attribute of an Universal, which is but Ens
rationis, or a General Inadequate partial conception of an existent singular
being: and so All men are ONE as to the species of Humanity; And all Living
things are One in the Genus of Vitality: And so of Bodies, Substances,
Creatures, etc. It is much more than this that we have before us.

2. Some think that the word [ONE] or [UNITY] signi^ieth only Negatively an
Vndividedness in the thing it self: But this conception is more than Negative,
and takes in first in Compounds that peculiar Connection of parts by one form,
and in simple spiritual beings, that more excellent indivisible essentiality
and existence, whence the Being is intelligible as such a subsistence as is not
only undivided in it self, but divisible or differenceable from all other
existent or possible beings, so far as it is one.

4. Passing by the distinction of Vnum per se and per accidens, and some such
other, I shall only further distinguish of Unity according to the differences
of the Entities that are called One: Where indeed the difference of Things,
makes the word ONE of very different significations.

5. GOD is Supereminently and most perfectly ONE, as he is ENS, BEING: No
Creature has Unity in the same perfect sort and sense as GOD is One. He is so
ONE as that he is perfectly simple and indivisible: and so as that he cannot be
properly a Part, in any composition.

6. Therefore GOD and the World, or any Creature are not compounding parts; for
a part is less than the whole: And that which is less is not Infinite.

7. Yet God is more Intimate to every creature than any of its own Parts are:
no form is more intimate to the matter, no soul to the body, no formal virtue
to a spirit, than God is to all and every being: But his Perfection and the
Creatures Imperfection is such, as that creatures can be no addition to God,
nor compounding parts, but like to Accidents.

8. The same must be said therefore of Christ's Divine and humane natures. The
Schoolmen therefore say that Christ's soul and body are Parts of his humane
nature: but his Godhead and manhood are not to be called Parts of Christ:
Because the Godhead can be no Part of any thing.

9. When Paul says that God is (...) All in All things, he means not that he
is formally all things themselves; But yet not that he is less, or is more
distant from them than the form; but is eminently so much more, as that the
title is below him: so he is said here, Ephesians. 4. 6. To be (...)] the Father of
all, above all, and through all, and in us all: And 1 Cor. 12. 16. it is said
that the same God works all in all, as to the diversity of operations: He is
the most intimate prime Agent in all that acts (though he has enabled free
Agents to determine their own acts morally to this or that, hic and nunc, etc.)
For in Him we live and move and have our Being; for we are his offspring, Act.
17.

10. Somewhat like this must be said of the special Union of Christ and all
true believers: As to his Divine Nature, (and so the Holy Ghost) he is as the
Father, Intimately in all, but more than the form of all or any: But he is
specially by Relation and Inoperation in his members, as he is not in any
others: So Col. 3. 11. Christ is said to be (...) All in All, that is to the
Church: And so I conceive that it is in a Passive or Receptive sense that the
Church is said to be the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23.
Whether it be spoken of Christ's Godhead only, or of his humane soul also, as
being to the Redeemed world what the Sun is to the Natural illuminated world, I
determine not: But which ever it is, Christ filling all in all, the Church is
called his fullness as being eminently ^possessed and filled by him, as the Head
is by the humane soul more than the hand or other lower parts.

11. The Trinity of Persons is such, as is no way contrary to the perfect Unity
of the Divine essence; As the faculties of Motion, Light and Heat in the Sun,
and of Vital Activity, Intellection and Volition in man, is not contrary to the
Unity of the essence of the soul: (yet man is not so perfectly One as God is.)

12. The Unity of a spirit in it self, is a great Image or Likeness of the
Divine Unity; As having no separable Parts, as passive matter has, but being
One without divisibility; even one Essential Virtue or Virtuous substance.

13. The most large extensive Unity (as far as spirits may be said to have
extension or Degrees of Essence) is likest to God: And the Unity of a material
atome is not more excellent than the Unity of the material part of the world,
made up of such Atoms. (Whether there are such Atoms physically indivisible I
here meddle not, but the shaping of an Atome into cornered, hollow and such
other shapes, is to common reason a palpable contradiction.)

14. Whether there be any one passive Element (Earth, Water or Air) any where
existent in an Union of its proper Atoms, without a mixture of any other
Element, is a thing unknown to mortals.

15. So is it whether there be any where existent a body of the united Atoms
of the several passive Elements without the active.

16. The mixed Beings known to us do all consist of an union of the passive and
active Elements (or of these united.)

17. We perceive by sense what Union and Division of Passive matter is, which
has separable parts: But how far spirits are passive (as all under God are in
some degree,) and whether that Passivity signify any kind of Materiality as
well as Substantiality; and how far they are extensive, or partible, or have
any Degrees analogous to Parts, and so what their Unity is in a positive
conception, and how spirits are Many, and how One, and whether there be
existent One Universal spirit of each kind Vegetative, sensitive, and
Intellective, and whether they are both One, and many in several respects, with
many such like questions, These are all past humane certain knowledge in this
life: Many it is certain that there be: But whether that Number here be
Quantitas discreta, and how they are Individuate and distinguishable, and how
it is that Many come from One or two in generation, are questions too hard for
such as I.

18. But we see in Passive matter, that the parts have a natural propensity to
Union, and the aggregative inclination is so strong, as that thence the Learned
Dr. Glisson ( Lib. de Vita Naturae) copiously maintains that all Matter has
Life or a Natural Vital self-moving Virtue, not as a compounding part, but as a
formal inadequate conception: In which though I consent not, yet the
Aggregative Inclination is not to be denied* All heavy terrene bodies hasten to
the earth by descent, and all the parts of Water would unite; and Air much more.

19. The grosser and more terrene any Body is, the easilier the parts of it
continue in a local separation; you may keep them easily divided from one
another, though they incline to the whole: But liquids more hasten to a
closure; and Air yet much more.

20. Whether this their strong inclination to Unity be a natural Principle in
the passive Elements themselves, or be caused by the Igneous Active part which
is ever mixed with them, and whose Unity in it self is more perfect; or whether
it principally proceed from any spiritual substance which animateth all things,
and is above the Igneous substance, I think, is too hard for man to determine.

21. But so great is the Union of the whole Igneous substance that is within
our knowledge, that we can hardly tell whether it have divisible separable
parts, and more hardly prove that there are any parts of it actually separated
from the rest, even where by Termination and Reception in the Passive matter
there is the most notable distinction. The Light of the Sun in the air is One,
and that Light seems to be the effect of the present substance of the solar
fire, and not a quality or motion locally distant from it: A burning-glass may
by its Receptive aptitude occasion a combustion by the Sunbeams in one place
which is not in another. But those beams that terminate on that glass are not
separated from the rest. As there are in Animals fixed spirits which are
constitutive parts of the solid members, and moved spirits which carry about
the humors, and yet these are not separated from each other: so the Earth it
self, and its grosser parts, have an Igneous principle still resident in them,
as fire is in a flint, or steel, and indeed in every thing: And this seems to
be it which many call Forma telluris: But that all these are not contiguous or
united also to the common Solar fire, or Igneous Element, is not to be proved.
The same Sunbeams may kindle many things combustible and light many Candles,
which yet are all one undivided fiery substance, though by the various
Receptivity of matter, so variously operating, as if there were various
separate substances. And as all these Candles or fires are One with the solar
fire in the Air, so are they therefore One among themselves: and yet not One
Candle; because that word signifies not only the common fire, but that fire as
terminated and operative on that particular Matter. The stars are many: but
whether they be not also One fiery substance, diversifyed only by Contraction
and Operation of its parts upon some suitable Receptive matter (or contracted
simply in it self) without separation from all other parts, is more than we are
able to determine.

22. They that hold that non datur vacuum, must hold that all things in the
world are One, by most intimate conjunction or Union of all the parts of being:
And yet distinguishable several ways.

23. We constantly see a numerical difference of substances made by Partible
Receptive matter, when yet the informing substance in them all, is One in it
self thus variously terminated and operating: so one Vine or Pear Tree has
many Grapes or Pears numerically different; And many leaves and branches and
roots; And yet it is one vegetative substance which animateth or actuateth them
all; which consists not of separated parts: And that Tree which is thus
principled, is it self United to the Earth, and radicated in it is a real part
of it, as a man's hair is an Accident, (or as some will call it, an Accidental
part) of the man, or the feathers of a bird: And consequently the forma arboris
or its vegetative spirit, and the forma telluris are not separated, but One.
And we have no reason to think that there is not as true an Union between that
forma telluris, and the forms or spirits of the sun, stars, or other Globes of
the same kind, as there is between the spirits of the Earth and plants. So that
while Vegetative Spirits are many by the diversity of Receptive or Terminative
matter, (and perhaps other ways to us unknown) yet seem they to be all but One
thus diversifyed, as One soul is in many members.

24. Seeing the Noblest natures are most perfect in Unity (and the basest most
divisible) we have no reason to think that the Vital principles of the diverse
sensitive Animals (merely such) are not as much One as the diverse principles of
plants or vegetables are.

25. And as little reason have we to think that there is no sort of Unity among
the diverse Intellectual substances, seeing their nature is yet more perfect,
and liker to God, who is perfectly one.

26. It is not to be doubted but the Universe of created being is one,
consisting of parts compaginated and United, though the bond of its Union be
not well known to us.

27. But it is certain that they are all United in God (though we know not the
chief created Cause of Unity;) and that though it be below him to be the
Informing soul of the world, yet is he more than such a soul to it: and of Him,
and through Him and to Him are all things, who is All things in all things,
above all and through all and in us all (as is aforesaid): and being more
intimate to all things as their proper form, is the first Uniting principle of
all being, as he is the first Cause and the End of all. And yet it is Above the
Creatures to be accounted parts of God; for they are not his Constitutive parts
(who is most simple) but slow from him by his Causal efflux, and so are by many
not falsely called, Vna emanatio Divina, or a continued effect of one Divine
creative or efficient Volition; All One as In and Of and To One God, and as
compaginated among themselves, and yet Many by wonderful incomprehensible
diversities: Ab uno Omnia.

28. God is said to be More One with some Creatures than with others, as he
operateth more excellent effects in one than in others, and as he is related to
those effects: but not as his essence is Nearer to One than to another.

29. Accordingly his Union with the Intellectual Spirits, and souls of men is
said to be nearer, than with Bodies, and his Communion answerably: But that is
because they are the Nobler product of his Creating or efficient Power and Will.

30. And so he is said to be more United to holy souls than to the unholy, to
the Glorified than to the dammed; Because he makes them Better, and
communicates to them more of his Glory and the effects of his Power, Wisdom
and Love. As the Sun is more United to a burning-glass, or to a place where it
shines brightly, or to some excellent plant which it quickneth, than to others.

31. Accordingly we must conceive of that Union (before mentioned These. 10.) of
Christ with Believers here, and with the glorified hereafter, as to his Divine
Nature; which may well be called mystical, and is of late become the subject of
some men's contentious opposition, and is matter of difficult enquiry to the
wisest. And yet it is hard to say that in all their hot opposition any sober
men are in this disagreed: For 1. it is by such commonly confessed that the
Spirit of Christ does operate more excellent effects on believers than on
others, and on the Blessed than on the damned; even making them liker unto God.
2. And that this Holy spirit is by Covenant related to them, to operate for the
future more constantly and eminently in them than in others. 3. And that this
Spirit proceeds and is sent from the Father and the Son to do these works. 4.
And that Christ is Related to each Believing and each Glorified soul, as one in
Covenant self-obliged (or a Promiser) thus by his Spirit to operate on them. 5.
And that he is thus Related to the whole Church or society of such persons,
whereof each Individual is a part.

So that all this set together tells us, that every Believing and every
Glorified soul is said to be United to Christ in all these several conjunct
respects (as to his Godhead) 1. In that he eminently operateth Grace and Glory
in them, that is, Holy Life, Light and Love, by the Holy Ghost: And this he
does (as God does all things) per essentiam, and not as distant by an
intermediate Virtue which is neither Creator nor Creature: As the very
Sunbeams touch the illuminated and heated object. 2. By a moral-relative Union
by Covenant to that individual person, to do such things upon him. (As husband
and wife are United by Covenant for certain uses.) 3. By a Political Relative
Union, as that person is a member of the Church or Political body, to which
Christ is United by Promise as aforesaid: who denies any of this, and who
affects more?

32. And then our Union with Christ's humane nature (besides the General and
special Logical Union, as he is a Creature, a Man, of the same Nature with us)
can be of no Higher or Nearer a sort: But differs from the former, so far as
the Operations and Relation of a Created Medium differ from those of the
Creator: That is, 1. The humane nature is honored and used by the Divine, as a
second cause of the foresaid effects of Grace and Glory on us. 2. The humane
Nature (being of the same species with ours) is by a Law, obligation and
consent, related to each Believer and to all the Church, as the Root, and chief
Medium, Administrator and Communicator of this Grace and Glory; and so as our
Relative Head in the foresaid Moral and Political sense, communicating those
Real Benefits. 3. And Christ in his Humanity is the Authorized Lord and
Governor of all inferior means and causes, by which and Grace and Glory is
conveyed to us (as of Angels, Ministers, Word, Sacraments, changing
Providence, etc.) 4. But whether his own Humane Soul per essentiam and
immediatam attingentiam, do operate on all holy souls, and so be Physically
also United to them as the Sun is to the quickened plants or animals, I told
you before, I know not yet, but hope ere long to know.

33. Christ's Divine Nature is United to his humane, in a peculiar sort, as it
is not to any other creature. But it is not by any change of the Divine: but by
that peculiar possessing operation and Relation, which no other created being
does partake of, and which no mortal can comprehend; of which I have said more
elsewhere. In Methodo Theologi^e, Part. 2.


34. All Creatures as such are United in God as the Root or first cause of
Nature: All Believers and Saints are United in Christ as the Head of the
Church, as aforesaid; and in the Holy spirit as the principle of their
sanctification.

35. The Political Relative Union of such Saints among themselves, is
intelligible, and sure; as having One God, one Head, one Holy spirit: But (as I
said before) how and how far their very substance is One, by an Unity analogous
to Physical Continuity (like the solar Light, etc.) and how far and how they
are substantially diverse; and how and how far the spirit of Holiness does in a
peculiar manner Unite the substances of Holy souls among themselves, (by
Analogy to the Illuminated Air, etc.) and how all souls and Angels are
individuate and distinguished, I say again is past our reach.

36. Seeing Union is so naturally desired as Perfection by all creatures known
to us, it is great mordinateness and folly to fear lest death will by too near
an Union end our individuation.

37. And as things sensible are the first known by man in flesh, and we see
that among them Union destroys no part of their substance; but a sand or Atom
is the same thing in Union with others as it would be if separate, or solitary,
and a drop of water has as true and much existing substance in the Ocean, as
in its separate state, and so of a particle of Air; we have reason to conclude
no worse of the ingneous Element, nor yet of sensitive or Intellectual spirits:
For 1. How far they are passive and partible (being many) we know not. Most of
the old Fathers, especially the Greeks (as Faustus Regiensis cited them in the
book which Mammertus answered) thought that God only was totally Immaterial or
Incorporeal; And it must not be denied that every creature does pati a Deo, is
passive as from God the first cause; and many Philosophers think that all
Passivity is a consequent or proof of answerable Materiality; And many think
that we have no true notion of substantia, besides Relative (as it does subsist
of it self and substare accidentibus) but what is the same with Materia
purissima. 2. But supposing all this to be otherwise, spirits being true
substances, of a more perfect nature than gross bodies, as they are more
inclined to Union inter se, so there is as little if not less danger that they
should be losers by that Union, than that a drop of water should be so: For the
perfection of the highest nature, must needs be more the perfection of all the
Parts (Physical or intelligible) than the perfection of the lowest: And the
noblest inclines not to its own loss, by desiring Union which to the lowest is
no loss.

38. It is called in the Text [The Unity of the spirit] 1. As it is One species
of Spiritual Grace which all the members are endowed with, which is their
Holiness, or Gods Image on them which is called, The Spirit in us, because it
is the immediate and excellent work of Gods spirit: As the Sun is said to be in
the room because it shines there. 2. As the Spirit is the efficient cause
hereof. 3. And because this One spirit in all the members inclines them to
Unity; even as the soul of every animal inclines it to preserve the Unity of
all its parts, and to abhor wounding and separation, as that which will be its
pain and tends to its destruction, by dissolution.

39. The Holiness, or spiritual qualification of souls, which is called The
Spirit, is Holy or Divine, Life, Light and Love, or the holy disposition of the
souls three natural faculties, Vital Power (or Activity) Understanding and
Will. As all men have One species of humanity, so all Saints have this One
spirit.

40. Though Quickening (by holy Life) and Illumination be parts of
sanctification (or this spirit), yet the last part [ Love] is the completing
perfective part, and therefore is often called Sanctification specially; and by
the word [ Spirit] and [ Love] is often meant the same thing. And when the spirit
is said to be given to Believers, the meaning is, that upon and by believing
the wonderful demonstrations of Gods Love in Christ, the habit of holy Love is
kindled in us.

41. This holy Love which is gods Image, (for God is Love) usually begins at
things visible, as being the nearest objects to man in flesh; And as we see ^od
here as in a glass, so we first see the Glass, before we see God in it; And
accordingly we first see the Goodness and Loveliness of Gods blessings (...)
us, and of good people, and of good words and actions; But yet when we come up
to the Love of God, it is H^ that is the chiefest object, in whom all the
Church by Love is centred: so that we thenceforth Love God for himself, and all
his servants and word as for his sake and impress on them. And our Union by
Love would not be perfect, if it United us together only among our selves, and
did not Unite us all in God and our Redeemer. So that the Unity of the spirit
is the Love of God in Christ and of all the faithful, (yea and of all men so
far as God appears in them) to which Gods spirit strongly enclineth all true
believers; including holy Life and Light, as tending to this Unity of spiritual
Love.

42. Therefore Love is not distinctly named after, among the particular terms
of Unity, as faith and hope are; because it is meant by that word [ There is
One spirit.]

43. The love and Unity of Christians as in One Church, supposes in Nature a
Love to man as man, and a desire of the Unity and concord of mankind: As
Christianity supposes humanity.

44. But Experience and Faith assure us that this humane Love and Unity is
woefully corrupted, and much lost; and that though man's soul be convinced by
natural light, that it is good, and have a general languid inclination to it,
yet this is so weak and uneffectual, as that the principles of wrath and
division prevail against it, and keep the world in miserable confusion.

45. It is the predominancy of the corrupt selfish inclination which is the
great Enemy and destroyer of Love and Unity.

46. Christianity is so far from confining all our Love to Christians, that it
is not the least use of it to revive and recover our Love to Men as Men* so
that no men have a full and healed Love to mankind, and desire of universal
Unity, but believers.

47. The purest and strongest Love and Unity is universal. And it is not
genuine Christianity if it do not incline us to Love all men as men, and all
professed Christians as such, and all Saints as Saints; according to their
various degrees of amiableness.

48. Love and Unity which is not thus universal, partaketh of wrath and S^hism.
For he that loves but a part of men, does not love the rest; and he that is
United but to a part (whether great or small) is Schismatically divided from
all the rest.

49. But Love to All, must not be Equal to all, nor our Unity with all Equal,
as on the same terms, or in the same degree. As the Goodness of mere Humanity,
and the mere Profession of Christianity is less, and so less amiable, than is
the Goodness of true sanctification; so our Love and Unity must be diversified.
All the members of the body must be Loved, and their Unity carefully preserved:
But yet not Equally; but the head as an head, and the heart as an heart, and
the stomach as a stomach, and all the essential parts as Essential, without
which it is not a humane body: and all the integral parts as such, but
diversely according to their worth and use: The eye as an eye, and a tooth but
as a tooth. Goodness being the object of Love, and Love being the life of our
Unity, it varieth in degrees as Goodness varieth.

50. That Love and Unity which is sincere in kind, may be mixed with lamentable
wrath and Schism (as all our Graces are with the contrary sin in our imperfect
state:) Not but that all Christians have an habitual inclination to Universal
Love and Unity; but the act may be hindered, by the want of due information, and
by false reports and misrepresentations of our brethren, which hide their
amiableness, and render them to such more odious than they are.

51. Sincere and genuine Love and Unity has an Universal care of all mankind,
and is very apt to enquire and take knowledge how it goes with all the world,
and specially with all the Churches: For none can much love and desire that
which they mind not, or take no thought of. And this is the chief News which a
true Christian enquireth after, whether Gods name be hallowed, his Kingdom
come, and his will be done on Earth, as it is done in heaven: And of this he is
sollicitous even on his deathbed.

52. The Unity of the spirit inclines men to mourn much for the sects,
Schisms, divisions and discords of believers; and to smart in the sense of
them, as the body does by its wounds. And they that bewail them not, are so far
void of the Unity of the spirit.

53. The Unity of the spirit helps a man greatly to distinguish between
wounding and healing Doctrines, wounding and healing courses of practice, and
between wounding and healing persons, even as Nature teaches us to discern and
abhor that which would dismember or divide the body, as painful and destructive.

54. Therefore holy experienced Christians who have most of the Unity of the
spirit, are most against the dividing impositions of Church Tyrants, and also
against the quarrelsom humor and causeless separations of self conceited
Singularists whether Dogmatical or superstitious; who proudly overvalue their
own conceptions, forms and modes of worship and doctrine, and thence aggravate
all that they dislike into the shape of Idolatry, Antichristianism, false
worship, or some such heinous sin, when the beam of self-conceit and pride in
their own eye, is worse than the mo^e of a modall imperfection of words, method
or matter, in another eye.

55. The Unity of the spirit inclines men to hope the best of others, Romans 14.
17. and 15. 1 Cor. 12. and 13. Gal. 6. 1, 2, 3.
till we know it to be untrue: and to take more notice of men's virtues than of
their faults, and love covers such infirmities as may be covered; and bears
with one another burdens, while we consider that we also may be tempted.

56. The Unity of the spirit teaches and inclines men to yield for peace and
concord to such lawful things (whose practice does truly conduce to unity:) yea
and to give up much of our own right for unity and peace.

57. This Love and Unity of the spirit inclines men to vigorours Endeavors
for concord with all others; so that such will not slothfully wish it but
diligently seek it: They will pursue and follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.
14. as far as is possible, and as in them lies, Romans 12. 18. They that are
true Peace-lovers are diligent Peacemakers, if it be in their power and way.

58. This Love and Unity of the spirit, will prevail with the sincere, to
prosecute it through difficulties and oppositions, and to conquer all: And it
teaches them at the first hearing to abhor back-biters, and slanderous
censurers, who on pretense of a (blind) zeal for Orthodoxness or Piety or
Purity of worship, are ready to reproach those that are not of their mind and
way in points where difference is tolerable: And when children that are tossed up
and down and carried to and fro, (Ephesians. 4. 14.) with every wind of doctrine, are
presently filled with distaste and prejudice, when they hear other men's
tolerable opinions, forms and orders aggravated, the right Christian is more
affected with displeasure against the self-conceited reproacher, who is
employed by Satan (though perhaps he be a child of God) against the Love and
Unity of believers.

59. The more any man has of Love and Unity of the Spirit, the greater matter
he makes of Universal Unity, and the more Zealous he is for it. A small fire
or Candle gives but a faint and little light and heat, and that but a little
way. But the Sun^light and heat extends to all the surface of the earth, and
much farther; and that so vigorously as to be the life of the things that live
on earth: so strong love is extensive.

60. The more any man has of Love and the Unity of the spirit, the more
resolved and patient he is, in bearing any thing for the furthering of Unity.
If he must be hated for it, or undone for it; if his friends censure and
forsake him for it; If Church Tyrants will ruin him, he can joyfully be a
Martyr for Love and Unity; If Dogmatists condemn him as an Heretic, he can
joyfully bear the censure and reproach. If blind superstitious persons charge
him with Luke-warmness, or sinful confederacies, or compliance, or corrupting
Gods^worship, or such like as their error leads them, he can bear evil
report, and to be made of no reputation, and to be slandered and vilisyed by
the Learned, by the Zealous, by his ancient friends, rather than forsake the
principles, affections and practice of Universal Charity, Unity, and peace.

61. Though Perfection must be desired, it is but a very imperfect Unity which
can be reasonably hoped for on earth.

62. There must go very much wisdom, goodness and careful diligence, to get and
keep Unity and Peace in our own souls, (it being that healthful equal
temperature and harmony of all within us which few obtain) And most have a
discord and War or disquiet in themselves. But to have a family of such is
harder, and to have a Church of such yet harder; and much more to have a
Kingdom of such, and a conjunction of such Churches; and most of all to bring
all the world to such a state: And they that have a War in themselves, are not
fit to be the Peacemaking healers of the Church (in that degree).

63. Yet as every Christian has so much concord and peace at home as is
necessary to his salvation, so we may well hope that by just endeavors, the
Churches may have so much, as may preserve the essentials of Christianity and
Communion, and also may fortify the Integrals, and may much increase the
greatness and glory of the Church, and much further holiness and righteousness
in its members, and remove many of the scandals and sinful contentions, which
are the great hinderers of piety, and are Satan's advantages against man's
recovery and salvation: This much we may seek in hope.

64. Despair of success is a an enemy to all pacificatory endeavors, and low
and narrow designs show a low Spirit, and a little degree of holy love and all
other uniting grace.

65. An earnest desire Such as now works in Mr. Eliats in New England, and
Mr. Thomas Gouge in England toward the Welsh, and in many worthy Ministers who
suffer the reproach and persecutions of men because they will not consent to be
as lights put under a bushel.
of the worlds Conversion, and of the bringing in the barbarous, ignorant,
infidels and impious, to the knowledge of Christ, and a holy life, does show a
large degree of charity, and of the Unity of the spirit, which would fain bring
in all men to the bond of the same Unity, and participation of the same spirit.

66. The most public endeavors therefore of the good of many, of Churches, of
Kingdoms, of mankind, are the most noble and most beseeming Christianity,
though it is possible that an hypocrite may attempt the like, to get a name, or
for other carnal ends.

67. And it is very savoury and suitable to the Unity of the spirit, to hear
men in prayer and thanksgiving, to be much and fervent for the Churches, and
for all the world, and to make it the first and heartiest of their requests,
that Gods name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his will be done on earth
as it is done in heaven, and not to be almost all for themselves, or for a
sect, or a few friends about them, as selfish persons use to be.

68. A very fervent desire of Union con^ined to some few, that are mistaken for
all or the chief part of the Church, with a ^ensorious undervaluing of others,
and a secret desire that God would weaken and dishonor them, because they are
against the opinions and the interest of that sect or party, is not only
consistent with Schism, (as I said before) but is the very state of Schism
(called Heresy of old): And the stronger the desire of that inordinate
separating Unity is, as opposite to the Common Unity of all Christians, the
greater is the Schism: Even as a bile or other aposteme or inflammation,
contains an inordinate burning collection or confluence of the blood to the
diseased place, instead of an equal distribution.

CHAP. III.
II. The necessity and Benefits of this Unity and Peace.

II. THE Necessity and excellency of the Unity of the spirit and peace, will
appear in these respects. 1. For the good of the particular persons that
possess it. 2. For the good of Christian societies. 3. For the good of the
uncalled world. 4. For the Glory and well-pleasing of Jesus Christ and of the
Father: of these in order.

1. For the good of each particular person that possesses it.

1. It is the very Health and Holiness of the soul, and the contrary is the
very state of sin and death. What is Holiness but that Uniting Love by which
the will adhereth to God and delights in his Goodness as it shines to us in
his works, and specially in Christ and in all his members (and in a common sort
in all mankind?) And what is the unholy state of sin and death, but that
Con^ractedness and retiring to our SELVES, by which the selfish person
departs from the due Love of God and others, and of that holiness which is
contrary to this his selfishness? So far as any man's Love is contracted,
narrowed, confined to himself, and to a few, so far his soul is indeed
unsanctified and void of the Unity of the Spirit, or the Spirit of Unity. If a
man lived in banishment or a prison incapable of doing others any good, yet if
he have that Love and spirit of Unity which inclines him to do it if he could,
this is his own health and rectitude, and acceptable unto God. Little do many
Religious people think how much they do mistake unholiness and sin it self, for
a degree of holiness above their neighbors! When they contract and narrow
their Christian Love and Communion to a party, and talk against the Churches of
Christ, by disgraceful and Love-killing censures and reproaches, as being not
holy enough for their Communion; this want of the spirit of Love and Unity, is
their own want of holiness it self. It was the old deceit of the Pharisees,
which Christ the messenger and mediator of love condemned, to think that
holiness lay more in sacrifices and Ritual observances, and in a strict keeping
of the Sabbaths rest and such like, than in the Love of God and all men: And
the lesson that Christ twice set them to learn was, [ I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.] He has most grace and holiness who has most of the spirit of Love
and Unity.

2. It is the souls necessary qualification for that life of true Christianity
which God has commanded us in the world. It is this inward Health which must
enable us to all our duty.

1. Without this spirit of Unity we cannot perform the duties of the first
table unto God: Our sacrifices will be as loathsome as theirs described Isa. 1.
and Isa. 58. If we lift not up pure hands without wrath, and wrangling (or
disputing) (for so I would rather translate (...), 1 Timothy 2. 8. than
[doubting]) our prayers will not be acceptable to God: Though it be Christ's
worthiness for which our prayers and services are accepted, yet there must be
the subordinate worthiness of necessary qualification in our selves. For Christ
himself has annexed specially the express mention of this one qualification in
the Lords prayer it self [ Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us] and he repeateth it after, [ For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you your trespasses; but if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive
you] Mat. 6. 13, 14. Love is here included in [ forgiving] as a cause in its
effect: And Christ rather names [ forgiving] than [ Love], because men may
pretend to that act which is secret in the heart, but if it should not work in
the necessary fruits (of which forgiving others is one) it would be but a vain
pretense.

And here I entreat the Reader to consider a while the singularities of this
passage of Christ. 1. That men that must trust in Christ's merits and mediation,
must yet be told of such an absolute necessity of a Condition or qualification
in themselves. 2. That Forgiving others as an Act of Love, is singled out as
this qualification. 3. That this condition must be put into the very prayer it
self, that our own mouths may utter it to God. 4. That it must be annexed to
this one petition of [ Forgiveness] rather than any of the rest, where men are
apt to confess their own necessity, and where many are readiest to think that
Gods mercy and Christ's merits and mediation must do all without any condition
on their part: They that know that [ their daily bread] and [ deliverance from
temptation and evil] must have some care and endeavors of their own, are yet
apt to think that the Forgiveness of sin needs nothing on their part but [
asking and receiving.] 5. That Christ should after single out this one clause
to repeat to them, by urgent application. And yet how little is this laid to
heart?

And indeed the first word in the Lords prayer [ Our Father] teaches us the
same lesson, How needful a qualification Love and Unity are to all that will
come to God in prayer: He that teaches us that to Love our neighbor as our
selves is the second summary Commandment, and even like to the first, which is
Love to God (for it is Loving God in his Likeness on his works) does here call
us in all our prayers to express it, by Praying for our brethren as for our
selves. O that men of wrath and wrangling were truly sensible what affections
should be expressed by that word [ OUR FATHER], and with what a heart men
should say [GIVE US] and [FORGIVE US] and how far [ VS] must extend beyond [ME]
and beyond [OUR PARTY] or [ our side] or [ our Church] in the dividers sense. I
tell you if you will be welcome to God in your prayers or any other religious
services, you must come as in Union with Christ and with his Universal Church:
God will receive no one that comes to him as alone and divided from the rest?
As you must have Union with Christ the Head, so must you have with his Body: A
divided member is no member, but a dead thing. Little think many ignorant
persons of this, who think that the singularity and smallness of their sect or
party is the necessary sign of their acceptance with God: Because they read [
Fear not little flock:] As if [ a little flock] must separate from Christ's
little flock, for fear of being too great? And as if his Flock which then was
but a few hundreds must be no greater, when the Kingdoms of the world are
become his Kingdoms? Yet such have there been of late among us, who first
became (as they were called) Puritans, or Presbyterians when they saw them a
small and suffering party. But when they prospered and multiplied, they turned
Independents or Separatists, thinking that the former were too many to be the
true Church. And on the same reason when the Independents prospered they turned
Anabaptists; And when they prospered, they turned Quakers, thinking that unless
it were a small and suffering party it could not be the Little flock of Christ.
As if he that is called The Savior of the world, would take it for his honor
to be the Savior only of a few Families or Villages, and his Kingdom must be
as little as Bethlehem where he was born.

Should they take the same course about their Language, and say, that it is not
the language of Canaan but of the beast, if it grow common, and so take up with
a new one, that it might be a narrow one, the folly of it would discover it
self: And what is the excellency of a Language but significancy and extensive
community? and what greater plague since Adams sin has befaln mankind, than
the division of tongues? as hindering communication, and propagation of the
Gospel? And what greater blessing as a means to universal Reformation could be
given men, than an universal common language? And what is the property of Babel
but division and confusion of tongues? And does not all this intimate the
necessity of a Union of minds?

While we keep in the Unity of the Body and spirit, we may, we must strive for
such a singularity, as consists in an excellency of degree, and endeavor to
be the best and holiest persons, and the usefullest members in the body of
Christ. But if once you must separate from the body as too good to be members
of so great or so bad a society, you perish.

God will own no Church which is so Independent as not to be a member of the
universal; not any person who is so independent, as not to come to him as in
Communion with all the Christians in the world. We must not approve of the
faults of any Church or Christian, and so communicate with their sin by
Voluntary consent: But disowning their sin, we must own them as Christ's
members, and have communion with them in faith and Love, and holy profession of
both; and while we are absent in body, must be as present in spirit with them,
and still come to God as in communion with all his Church on earth, and offer
up our prayers as in conjunction with them, and not as a separated independent
thing.

2. And as our Unity is part of our necessary fitness for duties of holy
worship, so is it also for duties of the second table, that is; of Justice and
Charity to men: And this is evident in the nature of the thing. No man will be
exact in Justice till he do as he would be done by: And who can do that who
Loves not his neighbor as himself? What is our unity but our Love to others
as our selves? And how can we do the works of Love without Love? It is divided
SELF that is the cause of all the unmercifulness and injustice in the world.
Unity makes my neighbor to be to me as my self, and his Interest and welfare
to be to me as my own, and his loss and hurt to be as mine: And were he indeed
my self, and his welfare and his hurt mine own, you may judge without many
words how I should use him; whether I should show him mercy in his wants and
misery? whether I should rejoice with him in his joy, and mourn with him in his
sorrows? whether I should speak well or ill of him behind his back? and whether
I should persecute him, and undo him? whether I should defame him and write
books to render him odious, and to persuade the rulers that he is unworthy to
have the liberty of a Christian or of a man; to preach, to pray, to be
conversed with, or to live! Would not uniting Love make a wonderful change in
some men's judgments, speeches and behavior, and make those men good
Christians, or good Moralists at least, who now when they have cried up
Morality, and Charity and good works, would persuade men by the Commentary of
their practice, that they mean Malignity, cruelty, and the propagating of
hatred and all iniquity? Where there is not a dominion of LOVE and UNITY, there
is a dominion of SELFISHNESS and ENMITY; and how well these will keep the
Commandments which are all fulfilled in LOVE, how well they will do good to all
men, Romans 13. 12, 13.
especially to them of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8.
and provoke one another to Love and to good works, it is easy for any man to
judge. Once alienate men's hearts from one another, and the Life will show the
alienation.

3. This UNITY of SPIRIT (and spirit of unity) is our necessary preservation
against sins of commission (as well as of omission as aforesaid), even against
the common iniquities of the world: LOVE and UNITY tyrannize not over
inferiors, contrive not to tread down others that we may rise, and to keep
them down to secure our domination: They oppress not the poor, the weak, or
innocent: They make not snares for other men's Consciences, nor lay
stumbling blocks before them, to occasion them to sin, nor drive men on to sin
against. Conscience, and so to hell, to show men's authority, in a thing of
naught. Had this ruled in Ahab and his Prophets, Michaiah had not been smitten
on the mouth, nor fed in a Prison with the bread and water of affliction; nor
had Elijah been hunted after as the troubler of Israel: Had this unity of
spirit ruled in Jeroboam, and in Rehoboam, one had not stretched out his hand
against the Prophet, nor the other despised experienced Counselors, to make
heavier the burdens of the complaining people. Had it overcome the SELFISHNESS
of the Kings of Israel, their Calves and High places had not engaged them
against the Prophets, and been their ruin. Had it prevailed in the Kings of
Judah and their people, Jeremy had not been laid in the dungeon, nor had they
forbid Amos to prophecy at the Kings Chapel or his Court, nor had they mocked
the messengers of God, and despised his prophets, till the wrath of the Lord
arose and there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.

Had this Spirit of Unity been in the persecuting Jews, they would not have
counted Paul a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among the people, nor
have hunted the Apostles with implacable fury, nor have forbidden them to
preach to the Gentiles that they might be saved, and have brought Gods wrath
upon themselves to the uttermost, 1 These. 2. 15, 16.

Had this Unity of spirit prevailed in the Nicolaitans and other heretics of
old, they had not so early grieved the Apostles, and divided and dishonored
the primitive Church, nor raised so many Sects and parties among Christians,
nor put the Apostles to so many vehement obtestations against them, and so many
sharp objurgations and reproofs: Nor had there been down to this day a
continuation for so many hundred years, of the Churches woeful distractions and
calamities by the two sorts of afflicters, viz. the Clergy Tyrants on one
side, and the swarms of restless Sectaries on the other.

And if the Spirit of Unity ruled in the people, there would he less rebelling,
repining and murmuring against Governors, but subjects would render to all
their dues: tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear
is due, and honor to whom honor, Romans 13. 7. They would owe nothing to any
man but to Love one another, v. 8. For he that loves another has fulfilled
the Law: For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and
if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
Thou shall Love thy neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his
neighbor: Therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law, v. 9, 10. Love is
long-suffering and kind; Love envyeth not: Love vaunteth not it self (or is not
rash) nor is puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly; seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked (or siercely angry), thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in (or with) the truth: Love bears (or concealeth)
all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, 1
Cor. 13. 4, etc.

Did the Unity of the spirit and Love prevail, it would undo most of the
Lawyers, Atturneys, Solicitors, Proctors: It would give the Judges a great deal
of ease: It would be a most effectual corrector of the press, of the pulpit, of
the table talk of calumniators and backbiters; It would heal factious preachers
and people, and many a thousand sins it would prevent. In a word, Love and
Unity are the most excellent Law. They are a Law eminenter: For it is to such
that the Apostle says, there needs no Law: that is, no forcing constraining
Law which supposes an unwilling subject: For what a man Loves, ^e need not be
constrshained to by penalties: And men need not many threats to keep them from
beating or robbing or slandering themselves: And did they but Love God and the
Church, and their Neighbors, and their own souls, as they do their bodies,
piety and justice and concord and felicity would be as common as humanity is.

As the best physicions are most for strengthening nature, which is the true
curer of diseases, so he that could strengthen Unity and Love, would soon cure
most of the persecutions, schisms, reproaches, contentions, deceivings,
overreaching, rashcensuring, envy, malice, revenge, and all the injuries which
selsishness causes in the world.

4. The Unity of the spirit is necessary to the fullness of our joy, and the
true consolation of our lives: A private selfish Spirit, has very little
matter to feed his joy; even his own poor narrow and interrupted pleasures: And
what are these to the treasures which feast the joy and pleasure of a public
mind? If Love Unite me as a Christian to all Christians, and as a man to all
the world, the blessings of Christians and the mercies of all the world are
mine. When I am poor in my own body, I am rich in millions of others, and
therefore rich in mind: When I am sick and pained in this narrow piece of
flesh, I am well in millions whose health is mine: and therefore I am well in
mind: when I am neglected, abused, slandered, persecuted in this vile and
perishing body, I am honored in the honor of all my brethren, and I prosper
in their prosperity, I abound in their plenty, I am delivered in their
deliverances; I possess the comfort of all the good which they possess.

Object. By the same reason you may say, that you are holy in their holiness,
and righteous in their righteousness, which will be a fanatical kind of comfort
to ungodly persons.

Answ. He that is himself unholy and unrighteous, has not this Unity with holy
righteous persons: He that has not the spirit, has not the unity of the
spirit: This frivolous objection therefore goes upon a mistake, as if this
Unity were common to the ungodly. But to those that have the spirit of Unity
indeed, the comfort of all other men's holiness is theirs, and that in more than
one respect. 1. By some degree of causal participation; As the common health of
the body is extended to the benefit of each particular member; And the common
prosperity of the Kingdom, does good to the particular subjects: Goodness in
all men is of a communicative nature; as Light and Heat are: And therefore as a
greater fire, much more the Sun, does send forth a more extensive Light and
Heat than a spark or candle; so the Grace of Life in the United body of Christ,
does operate more powerfully for every member, than it would do were it
confined to that member separatedly: As in the holy Assemblies we find by sweet
experience, that a conjunction of many holy souls does add alacrity to every
one in particular: And it is a more lively joyful work, and liker to heaven, to
pray and praise God with many hundreds or thousands of faithful Christians,
than with a few. I know not how the conceit of singularity may work on some,
but for my part Gods praises sung or said in a full assembly of zealous,
sincere and serious persons, is so much sweeter to me than a narrower Communion
(yea though many bad and ignorant persons should be present) that I must say
that it is much against my will, when ever I am deprived of so excellent a help.

2. And as Efficiently, so Objectively a holy soul by this Unity of spirit has
a part in the blessings and Graces of all the world. He can know them and think
of them* (so far as he is One with them) with such pleasure as he thinks of
his own. For what should hinder him? Do we not see that husband and wife are
pleased by the Riches and honor of each other, because their Union makes all
to be common to them? Are not Parents pleased to see their children prosper,
and every one delighted in the welfare of his friend? what then if all the
world were as near and dear to us as a husband, a child, or a bosom friend?
would it not be our constant pleasure to think of Gods blessings to them, as if
they were our own? A narrow spot of ground does yield but little fruit, in
comparison of a whole Kingdom, or all the earth: And he that fetches his
content and pleasure from so little a clod of earth as his own body, must have
but a poor and pitiful pleasure in comparison of him that can rejoice in the
good of all the world. It is Uniting Love, which is the great enriching,
contenting and felicitating art. (An Art I call it as it is a thing Learned and
practiced by Rule, but more than an Art, even a Nature as to its fixed
inclination.)

3. And Union makes other men's Good to be all ours, (as efficiently and
objectively, so also) finally: As all is but a means to one and the same end in
which we meet: It is my ends that are attained by all the Good that is done and
possessed in the world. They that have One holy spirit, have one end. The
Glorifying of God in the felicity of his Church, and the perfection of his
works, and the Fulfilling and Pleasing of his blessed will in this his Glory,
is the end that every true believer does intend and live for in the world: And
this One End, all Saints, all Angels, all Creatures are carrying on as means.
If I be a Christian indeed, I have nothing so dear to me, or so much desired as
this Pleasing and Glorifying of God, in the good and perfection of his works:
This is my Interest: In this he must grati^ie me that will be my friend: All
things are as nothing to me, but for this: And in this all the world, but
specially all Saints are continually serving me: In serving God they are
serving me; while they serve my chiefest end and interest. If I have a house to
build, or a field to till, or a garden to dress, do not the labors of all the
builders and workmen serve me, and please me, while it is my work that they do.
This is no fancy but the real case of every wise and holy person: He has set
his heart and hope upon that end, which all the world are jointly carrying on,
and which shall certainly be accomplished. O blessed be that Infinite Wisdom
and Love, which teaches this wisdom, and gives this Uniting Love to every
holy soul! All other ways are dividing, narrow, poor and base: This is the
true and certain way for every man to be a possessour of all men's blessings,
and to be owner of the good of all the world. They are all doing our Heavenly
Fathers will, and all are bringing about the common end which every true
believer seeks. It is this base and narrow SELFISHNESS and inordinate
contractedness of spirit, and adhering to individual interest, which
contradicts all this, and hinders us from the present joyful tast^ of the
fruits of UNITY which we now hear and read of.

Yea I can dye with much the greater willingness, because (besides my hopes of
heaven) I live even on earth when I am dead: I live in all that live, and shall
live till the end of all. I am not of the mind of the selfish person, that
says, when I am dead, all the world is dead or at an end to me: But rather,
God is my highest object: His Glory and complacency is my End: These shine and
are attained more in and by the whole Creation than by me: while these go on,
the End is attained which I was made for: And I shall never be separated living
or dead from the universal Church or universal world: so that when I am dead,
my end, my interest, my united Fellow Christians and Creatures will still live.
If I loved my friend better than my self, it would be less grief to me to be
banished than for him to be banished: And so it would be less grief to me to
dye, than for him to dye. And if I loved the Church and the world but half as
much more than my self, as my reason is fully convinced there is cause, it
would seem to me incomparably a smaller evil to dye my self than that the
Church or world should dye. As long as my Garden flourishes, I can bear the
death of the several flowers, whose place will the next spring be succeeded by
the like: And as long as my Orchard lives I can bear the falling of a leaf or
an apple, yea of all the leaves and fruit in Autumn, which the next spring will
repair and restore in kind, though not those individual* What am I that the
world should miss me, or that my death should be taken by others or by me, for
a matter of any great regard? I can think so of another, and another can think
so of me: But unhappy selfishness makes it hard for every man or any man to
think so of himself. Did UNITY more prevail in men, and SELFISHNESS less, it
would more rejoice a dying man, that the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God,
will continue to shine forth in the Church and world, and that others shall
succeed him in serving God and his Church when he is dead, than it would grieve
him that he must dye himself.

Yea more than all this, this Holy UNITY will make all the Joys of Heaven to
be partly ours. Even while we are here in pain and sorrows, we are members of
the Body, whose Best part is above with Christ; and therefore their joys are
by participation ours, as the pleasure of the head and heart extends to the
smallest members. Would it be nothing to a mother if all her children, or to a
friend if all his friends, had all the prosperity and joy that he could wish
them?

The nearer and stronger this holy UNITY is, the more joyfully will a believer
here look up, and say, Though I am poor or sick or suffer, it is not so with
any of the blessed ones above: My fellow Christians now rejoice in Glory: The
Angels with whom I shall live for ever are full of Joy in the vision of
Jehovah: My blessed Head has Kingdom and Power and Glory and Perfection.
Though I am yet weak and must pass through the gates of death, the Glori^ied
world are triumphing in perpetual Joys; Their Knowledge, their Love, their
Praises of God, are perfect and everlasting, beyond all fears of death or any
decay or interruption. UNITY gives us a part in all the Joys of earth and
heaven: And what then is more desirable to a Believer?

5. And in all that is said it appears that UNITY is a great and necessary
part of our preparation for sufferings and death: without this men want the
principal comforts that should support them: They that can fetch comfort
neither from Earth nor from Heaven, but only from the narrow interest of
themselves, are like a withering branch that is broken from the tree, or like a
lake of water separated from the stream, that will soon dry up: A selfish
person has neither the motives to right suffering, nor the truest cordials for
a dying man. Something or other in this sinful SELF will be still amiss; And a
selfish person will be still caring, fearing or complaining: Because he can
take but little pleasure, in remembering that all is well in Heaven, and that if
he were nothing, God would be still Glorified in the world. Therefore the more
selfish true Christians are, the less is their peace, and the more their hearts
do sink in suffering: Their Religion reaches little higher than to be still
poring on a sinful, confused heart, and asking, How should I be assured of my
own salvation? When a Christian that has more of the Spirit of UNITY, is more
taken up with sweeter things, studying how to Glorify God in the world, and
rejoicing in the assurance that his name shall be hallowed, his Kingdom shall
come, and his Will shall be done, yea and is perfectly done in Heaven: that
which is first in his desires and prayers, is ever the chiefest in his
thanksgivings, and his Joys.

CHAP. IV.
The UNITY of the Spirit in the welfare of the Church.

II. AS the UNITY of the Spirit is the personal welfare of every Christian, so
is it the common interest of the Church, and of all Christian Societies,
Kingdoms, Cities, Schools and Families: And that in all these respects.

I. UNITY is the very life of the Church (and of all Societies as such). The
word LIFE is sometime taken for the LIVING PRINCIPLE or FORM, and so the SOUL
is the LIFE of a Man, and the SPIRIT as dwelling and working in us, is the
Moral or holy-spiritual LIFE of the soul, and of the Church as mystical: And
sometime LIFE is taken for the UNION of the said vital principle with the
Organical Body, or matter duly united in it self: And so the UNION of soul and
body is the Life of a man; and the Union of the Political Head and Body is the
Life of political Societies: And so the Union of Christ and the Church is the
Life of the Church; And the Union of the members among themselves, is (as the
union of the parts of the organical body) the necessary Dispositio materiae,
without which it cannot have Union with the Head; or the effect of Union with
the Vital principle, and so the Union which is essential to the Church. As that
is no Body whose parts are not united among themselves, nor no Living Body
which is not united to the soul (and in it self); so that is no Church or no
Society which is not United in it self; and no Christian Society or Church
which is not united unto Christ.

It is a gross oversight of them that look at nothing but the Regeneration of
the members, as essential to the Church, and take Unity to be but a separable
Accident. Yea indeed Regeneration it self consists in the Uniting of persons
by Faith and Love to God and the Redeemer and to the body of the Church: And if
Union be Life, then Division is no Less than Death: Not every degree of
division: For some breaches among Christians are but wounds: (But to be divided
or separated from Christ, or from the Universal Church which is his body, is
Death it self: And even wounds must have a timely cure, or else they threaten
at least the perishing of the wounded part.)

II. UNITY is the health, ease and quiet of the Church and all Societies, as
well as of each person: And Division is its smart and pain: And a divided
disagreeing Society is a wounded or sick Society; in continual suffering and
disease: But how easy, sweet, and pleasant is it, when brethren dwell together
in Unity? when they are not of many minds, and wills and ways; when they
strive not against each other, and live not in wrangling and contention, when
they have not their cross interests, wills and parties, and envy not or grudge
not against each other: But every one takes the common interest to be his own;
and smarteth in all his brethrens sufferings and hurts: when they speak the
same things, and mind the same interest, and carry on the same ends and work?

O foelix hominum genus
Si vestros animos Amor
Quo coelum regitur, regat, says Boethius.
Many contrivances good men have had, for the recovering of the peace and
felicity of Societies: And they that despaired of accomplishing it, have
pleased themselves with feigning such Societies as they thought most happy:
whence we have Plato's Commonwealth, Moor's Vtopia, Campanella's Civitas
solis, etc. But when all is done, he is the wisest and happiest Politician, and
the best friend and benefactor to Societies and to mankind, who is the
skilfullest contriver, and best promoter of UNITING LOVE. I know that this is
(like Life in man) a work that requires more than Art: But yet I will not say
hoc non est artis, sed pietatis opus, as if art did nothing in it: It is Gods
work blessing man's endeavors. Even in the propagation of natural Life, though
Deus and sol vivificant, God is the Quickener, and Fountain of all life; yet
man is the Generator (even if it prove true that the soul is created): And God
will not do it without the act of man: So God will not bless Churches, and
Kingdoms and Families, with Vniting-Love, without the subordinate endeavors of
man: And the skill and honesty of the endeavourers greatly conduces to the
success of the work: Men that stand in a significant capacity (as Rulers and
public Teachers do) may do much by holy Art to promote Vniting-Love in all
Societies; By contriving an Uniting of Interests, (and not by cudgelling them
all into the same Temples or Synagogues as prisoners into a Jaile); and by
diligent clear teaching them the excellency and necessity of Unity and Love,
and mischiefs of dividing selfishness: But of this more after in due place. All
the devices in the world for the felicity of Societies which tend not unto
Unity, and all ways of Unity which promote not Love, are erroneous and merely
frivolous: And all that are Contrary to Love are pernicious, whatever the
contrivers pretend or dream.

III. UNITY is the strength and preservation of Societies, and Selfishness and
Division is their weakness, their dissolution and their ruin. As in Natural,
so in Political Bodies, the closest and perfectest Union of Parts, makes the
firmest and most durable composition. What is the strength of an Army but their
UNITY? When they obey one General Commander, and cleave inseparably together,
and forsake not one another in fight, such an Army would conquer far greater
multitudes of incoherent separable men: when every Soldier thinks how to
shift for himself, and to save his own life whatever become of others, a few
run away first, and show the rest the way, and they are quickly all made
conquered fugitives: when they that resolve [We must all stand or fall
together, and we will not Live or escape alone; It is more the Army than my
Life that I would preserve] these are seldom overcome by any policy or power.
What is the conquest of an Army, but the routing and scattering of them? The
strength of composed bodies lies in the great Number of parts most inseparably
conjoined. Small Cities and Republics are made a prey to potent Princes,
because they are insufficient for their own defense, and are hardly United with
their neighbors for mutual preservation. An United flame of many Combustibles
consumes all without resistance; when divided sparks and candles have no such
power: Divided drops of rain are easily born, when United streams and floods
bear down all before them. He can break a single thread, that cannot break a
cord that is made of multitudes. And though the chief strength of the Church of
Christ be not in themselves, but in their God and Head, yet God fitteth every
thing to the use that he designeth it to, and makes that creature, that
person, that society strong, which he will have to be most safe and durable,
and to do the works and bear the burdens that require strength. Though we have
all one God and Christ and Spirit, yet are there great variety of gifts and
graces; and as there are strong and weak Christians, so there are strong and
weak Churches and Commonwealths.

O what great things can that Church or Kingdom do, which is fully United in it
self! What great assaults can they withstand and overcome! But the Devil
himself knows that a Kingdom or a house divided cannot stand, Matthew. 12. 25,
26. And therefore by some kind of Concord (whatever it is) even Satan's Kingdom
is upheld: Mark 3. 24, 25. Luke 11. 17, 18.
And by Discord it is that he hops and labors to destroy Christ's Kingdom.
And he that would have Christ's Kingdom to be stronger than the Devils, must do
his part that it be more United, and less divided. All living creatures perish
by the dissolution of parts: what Concord and Discord do in Kingdoms and all
societies, he must be stupidly ignorant that knows not after so long
experience of the world. Therefore they who agree in error, are hardliest
convinced (which is the Roman strength) and they take their own Concord for an
evidence of truth: And those that disagree and divide and wrangle, are apt to
be drawn at last to suspect if not forsake that truth in which they are agreed.
Concord corroborateth even rebels and thieves in evil, much more the servants
of God in good. Sicut noxium est si unitas desit bonis, ita perniciosum est si
sit in malis: Perversos quippe unitas corroborat dum concordant, and ta^to
magis incorrigibiles quanto unanimes facit. Greg. Moral. l. 33.


O unhappy people of God (says Hierome in Psalm. 82.) that cannot so well agree
in good as wicked men do in evil! But, by his leave, there is more Unity and
Concord among all Christ's true servants, than among any wicked men: else the
Devils Kingdom would be stronger and perfecter than Christ's.

Obj. But this of Jeromes is a common saying, and common experience seems to
confirm it. How unanimous were the Sodomites in assaulting the house of Lot?
and what multitudes every where agree in Ignorance and enmity to the godly? and
how divided and quarrelsome are the Religious sort?

Ans. The question whether Christ's Kingdom or Satan's has more Unity and
Concord, requires a distincter kind of answer; which is, I. UNITY is one
thing, and similitude is another. 2. Active Concord or Union of excellent
coherent and cooperative natures, is one thing, and Negative non-repugnancy of
dead or baser creatures is another.

1. As there is a great similitude between incoherent sands or drops of rain,
so is there between ungodly men: They are very like in their privations and
ungodliness: but this is no Unity at all. But the faithful are not only Like,
but United, as many drops in one Ocean, or as many Candles united in one flame,
or many Sunbeams in one Sun and air. 2. All these sands, or dust or dead
bodies, quarrel not among themselves, because they are unactive beings, whose
nature is to lie still; while parents and children and brethren may have many
fallings out: And yet there is that Unity in Parents and Children, inclining
them to the Loving Communion of each other, which is not in the sand or dust or
dead.

And so wicked men in some cases have not those vital principles which are
necessary to an active quarrel, and yet may have far less Union than the Godly
in their scandalous discord. Swine and Dogs will not strive or fight for Gold
or Lands or Lordships, as men do; nor Asses for the food or delicates of men;
nor yet for our ornaments or gay clothes: Brutes never contend for
pre-eminence in Learning, nor fall out in argumentation as men do; Because
their faculties are as dead to all these things: And that which moves not,
does not strive: so wicked men strive not who shall please God best, or who
shall be soundest in the faith, or the greatest enemy to sin, which is the
commonest cont^ntion of good men, (while some of them mistake some sins for no
sins, and some take those to be sins that are none See Whateley's notable
Di^course of this in his Carecloth. Doct. 1.
) But Brethren that often fall out, have yet more Unity, than strangers that
never think of one another, or than fellow-travellers that quietly travel in
the way. Godly persons are all closely United in one God, one Christ, one
faith, one hope, one bond of Love to one another, one mind, and one design and
work, as to the main. There is no such Union as this among the ungodly. It Is
true, that they all Agree by way of similitude, in being all blind, all bad,
all worldly and fleshly, all void of Gods spirit, and all enemies to the godly:
But so all dead Carcasses agree in being dead, and all toads agree in being
toads and poisonous: And yet when the fable feigneth the belly and the hands
and feet to fall out, because the hands and feet must labor for the belly,
they had then more Unity than several Carcasses, ^oads or serpents that never
fall out: yea if a gowty foot be a torment to all the Body, it has yet more
Unity with the body than another man's foot has that puts it to no pain.

But yet the perfectest Unity has also ^ase and strength, and safety. Things
United are durable. Death when it creeps upon decaying age, does it by
gradual separations and dissolution: The fruit and the leaves first fall from
the tree, and then one branch dies, and then another: The combined parts of
our nutritious juices are first loosened, and then separated in our decaying
bodies; and then the pained parts feel the ill effects: The hair falls off;
The teeth ^ot and fall out: and we dye by degrees, as by a coalition of parts
we lived by degrees in our generation and augmentation; says Boethius, De
consol* philos. l. 4.
Omne quod est, tam diu manet and subsistit, quam diis sit unum; sed interit
and dissolvitur quando unum esse desierit. We live while we are One: We dye
when we cease to be One: and we decay when by separation we hasten toward it;
and we grow weak when by looseness we grow more separable. Therefore all
Loosening opinions or principles, which tend to abate the Love and Unity of
Christians, are weakening principles and tend to death. Schisms in the Church,
and feuds or wars in the Commonwealth, and mutinies in Armies, are the
approaches or threatenings of death: Or if such ^evers and bloody fluxes prove
not mortal, the cure must be by some excellent remedy, and Divine clemency and
skill. Discordia Ordinum est reipublicae venenum, says Livy. For (as Salust.
says) War is easily begun (as fire in the City easily kindled,) but to end it
requires more ado. And the and is seldom in the power of the same persons that
began it; much less will it end as easily as it might have been prevented. It Is
like the eruption of waters that begin at a small breach in the damm or banks,
but quickly make themselves a wider passage. Prove. 26. 17. He that passes by
and medleth with strife which is not to him, is like one that takes a dog by
the ears. Prove. 17* 14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out
water: therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with (or exasperated
or stirred up to rage.) As passion inclines men to strive, rail or some way
hurt, so all discord and division inclines men to a warring depressing way
against others; As Gregory says Moral. l. 9.
[ When perverse minds are once engaged ad studium contrarietatis, to a study
of contrariety, they arm themselves to oppugn all that is said by another, be
it wrong or right; for when the person through contrariety is displeasing to
them, even that which is right, when spoken by him is displeasing. And when
this is the study of each member, to prove all false or bad that another says
or does, and to disgrace and weaken one another, what strength, what safety,
what peace, what duration can be to that society?

IV. UNITY is also the BEAUTY, and Comeliness of the Church and all societies:
Perfect UNITY without Diversity is proper to God. But ab Vno omnia: that all
the innumerable parts of his Creation, should by Order and UNITY make ONE
UNIVERSE or world; that all the members of the Church of Christ, of how great
variety of gifts, degrees and place soever should make one Body, this is the
Divine skill; and this Order and Unity is the Beauty of his works. If the Order
and Unity of many Letters made not words, and of many words made not sentences,
and of many sentences made not Books, what were their excellency or use? If
many Notes ordered and united made not Harmony, what were the pleasure of
music or melody? And how does this Concord make it differ from a discordant
odious noise? The Unity of well-ordered Materials is the Beauty of an Edifice:
And the Unity of well-ordered and proportioned members, is the symmetrie and
Beauty of the Body* It delights man's nature more to read the history of
Loves, and amiable concord (which is the charming snare in tempting Lust^books)
than to read of odious and ruinating discords: And no doubt but the many
histories of sinful discord, and their effects are purposely recorded in
Scripture, to make it the more hateful to all believers: This is the use of the
recorded malice of Cain to Abel, of the effect of the Babel division of
tongues; Genesis 4. 8, 9. and 13. 7. etc. 19. 4. and 26. 20. and 27. 41. and 31.
36. and 34. 25, etc. and 49. and 50. and 53. Exodus 2. 13. and 16. 2. and 17. 3.
Numb. 21. 4, 5, 6. Judge. 9. and 12. and 20. 1 Samuel 18. and 2 Samuel 3. and 15.
and 19. 1 King. 12. etc.
of the disagreement of the servants of Abraham and Lot; of the envy of Joseph's
brethren, and of Esau's thoughts of revenge against Jacob, and of Jacobs fear
of him; of the discord of Laban and Jacob; of the bloody fact of Simeon and
Levi, and Jacob's dying detestation of it and his curse; of the two Hebrews
that strove with each other, and one of them with Moses; of the Israelites
murmurings and mutinies against Moses; Abimelech's cruelty against his
brethren; of the tribe of Ephraim's quarrel with Jephta; and the Israelites
with the Benjamites and their war; of the envy of Saul against David, and his
pursuit; of his and Doegs cruelty against the Priests; of Absoloms rebellion
against David; of Joabs murders and his death; of Solomon's jealousy and
execution of Adonijah; of Rehoboams foolish difference with his subjects, and
the loss of the ten tribes, and Jeroboam's reign; of the continual wars of Juda
and Israel; of the many malicious actions of Priests and people against
Jeremiah, Amos and other Prophets and Messengers of God; 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Mat.
2. and 3. Luke 22. Act. 15. 1, etc. and 15. 39, 40. 1 Cor. 1. and 3. etc.
of the persecuting cruelty of Herod against Christ and the Infants, in his
jealousies about his Crown; of the Jews malicious and foolish opposition to
Christ, of Christ's disciples striving which should be the Greatest, and the
aspiring request of James and John; of the short dissension of Paul and
Barnabas, etc. Are not all these, unpleasant histories to us, and written to
make dissentions odious? To this end it is that we have the sad history of the
early contentions between the Jewish and the Gentile Christians about
Circumcision, and the Law, and the reconciling assembly, Act. 15. To this end
we have the sad history and sharp reproofs of the factions and sidings among
the Corinthians; of the false Apostles envy raised against Paul among the
Corinthians and Galatians; and of those that preached Christ out of envy and in
strife, to add affliction to his bonds, Phil. 1. of the many heresies that rose
up even in those first Churches to trouble, desile them and disgrace them; To
this end we have the abundance of sharp rebukes of contentious persons, and
such as strove about words, and genealogies and the Law; and the reproofs of
many of the Asian Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. and the odious description of the
heretics, 2 Pet. 2. and Jud. etc. not only as corrupters of doctrine, but in a
special manner as Separatists and dividers of and from the Christian Churches.
To this end we have the sad predictions that two sorts should arise and tear
the Churches, Act. 20. Grievous wolves that should not spare the flocks, and
some of themselves that should speak perverse things to draw away disciples
after them. To this use we have so many vehement obtestations, and exhortations
against discord and divisions; even in those times of vigorous Love and
Concord: such as 1 Cor. 1. 10, etc. and 3. etc. Phil. 2. 1, 2, etc. 3. 14, 15,
16. and abundance such, of which hereafter. And even those that by their Master
are taught not to be too forward in seeing the mote in another eye, must yet
be entreated to Mark them that cause Divisions and offenses and avoid them; and
whereas they that were such, pretended to be the most excellent servants of
Christ, and to speak more sublimely and spiritually, for greater edification
and advancement of Knowledge than the Apostles did, it was no ill
censoriousness to judge, that being the Causes of Divisions and offenses,
contrary to Christ's doctrine of Love, Unity and peace, they did not serve the
Lord Jesus (whose great and last command was Love, which he made the Nature and
character and badge of his true disciples) but by those good words and fair
speeches deceived the hearts of the simple and deceivable. Here there are four
words especially to be noted: 1. (...), which we translate good words, is
commonly translated flattery; but as Beza well notes, it signifies a speaking
of things that are plausible in themselves for some good that is in them, and
that are pretended to be all spoken for the hearers good; as Satan pretended
when he tempted Eve; yea, perhaps to be necessary to their salvation, or to
make them the most knowing and excellent sort of Christians. 2. (...), which
signifies both to Bless them as ministers do that desire their happiness, and
to praise them and speak well or highly of them: And so almost all sects and
divided bodies are gathered by flattering the hearers into a conceit that thus
they shall become the surest and most excellent Christians; and all others are
far inferior to them. 3. (...), It is the Hearts of such hearers that are
deceived, and not their heads or reason only or chiefly: For the good words
first take with them by moving their Passions or affections; And then the
Praise, fair promises and speeches kindle a kind of secret spiritual pride and
ambition in the heart, as Satan's words did in Eve to be as Gods in Knowledge:
And the Heart thus infected and puffed up promoteth the deceit of the
understanding. 4. And this is (...), hominum minime malorum, as Beza
translates. It is not simple fools, but such simple persons as we call harmless
or innocents, (as the Vulgar Latin translates it), well meaning men, or not
ill men: People that fear God and have good desires and meanings, are for want
of Judgment and watchfulness overcome by dividers.

And on the contrary, the amiable examples of Unity and Concord, and their
happy effects, are recorded in Scripture, to make us in Love with them: but
none so eminent as that of the first Christians. It is very remarkable, that
when Christ would show the world the work of his Mediation in its notable
effects, and when he would show them the excellency of his disciples about the
common world, and of his Church under the Gospel above that under Moses Law, he
does it by showing them in the power and exercise of Uniting Love. Love was it
which he came to exercise and demonstrate (his Fathers and his own): Love was
that which he came to kindle in their souls, and bring them to possess and
practice: Perfect Love is the perfect felicity which he has promised them:
Love and Unity are the matter of his last and great Command: These are the
Characters of his genuine disciples, and of the renewed Divine Nature in them:
It was Love and Unity which must in them be the witness of Christ's spirit and
power, to convince the unbelieving world; And therefore it is Love and Unity
which is the matter of his last excellent prayer for them: John 17. 22, 23, 24,
25. and 15. 12, 17. and 13. 34. 1 John 3. 14, 23. and 4. 21. And all these his
preparations, precepts, examples, and prayers, were accordingly exemplified in
the wonderful Love and Concord of his followers. When the day of Pentecost was
come, in which the Holy Ghost must be most eminently communicated to them, they
were all with One accord in one place, Acts 2. 1. The Apostles had an Unanimity
and Concord before, proportionable to the measure of their grace, which was
preparatory to their reception of the eminent gift of the Spirit, which
increased their unanimity. And v. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. the three thousand
that were suddenly added to the Church, continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers: And all that
believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions
and goods, and parted them to all men as every man had need: And they
continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house
to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising
God, and having favor with all the people.] What greater demonstration could
be given that Christ is the great Reconciler, the messenger, gift and teacher
of Love, the Prince of Peace, and the great Uniter of the divided world, both
with his Father and Himself, and with one another.

In this text Acts 2. and mavelous example, you see the design and work of
the great Reconciler: When men fall out with God, they fall out with one
another: when they depart from the only Center of Unity, they can have no true
Unity among themselves: when they lose the Love of God, they lose the Love of
Man as for Gods sake and interest. And he that cannot see and Love God in man,
can see nothing in man that is worthy of much love: As he that loves not a man
for his soul and its operations, more than for his body, loves him not as a
man: And few have any great Love to a dead Corpse. Cicero could say, It is your
soul that we speak to, and converse with: were that departed we should speak to
you no more. God is more to every man, than his soul: If God were not their
life and amiableness, all men would be unlovely loathsome carcasses: Therefore
wicked men that cannot Love God and Goodness, can Love none thoroughly but
themselves and for themselves, or as Bru^es by a low or sensitive kind of love:
For it is self that they are fallen to from God and Man: And yet while self is
carnally and inordinately loved instead of God and Man, it is but destroyed and
undone by that inordinate idolatrous love: And he that loves Himself to his
own destruction (with a Love more pernicious than another hatred) does love
his friends but with such a kind of killing love: (as I have seen some Brutes
kill their young ones with the violence of their love, that would not suffer
them to let them alone.) Thus all love to man, saving a pernicious love, does
dye, where the love of God and goodness dies: And Cain gives the world the
first specimen or instance of depraved nature, in envy and wrath, and finally
in the murder of his Brother, and undoing Himself, by setting up and adhering
inordinately to himself.

But when Christ reconcileth God and Man, he reconcileth Men to one another:
For he teaches men to love God in Man, and Man for God, with a Holy, noble,
reasonable kind of Love: And so to love all men, as far as God has an Interest
in all: And to Love all Christians with an eminent Love, as God is eminently
interessed in them. And this is Christ's work on the souls of men; and much of
his business which he came for into the world. And therefore he would have his
first Disciples to give the world such a specimen of Love in this extraordinary
way of Community: For as extraordinary works of Power, (that is, Miracles) must
be wrought by the first Preachers of the Gospel, to show Christ's power, and
convince the unbelieving world; so it was as needful that then there should be
extraordinary works of Love, to show Christ's Love, and teach them the great
work of Love which he came to call and bring men to: For the first Book that
Christ wrote, was on the Hearts of Men, (which no Philosopher could do); In
fleshly tables he wrote LOVE TO GOD and MAN by the finger of his Spirit, (many
a year before any Book of the New Testament was written). And as his Doctrine
was [ Love one another] and [ Love your enemies, forbear and forgive, etc.] so
his first Churches must extraordinarily exemplify and express this doctrine,
by living in this extraordinary community, and selling all, and distributing as
each had need: And afterward their Love Feasts did long keep up some memorial
of it: For they were the first sheet, as it were, of the New Book which Christ
was publishing: And, LOVE was the sum of all that was imprinted on them: And
their Practice was to be much of the Preaching that must convert the world.
Christ was not a mere Orator or teacher of Words: And, non magna loquimur, sed
vivimus, was the profession of his disciples: He came not merely to talk, and
teach men to talk; but to Do, and teach men to Do; even to do that himself
which none else ever did, and to teach his followers to do that which no other
sort of men did in this world: But this leads me up to the next Use of Unity.

V. The SPIRIT of UNITY and LOVE is the Great means of the Churches increase:
There is a twofold augmentation of the Church: 1. Intrinsic and Intensive;
when it Increases in all Goodness, and hastes to perfection: And it is this
Vital principle of Uniting Love, or the Spirit of Unity, which is the immediate
cause of this. 2. Extensive, when the Church is enlarged, and more are added to
it: And it is a Life of Uniting Love among Christians, that must do this as
much or more than preaching: Or at least, if that preaching which is but the
effect of Knowledge, produce Evangelical Knowledge in the hearers, yet a Life
of Love and Unity is the adapted means of breeding Love and Unity, the Life of
Religion in the world: Light may cause Light; but Heat must cause Heat; and it
must be a Living thing that must generate life, by ordinary causation: That
which comes from the Head, may reach the Head, and perhaps the Heart, but is
not so fit to operate on Hearts as that which comes from the heart.
Undoubtedly if Christians did commonly live in such Love and Unity among
themselves, and show the fruits of common Love to all about them, as their
Great master and his Religion teaches them, they would do wonders in
converting sinners, and enlarging the Church of Jesus Christ. Who could stand
out against the convincing and Attractive power of Uniting Love? Who could much
hate and persecute those that Love them, and show that Love? This would heap
melting coals of fire on their heads. Our Savior knew this when he made this
his great Lesson to his disciples, and when he prayed ( Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23,
24.) over and over [ for them which should believe on him, through the Apostles
word, [that they all may be One, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that
they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me:
And the Glory which thou gave me I have given them* that they may be One even
as we are One: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in One,
and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me]. O when will Christ revive this blessed principle in his
followers, and set them again on this effectual way of preaching, that Love may
draw the world into the Churches Unity? Some look for new miracles for the
converting of the now-forsaken Nations: what God will do of that kind we know
not; for he has not told us: But Holy Uniting Universal Love is a thing which
he has still made our certain duty; and therefore we are all bound to seek and
do it: And therefore we may both pray and labor for it in hope: And could we
but come up to this known duty, we should have a means for the worlds
conversion, as effectual as miracles, and more sweet and pleasant to them and
us.

Obj. But why then is the world still unconverted, when all true Christians
have this love?

Ans. 1. Alas, those true Christians are so few, and the hypocrites that are
selfish worldlings are so many, that the poor people that live among professed
Christians, do judge of Christianity by those false professors, who are indeed
no Christians: Men see not the hearts of one another. Thousands of ungodly
persons, for interest, education and custom take on them the name of
Christians, who never were such indeed by heart-consent. When these counterfeit
Christians live like Infidels, men think that Christians are no better than
Infidels: For they think they must judge by the greater number of such as go
under the Christian name. But if the world could tell who they be that are
truly Christians at the heart, they would see that they have that spirit of
Love, which is not in unbelievers. 2. And alas the Love and Unity even of true
Christians is yet too imperfect, and is darkened and blemished with too much of
the contrary vice: were Christians perfect Christians, they would indeed be the
honor of their profession. Then Love would be the powerful principle of all
their works; which would taste of its nature, and, as it is said of Wine, Judge.
9. 13. it cheereth God and man, so I may say, God and man would be delighted in
the sweetness of these fruits: For with such Sacrifice God is well pleased,
Heb. 13. 16. But alas what crabbed and contrary fruits, how sour, how bitter
do many distempered Christians bring forth? If it will increase the Church, and
win men to the Love of Christianity, to be reviled or persecuted, to be
contemned and neglected, to be separated from as persons unworthy of our-love
and kindness, then Christianity will not want propagaters: The pouring out of
the Spirit, was the first planting of the Christian Church: And where there is
most of Love, there is most of the spirit. As there needs no forcing penal
Laws, to compel men to obey God so far as Love prevails in them; so if Love
were more eminent in the Church Pastors and Professors, that they preached and
ruled and lived toward all men in the power of sincere and fervent Love, there
would be less pretense for all that violence, oppression and cruelty, which
has been long exercised by the worldly Clergy, and so much the more odiously
by how much the more the sacred name of Religion has been used for its
justification or excuse.

VI. UNITING LOVE is the GLORY and Perfection of the Church: And therefore
there will be in Heaven much greater Love, and much nearer UNITY, than there is
of the dearest friends on earth, yea greater and nearer than we can now
distinctly understand.

And again I say, that they that in thinking of the state of separated souls,
do fear lest all souls do lose their individuation, and fall into one common
soul, do foolishly fear a greater Unity than is to be expected. (And yet
nothing else about the souls Immortality is liable to a rational doubt: For, 1.
Its substance certainly is not annihilated: 2. Nor its formal essential Virtues
lost, by mutation into some other species; 3. Nor does the Activity of such an
Active nature cease, 4. Nor will there want objects for it to act upon). Were
it well considered that LOVE is as Natural to a soul as Heat is to the Sun,
that is, an effect of that Act which its very essence does perform; 2. And that
our UNITY is an Unity of LOVE (Voluntarily performed) it would much abate such
selfish fears of too much Unity: For who ever feared too much Love? too
extensive, or too intensive? too large, or too near a Union of minds? And as
the beloved Apostle says, that GOD IS LOVE as a name which signifies his
essence, why may not the same be said of souls, which are his Image? that A
SOUL IS LOVE? Not that this is an Adequate conception of A SOUL (much less of
GOD); but of the partial or inadequate Conceptions, it seems to be the
chiefest. The SOUL of Man is a Pure (or Spiritual) substance informed by a
Virtue of Vital activity, Intellection, and Volition, (which is LOVE),
informing (or animating) an organical body for a time, and separable at the
bodies dissolution. And as the Calefactive Virtue is the Essence of the Fire
(though not an adequate Conception of its essence; For it is a pure substance
formally indu^d with the Virtue Motive, Illuminative and Calefactive) and the
act of Calefaction is its essence as operative on a due recipient); so LOVE is
the souls essence in the faculty or Virtue, and its Essence as operative on a
due object, in the Act: which Act though the soul exercise it not ad ultimum
posse by such a Natural necessity as the fire heateth, yet its Nature or
Essence immediately exercises it, though in a fre^r manner: yea, some Acts of
Love quoad specificationem, though not quoad exercitium are exercised as
necessarily as calefaction by the fire: yea more, though now in the body the
exercise by cogitation and sense be not so necessary, we cannot say that in its
separated state it will not be so: yea yet more, even in the body the LOVE of a
Man's SELF and of felicity, or pleasure, seems to be a deep, constant or
uncessant Act of the soul, though not sensibly observed. And if LOVE be so far
essential to it, the perfection of Love is the souls perfection, and the
exercises of Love are the chief operations of the soul: And consequently the
perfection and glory of the Church (which is but a conjunction of holy persons)
consists in the same Uniting Love, which perfecteth souls.

And indeed Uniformity in circumstantials, and in external Polity were but a
Carcass or Image of Unity without Uniting Love which is its soul: As much
external Union in good as we are capable of, does advantage Unity of spirit:
But all Union in evil, and all in unnecessary circumstantials, which is managed
to the diminution of Christian Love, are to the Church, but as the glory of
adorned clothing, or monuments or pictures to a carcass: And the
Church-Tyrants that would thus Unite us, and sacrifice Love and the means of it
to their sort of Unity, are but like the Physician that prescribed a sic^man a
draught of his own heart blood to cure him* The Inquisitors that torture men's
bodies to save their souls, are not more unskilful in their pretended Charity
to save men, than is he that hinders or destroys Love, while he seeks the
Churches Unity in humane Ordinances by fraud or fear: When they have killed any
Church by Love killing snares and practices, and glory that it is united in
Papal power, splendour and decrees, it is but as if they cut all a man's nerves,
or cast him into a Palsy, or killed him, and gloried that they have tied his
limbs together with strings, or bound them all up in the same Winding Sheet and
Coffin. That edifieth not the Church, which tends not to save, but to destroy
men's souls.

CHAP. V.
This Unity conduces to the good of the world (without the Church.)

. 1. THe chief hopes of the Heathen and Infidel world consist in their hopes of
being brought into the faith and Church of Christians: And as God adds to the
Church such as shall be saved, so the means that our charity must use to save
them, is to get them into this ark. The measure of their other hopes, or what
possibility there is of their salvation I have elsewhere plainly opened: It
suffices us here to remember, that no man comes to the Father but by the Son,
and that he is the Savior of his body, however he be called also the Savior
of the world.

. 2. And as in nature it is the principle of life in the seed and womb, which
is the Generating Cause of formation and augmentation of the soetu^; And it is
the vital powers in Man, which makes his daily nourishment become a living
part of himself, and causes his growth; So is i^ the Spirit in the Church,
that is Gods appointed means to quicken and convert the Infidel world. And it
is those Christian Countries which are adjoining to Mahometans and Heathens,
that should do most to their conversion: who have far easier means than others
by proximity and converse to do it, and therefore are under the greatest
obligations to attempt it: As also those remoter Countries that are most in
amity and traffic with them.

. 3. And as Instruction by evidence must do much, so this Uniting Spirit of
Love must do a great part of this work; and that both as it works inwardly on
our selves in the Communion of Saints, and as it works outwardly by
attraction and communication, to draw in and assimilate others.

. 4. I. The Churches Unity of Spirit does fortify and fit it for all its own
offices in order to the conversion of the world: All parts are better qualified
for the work, by that Wisdom, Goodness and Life which they must work by: And
each member partaketh of the common strength which their Unity causes. An
united Army is likest to be victorious: Their routing is their flight and
overthrow: And the Army or Kingdom that is Mutinous or in Civil Wars, or not
unanimous, is unfit to enlarge dominion, and conquer others: They will have
wor^ enough at home.

. 5. Were but Christian Princes and people united, as they would be a terror to
Turkish and other Infidel Oppressors (and in likelihood easily able to vanquish
them) so they might easily contribute their endeavors to instruct and convince
these Infidels with probability of greater success, than any attempts have yet
had upon them. They might with greater advantage send out and maintain men of
Learning and other fitness to perform it. The Eastern Christians by divisions
were broken off from the Greeks: The Greeks by division (and wickedness) fell
into the hands of the Turks: The divisions of the Western Nations furthered
their Conquest, and hindered the Greeks recovery: The divisions of the Military
forces lost Palestine and frustrated their vast labors and expenses: Lost also
Armenian aids, and destroyed the hopeful beginnings of the Conversion of the
Tartarians. The division of Christian Princes, has set up the Papal Kingdom as
the Umpire of their feuds. That which has done so much to destroy Churches and
Kingdoms, and has murdered many hundred thousand Christians, and gone far
toward the extirpating of true Christianity out of much of the (formerly
Christian) World, must needs unfit us all to recover the World, and convert
unbelievers.

. 6. And were but Christian Preachers and Pastors United, instead of their
pernicious Churchdestroying contentions, how great things might their united
diligence have done! If all the mischievous unskilful proud wrangling, and
worldly ambitious strife by which the Christians were divided into Nestorians,
Eutychians, Monothelites, Phantasiasts, Donatists, Novatians, and their
Anathematizers, etc. had been turned into an united force and diligence, by
Light and Love to have converted Infidels, What a happy case had the World been
in? And what blessings had that part of the Clergy been, that now have left
their Names and History to reproach and shame?

. 7. II. And as Efficiently, so Objectively and Morally the Union of Christians
tends to convert the World, as it is notorious that their divisions have
hindered their Conversion. Men commonly suspect them to be deceived or
deceivers, that do not agree among themselves. They that reverence united
Christians, despise them when they see them fall into divisions, and learn of
themselves to condemn them all, by hearing them revile and condemn each other.
Christ had never made it so great a part of his prayer to his Father, that his
disciples might be One, even as the Father and he were One, to this end [ that
the world may know that the Father sent him] if this their Union had not been a
special means of convincing unbelievers. And this was not by a Political Union
of the rest of his Disciples under some One of them as the Governing Head of
all the rest: For no such Head was set over them by Christ, nor ever claimed or
exercised any such authority: But it was a holy Union of Minds in knowledge and
faith, and of Hearts in Love, and of Life in their published Doctrine and their
Communion and Conversation. The common Sun-light makes all men's sight (whose
Organs and Vi^ive faculty are sound) to agree: and though a man has two eyes,
they see unitedly as if they were one* The more united fuel make one fire, the
more powerful it is to kindle on all other combustible matter near it. When
many Ministers of the same or several Churches agree, it much avails to
procure the belief and obedience of their flocks. And when Pastors and people
agree, it strongly inviteth the reverence and consent of those without. By
wilful dissensions we are scandals and snares to unbelievers, and if Christians
live not in Unity, Love and Peace, they rob the world of a great appointed
means of their conversion: And they who for so doing do justly exclaim against
persecutors and hinderers of the Gospel, should also remember how much they
participate in that guilt, while the Love of Christians to one another is made
almost as needful as preaching to the winning of men's Love to faith and
holiness.

. 8. As in the solemn singing of Psalms, the harmony of concenting well tuned
voices, inviteth the hearers to join with them by delight, when bawling
confusion and discord (one singing one tune and another another) is loathsome
and tiresome and drives men away: so would the sweet concent of Christians
have won unbelievers to the Love of Christian faith and piety, when their
divisions and wicked lives have had contrary lamentable effects: woe to the
world because of offenses, and woe to them by whom offenses come.

CHAP. VI.
The Unity of Christians is due to the Honor of Christ, and is pleasing and
amiable to God.

. 1. IT is not only Miracles that are Christ's witness in the world. The spirit
of Prophecy also is called his witness, Rev. 19. 10. And if many Prophets
should all say that they speak from Christ, and speak contrary things, and
charge each other with falsehood and deceit, would this be to his honor or to
the credit of their testimony? It is the great Concord of the prophecies,
promises and types of the Old Testament with the history and doctrine of the
New, and the great concord of all the writers of the New Testament among
themselves, which greatly facilitateth our belief both of the Old and New. And
all Infidels who accuse the Scriptures of untruth, do accuse it also of
contradictions: And if they could prove the later, they would prove the former.

. 2. And the spirit of Holiness as it regenerateth and sanctifies sinners from
generation to generation, is no less a witness of the Truth and Love and Glory
of Christ, than prophecies and miracles: The same spirit that is the author of
prophecy and sacred doctrine, is also the author of believers renovation to
the image of God. And Illumination is not the least or last part of this
sanctifying work: Christ is the light of the world, and his word and spirit are
given to enlighten blinded minds, and to bring them out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and from the power of the Prince of darkness and from doing
the works of darkness, to the Father of Lights who gives wisdom liberally to
them that ask it, that they may walk as Children of the light. Light is usually
called Glory: Heaven is the place of the greatest Light and greatest Glory: And
heavenly wisdom in believers, is much of their Glory here begun, in which their
Father, their Savior and their sanctifier is glorified. Whatever therefore
obscureth or diminishes this sacred Light in Saints, opposes that Glory of
God and our Redeemer which must appear and shine forth in them. The holy
Learning of his disciples is the honor of the heavenly Teacher of the Church:
All true believers are taught of God: were they no wiser, nor no better than
other men, where were the testimony and the honor of their Teacher? and who
would believe that he were a happier Teacher than Philosophers? or that he were
the true Savior of the world that does not save his own disciples from sin and
folly* No wonder that God has no pleasure in fools, and that the foolish shall
not stand in his fight, when they are such a dishonor to Christ and him: what
fellowship has Light with darkness?

And who knows not that disagreement proves ignorance and error, in one
party at least? When they hold and plead for contrary opinions, both cannot be
in the right. And when this is but in dark and difficult matters, of no great
influence on our hearts and lives and future hopes, it is tolerable; and no
more to be wondered at, than that we are yet but imperfect men in flesh, and in
this low and darksome world: But when it amounts to that which makes
Christians judge it necessary to anathematize one another, and to cast out each
other from their communion as intolerable, and perhaps to seek one another
destruction, do they not loudly proclaim their shameful ignorance to the world?

. 3. I know that discipline must be exercised and the precious separated from
the vile, and this especially for the honor of Christianity. For if the Church
be as a Swinesty, and the clean and unclean, the sober and the drunken, the
chaste and the fornicators equally members of it, such a society and their
religion will be contemned. For sin is a reproach to any people.

But casting a felon or murderer in Jaile does much differ from a civil war.
Prove. 14. 34. and 6. 33. and 19. 26. Jer. 23. 40. and 29. 18. and 42. 18. and
44. 8. Ezekiel. 5. 1^, 15.
For the Church to cast out the impure that repent not, is necessary to their
honor; but to divide and subdivide among themselves is their reproach, though
the dividers have never so fair pretenses.

. 4. I know also what pretenses against heresy, etc. and 22. 4.
the dividing sects have had in all ages. They have pretended that they only
being the true Church, the condemning and rejecting of all others was necessary
to the Churches honor: But is it indeed to the honor of the Christian name,
that so great bodies for so many ages have continued to condemn and
anathematize each other? That the Greek Church condemns the Western, and the
Western them? That the Eastern and Southern are separated from both? And the
Western Christians so divided among themselves? Who that is not a stranger to
man and history knows not that it has been to exercise a Dominion over
others, and also to extol the skill of their understandings, as speaking
rightlier than others, when they strove about ambiguous words, that very much
of their anathematizing has been used? And when the Pope has anathematized
the Patriarch of Constantinople, he has anathematized him again: yea so has
the Patriarch of Alexandria also. And when the three parties (the Orthodox, the
Nestorians and the Eutychians) for so many ages have continued anathematizing
each other, the dishonor falls on them all in the eyes of beholders, and no
party recovereth their honor with the rest.

. 5. Undoubtedly it is they that God shall make the blessed instruments of
restoring the necessary means of Concord, and thereby of reviving Christian
Love and peace, that will be the chief and honorable agents for the repairing
of the honor of the Christian Church, if ever it be repaired in this world.
All parties seem agreed in this, even they that most foolishly and cruelly tear
and distract the Church, that it must be Love and Concord that at last must
heal it, and recover its glory if ever it be healed. And how much Christ is
pleased to see his servants live in Love and peace, his office, his nature, his
many and vehement Commands do tell us.

CHAP. VII.
III. What obligations are on all Christians to avoid sinful divisions and
discord, and to promote this Unity and peace.

. 1. FRom what is already said it is easy to gather, that many and great
obligations are on all Christians to be promoters of Concord and enemies of
discord and divisions. I. The many and express commands of Christ in Scripture
do oblige them. This is no dark or controverted point, written in words which
are hard to be understood, but plainly uttered and often urged: Yea when
several of Gods commands are mentioned, this is still preferred before most
others that can be imagined to stand in competition against it: As the uniting
Love of God is called the first and great Command, so the uniting Love of man
is called the second like to that, and the sum of the second table, and the
fulfilling of the Law. It is not mentioned as an Accident of the New Creature,
but as an essential part; not as the high qualification of some rare Christian,
but as that which is necessary and common to all that are the living members of
Christ: Not only as needful to some inferior uses, but as necessary to all the
great Ends of our Religion, preferred before sacrifice and all the rituals, and
not to be dispensed with, on any pretense.

. 2. II. No man therefore can be an obedient servant of Christ that seeks not
to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: If he that breaks one
of the least commands and teaches men so to do, shall be called Least in the
Kingdom of God, what shall he be called, and where shall be his lot that
breaks the greatest?

. 3. III. The Love of God our Father and of Christ our Redeemer does oblige us:
For if he that loves not his brother whom he se^th daily, cannot Love God whom
he never saw; how much less he that loves not the multitude of believers, and
so great an interest of God in the world, as is that unity and concord of the
body of Christ? And if he that does or does not good to one of the least of the
servants of Christ, is supposed to have done it or not done it to himself, how
much more he that does or omitteth that which Christ and his whole Church is so
much concerned in?

. 4. IV. The Love of our own souls obliges us, considering how many and great
impediments discord does raise against all grace and duty, and against our
holiness, comfort and salvation: And how much Christian Love and Concord do
conduce to the preservation of all grace, and to the attainment of Glory: All
men in true Concord are our helpers, and all men in discord are our hinderers,
and tempters. How fair and easy is the way to Heaven among true Loving and
agreeing Christians? and how hard is it where divisions and contentions take
place?

. 5. V. The Love of our neighbors souls obliges us to this: That which is
best for us is best for them. Alas, carnal minds deceived by sin need not to
have the way to heaven made harder, nor to be tempted by the discords of
Christians to despise them: Their own malignity and the devils temptations,
when we have done our best may suffice to deceive them and undo them: Every
Christian should be a helper to the salvation of all about him, and a soldier
under Christ, to fight against Satan as he is the great divider and destroyer.
As ever therefore we pity the souls of sinners, and would not be guilty of
their damnation, we should keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

. 6. VI. Our Love to the Church and Sacred Ministry does oblige us. Our
Discords unsay too powerfully what Christ's Ministers say, when they set forth
the power of grace, and the excellency of Christianity! All the opposition of
the arguments and reproaches of Quakers or malignant profane enemies is of far
less force against the Gospel, than the discords of professed Christians. The
labors of many worthy Ministers have been hindered, and their hearts even
broken with such sinful and scandalous divisions; when the enemies hit us in
the teeth with these, we are ashamed and cannot deny the fact, though we can
deny their false conclusions. How much of the designs of Satan and his agents
have lain in dividing the servants of Christ? Some of the moderate and
peaceable Emperors in the more flourishing state of the Church and Empire, by
the discords and mutinies of factious Christians were made a-weary of their
Crowns: Yea some of those that the hasty hereticating Orthodox party too
hastily pronounced heretics and heretical (such as Theodosuis junior, Zeno,
Anastasuis, Justinian, etc.) were tired out with laboring in vain to keep the
Christian Bishops in Peace, and by Historians are recorded to be men of better
qualities than the Bishops: And one of them ( Anastasius) laid down his Crown
and told them he would not be the Ruler of such contentious and unruly men,
till the necessities of the people brought them to remorse, and to entreat him
to continue Emperor, and promised to cease their mutinous contentions.

And what the divisions in the Church of Rome did to shame and thus far abase
the Papacy, is past all doubt: When there have been in many generations
sometimes two and sometimes three called Popes at once; when some Kingdoms
owned one and some another, and when they often fought it out, and (as Victor
the third and many another) got their pretended right by Victory, not by the
Word but by the Sword; When one Pope for forty years together lived in France
at Avignion, and the other at Rome; When they fought it out with many Emperors
and Kings; When Italy was kept by them many ages in divisions and bloody wars;
and when the very Citizens of Rome and their Popes were put to fight it out at
home in their streets; And when the Popes have excommunicated the people of
Rome it self (where then was the Church of Rome?) All this Church history
records to their perpetual shame.

And have not the dissensions between Luther and Carolostadius, and Zuinglius,
Lutherans and Calvinists, to name no more, been a reproach to the Reformation
(as I said before). As we Love the Church then, and as we regard the honor and
success of the Ministry, and would not have Christ's house and Kingdom fall or
be shaken or disgraced by our sinful discords, Let us keep this spiritual Unity
and peace.

. 7. VII. And indeed Experience is not the least of our obligations: A danger
never tried, is seldom so cautelously avoided as those into which we have
formerly fallen, and out of which we have narrowly escaped. They that have read
Church History, what the factions and heresies of the Bishops and people have
done from the days even of the Apostles to this day: Yea, they that have but
seen and felt what Religious discords have done in this generation, even at
home in England, Scotland and Ireland, and yet do not hate such discord as
death, and love peace and spiritual unity as life and health and safety, they
are hardened past all excuse.

CHAP. VIII.
What sort and measure of Unity may not, or may be groundedly hoped for on
earth.

. 1. THe Prognostics in diseases are needful to direct Physicians in their
attempts: He that either pretends to Cure incurable diseases, and thereby
does but torment the Patient and hasten death, or else will hastily prevent the
Crisis, or will open inflammations before the time, may be called a Physician
or Surgeon, but will prove a hurtful or pernicious enemy. Some diseases will
admit of no better than palliating and delay: Some that are curable, are made
mortal by temerarious haste. Who will break the Egg to get the Chicken before
it is ripened by nature for exclusion? Yet has the Church had too many such
Midwives that will hasten abortion and untimely birth, and cannot stay till
natures time; such mischievous Surgeons as are presently lancing unripe
apostemes: It is of mischievous consequence to expect such Concord, and
accordingly set upon the hastening of it, which certainly will never be: And it
is of great and necessary Use, to know how much, and what Unity may be
expected, in the Church militant, and what not.

. 2. I. Negatively: I. It is certain that Christians will never be all of one
stature or degree of grace. The Apostle has fully opened this, 1 Cor. 12. and
here Ephesians. 4. and Romans 14. and 15. and elsewhere. Some will be of more blameless
lives, and some more offensive: Some will be more fruitful and useful in the
Church than others; some will have greater gifts than others for that end: some
will be more patient and meek, and others more passionate and hot: some will be
more considerate and prudent, and some more rash and of indecent carriage: some
will be more humble, and condescending, and abhor pride much more than others
will do: some will be more zealous, and some more frigid or lukewarm: some
will be much more heavenly, and make less of earthly things than others: some
will be more self-denying and patient under sufferings, and some will too much
seek their own transitory things, and with greater impatience bear both crosses
from God and injuries from man: some will be more cheerful and rejoice in God,
and the hope of Glory, and others will be more sad and timorous and heavy: Some
will have a strong faith, and some a weak: Some will have assured sealed hopes,
and others will be doubting of their salvation: But in nothing will there be
more certain and notable difference, than in men's knowledge and conceptions of
spiritual things. Undoubtedly there is scarce a greater difference of Visages,
than there is of Intellectual apprehensions: Nay, perhaps the likeness of all
men's faces is greater than of their understandings. Some will still know
little, (and none very much, but) others comparatively much more: Some that
know much in one kind, will be ignorant in others: And as all men are not of
the same Trade, nor all Scholars prosecute the same studies, but some excel in
one thing, and some in another, and some in nothing, so in religion such
proportions and differences of understanding there will be.

. 3. No observing man that converseth with mankind one would think could be
ignorant of this: And yet the talk and actions of too many Church-Leeches in
most parts and ages of the Christian World, has showed that they did not well
understand it. If universal, constant, undeniable experience be not enough to
prove that it is so, and has been so, and therefore will be so, Let the
certain Causes of it be considered.

1. Men are born of much different Intellectual complexions, and degrees of
capacity: some are Idiots or natural fools; some are half such: some are very
phlegmatic and dull of wit, and must have long time and teaching to learn a
little; and of memories as weak to retain what they learn: some have naturally
strong wits, and as strong memories. If these be bred up in the same house,
will they therefore have the same knowledge and conceptions?

. 4. 2. And as men naturally differ in quickness and dullness of wit, so they do
in the temperature of all their humors and bodies, which accidentally will
cause great difference in their minds. A sanguine man has usually other
thoughts and perceptions than a phlegmatic man; and a phlegmatic man has
other thoughts and sense of things, than the choleric have: And the melancholy
man differs from them all, and often from himself. As these tempers variously
affect the fantasy and the passions, so consequently, they do usually the
Intellect and the Will.

. 5. 3. The Countries that men are born in, it not by the air and soil, at
least by the great diversity of Languages, Laws, Governments and Customs, do
make much difference in men's conceptions: As we see by experience in the
difference of many Nations.

. 6. 4. The very sins or merits of Parents may do much to the hurt or benefit
of Children; partly by corrupting or bettering their bodily temperature, and
partly by Gods curse or blessing on their souls: As I have fully proved in my
Second Disputation of Original Sin.

. 7. 5. And were there no other cause of different conceptions than the
different education of children by their parents, it would make a very great
difference in the world. When one is brought up in Learning, and another in
barbarism; one in reading and hearing Gods Word, and another in contemning and
deriding it: One is taught to reverence Gods name and truth, and another to
blaspheme them or despise them: One is taught one Religion and another another:
One is taught to lay all his salvation on that which another is taught to
abhor. And it is not only in Diverse Lands, but in the same Cities, Towns and
Streets, yea, among men that publicly profess the same Religion in Name and
Generals, that this difference is found.

. 8. 6. And if Parents make no difference, yet Schoolmasters often will: With
their Grammar learning, one teaches his Scholars to deride such or such a
party of Christians as Heretics, Heteroclites or anomalous; and others say the
same of others, as they themselves do like or dislike: And Boys usually take
deeply their Masters dictates, especially if they be cunning and malignant, and
such as the Devil and flesh befriend.

. 9. 7. And it is no small difference, that Company and Converse cause: Even
among Children and Servants in families, and Boys at School: from whom they are
as apt to receive ill impressions as from evil Teachers. And therefore variety
of company in Youth, is like to breed variety of sentiments.

. 10. 8. And the different Books which they read, will make the like
difference: while one writes against that which another proclaims to be
excellent, and necessary, and all set off the matter with such plausibility and
confidence as young and unexercised persons are unable to see through and
perceive the error.

. 11. 9. And when they go abroad in the world, the difference among those that
they converse with all their lives, may well be expected to cause much
difference in their thoughts. If they be set Apprentices, one falls into a
family of one mind, and another of another: And so if they be servants: And
their friends and companions will occasion as much: And if they marry, the
different judgments of Husbands and Wives may do the same.

. 12. 10. And especially when differences in Religion have already got
possession of all mankind (in some degree) and they set themselves to enquire
after the nature of these differences, and being at first unskilful are unable
to try and judge aright, they must needs fall into great variety of judgments.

. 13. 11. And the great difference among Preachers and Pastors of the Church
will be as powerful a cause of discord to youth and learners, as almost any of
the rest: while one Preacher condemns that as a dangerous error, and
frighteneth them from it as a heinous sin, which another extolleth as necessary
truth or duty. And yet thus it is in many particulars even where men profess
the same Religion: witness the many loads of books that are written by the
Papists against each other; As the Dominicans against the Jesuits, and the
Jesuits against them; The Jansenists against both, and their odious charges of
highest false doctrines and crimes in their provincial Letters, and the Jesuits
Morals: Gulielmus de sancto Amore and his partners against the Friars; The
secular Priests against the regulars, such as Watson in his Quodlibets, and
abundance more such like: And in what Country almost or City do not preachers
in some measure differ, and breed diversity of senses in the people? Which Paul
foretold even in the purest times and Church, that of their own selves should
men arise speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them. Besides
the grievous Wolves that should enter and devour the flock, Act. 20. 30. It
must be that heresies must arise, that they that are approved may be made
manifest. In Corinth some were of Paul, and some of Apollo and some of Cephas,
and they had such divisions as showed them to be much carnal; At Rome they
judged and despised one another about meats and drinks and days: Romans 14. and
15. And some caused divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which they
had learned, Romans 16. 16, 17. In Galati^ they had Judaizing teachers that
troubled them. And at Antioch some taught them that except they were
circumcised and kept the Law of Moses they could not be saved, Act. 15. 1, etc.
In Asia some Churches had Nicolaitans, and such as taught them to eat things
offered to Idols, and to commit fornication, and the woman Jezabel that seduced
them: and some had such as Diotrephes that received not the brethren and cast
out those that did, and prated even against the beloved Apostle with malicious
words: Diverse Churches had perverse disputers, about the Law and genealogies,
and such as strove about words that profited not, but to the subverting of the
hearers: and some whose doctrine fretted like a Cancer, who subverted whole
houses, whose mouths were to be stopped: And the Colossians had such as were
for humane ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, and for worshipping
Angels, and prying into unknown things: Col. 2. And Paul tells the
Philippians that some preached Christ, not sincerely but in envy and strife to
add affliction to his bonds, whom yet he silenced not, but rejoiced that Christ
was preached even by such: And he foretells Timothy that in the later days
much false doctrine should be vented, And even then he had none like minded to
Timothy that naturally sought the Churches good; but all sought their own (too
much) and the things of Jesus Christ too little. And the Apostle John met with
such as he would not have Christians bid Good speed to, nor receive them into
their houses; And James was put sharply and largely to reprove such as in
conceited wisdom would needs be Masters, and had the envious wisdom which is
from beneath, and is earthly, sensual and devilish, producing strife,
confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3. And could it then be expected that all
Christians be of the same opinions in all things?

. 14. 12. But now this temptation to differences of judgment is grown much
greater, in that the Christian world is so publicly and notoriously divided
into different parties. The Greeks are one party; the Armenians and Georgians
somewhat differ; The Syrians and the Abassines and Copties in Egypt and other
Eastern and Southern Countries, are of diverse sentiments in many things: The
Papists differ from all; and the Protestants from them; and too many divisions
are among themselves; which I need not name. And can it be expected that in
such a world, particular Christians should be sound without their personal
differences?

. 15. 13. And the variety of Governments, an^ Laws, will also produce the like
disagreements. While one Prince or State is of one mind, and another of
another; One is a Papist, another a Protestant, one a Lutheran and another
Reformed, one a Greek and another against all sorts of Christians; And in the
same Kingdom in one age the Prince is of one mind, and in the next his
Successor of another. And this must needs cause disagreement in the Subjects.

. 16. 14. And even the variety of Gods providence will occasion diversity of
thoughts: when some are in health and some in sickness, some in wealth and some
in poverty, some high and some low, some favored and preferred, and some
persecuted, imprisoned, slandered and distressed, whence different impressions
will arise.

. 17. 15. Yea men's different trades and callings will occasion different
impressions; whilst their business leads them several ways and into several
companies, and altering employments.

. 18. 16. And almost all men have some different interests; The Teacher and the
Hearer, the Landlord and the Tenant, the Soldier and the Countryman, the
buyer and the seller, the master and the servant, the ruler and the subject,
which will occasion different inclinations.

. 19. 17. And men have great difference of temptations, and provocations, from
Satan and from men: some Satan tempts one way, and some another; some are
abused and provoked by one sort of men, and some by another; some are called
out to disputes with one Sect, and some with another: And when they are engaged
they usually bend all their studies one way, and little consider what may be
said on the other side, or of other matters?

. 20. 18. And when once a man has received some one great opinion, true or
false, it draws on abundance of consequences, which those that received not
that point did never think of.

. 21. 19. And some have much more time and leisure to study, and happy
counselors to help them. And some follow hard labor and have little leisure
to read, hear or think, or else live retiredly where they have little notice of
affairs, and miss the help of sound and faithful counselors and helpers.

. 22. 20. Lastly, Gods own Grace is free, and given to men in great diversity;
some that have the same spirit have more illumination, and some less, as the
Apostle at large declares, 1 Cor. 12. and elsewhere. There is one Glory of the
Sun, and another of the Moon says Paul; And as one star differs in glory from
another, so does one man in gifts and understanding; And the face of the whole
Creation shows that God delights to make a wonderful diversity in his
works; scarce two stones in the street, two sheep, two beasts, two birds, two
fishes, two trees, etc. so like, but we may know one from another by their
differences: No nor two sons of the same parents, or two of the offspring of
any animals.

And is not all this joined to the constant experience of all ages, enough to
prove, that even among Christians, and good and tolerable Christians, yea among
all, there will still be differences in degrees of knowledge and virtue, and
consequently discords in some matters of Religion, higher or lower more or less?

. 23. II. It is therefore certain that while there will be discord in
Judgment, there will be also discord in professions, and in practice. For
honest men's professions and practices will agree with their judgments in the
main. Even Paul and Barnabas will part when their judgments lead them so to do
When men have not the same measure of skill and accurateness in expressing
their own minds, and in speaking properly, grammatically, logically,
significantly, agreeably to the thing spoken, nor the same skill in defining,
or distinguishing, or sitting the true sense of words, they will really differ,
and they will verbally differ, and seem to most unskilful judges, to differ
really when they do not.

. 24. It is not therefore to be expected that if some men think that long
doctrinal confessions formed in men's private words, or Liturgies or other
humane forms, have nothing in them untrue, or evil, or which all men may not
consent to, therefore all others must think so too, and say as they: who can
think that in many thousand uncertain words, all men can and must be of the
same mind, and approve them all alike? Or that honest men can lie, and say that
they assent to what they do not?

. 25. And if men's judgments differ about matters of practice, in essentials,
integrals or accidents, their practice will accordingly differ. He that judges
a thing unlawful will not do it, if he fear God and be truly conscionable. Had
Images been lawfully used in places or exercises of Gods worship, yet it was
inhumane and unchristian in those Bishops and Councils who cursed from Christ
all that were of the contrary mind, and pronounced it an intolerable heresy,
and ejected and silenced dissenters, and raised wars and bloodshed for such a
difference: Much more unchristian was it for the Roman Pope to rebel against
his proper Prince, the Greek Emperor, and alienate the Western Empire from
him, to the French, on that account, and to excommunicate and depose Emperors
as heretics called Iconoclasts, as if Imagery had been an Article of faith, or
a necessary universal Command of God: For how can that be a heresy that is not
a plain denial or subversion of any necessary article of faith or practice? And
sure no such for Images is in the Creed or Decalogue.

. 26. The same I may say of many other Religious practices: As St. Paul
speaks of meats and drinks and days, Romans 14. and 15. so must we say of all
things that are of no greater necessity: If men in all these must be brought to
uniformity and practicing in the same mode, it must be either by argument and
persuasion, or by force: The first we are sure will never do it, in all things,
though it may in many: All the twenty reasons before mentioned prove it; and
many hundred years experience much more; It is certain to all save blinded
persons, that all Christians will never be in all things of a mind, about
Lawful and Unlawful, Duty and Sin: And (...), that force will never do it: St.
Paul says of things indifferent, that he that doubts is damned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith: For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Ungodly
persons that have no true Conscience may go against their false Consciences for
worldly ends, and wilfully sin for fear of men; But so will no true Christian,
unless in the hour of such a temptation as Peter's, by a fall from which he will
rise again to a stronger resolution than he had before: No sound believer will
sell his soul to save his flesh, nor hazard heaven by wilful sin to save his
interest on earth. So that this way of forcing men to practice contrary to
their Consciences, in points in which good and tolerable Christians differ,
will but make up Churches of wicked men that have no conscience, joined with
one party that is therein agreed. And I shall show you in due place, that they
will never devise what to do with the Conscionable dissenters, that shall not
be far worse than a charitable and peaceable forbearance.

. 27. III. It is certain that there will never be so great Concord, as that all
Disputings, opposition, and passionate and injurious words and writings will
cease among all sorts of Christians; No nor among all that are honest and
upright in the main. For as long as one takes that for a dangerous error or
sin which another takes for a necessary truth or duty, men will (even on Gods
account) think ill of one another, and in some measure speak ill as they think.
They that know that they must not call evil good and good evil, nor put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, will abuse and injure one another
in things where they confidently err: A Lutheran, though pious, will speak and
dispute against a Calvin^^, and a Cal^inist against a Lutheran; And so of many
other Parties. And though it is greatly to be wished that all Christians had
humble thoughts of their own understandings, and would stay till they know well
what they say, before they talk much against things or persons, and though it
be so with wise and eminently sober humble men, yet with too many it is far
otherwise, and like so to continue. Perverse disputings and shameful
backbitings, and speaking evil of things and persons not understood, have such
unhappy causes in the remnants of dark corrupted nature, that they seem to be
like to live till a golden age or heaven do cure them. Talking and writing
against one another even of the same Religion, yea praying and preaching
against one another must be expected in some degree: I would I need not say,
silencing and persecuting one another; yea excommunicating and anathematizing
among the worser sort of men; such usage as Nazianzen had from one of the
famous General Councils, and such usage as Chrysostom had from such Bishops as
Theophilus Alexand. and Epiphanius and a Council of other Bishops, and such as
abundance of excellent men in most ages have met with in the like kind and way,
may be expected again till Bishops and all Christians become more wise and
resined persons.

. 28. II. But (affirmatively) there is yet an excellent sort and degree of
Unity and Concord to be sought with hope among Christians, worthy of all our
utmost labor: Yea there is a true and excellent Unity and Concord which all
true Christians do already enjoy: consisting in the following things.

. 29. I. All Christians (truly such) believe in One God; and believe the
incomprehensible Trinity, and believe Gods Essential Attributes and Grand
Relations to man. They believe that he is Infinite in Immensity and Eternity
and Perfection, even a most Perfect Spirit, Life, Understanding and Will, most
Powerful, Wise and Good, the Creator and preserver, the Governor and the End
of all, of whom and through whom and to whom are all things; in whom we Live
and Move and have our being; Most Holy and True and Merciful and Just; whom we
are bound to believe and trust and love and serve, and obey and praise with all
our heart and mind and strength: and perfectly and everlastingly to see, Love
and Praise him, (to Please Him and be Pleased in Him) in Glory, is the end and
happiness of Saints.

. 30. II. All true Christians believe in One Mediator between God and man,
Jesus Christ, the Eternal Word, God, and one in Essence with the Father,
Incarnate, assuming the whole Nature of man, conceived by the holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, and was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
fulfilling all righteousness, and overcame the Devil and the world, and gave
himself a Sacrifice for man's sin, by suffering a cursed death on the Cross, to
ransom us and reconcile us unto God; and was buried and went to the departed
souls in hades, and the third day rose again from the dead, having conquered
death: And having declared the new Covenant or Law of Grace, and commanded his
Apostles to preach the Gospel to all the world, and promised them to send the
Holy Spirit, he ascended into Heaven before their faces: The said Covenant of
Grace is summarily this [that whereas all have sinned and come short of the
Glory of God; sin by one man entering into the world and death by sin, and so
death and condemnation passed upon all, in that all have sinned; God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever Believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life; that is, God freely gives to
lost undone sinners Himself to be their reconciled God and Father, Jesus Christ
to be their Savior, and the Holy Ghost to be their Sanctifier, if they will
Believe and Trust him and accept the gift, and will in serious Covenant (which
Baptism celebrateth accordingly) give up themselves to him, Repenting of their
sins, and consenting to forsake the Devil, the world and the Flesh as opposite
to God, and sincerely (though not perfectly) obey Christ and his Spirit to the
end, according to the Law of Nature and his Gospel institutions, that so they
may overcome and be Glorified for ever.]

And they believe that Christ will come at last in Glory and judge all men
according to his Laws and to their works].

. 31. III. And they all believe that the Holy Spirit, being God and one in
Essence with the Father and the Son, proceeding from the Father and (or by) the
Son, is the Great Witness, Agent and Advocate of Christ, before, at, and after
his coming into the world incarnate; by his gifts of Prophecy, Miracles and
Sanctification, convincing sinners and drawing them to Repent and Believe, and
dwelling in Believers as an operating cause of Divine Life and Light and Love,
thus Uniting them to God in Christ their Head, and to each other in Faith and
Love, by which they are gathered to him as his Church or body, having the
forgiveness of their sins, and the adoption of Sons, and right to the heavenly
inheritance; And living in holy communion on earth, their souls at death are
received to happiness with Christ, and their Bodies shall be raised, and soul
and body Glorified at the last with Jesus Christ and all the blessed, in the
perfect Vision, Love and joyful Praise of the most Glorious Jehovah.

. 32. And as I. All Christians agree in this Belief, so also II. They all
solemnly in and by the Baptismal Covenant, and their holy Eucharistical
Communion and other duties Profess the Consent of their wills to these
Relations to God their Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and to his Church or
body, and their thankful Acceptance of the foresaid Gifts: And they profess and
express their seeking-desires hereof, according to the Contents of the Lords
Prayer.

. 33. III. And as to Practice they all agree in professing and promising
obedience to Christ, according to the Law of Nature, the Decalogue and all his
Written Laws, so far as they understand them, and their desire to Learn them to
that end.

. 34. All sincere Christians agree in the true and Hearty Consent to all this;
And these are the true saved Church of Christ, called Invisible, because their
Hearts-consent is Invisible. All other Baptized and Professing Christians with
them, agree in the Profession of all this; And are called The Church-visible,
their Profession being visible. And all this being truly included in Baptism,
which is our entrance into the Catholic (or Universal) Church, in this before
described consists our Catholic Communion in Christ's body, as spiritual or
invisible and as visible.

. 35. II. But besides this Universal Church-Union and Communion, for ORDER and
Advantage to our great end, God has instituted the ORDER of Christian
Assemblies or Particular Churches; which are to the Universal Church as Cities
and Corporations to a Kingdom: Which are the noblest and most privileged parts
of the Kingdom; but yet not essential parts, but eminently Integral: For it may
be a Kingdom without them, and would be if they were all disfranchised and laid
common. And if Apostles and Evangelists as Itinerant Preachers, convert and
baptize men, they are part of the Church Universal before they are gathered
into distinct societies under proper Pastors of their own. The Eunuch Act. 8.
was baptized into no particular Church, but into the universal only; and so
were many others: And mere Baptism as such without any additional contract,
does no more. If thousands were Converted in America, or cast there without
Pastors, they were parts of the Universal Church, if baptized Professing
Christians. And before the Apostles ordained any fixed Bishops or Pastors of
particular Churches, the Church Universal was in being though small.

. 36. But these particular Churches being a great part of Christ's Institutions,
and necessary not only by Precept, but as a means to the Well-being of the
Universal, and the Edification of it and the particular members; It must be
endeavored, and that with good hope of success, that there may so much
Particular Church-Vnion be obtained and maintained as shall much conduce to its
great and excellent ends. That is, 1. So much as that in them, God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost may be Publicly, solemnly, and constantly confessed, by
sound doctrine, holy worship, and holy discipline and conversation.

2. So much as that hearty Christian Love may be exercised and maintained, and
Christians edified in Communion of Saints.

3. So much as that God shall accept them, delight in them and bless them,
their converting, edifying and comforting souls, hearing their prayers and
praises, and owning them by his Ministry, Covenants and grace, and differencing
them from the people that do not thus confess and worship him, and promoting
hereby their salvation.

And if this much be attained, it is not to be vilified for want of more, nor
blotted with reproachful names; but acknowledged with thankfulness and praise.

. 37. III. And yet there is a further degree of concord to be hoped for and
endeavored, and that is the concord of these particular Churches with one
another: That they may all Profess, 1. The same faith, and necessary doctrine;
2. and the same Love to God and one another; 3. and the same Hope of life
eternal, 4. and may offer to God the same necessary and acceptable sort of
worship, viz. by preaching and applying his holy word, recorded in the holy
Scriptures, preserving and reading them, calling upon his holy name by
Confession, prayer, thanksgiving and praises, and holding respective communion
in the use also of the Sacraments of his Covenant* and exercising in some
measure such holy Government and Discipline, by Pastors overseeing their
several flocks, as he himself by his institution has made universally
necessary. And all this, though not in perfection, nor every where with the
same degree of purity and care, yet so far, 1. as that Gods word and ordinances
be kept up in soundness in all parts and respects necessary to salvation; 2.
and as may tend to the edifying of the Churches by Love, and concord in
necessary things, and their mutual help by counsel, and strength by that
concord, 3. and the avoiding of pernicious feuds and divisions.

. 38. The means by which this is to be done, 1. by communicatory Letters; 2. by
Synods, 3. and by Civil Governors, is after in due place to be explained.

Thus much of Christian Unity and Concord may be well hoped for upon just
endeavors here on earth: But neither Perfection in these, nor those
unnecessary terms of Concord which some have long taken to be necessary.

. 39. And indeed so much as may be hoped for, is so very hardly to be obtained,
that if we trusted not to Gods extraordinary Grace, more than to any natural
probability that appears to us in man, we should be ready to despair that
ever Christians should live long in so much peace and concord: And though the
great difficulty must not kill our hopes, it must much quicken us to strenuous
endeavors: Of which more anon. Satan is so great an enemy to it, and every sin
in man is so much against it (as every disease in the body is against its ease
and peace), and the multitude and malignity of sins and sinners is so great,
and the very healers so few and faulty and unskilful, and do so much against
their own desired ends, that instead of accusing the providence of God, we
should thankfully wonder that there is so much peace and concord as there is,
and that all men live not as enemies to each others in continual war; or that
the devouring Pikes leave so many of the lesser fish alive, and the weak and
innocent are not wholly a prey to the oppressors.

CHAP. IX.
That Christ himself who commanded the Unity, Love and Concord of Christians,
did prescribe the necessary terms.

. 1. IF it be once proved, that Christ himself has prescribed the conditions
or terms of Christian Union and Communion, what remains to Christians, but to
enquire What are those terms? Whereas for want of that necessary supposition,
while men think it is left to them, no man knows who should do it, and the
Pope prescribes his terms, and others prescribe their terms, and almost each
Sect has different terms.

. 2. That Christ did prescribe them, I shall prove I. Antecedently, a Causis,
II. Consequently, ab Effectis; III. By proving the necessary exclusion of any
other competent prescribers.

. 3. I. Antecedently it is proved from 1. The universal necessity of the thing,
2. And from the office of Christ to do things of such universal necessity, and
his faithfulness therein.

. 4. 1. There are few Christians so ignorant or inconsiderate, but will confess
that the Union of Christians is necessary, not only to the edification and well
being, but to the very being of the Church, (both universal and particular.)
For what is a Church, but many Christians united and associated for
Church-ends? Pull all the Bricks or Timber of the house asunder, and it is no
house: Pull all the Planks and parts of a Ship asunder, and it is no Ship: Pull
all the leaves and sentences of a Book asunder, and it is no Book: Pull all the
parts of a man's body asunder, and there remains no body of a man, considered
formally, but only materially, and in their aptitude to reunion at the
resurrection. An Army disbanded and dissipated, is no Army. And certainly it is
no Church, that has not Church-unity of parts.

2. And all that believe in Christ, believe that he came into the world to call
and gather his Church, and to save them; and that he sent his Word, his
Ministers and Spirit to this end. He is the principle of life to the Church his
body; who first by aggregation uniteth them to himself and one another, and
then is their constitutive and governing and quickening head. It is his
undertaken office first to make all his own members, and then to govern,
preserve, edify and save them. And how can Christ make his Church, without
uniting the members? Can he build his house, and never set the bricks, stones
or timber together? Can you make a Clock or Watch, without adapting and uniting
the parts? And can Christ gather, build, compaginate and unite his Church, and
not so much as tell men (either Pastors or people) what are the Conditions and
terms of union, and the cement or solder that must unite them?

. 5. And all Christians confess Christ's sufficiency for his office, and his
perfect faithfulness in performing it. He wanted neither Power, Wisdom, nor
Love (or Will) to gather his own Church or body: He was faithful as Moses in
all Gods house. And he that fulfilled all the righteousness of the Law, and
whatever was imposed on him as a humbled satisfier of Justice, surely no less
fulfilled all that belonged to him as the grand Administrator, and Benefactor,
and Executor of Gods mercy and his own will, and as Head over all things to his
Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

. 6. Nay, as he was the King and Law giver of the Church, who was to give them
all their Universal Laws (binding all men) could he be supposed to have done
this faithfully, if he had left out the very terms of Church-unity and concord,
when such unity is essential to the Church? Did he send the Apostles to
disciple and baptize all Nations, and be in Gods house (the Church) as Paul
calls Timothy [ Pillars and bases of truth] yea, foundations, and
Master Builders, that must gather his Church out of all the world, and yet
never tell them What a Church is? that is, how the parts must be united?

As he is the Teacher of the Church, did he never teach them so necessary a
thing, as what essential Church-unity is? These are such imputations against
Christ, as seem to deny him to be Christ; As he would deny God to be God, that
would deny his providence and government of the world.

. 7. Christ's Law is to be both the Rule of our actions and his judgment. And
if he have left out so great a point as the essentiating terms of Church Union,
what momentous acts of our lives are left to be ungoverned and unjudged by the
Laws of Christ?

. 8. Above all men those are bound to consent to what I say, who hold that
Christ's Laws have not left so much as a ceremony undetermined, and that nothing
may be added or diminished in his worship. How much less then has he left the
essentiating terms of Church-unity unprescribed?

. 9. II. And consequently ab effectis we find, that Christ did it.

1. He plainly declared what makes a Christian. 2. He declared how all
Christians should live in love and concord. 3. And how the coalition of these
Christians makes his Church.

. 10. I. It had been strange, if he that came into the world to make men
Christians, had never told men what a Christian is. And if he that sent his
Apostles to make Christians, had set them to do they knew not what, and never
told them what a Christian is, and consequently what they must persuade men to.
And if he that promised Justification, Pardon, Adoption and Glory to all true
believers (that is, to true Christians,) had yet never told them how they may
know that they are such? And that he that commanded so much Christian duty,
public and private, and required Christians to suffer so much for his sake,
and to look for a reward in Heaven, should yet never tell them what
Christianity is? If Christ made Christianity, (that is, the Laws and
description, objects and principle) then he made a Determinate thing: If not,
has he left it to man to make Christianity (objectively)? Then how shall we
know to whom he gave this power? And how many several species of Christianity
(or faith) may be made in the world?

. II. It is evident in Scripture, that Christ sent his Apostles, and that he
taught them what to preach, and particularly that he Matthew. 28. 19, 20. said [
Go and Disciple me all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost] teaching them to observe all things whatever I
commanded you.] And it is certain, that a Baptized person was then accounted a
Christian, and Baptism was their Christening; and that this was the Church
entrance, and visible symbol of a Christian and Churchmember: And that all
Christ's Church has so accounted of baptism to this day: and true Tradition is
in no one point so full and constant as in this. And moreover the very nature
of the thing it self declares it. Is not he a Christian that believes
according to the sense of the institution, in God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and by a solemn Vow and Covenant devoteth himself to him as his God and
Father, his Redeemer and Savior, and his Sanctifier and Comforter, and the
witness of Christ; and that hereupon has right to justification, adoption, and
the heavenly inheritance: Who is a Christian, if this be not?

. 12. The sense of the Catholic Church is so notorious in this, that I think
there is little disagreement about it. The Papists confess it: The Protestants
confess it: See but Vossii Theses de Baptismo, and Davenant de Bapt. and
especially Gatakers Ammadversions on that of Davenant: All confess, that all
the ancient Churches held, that to the duly qualified receiver, all sin was
pardoned in baptism, and the person put into a state of life: And therefore was
a member of the Church.

. 13. II. And that Christ commanded all Christians to take each other as
brethren, and to live in Love; and that all men by this were to know them to be
his disciples, is so fully revealed in Scripture, that it is needless among
Christians to prove it.

III. As also that such Christians united to him their Head, are eo nomine his
Church; and living in this Love, live as the members of his Church must do.

. 14. And here three things are to be noted, 1. That what was done by the Holy
Spirit as given extraordinarily to the Apostles as founders or Architects of
the Church, to lead them into all truth, was truly done by Christ himself; the
Holy Ghost so extraordinarily given being his promised Agent.

2. That yet this work of Instituting Baptism as the terms of Church-union, he
would not leave to the Spirit in the Apostles, but was the immediate author of
it himself.

3. But yet two things hereabout he left to the Apostles, 1. To explain to the
baptized the true sense of the general words in the baptismal Covenant: 2. And
to institute part of the terms of Particular Church Order and Unity: who
accordingly settled (or ordained) Elders, Bishops or Pastors, in every
particular Church, which at first was for the most part in every City (or great
Town) where the Gospel was received by any competent number; and after they
added Deacons and Deaconesses or Widows ad melius esse only, and they taught
them by word and writing to observe all that Christ commanded.

. 15. III. And as I have proved, 1. That it must be done, 2. And that Christ
did it, so 3. It is part of our proof, that no other did it or could do it.

1. No other had authority to institute Church-Essentials, and to give such
necessary universal Laws. 2. No other came early enough to do it, but as his
Ministers after Christ had done it. 3. No other had wisdom and fitness enough
for it; nor were fit to agree to make Church essentials. 4. De facto History
proves they did it not. 5. To undertake it, is to invade Christ's office. The
Apostles themselves found it done to their hands: Much less can any ordinary
Pastors since prove any authority from God, or any true capacity in themselves
for such a work.

. 16. And if any pretend to it, they must be such as lived before Christ had
any Evangelical Church (that is, of the same species as has been since the
institution of Christian baptism) or such as have lived only since. The former
came not in as competitors: The latter were too late to be the do^^s of that
which was done before. Union is essential to the Church in general: The
necessary terms of Union are essential to it in specie as the Christian Church:
For necessarium est sine quo res esse non potest: It Is no Christian Church,
without the necessary terms of Church union. And therefore before those terms
were first made or instituted, there was no Church of that species: and after
there was such a Church, and consequently such terms of its Union, none could
make them, they being made before.

If any that came after did or shall hereafter attempt to make such terms, it
must be new ones, and not the same that constituted the first Church: and then
their Church will be new, and not of the same species as the first. Indeed God
did make new Laws of Administration, and so may a Kingdom, without changing the
constitution: but not new constituting terms: Governing Laws which follow the
Constitution, are not to make the Kingdom a Kingdom, or the Church a Church:
but to preserve the Church and its order, and promote its welfare: and the Oath
of Allegiance makes a man a Subject, without subscribing to the Governing
Laws: But as a Subject he consents to live under those Laws: and if he break
them, he is punishable according to them, and for breaking some of them, may be
cut off: and for some crimes a man may be excommunicate.

But yet excommunication must be distinguished: That which totally cuts a man
off from the Church, must be but a sentence upon proof that he has first
morally cut off himself: Lesser crimes must be punished with the lesser
excommunication, which is but a suspension, and that which Paul speaks of, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Yet take him not for an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

. 17. By all this it is most evident, that Christ himself the Institutor and
maker of his Church, has made the terms of essential Catholic Union; and that
we have nothing to do herein, but to find out what are the terms that he has
made, and not to enquire what any men since have made or added, as being not
authorized thereto.

CHAP. X.
No humane terms, not made by Christ, or his Spirit extraordinarily given to
the Apostles, are Necessary to the Being of Particular Churches: But diverse
humane acts are necessary to their existence, and administration.

. 1. Diverse men speak diversely of this matter: 1. Some say that no form of the
Polity of particular Churches is of Divine institution, but that God has left
all the forming of them to the will of man.

2. Others say, that no form of them is lawful but what is of Divine
institution.

And of the first, some say that Christ instituted the Papal form, and some say
General Councils, the summam Potestatem to the universal Church, and left it to
them to form particular Churches. Others say that Magistrates are to do it: And
others that the Diocesane Bishops of every Nation in National or Provincial
Synods may do it. But all agree that the form of particular Churches must be
made, by some that had authority from Christ to do it.

. 2. Of the second sort (who hold no form of a particular Church lawful, but
what is of Divine institution) some hold that only a Diocesan Church (that has
many Congregations and Altars) is of Divine institution, and that the Parochial
are not Churches but Oratories or Chapels, or parts of a Church: Others ho^d
that only Parochial Churches (of one Altar or associated for personal Communion
in presence) are of Divine institution: some that both Diocesane and Parochial
Churches are of Divine institution; and some that these and Provincial,
National, Patriarchal (and the Papal) are of Divine institution: Thus do men's
judgments vary.

. 3. A third sort hold that God has instituted some Church forms besides the
Universal, and left men to make others: And here some think that God instituted
Patriarchal, and left them to make the Diocesan and Parochial: some hold that
God instituted only the Diocesan and left them power to make the Patriarchal
and the Parochial: some hold that he made only the Parochial (I mean single
societies associated for present personal Communion) and left them by voluntary
associations to make the greater over them.

. 4. Among these opinions let us first try whether Christ has instituted any
Church form besides the universal, and 2. what that is.

I. And 1. if Christ has instituted a holy Christian society for ordinary holy
Communion and mutual help in Gods public worship and holy living, consisting
of Pastors authorized and obliged to Teach, and Guide, and speak for the flock
in Gods public worship and administer his Sacraments according to Christ's
word, and of a flock obliged to hear them, learn, obey and follow such their
conduct to the foresaid ends] then Christ has instituted a form of a
particular Church, and its policy. But the antecedent is true, as shall be
proved: And the consequent or major is proved, a definito ad denominatum; This
definition contains the Essentials of a Church. No man can deny that to be a
Christian Church which has this definition.

. 5. Here still it is supposed that the Spirit in the Apostles, who were
designed to be founders and master builders, and to gather and order Churches,
and teach them to observe all Christ's commands, was Christ's promised Agent (as
Tertullian calls him) and that Christ did what the Spirit did by the Apostles
in their proper work, to which he was promised them as their Guide; as it is
aforesaid.

. 6. And that Christ and his Apostles instituted sacred ordinary Assemblies of
Christians for holy worship and Communion, is so clear in the New Testament
that it were vain to prove it.

. 7. And 2. as notorious and past doubt it is that the end of these Assemblies
was such as is here mentioned; 3. And as plain that such Pastors as are here
described were set over all these Congregations, and authorized and obliged to
the foresaid work, that is under Christ the great Teacher, Priest and Ruler of
the Church, to Teach them Gods word, to intercede under Christ for them to God,
and from Christ to them in prayer and Sacraments, etc. and to Guide them by
that called the Keys of the Church, discerning whom to receive by Baptism,
whom to reprove, exhort, comfort or absolve, Act. 14. 23. Act. 20. 1 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1. and many other places show this.

. 8. And it is no less plain that the people were bound to continue in their
doctrine, communion and prayer, and to obey them in that which they were
commissioned to do: Heb. 13. 7, 13, 24. and 10. 25, 26. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and 20. and many other places; so that the form of such Churches as
consist of such Congregations and their Pastors is past all denial and just
doubt.

. 9. And as to all other Church-forms (Classical, Diocesan, Metropolitical,
Provincial, National, Patriarchal and Papal, it is these only that fall under
reasonable doubt and controversy. And 1. for Classical Churches, I can say but
this, 1. That the General commands of holding Christian Love and Concord, and
doing all to edification require such Churches as live near together to be
helpers to each other, and that counsel and correspondency is necessary hereto,
which the Churches have still laudably exercised by Synods: And if these
associations for order-sake be agreed on, as to stated times and numbers and
bounds, it is but the circumstantiating of a known duty: And if any will call
this a distinct Policy or Church-form, I contend not against their liberty of
speech, while we agree de re: But I judge it perilous to give the same name to
such an Assembly or. Association as to a Church of Christ's institution; lest it
seduce men to think that the word is not equivocally used. If the Agents of
several Kingdoms met at a common Diet, I had rather not call them a superior
Kingdom, were their meeting never so necessary. An Assembly that is the Pars
Imperans of one body Politic, having Legislative power, is one thing; and an
Assembly of Agents or Princes for mere concord and strength and help of
distinct Kingdoms, Schools, Armies, etc. is another thing. And I know no proof
that such Councils must be ordinary, or at stated Times and places, but
sometimes that is best, and sometime not, as the case stands, as even the
Papists confess. And when they begin to degenerate from a Council for Concord
to a Majesty or highest Governing power, it is time to cross their claim and
interrupt the occasions of it.

. 10. And if men at such Classes, and Councils choose one to keep order as a
moderator, yea if they fix him, it is but the circumstantiating of the
Assemblies work: But if he will claim hereupon a distinct order, office, and
proper political Church relation, so as hence to make himself the Regent part
of a species of a Church, yea and claim this as of God and unalterable, I
cannot justify such a Church-form.

. 11. This holds as to the Presidents of all ranks of Synods, Classical,
Diocesan, Metropolitical, Provincial, National or Patriarchal. To use them as
Presidents of Councils for Concord is one thing; and to use them as the Pars
Imperans, or the constitutive heads of a distinct Church- species is another.
Archbishop Usher told me himself his judgment, that Councils were but for
Counsel and Concord, and not for the Government of each other or any of the
members; and that they had no proper Governing power either over their Minor
part, or over any absent Bishops: Though each Bishop was still the Governor of
his own flock, and their power over their flocks was exercised with the greater
advantage by their Concord in Councils. Dyets and Councils of distinct
independent Bishops are not distinct forms of policy or Churches.

. 12. And if this hold true, that the Councils themselves are not thereby
Rectors of a distinct political society, but for Concord of many, then it will
follow that a President of such a Council, whether Diocesan, Provincial,
National or more General, is not as such a Rector of the Bishops under him and
their people, but only the Orderer or Guide of the Modes and Circumstances of
the Council as such. And therefore could the Pope prove a right to preside in
General Councils ( orbis Romani, vel orbis terrarum) which he cannot, it were
no proof that he is Regent Head of the Church universal. The same I may say of
the other Presidents.

. 13. If it hold that God instituted only Congregational or Parochial Churches
(as for present Communion) then it must needs follow that none of the rest
instituted by man, have power to deprive such single Churches of any of the
Privileges granted them by Christ: And therefore whereas Christ has made the
terms of Catholic Communion himself, and has commanded all such to worship
him publicly in holy Communion under faithful Pastors chosen or at least
consented to by themselves (which many hundred years was the judgment of the
Churches), no humane order or power can deprive them of any of this benefit,
nor disoblige them from any of this duty, by just authority.

. 14. Nay seeing that the universal Church is certainly the highest species,
none has authority on pretense of narrower Communion in lower Churches, to
change Christ's terms of Catholic Communion, nor to deprive Christians of the
right of being loved and received by each other, or disoblige them from the
duty of loving and receiving each other. Humane power made by their own
contracts, cannot change Christ's Laws, nor the Privileges or forms of Christ's
own Churches.

. 15. They that say that these several Church species are of God, must prove
that God instituted them; and that can be only by Scripture: or else that he
gave some power to institute them since Scripture times: which till they prove,
none are bound to obey them, at least when they over rule Christ's own
institutions.

. 16. To devise new species of Churches without Gods authority and impose them
on the world (yea in his name) and call all dissenters schismatics, is a far
worse Usurpation than to make and impose new Ceremonies or Liturgies.

. 17. Dr. Hammond (Dissert, cont. Blond. and Annot. in Act. 11. and pass.)
affirms that it cannot be proved that the order of subject Presbyters was
existent in Scripture times; and consequently holds that Bishops had but
single Congregations (as Ignatius speaks with One Altar). Now if Diocesans,
Metropolitans, Provincials, Patriarchs, or Pope as constitutive of
Church-species were made after, either these new Churches were made by the
Bishops of Parochial Churches, or by those that were No Bishops or Pastors of
any Churches at all (For the Apostles were dead, and no institution of these
but Scriptural can be truly proved. And other Churches besides the Catholic
and Parochial, or single, (distinct from a compound of Churches) there were
then none.) For the lower to make the higher Churches, is that which they will
not grant, who grant not that Presbyters may propagate their own species; and
deny that power ascends ab inferioribus. And that men of no Church, made all
these new Church- species is no honor to them.

. 18. Two contrary opinions herein now reign: One of the Papists that think
Christ instituted the Pope with power to make inferior Church species. That
other is, that Christ or his Apostles instituted Diocesans, giving them power
both as rulers to make Parish Churches (or Chapels) under them, and by Contract
or Consent to make the highest species over them, (Provincial, National,
Patriarchal, and say some Papal.) But as to the Papists so much is said against
their supposition that it is not here to be confuted: And it is certain that
single Church order was constituted by no Pope, and that all the Apostles had
power thereto. And as for the latter, which affirms the lower degrees to make
the higher, we still want the proofs of their authority so to do: of which more
afterward.

. 19. As for them that say that it is Magistrates that have power to make new
species of Churches, I grant them that whatever alterations of Church-Orders
may be made, Magistrates may do much in them. The Power of Princes, and the
Guidance of Pastors, and the Consent of the people have each herein their
special place: But what these alterations or additions are which they may make,
is the chief question: Both the Catholic Church, and single Church assemblies
being instituted by Christ are not left to them. The circumstantiating of other
Assemblies and Associations are left to them, to be done according to Gods
general Law: But that making new Political Societies that are properly called
Churches, or Religious bodies consisting of the Pars regens, and pars subdita,
is left to them by Christ, I never saw proved, any more than the making of new
Sacraments. But if that could be proved, yet that these humane Churches or
their makers may change those that are of Divine institution or deprive them of
their privileges, or forbid them commanded duty, cannot be proved.

. 20. And it is certain, 1. That if Princes or Bishops or the people did
institute Diocesan, or Metropolitan, Provincial or Patriarchal Churches, they
may yet make more and other species: And who knows how many new forms of
Churches we may yet expect? 2. And they that made them, upon good reason may
unmake them, or alter them when they please.

. 21. But though the Legislator and not the Subjects be the institutor of the
Universal and particular Church-policies, yet men are the constitutive matter,
and man's consent and faith is the dispositio materiae without which the form is
not received: and man's welfare is part of the final cause; and Ministers are
the instruments (and Gods word written and preached) for the gathering of
Churches by such qualification of the persons, and also of revealing the
Institution of Christ, and investing of particular persons in their
Church-relations.

. 22. By all this it appears that as it belongs to Christ to institute the
political species of Churches (though circumstantiating may be left to man), at
least undoubtedly of the Universal and of the single species, so it belongs
to Christ and not to man to institute and describe their terms of Union: For
this is the very institution of the species: And we are not to receive humane
Church-policies without good proof of men's authority to make them, and impose
them.

CHAP. XI.
The danger of the two extremes: And first of despairing of any Concord, and of
unjust Tolerations.

. 1. SOme men having seen the Christian world so long in Sects and contending
parties, do think that there is no hope of Unity and Concord, and therefore
that all should be left at liberty: And others think that there is no hope but
on terms so wide as shall take such as Christ receives not, nor would have us
receive. And on such accounts there were very early great contentions about the
qualifications of the baptizers and baptized, and the validity of baptism, and
about re-baptizing.

As to the Baptizers, some thought that only Priests should baptize (none
appropriated it to Bishops): some thought Laymen might baptize in case of
necessity, and some thought that women also might do it: And some thought that
though women or Laymen might not do it lawfully, yet factum valet, being done,
such should not be rebaptized. And some thought that those that were baptized
even by Priests that were Schismatics, (or as they called them Heretics when
they separated from common Concord and Communion) must be rebaptized. And they
thought that if they were baptized in such a Schismatical (or Heretical)
society, by whomsoever, it was not into the true Church. In this case Cyprian
and the African Bishops with Firmilian and his Colleagues, were in the wrong,
when the Bishop of Rome was in the right. And the Donatists thought they were
but of Cyprians mind: For it seems they had there the greater number of
Bishops; And the greater number went for the Church, and the less for
heretics: and so they called themselves the Church (though out of Africa the
number against them, or that meddled not in the quarrel was far greater.) And
all this arose but by the contests of two men for the Bishopric of Carthage,
some following one and some the other.

. 2. This error of Cyprian and the Donatists, arose 1. from their not
sufficiently distinguishing the Church universal, from the Associated Churches
of their Country; nor well considering that Baptism as such is but our
entrance into the universal Church, and not into this or that particular
Church. 2. By an abusive or equivocal use of the name [ Heretick] their
doctrine being true of Heretics strictly so called, who deny in baptizing any
essential part of Christianity, but false of Heretics laxly so called, that
are only Schismatics, or deny only or corrupt some lower doctrines, precepts
or practices of Religion.

. 3. Therefore the Council of Nice truly decided the case by distinction,
decreeing the re-baptizing of some (as such as the Paulinists baptized) and not
of others. That is, All that had not true Christian baptism consisting of all
the true essentials, were to be rebaptized, and not others, whatever
particular Church they were of.

. 4. Hereupon also among the Roman Doctors, it has been a great debate,
whether the Priests Intention was necessary to the validity of baptism: The
true answer to which is this.

It is one question what is necessary to the justifying of the Priest, before
the Church? and another before God? and another question what is necessary to
the validity of baptism to the receiver before the Church? and another before
God? And so I answer.

Supposing that no man shall suffer for another fault, but for his own: 1. If
the Priest profess and Intention to baptize in general, and express it in the
true words of baptism, his act ex part sui is valid coram ecclesia though he
dissemble.

2. If the Priest dissemble, his act is a crime and shall be punished by God.

3. If he profess not to intend to baptize the person, or to intend it in
general, but to corrupt it in the Essentials, it is as a Ministration invalid
coram Ecclesia and should be done again.

4. If the adult person baptized profess baptismal Consent dissemblingly, it is
valid baptism coram ecclesia as to what the Church must do upon it, but invalid
as to what God is to do as the performer of the Covenant.

5. If the person baptized do not so much as profess consent, or profess not to
consent, nor to intend to be then baptized, it is no baptism before God or the
Church.

6. If he profess to be baptized in general, but deny any Essential in
particular, it is not the true Christian baptism, but must be better done.

. 5. When any came in so great error as that the Church scarce knew whether it
was an Essential part of faith and baptism that was denied, it made the
Controversy hard about their re-baptizing. Many thought that the Photinians
and Arians denying Christ's Godhead as of the same substance with the father,
denied an essential article, and were to be rebaptized if they so entered at
first: Our Socinians are much worse, that deny Christ's Godhead in a fuller
sense. And how does he believe in Christ that believes him not to be God,
which is most eminently essential to him?

. 6. They that are over-bold in altering Christ's terms of Church Union and
Communion, making them less or more or other, if they knew what they do, would
find themselves more concerned in these controversies of baptizing and
re-baptizing, and consequently greater corrupters, than they have thought.

. 7. To think that Church Union is impossible is to deny that there is any
Church, and consequently any Christ. To think that necessary Concord in
Communion is impossible, is so great a disparagement to the Church, as tempts
men by vilifying it to doubt of Christianity: For if Christians cannot live in
Unity of faith and love and converse, what is their Christianity? And such
despair of Concord will make men suspend all endeavors to attain it: For
Despair uses no means.

. 8. And to take into the Church of Christ such as want the Essentials, and
Christ would not have received, is to corrupt his Church, and bring in
Confusion, and such as will dishonor him, and will be more hurtful in the
Church than they would be without: like rebels in a Kingdom, or mutineers in an
Army, or enemies in a Family: The nearer the worse.

. 9. It is for this use especially that Christ has committed the Church Keys
to the Pastors: And the Key of entrance is the Chief. Therefore he that judges
who is to be Baptized, exercises the chief act of the Church Keys: And he
that Baptized was held to have the Power of judging whom to baptize: which was
never denied to the Presbyters, till after for order some restrained them.

. 10. It is a strange contrariety of some Pastors to themselves, who judge that
all Infants of Heathens, Jews, Turks or wicked men are without exception to be
taken into the Church, if any ignorant Christian will but offer them, and say
over a few words; and the Adult also if they can but say over the Creed by
rote, and a few words more; and thus fill the Church with Enemies of Christ;
and yet when they are in, deny them Communion unless they will strictly come up
to many humane unnecessary impositions; as if far stricter obedience to men
(perhaps in usurpations) were necessary, than to Jesus Christ.

. 11. How far Infidels, Catechumens, or Heretical or Schismatical Assemblies
may be tolerated in the world about us by Magistrates, is not here to be
enquired, but hereafter: But that the Churches themselves should not corrupt
their own Communion by taking and keeping in incapable persons, the nature of
the Church and discipline, and its ends, and the reproof of the Churches, Rev.
2. and 3. and the judgment of the Universal Church do tell us.

CHAP. XII.
The sin and danger of making too much necessary to Church Union and Communion.

. 1. ADdition to Christ's terms are very perilous as well as diminution: When
men will deny either Church entrance or Communion to any that Christ would have
received, because they come not up to certain terms which they or such as they
devise. And though they think that Christ gives them Power to do thus, or that
reason or necessity justifies them, their error will not make them guiltless:
Imputing their error to Christ untruly, is no small aggravation of the sin.

. 2. Nor is it a small fault to usurp a power proper to Christ: to make
themselves Law givers to his Church without any authority given them by him:
Their Ministry is another work.

. 3. And it is dangerous Pride to think themselves Great enough, Wise enough,
and Good enough, to come after Christ and to amend his work, and do it better
than he has done.

. 4. Much less, when they hereby imply an accusation against him and his
institutions, as if he had not done it well, but they must amend it, or all
will be intolerable.

. 5. And indeed Man's work will be like man, weak and faulty and full of flaws,
when Gods work will be like God, the effect of Alsufficience, power, wisdom and
Love.

. 6. And the merciful Lord and Savior of the Church, that came to take off
heavy burdens and intolerable yokes, will not take it well to have men come
after him and as by his authority, to make his easy yoke more strait, and his
light burden heavy, and to cast or keep out those that he has Redeemed and
does receive, and to deal cruelly with those that he has so dearly bought, and
tenderly loves.

. 7. And indeed it is ofter for men's own interest, and dominion, to keep up
their power and honor of superiority, that men thus use the servants of
Christ, than truly to keep clear the Church, and to keep out the polluters.

. 8. But when it is done by too much strictness and as for Church-purity, yet
this also has its aggravations: For men so far to forget themselves, that they
are servants and not Lords, sinners that have need themselves of mercy, unfit
to be too forward to cast the first stone, to seem more wise and holy than
Christ, is but specious offending him.

. 9. And as spiritual privileges excel temporal, so is it an aggravated
Tyranny, to deprive Christ's servants of benefits so precious, and so dearly
bought. As it was not with Silver and Gold that we were Redeemed, so neither
for the enjoying of Silver and Gold. Communion with Christ, his body and blood
and his Saints in his Ordinances, is a blessing so great, that he that robs
such of it that have right to it, may answer it dearlier than if he had robbed
them of their purses: O what then has the Roman Usurper done that has often
interdicted whole Kingdoms of Christians, the use of holy privileges and
duties!

. 10. Little do many men, that cry up faith and Orthodoxness and Catholicism
and obedience, and cry down Heresy, Schism, Error and Disobedience, believe
how much guilt lies on their souls, and without Repentance how terrible it
will prove, to be charged with the cruelties which they have used to good
Christians, in reproaching them and casting them out of the Church, and
destroying them as Heretics and Schismatics, that should have been loved and
honored as Saints. But some men cannot see by the light of the fire, till they
come so near it as to be burned.

. 11. These self-made or over-doing terms of Church-Union and Concord, will
prove the certainest Engines of Schism; And none are so heinous Schismatics,
as they that make unnecessary terms of Union, and then call all Schismatics
that consent not to them. For 1. these are the Leaders of the disorder, when
other sort of Schismatics usually are but followers: 2. These do it by Law,
which is of most extensive mischief, even to all that are subject to them, when
others do it but by local practice, extending but to those that are about them,
or the particular assemblies which they gather. 3. These make the Schism
unavoidable, when private Seducers may be resisted: For it is not in the power
of good men to bring their judgments to the sentiments of every or any
dictator, or yet to go contrary to their judgments. Ilicitum stat pro
impossibili. 4. These aggravate the crime by pretending power from God, and
fathering Schism on so good a thing as Government, and causing it as for Unity
it self. 5. They condemn themselves by crying down Schism, while they
unavoidably cause it.

. 12. And this over-doing and making unnecessary terms, unavoidably involveth
them in the guilt of persecution; and when they have begun it, they know not
where to stop. Suppose they decree that none shall preach the Gospel, or
assemble for holy Communion in public Worship, but those that subscribe or
swear or promise or profess or do, somewhat accounted sinful by the persons
commanded, and not necessary indeed, however esteemed by the imposer (who yet
perhaps calls it but Indifferent). It is certain that no honest Christian will
do that which he judges to be sin: It is certain that other men's confident
talk will not make all men of their minds, to take all for lawful which they
take for such: what then will the Imposers do? They will make strict Laws to
punish severely all that disobey: For say they, Our commands must not be
contemned, nor disobedience tolerated: so do the Papists as to the Trent Oath,
etc. so did Charles the fifth, a while about the Interim; and so many others.
These Laws then must be executed: The Pastors must be cast out; the preachers
silenced; They still believe as Daniel did about praying, and the Apostles
about preaching, that God commands what men forbid, and it is a damnable sin
to forsake their calling and duty, no less than sacrilege, and cruelty to
souls, and deserting the Church and worship and cause of Christ; and the people
will still believe that no man's prohibition can excuse them if they forsake
Gods public worship and comply with sin. The Prelates will say that all this
is but error, wilfulness, and rebellion, and they can prove the contrary.
Their words will not change the judgment of dissenters. The Pastors and
preachers then must be fined, imprisoned or banished for preaching, and the
people for public worshipping God: when they are fined they will go on: when
they are out of prison they will return to their work: nothing is left then to
remedy it, but either perpetual imprisonment, banishment or death. When this is
done, more will still rise of the same mind and continue the work that others
were disabled to perform: And the Prelates that cause this will be taken by the
suffering people for thorns and thistles, and grievous Wolves that devour the
flocks, and the military Ministers of the Devil: The indifferent common people
knowing their Neighbors to be conscionable men of upright lives, will become
of the same minds, and look on the persecutors as the enemies of good men and
of public peace, that do all this by pride and domination. The ungodly rabble
of drunkards, profane swearers, adulterers, and such like, for the most part
hating Godliness and strict living, will cry up the Prelates, and triumph over
the sufferers: And thus the Land will be divided; the Prelates and other
prosecutors with the dirty malignant rabble of the licentious will make one
party, and these will call themselves Orthodox and the Church; The sufferers
and all that pity them and like them better than the Persecutors will be the
other party. The conjunction of the debauched and malignant rabble with the
Prelates and their party will increase sober men's disaffection to them, and
make men take them for the patrons of impiety: And how sad a condition must
such Churches be in! To say nothing of the state concussions and diseases that
usually follow. Whatever ignorant men may dream, these prognostics are most
certain, as any man that can discern effects in moral causes, may see, and as
history and sad experience prove to all men of reading, observation and
understanding.

. 13. And in Pastors of the Church, this will be a double crime and shame;
because 1. It is their office to gather and edify Christ's flock, and not to
scatter and afflict them: 2. Because they should most imitate Christ in tender
bowels, gentleness and long-suffering, bearing the Lambs in their arms, and
not breaking the bruised reed, nor quenching the smoking flax: Nurses or
Mothers use not to kill their Children for crying, nor to turn them out of
doors because they are unclean, nor to cut their throats to make them swallow
bigger morsels, instead of cutting their meat: Much less to cast them off for
obeying their father. 3. Because it is supposed that they best know the will of
Christ, and should be best acquainted with the ways of peace. And therefore
should understand Romans 14. and 15. Him that is weak in the faith Receive; but
not to doubtful disputations. The Kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: And he that in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men, that is, of wise and
good men, but not of proud persecutors, Romans 14. 17, 18. Wherefore receive ye
one another as Christ also received to the Glory of God. Romans 15. 7. If the
people were Schismatical and inclined to fall in pieces, the Guides and
builders should soder and cement them, and as pillars and bases in the Church
which is the house of the living God (as Timothy is called) should bear them up
that they fall not by division.

. 14. In a word, whoever will impartially read Church History, especially of
the Councils and Popes, shall find that the self-conceited Usurpation of proud
Prelates, imposing unnecessary devices of their own (professions or practices)
on the Churches, and this with proud and fierce impatience toward dissenters,
and usurping a Legislation which Christ never gave them, has been the great
cause of much of the hatred, schisms, persecutions, wars, rebellions against
Emperors and Kings, false excommunications, interdicts, and the disgrace of
Christistianity, weakening of the Church, and hindering the Conversion of Jews
and Infidels, and been a chief Granado, Thunderbolt or Wildfire, by which
Satan much prospered in storming of the Church.

CHAP. XIII.
To cry out of the intolerable mischiefs of Toleration, and call for sharper
execution, while dividing snares are made the terms of Union, is the work of
ignorant, proud and malignant Church-destroyers.

. 1. TO tolerate all evil that pretends Religion, is to be no friend to
Religion, Government or peace. To tolerate no error in Religion, is for no
Prince to tolerate himself, his wife, his child, or any one subject: And to
pretend to this, is to crave self-destruction ( neque enim lex justior ulla
est, etc.) and to proclaim himself ignorant, yea grossly ignorant, what is a
Church, a Pastor, a Government, a Christian, or a Man.

. 2. Multitudes of Books are written for and against Toleration: They that are
lowest usually write for it (Even Jer. Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying before
he was a Bishop, was thought a commendable or tolerable Book). But most are
against it that are in power, and think they can force others to their wills.
But it is wise and just and impartial men, that are here the discerners of the
truth, whose judgments are not biassed by interest or passion, nor blinded by
unacquaintedness with their adversaries or their cause, or perverted by using
only one ear and one eye. He knows not mankind, who knows not how greatly
(not only the common gang, but) even learned men, yea, and zealous religious
men, are to be suspected in their evil characters and reports of those that
they are speaking against as adversaries. It grieveth me to know and think, how
little most adversaries in this case are to be believed.

. 3. To describe the due bounds of Toleration is far from being impossible, or
very difficult to an understanding and impartial man: But to stop the mouth or
rage of Contradicters, and to reconcile the multitude of ignorant, proud,
tyrannical, uncharitable, interessed, factious, partial men to such certain
measures, is next impossible, and never yet even among the Clergy was attained,
since the Spirit of infallibility, simplicity and Love departed, and the Spirit
of darkness, pride and malignity in most places got the upper hand.

. 4. Many and many Books of this nature I have lately read, that cry down
liberty and Toleration, and call for greater severities, and describe those
whose ruin or sufferings they plead for, as ignorantly and falsely, as if they
talked of men at the Antipodes, whom they had never seen, and as if they had
never heard their Cause; and as cruelly, as if they had been preaching to
Soldiers, and confuting John Baptist, or preaching a Visitation Sermon to
Bonner or Gardener: And yet the falsehoods or injuries set off, with so great
confidence, and well composed words, and zeal against schism, and error, and
especially for the Church and Government, that it grieveth my soul to think,
how difficult such men do make it, to strangers that must know all on trust
from others, and men of other business, that cannot have while to search into
the truth, to escape deceit and the consequent mischiefs: Zeal for piety is not
more abused by Sectaries, than zeal for themselves, and their power and wealth,
called zeal for the Church and truth and order, is abused by bad domineering
men. Or else the world had not been embroiled by the Clergy these twelve
hundred years at least, nor Rome arrived at its pernicious Greatness, and power
to destroy.

. 5. And let men's different Religions or Opinions be never so many and notable,
yet every where the same plea against Toleration is used, and the same
Arguments seem good for every party that is in power. In Japan and China, and
Heathen Lands, they can copiously declaim against the mischiefs of tolerating
Christianity: The Papists think tormenting Inquisitions, and burning
Christians, and murdering thousands and hundreds of thousands better than to
tolerate Protestants. The Lutherans cry down the toleration of Calvinists: What
need I name more? As the Papists say, that every Sect pleads the Scripture,
so we may say, that every powerful party, be their cause never so false, cry
out against tolerating others, though in the truth.

. 6. And doubtless Concord even in perfection is so desirable, that it is easy
for a man to set forth the beauty and excellency of it: And discord is so bad,
that it is easy to declaim against it: But for him that Causes it, to do it,
is self-condemnation. And for him that falsely describes the cause, and
justifies the Schismatic, and accuses the innocent, to write Books and
preach Sermons against Schism and Toleration, is but delusion tending to their
own shame, and others deceit and ruin.

. 7. And he never was a good Musician, Builder, Watch-maker, nor good at any
Art or Science, that thought all diversity was discord: He that would with zeal
and learning write a Book to prove that a Lute or Organs must not be tolerated,
if each string and key be not of the same sound; or that all the parts in a
Clock, Watch, Building, etc. must be of the same shape and magnitude, or all
men of one language or complexion, etc. would scarce get so much credit as most
of our Hereticaters do, when they call for fire and faggot and Jaylors, as more
meet and able confuters of error than themselves.

. 8. The men on whom they cry for vengeance, either are really religious, or
not: If not, it is a marvel that they are not of the accusers mind, being
supposed to follow the upper side: It Is possible that some advantage may turn a
man that has no religion, out of the Kings highway, into some Sectarian
cottage, especially in some storms: But it is very rarely that Gain goes not
for Godliness, and the way of reputation, ease and profit, for religion, with
such as indeed have none at all. But if they are seriously religious, they take
it as from the Law of the Almighty, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords; to
whom all men are less than the vilest worms to us: and they take it to be that
which they lay their salvation and everlasting hopes on; believing that God
will bear them out, and if they dye for it, will reward them with the crown of
Glory: They believe that they shall be damned in Hell for ever, if they break
Gods Law, and obey man against him: And in this case it should not be hard to
reasonable men, especially Bishops and Teachers, to know what means and
measures are meetest to be used with such men; and when he that must suffer,
has flesh that is as unwilling to suffer as other men's, it should be
considered how far Satan uses the flesh for his interest, and how far the
Pastors of the Church should take part with it; when as St. Paul says, He that
doubeth is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith.

. 9. There is no heed to be taken by men's crying out against error or schism,
to discern who is the erroneous or Schismatic. None more cry out against them
than the guilty: Who condemns error and schism more than the Papists, and who
are greater causes and authors of them than the Pope? As our common profane
rabble are so great hypocrites, that they live quite contrary to their
Baptismal Vow, and the Religion which they nominally profess, and yet commonly
cr^ ^ut against hypocrisy, and call all men hypocrites that seem to be serious
in living as they vowed and profess; even so the greatest Schismatics and
Heretics, partly in blindness, and partly to avert both men and conscience
from accusing themselves, do usually first cry down Schismatics and Heretics,
and perhaps preach and write most vehemently against them. I take a man to be
never the more Orthodox, Catholic, or of the true Church, for crying up the
true Church, Catholicism and Orthodoxness, and crying down the contrary, and
accusing others.

. 10. I have long observed with the best judgment I have, that usually those
Divines that write most for Peace and Reconciliation of hot contenders, are men
of clearer judgment than others, and usually see further into the cause, than
either of the fierce contending parties: Though the Turks in policy give some
liberty to Christians, as a necessary preservation of their Empire; and the
Socinians have much pleaded for peace and concord, partly by necessity for
themselves, and partly from common light of reason; yet among real Reformed
Christians, the greatest judgment is found in the greatest Pacificators: such
as Le Blank, Amyrald, Phaceus, Camero, Lud. Crocius, Bergius, Martinius,
Calixtus, Dallaeus, Blondel, Usher, Davenant, Hall, Morton, Chillingworth, and
such others: Darkness does best fit the Spirit of contention.

. 11. There is nothing in humane actions that is free from inconveniences;
especially actions of public consequence. And the collecting and aggravating
of such inconveniences, and making tragical exclamations thereupon, without
looking to the mischiefs that men imagine must be the remedy, or seeing the
evils on the other side, is the common practice of these Church-Mountebanks.
How easy is it to say [If we be not all of one Religion, it will cherish
contention, bring Ministers into contempt, scandalize the weak, harden the
enemies, raise factions, shake the peace of Kingdoms] and more such like: How
easy is it to say [If men be tolerated to break the Laws, and gather
Conventicles, souls will be poisoned, error propagated, Christianity disgraced,
etc.] When in the mean time 1. Their course tends not at all to make men of
one Religion: 2. Nay, they plead for that which is the great divider: where do
fire and banishment or prisons cause true faith, or make men think that their
persecutors are in the right? Is there any thing in the nature of the thing so
to persuade men? nay what more inclines men to think that other men's opinions
are false, than to feel that their practice is hurtful? All will say, Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? By their fruit they may be known.
If it be forcing some to dissemble, and destroying the rest, that they mean, by
[making men of one religion] thus says Tertullian did the Heathen persecutors:
Solitudinem faciunt and pacem vocant. But 1. This will not do: France, Ireland,
Belgia, and Queen Mary in England cried it in vain: God will still have some
that shall be seriously religious, and shall fear him more than man, and not
sell their souls to save their bodies: If you have no hope of making men to be
of one Religion, but by making them to be of no Religion (as all are that fear
not God more than man) your hopes are vain as well as wicked. There is so full
testimony given to the world, that there is a God and a life to come, that
still some men will believe it, and will think whither they must go next, and
therefore will not forsake their religion through fear, seeing that is to
forsake their God, and their salvation.

2. And if you could accomplish it, it were not worth your labor: If all the
Princes on earth should force their subjects to be of One Religion, it would be
their own: And then five parts of six would be Heathens and Mahometans, and of
the sixth part a third or fourth would be Papists, and above two parts of the
other three would have foul corruptions, for which they would be sharply
censured by the rest. Is it not better that in Congo, China, etc. Christianity
is tolerated, than that they had all continued of their One Religion? And so is
it that the Turks do tolerate the Greeks and other Christians. And I think if
Spain had both Papists and Protestants, it were better than to have but Papists
only; And if the Swedes, Danes and Saxons did tolerate the more Reformed, it
would do more good than harm. If Prelacy were banished out of Scotland and
England, many would think it better to tolerate it.

. 12. It is certain, that Unity and Concord is most desirable; and as certain
that these over-doers do destroy it, while they lay it upon impossible terms.
1. The most desirable Concord is in common perfection of wisdom and holiness:
But it is certain it will not be, nor are any perfect.

2. The next desirable Concord is in such high degrees of Wisdom and Goodness,
as that all Christians be strong and excellent, and err not notably in a word,
ceremony or mode: But it is certain, this is not to be expected.

3. The next degree desirable is, that all should be so far teachable and
perswadeable, as to yield to every truth* and lawful imposition, when reason is
set before them: But it is certain this is not to be expected: And he that
denies it, knows not man.

. 13. A Peacemaker therefore must understand 1. What Concord is already among
all Christians, and what is of necessity to Communion with the Church
universal: 2. And what more is necessary to Communion in a particular Church.
3. And what more is necessary to the Association and Concord of such particular
Churches: 4. And what is necessary only to eminency, praise and special
encouragement: 5. And what is necessary to mere humane neighborhood and
converse.

And accordingly he should study, 1. How all men may be used like men, and all
peaceable men as peaceable: 2. How all Christians may be used as Christians: 3.
How all the members of particular Churches may hold such Concord as the ends of
their society require: 4. How all such Churches may keep such Love and
Correspondency as tends to the good of all. 5. And how eminent Christians may
be used according to their worth: 6. And how heresy and sin may be suppressed
without contradicting any of these ends.

. 14. If once unnecessary terms of Unity and Concord be taken for necessary,
even multitudes of honest well meaning men, will hence bend all their strength
to do mischief: They will think that all Peacemakers must promote these terms:
and all must be used as Schismatics that are against them: and so all the
forementioned accusations, cruelties and persecutions will (alas) go for the
work even of Peacemakers: And so the common engine of Church-division and
persecution and discord, will be preaching and writing against Schism, and
crying up peace, and aggravating dissent as a heinous crime, even when it is a
duty, and making all odious as far as they can that are not of their mind.

The Second Part.
The Terms of Concord.
CHAP. I.
In general, What are the true and only terms of Church-Vnion and Concord, and
what not?

. 1. THE true works of a Peacemaker consists, 1. In finding out the true and
necessary terms of Concord, and discerning the evil and insufficiency of the
false terms: 2. In finding out the meet and necessary Instruments and helps: 3.
In discovering the Hindrances and Enemies: and 4. In faithful prosecuting his
known duty. And the first is not the least.

. 2. Having proved what Christ himself has already done in instituting the
terms of Unity and Concord, I shall here further show, I. In General what these
Terms are and must be, and what not. II. What Texts of Scripture describe them.
III. Particularly and distinctly what they are. IV. I shall answer some of the
objections that are made against them. And V. The false Terms shall be detected
and confuted in the third Part.

. 3. I. In General, the terms of Catholic Unity and Concord, necessary to all
Christians must be and are, I. Only things Great and needful, II. Only things
True and Sure; III. Only things plain and intelligible: IV. Only things of Gods
institution or authority. V. And but Few and not very many as to matter of
Knowledge and belief.

. 4. If they were not such, man's known incapacity would make them unfit to be
any means of the intended end: And this is fully proved by all the foregoing
proofs of unavoidable diversity that will be found in men: And I will here add
yet more profs that Concord is so very difficult as that it will not be had on
any stricter terms: and when all is done it will be very imperfect in this life.

. 5. The great difficulty of Concord does further thus appear.

1. It cannot be expected but that the greatest part of men will be of low
capacity, and partial, and ignorant, and therefore incapable of understanding
higher terms than these.

2. The Greater number, or too many will be bad, though their professed Religion
be Good: And bad men will be still self-troublers, and troublers of others:
There is no Peace says my God to the wicked: They are like the troubled Sea
that casts up mire and dirt, Isa. 46. Piety and true Concord must grow
together. There will be in Christ's Kingdom things that offend and men that work
iniquity: There will be Pastors and people that are Worldly, Covetous, Lovers
of themselves, Lovers of pleasures more than of God, proud, boasters, haters of
those that are good, striving who shall be greatest: And these will be unfit
materials in the building, as to full unity, peace and concord.

3. Yea there will be Satan's Soldiers and bitter enemies to true piety in the
Ministry and all ranks of men: In the same household as he that was born after
the flesh did persecute him that was born after the Spirit, even so, says St.
Paul, is it now; and so it will be. The first born man was a murderer of his
own brother, because his works were evil and his brothers good.

4. And Christ says that the Rich shall hardly enter into heaven; And yet we
see the Rich will be the Rulers: It has been so and will be so, and must be
so. And if they are as usually bad as Christ and his Apostles tell us, then bad
men will rule: And operari sequitur esse: As men are, they will do: Great men
will have worldly selfish interests clean contrary to the interest of Christ
and his doctrine: And how great influence Rulers have as to concord or division
is easily known.

5. And hitherto the Pastors of the Churches have been, alas, such as Gregory
Nazianzen, Isidore Pelusiota and many others have described (to say nothing of
Gildas or Salvian, or the sad Characters that most parties give of one another,
and the accusations that Afflicters bring against those whom they afflict, and
which the sufferers give of them.) If Paul then must say, All seek their own,
and not the things that are Jesus Christ's, no wonder if it be so now; and that
even General Councils have sadly anathematized one another, and thousands of
Bishops or Pastors have been cursed from Christ by the rest. And how much power
proud turbulent ignorant and worldly Pastors have to hinder the Churches
Concord, has been found by too long and sad experience.

6. And man's nature is sensual and slothful, and it will cost so dear, by long
and hard study to be wise indeed, and by mortification and self-denial to be
truly good, that few are likely to attain it.

7. And education, company, friends, and false writers and teachers will still
cherish faction and discord in the world.

8. And distance and disacquaintance will leave open men's ears to back-biters,
slanderers and false reports. Men will think it uncharitable not to believe
such, e. g. as Learned Historians, Doctors and their Pastors are.

9. And the wars and cross-interests of Princes and States have hitherto by
jealousies fomented divisions in the Church.

10. And the false ways and terms of Concord will be kept up in opposition to
the true, and will not be the least impediment.

11. And Lastly, Even the Wise and Good that must be the Peacemakers, are such
but in part, and have in them too much of the folly, error and sin of others,
which will hinder their work, yea and make them also troublers of themselves
and others.

. 6. These being not doubtful conjectures but certain Prognostics, the remedy
must be suited to the Patients capacity.

And I. Necessary Essentials all Christians are and must be agreed in: But
unnecessary things such as I have described are never like to be commonly
united in, nor is it necessary that they should: It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to the Apostles to impose nothing on the Church, but Necessary
things, Act. 15. It was the deceivers and false Teachers which would have done
otherwise: Against whom St. Paul does copiously and zealously dispute, in his
Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Colossians, etc. To pretend
that as necessary which is not so, or to command that as necessary and
causelessly to make it necessary which is not so in it self, and which we may
easily know will never be so judged of, nor received by all, is but to rack and
tear the Church, and do mischief for an unnecessary thing.

. 7. II. As it is certain that nothing but Truth can be fit matter for the
Churches Concord, so it must be certain Truth: that is, not only such as
whoever believes is not deceived, but such as may be discerned by ascertaining
Evidence by all sober willing Christians; Not only such as the Learned may be
sure of, but all that must take it as certain in their profession; For no man
must make a false profession, and say he is certain when he is not. Not that
all that may be called certainty must needs exclude all doubting; but that the
Assent be prevalent against such doubting: Nor do I mean that it must be
certain by natural evidence; It is enough if it be so by Divine Revelation: And
if any be so weak that they perceive not some necessary revealed truth to be
certainly so revealed, they must be put on no more than to say, [ I do, though
not with certainty, believe it.] And no probability must be imposed on men's
profession, when there is notable danger on the contrary side, if they should
mistake.

. 8. III. Therefore the terms of Union must be only things plain and
intelligible to all sober willing minds: For all persons of dull wits and
diverting business cannot attain such certainty or firm belief of things which
they cannot underst^nd: Belief without understanding is but a dead notion or
name, or rather a contradiction.

. 9. As for the Popish doctrine of Implicit faith, it is no true belief of any
thing but that General verity in which they say the particulars are implicitly
contained. We must all believe implicitly in God, that is, That whatever God
reveals is true: But he that believes no more but this, is falsely said to
believe other things; For he may believe this, who never understood that God
revealed any thing in particular: He that never heard of Christ or the
resurrection may believe that all Gods revelations are true: But to call this,
an Implicit belief of Christ and the Resurrection, is but to equivocate, and
call that believing a thing, which is no believing of it: If they hold that to
believe that the Church (that is, the Pope and his Councils) is infallible in
acquainting us with matter of faith] is all that is necessary to salvation,
though they know not what the particulars are, let them say so plainly, and not
call this a believing of other things, or a believing in Jesus Christ, or his
Gospel.

. 10. IV. And it is only things of Divine Authority that can be the necessary
terms of universal Unity or Concord, supposing the necessary media of bringing
them to men's notice: Had we lived in the time and place where Christ and his
Apostles did preach and work their Miracles, it had been one thing to determine
what were then preached as the necessary articles of faith, and another thing,
how we come to hear, know and understand them: It must have been by our ears,
eyes and intellects, that we knew and perceived what was said and done. And so
now standing at the distance of many ages, certain history, or tradition must
bring that to our notice, which our eyes and ears would then have brought to
it: But still the Law and terms of Union are no less Divine, whatever means do
help us to understand them: And as for them that will make humane terms seem
necessary to Catholic Union or Communion, that they deceive themselves and
others and shall never attain the end, but tear the Church by such ill engines,
is easily thus proved.

. 11. The Catholic Church never did or will agree what humane power it is to
whom this work belongs: whether it be a Pope or Council, or some universal
Monarch, or a Council of Princes by agreement; Never such a thing was, or will
be. Popes and Councils were but in one Empire, the chief Ecclesiastical
Governors under the Emperors Civil Government; and not over the world; nor
was there ever such a thing as a General Council of all the Christian world,
but only General as to one Empire: Nor did any of these Councils take on them
to make Constitutive terms of the Universal Church or its Union; but only to
preserve, declare and expound them, and to make subordinate governing Canons.
And if they had undertaken more, no wise man can imagine that all Christians
will therefore confess the right of such a claim, and so submit to it. The
proof of their authority will be so obscure, that as such as I cannot see it,
so there will be so many no wiser than I am, as that the exclusion of all
Christians that are but of our size will never stand with Catholic Unity. And
if it were possible to satisfy all the present age, 1. that some have such
authority from God, 2. and who they are, 3. and how far it extends, yet still
such will succeed them in whom the uncertainty and dissent will be revived.
What needs there more proof than man's incapacity and the experience of so
many Generations? All Christians agree in Christianity: All Christians never
agreed on any human^ terms of Unity; Pope, Council, or Monarch. One Empire has
pretended to agree in Councils, but have been so far from it, as that they have
been the occasion of their greatest disagreements; witness even the Great ones,
Constable. 1. Ephesians. 1. and 2. Calcedon, which some blessed and some cursed for
many generations after; and that at Constantinople that made the decree de
tribus capitulis divided even the Roman Church so far as that for one hundred
years a great part of it renounced the Roman Bishop, and set up another
Patriarch against him. And Abassia and other extra-imperial Churches were never
under the Roman or Imperial Government.

. 12. V. And that the terms of Catholic unity must not be very many things is
evident from the foresaid Incapacity of the most to comprehend many things; and
also from the confession of almost all sorts of Christians: Even the Papists
who have advanced the Christian Religion to the monstrous magnitude of their
vast and numerous Decrees of Councils are forced yet to make them almost all
unnecessary under the name of Implicit belief, and do narrow the necessary
articles of the Christian faith almost to an annihilation, Of this I have
written at large in my last Confutation of Johnson, Which is the true Church;
or for our Churches perpetual Visibility.
while they agree not whether it be necessary explicitly to believe the life,
death, resurrection, mediation, judgment, yea or being of Christ himself, or
any more than that there is a God and an Infallible Church: Of which see
Francisc. de sancta Clara his Deus, Natura, Gratia, at large.

And those of our selves that eject Ministers and Christians for dissenting
from some of their own impositions, are yet contented to admit such as submit
to themselves, upon very low terms of Christian knowledge, to the Sacraments
and Communion of the Church. And indeed he knows not man, who knows not,
that universal unity and concord will never be had upon the terms of Many,
dark, uncertain, humane, or unnecessary things, but only on the terms of things
Few, sure, plain, divine and necessary.

CHAP. II.
Some instances of Gods description of these terms in the words of the Sacred
Scriptures.

. 1. I Have before proved, that Christ instituted the terms of Catholic Unity
in Scripture, and have cited some texts on the by. It will not be amiss for
conviction to set diverse texts together, which will fullier open the terms
themselves.

. 2. The words of the institution of Baptism before mentioned are the most
convincing, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. [Go ye and disciple all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you
always even to the end of the world.]

Here Christ himself sends his messengers, and prescribes them their work,
and makes the terms of Baptism the Entering and Constitutive terms of his
Church which they were to gather: But the Administering or Governing terms are
larger, even teaching them all things which Christ has commanded them. And
this was a Law not only for that age, but to the End of the world.

. 3. It is the same in sense which reduces all the terms to [Believing in
Jesus Christ] as including Belief in the Father and the Holy Ghost, John 1. 12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even
to them that believe on his name.

John 3. 14, 15, 16, 18, 36. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but
have everlasting life: He that believes on him is not condemned -- He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life.

John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

John 14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

John 15. 1, 2, 3. Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken to you,
abide in me and I in you, etc. See John 6.

Mark 16. 16. Preach the Gospel to every creature: He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, and he that believes not, shall be damned.

It will be needless to repeat all words to the same purpose, Matthew. 18. 6. He
that offends one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better a
millstone were hanged about his neck, etc. And yet must Bishops curse such
from Christ, and excommunicate them? Mar. 1. 15. John 6. 29, 69. and 7. 39. and
4. 35, 38. and 11. 27, 42. and 12. 36. and 13. 9. and 16. 30. 31. and 17. 20,
21. and 20. 31. and 2. 11, 22. and 9. 53. and 16. 27. and 7. 31. and 8. 30. and
10. 42. and 11. 26, 27. and 5. 24. and 6. 35, 40, 47. and 7. 38. and 12. 46.
Acts 10. 42. and 5. 14. and 8. 37. and 13. 39. and 16. 31. and 19. 7. and 18.
8. and 17. 4, 34. and 14. 1. and 13. 12, 48. And all these believers ( no doubt
of no hard numerous humane articles) lived in Love and Communion, Acts 2. 44.
and 4. 32. so Romans 3. 22. The Righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ is
unto all and upon all them that do believe, for there is no difference, and 4.
11, 24. Abraham is the Father of all them that believe, and righteousness shall
be imputed to them all: Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved: For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Gal. 3. 22. and 2. 16. Heb. 11. 6,
etc. and 10. 39. and 4. 3. 1 John 3. 23. and 5. 1, 5, 10, 13.

. 4. Other texts that add Repentance to Faith, speak but the same sense, adding
the express mention of the terminus a quo, as well as of that ad quem: as Mar.
6. 12. Luke 13. 3, 5. Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 8. 22. and 17. 30. and 26. 20.
Matthew. 9. 13. Luke 24. 47. Acts 5. 31. and 11. 18. and 20. 21. and 26. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Luke 10. 13. and 15. 7, 10. 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11.

. 5. Christ himself the Law giver and Judge does often in his explications lay
his acceptance of men on a few great, plain, sure necessary things: He summeth
up the whole Law into the two great Commands, the first and the second like
unto it, even the Love of God and Man: and when he tells one that had lived
soberly and justly, that yet he lacked one thing, Luke 18. it is but this plain
great necessary duty, to prefer his heavenly reward, and hopes, and Christ to
bring him to it, before his wealth and prosperity on earth: This was not a
great Volume of hard opinions, but one plain and necessary duty, not hard to
know, but hard to an unbelieving worldly heart to be willing to do. So in his
great Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5. it is not many dark opinions or small
ceremonious practices that he pronounces blessedness on, but the pure in
heart, the poor in spirit, the merciful, the peacemakers, and such as suffer
for righteousness sake: And in all his most excellent Sermons and Prayers, John
5. and 6. and 10. and 13. and 14. and 15. and 16. and 17. what have you but our
common Catechism truths? Which of the controversies of contenders, or what nice
opinions are there decided or propounded?

Nay, he himself often distinguishing tells men, that God will have mercy and not
sacrifice, and reproves the Pharisees that were strict in tything mint, annise
and cummin, and neglected the great matters of the Law, Mercy, truth and
justice, and that troubled the Church with their ceremonies, and worshipped God
in vain with their traditions, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men,
Matthew. 15.

Yea, when he describes the Judgment to come, it is not many hard opinions
that he lays life and death on, but on loving, relieving, visiting his
members, yea, the least of his members, yea, himself in them: And he condemns
those that do it not even to the least: What then shall they suffer, that
interdict and anathematize Kings and Kingdoms, and hereticate great part of the
Church of Christ; yea, the Pope and his Councils of military Bishops that have
risen to their greatness, and conquered the Christian Nations by this art of
Anathematizing or cursing Kings and Subjects from Christ.

. 6. We find Christ preaching also to diverse single persons, as to Nathaneal,
to the Samaritan woman, John 4. to the blind man, John 9. to the Canaanitish
woman and others; and he never went beyond these few, plain, divine and
necessary terms.

. 7. And he sent out his disciples to preach but the same doctrine that he had
done; even to Repent and believe the Gospel: and Devils were subject to them
that preached this short plain truth; who I fear are the Masters of many that
spin a finer web. And John Baptist went but the same way: And among the
counsels which he gave to the many sorts that flocked to him, see whether any
of our Engines of heretication and division and silencing are to be found. All
the four Gospels are strangers to such things.

. 8. And the very Controversal Epistles of St. Paul that were written to
confute Seducers, were written by the same spirit, and go the same way. The
sum of all is, Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: The doctrine of faith in Christ, and the abrogation of the burdensome
Ceremonious Jewish Law, and that the Gentiles ^ere not bound to keep it, is the
sum of his doctrine. (...) summeth up all the Law in LOVE, Romans 13. ^^d in
living soberly, righteously and godly in the ^orld, following the spirit, and
mortifying the lusts of the flesh, living a holy and heavenly life in love and
unity and peace. And whereas pride and ignorance then began the dividing way,
and condemning Christians for tolerable differences, he often and plainly
reproves and confuteth this: But most fully and purposely to the Romans, Chap.
14. and 15. Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations (or not to judge his doubtful thoughts) instancing in differences
about meats and days; Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not;
and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats; for God has received
him: Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own master he
stands or falls: Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand. Let every man be fully persuaded (or assured) in his own mind: He that
regards a day, regards it to the Lord, etc. But why do thou judge thy
brother? or why do thou set at naught thy brother? For we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ. Let us not therefore judge one another any
more? but judge this rather that no man put a stumbling block in his brothers
way -- If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably: Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. -- For the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God and approved of men. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for
peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. For meat destroy not the
work of God. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man that
eats with offense. I is good neither to eat flesh, or drink wine, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended or ma^^ weak -- And he that
doubts is damned if he eat, be^cause he eats not of faith: For whatsoever
is not (...) faith is sin. Chapter 15. We then that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves: Let every one of us
please his neighbor for his good to edification. For even Christ pleased not
himself, etc. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be
like-minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the glory of God.

. 9. I know not what can be spoken more plain and home to the case in hand, and
the humane unnecessary impositions which have so many ages torn the Churches of
Christ: And yet all this is nothing to the Imposers. The different exposition
of this one part of Scripture has had a great hand in the calamitous
distractions, silencings, imprisonments, scatterings that have been exercised
in many Nations of the world. The controversy lies here: The One side say,
that All this was spoken by St. Paul only of such things indifferent as the
Church had not settled by any Law, and would not so settle; but that it is
nothing to such as the Church either has or will so command: This opinion has
carried it in England and other Nations of the world. Being once commissioned
to plead this cause by his Majesty among others, I then presumed to say, 1.
That St. Paul here writes not only to the laity, but to all the Roman Church?
That therefore he writes (as Christ, Rev. 2. and 3. to the Angels of the seven
Churches,) to the Rulers of the Church as well as to the People. 2. And
therefore he forbids those Rulers what he forbids others; and so
forbids them the imposing of any thing contrary to this his full
determination. 3. Yea himself was an Apostle and a Church-Governor of as great
authority as those that he wrote to; And these his words signified his own
judgment and what he would do himself. Yea they were as good a Law, as any the
Romans could make that he wrote to. Therefore when an Apostle by the Spirit of
God, shall write thus plainly and peremptorily to Priests and people thus to
tolerate and receive each other, he that now expounds it with an [ except the
Church otherwise, decree] makes this the sense [ I do by all these great
reasons charge and persuade you not to judge, despise or reject one another
unless you decree to do it; or not to make such rejecting Laws, unless you make
them.] And the Holy Ghost speaks not in the holy Scriptures at this rate.

. 10. Yea I prove from the arguments used by St. Paul that he extended his
speech to the Clergy or Rulers as well as to the people, and so forbad them
making such Laws: (And indeed the knack of making Church-Laws, (without the
Holy Ghost in Apostolic persons) was not as then learnt and used by the
Churches): 1. Because St. Paul argues from Universal reasons: 2. and from
Moral and necessary arguments, and 3. Speaks by the Spirit and Apostolical
Authority.

. 11. I. His reasons touch not only some singular persons and case, but the
case of all Churches in all Ages: He argues from the difference between
well-meaning Christians as Weak and Strong, as doubting and as assured, as
mistaken and as in the right, as in danger of being damned if they act
doubtingly, and of stumbling and being offended, etc. Now such weak, mistake^
Christians in such matters ever have been, and ever will be, and so the reason
from their case and necessity will hold in all Countries and Ages to the end.

. 12. II. And many great and pressing Moral reasons that all Christians are
bound by are here heaped up. 1. One is from Christian Love to brethren. 2.
Another from humane Compassion to the weak. 3. Another is from Gods own
example, who receives such, whom therefore we must not reject. 4. Another is
from Gods prerogative to judge; 5. and another from his propriety in his own
servants. 6. Another is from our having no such judging power in such cases. 7.
Another is from Gods Love and mercy that will uphold such. 8. Another is
because what men do as to please God, must not be condemned without necessity,
but a holy intention cherished, so it be not in forbidden things. 9. Another is
that men must not go against Conscience in indifferent things. 10. Another is
from Christ's dreadful judgment which is near, and which we our selves must
undergo, and must be that final decider of many things which here will not be
fully decided. 11. Another is from the sin of laying stumbling blocks and
occasions of offense. 12. Another is from the danger of crossing the ends of
the death of Christ, destroying souls for whom he dyed. 13. Another is that it
will make our good to be ill spoken of. 14. Another is that the Kingdom of God,
or the Constitution of Christianity and the Church lies in no such matters,
but in righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. 15. And another that
Christ is pleased in this without the other, and God accepts such. 16.
Another is that such are approved of men, that is, This righteousness, peace
and holy joy without agreement in such Ceremonies and by-matters, bears its
own testimony for approbation to the judgment of all impartial men; humanity
and Christianity teach us to love and honor such. 17. Another is from our
common obligation to live in peace with all. 18. Another is from our obligation
to do all to the edifying of one another. 19. Another is because Gods work else
is destroyed by us. 20. And our own lawful acts are turned into sin when they
hurt another. 21. Another from the obligation that lies on us to deny our own
liberty in meat, wine, etc. to avoid the hurting of another that is weak. 22.
Another is from the damnation of such as are driven or drawn to act doubtingly.
23. Another is from the special duty and mercy of the strong that should bear
the infirmities of the weak. 24. Another is from the common duty of pleasing
others for their good and edifying. 25. Another is from the example of Christ
himself that pleased not himself. 26. Another is from Gods patience to us. 27.
Another is from our great obligation to imitate Christ. 28. Another, because
indeed this is the true way to Love and unity, that with one mind and one mouth
we may glorify God, while we lay not our concord on impossible terms. 29.
Another is in the concluding precept, because Christ receives us and it is to
Gods Glory: therefore we must thus receive each other. If all these moral
arguments signify no more than this [ Receive and tolerate such till you make
Laws against it] I cannot understand the argumentations of God or holy men.

. 13. III. And to conclude, Paul spoke by the Holy Ghost and by Divine
authority himself, and his words recorded are part of Christ's Law indicted by
the Spirit; and no man that comes after him or to whom he wrote, had power to
contradict or obliterate it. All this methinks should satisfy men of the
meaning of so full a decision of an easy case about things indifferent, which
it is strange that so many yet for nothing do oppose: And that the authority of
an Apostle in Sacred Scripture, the peace of the Church, and the souls and
peace of all dissenters and doubting persons, should seem so contemptible to
them, as not to weigh down their humor and domineering will, in an unnecessary
and indifferent thing? But it is the nature of sin, especially Pride, to be
unreasonable and unpeaceable, and the troubler of the soul, the Church, the
world.

. 14. The same Apostle in the Epistles to the Corinthians, 1. c. 1. v. 10. etc.
importuneth them to peace and unity, and sharply reprehendeth their divisions
(1. c. 3.) He desires them to be perfectly conjoined in the same mind, and in
the same judgment. But what are the terms and means of such a union? Is it
that they all unite in Cephas (Peter) or in One Patriarch or Pope? Or that they
adhere to men with greater estimation? No, but contrary. It is this that
divided them, while one was for Paul, and another for Apollos, and another for
Cephas: He calls them to unite in Christ alone, and not to think of men above
that which is written, nor to be puffed up for one against another, nor to take
any Pastors as the Lords of their faith, but as Ministers of Christ and
stewards of his mysteries, given for their good, and helpers of their joy and
edification: c. 3. and 4. He tells them that neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase: and he that
planteth and he that waters are one: c. 3. v. 7, 8, 9. And in case of eating
things offered to Idols, as to so much as was lawful in it self, he charge
them to deny their liberty when it will be a stumbling block to the weak, and
tells them that he will never eat flesh while the world stands, if it make
his brother to offend: c. 8. 13. Telling them that when they sin so against the
brethren and wound their weak Conscience, they sin against Christ; v. 12. And
he himself would labor for his bread, and not take a lawful and due
maintenance from them, when he saw it would hinder his success, c. 9. and would
rather dye, than any should make void this his glorying, v. 15. To the Jews he
became as a Jew, to gain the Jews, and to the weak he became as weak to gain
them, and was made all things to all men that he might by all means save some,
v. 20, 21, 22, 23. His rule is, Give no offense to Jews, or Greeks or to the
Church of God: even as I please all men in all things, not seeking my own
profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved, c. 10. v. 32, 33. Their
divisions at the Communion he reproves, chapter 11. not caused by ceremonious
impositions, but their own partiality and selfishness. The great difference
among Christians in gifts and strength he largely opens, c. 12. to show them
that all this must stand with unity, and that yet there must be no Schism in
the body, but the members must have the same care one of another, v. 25. yea
the less comely parts must have the more care, v. 23, 24.

And chapter 15. 1, 2, 3. he gives us this sum of the Gospel which he preached
[Moreover brethren I declare to you the Gospel which I preached, which also you
have received, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved if ye hold fast
what I preached, to you, unless you believed in vain: ( Are not here the terms
of Christian unity and salvation?) For I delivered to you first of all that
which I also received, how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the
Scriptures, and that he was buried and rose again the third day according to
the Scriptures, and was seen, etc. whence our resurrection is proved. Here is
nothing but the common articles of the Creed; and this was the Gospel.

Indeed St. Paul is an Anathematizer too, but it is not of men that differ
about words or humane forms, but of all them that love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

. 15. The same Apostle sharply reprehendeth the faults of the Galatians; But
what is it for? not for differing about things unnecessary, but for making such
necessary that were not: For which he wishes those cut off that troubled them.
And he concludes all with this uniting true Canon, c. 6. v. 15, 16. [For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
New Creature: And as many as walk according to this Canon (or Rule), peace be
on them and mercy and on the Israel of God: I Can any thing be plainer? No, say
the battering Canoneers, [As many as walk according to this Canon, but conform
not to all our Canons or Decretals, let them have no peace or mercy, but be cut
off from the Isreal of God]; so contrary is the Papal Spirit to Christ's.

And Paul there gives also this rule and the reason of it: c. 6. 1, 2.
[Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such
a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted: bear ye one another burdens and so fulfill the Law of Christ: And
because he knew that self-esteem and contempt of dissenters lay at the root of
impatience toward others, he adds [If a man think himself to be something (
to whom all must needs consent) when he is nothing, he deceives himself.]

. 16. The same Apostle to the Ephesians accurately opens the terms of
Christian Unity and Church Concord in my Text; purposely describing both the
end, the instruments and the terms: so that I know not how we could have
desired more. The End is [For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. That we henceforth be no more
Children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
slight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but
speaking the truth in love may grow up in him in all things which is the head,
Christ, From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that
which every joint supplyeth according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love.]

Can all the Canons in the world attain more Concord and higher ends than these
expressed?

And the Instruments are the gifts which Christ gave to men, even to Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, and the loving endeavors of all
believers.

. 17. And the Terms of all this Union and Concord are these seven, 1. One Body,
(of Christ the only Head, that is, all true Christians in the world) 2. One
Spirit (given by Christ to quicken, illuminate and Sanctify and confirm and
comfort them.) 3. One Hope of their calling (that is, the Glorious coming of
Christ and our Heavenly Glory.) 4. One Lord (the King, Head and Savior of the
Church.) 5. One Faith, (that is, Christianity, expressed in the Churches Creed
or common profession.) 6. One Baptism, (that is, One solemn entrance into the
Church and Covenant of God in the public profession of this one faith.) 7. One
God and father of all, who is above all, and through and in us all.] But all
this consisting in various degrees of grace and gifts, chapter 4. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.

These are Gods own terms of Christian Unity and Concord, sufficient in their
kind, but judged insufficient by the ignorant, proud, tyrannical Church-tearing
Spirit.

And to shut out false anathematizing, he concludes with pronouncing [ Grace
to all them that Love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity] whoever condemn them.

. 18. The same Apostle leaves the same Canon to the Philippians, c. 1. v. 15,
16. Though some preached Christ not sincerely but of contention, supposing to
add affliction to his bonds, so far was he from silencing them or forbidding
men to hear them, that he rejoiced that Christ was preached, though in pretense
and contentiously.

And chapter 2. 1, 2, 3. he most vehemently importuneth them to be like minded, of
the same Love, of one accord, and of one mind: But how can that be, and on what
terms? [Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Not say [say as I say or be
silent.] Look not every man on his own things, but every man on the things of
others ( And not tread down others that you may be great; nor think of your own
case and reasons only.) Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus
-- who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
etc. This is the Pastors pattern. Let him that is Greater than Christ refuse to
stoop so low.

And his Canon for the Concord is chapter 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. To confess our selves
imperfect, seekers of perfection, pressing forward for the prize. [ Let as many
as be perfect be thus minded (This is your measure here) and if in any thing
you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the
same thing.] As if he said, while you agree in true Christianity, take it for
granted that you will all have imperfection, for I have so my self, and
therefore there will be different judgments in tolerable cases; but let this
be your Canon; notwithstanding such difference, while you press toward
perfection, walk by the Rule of Christian Love, in searching after the will of
God, and mind with Concord the great things which you are all agreed to pursue;
And bear lovingly with each other in lesser differences, and God in this way
will teach you more.

. 19. The same doctrine he delivers to the Colossians, reprehending those
that would lay Christian faith or Concord on their will worship, worldly
rudiments and ordinances, Touch not, taste not, handle not, after the
Commandments and doctrine of men, in things which have a show of wisdom, in
voluntary humility and neglecting the body; in worshipping Angels and intruding
into unseen things, vainly pufft up by fleshly minds: And instead of this he
exhorts them to hold the Head Christ, who is the true wisdom and bond of
unity, and believe that in him they are complete; and to take heed lest any
spoil them ( of their faith love and concord) by Philosophy ( pretending
greater subtilty) and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, and after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, in whom dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, in whom we are complete.] And he instances in some such
snares, [Let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day,
or new Moon, or of the Sabbath, which are a shadow of things to come, etc.]
that is, Let no man bring you under such Laws, and lay salvation or unity and
Concord on them.

And chapter 3. he largely shows that in the New Man there is neither Greek nor
Jew, circumcision or uncircumcision, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but
Christ is all and in all: And that the true bond of perfection is charity by
which the peace of God must rule in their hearts that are called into One body;
And the subordinate Canons are [bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so do ye.]

. 20. If any say, These are not precepts for Church Governors but for
subjects: I answer still, They are the precepts of the Holy Ghost by an Apostle
that had more authority than any of our Church Governors, and that to all the
Churches about their common duty, unity and interest, binding them and binding
us, even all the Churches.

. 21. It would seem tedious to recite all other texts to the same purpose: His
prohibitions of vain disputes and janglings about the Law and genealogies, and
his confining men to the common doctrine of Christianity, and his warning men
to preach no new or other doctrine, may be seen in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus.

. 22. And it is much to be observed, 1. That all the heretics of those times
pretended to greater wisdom and curiosity than the Christian Churches had, and
by such pretenses brake their Concord, as may be seen in all the Epistles,
especially Col. 2. and Jam. 3.

2. And yet that whenever the Apostles or Christ himself, Rev. 2. and 3.
censure any such heretics to be forsaken and cast out, it is never for any
little matter, but for denying some common article of the faith (as Christ's
Incarnation, the Resurrection, etc.) or for some gross wicked doctrine and
practice, (as fornication and eating things offered to idols, or rebelling
against Rulers, etc.) Which shows what then were the terms of Church unity, and
by what Canons they were governed, by Gods appointment.

. 23. I will add that one great warning of Paul, which summeth up all, 2. Cor.
11. 3. a prophecy of the deceit and corruption of the Churches; [ would to God
you could bear with me a little in my folly (as proud corrupters account it)
and indeed bear with me: For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy; For I
have espoused you to one husband (and not to usurpers) that I may present you
as a chaste Virgin to Christ: But I fear lest by any means as the Serpent
beguiled Eve though his subtilty ( flattering her with the hopes of higher
knowledge) so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.] Christianity is not a snare for men's wits, but a way to their
salvation: It is a plain and simple thing though most mysterious: 1. It
consists of simplicity of doctrine, a few, great plain and necessary things,
and not of philosophical curious subtilties, though it forbids not but
encourages the utmost improvement of reason and true learning, especially for
method, elucidation* and defense.

2. It is a simple and spiritual worship that it commands, for God is a
spirit and will be so worshipped in spirit and in truth. The Schismatics
contended whether in this Mountain or at Jerusalem] but Christ rebuked that
contention.

3. And it is a simple sort of Government or Discipline that Christ has
instituted; commanding him that will be Greatest to seek his preeminence in
being most useful and humble, as a servant unto all, and not as the Rulers of
the world to be called Benefactors and gracious Lords, not as Lording it over
Gods heritage but as examples to the flock: 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
Not smiting with the sword, but leaving force to Civil Magistrates.

4. And it is a simple conversation that Christ by his Law and example has
prescribed, and his servants used: This was Paul's rejoicing, the testimony of
his Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom,
he had his conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Wisdom must go with
innocence: but it is not worldly carnal wisdom, but such as consists in
knowing God in Christ; to be wise to salvation.

. 24. Now this fourfold Christian-simplicity* Paul foresaw the Serpent on
pretense of finer wit and subtilty would draw the Church to forsake, till (as
Erasmus says) it became a point of wit to be a Christian: and this would be
(and has been) the corruption of the Churches.

1. The simplicity of Doctrine is turned by Councils and by other Dictators
into multitudes of unnecessary and uncertain notions, to say nothing of the
false ones. In the clear discovery of the sense and method of the sacred
doctrine, we must use our greatest skill and accurateness: But salvation, peace
and concord is not to be laid on the fine elucidations, and numerous articles
of men's wits.

2. The simplicity of Christian worship is corrupted, and turned into such
pageantry of Ceremonies and formalities (to pass by much worse) that spiritual
worshippers find it exceeding unsuitable to them, in much of the Christian
world.

3. And how far and dolefully the simplicity of Church Government or Discipline
is lost, in more places than the Papal Kingdom, needs not many words to tell
him, that can compare things old and new.

4. And what wonder if the honest simplicity of Conversation perish with the
rest, and carnal interest and fraud and falsehood, and oppression reign by
carnal wisdom? Thus has the subtle serpent corrupted the Churches by drawing
them from the simplicity that is in Christ.

CHAP. III.
III. The true terms of Catholic Unity and Concord more particularly
described, as the principal means of hope for the Churches Peace.

. 1. THe false terms having been the engines of Schism and Church-distractions,
it is the opening of the true terms that must be the cure, with which I shall
begin, because Rectum est index sui and obliqui. And here are distinctly to be
laid down, I. What are the terms of entering into Christian Catholic
Church-Vnity and Communion? II. What are the necessary terms of continuing it?
and what are the causes of abscission either by apostasy or excommunication?
III. What are the terms necessary to the office and exercise of the sacred
Ministry? IV. What are the terms necessary to the constitution, administration
and Communion in single Churches. V. What are the terms necessary to the
concord of such single Churches among themselves as associated or corresponding
for mutual help. VI. And what is necessary to the civil peace and concord of
Christians, in Kingdoms, Cities and Families. Of these in order.

. 2. I. Nothing but Baptism truly received is necessary to entrance into the
state of Union with the visible Church called Catholic or Universal.

. 3. I before showed that Christ himself instituted the terms, in the
institution of Baptism, and that herein all Christians are agreed. The proof of
this is so full that nothing but gross ignorance or wilfulness can make it a
matter of doubt. 1. In the forecited institution; 2. In the constant judgment
and practice of the Universal Church, through all places and ages since the
institution of baptism to this day.

1. That Baptism has been still used, no one that knows Church history can
deny.

2. That it has been used to this end, to be the entrance into the Church
universal and visible Christian state, is an undeniable. About Infant baptism
the Anabaptists doubt; But they also deny Infants to be Christians or
Church Members: and we prove to them both together, by Christ's command to
Disciple Nations baptizing them: They confess that Baptism is the
Church-entrance as well as we.

3. And all that are truly baptized persons are Christians or visible
Church Members, till they revolt or are cast out, all the Christian world from
the days of the Apostles are agreed.

4. And as all visible Covenanters in baptism have been taken for visible
Christians, so all sincere heart-Covenanters have ever been supposed by the
Church to have by Baptism a sealed and delivered pardon of sin, and right to
adoption, and everlasting life.

All this is so evident that it is labor in vain to prove it, that this has
been the constant consent of the Christian world, and so continues to this
day: And all that are Christians are still in all Countries thus baptized.

. 4. And if Baptism be the common symbol of Christianity, and the common making
of a visible Christian, then it must needs be the constitutive term or
qualification sufficient to men's first Church-Vnion and Communion: which is
commonly confessed.

. 5. If there be any place for contention here, it must be only about the
validity of men's Received baptism: 1. As to the Minister and his part: 2. As to
the mode and Ceremonies: 3. As to the qualification of the receiver or baptized.

. 6. I. As to the first, though all be not agreed in point of Duty who should
baptize, yet so great a number of the Christian world are agreed as to the
validity of baptism received de necessitate medii, that the dissenters are so
few as that we need not fear any great disagreement hereabout. The very
Romanists maintain the validity not only of the Baptism received by heretics
and wicked Priests, and silenced and suspended Priests, but also of Laymen,
yea of women: But de officio all are agreed that where it is possible a lawful
Minister of Christ should do it. Only a few Anabaptists say that it must be
only one that was baptized at age himself: And one or two Singularists (whether
in ignorance or design I know not) think it the aptest medium to unchurch the
Reformed Churches, that they have no true Priests for want of due succession of
ordination, and consequently no true Sacraments, because God owneth no Acts but
such as are commissioned or appointed by him; and consequently no Covenant; and
consequently no Covenant- promise and benefits, of pardon, justification and
salvation: But this is after at large to be detected and confuted.

. 7. The great difficulty is of the necessary qualification of the baptized:
And there 1. the Anabaptists keep out Infants: But besides Baptism and
Church Membership, they deny them no offices that their age is capable of: And
they are ready to receive them all by baptism as soon as they come to the use
of due understanding: And these delays are but few in comparison: And 1. the
ancient Churches compelled none to be baptized, but only received them that
voluntarily came, or were duly brought. 2. And if men will stay without or keep
their Children out, they wrong themselves and theirs, but this breaks no
unity of the Christian Church.

. 8. There have been also factious persons that tie the validity of Baptism to
their sects: such as were specially the Donatists, supposing that their
Prelates had the truest call and power; and that all others were Sectaries or
Heretics, and therefore their baptism null and void and to be iterated: But
though in other arrogancies some follow them to this day, yet few if any in the
nulling of baptism.

. 9. But a greater and longer stir there has been about Creeds and professions
required as Tests to excuse men from heresy. But yet it is to be noted, that
few of them by these altered the form of baptism, but there took up with the
ancient Creed, (the Apostles and the Nicene or Constantinopolitane) and
required no more; but only imposed the rest on Bishops, Priests or other
afterward.

. 10. And is there now any cause of discord here? 1. All Christians have been
made such by baptism from the Apostles days till now. Is there any thing in
the world that ever came down to us by more certain, uniform, consenting
tradition? The very same words of baptism which Christ did institute are every
where used to this day: And if all ages and Countries have still baptized
persons as believers, or Christians, and yet be not agreed what Christianity
is, or what the faith is that baptism requires, it will be a strange
incredible shame to them. But even Hierome and Hillary that cry out of their
new Creeds, do tell us that in Baptism the old one was still used, to which
they did appeal. And though the Greeks and Latins differ about their filioque,
and some small new clauses are found in the Creed that were not in the old
Copies which are now found on Record, they are not so factious or vain, as to
nullify Baptism by any of those differences. For the Creed is but part of the
Exposition of Baptism, and Baptism is true Baptism, if no other Creed or words
were used but it self.

2. And there are few Christians yet that will refuse any of the truly ancient
Creeds; of which more anon.

. 11. 3. It is true that there are some humane ceremonies which some Churches
adjoin to Baptism, and by others are rejected or omitted. The most of the
ancient Churches used the tasting of milk and honey, the wearing of a white
garment, and Chrisme: and now some use the transient Image of the Cross as a
symbol of our engagement to a Crucified Christ; which others omit as taking it
to be so far participant of the nature of a Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace,
as that it is an usurpation of Christ's prerogative, for any men without his
institution to appoint: But yet all these Churches that differ in these
Ceremonies agree that the validity of Baptism depends not on them. Whether
they be used or omitted, the person is nevertheless baptized.

. 12. Qu. But what is it that is necessary to the being and validity of baptism?

Answ. This was partly answered before. 1. It is necessary to the validity of
it in foro Ecclesiae, that both the baptizer and the adult baptized (or the
person that is authorized to Covenant for the infant) do Profess to intend real
Baptism, and not to do it in jest or to other ends: And it is necessary to its
efficacy to pardon and salvation, that this profession of the Baptized be
sincere, and that he do it from the heart: And it is necessary to free the
baptizer from Gods displeasure that his intention be sincere.

2. It is necessary that the words of Baptism be such as express all the
Essence of it; such as are those of Christ which all Christians use [ I Baptize
thee in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.] And that no
contradictory words which nullify these be added.

3. It is necessary to the validity of it in the judgment of the Church, that
the adult person, (and the Parent or pro-parent for the Infant) do seem or
profess to understand all the words of Baptism, so far as is essential to it:
For ignorantis non est consensus.

4. It is necessary to the validity of it to real pardon and salvation that he
not only seem to understand it, but really do so.

5. It is accordingly necessary that the person consent to all the essence of
the Covenant, that is, seem and profess to do it, to the Church, and really do
it, to satisfy God, and obtain pardon and life by it.

6. It is not absolutely necessary to the validity, that the Creed or any other
profession be used, by the baptized, besides the words themselves [ I believe
in God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, and give up my self to him in this
Baptismal Covenant.] Because understanding and consent may be expressed by
those words.

7. But it is usually necessary to the been esse, or the best performance of
baptism that the adult person (or the Parent of Infants) do in larger words
profess his understanding, belief and consent to baptism: And it is best that
these words be not too many nor too few, and that they be for the most part one
unchanged form; Lest ignorance or heresy deprave baptism by change and variety
of words.

8. To this end the Churches of Christ have still used the Creed as the summary
form of Profession of faith, As the Lords Prayer is a summary form of our
Desires, and the Decalogue of our rule and profession of practice. But because
Assent is supposed to imply Consent to the particulars Assented to, though but
Generally professed, therefore the Church has more rarely omitted the Creed in
the profession of Assent, when yet they have accepted of a more General
profession of Consent to the Covenant, and promise of obedience.

9. But if the adult do beforehand as a Catechumen learn the Creed, Lords
Prayer and Decalogue, and give the Pastor a satisfactory account of his
competent understanding of them, then that may be supposed, and only a General
profession of faith, consent and subjection, be used at the time and in the
words of baptism. And so much of the constitutive causes of baptism.

13. II. Though no more than Baptism be essentially Necessary, because so great
a work should be well done; and ignorance and error are very common, it is
meet that the Church require [an understanding Assent to the common Articles of
the Creed, and an understanding Consent to the Lords Prayer and Decalogue; and
in general to all that he understands to be Gods Word, Belief and sincere
Obedience.] And therefore that the adult person, (and Parent of the Infant) be
one that has before been Catechized or examined herein.]

. 14. Though I consent to Ger. Vossius and others that there is no proof at all
that the twelve Apostles made the twelve Articles of the Creed respectively,
every one making one, as some have feigned; and though I deny not what he and
Bishop Usher and many others say, of the two or three Articles being not found
in the most ancient Copies or Records, and though I verily consent to Parker de
Descensu and many others, that the words of Baptism were the first Creed, and
that the Creed was brought in by degrees as the Exposition of the Baptismal
profession, and that at first it had but three Articles [ I believe in ( and
give up my self to) God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost], Yet I take the Creed
in the sense at least to be of necessary use to the ends now mentioned, and I
think we may say so much as is of greatest antiquity to be Divine and the word
of God, and a special part of his word more necessary to be believed than many
other parts.

. 15. For, 1. Though we receive not the pretended Traditions of Rome or any
Church that shall be obtruded on us without proof, or as accusing the Scripture
of insufficiency; yet we never denied that the Apostles preaching was Gods Word
before they wrote it, and as well as their writing. It being eight years after
Christ's Ascension (as is commonly supposed) before the first part of the New
Testament was written by St. Matthew, and near an hundred years after his
incarnation that the last was written by St. John; and only four or five of the
twelve Apostles having left us any of their writings, it were intolerable to
deny that the constant preaching of them and all the rest to their death, was
not done by the inspiration of the same infallible spirit as their writing was,
and so was the Word of God.

. 16. 2. And it is certain that Baptism was then as common as Christians, and
that nothing was sooner done by the Apostles, nor more constantly, nor with
greater concord and concent, than discipling persons and baptizing them: For
this was the sum of their first appointed work, in which Christ promised to be
with them to the end.

. 17. 3. It is certain that the Apostles did administer Baptism as wisely and
holily according to Christ's will, as any that ever did come after them: And
therefore that they did not take up with men's bare saying of three words [ I
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost] without understanding what they
said: All following ages Cathechized or examined the adult before baptism, and
to this day we would take the contrary course for an abuse: Therefore no doubt
but the Apostles did it and appointed it.

. 18. 4. And this is plainly employed in the Scripture when believers are all
said to be enlightened, and translated from darkness to light, and to know God
and Jesus Christ as being life eternal, Ephesians. 1. 18. Act. 26. 18. Joh. 17. 3,
etc. and to be wise to salvation; and indeed when they are said to Believe: For
believing supposes understanding: And when Peter says that Baptism saves;
not the washing of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God. And when all the Christians in the world as far as we have any
notice from the Apostles days, have been baptized after Profession of faith,
we have no reason to doubt, but that the Apostles used and appointed the
requiring of it.

. 19. 5. In doing this, it is no doubt but what they required of the
Confessors from their mouths was short and plain, or else those multitudes of
men and women who were in a short time baptized, would neither have had
capacity nor time to do it: But the words of the Teachers and baptizers in
explaining the said articles were large, and many: For we find that it was
their common preaching work.

. 20. 6. It is most probable (by the reason of the thing and the history, Act.
2. and elsewhere) that at the first no form of words was required and used
besides the form in baptism, but that the people being instructed in the sense
of those words, thereupon professed understanding, belief and consent. (And no
more is essentially necessary) But that after a Creed in terms was the common
form which was used by Professors in order to baptism: 1. Because so many
thousands being baptized, the matter being short, and merely Divine, they could
not be supposed to be left to much variety of expression: Divine, great,
necessary things must be spoken with so much caution as may avoid error,
heresy, corruption and abuse: And if every ignorant man and woman were left to
use only words of their own devising to express the Christian faith, it would
be of confounding and dishonorable consequence.

2. And the great care that then was used that all Christians might be of one
faith and speak the same things, and that the heresies then arising might be
suppressed, does imply that this necessary means was then used by those that
commanded that all be done to edification and unity and in order.

3. And many expositors think that this Creed is it that Paul meant by the
depositum and form of wholesome words to Timothy.

4. But the fullest proof is universal historical tradition and consent of the
Christian Churches, who have ever used Catechizing and the Creed as the
profession of faith, in order to baptism, and this as from the Apostles,
without the least notice of any other original of it: There is some difference
in words between that recited by Irenaeus, and two recited by Tertullian, and
that which we now use, and some little difference between that of Marcellus in
Epiphanius, and that of Aquileia in Ruffinus, and ours now used: And the
forming of the Nicene Creed in other words does show that the Churches took not
themselves to be so tied to the same words of the former Creed as not to alter
any part of them: And it is supposed that before the Nicene Creed, the Greek
Church had a Creed that had as much of the words of the Nicene as of that
called the Apostles. And no doubt it was the wisdom of the Apostles and the
Churches, not to lay too much on particular words, and make them seem essential
to baptism or more necessary than they were: And to this day if any in other
words expressed the same thing, he may be baptized. But ad melius esse and for
concord and safety the Churches that still agreed in words of the same sense,
and mostly the same words as to all that explained the essentials of
Christianity, found it more and more needful to agree in every word, and leave
men no room for dangerous diversity (though over and above they may explain
their minds.) From whence it was that so great contentions have risen about
some single word, as the Nicene (...) and the Latins Filioque, lest the Creed
should be altered at the will of man, and the Christian faith seem to be an
uncertain mutable thing.

. 21. By all this it is evident that the Church must make Baptism the term of
Christian Catholic unity and concord as necessary ad esse, and the Creed as
needful and apt ad been esse ordinarily.

. 22. There is a controversy raised (as aforesaid by Donatists and other
Sectaries, so) now by the Papists, whether the person baptized must not also
own, 1. the Ministry in general, 2. the particular Minister that baptizeth him,
3. and the particular Church into which he is received; 4. and subject himself
by profession to such pastoral power. To all which I shall distinctly answer.

. 23. I. To the first, 1. what is connoted is not always a necessary part of
the contract: A man cannot be baptized but he must know that some one has
power to baptize him.

2. It is more needful of the two that the Apostolical office and power be
known and believed than the successive ordinary Ministry: Because the belief of
the truth of the Gospel more depends on their testimony, as commissioned and
qualified with those extraordinary gifts of the spirit which are its seal and
proof.

3. It is of great use to our faith and obedience to understand that Christ
has settled an authorized Ministry to preserve and preach his Word, and
administer his Sacraments, and guide his Churches to the end of the world, and
he that knows not this wants an integral part of Christianity, and a great
and needful help to his edification and salvation.

4. Yet none of these are absolutely necessary to the essence of Christianity:
If any lived where the ministerial office were not known, or should by
misleading so far err as to think that any judicious Christian, or any
Christian Magistrate, or master of a family, might preach and administer the
Sacraments, if yet this man believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as
his Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and be accordingly devoted to him in
baptism, this man shall be saved, notwithstanding his ignorance or error about
the Ministry, yea though he knew not of the office of the Apostles, but took
them for lay men. For the promise is, that whoever believes in Christ shall
not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16, 18. by what means soever he
was converted to the faith: It is not only, [He that is converted by a Priest
shall not perish] Nor is it ever said [ He that believes in the Apostles or
Priests shall not perish], but he that believes in Christ (which essentially
includes the belief in the Father and the Holy Ghost.) And therefore Paul
calls them carnal as guilty of Schism that said I am of Paul, and I of
Cephas; because they were not baptized into the name of Paul or Cephas, but of
Christ: And he thanketh God that he had baptized few of them, lest they should
say that he had baptized them into his own name.

And yet are the Apostles foundations or bases and pillars in the Church,
because Christ used them as the first great keepers of his word and seals, and
the means of converting unbelievers, and it is hard and rare to believe in
Christ without knowing and believing that they were his commissioned Ministers.

. 24. II. But, though it be a duty to choose a true Minister to be baptized by,
yet it is not at all necessary to the validity of baptism to know that the
baptizer is such: Indeed not one of many can be sure, as not having seen his
ordination, nor knowing of his necessary qualifications: Many things may
deceive them, and all baptism by Laymen is not null, as the Fathers held, and
the Papists now hold and confess.

. 25. III. And as to reception into a particular Church, I have proved before
that it is no work of baptism as such, but a consequent act (in order of nature
always, and often of time.) The Eunuch, Act. 8. was baptized into no Church but
the Universal. There be some few rigid mistaken brethren called Independents in
New England that think indeed that all baptized persons must be baptized into a
particular Church, but others even of that party are wiser herein. It is very
fit that every one that can, be a member of some particular Church: But some
cannot (as Travelers, Merchants, Ambassadors, etc. who reside among Infidels
only, and those that live in Countries where the Pastors by tyranny refuse to
admit any to their communion who will not say or do some unlawful thing.) But
yet Baptism as such is no such thing, nor has such an effect. Much less is it
a profession that such a particular Church is sound.

. 26. IV. And as to subjection to the Clergy, It is true that Baptism
essentially subjecteth us to Christ; and this includes an obligation to obey
him in all things which we know to be his Law; And it is true that just
obedience to the Guides of the Church is his command: But it follows not that
every man knows this, nor that every disobedience unchurcheth us: It is his
command that we pray continually, and in all things give thanks, and that we
speak not an idle word, and use not vain jeasting, etc. But it nullifieth not
Christianity that we culpably offend in one of these: Nor does our baptism
contain our promise that we will never sin, nor that we will obey a command
which we understand not: but that we will be Christ's subjects and obey him
sincerely, so as that when we fail by weakness we will renew our repentance.
Christ also commands every child, subject, wife, servant to obey their
parents, Princes and Magistrates, Husband and Master; And he that is baptized
binds himself also to obey these Laws sincerely if he know them. But it
follows not that it is essential to Baptism to oblige us to subjection to
parents, husbands, masters, but only to Christ who commands us to obey them.
Even as subjects take not an Oath of Allegiance to every Justice, Constable, or
Messenger, but only to the King, who yet commands us to obey his Judges,
Justices, Constables, etc.

. 27. To pretend that Baptism as such does subject men to the Bishop of Rome,
or to the Bishop of Alexandria, Antioch, Paris, London, or to the Pastor of a
single Church, is a perverting the sense of it, and to be answered as the
Apostle did others, Were ye baptized into the Name of Paul?

CHAP. IV.
II. What are the terms necessary for the continuance of Church Communion? and
what are the lawful Causes of abscission or Excommunication?

. 1. IT is granted that as there is somewhat more necessary to the continuance
of our pardon, justification and right to glory, than was to our first
reception, so also to our continuance as members of the Catholic Church: That
is, the bare profession of faith and consent and subjection, or Covenanting
with Christ for future sincere obedience, is enough to our first reception by
baptism: But some performance of this Covenant is necessary to our continuance.

The reasons are, 1. Because the Covenant or promise is necessary, not merely
for it self, but for the performance-sake, to engage us to do what we promise.
2. And as a known false Covenant is null as to the benefit of the Covenanter,
though not as to his obligation, so at the entrance a man's word is his credible
profession; but if he by notorious wilfulness violate this word or promise in
any essential point, he then so far nullifieth his verbal profession as to his
benefit, and proves his Covenanting to be false. And therefore all disciplined
Churches do cast out gross impenitent violaters of that Covenant, in such
essential parts.

. 2. But what is such violation, and for what fin men are to be cast out, is a
difficult question in some instances.

1. I take it for a sure rule that no man is to be further cut off from the
universal Church by sentence, than he first morally departs or cuts off
himself. For the Pastors have not their power for destruction but for
edification: And their office is subservient to Christ, who came not to destroy
men's lives but to save them, even to seek and to save the lost. They are not to
be hurtful but helpful to men's souls.

. 3. 2. He therefore that apostatizeth or denies any one essential article of
Christianity, cuts off himself first, and is to be declared by the Churches
sentence to have so done, if he repent not: If he timely repent, it must
prevent the sentence.

. 4. 3. Whatever sin amounts to an evident refusal of promised subjection to
Jesus Christ, cuts off the sinner morally from Christ, and if he prevent it not
by repentance, he is to be sentenced accordingly by the Church; who do but thus
declare who depart from Christ and cut off themselves.

. 5. 4. Every sin is not a renouncing of our allegiance or subjection to
Christ, nor to be censured by excommunication.

1. There are sins of mere infirmity or imperfection in duty; as imperfection
of sincere faith, love, hope, obedience, prayer, etc. 2. There are sins of
sudden passion and surprise which the will habitually abhors, and the sinner
quickly repents of. 3. There are sins of ignorance which a man knew not to be
sins. 4. There are sins of mere forgetfulness. 5. Yea it is not all
presumptuous sin that is a renouncing of our subjection: A faithful man knows
that the least sin should be avoided, and he may know that vain jesting or idle
words are a sin; And he may be often guilty of these by some degree of
presumption, that is, he may be tempted to think that all men being sinners,
such a sin may stand with grace, and for want of due excitation not fear it or
fly from it because it is a little one, as he would do from perjury, murder or
some greater sin: No small evils or danger does so much suscitate the soul to
resist and avoid it as a greater does: no man is so careful to avoid the prick
of a pin as of a sword: This want of suscitation through the smallness of the
thing, makes less resistance and so some degree of presumption in all men.

. 6. 5. No one Act of sin sufficiently repented of, is matter for a just
excommunication, be the sin never so great; For the penitent are pardoned: If
the Repentance be before the excommunication, it preventeth it: For the first
part of discipline is to persuade the sinner to repentance, as being intended
for his recovery and salvation: and excommunication is never just but when the
sinner will not repent. As under the Law of Innocence death was the wages of
any sin, but under the Gospel faith and repentance are the remedying
conditions; so accordingly though Adam was cast out of Paradise for the first
sin, none are to be cast out of the Church for any sin merely as a sin, but as
not repented of by a believer. I say not that this is the Magistrates rule in
punishing the body, but the Pastors in excommunicating.

. 7. 6. Yea the time and means of admonition for bringing the sinner to
repentance must be competent, and such as are suitable to a rational hope of
his repenting, and not as some Lay Chancellors do, if a few rough words make
them not repent, presently excommunicate him; nor pro forma to say thrice I
admonish you, I admonish you, I admonish you] and then [I excommunicate you.]
It is not a jeasting matter, nor to be past as hastily as angry word. The
sinner must be gravely and seriously told of the evil of his sin, and if it be
something which he takes for no sin, he must be convinced by Scripture proof,
and must be heard speak for himself with patience; and if he hear not a more
private admonition, he must be reproved before the Church, that many may
consent for the more authoritative conviction, and for the warning of others,
and that the Church may thereby clear themselves as not consenting to the sin,
1 Cor. 5. And the excommunication is only to pass at last, when repentance
justly seems hopeless.

. 7. But yet there is much difference herein to be made in respect of the
difference of sins and of persons: 1. A sin of error or ignorance, or
controverted, as also a smaller sin, requires a longer time of patience for
the sinners conviction before he be judged to be impenitent: But a notorious
sin against the light of nature, or plainest proof, and of most scandalous
consequence, must have shorter time of patience: yet so much as that the
sinners passion may be over, and he may have leisure well to consider of the
evil, and of the Churches reproof.

. 8. As gravity, convincing reason, compassion and patience are certainly
necessary, so it seems very convenient at least that when the sinner is
admonished before the Church, the Congregation join with the Pastor in earnest
Prayer to God for his conviction and repentance, and if that prevail not at
once, in tolerable cases to do it again, before the sinner be cast out: Ye
ought to mourn, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. Men will not cut off a corrupt member
of the body hastily, nor till flat necessity, nor without sense of pain.

. 9. It is not every sin that a man repents not of, that is a just cause of
excommunication: For there is no man living that has not some sins which he no
otherwise repents of, than as in general he hates all sin so far as he
knows it: For every man has sins of ignorance, and every man has some
degree of error, and some faithful men have more than others, and take some
sins to be duties or no sins; and some have darker minds than others that are
hardly convinced and cannot perceive the force of an argument against the
prejudice before received. And some are educated where some sins are praised,
and converse with such persons as by their parts and interest in them harden
them in their error; How many thousand zealous Papists, Nestorians,
Eutychians, Greeks take others for heretics by mistake, and perhaps by words
and actions wrong or persecute them, and never repent of it, because they err?
How many Lutherans slander Calvinists, and they the Lutherans, and Papists and
Protestants often make each others matters seem otherwise than they are; Yea so
do Conformists and Nonconformists, Anabaptists and Padobaptists and most that
disagree, and yet repent not, thinking that to be true that is not, and so that
they do well?

. 10. Therefore two things must concur in the sin that deserves an
Excommunication from Catholic Communion. 1. That it be such as some call a
Mortal sin, that is, Not a sin of mere infirmity and ignorance, which may
consist with sincere Love to God and holiness, and subjection to the Government
of Christ, but a sin which in an impenitent person proves the absence of such
Subjection and Love: And the mark of this is, That it be a sin which is so much
in the power of the Will, that no one can keep it that is sincerely willing to
leave it, and which must be known to be sin by all that are truly willing to
know it: A sin that men may know if they are willing, and had rather keep than
leave. 2. And that it be unrepented of, and such as due information and
persuasion with patience, do not bring the sinner to repent of. A heinous,
mortal, wilful sin unrepented of.

. 11. By this it appears, who is to be sentenced cut off from the Catholic
Church, and who not. None but those that first really depart, because the
sentence must be true and just: And this departure is either direct, by
Apostasy, renouncing God the Father, the Son or the Holy Ghost, or some
essential part of Godliness or Christianity: 2. Or indirectly, when men deny
not any of these in words, but in works do that which is evidently inconsistent
with them, and may be so discerned by any willing mind.

. 12. And hence it appears, 1. that the number of these is greater than the
Pastors that cast off true discipline do acknowledge. That is, All those that
are guilty of living in such sins as the common light of nature detecteth to
every willing mind, (such as are fornication, adultery, drunkenness, perjury,
malignity, persecution, slanderous preaching or speech, hating others,
especially for good, etc.) and are obstinate in refusing to repent and amend.
And, alas, how great a number live in our Churches never excommunicated nor
publicly admonished who lie in such sins and will not repent? The Papists
Priests themselves conform by unjust oaths and professing to assent and consent
to many Decrees and Canons of Councils which are false and sinful, and by many
other sinful practices. Their very persecution of men better than themselves on
false pretenses of heresy and schism, is a crime that many were they truly
willing might soon know. Drunkenness, whoredom, lying, perjury, profane
swearing, cursing and slandering, covetous and proud oppressing, and many such
like, yea even professed Saduceism and infidelity and deriding serious
Godliness, are all too common in the world; Yet few of all these are ever
excommunicated.

. 13. 2. Yet hence also it is plain that the commonest sort of Excommunications
for these thousand years at least have been but the acts of carnal tyrannical
usurpation like a plague or public war or fire to the Churches.

Viz. I. Anathematizing men for a dark ambiguous word or phrase, though inept,
and though in the obvious sense by undiscerned consequence it might be
inconsistent with the essentials of Religion, is tyrannical and unjust.

. 14. 1. When the words only are bad, and the man does not so mean them, this
is no heresy in the man. If that word which signifies God, or Heaven, should
in another language, or by misinformation be used to signify, Satan or Hell,
and so have opprobrious epithers annexed, this were no blasphemy or error in
the man. For he used the words as significations of his mind: And they are not
Natural but arbitrary signs. Else all unskilful speakers would be heretics:
Yea all men would be damned; For there are few words but are ambiguous, or of
many sens^ and are good in one sense and bad in another.

. 15. 2. And as Amesius has well noted, there is so harmonious a connection
between all the Moral parts of Religion, that if you deny any one, by
consequence it will overthrow the rest: and every error (though not in
History, topography, Genealogy, Chronology, etc. yet) in morality wrongeth yea
subverteth the foundation.

. 16. 3. And (not only Davenant, Morton, Hall, but) all peacemaking Divines
are agreed that unseen consequences are not to be taken for a man's judgment,
rather than the contrary truths which he professedly owneth.

. 17. For instances, I will over-pass the word (...), and not resolve the
Controversy whether Eusebius Caesariensis proved by D. Petavius and others to
have been indeed an Arian, after all his great labors in his History, his
Praeparatio and Demonstratio Evangelica, ought to have been cut off from the
Catholic Church: or whether Constantine justly chid Alexander as well as Arius
for their contention? Nor whether Hilary justly blamed the making of New
Creeds, beginning with the Nicene; Nor whether Justin and all the rest of the
Ancient Fathers whose words Petavius cites as speaking as the Arians, should
have been Excommunicated. Doubtless the denial of Christ's Godhead is the denial
of his Essence. But there be subtle Schoolmen that think the word [
substance] is spoken of God but equivocally or metaphorically, yea some and no
small men or number say the same of Ens it self, which yet the Scotists
contradict them in: And many choose rather to call God A Pure Act, than a
substance: And these men think that they that know not what substance means
as spoken of God, should not excommunicate men for denying Christ to be [ of
the (...) substance] unless they better understood the subject: And they think
that Damascene that subtly calls God [(...)] must needs be as guilty as
they that denied Christ to be [(...)]; and that where there is no substance,
there is no [ same substance] And therefore thinking that some men mean the
same word heretically, and some well, they wish that the word had never been
put into a Creed, which must be the test of all Church Members: Though the word
be true.

. 18. But there are abundance of other heresies that I may safely instance in,
See what I have recited out of Philastrius in my book against Johnson called [
Which is the true Church] in the end.
as Philastrius * yea and Epiphanius have described them. I am ashamed to
mention some ridiculous heresies in Philastrius, (as calling the stars by the
names of living Creatures, and other better.) And diverse in Epiphanius are not
much worse. But I will speak only of three or four that have made the greatest
divisions in the Church.

. 19. I. Cyprian with his African Councils with Firmilian judging for the
re-baptization of those baptized by heretics, was judged a heresy, which
their Countrymen the Donatists followed: Yet Augustine says that Cyprian was
no heretic for it. And indeed, it had been but justly distinguishing of men
called Heretics, as I before said the Council of Nice did, naming the
Paulinists, and all had been ended. But if not, this was no ju^^ cause of
Excommunication.

. 20. II. The same I may say of the unhappy Controversy of the time of Easter;
about which Victor and Polycrates strove; wherein Irenaeus so much reproves
Victor, as most wise and good men ever since have in their judgments done.

. 21. III. And truly I think on several accounts that the Novatian heresy was
not such as deserved Excommunication from the Catholic Church, though they
sinfully separated from those concordant particular Churches, which by
advantage got the name of the Catholic. For 1. wise men are not agreed what
the heresy was: But the skilfullest agree that it was not a denial of pardon
before God in another world, to the penitent, but only of Church-pardon and
admittance to Communion: And some of their accusers told them that their first
founders denied such Church-pardon only to those that denied Christ or lapsed
against Christianity in time of persecution (good Christians that came out of
prisons being too unwilling to receive those when the storm was over, that had
saved themselves by denying the faith), and that the denial of it to other
criminals came in after by degrees on supposed parity of reason. 2. And I find
it confessed by their adversaries that the wicked lives of the Catholics
occasioned this addition; and that the Novatians were otherwise Orthodox, and
of better lives than most of the Orthodox. 3. And I find that the proudest and
worst Bishops (such as Nestorius) were their sharpest Adversaries, and that the
best lived lovingly and as brethren with them: Chrysostom once threatened their
Bishop in Constantinople, but went no further, and recalled it at the next
word. Atticus and Proclus kindly kept peace with them. And though Socrates and
Sozomen are by many accused as being Novatians, for speaking well of them, I
see no reason to believe it; unless every man that chooses rather to speak
truly of dissenters, than maliciously and slanderously, be therefore of their
opinion. But if it were so, it would be so much the greater honor to the
Novatians, with them that discern, that we have no ancient Church-historians
that write more credibly than Socrates and Sozomen; or in whom the footsteps of
veracity may by a stranger be easilier discerned: If their historians are
truest, it is like they were not the worst men. And to say, [Let men be never so
pious, such an opinion cuts them off from Christ] deserves indignation rather
than confutation.

. 22. IV. Nestorius himself was so turbulent an enemy to heresy and
toleration, that while he would needs be an Orthodox persecutor he fell under
the reputation of being a most damnable heretic: His zeal arose against the
supposed heresy of calling Mary (...), the mother or parent of God; But he
never denied that she was the mother of him that is God: Hereupon Cyril (as
turbulent a man and more, if Isidore Pelusiota and other good men say true)
charged him with asserting two persons in Christ, as well as two Natures: which
his own express words deny: And who best knew his own opinion but himself? On
the other side the Nestorians accused the Cyrilians of heresy, as confounding
the two Natures, and blasphemously making a Creature God, and saying that God
was but so many months or so many years old. Though the extraordinarily Learned
David Derodon have written to prove Nestorius Orthodox, and Cyril an Eutychian
heretic^^ yet truly it is evident in the history and their (...) that they
meant the same thing, and strove but about words, and skilful speaking, in
which Cyril carried it by his greater learning, and by Nestorius his succeeding
St. Chrysostom in the hatred of the Court.

Plainly, One spoke of the concrete, and the other of the abstract: One of Him
that was God, and the other of the Godhead, and both true: Nestorius spoke
formally (that is, strictly, for denominatio est a forma) and Cyril Materially:
Nestorius said, Mary was not the Parent of the Deity or of Christ as God, but
only of the humanity and partly of the Union; and therefore was not aptly to be
called The Mother of God, but of Christ, who is God]: Cyril said that Mary was
not the Cause or Parent of the Godhead, but yet because of the Union of the two
Natures was to be called The Mother of God: And is it not evident that they
strove but about words? which Sophronius in Council after plainly opened, and
could not be heard. O doleful! that two men's sinful striving who should be
judged to speak best, while they meant the same thing and did not know it,
should set most of the Christian world under Anathema's and in a flame of wrath
and mutual condemnation to this very day! But suppose some difference had been
in their sense, was it any renouncing of Christianity and such as cut them off
from Christ?

. 23. V. Cyril so carried it by wit and Grandeur, and the countenance of the
Court that all went for right that he had said. And he had said (as is yet
visible in his writings largely cited by Derodon,) that Christ's Natures were
two before the Union (as if the humane had existed before) and afterward but
one. Eutyches imitated him, and was accused for it otherwise: Dioscorus
honoring his predecessor Cyril took his part, thinking (...) which carried it
then would carry it now: But the Court and stream was changed and he was
deceived: and when they had fought it out and Flavian Bishop of Constantinople
was mortally hurt, Eutyches went for the heretic, and yet the name of Cyril
was honored still as Orthodox. And now that Church war was revived, which drew
streams of consecrated blood, and shook the Empire, and dolefully continues to
this day. The banished Eutychians prevailed in the East and South, and even
beyond the Empire as far as Ethiopia; and the Abassines, Copties, and others
are called by many Eutychian heretics, who know not what that heresy is, but
only honor the names of Cyril and Dioscorus, and condemn those that condemned
them; and being now, from a later propagater of the party called Jacobites, are
the greatest number of Christians in those Countries. And thus the pride and
contention of Prelates under pretense of zeal against heresy and error, have
set the mere names of differing leaders to be the means and marks of Schism to
this day.

. 24. And that still it was the same thing that they meant, will appear to a
diligent reader of the history, and the contenders words: The undeniable truth
is (as Nazianzene before lamented) few Bishops were learned understanding men,
but such as the more ignorant sort of our Curates, and too many of them
worldly, proud and factious, following the Court and those Patriarchs that were
most able to promote or eject them, after Christian Emperors had once made
them the Rulers of the Countries and the Judges of all Christians even in
secular affairs: And when one Sophronius or few others opened the case rightly
to them, they either understood it not, or bawled it down and set up a cry,
Away with the Heretics. The Eutychians following Cyril spoke u^ntly; and said
[ Christ had two natures before the union and but one after, because united,
and union makes one of two.] But it is apparent (as Derodon has proved) that
Cyril (and so his ignorant followers) did not think that Christ's humane nature
did exist before the union, and so that ever they were divided, but that in
order of nature the existence is intelligible before the union, and so that
they were but one as being undivided, not denying them to be still
distinguishable, and so to be what Nestorius and the Orthodox meant by [two] as
being distinct but not divided.

. 25. And Derodon has also proved that Cyril (and so the Eutychians) when they
called them [ One] did mean [ One person] mistaking the sense of the word [
Nature] and meaning by [ Nature] the same that the Orthodox meant by [ Person].
And so the opening of two words, would have ended all their Controversy, and
proved that they meant the same thing and knew it not; that is, 1.
distinguishing between [ One undivided] and [ One undistinguished]. 2. Opening
what they meant by Nature and Person: But, alas, this was no work for those
famous General Councils, but to cry out [ Anathema to Nestorius, Anathema to
Eutyches, Anathema to Dioscorus; Holy Leo, Holy Cyril, etc.] these were their
arguments. And Dioscorus as bad as his adversaries or worse, excommunicated Leo
the Bishop of Rome, and went the Anathematizing way: And so much of Religion
was placed in cursing one another, that there were scarce any Bisops in the
world that were not cursed by one another.

. 26. VI. And the difference between the Greeks and Latins about the words [
hypostases and Personae] had almost come to the same extremity: When Hierome
himself that liked ^ot [ three hypostases] was accused of heresy, and was fain
to fly to his baptismal Creed for refuge, and to prove that he was a believer
because he was baptized. But Greg. Nazianzene.
one wiser than the rest had the unusual good success as to convince them that
by the two words it was the same thing that they meant, and did not know it.

. 27. VII. The next calamitous Anathematizing fell out about the owning or
disowning of the Council of Chalcedon, because of the foresaid Nestorian and
Eutychian quarrels: And so doleful was the case, that it became the test of the
Orthodox in one Country to Curse or Anathematize that Council, and in another
to Curse all that did not receive it. Especially when one Emperor was for one
side, and the next for another, the Cursing varyed accordingly, for the most
part.

. 28. But that which added grievously to the Calamity was, that the same
Bishops that under one Emperor cursed the Council, under the next cursed those
that owned it not, and thus most scandalously anathematized themselves, even
one party this year, and another the next. I say nothing but what Binius and
Baronius and such others say.

. 29. VIII. The next sad Anathematizing was about the Monothelites: They that
said that Christ had but One Will and One Operation were cursed as Monothelite
heretics, and they that said He had two were cursed by the Monothelites: And
these were no narrow petty Sects, but Emperors and great General Councils were
for them. Binius says, that the Council of Constantinople called Quin sextum
that made the Trull Canons, were Monothelites, and yet that they were the same
Bishops that had constituted the fifth Council, so that those also were
Monothelites; And in the reign of Philippicus he says a Council of the
Monothelites was so great that there were besides the rest Innumerable Bishops
out of the East. And these and their adversaries kept on the cursing trade of
Religion, one side cursing under one Emperor, and the contrary under the next.

. 30. And (O doleful case) even these also seem fully to me to contend about
nothing but bare words, and really agreed and did not know it, partly following
the stream for worldly interest, and partly having not skill enough to
explicate ambiguous words and state the Controversy. Who knows not that ever
read any Metaphysics, how many senses the word [ One] or [ Vnity] has? and
how the same thing in several respects may be said to be One or Two? And was
this discussed in any of these Councils? Which? where? and when? 1. Two things
may concur to one effect, where, say the subtilest Philosophers, materially
they are two causes, but formally and properly but one; All set together make
but one cause (being ejusdem generis) and are but many parts of that one cause,
though many things: And so some called Christ's Wills One as being but One cause
in these School-mens sense of the same effect. For the Deity operateth only per
essentiam and has no effect in God himself. 2. And as Voluntas and operatio
signify the Internal principle of the effect, no one can doubt but Christ had
two; for the Divine essential Will, and the humane faculty or Act, were not the
same principle or thing: But Objectively they are One; that is, The Divine
Nature or principle and the humane do will the same thing, and contradict not
one another. 3. And the Controversy is the same as the former with the
Eutychians: Christ has but One Will as opposite to Divisions; One as not
divided: but Two as intellectually distinguishable. Two as denominated a
principiis from two natures; one as 1. from One person, and 2. as undivided,
and 3. as terminated on One object. I doubt not but had this been thus opened
to them, all the sober men would have said, we are all agreed in it. And yet
this wordy difference makes the name of an Anathematized heresy to this day.

. 31. IX. The next cursing difference arose about ^ question whether Christ's
body on earth was corruptible or no? O the unhappy spirit of self conceited
anathematizing Prelates! The affirmers were called corrupticolae and reproached
as blasphemers of the Christ, and the worshippers of that which was
corruptible. The denyers were called Phantasiasticks and made heretics, the
affirmers getting the last prevailing vote; And alas, the Emperor Justinian
out of his great zeal for the honor of Christ, proved one of the heretics,
and is so branded to this day; yea and persecuted the corrupticolas as
heretics. Where will hereticating, cursing and persecuting stop or end? And
yet one word of just distinction had ended all this, had it been duly used and
received. Christ's Body was potentially and as to the natural quality of flesh
liable to or capable of corruption: But not actually corrupted, and not
corruptible in respect to Gods decree, that it should not actually corrupt. And
yet even holy Hilary Pictav. held not only this error but somewhat more; His
words are so bad I am loath to cite them.

. 32. X. The next lamentable Schism and Cursing arose from the Decree of the
Constantinopolitan Council de tribus capitulis. The Cursing one another for
owning or not owning the Council of Chalcedon still continuing; and Learned
Theodoret with Theodore of Mopsuest and Ibas having been formerly by Dioscorus
Ephesine Council condemned and deposed as Nestorian heretics, and the Council
of Chalcedon having restored them upon their just subscriptions, a crafty
Eutychian persuaded the Emperor, that he might reconcile all the Eutychians to
the Council of Chalcedon, if he would but condemn some ill words in the
writings of these three Bishops; which the Emperor called a General Council
together presently to do. The one half the Bishops absent thought this was a
condemning in part of the Chalcedon Council; And Vigilius Bishop of Rome being
then at Constantinople refused to subscribe, and after excommunicated Menna the
Patriarch; The Emperor caused him to be dragged through the streets by a rope,
to reconcile him: The flames of the Church were by this Council much increased,
and by condemning three dead men's writings, the living were more engaged in a
doleful war. At last Pope Vigilius consented to the Council; whereupon a great
part even of the Western Churches and Italy separated from and renounced the
Pope, and chose them another Patriarch (at Aquileia) to be their chief
Church-Ruler in his stead. And this continued about an hundred years, till
Sergius reconciled them: so far was the universal Church even then from taking
the Pope or Church of Rome for the Head, or any essential part of the
Church-Universal. And all this was about the Exposition of some doubtful words
in three men's writings: And can any sober man now think that the right or wrong
Exposition of every man's, or those three men's writings, was a thing that
salvation lies on? or that these are the terms of Christianity and
Church Membership?

. 33. It would be but matter of shame and sorrow to go on, and add the later
and more shameful instances of Anathematizing, especially about Images, several
Emperors and Councils hereticating each other. What an Engine the Pope and
Prelates made Cursing men from Christ, to get dominion over Emperors and
Kings, to subdue Kingdoms, and to turn Love and peace into wrath and wars and
bloodshed and pernicious divisions: To recite their damning of Loyalty under
the name of the Henrician heresy: their damning all that (about
Transubstantiation) renounced not the belief of all their senses and rational
perception of sensate things; and that renounced not also the belief of all the
sound men's senses in the world, and consequently the belief of God: as he is
the God of Nature, making his revelation to our understandings by our senses;
making it necessary to salvation to take God for the deceiver of the senses (or
apprehensions by sensation) of all the world. How they have decreed the burning
or exterminating of all others, that do not thus believe Transubstantiation,
and deposing temporal Lords that will not exterminate them, and absolving their
Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance, and giving their dominions to others.
Did I but recite to you how ridiculously they hereticated Gilbert Porretane and
some other learned men, and how such exposed the Councils of Bishops to scorn
by detecting their ignorance by some questions which they could not answer;
should I tell you what work their long and numerous Schisms, and two or three
Popes at once made for the great Councils of Constance and Basil; and also what
work those Councils made themselves, it might melt the heart of a lover of
Christianity into grief and tears.

. 34. I conclude this, that the hereticating and Cursing men for doubtful
words, or want of skill in aptness of expressions, yea or for errors which
consist with saving faith in Christ, is so far from being a means of the
Churches good, that it has been the grand engine of Satan to exercise Tyranny,
excite hatred and Schism and Rebellions, and do most lamentable mischiefs in
the world, and therefore carefully to be avoided.

. 35. II. And what I have said of words, I may partly say of actions:
Anathematizing men for doubtful actions, or for such faults as consist with
true Christianity, and continued subjection to Jesus Christ, is a sinful
Church-dividing means.

. 36. More particularly I shall show after in the third part of this book, that
it is not all the same things that make a man incapable of present Communion in
this or that single or particular Church, or in a compound Church, Diocesane,
Metropolitan, Provincial or National (or Imperial) which make him incapable of
continuing in the Universal Church. Much less does every continued disobedience
to a Bishops or Councils Canons or Commands make him Excommunicable from the
Church Universal.

. 37. But most abominable was it in the Roman Popes and Prelates, to shut up
all Churches, interdict whole Kingdoms, and excommunicate the innocent people,
because a King displeased them, or denied them subjection or obedience. And as
old Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln in his Epistle to Pope Innocent IV.
recorded by Matthew. Paris, truly tells them, It is the work of Satan, and next
Antichristianity one of the greatest sins in all the world, thus to silence
Christ's Ministers, and hinder the preaching of the Word of God, and the
exercise of his public Worship: Which it concerns all unjust Silencers to
consider.

. 38. But yet somewhat more tyrannical and abominable is it, for one man, the
Bishop of Rome, to damn all the Church of Christ on earth that will not be his
Subjects as the Vicar General of Christ, and own his Usurpation, and so to cut
off and damn the far greatest part of the Christian world. But the best is
procul a Jove, procul a fulmine, the remote Churches feel it not, and do but
deride it, and to the nearer parts his thunderbolt does not kill all so many
nor kindle so many fagots as once it did; nor is any one ever the more
condemned by God for such Papal condemnations.

. 39. But when I speak of particular Church Communion, I shall show, that there
is some lawful suspension (called by some the Minor excommunication) which cuts
not a man off from Communion with any Church, much less from the universal or
from Christ.

. 40. Not approving of or practicing a doubtful or indifferent humane form of
Liturgy, or ceremony or circumstance or mode, is no just cause of cutting off a
man from the Universal Church* Because notwithstanding that, he may be a true
Christian and a member of Christ and his Church, and therefore must not falsely
be declared to be none.

. 41. Not taking this or that man to be ones Bishop or Pastor who is obtruded,
yea or justly set over that Church, nor yet particular acts of disobedience to
him merely as such, are no good proofs that a man is no true Christian or
member of Christ and his Church; and therefore are no just cause to sentence or
declare him none: For the sentence must be true. Many things in such cases may
cause a man to err, which do not unchristen him or cut him off from Christ.

. 42. The disowning and refusing some humane forms of Profession of faith,
called Creeds, or some doubtful (though lawful) subscriptions, promises,
declarations, Covenants or oaths (much less false ones) are no just causes of
Excommunicating that man who professes all the essentials of Christianity, and
whatever is necessary to salvation.

. 43. The condemning of some such humane Creeds, Articles, Forms, Covenants,
promises or oaths, though unjustly, is no just cause of such excommunication;
because all men being known to be fallible, a good Christian may mistake
another man's (or many men's) words: And the misunderstanding of a man (or many
men) may stand with Christianity, piety and salvation.

. 44. It is not all that makes a man incapable of local Communion with this or
that particular Church which unchristeneth him, or makes him incapable of
continuing in the Church-universal, as shall be after proved.

. 45. Nay a man may be a Christian in the Universal Church, who is a member of
no particular Church, as is before showed: As 1. some newly Baptized, as the
Eunuch, Act. 8. 2. Some Christians that live among Infidels, where is no Pastor
or Church: As if one were now Converted in any Heathen Land, or cast there
after; or called as an Ambassador or Merchant to live there. 3. Some poor
vagrant persons that have no dwelling; as Pedlars, Tinkers, and such others
that go from place to place: and some others.

. 46. Therefore if a man should so far err as to think that he were not bound
to be a member of some particular Church, it may consist with his being a
member of the Universal Church.

. 47. Some few brethren called Independents, think that none are members of the
Church-Universal but those that are members of some particular Church: But it
is but few of them, and they are mistaken: As Corporations are the most regular
parts of the Kingdom, but not the whole Kingdom; so particular Churches are the
most regular parts of the universal Church, but not the whole: as has been
proved by instances.

. 48. Yea (though we need lay no stress on this) I doubt not but in cases of
necessity an open profession of Christianity, and entering into the Covenant of
God, does make a man a Christian even without baptism it self. As if a Bible or
good book or speech convert a man among Infidels where there is no one to
baptize him: St. Peter says, It is not the outward washing that saves, but
the answer of a good Conscience to God (in the holy Covenant.) And it is a
dishonorable doctrine against God and Christianity to say that God lays his
love and man's salvation so much on a Ceremony, as to damn or deny an upright
holy soul for want of it, or to give grace to none but by that Ceremony, though
it be of Gods institution. I am sure St. Paul says, Else were your Children
unclean, but now are they holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And if Holy before baptism,
(because the Parents are so and do devote them to God and God accepts them)
then baptism does but solemnize this dedication and invest them. It is the
solemn Covenanting with God, that is the chief part of baptism, and is it which
the ancient Churches meant, when they pleaded for the necessity of baptism to
salvation; Though it is, no doubt, a duty, where it may be had; and the thing
signified is necessary to salvation.

. 49. The Keys of Admission and exclusion as to the Church universal, and
salvation are not given absolutely to the Pastors, but only to exercise on
qualified persons: And every man herein has more power as to his own entrance
or ejection than the Pastors have: They do but judge a man to be what he is,
according to Christ's Law, and not what he is not: no man can make a man a
Christian without himself, nor unchristian him without himself: nor can all men
and devils do so much to it as himself: God has not put our salvation or
damnation so much in any ones power as our own.

. 50. A false and unjust sentence of excommunication does no more to damn a man
than a false absolution does to save him: But till the falsehood is known,
others for order sake must avoid the person, if it be done by a just power, and
not notoriously abused to the subversion of order or the Church; otherwise not.
But the injured person is still a member of the Catholic Church; And is not
disobliged from his Communion with it, and public worshipping of God, because
a Pastor unjustly forbids him: Though he must give all due satisfaction, and
seek his right in a regular way.

CHAP. V.
III. What are the terms necessary to the Office and Exercise of the Sacred
Ministry?

. 1. THe Schisms in the Church are far more among the Clergy than the people,
and have been mostly exercised by Bishops militating against each other, and
anathematizing each other as heretics or as not submitting to the challengers
of superior jurisdiction: Or else in the Bishops silencing Christ's Ministers
for not obeying them as they expect: HARD WORDS for want of an equal skill in
speaking, and JURISDICTION or superiority through pride and a carnal mind,
contended for by the Clergy against each other, have torn the Church, and
confounded States, and been the shame of Christianity in the eyes of Infidels,
and brought us to the low and broken state that we are in.

. 2. The great cause of all this has been the introduction of ignorant or bad
men into the sacred Pastoral Office. And the remedy does not yet seem very
hopeful to us: And operari sequitur esse: As the man is so will he do. A good
tree will bring forth good fruit, and e contra. An ignorant man will err: An
erring man will do evil and not repent: none will do more mischief against the
Churches peace, than an erring Ruler, that Can do it, and thinks that he
Ought to do it: worldly men will prefer their worldly interest, before the
interest of Christianity and men's souls: The carnal mind is not subject to the
Law of God, nor (while such) can be: But the Proud while they will not obey
God, will rage against the best that obey not them. Read Church History, and
you will see it proved.

. 3. Such as the choosers are, such ordinarily the chosen are like to be: God
and the ancient Churches set three locks to this door, for the safety of the
Church; that so great a matter should not be disposed of without a manifold
consent:

1. The person to be Ordained and the Ordainers were made the Judges who should
be a Minister of Christ in the Church-Universal, as being qualified by God
thereto.

II. The People and the Ordainers were to choose or consent who should be their
Pastors in particular. The people and the Presbyters chose the Bishop: and the
Bishop and people consenting, chose the Presbyters.

III. The Magistrate was judge whom he would countenance or tolerate. But Gods
Law was the Rule which all these were to observe in judging.

.. But all men are corrupt, and some more than others: And they like those best
that are likest themselves, or at least most agreeable to their interest and
desires. This chain has been long broken: sometimes the Bishop of Rome has
claimed the choice of Bishops, and given the Bishops the choice of the
Presbyters: sometime he has given the people the choice of their Bishops, but
claimed to himself the power of investing and instituting them. Sometime
Emperors and Kings have used this investing power, leaving still the people to
choose. In England now the King really chooses all Bishops, commending them to
the Dean and Chapter pro forma: And the Bishop only chooses whom he will
ordain a Minister in specie: And one called the Patron chooses who shall be
the Parish Priest, and the Bishop must institute and induct him; but according
to the Law, and the choosing and consenting liberty is wholly taken from the
people.

. 5. 1. How the Popes formerly chose and yet choose where it is in their power,
I need not tell them that know history and the world: nor yet what Presbyters
such Bishops chose: nor is it any wonder that such choosers served their own
interest, nor that the chosen serve it.

2. How Princes, and Patrons and Prelates have chosen, history tells us: And
Christ who says, How hard it is for the Rich to enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, teaches us to expect that ordinarily Rich men should not be the best
(to speak softly). And the Rich will rule; and will choose according to their
interests and their appetites.

3. And when the people had their choice, in some places they chose heretics
or ignorant men: In other places they chose vicious men: In most places they
followed the Court or Great men, whenever they interposed: and too often
divided from each other by disagreement, or caused tumults in the choice. And
then what wonder if the sacred office was corrupted to the doleful detriment
and danger of the Churches, when the choosers were but such as these?

. 6. The things necessary to the sacred Ministry (Bishops or Presbyters) are I.
Either to the Being, II. Or to the Well-being; III. Or to the Exercise.

. 7. I. To the Being are Necessary, I. A true efficient cause. II. The true
constitutive causes. III. A due Terminus or End.

. 8. I. The true efficient cause here is necessary to the effect, it being the
Fundamentum of the Relation. And this is, 1. Primary (or Principal) which is
Jesus Christ the Lord Redeemer, and the Churches King and Head: 2.
Instrumental; and that is, The Law of Christ, which is as a Charter to the
Church, first telling the Choosers, and receiver what to do, and then Giving
the Power and Imposing the Obligation on the person chosen, consenting and
ordained.

9. II. The necessary Constitutive Causes are I. Matter (or the subject.) II.
The necessary Disposition of that Matter: III. The form; as in Physical beings
it is so, so Relations have somewhat answerable.

. 10. I. The Subject or Matter is A Man: II. The necessary Disposition is, 1.
That it be a Male and not a Woman. 2. That he have the use of Reason, or
natural wit and speech. 3. That he be a Christian. 4. That he have necessary
abilities for the essentials of the office-work. And those are; 1. The
understanding at least of the Essentials of Religion and Ministry. 2. A Will to
perform the work of the Ministry. 3. Ability of utterance to do it, and all the
necessary executive power.

. 11. III. The Form of the Office is, 1. In general AUTHORITY and OBLIGATION
conjunct: 2. In special Authority to perform the Office-work, and obligation to
perform it. Which work is,

1. To be a Teacher under Christ the chief Teacher.

2. To be a Priest or Intercessor, to guide the Church in worship and speak in
their name and on their behalf to God, and intercede for them, and as from God
to administer his Seals or Sacraments.

3. To Rule the Church and particular Believers in things spiritual, not by
force or sword, but by opening and directive applying Gods Word, and exercising
the Church Keys, as Judges who is to be received or cast out, loosed or bound
according to the Word of God. The Form consists of these parts.

. 12. III. The End or Terminus of the Sacred Office; that is, of the Authority
and Obligation, is, 1. Proximately, the Work to be done.

2. the necessary objects of that work; 1. Particular persons; 1. Infidels and
ungodly men to be converted, 2. Christians and godly men to be edified. 2.
Societies. 1. The Church^Universal to be increased and edified. 2. Particular
Churches to be taught, and guided and led in worship and discipline. 3. The
necessary effects (here named) to be intended.

All that I have named and no more is necessary to the Being.

. 13. About all these there are diverse errors brought in by the arrogance and
ignorance of men, which hinder the concord and peace of Christians: And I.
About the Efficient Cause.

Too many falsely persuade the world that the ORDAINERS are the efficient Causes
of the Power or Office: See Mr. D^dwill.
yea that their Intention can alter the species instituted by Christ, in the
conveyance of it to this or that person: As if when Christ and his Apostles
have described the office in its parts, and commanded that a Bishop or
Presbyter be chosen and ordained to such particular work and ends, an Ordainer
might now give him half this power without the rest: And when he makes Bishops
or Presbyters they shall have no more power than the Ordainer was willing, or
intended, or did particularly express: Than which nothing is more false. For it
is Gods Law, that is the specifier and donation, and the Ordainer does but
ministerially invest and deliver possession of what the Law gave, and commanded
him to deliver.

The Kings Law or Charter gives power to the Citizens to choose a Major, and
describes all his power and work, and orders the Recorder to Swear him and
deliver him the insignia. Here now, 1. The Electors do but determine of the
person to receive the power, but do not at all give it. 2. The King by his
Charter as the instrument gives it: It results hence as every Jus a titulo seu
fundamento juris. 3. The Recorder only Ministerially delivers possession by
investiture. Now if the Recorder or Choosers shall say, [We choose you or
deliver you power as Major according to the Kings Charter, but you shall have
but so much less] than the Charter gives, this diminution is a nullity? For
they have no power to choose another kind of Major than that described in the
Charter, nor to make his power more or less; but he may exercise what the
Charter gives.

Let them not deceive men by making a Verbal strife of it. If they will call
either electing or investing [a Giving of the Power] I will not contend against
their liberty of speaking as unfitly as they list, if they will but well
explain it. But the thing is plain and sure, that 1. The election does but
determine of the Receiver, 2. and that the Investing act is but a ministerial
public delivery of a Right which resulteth immediately from the Charter or Law
of Christ: If a Bishop say [I ordain you to the office of a Presbyter] the
Scripture must tell us what that is. If the Bishop say [ Take the office of a
Presbyter, but preach not, or only preach and administer the Sacraments, or do
both, but you shall have none of the Church Keys, or power of discipline] it
is null, as to the restraint.

There is no contract freer than that between a husband and wife, as to the
choice of persons. And yet when a woman chooses a man for her husband, it is
not she that (properly) gives him the Ruling power; she did but choose the
receiver; God by his Law is the Giver: If she bargain with him that he shall
not be her Governor, it is null because against Gods Law: And so it is in the
present case. If the power of Ordination and Church Government can be proved to
be settled by Christ on the Presbyters either conjunct with the Bishop or alone,
he that ordains a Presbyter by virtue of Christ's institution, cannot deprive
him of that power by his own will and act, by saying, You shall have no such
power: For God is the describer and the giver.

. 14. Yea some would persuade men that the very office of Presbyters is of
humane institution; As some Papists in the Council of Trent would have had it
pass that Christ having made the Pope, the Pope makes the office of Bishops,
and they hold their power from him, so some Prelates would have it believed
that Christ only instituted the Order of Bishops, and that Bishops made the
Order of Subject Presbyters, and that after Scripture-times; there being none
till then existent, but the word [ Presbyter] in Scripture, everywhere
signifying only a Bishop. Which those that are against the distinct order of
Bishops thankfully accept, and say that indeed Subject Presbyters having no
ordaining power are a humane invention since Scripture-times, and that God
instituted no such order: But the difference, is that these say man had no
authority to do it, and bid the other prove by what authority it was done, and
where the Bishops had such power given them to make a new species, order or
office of sacred Ministers; But the other say that it was well done: But proof
is all.

. 15. And here come in many other Church-distracting contentions: As 1. Whether
any Bishops Ordination be valid that holds not his Power from the Pope? 2.
Whether he be a true Bishop that is not Canonically ordained by three Bishops?
3. Whether he be a true Bishop that is not chosen or consented to by the people
and Presbyters of his Church? 4. Or if he have but the minor part? the rest not
being allowed or called to choose? 5. Or if the major part be against him? 6.
Or if three neighbor Bishops be for him and ordain him Bishop, and many more
be against it, or forbid it? 7. Whether he be a true Presbyter that is not
ordained by a Bishop of distinct and superior Order: And whether an
uninterrupted succession of such ordination is necessary? 8. Whether he be a
true Bishop that is ordained only by Presbyters? 9. Whether he may be a true
Bishop or Presbyter that has no Ordination? 10. Or he that has no Election
but the Kings or the Patrons, nor other proved Consent of the people? 11.
Whether he be a true Bishop or Presbyter that the King allows not or
forbids? 12. Whether the Ordination of heretics be null? 13. Whether the
Ordinations of prohibited, degraded or excommunicate Bishops be null? Abundance
of such controversies ignorance and faction have torn the Churches with.

. 16. I. As to the first I need not answer it to any but Papists, and as to
them, I and others have said enough that is unanswered.

. 17. II. As to the second, where the Churches agree to take none for a Bishop
that is not ordained by three, four or more, that person cannot be the Bishop
of that particular Church which by such agreement does refuse him: Not for want
of any thing necessary to a valid ordination, but for want of the Consent of
the people or subjects that are to receive him: For he cannot be their Pastor
against their will. But the Ordination of One may make a man a Minister in the
Church-universal, unfixed; and to a particular Church, if the receivers of him
do consent.

. 18. III. As to the third, Election often signifies the first determining
nomination distinct from after consent: This is not necessary to the office or
power: But Consent is necessary at least to the exercise: and therefore to the
office which is for that exercise. If people were as much under Princes for
choosing Guides for their souls, as a daughter in her fathers house is under
her father for the choice of a husband (which yet I never saw proved to be so),
yet as he can be no husband to her without her consent, though she culpably
deny consent, so is it here: he can be no Pastor to them till they consent.

. 19. IV. and V. In all Societies where consent is necessary, the consent must
be either of All or of the Most, or else they will divide.

. 20. VI. To the sixth, The question of the Validity of the Ordination
depends not on it; but on the peoples acceptance and consent: If ten Bishops
ordain one man Bishop of a Church, and three ordain another to the same Church,
and one a third (as sometimes there have been diverse ordained Popes) that only
is the true Bishop whom the Church which he is to be over, consents to. Other
decisions will not serve.

. 21. VII. I will answer this largelier by it self in the third part: Here I
only say, 1. so far as any Ordination is necessary, the Ordination of a Bishop
is necessary: But the question (...) what a Bishop is? If he be defined by the
Power of ordaining alone, some think there is no such: because by the old
Canons the Presbyters were to join in Ordination. Others think that when none
else are there, any one Presbyter may ordain alone. If he be defined by the
Power of Ordaining simply, or of having a Negative vote in ordaining, the doubt
is whether every Presbyter have not Power to ordain, as in nature the
Propagation of its own species is common to all living things. Either
Ordination is a Governing act of superiority, or a propagation of the species.
If the later, Presbyters may do it. If the former, then Bishops cannot ordain
Bishops as such, nor Archbishops ordain Archbishops, nor Patriarchs ordain
Patria^rhs, nor any one ordain a Pope: And yet of old Deacons and Presbyters
were made Popes, that were not before so much as Bishops, Formosus being the
first Bishop of Rome that had been a Bishop before, and therefore condemned and
executed dead, the Canons forbidding any to remove from one seat to another,
says Archbishop Usher, [ Jerome ad Evagr. assures us that at Alexandria from
the days of St. Mark till Demetrius the Presbyters made their Bishop, ergo
they may make Presbyters: They that can do the greater can do the less.] And
Dr. Hammond concluding that there is no proof that in Scripture-times there
were any subject Presbyters distinct from Bishops, makes it hard to be proved
that there should be any such at all; and whether the making of a rank of
Presbyters that have no power of Ordination be not a changing of Scripture
order and a sin? Yet even subject Presbyters (made since Scripture-time)
concurred in ordinations, and do partly to this day.

2. If a Bishop be described by his actual superiority over Presbyters, then
says the foresaid Dr. Hammond, there was none in Scripture-times.

3. If a Bishop be described by being over a Church compounded of diverse Parish
Churches, (or Congregations that have Altars) there can none such be proved to
be in the world for about two hundred years after Christ, (besides Apostles and
Itinerants, whose Province was indefinite and not a particular Church) not of
long after saving at Rome and Alexandria. There was none such when Ignatius's
Epistles were written.

4. But if the chief or only Pastor of a single Church (that has unum altar)
yea of a City Church, be to be called a Bishop, then multitudes now called mere
Presbyters have been such Bishops, and have ordained.

And as to a Negative Vote in ordaining, that (if it were proved it self)
proves no distinct order or office, but for order-sake a prerogative in the
same office. The question is yet undecided even among Schoolmen and Bishops,
whether a Bishop and Presbyter differ only Grad^ (as the foreman from the rest
of the Jury, or a Justice of Quorum or a chief Judge or Justice, from the rest)
or also Ordine or Specie, (as a Justice and a Constable.) Says Archbishop
Usher with Bishop Reignolds and many other Bishops, Ad ordinem pertinet
ordinare; and they are ejusdem ordinis; which others deny.

. 22. But not to anticipate my fuller answer to this case, I briefly answer,
that Gods Law or Charter giving the Ministerial power to the duly qualified
receiver, no Ordination does more than to determine (with the peoples consent)
who is the qualified receiver, and for the sake of Order, and the Churches
notice, to declare his right and solemnly invest him. And God has not
appropriated this declaring and investing power, so to their Prelates distinct
from Presbyters (that I ever found) as that the Church should receive none but
of their ordination. What men decree is one thing, and what God ordains is
another. Where an order is settled by men according to Gods allowance and
general rules, there the people should caeteris paribus receive him that is
most regularly commended to them. But if they receive one less regularly sent
them, if he want nothing necessary to the Being of the office, he is their
Pastor who is so received by them. When Justices of the Peace did marry the
people in England, the Marriage was valid before God, as truly as when the
Clergy did it. The same is a sufficient designation of the Recipient person in
some times, places and circumstances, which is not at others. And when the
Person is but Determined of and consented to, Gods word authorizeth him.

. 23. VIII. The answer to the seventh question serves to the eighth: They were
true Bishops whom the Presbyters made at Alexandria; and those in the North of
England who (as Beda says) were made by Scots Presbyters.

. 24. IX. He may be a true Bishop or Presbyter that in cases of necessity has
no Ordination at all: (much more he that is ordained but by Presbyters) The
proof lies in these things set together.

1. As is said, Gods Law or charter gives the right or power to the duly
qualified, determined and chosen person: But in cases of necessity a qualified
person may be determined of and chosen without any Ordination: Therefore he may
have the right or authority without.

2. Such necessity there may be in several cases: As 1. If by good books men be
Converted among Infidels where no Bishop or Ordained Minister can be had: They
must not therefore forbear Church Assemblies and public worshipping God, and
baptizing.

2. In case that many Christians be banished or cast upon foreign lands where
no Minister is to be had.

3. In case that persecutors banish or destroy all ordained men, and will
suffer no other to come among them, or them to fetch ordination.

4. In case that all the Bishops or Ordainers turn either heretics or tyrants,
and will ordain none but on some sinful terms.

5. In case that men living under Bishops do forge Orders and pretend that they
are ordained when they are not, and the people know it not: Their acts now are
of full authority or validity to the innocent people, though God will condemn
the pretender for his sin. This case I have often known my self, and in my youth
lived under such as was after discovered. And the opponents themselves here
confess that Presumption may serve turn to the people, when they cannot detect
it. And indeed few people in England know any otherwise than by presumption
that their Bishops or Pastors are ordained. And if it were true that Presbyters
Ordination were null, yet when the ordained after great study believes it
valid, and the people cannot know the contrary, here is a Presumed title both
to the ordained and the people; that is, valid administrations and receptions
without ordination.

. 25. 2. And indeed the like cases prove it by parity of reason.

Ordination to the Ministry is but like Coronation to a King, or public
marriage to Consenters, or like listing and the sacramentum militare to a
Soldier, or like public authorizing to a Physicion, a School master, etc. and
not all so much as baptizing to make a Christian: But an hereditary or Elected
King, is a King before his Coronation; and marriage privately contracted and
publicly professed, is valid before God before the solemnization by a
Minister, and in case of necessity without it: And a Soldier may be truly such
by contract without Colors or Oaths: And a man may be a Lawful Physicion or
Schoolmaster in case of necessity without a License or public authorizing.
Yea one may be a Christian before God, yea and before men, that openly
professes and Voweth the Baptismal Covenant, though in case of necessity (when
either a Minister or Water cannot he had) the washing be wanting. And we are
not to feign God to make a difference here without proof, or to lay more stress
or an outward act of man and point of order than he does.

. 26. 3. And as to the Nature and Use of the thing, Order is for the sake of
the thing ordered, and the persons for whose good it is; And therefore not to
be set against them.

. 27. 4. And Christ himself has often taught us this way of judging: When he
bids us, Go learn what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And
when he often reproves Jews and Samaritans for striving about circumstances,
setting them against spiritual worshipping of God; And when he says, The
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; And Paul when he says,
All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos, and Let all be done to
Edification. All which tell us that the End is a certain Canon to the means,
and to be preferred; and that Morals must be preferred before Rituals, and
Rituals never set against them. And methinks they should be of this mind that
deny the Scripture to have unchangeably fixed all Rituals; and yet confess that
Morals are fixedly determined.

. 28. 5. And even Popes have been taken for Popes upon Election before
Consecration: And Archbishops with us have no superiors to Consecrate them,
but such Inferiors as promise them obedience at their own Consecration.

. 29. X. To the tenth question, There be some called Erastians who hold the
King to be so mixta persona like Melchizedeck, as that he is also the chief
Priest, and has the chief power of Ordination, and that he might administer
the Sacraments if he would, and that his Appointment is an Ordination, which
the people are bound by reception of the person to consent to. There are others
that think that though the investing act must be performed by a Bishop, yet he
is bound by the Kings choice and command to do it, as a Minister of God and the
King. But as I never saw either of these well proved, so very few comparatively
receive them, and therefore they will never unite the Churches. And Christ's
giving the power of the Keys himself to the Apostles and their Successors in
the Ministry, seems to me to contradict them. Sure I am that Christ's Church
has not thus been founded or edified: And yet Magistrates have a great and
honorable part even in the Government of the Church, I speak not for all those
Popish Councils and Canons which nullify all Ordinations of Bishops either
chosen or presented by Civil Rulers or Great men that are Secular; nor of those
that pronounce even a Pope an Usurper that is so introduced: But of the
Councils and practice of the sounder ages that were still against this.

2. However if Clergy and people were proved to be bound to Consent to
whomsoever the Prince shall choose, yet till they do consent, he is no Bishop
to them: You may (could that be proved) prove them culpable for not consenting,
but not prove him their Bishop; as the Scripture, and all Church custom and
Canons and Reason show.

. 30. XI. To the eleventh case I answer, That the Priests or people sin who
disobey a lawful command of the King (and not otherwise.) But sin or not sin,
it nullifieth not the Ordination or Priesthood, merely that it is against the
will of the Prince. All the Bishops and Priests in the world (or most) were
made against the will of Princes for three hundred years: And Christ gave the
Keys to other hands.

. 31. XII. and XIII. To the twelfth and thirteenth cases I answer together, If
a heretic whose denial of an essential of Christianity is notorious and makes
him equal to an Apostate, ordain, his Act is null as without all authority; And
the man's Priesthood or Episcopacy is null, if he have not a sufficient cause
and proof of it besides or without this: The same I say of one excommunicate
for such a cause.

But if the Heresy be only a schism or some lower error consistent with
Christianity and Priesthood, or the excommunication only on such a cause, then
the ordination (in sensu passivo) is not null, merely on that account that it
was done by such a heretic or excommunicate man (As is commonly agreed on).

But yet if this Bishop or Presbyter be ordained by a heretic or excommunicate
man of a lower order, to this or that particular Church, caeteris paribus the
people may see reason to refuse him; and consent to another that has a better
ordination; (unless in a Church so corrupted that the Ordainers and
Excommunicators authority is not to be regarded and help up, (which has too
often fallen out.) But regularly none ought to ordain a man to any Church before
the election or consent of the flock, though it may serve ad esse officii, if
the consent come after.

But if three Bishops ordain one man to be Bishop of such a Church, and three
others ordain another to the same, that is the true Bishop quoad esse, which
the Church to which he is ordained does accept, by their consent before or
after. Yea though it were the worser party of Bishops that ordained that man.

. 32. As to the point of successive-right-ordination uninterrupted from the
Apostles, I hope afterward in due place to prove, that to the Church universal
such there has been de facto in all the necessary parts: But that to any
particular Church, or any individual persons ministry, such uninterrupted
course of ordination in being, notice or proof, is utterly unnecessary: and
that the Papacy has no such to show.

. 33. To conclude, To the Being of the true Relation of a Bishop or Presbyter,
is necessary only, 1. The Subject, which is a Qualified Christian man,
sufficiently notified and offered. 2. The Fundamentum Relationis, Christ's Law
or Charter giving him his power and obliging him to his work. 3. The mutual
consent of Pastor and flock in the Relation to a particular Church, is partly
Dispositio subjecti, and partly as it is Gods means, a modus fundandi or
conditio tituli. 4. The Terminus of one ordained to the gathering of Churches
sine titulo or not to any particular Church, is objectively first men
unconverted to be called, and next men converted to be edified: and as Effects,
the work to be done and the good to be done by it. And in those ordained to
particular Churches, it is the work and the effect on them. 5. The Correlate
is, 1. Christ to whom we are related as his Ministers, as the efficient of our
office; 2. The people to whom we are related as the end; and that 1. we are
Ministers to the world to be converted, 2. To the Universal Church to be
edified, 3. and mostly to particular Churches to be guided. 6. The Relatum then
is, such a person Authorized and obliged to Teach, Worship and Rule under
Christ the Prophet, Priest and King of the Church the foresaid flocks or
Christians to the foresaid ends.

. 34. II. So much for what is necessary to the Being of the sacred office: Now
what is necessary to the well being. And indeed, though the Essential Unity of
the Church lie not upon this, yet the Peace and Concord of it does, and that so
much as that no other means without this will attain it: And the want of what
is necessary ad been esse in the Ministry and Bishops, is it that has caused
the common calamities.

. 35. And I. Nothing is more wanting hereto than better qualifications in the
persons: 1. That there be a strong wit, and good acquired gifts of knowledge,
and a strong and lively faith from Divine illumination, and good acquaintance
with the Oracles of God: A Pastor or Teacher should not only know the
essentials of Christianity, which every Christian knows, but also the
Integrals and many Accidents. And both essentials and integrals should be known
by him by a more clear, distinct and orderly understanding, not only above the
vulgus s^delium, (common Christians) but above the better sort of the flock.
And some store of natural and common knowledge called Learning is needful
hereunto: But especially more illumination, faith and holy wisdom, and
skilfulness in matter, senc^ and method of the word of God.

. 36. Where Gods Word is not by the Teacher clearly understood and firmly
believed, and he is not well acquainted with the work of his office, it is not
any formalities of Ordination, consent or Titles that use to make up these
defects as to the success. To say what God can do, is little to this business:
He can make an Ass to preach to Balaam: He can work by fools and ignorant men
and heretics: But Scripture and all the common experience of ages assures us
that it is not his ordinary way, and that he rarely blesses such with great
success, but works according to the qualifications of the Instrument and the
Receivers. And let a man's ti^les and ordination be what they will, weak men
will do weakly, and ignorant men will do ignorantly, and erring men will do
erroneously, and the Gospel will be wronged, the people will be hurt or losers,
and enemies will deride and scorn.

. 37. When Aristotle says that Wise men are by Nature to Rule, and fools and
ignorant persons to be ruled, he meant not I suppose that this gave wise men
formal Power; but that this was the materiae dispositio receptiva; as Gold and
Silver are to be the Kings Coin, but are not so qua talia: so only wise
Christians are receptive matter of Ministerial power, and the wiser the better.
And when one appears to be of eminent wisdom above all the rest, caeteris
paribus, the ordainers and people are directed and bound by God to choose that
man. And what scruples soever rise about his Ordination, usually God works by
excellent worthy men, and as light cannot be hid, so holy wisdom will be known
and valued.

. 38. 2. But LOVE or HOLINESS is necessary ad been esse as well as wisdom: Heat
causes heat: And we have need of sacred Heat as well as of Light. Love
kindles love: A Pastor should excel the Flock in Love to God, to Christ, to
Holiness, to Gods word and work, and to all the peoples souls, and should speak
all from the Zeal of Love: As the Nurses milk should have the warmth of Nature.
Cold heartless preachers usually reach not the heart and have but cold^ and
small success. Here also God works usually according to the means: And how
can he be taken for a sound Believer of so great overwhelming things, as we
have to speak of, that speaks only of them sleepily and coldly?

. 39. 3. And as wisdom and zealous Love, so executive Activity, but especially,
Taking utterance is necessary to the well-being of the sacred-office, and the
success. Though it be not the tricks of vain humane art and affectation which
must do our work, yet is it a free and moving utterance of holy wisdom, faith
and Love. And words are not all: Holy example of living in blamelesness,
justice, humility, self-denial, meekness and patience must be our work: And
diligence in doing all the good we can. What examples are there this day among
us of one or two holy, humble, meek and patient and unwearied laborers, even
in a silenced, suffering and low condition, men of no extraordinary parts, but
with ordinary parts of extraordinary labor and patience, that whole Countries
have cause to bless God for: I will venture to name three such, 1. Mr. John
Eliots in New England, that has translated all the Bible into that most
barbarous language, preached to the Indians about forty years, and gathered
diverse Churches among them. (And verily I would the Jesuits had never done
worse work than what they did (with several Friars) in Congo, China, Japan,
etc. which is their greatest honor.) 2. Mr. John Dury, I hear yet living, who
has these fifty years or near been employed in reconciling the Lutheran and
Calvinist Protestants, not without success, as Helmstadt, Breme, Hassia and
other places know; Though much more might have been expected if the wars of
Princes and the obstinacy of contentious Divines had not hindered. 3. Our Mr.
Thomas Gouge, an ejected silenced Minister, who has set up about fourscore
Schools in Wales, for thousands of Scholars, given away many thousand books to
them, relieved many poor honest ejected Ministers, got the Bible, the Practice
of Piety, the Whole Duty of Man printed in Welsh, and visits the Counties
there (though aged) once a year.

Gods work must be done as our trade and business and not on the by, as taking
up the place and time which men's fleshly and worldly interest and work can
spare.

Had the Church such men enough as I have described, and as some have been (such
as Cyprian, Nazianzene, Basil, Chrysostom, Atticus, Proclus, Hierom, Augustine,
Ambrose, Martin, Salvian, etc. and such as Melancthon, Bucholtzer, Bucer,
Phagius, Musculus, Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Vrsine, Olevian, Paraeus, Camero,
Placeus, Molineus, Dallaeus, Blondel, Chamier, Sadeel, Le Blank, etc. and such
as we have had many in England, Jewel, Grindal, Field, Reignolds, Usher,
Morton, Hall, Davenant, Chillingworth, Hildersham, Dod, Ball, Bradshaw,
Gataker, etc. and such as yet through Gods great mercy we have many, (I say had
the world enough such as these, the light would scatter the dismal darkness, and
they would carry on Christ's interest in the Churches, against the opposition of
Usurpers, heretics and contenders: For even a few such have broke through
armies of Philistines to fetch men the sacred waters of life. And it is not
scruples and quarrels about their ordinations or such like as would frustrate
their endeavors.

. 40. II. It is greatly needful to the well-being of the Ministry and the
success, that Doctrine be kept sound: And therefore, 1. That the Christian
simplicity be retained, and many subtle and curious decisions be not made
necessary: A few great, necessary certain truths, are easilier preserved than
multitudes of uncertain controverted niceties.

2. It is needful that such as are ordained Ministers, be tried men, of sound
understanding in that which they must teach and do, and therefore that both the
ordainers and the hearers try them. This account of their understanding is
better than the imposing of humane forms upon them for subscription: Not but
that Teachers should know more than the flock, that is, than the essentials;
nor that I presume to condemn all the Churches that impose their Confessions to
be subscribed in their own and not in Scripture-words, while they keep only to
necessary certain things: But I shall afterward prove, that this way, though
tolerable, is not best, but unnecessary and dangerous, 1. the Scripture
affording us apt words enough to form our Confessions in, which are past
Controversy; 2. and there being no probability of bounding men's Impositions of
this kind, when once they set upon this way; 3. and most Confessions of that
nature now extant having some needless words which other Churches or good
Christians do dissent from: 4. And the ancient Creeds understood (which the
ordainers must try) and the old Catechistical Verities being sufficient to this
use. 5. And there being means of restraining men from preaching and vending
heresies which are more safe and congruous.

3. I add therefore that a certain Confession containing the certainest and
needfullest Integrals of Religion should or may well be drawn up as a Law,
forbidding all upon meet penalties to preach or speak against them; without any
subscribing, promising or professing. 4. And upon proof of the violating of
such a Law, and preaching against such articles it is sufficient that both the
Church and the Christian Magistrate in their several ways may judge them, and
by just penalties correct them (of which more after in due place.) For it is
very hard so to form long Confessions (beyond the old Creeds, Lords Prayer,
Decalogue, and the General belief of Scripture) and this not in
Scripture-terms, which shall not have some words, which sound and honest
Ministers cannot assent to, (without lying, which they will not do): But to
silence many words which yet we conceive true, and forbear speaking against
some things which yet he cannot profess assent to, there are very few sober men
but will do. And an error never spoken or written hurts not others, nor is to
be judged being not known; Non apparere here is as non esse. And if it be
vended, the person may be judged as well as if he had sworn, subscribed or
promised. And they that will tell us yet what evil may befall secret whispering
errors without out such oaths, subscriptions or promises, do by this
over-doing dangerously undo; and lest man should be man and the Church
imperfect, on pretense of avoiding a possible unavoidable hurt, they will set
up knaves that will say any thing, shut out honest men, and necessitate
divisions, confusions and persecutions, where they can never stop on this side
banishing or killing, or continued imprisoning multitudes of faithful men, and
never the more attain their ends. Sound doctrine may be kept up as far as is to
be hoped, by the aforesaid means.

. 41. III. It is greatly needful to the well-being of Ministry and Church that
Gods public worship and Sacraments be kept pure. Not that any thing done by
man will be void of imperfection, but that it be such as is acceptable to God,
honorable to Religion, and profitable and suitable to the flock, and to good
men.

To which end, 1. Christian simplicity here also is necessary; That it be not
corrupted or clogged with things uncertain, needless, curious, nor yet much
defective, not confused, disorderly, much less erroneous, superstitious,
ludicrous, undecent, false or profane.

2. It is needful that men to be ordained be tried and known to be such as can
speak to God and men without such unsufferable mis-performance.

3. And that they be responsible to the Church and Magistrate for what they say
and do.

Of Liturgies I am to speak in the third Part: Only here 4. I add that fit
words, and spiritual life, are the body and soul of worship, and one must not
be pleaded against another, nor any by Formality mortify holy worship and turn
it into a Carcass or a lifeless image; Nor yet on pretense of spirituality
condemned the frequent use of the same words (commonly called Forms) whether
prepared by the speaker who best knows what he needs, or agreed on by the
Churches in fit cases and measures, for greater Concord.

. 42. IV. It is needful to the well-being of the Ministry and Churches that all
Pastors in their places be not only allowed to use Christ's true Discipline, but
that it be expected and really done in every Church; and that this Discipline
be neither cast aside, nor corrupted and turned into malignant war against the
good, nor into tyranny and usurpation.

. 43. What this Discipline is, is opened before: It is described by Christ in
Matthew. 18. If thy brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault between
thee and him, If he hear thee thou have won thy brother. If he hear thee not,
take with thee two or three: If he hear not them, tell the Church: If he hear
not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen or a publican] Serious
convincing admonition must be used (with due patience) to bring a sinner to
repentance. And more public admonition after private; And the person sentenced
unfit for Christian Communion, when refusing all he shows himself utterly
impenitent. And he must be reconciled, absolved and received when he gives the
Church just proof of his true repentance.

. 44. 1. It is a great corruption of this Discipline, when it is exercised by
Lay-Chancellors or other Laymen, to whom the Keys of the Church Government
were never committed by Christ.

. 45. 2. It is a great corruption when it is done only by an officer of another
species than Christ ever instituted.

. 46. 3. It is an usurpation and corruption when it is done by the Pastor of
some other Church, and not by the proper Pastor of the Church where the sinner
lives. Such is Papal Usurpation, when the Bishop of Rome will be judge in
London.

. 47. 4. Especially when such a pretender lives far from the place, where
persons and actions are not half known, and that only by great charge and
travel. When the Pastor and people of the present Church may easily know all,
and it belongs to them, who are executively either to communicate with him or
avoid him, which distant strangers have no opportunity or occasion to do,
further than by declared consent.

. 48. 5. It is a heinous corruption of it to Excommunicate men in a profane
worldly manner, without wise, serious, patient endeavors to apply Gods word to
the sinners case and conscience, to bring him to true repentance and amendment.

. 49. 6. And it is yet more heinous abuse, to excommunicate the faithful, for a
fearful avoiding sin in some imposed Oath, Covenant, Profession, promise,
subscription, or unnecessary Ceremony or Form; and especially withal to retain
in Church Communion multitudes of Infidels, Adulterers, Fornicators, Perjured
persons, drunkards, railers, slanderers, oppressors, heretics, scorners at
piety, etc. And it is yet worse to cast out men for not subscribing to some lie,
false doctrine or wicked thing, or for refusing down right heinous sin. And yet
worse is it, to make Discipline an engine to dethrone Kings and embroile,
confound or subdue Kingdoms, and enslave the earth.

. 50. The lower first degrees of Church Government, which is but doctrinally to
teach men and reprove them, all Pastors must use, or they omit the essential
work of their office. But the full prosecution of it to excommunication or
public repentance is rather needful to the Well-being than to the Being of the
Churches and Ministry: especially when the Christian-Magistrate does his part.
No doubt but the Magistrate may admonish a sinner, and command him to make
public Confession in the Church, and may shame the impenitent, and forbid
familiarity with him, yea and Church Communion when the case is notorious or
judged by the Pastor: But it is the Pastors office to judge of his crime,
impenitence, and repentance, in order to excommunication and absolution; and
herein the Magistrate is not to take on him the Pastors work, but to command
the Pastor and people to do their duties.

. 51. III. So much of the necessaries to the Being and Well being of the
Ministry. As to the exercise, it may be gathered from what is said. There is
further necessary to it: 1. Natural ability, possibility, liberty and
opportunity; and the peoples acceptance, consent and reception. 2. And as to
the Well-being and success, 1. The great diligence and skill of the Minister;
2. The forwardness and teachableness and zeal and concord of the flock; 3. The
Concord of the Ministers and Neighbor Pastors; 4. And the countenance and
encouragement of faithful Magistrates will much promote it.

CHAP. VI.
IV. What is necessary to the Constitution, Administration and Communion of
single Churches?

. 1. BY [ single] and [ Particular] Churches I still mean those that are
compounded of many Christians, but not of many Churches.

And I take not the word [ Church] in any of the la^e senses, (for civil, or
occasional meetings, or societies, or for every religious concourse of
Christians, as a Synod, an accidental day of fasting and prayer, etc.) nor for
a mere Community or neighborhood of Christians, nor for a Christian Kingdom or
City, governed by the Magistrates sword: But for a proper Church as political
consisting of Pastor and flock.

. 2. When the Apostles ordained them Elders in every Church, Act. 14. 23. it
signifies that they settled these Elders as the proper fixed Church-guides of
those Churches; Not that they had no Ministerial power elsewhere, but that this
was their proper special Charge or Province. As a Licensed Physicion that has
a particular Hospital or City, is a Physicion every where that he comes, and
not breaking order may exercise his Art, but he may not invade another man's
Hospital or Province, nor is bound as the other is to medicate that Hospital,
etc. So a Minister of Christ lawfully invited, may Preach and Administer
Sacraments, yea and Discipline in any other Church pro tempore, not as a
Layman, but as a Minister in office. But he is not bound to take the Charge of
another man's flock, nor may intrude disorderly, but as a helper or on just call.

. 3. Titus is appointed to ordain such Elders in every City, which is all one
as in every Church: not that every City then had a Church; nor that he was to
ordain Elders in the Cities that had no Churches: nor that he was forbidden to
ordain Elders in Country Villages: Nor that he was tied either to ordain many
Elders in every Church or City, or yet to ordain but One in one City, or one
Church. But because de facto there were few or no Villages then that had
Christians enough to make a Church of desirable consistence, therefore they were
congregate commonly in Cities and great Towns, where the Christians of the
neighbor Villages joined with them.

. 4. Every such single Church then by the Apostles order had their own Pastor
(one or more) and every such fixed Pastor knew his proper Charge and flock. And
in the time when the Epistles of Ignatius were written, every such Church had
One Bishop over the other Elders, and usually some fellow Elders and Deacons,
and a single undivided Church was known by these notes of Unity [(...), etc. In
every Church there is one Altar (or Altar place, (...)) and one Bishop with his
fellow Presbyters and Deacons] Whence Mr. Mede well notes the certainty that
then no Church of one Altar was denied a Bishop, and no Bishop had more
Churches with an Altar than one. That is, no other Assembly for stated
Communion.

. 5. Yet occasional and subordinate Communion parts of a Church may hold: Those
called Independents deny not but that in persecution or for want of a large
room, the same Church may meet by parts in several places at once: And all
confess that a Parish Church may admit of Chapels and Oratories, where distant
and weak persons may frequently meet, that yet sometimes must come to the
Parish Church. And families that have sick persons may Communicate with
neighbors joining with them. But these are not Churches but parts of such.

. 6. God has not said just how many persons must make a single Church, no more
and no less, determinately: but he has given us sufficient notice to guide us
by the work and end, and by his general precepts and examples.

. 7. A single Church is a society of Christians of Divine institution,
consisting of one Pastor or more as the Guiding part, and a competent number of
private Christians as the Guided part, associated by Consent for personal
presential holy Communion and mutual assistance, in holy Doctrine, holy worship
of God, holy order, and holy Conversation, for the edification, preservation
and salvation of that Church, and the welfare of the Church universal of which
it is a part, and the Glorifying and Pleasing of God our Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier.

. 8. To open the parts of this definition observe,

1. That as in defining a Sacrament, so in defining a Church, we mention the
Divine Institution, because it is not human Sacraments or humanly-invented
Churches that we treat of.

. 9. 2. Note that only Christians make a Christian Church (as is often said)
Professed Christians the visible Church, and sincere heart consenters the
mystical regenerated saved Church.

. 10. 3. It is not any other company of Christians, but a society or Governed
association that we speak of as strictly called a Church.

. 11. 4. The Pastors and flock are the essential constitutive parts: It may be
a Community without a Pastor, but not a Policy, or Ecclesiastical Society.
While the Pastor lives it is such a Church in esse existente: when the Pastor
is dead, it is an existent Community, and virtually and morally a Political
Church, because by the Law and the peoples resolution another is to be
seasonably chosen. As an elective Kingdom in the interregnum is virtually and
morally a Kingdom: But if the purpose of chosing a Successor be changed, the
Kingdom and so the Church is dissolved, or changed into somewhat else.

. 12. 5. It is indifferent to the being (though not usually to the well-being)
of a Church, whether it have one Pastor or many.

. 13. 6. The number of the people though not precisely determined must be
competent to the Ends of the Society: If it be Greater or smaller than is
necessary to the Ends, it is no Church of this defined species: As Logicians
say of the subject of other relations: If a Boat or Ship be no bigger than a
spoon, it is not a Boat or Ship, but equivocally: And it may be so big as to be
no Boat or Ship, when it is incapable of the Ends. A Family is too small to be
a City: And a Kingdom or the world is too big. Dispositio materiae est
necessaria ad receptionem formae.

. 14. 7. It is impossible to be a Church without the cement of Consent,
professed or cordial: If many be forced into a Temple not consenting, it is a
Prison, and they are not a Church. If they consent only to meet on other
occasions, or for some occasional act of Religion, it is not thereby made a
Church. If they be commanded to consent and do not, and if it only be their
duty, it makes them not a Church, but only proves that they ought to be one.
No Law or command makes a Church without Consent. But this Consent may be
diverse ways expressed: The plainest and most obliging way is best; but is not
absolutely necessary: In some times and cases it may be more needful than at
others: especially at the first gathering and forming of a Church: sometime
ordinary Communion or attendance specially of persons born in that Church, may
signify necessary Consent. It Is pity then that men should be so weak as some,
to make express Covenanting of each member with the Church and Pastor
necessary, and others to deride it; when it is laudable ad been esse but not
necessary ad esse. But some signification of Consent is necessary ad esse, that
is, A Consent to be a member of the society, and submit to the Pastor, and hold
Communion with the Church to the Ends in the definition. And the plainer this
is expressed, it is the fitter to satisfy the Church and oblige the person. But
whether the Consent be signified by words, writings or deeds is undetermined.
No man can have the great privileges of a member either of the universal or
particular Church against or without his will and consent: And no Minister not
consenting can be a Pastor to any. The Relation of a Church member consists
in a Right to great benefits due to no refuser or unwilling person, and in
obligation to duty contracted by Consent, besides the obligation of Gods
Command. We can no further prove any Company of Christians to be a Church than
we can prove that they Consent to Church relation for Church Ends.

. 15. Christianity it self consists in a believing Consent to the Covenant of
Grace; and as no man is a Christian nor has right to Christ and his saving
benefits without Consent, so no man can have right to the Sacraments that seal
and deliver this Covenant and benefits without consent: No Christian in his
wits is for the Baptizing of any adult person that consents not; And the
Lords Supper is a seal of the same Covenant, and no more due to non-consenters
than Baptism. And as it is not enough to say [I am willing to be Baptized, but
not by a Minister, or not in the order appointed by Christ] so it is not enough
to say [I would have the Sacrament and Communion with the Church, but I will
not submit to the Ministry, Doctrine, Worship or Discipline of that Church].
For this is as great a contradiction as to say [I will be a servant to you, but
I will not work or obey but only have my wages] or [I will be a Soldier, but I
will not fight but be paid]. He that will have Communion with the Church, must
consent to the Ministry, Worship and Discipline of that Church in which
Communion consists.

. 16. And if a Minister shall be so imposed on, as that any man or woman may
come when they please, and force him to give them the Sacrament of Communion,
without consenting to take him for their Pastor, or to be taught or guided by
him, (yea or give him satisfactory notice that they know what the Sacrament is,
or who Christ is) he is a slave and not a Pastor: Baser than any Schoolmaster,
Philosopher, or Physicion, that are not forced to take a Scholar, Pupil or
Patient against their will, or that will not take them for their Teacher or
Physicion, and obey them.

. 17. Yet if on this pretense any Bishop or Pastor will impose unnecessary
Covenants, promises or professions on the Church or any Christians, and make
their wills a Law, and oblige men to give them any other Belief or Obedience
than truly belongs to the Pastoral Office, and so will set up a tyranny
instead of a Christian Ministry, they are not herein to be obeyed, lest we be
guilty of the corruption.

. 18. Yea if every integral part of the Pastors power and the peoples duty be
put into such Promises or Contracts, and the people required to profess their
Consent, as a necessary condition of their Communion, it is sinful tyranny,
contrary to Gods Law and common reason and the constant practice of the
Primitive Church. Christ himself requires unto Baptism no other Consent as
necessary, save to the essentials of Religion. A thousand Integrals may be
unknown to the Baptized, and are so to most Christians: It is our duty never to
think, speak or do amiss; But Christ makes not such duty necessary to our
Baptism, Christianity or Church Communion. It is the duty of every member of a
single Church, to hear, believe and obey the Pastor in many things where the
best may fail. To excommunicate a man therefore for not subscribing or
professing assent to some unnecessary doubtful form, for not being convinced by
a Lay-Chancellours sayings in a doubted case, or for not paying the Court Fees,
or for not appearing the day that one is summoned to appear at the Chancellours
Court, and such like, are but tyrannical Schismatical acts.

The King himself is satisfied with the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
does not require all the subjects, no nor the wisest Lawyers or Judges, to
swear, subscribe or profess, that they assent and consent to all the Laws of
the land.

. 19. 8. The great Controversy of the age and many ages, is about the true and
formal difference between the lowest species of Churches, which is called A
particular or single Church, and an association of Churches or a compound
Church: That we may not confound them, nor make a mere gradual difference in
the same species to pass for a specific difference. And there is more lies on
this than most observe. And therefore I determine it here in the definition.

1. It is commonly granted that there must be Christian Assemblies fixed for
ordinary Communion in Gods worship. 2. And it is agreed that these Assemblies
cannot be held without the officiating and conduct of Ministers of Christ,
authorized to teach and administer the Sacraments (Though there be also another
sort of assemblies, even for some Religious exercises, which may be held by
Princes, Judges and other Laymen.) 3. And it is by Grotius and many others
manifested, that Christ formed his Churches more to the similitude of the
Synagogue than the Temple state of order and worship. 4. And it is agreed that
though Apostles, Evangelists, and other itinerant Preachers might gather Sacred
Assemblies where they came, and were as transient temporary Pastors to them,
yet the Apostles were guided by the Spirit to settle Elders in every Church, as
is proved before.

But here men make a great and distracting Controversy, 1. Whether this first
Church-species may not consist of many Congregations, yea, many hundreds or
thousands? 2. And whether every Church of the lowest species must have a Bishop?

. 20. To decide this Controversy I do in the definition express the
specification of this Church relation from the End, as all such kind of
relations must be. It must be a fixed association of Christians [ for personal
presential Communion and assistance in holy doctrine, worship etc.] This
definition is necessary and herein sufficient. 1. It is necessary that a
difference be noted between a single Church and a Composition of Churches:
Because, 1. Several ends show us that they are not univocaly called Churches
but are of several sorts. 2. The first is past controversy of Divine
institution: The other are by some men taken for Divine, by some for Lawful
humane, and by some for sinful inventions, and additions to Gods appointed
order. Things that so much differ must be differenced.

2. It is sufficient as 1. Assigning the true specifying end, 2. and avoiding
all extremes.

1. It assigns the true end: For that Churches of such a sort, for that end
were settled by the Apostles, none deny: 2. It justly differenceth them from
all other societies: 1. There may be occasional meetings of Part of a Church,
for want of room, or liberty, in private houses, Chapels, or Oratories;
Independents, Presbyterians and Diocesans grant this: But these still
acknowledge themselves to be but parts of a larger society consenting to the
same specifying ends; and assembling sometimes with that larger body and
sometimes apart, by reason of impediments, (age, weakness, distance, weather,
persecution etc): And though a Parish (as many) have far more than can meet at
once together, yet, 1. Still the ends of the association is for that sort of
Communion: 2. Some of a family may meet one day and some another and some a
third. 3. Every error and corruption alters not the species of the Church:
The individuals that fail and absent themselves make not Parochial Communion to
be another thing for other ends. A Parochial Church then is the lowest and
first true species of Churches.

2. And this distinguishes it from all Compound Churches, which are not for
Present Ordinary Communion in public worship and Discipline, but only for
Distant Communion by Officers, Delegates or Letters.

1. A Synod is for Consultation, and not purposely congregated for ordinary
Communion in worship, and the Churches which send their Bishops or Pastors
thither have not personal presential Communion one with another ever the more;
but only mediate by Delegates or Officers. They may dwell a thousand miles or
more from one another. If all the Schoolmasters in several Kingdoms should hold
Provincial, National, or much larger Synods for agreement in Teaching and
Governing their Schools, this would not confound such a Synod with a School, as
if they were of the same Species of society.

2. This distinguishes a single Church from the Papal pretended universal
policy; And from a Patriarchal Church, and from a Provincial, and a Diocesan
Church in the sense now used: For these are compounded of several single
Churches; and they are not a society at all associated for ordinary personal
presential Communion in Gods worship and holy living: Only they are all under
one General Governor, not using to meet themselves nor ever seeing one
another. Now if to be under one absent General Bishop be that which specifyeth
a single or particular Church, then All that called the Roman Catholic Church
is but one single Church, compounded of no Churches: Or one Patriarchal or
Provincial or National Church, were the lowest species, and a single Church,
and so the Diocesans were none.

But if that which makes it a single Church of the lowest species were that no
Bishop is under them, but that they are under one sole Bishop, then 1. If all
England had but one Bishop (as many tell us all Abassia has but one called the
Abunah) or if a Patriarch put down all the Bishops under him, this Church of
his would be but a single Church. 2. And then there would be no such thing as a
Church associated for personal presential Communion, which I have proved that
the Apostles by the spirit settled.

. 21. Those that tell us that a Diocesan Church is the first or lowest species
of Divine institution, do either mean by a Diocese such a society as we now
call a Parish, associated for presential Communion, or a Church made of many
such associated under one Bishop: If the first, they differ only about the
name, in which they go against our common use, and are not intelligible by the
vulgar. Though in old Church writers a Diocese is sometimes taken as greater
than a Province and sometime as less, and a Parish and a Diocese are sometimes
used for the same, and sometime not, yet that diversity of naming hinders us
not from knowing the difference of the things, either as defined, or as
commonly now denominated a Parish Church and a Diocese. And if their meaning be
to prove that single Churches essentiated by their Association for Present
personal Communion, are not of Gods institution, no intelligent impartial
Christians will believe them, who understand the Scripture and the state of the
primitive Churches, and the reason of the thing. Did men believe this, they
would believe that Christ had instituted no Church order or form at all; Much
less being to be said for the rest than this. And even those few that say that
no form of Church Government is settled by God, do yet grant that settled
congregations for ordinary worship and mutual help with their guiding Pastors
are of Divine right; and so confute themselves; unless they mean only that
Pastoral Government of compounded Churches is not jure Divino.

. 22. And some called Presbyterians distinguish between a Worshipping Church,
and a Governed Church, and tell us that the lowest Governed Church should
consist of diverse worshipping Churches. It may sometime contein diverse
subordinate bymeetings as Chapels for them that must needs be often absent from
the full assembly: But that it must have many such, or that it must or may have
many full settled worshipping Churches, that personally communicate still
distantly only in their several Parishes, is contrary to Scripture, antiquity
and reason; and denies the first instituted Church form.

Thorndikes first books which fetch the reason of Church Government from
Assemblies, were far truer than his later, in which he seemed to dream of a
humane universal Policy.

. 23. Either a Bishop as distinct (in Order or Degree) from Presbyters is
necessary to the Being of a Church of Divine institution, or not: If not, then
it may be a Church without such a Bishop, and have accordingly the rights of a
Church (in the proper political sense now intended by the word [Church.]) And
then the old sayings would not be true, 1. Of Ignatius that [ to every Church
there is one Altar, and one Bishop with his fellow Presbyters and Deacons] 2.
Of Cyprian, that ubi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia: 3. Of Hierome and others, Ecclesia
eft pl^bs adunat a Episcopo.

If yea, then 1. Our Parish Priests are true Bishops, or else the Parish
Churches are no true Churches, but Chapels, as wanting an essential part. 2.
And then there are no Churches in England of the lowest species (for present
Communion, etc.) 3. And then it will be hard to confute them that say, No form
of Church Government is jure Divino or instituted of God. 4. And the form of
Government being the specifying form of the policy or Church, it will follow
that God has instituted no Churches but the universal as headed by Christ. 5.
And if you will confess to the Separatists that we have no Churches of Gods
institution, you will never heal their separation.

. 24. I am therefore past all doubt that if it can be proved that a Bishop is
necessary to every true Church, that every Parish should have a Bishop, and if
Archbishops be good and meet, the Diocesans should be their Archbishops. And
that deposing the Parish Bishops and Churches is a heinous corrupting crime.
But if Bishops be not necessary to a Church as such, the case is otherwise.

. 25. It is therefore of great importance that single Churches be neither too
great nor too small. If too small, they will want 1. the honor of fullness, 2.
and the cheering help of praising God in great assemblies, 3. and the mutual
counsel and vigilant help of many, 4. and the safe guidance of many Presbyters
(or a Bishop and Presbyters) which a few people cannot expect.

And if it be too great, it will 1. hinder the comfort of those that want room
in the Church assembly, 2. or cause the Church to degenerate into another sort
of society.

It is best therefore that it should be as Great as that all the people who are
constant worshippers of God on the Lords days may meet in one place, where they
have liberty, Chapels or lesser meetings being allowed to the aged, weak, sick
or very distant; yet all that are able coming sometime to the common Church.

. 26. The first degenerating of single Churches grew 1. out of the ambition of
the Pastors to, extend their power as far as they could; 2. and out of a desire
in the people to see their assemblies as honorable for greatness, number, and
concord as they might; 3. and out of a conceit that one City should have but
one Bishop and so be one Governed Church.

And hereupon at Alexandria and Rome they began to have several fixed Chapels
in the same City and neighbor villages, and the Bishop to send
Curate-Presbyters to them as he pleased, yet so that at first they communicated
frequently in the Bishops Church. After that these Presbyters were fixed and
gave them the Sacraments where they came: After that they were tied to come to
the Bishops Church for communion but at Easter, Whitsontide, or some great and
rare seasons: After that they were so many and far off, that they were no more
obliged to come at all, or to hear or see the Bishop, but only to be distantly
ruled by him, and their Presbyters. Then many Country Parishes got Bishops:
But the City Bishops disagreeing with them, long after got them down.

. 27. Were it true that every City in the old sense should have a Bishop and
but one, it would follow that every Corporation or great Town or Borough
(called Market Towns) in England should have one; the word [(...)] signifying
such of old. And were it so, and the Country Parishes adjoining made Chapels
and distributed accordingly to the several Towns, it would be like the old
state of the Church about three hundred and four hundred and five hundred years
after Christ, and much better than it is, though not as it should be.

. 28. 9. The remote ends are mentioned in the definition, viz. the right
worshipping and obeying God, the welfare of the Church-universal (for the parts
all contribute to the perfection of the whole); and the glory and pleasing of
God are the common ultimate end of all.

. 29. By all this it appears what is necessary to make a particular Church,
and to make a man a member of it: And that it is not necessary hereto that the
person be a member of a Compound Church, Diocesan, Provincial, Patriarchial,
National or Papal (whatever it be to some of these on any other accounts): Nor
yet that he make any unnecessary profession, promise or Covenant.

. 30. But to the actual Communion with such a Church in exercise, the nature of
the thing makes it necessary that the people consent and be guided by their
Pastor in the circumstances belonging to his office, which are necessary in
genere (to be some way determined) but not necessary in specie vel individuo (
this rather than that). For instance: They that will have communion in public
worship, must meet in some capacious place, at some day, some hour: If any one
will not come to that place, at that time appointed, he separateth from that
Communion in that act. The Scripture must be read in some Translation, some
order. If any say I will not Communicate with you unless you use another
translation, another order (without verses, and Chapters) or read some other
parts, he so far separateth from that Church: In singing Psalms if he will not
join in that Version, that Psalm, that Tune which the Church uses, he so far
separateth: If he will not hear the Preacher unless he change his text, his
method, or use notes, or no notes, and so in such cases will not follow but
lead, he separateth so far: for all cannot be leaders, and be of one mind. But
if the Minister will say, [You shall not communicate with us unless you will
swear, or say, or do some unnecessary thing] it is he then that is the divider,
and unjustly casts out a Christian.

CHAP. VII.
What are the necessary terms of Concord of these single Churches with one
another, in the same Kingdom or in diverse.

. 1. THat they be under the Government of a Christian Magistrate is necessary
to the well-being or great advantage of them, though not to the being, of which
more in due place.

. 2. That they live as neighbor Churches in Unity of faith and love, and avoid
all things contrary, and to their power help each other according to need and
opportunity, is their duty.

. 3. It is necessary that they agree in all things necessary to the communion
of men as members of the Church universal, mentioned before; and in all things
essential to particular Churches.

. 4. If any one excommunicated justly for heresy, apostasy, or impenitence,
in any crimes, shall offer to defile and endanger any other Church by intrusion
or deceit, the Church which cast him out is bound by the Laws of Love and
Concord, to send notice to such endangered neighbor Churches of the person and
his case, to prevent their hurt: And unless the Church that cast him out have
criminally forfeited their credit, other Churches are bound by the Law of
Charity to take their sentence as probably just, and not to receive the ejected
person, till he have either proved his sentence unjust, or profess repentance.
Not that they are bound absolutely to exclude him and deny him audience (though
yet they claim no superiority over the Church that excommunicated him;) but as
neighbors and parts of the same Church universal, they must hear both sides
before they deny any Christian communion that claims it; at least when his
allegations have great probability of truth, and seem to weigh down all that
they have received against him.

And they may absolve the Criminal upon a just profession of true repentance,
but such a prosession will not stand with a refusal to confess in the same
Church where the man sinned, without some special probable reason; it being
that Church which is most wronged by the scandal, and has heard the causes.

. 5. If any Church (in the same Kingdom or another) be accused of violating the
Christian faith, or of any crime which Christians are bound to disown by
avoiding the criminal, it is the duty of the accused Church to be ready to
satisfy the offended Churches, by answering the accusation; not as to Rulers
by the reasons of obedience, but as to Christian neighbors by the rule of
common equity and love, and for the preservation of unity and peace.

. 6. If the charge be but general, (that the Church is guilty of heresy or
unsoundness in the faith) it is the duty of the accused Church to send to the
offended the Profession of their Faith and Religion, which need to be no more
than this, which the offended ought to take as satisfactory.

We hereby profess that we stand to our Baptismal Covenant, fiducially
believing in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, our Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, and give up our selves to him accordingly in these Relations,
Believing the articles of all the Creeds in which the universal Church ever
agreed, and desiring the things contained in the Lords Prayer, and consenting
to obey the ten Commandments as delivered to us in nature and by Christ; and
we profess our obligation and Consent, to Believe, Love and obey all that we do
or shall understand to be the revealed word of God, even the sacred Canonical
books of Scripture, and in this common Belief, and Love and practice, to livein
the Communion of the unniversal Church of Christ: Renouncing the Devil, the
world and the flesh as they are enemies to any of this, and all doctrines,
desires and practices, contrary hereunto, so far as unfeignedly to endeavor to
res^^t and overcome them, and when we (...) and sin, to rise by true
repentance; And all this in Hope of the Love of God the Father, the Grace of
the Son, in our Pardon, Justification and Adoption, and the Communion of the
Holy Ghost, and of the Perfection of these and of our selves with the Church in
everlasting Glory.

This may be briefly expressed in Baptism and to present persons that may receive
our explications where they doubt of our understanding or sincerity: But to
distant suspecting persons or Churches, such largeness is useful; and this is
enough.

. 7. But if any particular heresy or crime be charged on a neighbor Church,
it is not to be believed without proof, nor they to be disclaimed till the
charge be sent to them, and their defense be heard; And herein they ought to
offer satisfaction to the offended Church, 1. By denying the charge if false;
2. By explaining words and actions which are ambiguous and to be suspected: 3.
In controverted cases, by renewing the foresaid profession of all that is
necessary explicitly to be held, and promising to renounce any opinion or
practice as soon as they perceive it contrary thereto; 4. And in all cases of
words or deeds expressly contrary to Gods doctrine or Law, or which they shall
be convinced to be sinful, to confess the error or crime, and humbly crave
the prayers of the Church for pardon, and profess their purpose of future
reformation.]

This is the means, and this is enough for the offenders satisfaction: And if
the error be no real and discerned denial of any necessary article of faith,
but an undiscerned remote consequential contrariety, with which the professed
holding of that particular necessary article which they seem to overthrow may
stand, that Church (or person) is not to be rejected from Communion, or
hereticated.

For instance, If a Church be accused to be Nestorians, or Eutychians, or
Monothelites, their answer ought to be [ Mary is the Mother of Christ who is
God, and in that sense, of God, but not of the Deity, or as God]. And [ Christ's
Na^ures, Wills, and operations, are two as distinct, but not two as divided.]
But if they have not so much (easy) skill to explain themselves, but say
rudely as Nestorius [ I will not say that God was two or three months old] or
as Cyril and Eutychius and Dioscorus [Christs natures were two before the
Union, but since One and not Two], if withal they prosess that they believe
Christ to be true God and true man in one person, and do not destroy, deny or
confound the Godhead and manhood or any other essential point of faith or
religion, they ought not to be hereticated or rejected.

8. No Church has power or duty to deny any other Communion to another Church
or person, but such as they had power to grant them. But to remote persons or
Churches, never seen by them (as in other lands or Countries) they can grant
them no Presential local Communion but only Mental: Therefore they can eject
them from none but mental: They cannot take from them what they never had nor
are capable of: But we in London never had local Communion with them of Vienna,
Paris, Rome, etc. nor ever saw them. All therefore that they can do is to
account those Heretics or wicked or Apostates, whom before they accounted good
Christians, and to declare that they own them not as fellow Christians, and
would not communicate with them, did they live among them; and to warn others
that are in danger of them to avoid them, and this not as an act of Government
over them, but of common Christian duty for the honor of our common religion
and in charity to others. The just renouncing of mental or local Communion by
equals, or neighbors, much differs from a Governing commanding
excommunication, forbiding other Churches as their subjects to communicate with
such on certain penalties; which is the usurpation of Popes, Patriarchs and
some others who claim such governing power without proof.

CHAP. VIII.
VI. What is necessary to the Civil Peace and concord of Christians, and what
is the part of the Christian Magistrate about Religion, as to his promoting or
tolerating men's doctrines or practices therein.

. 1. THe contentions of the world here call us to resolve these several doubts,
1. Who it is that should have the power of the sword or Magistracy? 2. How it
is to be used toward all men as men in society? 3. How it is to be used for
the service of Christ and good of the Church? in encouraging some and
tolerating others, and keeping peace among them all?

. 2. It is here supposed that the subject is understood, and that we are agreed
what the Magistrates power is, at least de re, though not de definitione vel de
nomine: that is, it is the power of Governing by the sword, that is, of making
Laws, and judging according to them, and executing them by outward force on
men's bodies or estates. And so it is contradistinguished from the power called
Ministerial, Pastoral, Priestly or Ecclesiastical; which is the gathering and
guiding of Christian Churches by Gods word preached, expounded and applied. The
nature of each and their differences I have formerly opened in a small treatise
written purposely on that subject to end the Erastian controversy. (And Bishop
Bilson fuily opens them in his excellent book of Christian Obedience etc.)
The Magistrate has power forcibly to seize on offenders estates and bodies, to
imprison, mutilate, scourge, strike and kill them that deserve it, and to make
Laws and judge men unto such punishments. The Ministers of Christ or Pastors of
the Churches have no such power but only to declare Gods Laws to the people,
and convert and baptize the wicked unbelievers, and teach them the word and
will of Christ, and guide them in public worship, and Communion, and judge who
is capable thereof, and to require the people in the name of Christ to love and
receive the worthy, and to avoid the unworthy, and to resolve the peoples
particular doubts, and by personal application to pronounce and declare Gods
acceptance of penitent believers, and his promise to save them, and his decree
to condemn the ungodly, unbelievers, impenitent and Hypocrites.

. 3. This difference is commonly acknowledged by the generality of sober
Christians: But one schismatical Writer against schism, will needs call this
Pastoral power Coactive, coercive, or forcing also, though he confess that it
is not a power to touch men's Bodies or estates; that so by casting out all
differencing names, he may hide the acknowledged difference of the power, and
execution. And his reason for this error de nomine is, [ because, suspension
and excommunication are executed on the involuntary, and compel those that
believe the power, and fear them, to obey.] Where, 1. The word compel
contains the confusion; compelling the mind by mere argument, being not the
compelling by corporal force which we are speaking of: 2. And every man that
chideth, reproves or threatens a sinner, usually does it to the involuntary:
And if he believe him and yield, he will obey: And if you argue from his future
danger or suffering, it is the fear of it that moves him: But the fear of Gods
declared threatenings, is not the same as the fear of man's stripes,
imprisonments, unless etc. 3. And excommunication works on no man's body
further than it works on his conscience to make him a voluntary agent. If you
denounce damnation against him, it moves him no further than he believes you
as applying to him the word of God. If you forbid him to be present or take the
sacrament, and he refuse to obey, you may not forcibly thrust him out, without
the Magistrates consent, but only suspend your own act of delivery, or depart:
If you command the people to avoid him, they will no further obey you than they
perceive Gods authority in your words, and are convinced in Conscience of their
duty: And every sermon may thus compel men: And all that judge the sentence
unjust and powerless, will despise it.

. 4. 1. There are four or five opinions about the possessors of this forcing
power by the sword or violence: The first of them that say, It belongs to all
Magistrates Christian and unchristian. The second of them that say, It
belongs only to Christian Magistrates: The third of them that say, It
belongs to Orthodox Magistrates or Catholic only and not to Heretics: The
fourth of those that say, that the Judicial part in cases of Religion belongs
to the Pope, Prelates or Presbyters, and the executive only to the Magistrate.
The fifth of those that say that both judicial and executive belong to the
Pope, Prelates and Priests: I may add a sixth of them that say, it is radically
in the people.

. 5. 1. As to the first, it is undoubtedly true, if you distinguish between the
Office, Power, and the aptitude of the person to perform it. The Office of a
Supreme Ruler is the same in all, but all are not equally capable of performing
it. That is, It is the same as described by Gods command of their performance.
As he commands infidels to believe and communicate with the Church, but not
to communicate before they believe; so he commands Infidel Princes to believe
and to govern the Christian affairs: but to govern them as they are capable.
The common Laws of nature, justice and peace among Christian subjects, an
Infidel Prince may and must see executed: The Laws of Christ revealed
supernaturally, he ought to understand, believe and execute: But till he
understand and believe them, he cannot execute them. And therefore wants the
disposition and ability to do what he had command and authority to do; but to
do it only in the due manner, to which his sin disableth him: and so his Power
is in him incomplete.

. 6. I confess it is a very hard question, How an Atheist can be said to have
any Governing right from that God whom he denies, any more than a Constable
from the King from whom by rebellion he revolteth: And also since all power in
Heaven and earth is given to Christ, how an infidel that renounceth him can be
said to be authorized by him. And I can no otherwise resolve it, than by
distinguishing of a King or ruler, that is such simpliciter, and one that is
such but secundum quid: 2. One that is tolerated in the place by God the
Sovereign, and one that is also approved: 3. One that the people are bound to
obey only in tantum for civil order, peace and safety; and one that they must
obey in matters of Religion, and whom God will not condemn as an Usurper in
part. The case is much the same as that: How far subjects that are necessitated
to live under a Foolish Prince must obey him; which is, 1. So far as it is no
wrong to another: 2. So far as is necessary to the due honor of the office
which he possesses: 3. So far as is needful to the common peace, order and
safety, and to our own, and to the ends of Government; But so as still to
desire a better, and by just means to endeavor it, but not by sin, or that
which is worse to the Commonwealth than his Foolishness is.

. 7. II. The same answer mutatis mutandis will serve to the second: A Heretic
truly so called or a wicked man, or persecutor has radical remote power to all
a Princes work; But he has immediate full power to no more than he can do
according to Gods Laws: and in so much he is to be obeyed, and in nothing that
is against them.

. 8. III. The office of Orthodox Rulers is the same fundamentally and
radically: But their full nearest Power is greater because their Capacity is
greater. But yet even they are never to be obeyed against the Laws of God,
which give them their power and limit it, and are theirs and their subjects
highest rule.

. 9. IV. The Papists commonly, and many Prelatists, and some Presbyterians say,
that about causes of Heresy, or Church Communion, the Church is to judge and
the Prince to execute the Churches judgment. But with great difference: some
Presbyterians only say that the Magistrate ought upon the bare judgment of the
Church to force the excommunicate person from the Assembly if he intrude: And
the Independents will say as much as this: And indeed this is but to keep
peace; it being due to a family that none intrude against their will: But yet
as a Prince or Judge may right a servant, child or wife, so may they the
excommunicate, when it is proved that they are wronged; And therefore may to
that end re-examine the cause.

But other Presbyterians and Diocesans say that when the Church has
excomunicated a man, the Magistrate is bound to force him by imprisonment,
fines, or corporal penalties to repent and be reconciled: And the Papists say
that men judged Heretics he must burn or banish: which is all false, as shall
be proved in the third book.

. 10. V. The fifth sort hold, that as Melchizedek and Christ were both Priests
and Kings, so it should be now: And some say (before confuted) that every King
is the chief Priest; and others that the chief Priest should be King; and that
the Pope is the universal Monarch having both swords, Spiritual and Corporal:
But as to the execution, Bishops are to obey him in excommunicating Heretics
(that is, his adversaries) and Kings in killing or banishing, otherwise he may
depose both Kings and Bishops: But against this more in due place.

. 11. VI. As to the Radical power of the people I have said so much against it
in my Christian Directory in confutation of Richard Hookers Ecclesiastical
Policy, that I need to add no more. In my Political Aphorisms I more fully
opened this. I conclude with the common Christian judgment, that the Civil
Magistrate only has the power of Ruling by the sword.

. 12. II. As to the second case, How the Magistrates power is to be used
toward all men in Common, I answer in short, 1. All are agreed that the good
of the Commonwealth is the end of Government, as the Terminus of a Relation
which essentiateth it: It is not government univocally but equivocally which is
not for the common good, really or visibly, intentionally, really or
pretendedly.

. 13. 2. Every true member of the Commonwealth has a right to a part in this
common good, till he forfeit it.

. 14. 3. Every member has not an equal right because all have not equal
capacity or worthiness.

. 15. 4. It is as hard a question: How far an Atheist or Infidel is a rightful
member of a Commonwealth, as how far such a one may be a rightful Governor.
And, 1. It is certain that as to obligation he is a subject of God and man, and
bound to obey: as an Atheist King possessing the place is bound to rule well,
and smneth by not doing it: 2. It is certain that as a man, he has a
fundamental conditional right to the privileges of a good subject, that is, if
he will be such a one. 3. A Negative not-knowing God or Christ, much differs
from a positive denying him, rebelling and opposing: As Catechumens that know
not God or Christ are not Anathematized as deniers and opposers are; because
they are teachable, and coming toward the Church, though not of it; so in a
Christian Commonwealth, such are members in a large sense, secundum quid, and
forfeit not their lives, liberties or estates, but are only candidates as to
the rewards and preferments and special privileges of worthy members, who
either rule or have a voice in choosing Rulers. But being willing to learn to
know God and Christ, they should with love and kindness be encouraged and drawn
on. 4. But in a Kingdom of such as know not God or Christ they must have rule
and privileges because there are no fitter to have them: But such a Kingdom is
to God no otherwise his subjects than such a person before described is. 5. But
those that after sufficient instruction deny and oppose God as God, do forfeit
the protection and common liberty of subjects in a Kingdom, that confesses
God; and those that deny Christ in a Christian Kingdom and oppose him as
Christ, do forfeit the Common protection of Christian subjects: But wise men
think that because the Deity is of Natural Revelation by all Gods works to all
men as men, and Christ only of supernatural revelation by the Gospel and the
work of faith more difficult, therefore the opposers of a Deity, forfeit their
lives if they continue obstinate; but the enemies of Christ only forfeit their
place in a Christian Commonwealth and should be banished if obstinate: As the
mere ignorance of him, keeps such out of the Church till they believe: But
then denying or opposing Christ deserves ejection with anathema.

. 16. 5. All men then must by the Magistrate be used as men according to their
natures, and not as bruits, and therefore must be instructed and ruled by laws
of reason, and led toward Christianity and the hopes of future felicity: And
if they sin against the Laws of humanity, they so far forfeit the privileges
of humanity; or are to be punished as the ends of the society require.

. 17. III. To the third question, how Magigistracie (or the sword or forcing
power) is to be used, for Christ and for his Church, and on Christians as such,
who is to be rewarded, punished or tolerated for the Churches Unity and
edification and preservation. I answer, I. In general; Men should be used as
men; Christians as Christians: The weak as weak; The strong as strong, and the
eminently wise and good as such: The criminal as criminal. And all this with
chief respect to the laws of God and the common good.

. 18. II. More particularly, 1. Negatively: 1. The Magistrate cannot make men
Believers by the sword: He cannot make the ignorant wise, nor the wicked godly
at the heart.

. 19. 2. He ought not to force men to lie, by professing themselves to be what
they are not, or to know or believe or do what they do not: Therefore he may
not make a Law that All men shall be compelled to profess themselves
Christians, or Godly persons, or any that are not such indeed; And therefore
none must be compelled to it, because no man knows who are such: but every
man must be the voluntary professor of his own faith and piety.

. 20. 3. He ought not to force the weak to profess that they are strong, or
know or believe more than they do: either to profess those measures of wisdom,
those Articles of faith that are not essentials, or those measures of affection
or practice which are proper to strong Christians: And for not professing such
things, or Covenanting accordingly he may not deny them any privileges
belonging to Christians as such, but only such as are proper to wiser and
stronger Christians.

. 21. 4. Princes and other Magistrates may not make themselves the Lictors or
executioners to the Clergy, to punish men with fines, imprisonment, banishment
or death eo nomine because they stand excommunicate by the Clergy, without
trying whether it was rightly or wrongfully done, and whether the crime be such
as should be so punished by them. Excommunication if just is it self a dreadful
punishment, and no man is to be punished for being punished. If it be for not
repenting, 1. He must first be sure that it was a crime: 2. And that God has
appointed this way to force men to repentance: 3. And that such forced
repentance must go for true.

But when the excommunication is unjust, the Magistrate must not second it with
oppression: It is enough to be so much wronged by the Clergy, more should not
be added for that cause, nor must the Magistrate suppose the Clergy to be
unerring, and so lay by the person of a Judge himself and become the blind
executioner of their sentence.

. 22. II. Affirmatively; The Christian Magistrates Office is, [ To promote the
common good of the people, and their salvation, and the pleasing and glory of
God, by preserving and promoting Piety, Love, Justice and peace, even men's
obedience to all the Laws of God, in Nature and Scripture.

. 23. Therefore as the means, 1. He must promote to his power the due
publication or preaching of the Gospel, and the subordinate means that are
needful thereunto: 2. He must by just means restrain and punish the gross
violators of Gods Laws; and must encourage the obedient and good.

. 24. Therefore, III. He must deal differently with his subjects as they
differ; according to this common distribution: They are

I. Not Christians who are 1. Enemies of the Church, or of Christianity. 2.
Neglecters of Christianity. 3. Candidates or Catechumens Seekers.


II. Christians who are to be considered as 1. Personally qualified, and so
they are 1. Eminently wise, good and strong. 2. Of a middle sort or degree. 3.
Ignorant, culpable and weak.
2. Relatively as being 1. Only Christians of the universal Church and no
particular, 1. Not yet entered into particular Churches. 2. Separated from them.
3. Cast out of such only.
2. In particular Churches, which are either 1. Consociate viz. under 1. The
Pope. 2. Diocesans. 3. Presbyteries.
2. Independent, and diverse. 3. Opposites and adverse.

3. In their Practice, which is either 1. Laudable, to be encouraged and
promoted. 2. Tolerable. 3. Intolerable.



I shall therefore briefly show how each of these sorts are to be used by a
wise and righteous Christian Prince or other Magistrate: though somewhat is
said already to the first.

. 25. I. The enemies and opposers of Christianity are, 1. To be wisely and
soberly restrained from any effectual dangerous hindering of it: By moderate
means if they are moderate, and by greater severity if they be violent and
inhumane.

2. As far as obstinacy makes them incapable, Light and Love should be used to
win them with the example of our better lives: In meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth, that they may escape out of the snare of Satan, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

. 26. II. The Neglecters of Christianity are to be instructed and excited: And
therefore, 1. By persuasion, 2. or necessary moderate penalties, constrained
only to Hear what can be said for it.

. 27. III. The seekers or willing candidates are to be clearly and skillfully
and patiently taught, and encouraged by love.

. 28. IV. Eminent Christians are to be made the Teachers and Rulers of the
rest; and to have praise and best encouragement.

. 29. V. The middle sort of Christians must be governed and instructed, with
encouragement to grow, and the body of a Christian Commonwealth well ordered
will be most of such.

. 30. VI. The ignorant, faulty and weak must be pityed and gently used, but as
children, under more teaching, restraint and necessary rebukes, than better men.

. 31. VII. Those that are not yet entered into any particular Churches
Communion, under any known particular Pastor, if necessarily such (as persons
that have no dwelling, but wander up and down, as Pedlars etc.) are to be
pityed and suffered, if we cannot help them to better. Those that being
baptized only into the universal Church (as wanderers children etc.) and are
not come to knowledge or desire, should be taught, and persuaded into Church
order as a second sort of Catechumens: Those that are hindered by the disorder
or persecution of the place and times, must be pityed and patiently born with.

. 32. VIII. Those that separate from one or other particular Churches if by
some great crime, and abuse must be used according to their fault as is after
showed about Practice: But if either by tolerable weakness, or outward
necessity they depart but from one Church, they must be received into others:
If from all particular Churches (as some called Seekers) and not from the
universal, they must be used as the seventh sort (those not yet entered.)

. 33. IX. Those that are cast out unjustly must be pityed and allowed entrance
into another Church: Those that are cast out justly must 1. remain under that
penalty and shame till they repent; 2. And also be further used according, to
their crime; whether murder, fornication, theft, perjury, etc. as the Law
punishes such offenders: If it before Infidelity or Apostasy, they must be
used as the Churches deserters or adversaries, as aforesaid, and restrained
from opposing it.

. 34. X. The Papists should be used as men and as the faultier and weaker sort
of Christians, but so as, 1. May secure Princes from being unwillingly
subjected to a foreign Usurper or being abused by him or his Agents; and as may
secure the people from the efficacy of their laws, for burning, killing and
exterminating them: 2. And so as they may be soberly restrained from such
seducing and hurting the souls of others as is after proved to be Intolerable.

. 35. XI. Diocesans that are as Archbishops and destroy not Parish Churches,
Episcopacy and Discipline, are to be numbered either with the Promoted or
Tolerated party as they are taken by the Rulers for the Best or second. But
those that would unchurch Parish Churches and make them but Chapels, and set up
only one tribunal for the Discipline of many hundred Parishes, and thereby make
Discipline Impossible, and deprive particular Churches of the Rights given them
by the spirit of Christ in his Apostles, or would silence and persecute
faithful Ministers, or oppress the flocks, should be restrained from such abuse
and Tyranny by the Prince.

. 36. XII. The very same I say of the Synods and Classes of Presbyters, whether
provincial or national.

. 37. XIII. Churches are not to be discountenanced merely because they are so
independent, as not to be over and under each other in a regimental way, no
more than Schools of Grammar or philosopy or other sciences or arts: But the
Magistrate must make them Dependent on him as his governed subjects; and must
exhort them to that dependence on each other as is necessary to their mutual
help and peace; and moderately urge them hereto for Religion sake.

. 38. XIV. Adverse, contentious, militate Churches, must be restrained from
abusing one another, and destroying Christian Love and peace: And Justices of
the peace should keep peace among them and correct railers, slanderers and
peacebreakers.

. 39. XV. But the main care concerns practice; And here the sound in faith,
the Charitable, the peaceable and of good Conversation, should be promoted,
praised and maintained, with special favor and approbation.

. 40. XVI. The merely Tolerable (as to Doctrine, Charity and conversation)
should be defended and kept in peace.

. 41. XVII. The Intolerable must be suppressed or restrained according to the
quality of their offense.

. 42. To these great ends (as Campanella, would have every Sovereign to have
three sorts of Councils under him, One for Learning and Religion, another for
Civil affairs and another for War, so) it may be wished however that the Prince
have a Council that shall specially take care of Religion and the necessary
subservient learning: And that there be drawn up three several Catalogues or
Laws for these various ranks of Christians: That is,

I. The foredescribed necessary parts of Christianity and Communion, (the
Baptismal Covenant, Creed, Lords Prayer and the Essentials of Ministry and
Communion) which all Tolerated Ministers shall subscribe to or profess, having
also Testimonials of their competent Abilities, Piety and peaceableness.

II. Some of the great sort of Integrals added, This second may be spared, if
the third be well done. And instead of both may well be a Catalogue of
doctrines erroneous or doubtful which none shall preach or propagate, of which
after.
that are needful, plain and certain, and therefore it is best in the very
words of Scripture which all agree to, and this to be consented to by the
approved and preferred Ministers, who shall have the Temples and public
countenance and maintenance.

III. A Catalogue of Doctrines of so great use as that none be suffered to
Preach or privately dispute against them; And a Catalogue of sins, which none
may commit: And those that break either of these Laws, and subscribe not to the
Essentials first mentioned to be judged Intolerable (till reformed) in the
Ministry. Who shall be judged Intolerable in the Commonwealth, the first rank
of enemies here considered shows. And what private members shall be Tolerated
in the Churches may be gathered from what is said, viz. Those that join with
the Tolerated Ministers, and violate not this last Prohibiting Law, by
incorrigible opposition to the Truth here intimated, or by wicked or
unpeaceable behavior.

. 43. It is here supposed that the Catalogue imposed on the Approved maintained
Ministers be not of too many things, nor of any, but great and sure: And they
that will needs stretch it to the utmost of plain and certain truths, need no
other Catalogue of the third rank: And were it not that men are very inclinable
to overdo in rigor against dissenters, I should rather leave out the third
Catalogue; And that which the Tolerated be forbidden to Preach against, should
be but the same Catalogue which the Approved must subscribe, and so two will be
enough, so be it that all unpeaceable preaching as to the manner be restrained
by the Justices of peace.

. 44. This rule the ancient Churches followed: and when they suppressed the
intolerable heresies, they tolerated the Novatians even in Constantinople: And
the worst Bishops were most against their toleration (as Nestorius and such
like), and the best dealt gentliest and lovingly with them, and thereby did
more for the peace of the Church than the overdoers. The Lordly turbulency of
Theophilus and Cyril with Epiphanius's silly passion, set all on a flame
against Chrysostom and his Joannites, which the wisdom and peace of two
peaceable Patriarchs soon quenched.

. 45. That the Integrals to be subscribed by the Approved Ministers be not too
many, is requisite, 1. Because it is not many things that are necessary to be
preached: Read the preachings or doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and you
may soon see this: And they need to subscribe no more than they need to preach.
2. Because else overdoing will be undoing; and unavoidable dissent will cause
divisions and distractions.

And for the same reason it should be written if possible in the very words of
Scripture, which though some deride, is of great moment: Because nothing more
tends to avoid division by dissent: For all are agreed of the truth of the
Scripture, and even they that understand not the words confess them to be true,
and take not the liberty to except against them as they will against the words
of fallible men. The objections against this are answered after.

. 46. Penalties must not be equal, as offenses are not equal: As the Approved
are not ejected for every fault, so the Tolerated are not to be silenced for
every fault. A profane swearer pays twelve pence an oath: And some faults of
preachers are not worse: But some are so great at first, and others by the
addition of impenitencie and incorrigibleness, as that they forfeit their
Toleration.

. 47. Those are to be accounted Intolerable who do more hurt than good, and
whose silencing and suppression will do more good than harm. All men are faulty
and do some harm: And few are so bad as to do no good: But that which
prevails, must prevail in the judgment of the Magistrate. And yet when the
suppression of a hurtful person will do by accident much more hurt to the
Church or Commonwealth than the does (as it may fall out) he is not to be so
hurtfully suppressed.

. 48. Those therefore are intolerable in the Ministry, 1. who through ignorance
or disability are utterly insufficient for the necessary acts of the office;
and so will mar and disgrace the work appointed them, and make Religious
exercises scorned.

2. Those that are heretics in a strict sense, that is, that deny any Article
of faith or practice necessary to Salvation, or preach that which plainly
overthrows it.

3. Those that are against or utterly corrupt any necessary part of
Church Order, or of the public worship of God; so as that God accepts not
worship so corrupted, or that it tendethto more hurt than good to the assembly.

4. those that will not profess the Essentials of Christianity, Ministry and
Church Communion.

5. Those that live such scandalous and wicked lives as disgrace the Ministry,
and do more hurt than they do good.

6. Those that will not promise and perform necessary diligence in the work of
the Ministry which they undertake, but idly neglect the flock.

7. Those that by malignity and misapplication of truth, turn their preaching
or discourse to the reproach of serious godliness, making people think that it
is needless, or hypocrisy.

8. Those that will not promise and perform subjection to the supreme
Governors of the Kingdom or Republic.

9. Those that will not forbear such reviling of Tolerable dissenters, as
tends plainly to destroy love and peace, and to turn public assemblies into
stages of malignant strife.

10. Those whose Religion or opinion is for burning, destroying or
exterminating either all dissenters, or the innocent or tolerable, while they
call them Heretics; or that are for the subjecting of Kings or States or
people to foreign Usurpers, or for giving such a foreign Usurper power to
excommunicate, depose, or murder Kings or temporal Lords, and absolve their
subjects from their Oaths of allegiance, See more against the Magistrates
overdoing in the third Part.
or force them to destroy or exterminate their innocent or tolerable subjects;
and that exempt the Clergy from subjection to Kings.

. 49. The Approved, Tolerable and Intolerable thus distinguished and thus used
by the Magistrate, will best answer the ends and interest of Christianity, and
the Laws of Christ, and will do as much to preserve Love, Unity and peace as is
on earth to be expected which all other contrary ways will unavoidably violate.

CHAP. IX.
Objections answered.

. 1. 1. SOme object against any restraint in Religion, and the countenancing
and preferring of one sort before others, and say that the Magistrate should
equally tolerate all, or else he will discontent those that are but tolerated,
and much more those whom he uses as intolerable; But this is so unchristian
and unreasonable that I think it needless to say much against it. Few men that
believe there is a God and a life to come, and that religion is man's duty and
interest, can believe that God has appointed Government for no higher ends
than our bodily peace and safety. If men once believed what diverse Popes have
written, that the office of the Priest excels the Kings, as far as the soul
excels the body, and as the Sun excels the Stars; it would cause
religious people to set as light by Kings, as they do by these worldly things
which Kings have power over.

. 2. 2. Obj. But each party think themselves in the right, and Kings and
Parliaments are fallible, and if they trouble those that are in the right, they
are persecutors: if others, yet they shall be accounted so.

Answ. Being is before Thinking: either the King is in the right, or the
sufferers: If they are in the Right, either their cause is evident and such as
a willing diligent person may understand, or not. If it be clear, the Prince is
a persecutor that troubles them. If it be too hard for him, he is unfit to be
an active man against them; for he cannot do it in faith and therefore sins,
and may be a persecutor for ought he knows. If he or they be ignorant through
wilfulness or negligence, it will not excuse them. If their cause seem clearly
good to them, and clearly bad to him, one of them must needs be sinfully
erroneous; and it is the erring party that God is against, who will be the
final judge.

. 3. 3. Obj. But it is a thing that Princes and Statesmen are ignorant of: they
are not bred up in the study of Religion: Bishops and Clergymen are liker to
understand such matters, and it is their work.

Ans. 1. God has commanded that Kings and all Rulers study his word: As
Justices should know the Kings Laws, the King and they should know Gods Laws.
It is as truly their office to Rule by them, as it is the Ministers to Teach
and Guide by them. Government by the Sword and Church Government by the word
and Keys are to be exercised according to the same Law of God; and both have
their use about causes Ecclesiastical, in which we swear the King to be supreme
as to that part which is to be done by the sword or corporal force.

2. This objection long used by Popes and their Prelates has been sufficiently
confuted by themselves: Church history puts us quite past doubt that it went
ill with the Church while the Clergy had all the power of Religion: It has
been Popes and Prelates and Priests that have worse corrupted Religion and
disgraced the Church and embroiled the world in religious quarrels and Schisms,
than ever Emperors and Kings have done. Thirteen hundred years lamentable
experience confuteth such thoughts as many have and as I have sometime been
tempted to my self, how well it would go with the Church if the disposal of all
matters of Religion were rather in the hands of the Bishops and Clergy, than of
Kings and Parliaments. Nay rarely are any Magistrates so hot for persecution
and religious cruelty as the Bishops and Clergy or those that are stirred up by
them, against dissenters or one another. The doleful devastations and Schisms
about Nestorianism, Eutychinnism, and such like, were caused more by the
Bishops than the Magistrates: And though Constantius and Valens did much
against truth and peace, it was by their Clergies instigation. He that will
consider the lives of Constantine M. Theodosius Senior, and Theodosius Junior,
A^astasius, etc. and of Charles, Otho, the Henry's and others since in the
West, will see how much ado the Emperors had to keep the Prelates from Schisms,
and confusions: And he that reads but the Laws of the Spanish, French and
English Kings, will see what ado Kings had to keep the Bishops and Priests from
filthy fornication and utter corruption of their function.

. 4. 4. Obj. But if Princes meddle with Pastors, Preachers and Religion, when
far more of them are bad than good, and erroneous than in the right, it must
follow that more good will be hindered by them than evil, and in most places
the best will be persecuted by them, and the worst approved and preferred.

Answ. 1. And was it not so, and worse under the Popes and their Prelates? Let
their own historians judge. 2. Nay it has been ill Clergy men that have
instigated Princes to do most of the chief to the Church that they have done.
3. This tells us the calamitous case of mankind, but not at all how to help it.
4. This argument should urge Princes to amend, but not to neglect their duty
for fear of doing it amiss. By the like argument in Moscovy they have put down
preaching, saying, Most will preach amiss. And others put down all praying save
the reading of imposed words, saying that most else will pray amiss. And so
these would restrain Princes from Governing Bishops and Preachers and matters
Ecclesiastical, saying, Else they will do most amiss. 5. But it is supposed
that Princes have their Councils; And as they consult with Lawyers in matters
of Law, and with Soldiers in matters of War, and with Physicions in matters of
that profession, so they will consult with Divines (as they are called) in
matters of Divinity and Religion.

. 5. Obj. 5. But Religion is to be persuaded and not forced, which will but
make hypocrites.

Ans. We cannot force men to know or believe; and we ought not to force them to
lie: But they may be restrained from doing notorious mischief, and constrained
to hear that they may learn.

. 6. Obj. 6. But that which you think wrong seems right to them, and every
man's Conscience is his Law, and he must obey it, and whatsoever is not of faith
is sin.

Ans. 1. None but the Atheist or irreligious take all. Religion to be
uncertain: Man is naturally Animal religiosum, made to serve God in order to
future happiness: And Religion were no Religion if a man could have no
satisfactory notice of its truth.

2. No man's Conscience is his Law no more than it is the Law of the land. It is
but as his eye in reading it, a discerner of the Law. And mistake is not
discerning.

3. No man ought to take evil for good, nor to do evil because he thinks it
good; but first to use means for information, and then to judge better, and
then to do better.

4. Though whatever is not of says is sin, yet whatever is of error is of sin
too and not of faith. And we are not for forcing men against their conscience
to any thing unnecessary, or any thing which they are incapable of, but for
restraining them from that mischief which an erring judgment leaves them to,
and putting them on necessary duty which they can do: should they not be forced
to feed their children if their Consciences be against it? Or to pay their
debts, or their taxes, tithes and other dues?

. 7. Obj. 7. On the other side some (and more) will say that any toleration of
diversity in Religion, especially of Assemblies, is contrary to the unity and
harmony which should be among Christians, and will cherish heart-burnings, and
cause differences in the State, and foment seditions and rebellious, no discord
having worse effects than those about religion.

Answ. 1. To tell us that men are dark and selfish and proud and passionate,
and therefore contentious, and that this is the calamity that sin has brought
on all the world, is but to tell us what we all must know: But what is that to
the Cure? All sin, and all discord is contrary to our desired concord, and is
our reproach: But shall no sinners therefore be endured? Ye suffer fools
gladly, says St. Paul, seeing you yourselves are wise. 2. Will your way of
violence make this better or far worse?

Will men that really have any religion forsake it for fear of any thing that
you can do against them? It is not Religion if it set not God above man. When
they suffer by you, will they like you or your opinions the better for hurting
them? or the worse? If ever you let them out of prison, will they not come out
more alienated by exasperation? If you force the timorous or hypocrites to
dissemble to save the flesh, will they not hate you and your doctrine the more
as that which soul and body are both oppressed by? And will not their
sufferings move compassion in the people, and your cruelty alienate those that
else would never have forsaken you (what a shameful thing is it to hear and
read men's tragical outcries against necessary toleration (which Christianity
and humanity plead for) while they are the causes of that which they exclaim
against, and are furiously making it tenfold worse?) If diversity in Religion
be such an evil, cause it not by your unnecessary Laws and Canons, and making
engines to tear the Church in pieces, which by the ancient simplicity and
commanded mutual forbearance would live in such a measure of Love and Peace, as
may be here expected. Are men liker to hate you, or to plot rebellions for
being gently used as men, or cruelly like slaves or dogs? Nay slaves are
freemen in comparison of those that are dissenters from the Pope, if he get
them in his power. Though it be but for refusing to deny belief to all men's
senses, and consequently to Gods natural revelation. If you can cure all men's
errors, do it (but begin at home). But killing is not curing in the sense of
wise Physicions or Patients. Your way cures error as the man that was angry
with the Looking-glass for showing him his ugly face, did cure it by breaking
it into twenty pieces, and then it showed him twenty ugly faces for one.

There are no tolerated sorts among us here that are more accused by all for
seditiousness and rebellion when they once got some seeming strength, than the
Anabaptists and the people called the fifth Monarchy men. But have they ever
(even at Munster) made any such horrid slaughters in the world as the great
enemies of Toleration have done? Did they ever murder 200000 people that lived
peaceably at once, as the Frish Papists did? Or forty thousand if not (as some
say) twice as many, as they did at the French Massacre? Or so many thousands if
not millions (say some) as were killed of the Albigenses and Waldenses in
France, Piedmont, Italy, Germany, etc. Or did they ever use Christians as the
Inquisition has done? Or did they ever use Emperors as Henry the fourth and
fifth, and Frederick were used? Or kill two Kings successively; as Henry the
third and Henry the fourth of France were killed.

Nay did ever the Novatians, yea or the furious Prelatical Donatists make such
bloody work as has been made by Bishops, Councils and Emperors for the
suppressing of dissenters? What has been done at Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Rome, I have elsewhere showed. The late publisher of
his travels in Egypt (Vaneslup a Roman, they say a Jesuit) tells us that Egypt
is deprived of her ancient sort of inhabitants, destroyed for following
Dioscorus, and that Justinian killed no less than two hundred thousand of them.
I believe not his number. But if this be true, the tyrannical hereticaters are
the Pikes in the pond, and a far more bloody and devouring sort of men, than
most of those that they destroy as intolerable.

3. But it is not yet diverse Religions that is the subject in dispute: every
different opinion or practice, or diversity in some small point in Religion, is
not a diverse Religion. He knows not what Religion is that thinks that there
are as many different Religions as there are controversies among religious
persons. In a word, Bear a little or you must bear more.

. 8. Obj. 8. But the tolerated will seduce the ignorant, and poison Souls: And
therefore are no more to be tolerated than murderers, souls being more precious
than bodies.

Answ. 1. Who have poisoned the Church and souls with more errors and more
palpable, than the Papists who are most against Toleration? 2. The merely
Tolerated being discountenanced by Authority, have less advantage to deceive
men than the Approved if as erroneous. 3. We plead for restraining men from
poisoning souls by dangerous doctrines, and not for tolerating that. But every
dissenter or mistaking person is not such a poisoner of souls. 4. The Tolerated
speaking in public are more responsible and more easily convicted of their
fault, than those that do it secretly where there are no witnesses; And this
your violence cannot hinder. 5. As their errors will be openly known, so you
have advantage openly to confute them, and to keep the people right.

. 9. Obj. 9. But dissenting teachers will unsay what the Approved Teachers say,
and hinder their work, and steal the hearts of the people from them, and make
their calling bur densome to them.

Answ. 1. They are to be restrained from preaching against any great sure
necessary doctrine or practice.

2. Christ never sent out his Ministers with a supposition that none should
contradict them; but with that light and strength which which was to overcome
contradiction. Do you so debase and disgrace your selves and your religion, as
to think or say that it cannot prosper if any be but suffered to speak against
you?

3. Does the work of Christ afford you no more comfort, than shall leave you
thus burdened if any will but gainsay you? How unlike Christ's Ministers or
Christians do you speak?

4. Have not you that have sound doctrine, Gods promise, the Rulers
countenance, maintenance and honor, much more to support you, than they that
are supposed to have none of these?

5. If you tolerate not their open preaching, their secret endeavors, and your
seeming cruelty together, will alienate more from you, and make you not only
neglected but abhorred.

. 10. Obj. 10. The number of the erroneous will increase by a toleration.

Answ. And the number of the ungodly that will say, swear, or do any thing for
worldly respects; will increase by your mistaken way of suppressing them. 2. It
is better that tolerated honest Christians erring in tolerable cases do
increase, than that they be banished or destroyed, and a worldly Ministry
thereby lift up, abhorred by the religious, and heading the malignant and
profane against all serious piety.

3. Violence and Tyranny against good men for tolerable error, has already
increased that same error more than wiser means would have done, and has
introduced worse.

4. We have found where I lived (in Worcestershire and the neighboring
Counties, Warwickshire, Staffordshire and Shropshire) in the late times of
liberty in Religion, that an unanimous, humble, able, diligent Ministry
frequently and lovingly consulting and all agreeing, did more effectually
suppress heresy, error and schism, than violence ever did or would have done.
The next Parish to me had, a grave, learned, sober Anabaptist, B. of D. that
had great advantages; and yet almost all our flocks were kept from the
infection: In my own Charge (a great Parish of many thousand souls) where I was
above 14. years, we had no one separate assembly, nor one sectary that I
remember, save two or three apostate Infidels (or Socinians) and two or three
Papists. A faithful agreeing Ministry with the advantage of a good cause, we
found sufficient to shame all the Sectaries, and frustrate most of their
endeavors, and to keep the people unanimous and right.

. 11. Obj. 11. If every one that will may set up for a preacher and gather a
congregation, or if the ignorant people shall all choose their own Teachers, we
shall have ignorance, error and confusion.

Answ. 1. I told you that every one that will may not turn preacher. The
Tolerated are to pass their proper trial as well as the Approved, before they
receive their Toleration.

2. The Churches commonly chose their own Bishops or Pastors for near a
thousand years after Christ, or had a Negative consenting voice at least: And
many Canons did confirm it, yea and decrees of the Popes themselves: yea when
the Popes and Emperors in Germany (the Henry's etc.) strove about the
investing power, it was yet granted that the people should have their electing
or free conrsenting power continued. And no man can be really their Pastor till
they consent: And your contrary course will make worse work.

3. Our way is of all other the safest: Two or three locks keep the Churches
treasure safest. We say, none shall be approved but by three parties consent,
nor Tolerated but by two or three. The Ordainers are to consent to him as a
Minister, and the people as their Minister; and the Magistrate as a Tolerated
Minister: or if any unordained be tolerated (which I determine not) at least
the People and the Ruler must consent, and that upon a just testimonial of his
ability, Piety and fitness for such toleration.

4. And yet we speak this but of Pastors; not denying but Teachers, and
Catechizers may be imposed on children, infidels, and others that are not in
Communion with any particular Church.

. 12. Obj. 12. You would have the Church Articles, at least for the Tolerated,
in Scripture phrase: And what is the phrase without the right sense? How easily
may Heretics creep in under such phrases as several men put several senses on?

Answ. 1. Is there not Truth enough in all the Bible in intelligible words
necessary to salvation and Church Communion? Is the Scripture as insufficient
as the Papists make it, without their supplemental Traditions or Decrees? And
had not the Holy Ghost skill to speak even things necessary in tolerable
intelligible phrase? who are they that are wiser to reform it?

2. Almost all words are ambiguous and may be diversely understood: your own
invented expositions will be as liable to be wrested by Heretics as the
Scripture. It is ridculous presumption to talk of making any Law, profession or
Articles that a false Heretic may not subscribe to. 3. But there is another
remedy against them: while they conceal their heresy, they are no Heretics in
the judgment of the Church. Non apparere here is as non esse, when they divulge
it, the judicatures must correct them. It Is vanity to dream that the Law is
faulty as long as it is but such as men can break: or that any Law can be made
which none can break: But as they break them, they are to be judged. 4. And we
must not rack and divide the good, for fear of such letting in the bad. The
Churches Concord and peace is of more regard than the keeping out of some
secret Heretic: yea of old he was not called a Heretic that did not separate
from the Church. All good men agree to the word of God, but all will not agree
to every word of yours.

. 13. I conclude, In humane affairs there is nothing without imperfection,
weakness and incommodity: and to pretend the cure of these by impossibilities,
or mischiefs, is the way of such as these Thirteen hundred years have been the
true schismatics and distracters of the Church.

CHAP. X.
A draught or specimen of such Forms as are before mentioned, for the Approved
and the Tolerated Ministers.

. 1. TThis Chapter should have gone before the ninth: But I thought to pass it
by, lest it seem presumptuous. But the observation how ordinarily men miscarry
in this work, has persuaded me to run the hazard of men's censures.

. 2. 1. The form to be subscribed by the Approved Ministry.

I A. B. do seriously as in the sight of God profess, A. The form Common to all
Christians. Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.
that as I have been in Baptism devoted by the sacred* Covenant to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, renouncing the Devil, the world and the flesh, so
far as they are his enemies; so I do unfeignedly Believe in God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and consent still to that Covenant, in hope of the grace and
Glory promised, obliging my self to continue by the help of that grace, in
Faith, Love and sincere obedience to the end.

More particularly.

. 3. I. I do unfeignedly Believe 1. I. Assent. Heb. 11. 6. 1 Cor. 8. 4. Mat.
28. 19. Joh. 4. 24. Psalm. 90. 2. Genesis 17. 1. Heb. 4. 13. Luke 18. 19. Psalm.
117. 2. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Isa. 6. 3.
That there is one Only God an infinite Spirit of Life, understanding and will,
most perfectly powerful, wise and good; incomprehensibly Three in One, and One
(essence) in Three (called persons or subsistences by the Church), the Father,
the Word and the Spirit, of whom and through whom and to whom are all things,
he being the Creator, preserver, Governor, and the ultimate End of all: Our
absolute owner, our most just Ruler, and our most gracious and amiable Father
and benefactor.

2. I believe that this God created all the world, Ge. 1. Act. 17. 24. Genesis 1.
27. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Luke 10. 27. Joh. 17. 3. Mat. 4. 10. and 19. 17. Genesis 3.
Romans 5. 12. and 3. 23.
things invisible and visible; And made man in his own Image, forming a fit
Body, and breathing into it a spirit of Life, understanding and will; fitted
and obliged to know, love and serve his Creator, giving him the inferior
Creatures for this use, making him their Owner, their Governor and their End,
under God: But specially forbidding him to eat of the Tree of knowledge, Genesis
2. 17.
on pain of death.

3. The woman being tempted by Satan, and the man by the woman both fell by
wilful sin, from their Holiness, Innocence and Happiness, into a state of
Pravity, Guilt and misery, under the slavery of the Devil, world and flesh,
under Gods vindictive Justice and the condemnation of his Law. Ephesians. 2. 3.
Whence sinful, corrupted, guilty and miserable natures are propagated to all
mankind: And no mere Creature is able to deliver us.

. 4. II. I believe that God so loved the world, I Joh. 4. 14. Joh. 1. 1, 14. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Luke 1. 35. Romans 9. 5. Joh. 16. 33. Heb. 2. 14. Mat. 3. 15. Heb. 7.
26. 1 John 2. 6. Gal. 3. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Act. 3. 9. and 3. 21. Ephesians. 5. 23.
Luke 1. 33. Act. 3. 22. Heb. 7. 25, 26. Ephesians. 1. 23, 24. Romans 14. 9, 10. Joh. 5.
22. and 17. 1, 2, 3.
that he gave his only Son to be their Savior: Who being God and one with the
Father, took our Nature, and became man; being conceived by the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, named Jesus the Christ; who was perfectly holy,
without sin, fulfilling all righteousness, and being tempted overcame the Devil
and the world, and after a life of humiliation, gave himself a sacrifice for
our sins, by suffering a cursed death on the Cross, to ransom us and reconcile
us unto God, and was buried, and descended to Hades, and conquering death, the
third day he rose again: And having sealed the New Covenant with his blood, he
commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel to all the world, and promised the
Holy Ghost: and after forty daiesascended into heaven, where he is God and man,
the glorified Head, over all things to his Church, all power being given him in
heaven and earth, our prevailing Intercessor with God the Father, to present us
and our service acceptable to God, Luke 24. 47. Mat. 28. 19, 20 Mark 16. 15, 16.
and communicate Gods grace and mercies unto us; to Teach us, Govern, protect
and judge us, and to save and bless and glorify us.

. 5. 2. By the new Testament, Covenant or Law of grace, Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 5.
11, 22. Joh. 1. 10, 11, 12. Gal. 3. 27, 28. and 5. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Luke 14.
33. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Mat. 28. 20. Heb. 5. 9. Luke 14. 32. Rev. 22. 14.
God through the aforesaid Mediation of Jesus Christ, does freely give to
fallen mankind, Himself to be their Reconciled God and Father, his Son to be
their Savior, and his holy Spirit to be their sanctifier and comforter, if
they will accordingly believe, and accept the gift, and by faithful covenant
give up themselves to him in these Relations; Repenting of their sins, and
consenting to forsake the Devil, the world and the flesh so far as they are
enemies to God and their salvation, and sincerely to obey Christ, his Laws and
his Spirit to the end, bearing the Cross and following him though through
sufferings, that they may reign with him in Glory: All which God will
faithfully perform.

. 6. III. I Believe that God the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father, Joh.
16. 13. Ephesians. 2. 20. and 3. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Joh. 3. 5, 6. Romans 8. 9. Gal.
4. 6.
and from (or by) the son, was given to the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists,
to be their infallible Guide in preaching and recording the doctrine of
salvation, and to be the great witness of Christ and his truth, by his manifold
Divine operations. And that he is given to quicken, Tit. 3. 3, 5. Heb. 12. 14.
Tit. 2. 11, 12. Romans 8. 13. Heb. 5. 9.
illuminate and sanctify all true believers, and to save them from the Devil,
the world and the fleshes temptations, from sin, and from spiritual misery. And
that the Holy Scriptures indicted by this Spirit, are to be believed, loved and
obeyed as the word of God.

. 7. 2. I believe that all who by true Consent are devoted to God in the
foresaid Baptismal Covenant, 1 Cor. 12. Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 1. 11, 12. Ephesians. 4. 1.
to 17. Romans 8. 1. Act. 26. 18. Romans 14. and 15 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Romans 16. 16,
17. Joh. 15. 1. to 10. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Mat. 7. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. 17.
Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28.
and so continue, are one sanctified Church or Body of Christ, and have
Communion in the same spirit of faith and Love, and have forgiveness of their
sins; and having one God, one Christ, one spirit, one faith, one Baptism, and
one Hope of Heavenly Glory, are bound to keep this unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, in the Doctrine, worship, order and conversation and mutual
helps, which Christ has by himself or his Apostles commanded, avoiding
uncharitable contentions, divisions, injuries and offenses. And that the
Baptized Covenanters and external Professors of the foresaid Covenant consent
are the visible Church universal, and such as we must have outward Communion
with, though only the sincere believers and consenters shall be saved. Joh. 12.
26. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 7, 8.


. 8. 3. I believe that at death the spirits of the justified go to happiness
with Christ, Act. 7. 59. Act. 17. 31.
and the souls of the wicked to misery. And that at the end of this world, 2
These. 1. 7, 8. Joh. 5. 28, 29. Mat. 25. 46. Matthew. 13. 1 These. 1. 6, 10, 11.
Rev. 22.
Christ will come in glory, and will raise the bodies of all men from death,
and will judge all according to their works: And that the Righteous shall go
into everlasting life, where being perfected themselves, they shall see God,
and perfectly love and praise him in Joy, with Christ and all the Glorified
Church: And that the rest shall go into everlasting punishment, where their
worm never dies and their fire is never quenched.

. 9. II. AS I Believe thus in God, II. Consent and Desire. Romans 12. 1. Joh. 1.
11, 12. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Romans 8. 8. Heb. 11. and 12. 28, 29. Isa. 56. 4, 5. and
55. 2, 3, 4, 6. Rev. 22. 17. Luke 14. 26, 29. 2 Cor. 5. 7, 8, 9. 2 Pet. 3. 11,
12. 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Tit. 1. 3, 4. Mat. 7. 7.
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, according to the Sacred Scriptures, and the
Creeds and constant Profession of the universal Christian Church, so I do
unfeignedly continue to give up my self presently, absolutely and resolvedly,
to this God my Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, according to the Covenant of
grace: that I may be resigned to the will of God my Owner, and obey the will of
God my Ruler, and please and rest in the Will and Love of God my Father, the
Chiefest End and Infinite Good: And renouncing all Idols and enemies of God and
this his Covenant, I consent though with the Cross to follow Christ the Captain
of my Salvation to the death, desiring still more of the Love of the Father,
the Grace of the Son, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, and hoping for the
promised Glory; All which I pray for according to that Prayer which Christ has
left to be the summary Directory of our desires: Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.

. 10. III. ACcording to the foresaid Belief and Consent, III. Practice. Act.
27. 23. Ps. 73. 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9. Mat. 5.
17, 18, 19. Jo. 15. 10, 12, 14. Jo. 16. 7. 1 Jo. 5. 20, 21. Mat. 4. 9, 10.
Psalm. 1. 1, 2, 3. and 37. 4. and 104. 34. and 89. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 4. 1 Cor. 11.
23, etc. Psalm. 119. 97. Jam. 4. 12. Exodus 20. 7, 8. Rev. 1. 10.
As God has obliged me, I do by Covenant oblige my self, by the help of his
Grace, sincerely to obey this God, my Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier,
according to the Law of nature, summed up in the two Great Commands, of Loving
God with all our hearts, and our neighbors as our selves; and in the Ten
Commandments as the Law of Christ explained by him, with his superadded
precepts and institutions: By all which I am bound, to take God only for my
God, by believing, fearing, trusting, loving and obeying him; To Avoid all
Idolatry of mind and body: To worship God according to his Law, by learning and
meditating on his word, by believing-holy-fervent-prayer, thanksgiving and
praise, and the holy use of the Sacrament of his Body and Blood: I must
reverently and holily use his name, and not by perjury or otherwise profane it:
I must keep holy the Lords day, especially in holy Communion with the Christian
Assemblies, in the public worship of God, Romans 13. Col. 3. 20. Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
Romans 12. 19, 20. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Romans 13. 9, 10. Luke 18. 20. Mat. 5. 44, 45. 1
Jo. 3. 15, 16. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5. 1 These. 4. 6. Lev. 19. 11. Prove. 19. 5. Psalm.
15. 3. Mat. 19. 19. and 7. 12.
and thankful commemoration of Christ's Resurrection, and our redemption: I must
if I be a superior, faithfully and holily govern my Inferiors; and as an
Inferior I must honor and obey my Parents, Magistrates, and other superiors
in power over me. I must not wrong my neighbor in thought, word or deed; in
his Soul, his Body, his Chastity, Estate, Right or Propriety; but must do him
all the good I can, and justly give to all their own, and do as I would be done
by, as Loving my neighbor as my self: According to the Decalogue, God spoke
all these words saying, I am the Lord, etc.

. 11. 2. ANd as the special duty of my office as in the Sacred Ministry, B.
Proper to Ministers of the Gospel. Act. 20. 20, etc. Jo. 21. 15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 4. 16. and 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 4. 1, 3, 15. and 1 Timothy 3. 4,
5, 6, 19. 2 Timothy 1. 7, 8, 9, 10, 13. 2 Timothy 2. to the end.
I do Consent and Promise sincerely to perform that office for the flock over
which I shall be placed, or wherever I am called to exercise it; Teaching them
the doctrine of the Sacred Scriptures, especially the greatest and most
necessary parts, which I have here professed, and nothing contrary thereto, so
far as by diligent study I can discern it: exhorting them to live by faith in
love to God and man, and in the joyful hope of heavenly Glory; in humility,
self-denial, temperance, patience, justice, diligence and fruitfulness in all
good works: To be loyal and obedient to their superiors, 1 Timothy 6. 16, 17, 18.
Tit. 1. and 2. and 3. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Mat. 6. 33. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 1,
2. Mat. 24. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. 1 Cor. 9. 16, to the end.
teachable to their instructors, haters of sinful divisions and contentions,
and lovers and followers of peace: To seek first the Kingdom of God and its
righteousness, to mortify the flesh, and not to overlove this world; To repent
of sin, to resist temptations, to prepare for death and judgment; most
carefully to please, and quietly trust the will of God: 1 Cor. 11. 23. Mat. 5.
16, 20. Mat. 15. 8, 9. Isa. 8. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
And in the public celebration of the Sacraments, and all the worship of God,
and Guidance of the flock, the same word of God shall be my Rule; to which also
I will sincerely endeavor to conform my whole Conversation; not following
after vainglory, or filthy lucre, or lording it over the heritage of God, but
seeking to please and glorify Christ, in my own and their salvation.

. 12. ANd as I expect my part in the benefits of godly and peaceable
Government, C. Special duty to Civil Rulers. Romans 13. 1, etc. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
so I do profess to believe, and promise to teach and practice accordingly,
That there is no power but of God, and that Rulers are Gods Ministers for Good,
not for destruction but edification, to be a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to them that do well: and this under Christ, to whom is given all Power
in heaven and earth: That we must pray for Kings and all in authority, that we
may live a quiet and peaceable life, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 11.
in all godliness and honesty: Romans 13. 7. 5.
That subjects must obey their Rulers in all things lawful belonging to their
office to command; Col. 3. 12, 13, 14.
and not resist, Jam. 3. 1, 14, 15, 16, 17.
rebel or be seditious: Jud. 8, 9, 10.
That they must give honor, reverence and tribute to whomsoever they are due:
And all this not only for fear of man, but in Conscience as hereby obeying God.

The Renunciation.
ANd as I have thus unfeignedly professed my Belief, my Consent and promised
Practice; so I heartily Renounce all Doctrines, Desires and Practices contrary
to any part of this Profession: And if by error I hold or shall hold any thing
contrary thereto, as soon as I discern such contrariety I will renounce it.

Especially I Renounce Atheism, Polytheism and Idolatry of Mind or Body: All
Infidelity, Antichristianity and false Christ's: Profaneness, ungodliness, and
malignant enmity to God and Holiness: All contempt of Gods spirit and his word:
All serving the Devil, the world or the flesh as enemies to God or Holiness:
All selfishness, Pride and hypocrisy, perjury and taking Gods name in vain,
superstition, profanation of Gods holy day, and contempt of his public or
private worship: All Rebellion against my parents, Prince or other Rulers; All
murder, adultery and fornication, theft and deceit, lying and false witness
bearing, and all other injury against the life, health, chastity, estate, or
reputation of my neighbor; All sinful discontent with my estate and coveting
that which is another: And whatever is impious, uncharitable or unjust; From
all these I desire to be free.

PArticularly to approve my fidelity to my Rulers, I renounce all doctrines and
practices of Rebellion, sedition or Schism: I believe not that subjects may
take up Arms or use any force or conspiracy, to violate the Rights, Authority
or Persons of those in supreme Power over them: I believe not that by any Laws
of God or Man the Bishop of Rome has the right of Governing all the world, or
all Christian Kings and Kingdoms, nor the King or Kingdom of England, in
particular, in matters secular or religious; Nor that it is the duty of this
Kingdom or the King, to subject themselves unto him and obey him: Nor that the
said Bishop of Rome has any true authority or right, to impose oaths on Kings
or other temporal Lords, or otherwise oblige them to judge their subjects to be
Heretics, who deny the Popes universal Supremacy over all the Churches on
earth, or who deny that the universal Church has any Visible Head but Christ;
or who believe that the truly consecrated Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper remain true Bread and Wine after the Consecration, or that
believe they are not to be adored as their God, nor the Wine to be denied to
the Laity communicating: Nor may the Pope oblige Kings or any others to
exterminate, burn or kill or punish any such as heretics, nor excommunicate
Kings or temporal Lords for not doing it; nor depose them being excommunicated,
nor give their Kingdoms or Dominions to others, nor authorize any to kill
them, or to raise arms against them, and to invade their Countries by
hostility: Nor has he right or authority to forbid Kingdoms or Countries the
public celebration of Gods worship, or holy Christian Communion; Nor to oblige
any Rulers or others to destroy any as Heretics or judge them such, because
they are so judged by the Pope or Councils; And I believe not that the Clergy
are exempted from obedience to the Secular Powers, or from being judged and
punished by them, by any Laws of God, or any valid Laws of man, not made or
consented to by the said Powers: And I unfeignedly believe that if any Pope, or
Council how great soever do decree, or assert any of these things which I have
hereby renounced and disclaimed, or shall hereafter decree or assert any of
them, they err, and sin against God in so doing, and are not to be believed
therein, nor do oblige any thereby to obey them. And all this I profess as in
the sight of God my Judge without fraud or dissimulation in the sincerity of my
heart.

THe errors which men should be restrained from preaching or propagating are
innumerable, and not necessary to be all put into a subscribed or professed
renunication, so they be actually forborne. I will recite part of a Catalogue of
false and doubtful dangerous points, not fit to be published by preachers.

I. Of the nature and acts of God.

1. The God is corporeal or material.

2. That God is essentially only in Heaven, or in some finite space.

3. That God has parts and is divisible.

4. That God has the parts or shape of humane bodies, head, face, eyes, hands,
feet, etc. properly so called.

5. That God is the Universe or whole world, or that he is merely or properly
the soul of the world, as his body; and so but a part of the world.

6. That God or any essential of God, is really new, changeable or finite.

7. The God can suffer hurt, or has proper real grief and passion.

8. That God knows not all that has been, is, or will be, and all that is
intelligible.

9. That Gods own essential perfection, goodness, and love is not the ultimate
and chief object of man's love, to be loved chiefly for himself as most amiable,
and above our selves and all things created, but that he is only or chiefly to
be loved as our Benefactor, or as good to the creature; And so that man is Gods
end, and his own chief and ultimate end, and not God man's chief and ultimate
end.

10. That God is the first and chief, or any proper cause of sin; or that God
does by efficient premotion as the first cause predetermine every man's mind,
will, tongue and members, to every forbidden act that is done, as it is
determined to and specifyed by the object with all its forbidden circumstances
and modes: and so to every lie, perjury, hatred of God and goodness, murder,
etc. that is committed.

11. That God rules the world only as an engine by physical motion, and does
not rule any free agents by moral means as precepts, prohibitions, promises,
etc. in any acts, saving as these are parts of his physically necessitating
motion.

12. That God may or ever does lie; or by his inspiration, or his works of
nature or providence, necessitate innocent persons de facto, or oblige any as a
duty, to believe that which is false.

13. That God has so committed the affairs of this world to Angels, or any
creatures or natural means, as not to mind them, or particularly govern and
dispose of them himself.

14. That God is essentially or virtually absent from the effects which he
causes.

15. That God has not power to do any more or otherwise than he does, though
he would.

16. That Gods will is not the fountain, and the measure of all created good:
or that things are not good because they are willed by God.

17. That Gods proper and absolute will, desire and decree may be disappointed
and not come to pass.

18. That somewhat of or in the creature, may be a true or proper cause of
somewhat (not only relative, but) real in God, or make a real change on God.

19. That God has no vindictive, or punishing, and no rewarding justice.

20. That God may be formally conceived of and comprehended by man, and not
only known analogically and as in a glass.

II. Of the Blessed Divine Trinity.

1. That there are three Gods, or three divine essences or substances.

2. That the Trinity are but Three Names of God, or three relations of him to
the creature.

3. That they are Three parts of God.

4. That the three Persons are one God only in specie, as Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob are One man, because they have but one humane sort of nature.

5. That one person in the Trinity is in time or dignity before or after other,
or greater or less than other.

6. That in the Trinity there are three Fathers, three Sons, or three Holy
Ghosts.

7. That the doctrine of the Trinity is contradictory or impossible to be true.

8. That it is unnecessary to be believed or preached.

9. That there are no Impressions or notes of the Trinity on the soul of man,
or any other known works of God.

10. That the works of Creation, Redemption or Sanctification are no more
eminently or otherwise ascribed in Scripture to any one Person in the Trinity
than to the other. That Creation is no otherwise ascribed to the Father, than
to the Son and Holy Ghost, nor Redemption to the Son, than to the Father and
the Holy Ghost, nor Sanctification, Consolation and Sealing to the Holy Ghost,
than to the Father and the Son, and so that they are not hence relatively
distinguishable to us and by us at all.

III. Of the Person of Jesus Christ.

1. That Christ is but a Creature, or not eternal; or not of the same Divine
Essence as is the Father.

2. That Christ has no humane created soul, but the Divine nature was to his
body instead of a soul.

3. Or that a superangelical created nature, united to his Divine nature was
instead of a humane soul to his body.

4. That Christ's body was not derived from the Virgin Mary, but only passed
through her, as water through a Channel.

5. That the Mother of Christ alone was as much the cause of his soul and body,
as our Fathers and Mothers both are of ours.

6. That the Virgin Mary was not the Mother of him that was God and man.

7. That she was the Mother and actual cause or procreator of the Godhead, and
of Christ as God.

8. That Jesus Christ was two Persons, a Divine and Humane.

9. That he had not two distinguishable natures, viz. the Divine and Humane.

10. That he had not two distinguishable understandings, wills, and operations.

11. That the Body of Jesus Christ was incorruptible in and by its own nature
and constitution, and not only by its union with the Deity, and by Gods will,
decree and preservation.

12. That he was begotten by Joseph or some other man.

13. That Christ's humane nature, soul or body, suffered no real pain, nor was
capable of suffering any.

14. That he was not of the line of David after the flesh.

15. That he had original sin, guilt or vitiosity.

16. That Christ is not now God and man in heaven.

17. That the Glorified Body of Christ is now formally flesh and blood, so
called univocally as ours, having the same formal constitutive essence See the
s^^ond Council^ (...) ^citing and app^^^ing the former General Council of
(...): which in other things they opposed, yet both condemned this opinion.
.

18. That every Priest makes Bread and Wine by the Consecration in the
Eucharist to become no longer Bread and Wine, but the very Body, Flesh and
Blood of Christ, or that God so makes it, or the Priests speaking those words:
And so that all the consecrated Bread and Wine since Christ's days till now are
made Christ's flesh and blood, and yet his flesh and blood no whit increased.

19. That all believers are by union part of the Natural Person of Christ.

20. That the humane nature of Christ is now the Godhead, or is become a proper
part of the second Person in the Trinity as such. (And here presumptuous men
must take great heed of meddling too far: some Scholastic Divines say, It is
error to say that Christ's humane nature is a Part of his person; because his
Person was perfect from eternity, and the Divinity cannot be a Par. of any
thing: Others say that It is erro^ to say that the Humane nature is no part of
Christ (...) seeing it is no part of the Divine Essence, or nature, therefore
it is a part of his person: Others say that it is only an Accident of Christ:
some think that if it were not for fear of the clamours of Ignorant
Hereticaters that will call it Nestorianism, it were soundest and safest to
say, that the word Person is equivocal: And that as it is taken for the second
eternal person in the Trinity, the humane nature is no part of it: But as it is
taken Relatively for the Person of the Mediator, the humane nature is a part.
And so that Christ has two persons, but not univocally but equivocally so
called.)

IV. Of the Holy Ghost and the Holy Scriptures.

1. That the Holy Ghost is but a creature, or not God of the same essence with
the Father and the Son.

2. That the Holy Ghost is but the Angelical nature or species; and as the
diabolical nature and many Devils are called singularly [ the Devil,] so the
many Angels are called [ the Holy Spirit.]

3. That the Immortal part of man called his Spirit, is the essence of the Holy
Ghost.

4. That the Holy Ghost as operative on man, is not a valid witness of the
truth of Christ and Christianity in the world.

5. That the Holy Ghost did not impregnate the Virgin Mary, or that Christ was
not conceived by him.

6. That Adam had not the Holy Ghost, or true Holiness.

7. That the Prophets spoke not by the Holy Ghost; Or that their prophecies are
of Private interpretation, that is, objectively to be interpreted, of such
private persons and things as they immediately spoke of, and which were but
types of Christ or grace.

8. That the Holy Ghost in the Prophets was not the Spirit of the Redeemer, and
sent by him.

9. That the miracles of Christ and his Apostles were not wrought by the Holy
Ghost.

10. That the Holy Ghost may set the seal of true uncontrolled miracles to a
lie.

11. That the Canonical Scriptures were not indicted by the Holy Ghost, as
infallible records of the Divine will.

12. That they are but for a time, till a perfecter Law is made, called, [ The
Law of the Spirit.]

13. That they are imperfect without the supplement of Roman Tradition, as part
of the Rule of faith and life.

14. That they were but occasional writings, never intended for the universal
law or rule of faith and holy living.

15. That there are in the true original, as they came from the Apostles, some
errors.

16. That in the present received Originals there is any error inconsistent
with true saving faith and practice.

17. That we are not bound to believe the Holy Scriptures to be Gods word, but
by the authoritative proposal of the Church of Rome, that is, A general Council
subject to the Pope, or called or approved by him as authorized thereto by
Christ: or that we must believe that the Pope or Council are authorized by
Christ, before we are bound to believe in Christ himself.

18. That the Scriptures are not intelligible in necessary things, till the
Church, Council, Pope or Fathers expound them to us.

19. That the Scriptures have no such im^^ss or excellency, by which they
manifest themselves to be of God, supposing necessary conveyance and
ministerial explication.

20. That we must not understand any text of Scripture, but as the consent of
ancient Fathers expounds it.

21. That the Spirit now given to Po^^, Councils, or to individual Christians
is as much the Rule of faith and life, as (...) holy Scriptures: or that the
Spirit is not given now to us (...) to teach us to understand, believe, love
and practice Gods word indicted by the more emmen^ inspiration of the Apostles
and Prophets* ^ut also to inspire us as infallibly to know more than is
revealed in the Scripture, and that as needful to Salvation: Or that it is not
so much the Spirit extraordinarily inspiring the Apostles, as the Spirit as
inspiring ourselves, which is every man's rule of faith and life.

22. That the Light which is in Heathens, Infidels, and all men, is this
Spirit, and sufficient Rule.

23. That men must believe the Scripture without reason for their believing it:
or must believe it to be Gods word without seeking any proof that it is his
word.

24. That it is meritorious to believe the Scripture to be Gods word, without
knowing any proof or reason of it, this being an infused faith, and proof
making it but acquired.

25. That we must believe Gods word no further than we have evidence of truth
from the nature of the matter revealed.

26. That Mahomet is the Paraclet promised by Christ.

V. Of the Creation.

1. That this world was from eternity, and not made in time.

2. That an evil God made this earth, or a middle God between the perfect God
and the evil one (As old Heretics variously spoke.)

3. Or that such an evil, or middle God made the body of man.

4. Or that such an evil, or middle agent made the woman.

5. That God made sin, and death and disorder before sin deserved them.

6. That when God had made this world, he left it to the Government of certain
Angels, who fell and necessitated man to fall.

7. That the World is Gods body, and he the Soul of it, and no more.

8. That the world came by chance, or by a fortuitous conflux of atoms, and
was not made by Gods wise and powerful word or action.

9. That there is nothing in the world but matter and motion, and the various
shapes of matter caused by motion: or at least, nothing but God and matter and
motion, and its modal effects.

10. That the world is Infinite, as being made by that infinite God, who made
it as great and good as he was able, and therefore infinite in his own
similitude.

VI. Of Angels and Spirits, and Heaven.

1. That men can certainly tell the space, number and order of all the
celestial regions, orbs, or spaces, and the number of Angels, or when the first
were made.

2. That this world or earth was made by Angels only.

3. That the fallen Angels were necessitated by God to sin, and to tempt man.

4. That God has so left to Angels the Government of this world, as not to
govern it himself, save by such leaving all to their free contingent action.

5. That all that which scripture ascribes to the Holy Ghost is done only by
Angels.

6. That we may know which are our Guardian Angels.

7. That men may choose their own guardian Angels or spirits.

8. That we must pray to Angels though we see them not or have no special
notice when they hear us.

9. That Angels lusted after women and begat Giants of them before the deluge.

10. That they fight with each other for the government of the Kingdoms of this
world; (even the good Angels among themselves.)

VII. Of Man, as man, in his nature and first state.

1. That man's soul is God, or part of God.

2. Or is only a part or act of an universal soul of the world, and is no
singular or individual substance in each one.

3. That the soul is but a quality, motion or action of a higher agent.

4. That the soul is mortal and dies with the body; being either annihilated,
or asleep, or sunk into a mere potentia; or has no knowledge, will, sense or
action; or is swallowed up in the universal soul so as to lose its proper or
numerical existence.

5. That man's soul is of the same species as the bruits.

6. That man's spirit only is immortal and continues after death, but not his
soul.

7. That man's soul or spirit was from eternity.

8. That it was made before this earth, and sinned in a former body, and was
thrust for punishment into this body and world.

9. That the souls departed of men, are sent back into beasts, or at least into
other men, and so are often born.

10. That men's souls are fallen Angels.

11. That Adams soul was made first male and female before it was incorporate.

12. That Adams body was the clothing that God made him after he sinned,
having no body before.

13. That neither soul nor body was made after Gods image (as Epiphanius ill
affirms).

14. That man's Vital faculty, Intellect, and Will, are but accidents of his
soul.

15. That the soul is moved but as an engine by an extrinsick cause, and has
not any Essential selfmoving form or power.

16. That no man can do more or less or otherwise than he does, because God as
the first mover necessitateth all his actions.

17. That the will has no habits, but a mere power and liberty.

18. That Adam and Eve had no holiness, or holy inclination to love God as God
and to obey him, but a mere neutral possibility.

19. That Adam had not help or strength sufcient, or necessary power to have
forborne his first sin.

20. That man was made only to be an inhabitant of earth, as Angels are of
heaven; and is not capable of an higher habitation.

VIII. Of sin, Original and subsequent.

1. That God is as much the Cause of all sin, as he is of darkness and such
other privations: and that he made Adam sin; or that he irresistibly
predetermineth every ones will to every forbidden act which it does.

2. That the Devil irresistibly necessitated Adam to sin, and so some superior
cause did the Devils.

3. That sin is not only the occasion of much good, but a proper cause, and as
such is decreed, willed and caused by God.

4. That God made a Covenant with Adam, that if he sinned, all that came of him
should be reputed sinners, farther than they were really seminally in him, and
by natural in-being and derivation were partakers of his guilt, and
corruptions; and so that God made them sinners by his arbitrary imputation,
when naturally they were not so.

5. That Original sin necessitateth every sin of omission or act which ever
after follows in the world.

6. That sin being a mere privation, all are by nature deprived of all moral
good, and so all are equally evil, and as bad as those in hell, notwithstanding
any thing that the Redeemer has done to prevent it.

7. That infants have no Original sin; no guilt of Adams sin, and no sinful
pravity of nature.

8. That Infants have no participation of guilt of any nearer parents sin, but
Adams only, and God does not inflict any punishment on children for their
fathers sin, because of their derived guilt by nature.

9. That therefore Infants have no need of a Savior to suffer for their sin,
nor of a pardon.

10. That Infants need not the Holy Ghost to sanctify them, by killing any
sinful pravity or inclination in them.

11. That sin was not the cause of death.

12. That sin deserves not hell, or an everlasting punishment.

IX. Of Redemption and the Covenant of grace made to Adam and Noah.

1. That God made no promise, Covenant or gift of grace to Adam after his fall.

2. That God made the Covenant of grace only to Adam and the elect, and not to
all mankind in him, no not as it is a Conditional Covenant.

3. That all except the elect, or most or many at least are still under that
first Covenant of Innocence made with Adam, as prescribing to them and
requiring of them sinless innocence or perfection as the only condition of
their salvation; As if God still said to sinners, I will save you if you are
not sinners.

4. That the Covenant of Grace was made only to and with Christ, and no other.

5. That there was and is an eternal Covenant of Redemption made between God
the Father and the Son, which is neither Gods Essence, a Divine Person or
Decree, but a proper Covenant.

6. That God gave no grace, pardon or salvation by Covenant, till Christ's
incarnation.

7. That the same faith objectively considered, was necessary to salvation
under the first edition of the Covenant of grace as under the last, viz. to
believe that Jesus the son of Mary is or must be the Messiah, and that he must
die for sin, and rise again and intercede in heaven, and return to raise us and
judge the world.

8. That Christ's Disciples were not in a state of justification till they
believed all this.

9. That all men shall not be judged as they believed and kept (or brake) the
condition of the Covenant in that edition which they were under, but all
according to the tenor of the last edition.

10. That no faith in God as gracious and merciful to sinners, and as pardoning
sin, was necessary before Christ's incarnation.

11. That God before did pardon sin without any respect to the future
sacrifice, and merit of Christ as man's Redeemer.

12. That no souls were glorified or received to heaven and happiness, till
Christ's resurrection, but reserved in some Limbus till then.

X. Of the Covenant made with Abraham, and Moses Law, and the Israelites.

1. That Abraham was the first true Believer, or the first to whom a promise or
Covenant of Grace was made.

2. That the Covenant of Grace was made to no other people in the world, but
the Israelites were Gods whole visible Church on earth, and did not only add to
them a Covenant of peculiarity.

3. That this promise to Abraham and his seed in whom all Nations of the Earth
should be blessed, extended no way to the believing Gentiles.

4. That all Heathens children that were circumcised were certainly saved, if
they died before actual sin.

5. That Moses Law bound men to no spiritual duty, nor promised any future
reward or happiness after this life.

6. That Moses Law was given by an evil God or evil Angel.

7. That Moses Law was the same as the Law or Covenant of perfect innocence
first made for Adam.

8. That all the world was bound to keep Moses Law as such even the judicial
and ritual parts of it.

9. That under that Law God gave no grace to obey him.

10. That the converted Jews are still bound to keep Moses Law.

11. Yea and all converted Gentiles now:

12. That we are bound to form our Church government according to the Mosaical
or Jewish.

XI. Of Redemption by Christ incarnate; and the Gospel or last edition of the
Covenant of Grace.

1. That Christ brought no more Grace than was as ordinarily given before his
incarnation.

2. That he was habitually or actually a sinner, guilty of original or actual
sin.

3. That Christ was properly reputed a sinner by God, or a proper sinner by
imputation, in that he took our sin to be his own, or God took him to be guilty
of the fault of all our sin; and not only one that undertook to bear the
punishment deserved.

4. That Christ was as guilty of our sin as we were of Adams.

5. That Christ was habitually or actually holy, and fulfilled all
righteousness in the Legal person of every elect person, or of every true
believer, so that the Law therefore judges them to have been what Christ was,
or done what Christ did therein, they doing it in him.

6. That Christ was not a satisfying sacrifice for sin.

7. That Christ's satisfaction and merit were not sufficient for their proper
use and effect, without our satisfaction and merit to make up their defect.

8. That Christ was not the Savior of the world, or that God did not so love
the world as to give his only son, that who ever believes in him should not
perish but have everlasting life. Or that God has made no such promise or
grant to all to whom the Gospel comes, that if they repent and believe in
Christ they shall be pardoned and saved: or that this conditional universal
pardon was no fruit of Christ's death.

9. That none but the elect have any mercy purchased by the death of Christ,
nor are bound to be thankful to him for any such.

10. That Christ suffered the same pains of hell, hatred of God, and torment of
Conscience, which all the elect should else have suffered.

11. That Christ's Righteousness and sacrifice are not the true meritorious
cause of our righteousness, pardon, justification and salvation.

12. That Christ must be often really sacrificed.

13. That Christ at his last supper did make the bread and wine become his real
body, then living; and that it was broken and his blood shed by himself really
before he was crucified by the Jews.

14. That Christ felt no real pain (as St. Hilary Pic^av. ill said).

15. That Christ died not but another in his shape.

16. That Christ took not his body into Heaven.

17. That all power is not given to Christ, nor are Kings and Magistrates his
Ministers, nor hold their power by him.

18. That Christ is no Lawgiver, and made no Law.

19. That he is not our sufficient intercessor with God, by whom we may have
access and acceptance.

20. That Christ sends not forth his spirit to be his agent and witness to
the end of the world, in sanctifying his elect.

XII. Of Faith, Repentance and sanctification.

1. That Faith, repentance, holiness and obedience are not necessary in us to
our salvation, because Christ was righteous for us, and repented and believed
in our stead.

2. That believers are under no Law of God.

3. That he may be pardoned and saved who forbeareth only the outward Acts of
sin through mere fear, and is absolved by a Priest, though he love sin better
than holiness, and had rather keep it than leave it.

4. That loving others, and doing them good and no harm is all the Love of God
and Holiness that is necessary to salvation.

5. That Faith and Repentance are of nature or by mere natural power and
free will, and not the gift of grace through Christ.

6. That God gives grace equally to all till good improvers make a difference.

7. That men may be holy in the restored Image of God without the grace of the
Holy Ghost.

8. That men need not the Spirit of God to help them to pray or preach.

9. That the sins of sanctified persons, are not judged by God to be theirs;
and that he sees them not and hates them not, nor punishes them with any
correcting punishment.

10. That they that have the spirit need not study for matter, method, words or
affection.

11. That they are perfect, or their duties perfect who have the spirit,
because all the spirits works are perfect.

12. That the day of grace may be so past with some, as that sincere faith, and
repentance, and a changed will that loves holiness, and consents to the
Covenant of grace, may be rejected of God, and unavailable to salvation.

XIII. Of Justification and pardon.

1. That God forgiveth the deserved punishment of no sin, but requires it of
the sinner himself, and Remission is only the destroying of sinful dispositions
and preventing future sin, and not forgiving the punishment of what is past, or
will be.

2. That Christ's sacrifice and righteousness is not the meritorious cause of
our pardon, Justification, adoption and Salvation.

3. That Christ is not the Lord our righteousness, or made of God to us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; nor we made the
Righteousness of God in him: or that it is not the Righteousness of God by
faith in Jesus Christ, which justifies us.

4. That Christ suffered for his own sin, being either actually a sinner, or
our sins made properly his own sin, (in the guilt of culpability, and not only
of punishment) before he suffered for them. And so that he was by real
imputation or Divine reputation, the greatest Atheist, infidel, malignant,
murderer, adulterer, etc. in the world, these sins being in their forms, or
culpable guilt translated from all the elect on him.

5. That all the elect were justified from eternity, or before they were born,
or while they were no true believers, by that justification which the Scripture
means when it says we are justified by faith.

6. That the elect are justified by the Law of innocence made to Adam, or the
Law of works made to and by Moses to the Jews; because they were Legally in
Christ fulfilling them, and did perfectly fulfill them in him.

7. That the sense of the Law of innocence was, [Thou or Christ for thee shall
be innocent and obey perfectly to the end, or die].

8. That the Gospel Covenant or Donation is not Gods justifying instrument,
gift or Law.

9. That God reputeth us to have been perfectly innocent from our birth to our
death (or at least since our believing) because we were so Legally in Christ,
and yet reputeth us such sinners as need a Savior, and Christ suffered for our
sins, though we were so innocent.

10. That the elect have no need of pardon at all, because they are perfectly
obedient by imputation.

11. That at least we need no pardon of any sin committed since we believed,
save only of temporal correction.

12. That pardon and justification actually remit all sin at once that is yet
to come, (and is yet no sin) as well as that which is past and present*

13. That pardon and justification are perfect as soon as we believe.

14. That therefore no true penalty, no not corrective is inflicted or
remains after our first faith.

15. Therefore to such none of their wants of grace or Communion with God, nor
permitted sin, nor suffering nor death, are any true punishments for sin, for
the demonstration of paternal justice.

16. That therefore no believer must pray for the pardon of sin (it being
perfected already) nor seek for it of Christ by faith.

17. That therefore there is no further condition or means to be used by us for
pardon of new sins, or for fuller pardon.

18. Therefore there is no other or perfecter justification at the last
judgment.

19. That faith is not imputed to us for Righteousness.

20. That against the false accusations [that we were impenitent, infidels,
ungodly, hypocrites] we need no personal Repentance, faith, piety or sincerity,
to justify us as the righteousness contrary to this accusation, but only the
imputed righteousness performed personally by Christ himself.

21. That we shall not be judged according to our works, nor in any respect
justified before God by our works, nor is St. James so to be understood, nor
Christ that says, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. Mat. 12.

22. That men are justified by the works of the Law of Moses or of innocence,
or some other works, which must be joined to the righteousness of Christ, to
make it sufficient to its proper part or office; and are not only subordinate
thereto.

23. That we are justified by faith, only in our Consciences; as knowing that
we are otherwise justified before God.

24. That we are justified only by inherent righteousness; and that pardon of
sin and acceptance for Christ's merits and mediation, is none of our
justification at all.

25. That a man unjustified must believe that he is justified, that thereby he
may be justified (taking justification in the same sense).

26. That God does not make men just before he sentenceth them just.

27. That Christ justifies only by his Priestly Office and not by his judicial
sentence.

28. That we are justified by no act of faith, but only by the act of resting
on (or also accepting) Christ's imputed justifying righteousness.

29. That being perfectly justified by the first act of faith, we are never
after justified as to continuation, by any act after that first instant.

30. That to expect justification by believing in God the Father, or the Holy
Ghost, and in Christ as Christ, in his person and whole office of a savior,
and not only by the foresaid single act, is to seek justification by works,
reprehended by Paul, or unlawfully.

31. That faith or repentance are not by Gods gift or promise made any
conditions necessary to be done by us, through his grace, that we may have
right to Christ or pardon or justification.

32. That our believing in Christ is of equal impossibility to us as our
personal perfect innocence.

33. That to believe Heaven, and that God will glorify us for the sake of
Christ, and as a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, is no act of that
faith which justifies; as a Condition of justification or salvation.

34. That it is all men's duty to believe that they are elect.

35. That justifying faith is only a full assurance that we are elect.

36. That true faith is inconsistent with doubting or imperfection.

37. That it is unlawful to trust to any thing in us or done by us as a means
or condition of pardon or salvation, though but subordinate to Christ.

38. That no mere deathbed faith or repentance is accepted to salvation or
pardon, because good works are part of the condition.

39. That there is no degree of pardon given by God to any but the elect that
are saved.

40. That all praise that is ascribed to any thing in our selves or done by us,
or to any subordinate act of man, as a means to our salvation or final
justification, is a dishonor to God and our Savior, and derogateth from his
glory.

XIV. Of Baptism.

1. That Baptism was instituted only for the first times, or for reception of
Infidel countries when converted, and not for to be continued in Christian
Countries and Churches.

2. That outward Baptism by water will save the adult that have not true
Repentance, and faith and sincere consent to the baptismal Covenant.

3. That all the children of Infidels, Heathens, Heretics or wicked men are
certainly saved, if they be baptized and have Godfathers professing
Christianity (though those Godfathers be wicked hypocrites, and take not the
infants by adoption or otherwise as their own, nor really intend to educate
them as they promise) and if they die before they actually sin; and that this
is certain by the word of God.

4. That all the baptized are delivered from all culpable pravity of soul, or
inherent sin.

5. That it is certain that all baptized Infants of what parents soever, have
special grace infused into their souls by the Holy Ghost in Baptism.

6. That baptism entering all into the Catholic Church, obliges all the
baptized to the Bishop of Rome as the supreme head or pastor.

7. That the Infants of believers dedicated to God are holy only as legitimate
and not bastards, but are not as a holy seed under promise to be entered into
the Church and Covenant of God by baptism; but all baptized in Infancy must be
taken as no visible Christians till they are rebaptized.

8. That none that sin grossly after baptism, are upon their repentance to be
received into the communion of the Church.

9. That it is not necessary to baptism of the adult that they make any
covenant, promise or vow to God, nor to the baptism of Infants that Parents or
Proparents devote them to Christ by entering them into an obliging Vow or
Covenant.

10. That Baptism was not instituted to invest the baptized in his right to
pardon and life, but only to enter him into the visible Church, where as a
disciple he may learn how to come to such right and pardon hereafter.

11. That the adult duly baptized have no right to the Communion of the
Church, though they profess to continue their Covenant-consent, and none
disprove the truth of their profession, unless they have some higher
qualification and title.

XV. Of the Lords Supper.

1. That the Lords Supper is but an ordinance for young or carnal Christians;
but they that have the Spirit must live without it, as being above outward
signs and ordinances: And so of the Lords Day.

2. That the Bread broken and Wine poured out to be eaten and drunk, are not
the representative Sacramental body and blood of Christ delivering us the real
benefits of his sacrifice, to be received by faith.

3. That after the words of Consecration duly uttered, there remains no true
substance of bread or wine, but all is turned into the very body and blood of
Christ.

4. That the wine may justly be denied the Laity, and they be required to
communicate by receiving only the bread consecrated; or the body of Christ, as
they call it, without the other half of the Sacrament.

5. That Christ's flesh and blood is really and properly sacrificed by the
Priest.

6. That ordinarily the Priest is to partake alone and the people only to be
Spectators.

7. That the consecrated host being Christ's body is to be adored as very God.

8. That this sacrifice is to be offered by the Priest for the living and the
dead, and to ease the pains of Purgatory.

9. That God himself here deceives the soundest senses of all men, making that
to be no bread or wine which their senses and intellects of things as sensate,
apprehend as such.

10. That it is heresy and deserves extermination or death to deny these
things of the Sacrament, and to believe our senses that there remains true
bread and wine after Consecration.

11. That unbelievers and wicked men in the Eucharist, truly eat the real body
of Christ.

12. That the bare receiving of the Sacrament, though without true faith and
repentance, will procure pardon of sin from God, and Salvation.

XVI. Of the Church.

1. That the Church of Christ, as visible, is lost or ceased, or has been lost
since the Apostles days, so that there was a time when Christ had no visible
subjects and disciples.

2. That the Church differs from Heathens and Infidels only in opinion, and
not in real holiness.

3. That only the Clergy or Rulers are the Church of Christ.

4. That Christ has instituted a vicarious visible Head of all the world, or
of all the Church on earth, under himself, to whom all Christians must be
subject, as their chief Pastor.

5. That this Head, or universal Church Monarch is the Bishop of Rome: or else
a general Council.

6. That this Head or chief Ruler (Pope, Council or both) has universal
Legislative power, to make Laws obliging the whole world, or the whole Church.

7. That this Head is made the judge to all Christians, what shall be taken for
articles of faith, and what for heresy; and all are bound to believe such
judgment, or at least to acquiesce in submission to it.

8. That no one is bound to believe the Scripture or the Christian Verity, but
for or upon the proposal of the Pope, Council or both.

9. That such judgment and proposal is certain and infallible.

10. That this Church and its authority must be believed to be given by Christ,
before men can believe in Christ himself.

11. That this Pope, Council or both have power from Christ to excommunicate
such as deserve excommunication throughout all the world, and to judge who
deserve it.

12. That the Pope has power to call general Councils out of all Christian
Churches or nations on earth and to preside in them, and to approve or reject
and invalidate their decrees.

13. That all Churches are bound to send Bishops or Delegates to ^uch Councils,
if required by the Pope.

14. That a General Council approved by the Pope is infallible in all points of
faith; else not.

15. That the Pope, or Council, or both may judge all Christian Kings, and
depose such as they judge deserve it, and give their Countries to others, and
disoblige their subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance.

16. That they may interdict Gods worship to whole Countries and Kingdoms, and
the Clergy must obey such interdicts.

17. That whom they or the Clergy judge heretics, all are bound to avoid as
heretics, be they never so falsely judged such.

18. That at least in ordine ad spiritualia the Pope has power over Princes
and their Crowns.

19. That the Clergy owe not obedience to Princes, nor may be judged by them.

20. That the universal Church can have no error in any point which God has
revealed in his word.

21. That the universal Church has erred, or may err in points essential to
Christianity, or absolutely necessary to Salvation; (and so become no Church,
and Christ no King or Head of it.)

22. That no one is a member of the universal Church, who is not a member of
some particular Church.

23. That none are in the universal Church who are not the subjects of Diocesan
Bishops.

24. That a man not baptized by one that has Ordination from a Diocesan
Bishop, is no member of the universal Church.

25. That a member of the visible Church cannot be certainly known, because it
cannot be known what is essential to a Christian, seeing it depends on the
sufficiency of the proposal of truths, which cannot be known of many or most.

XVII. Of Gods worship, preaching and Ministers, and his day.

1. That there are more Gods than one, and several Countries may worship their
several Gods.

2. That if we keep our hearts to God, we may bow down before Images as
Idolaters do.

3. That it is not necessary that we actually love God above once a year, or
once a month, or week at most.

4. That if we fear Gods wrath, and love one another, we may be saved without
any other love to God.

5. That no higher Love to God is necessary, than to love him for our selves
and others, as a Benefactor and means to the Creatures good.

6. That Gods word is not to be trusted as infallibly true.

7. That because God will be spiritually worshipped, outward bodily worship is
not necessary to spiritual persons.

8. That he that loves, trusts and serves God so, as yet he loves,
trusts and serves the flesh and the world and sinful pleasure more
prevalently, may yet be saved without more.

9. That outward worship without inward love and holiness may serve to
Salvation.

10. That we may give Divine worship to Angels, or glorified souls, or to the
Cross or Images.

11. That if prayer move not or change not Gods will, it is needless to use
much prayer.

12. That it is lawful to require the people to pray and praise God in an
unknown language, instead of words which they understand, and such prayer and
worship they must prefer or use if the Pope, or Bishops command it.

13. That any man may make himself or become a Pastor or Teacher of the Church
in office, who thinks himself fit, without man's election, or ordination.

14. That none are true Ministers of Christ who are not sent by the Bishop of
Rome, or some authorized by him, or ordained by such.

15. That no Ministers are owned as such by Christ, nor are the Sacraments
administered by them valid, that are not ordained by Diocesans, or by such as
had an ordination themselves by an uninterrupted succession from the Apostles
down by Diocesan Bishops; (or a Canonical succession.)

16. That all Ministers ought to cease preaching the Gospel, and all Churches
or persons public worshipping God, who are forbidden by the Pope (as some say)
or by Bishops (as others say) or by the King or Magistrate (as others).

17. That it is sinful for Presbyters to preach (say some) or to pray (say
others) publicly in any other words, save those that are written down for them
or prescribed, by the authority either of Pope, Council, Bishops or Civil
Magistrates.

18. That it is sinful to instruct the people, or to pray to God or praise him,
in a form of words premeditated, or prescribed by any other, or agreed on in
Councils.

19. That it is sinful to join with any Pastor, who speaks any unlawful
words, in preaching, prayer or other ministration.

20. That it is unlawful to hold Communion with any Church, where scandalous
sinners are present, or are tolerated members.

21. That men may lawfully change the essential or integral parts of Gods
commanded worship, by diminution, or additions of the like.

22. That spiritual men are not bound to be members of particular Churches, or
put themselves under the guidance of any Pastors.

23. That all the people are bound to believe all that to be Gods word which
the Bishop, or Priests tell them is so.

24. That the people are bound to do in Gods worship whatever Bishops (or other
Rulers) command them, without examining and judging whether it be agreeable to
the Law of God.

25. That Pope, Bishops or Priests can forgive sin even as to the punishment in
another life, by immediate pardoning power in themselves, and not only by
preparing men for pardon, and offering and declaring it, and delivering it
ministerially by application from Gods word, and in order hereto judging who
are capable of Consolatory and Sacramental applications.

26. That God pardons in heaven all that the Priest pardons on earth,
though erroneously and by mistake.

27. That God will condemn to hell, all that an erring or malicious Pope,
Bishop or Priest condemns.

28. That it is lawful to separate from and disown Communion with all parties
of Christians differing in things not necessary to Gods acceptance, except that
one party which we judge to be rightest or allowed by the higher powers.

29. That the first day of the week was not separated to Divine worship in
commemoration of Christ's resurrection, by the Spirit of Christ in his Apostles,
or is not to be observed to that holy use, any more than any other day.

30. That it is lawful to swear unnecessarily, and to use Gods name lightly and
vainly in our talk.

31. That perjury is lawful for our safety, or in obedience to man.

32. That Popes, Councils or Bishops can dissolve the obligations of our Vows
to God, or Oaths of fidelity to Princes, though the matter be lawful and good,
and otherwise God dissolve them not.

33. That all Oaths and Vows are to be interpreted as not binding us longer
than it is for our commodity or safety.

34. That we may take Oaths imposed in words whose common sense is false or
sinful though not otherwise expounded by the imposer, because in charity we
must suppose always that our Rulers mean nothing against Gods word, or their
own, or the peoples good.

35. That it is unlawful to break any Vow or Oath which was unlawfully imposed
on us by man, or unlawfully taken by our selves, though the matter of it be
good or lawful.

36. That no Vow binds us to that which we were bound to before.

That all Vowing is sinful; and all swearing when lawfully called, for the
attesting truth and ending strife.

XVIII. Of our duty to our Rulers and Pastors, and their duty.

1. That Christianity so nullifieth all natural and civil relations or
obligations, that Children, subjects and servants owe nothing to Parents,
Rulers or Masters, but what they are bound to in mere justice and gratitude to
them as benefactors, or by voluntary consent and promise.

2. That Parents owe nothing for their children but bodily provision, and not
to educate them in Godly and Christian doctrine and practice.

3. That Princes may seek their own pleasure and wealth against the common
good, or above it.

4. That they may lawfully make war upon neighbor Countries, only to enlarge
their power or dominions, or satisfy their pride, passion or wills.

5. That they, or Bishops, may fine, imprison, banish or put to death all
Subjects that are not of their religion, or may compel all to those ways of
worshipping God, which they shall judge best, be they right or wrong.

6. That Gods Laws are not obligatory to Kings and Kingdoms.

7. That Princes or people may prefer their worldly interest before the
interest of Religion, Souls and God; or may set them in opposition against it.

8. That Princes must imprison, or otherwise punish such as are excommunicated
and not absolved by the Clergy, without knowing whether the cause be just or
unjust, by their own exploration.

9. That Princes may break Oaths and Covenants when their interest requires it.

10. That subjects have no liberty or propriety in any thing, either life,
wives, children, or estates, but what is at the mere will of Princes to dispose
of as they please.

11. That it is lawful for subjects to disobey the authority and commands of
the higher powers, because Christ has freed us from subjection to men.

12. That all Governing authority is originally in the people and by them given
to Rulers on what terms they please.

13. That therefore the people may depose any Princes where they see cause, or
may call them to their bar and judge and punish them, having themselves the
highest governing power.

14. That if Princes injure the people, the people may therefore rebel, take
arms against them, and depose them.

15. Contrarily that no people may defend their lives, houses or posterity, nor
the chastity of their wives, by resisting any Tyrants, or against the will of
Rulers, that have no true authority to destroy them.

16. That subjects may break their oaths of allegiance, whenever their own
worldly ends require it, or if the Pope disoblige them.

17. That if one King wrong another, the wronged King may destroy all the
others innocent subjects.

18. That no war is lawful.

19. That it is lawful to defame and dishonor Princes if they are sinners,
though the contempt tend to disable them from necessary government.

20. That none but sanctified persons have true Governing power or dominion.

21. That children are bound to obey their parents, subjects their Princes, and
servants their Masters, in nothing but what they think is wisely or justly
commanded them, though it be good or lawful in it self.

22. That Parents may not teach children forms of Catechism or prayer; nor
command them any duty which the child will but say is against his Conscience,
nor restrain him from any sin which he pleads Conscience for.

23. That Christian Parents in want may ^ell their Children for slaves to
Idolaters or Infidels, for supply.

24. That Children may disobey their parents in any matters of Religion, if the
Pope, Bishop or Priest so command them.

XIX. Of Duties to our equals or neighbors as such.

1. That no man is bound to love another but for his own sake, and so far as he
is beneficial to him.

2. That we are not bound to do another a greater good to the least hurt to our
selves.

3. That men are not bound to love and prefer the common good of multitudes,
of their Country, or the world, before their own commodities or lives.

4. That no killing of malefactors is lawful by laws and judgment.

5. That it is lawful to kill our enemies, for mere private revenge, or to
prevent some evil to our selves, though they are innocent.

6. That it is lawful to have many wives at once.

7. That it is lawful to put away wives, or for wives to depart, whenever their
fleshly or worldly interest seems to require it.

8. That it is lawful to commit adultery, at least by the husband or wives
consent.

9. That fornication is no sin, or no great sin.

10. That it is lawful when our need does urge us, to rob, steal, defraud or
oppress others.

11. That restitution or reparation is no duty.

12. That it is no sin to deceive another by borrowing when we are unable and
unlikely to repay, and do conceal this.

13. That it is not a duty for them that are able, to labor in some lawful
useful calling, for their own maintenance and the common good.

14. That it is lawful to lie for our commodity when it hurts not others.

15. That it is lawful by backbiting, slandering and false witness to disgrace
our enemies, or be revenged on them.

16. That it is lawful for Judges knowingly or rashly to pass unjust judgment
against the innocent or just, and for advocates or others to promote it.

17. That it is lawful for the poor to covet other men's goods, and for men to
desire and endeavor to draw from others whatever seems desirable or needful
to our selves.

18. That it is no sin to love the world, flesh and life, better than God,
Christ, grace and glory.

19. That it is no sin to be discontent and impatient in our sufferings, nor a
duty to deny our fleshly pleasure, profit or reputation, and life, for God and
for spiritual and everlasting benefits.

20. That it is no duty to love our enemies, forgive wrongs, and forbear each
other in their infirmities and provocations.

XX. Of Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell.

1. That the souls of believers go not to Christ and happiness, nor the souls
of the wicked to misery before the Resurrection of the body at the last
judgment.

2. That there is no Resurrection of the body; at least of the wicked or of
Infants.

3. That Christ will not come in glory to judge the world.

4. That we shall not be judged according to what we have done in the body.

5. That the faithful shall not be justified and judged to life everlasting.

6. That the wicked shall not be condemned to hell, or everlasting punishment
with the Devils; but without holiness men may see God and be saved.

7. That no man can know that he has certain right to Salvation.

8. That there is a fire of Purgatory where those that after shall be saved
must make penal satisfaction for some of their sins, and from which the Popes
pardons, and masses and other men's merits may deliver souls.

9. That the justified shall not live in Glory with God and Jesus Christ and
the Angels and the triumphant Church.

10. That there is an aereal life of trial before the final judgment, where
the justified and wicked souls shall again live under conditions of yet winning
or losing their heavenly glory.

11. That the Devils and damned shall all be delivered at last, and either be
saved, or have another life of trial. And the Glory of the blessed also will
have an end, and they must by revolution be tried in flesh here again.

12. That it is not a duty to seek first the Kingdom of God and its
righteousness and lay up a treasure in heaven, and there have our hearts and
conversations; and thence to fetch our motives and our chiefest hopes and
comforts, under all the sufferings of this transitory life, and the expectation
of our certain change.

THis or such a Catalogue of dangerous doctrines is not to be renounced by
Ministers, but to lie before the Church Rulers to tell them what to forbid
Ministers to preach, and moderately and wisely to rebuke or restrain the
offenders as wisdom shall direct them, according to the quality of the persons
and the offense, and their frequency, obstinacy, or impenitency in offending.
Not that every one should be ejected or silenced that holds or preaches any
one such error; but only those who consideratis considerandis, are found to do
more harm than good.

The Third Part OF SCHISM: OR The False Dividing Terms and Means OF UNITY and
PEACE.
CHAP. I.
What Schism is, and what are its Causes and Effects.

Sect. I. SCHISM (or Divisions among Christians) is by the Common Confession of
all Christians a sin against God, and a dishonor, and hurt, and danger to the
Church, but especially to the guilty: But what it is, and who are the guilty,
men are not so much agreed on: Each Party laying it upon the other, and one
taking that for Damnable Schism, which another takes for his greatest Duty:
And while the guilty are no better known, the Division is continued, and few
repent.

Sect. II. SCHISM or Division (or Rents) among Christians is considerable.

I. As to the Agents, when it is by 1. Many. 2. Few. 1. The Pastors or Rulers,
2. The People; either 1. The Learned. 2. The Ignorant.


II. The Terminus; as it is dividing 1. In a Church, and not from it 1. From
their Government 1. Of one 2. Of More 1. Few 2. Many 1. Sound. 2. Unsound.
3. From the Universal Church.

2. Communion
2. From a Church
III. The Act: As 1. In kind 2. In degree, which both are either 1. Inward 1.
Of Mind 1. Dividing Opinions 1. Of Doctrines 1. Of Faith 2. Practice 1.
Worship. 2. Conversation.

2. Of Persons, by consent.
2. Ignorance of necessary means of Unity.
2. Of will and passion 1. Wrath and uncharitableness 1. To things. 2. Persons.
2. Love to 1. Division 2. Dividers


2. Outward, by 1. Words 1. Of Persons 1. Single 1. Rulers 2. People
2. Collective: the Church
2. Things of 1. Doctrine 2. Practice 1. Toward God 2. Toward Men


2. Deeds 1. Separating 1. Morally by merit 2. Actually
2. Promoting Schism 1. Drawing Others 2. Resisting 1. Uniting Persons 2.
Uniting Means Doctrine Acts






IV. The Effects 1. On Christians 1. Single 1. The Dividers 2. Others, viz. 1.
Pastors 2. People 1. Weak 2. Strong


2. Collective 1. That Church 2. Other Churches 1. Church 2. State 3. Families


2. On those without 1. Unbelievers. 2. Enemies.


All these things should here distinctly be considered.

A large Scheme of the Causes, Nature and Effects of Schism and Contentions,
with the Remedies, etc. I have prefixed to my Book called. Catholic Theology.

Sect. III. Of all the sins that men charge on one another, there is none used
by Accusers more partially, and less regardably, than the charge of Heresy and
Schism; the words usually signifying no more but that the accused differ in
judgment from the accusers, and are not so obedient to them in matters of
Religion as they expect: Insomuch that whoever can but get uppermost, or get
the major Vote, does usually make it his advantage to call himself Orthodox and
Catholic, and all Dissenters Heretics and Schismatics. By which means
Heresy and Schism are greatly promoted, while many that else would hate and
oppose them, are tempted by this usage, to take the words to be but proud men's
reproach of the innocent.

Sect. IV. The full opening of all the parts of Schism, will be a work so long
as may tire the Reader: I will therefore first give some notice of them
transiently and briefly, and then examine some things that are by others
supposed to be the Causes, and show how incapable diverse means are of being
terms of real Union and Concord, which some men venditate as the only or
necessary terms.

Sect. V. 1. A Schism made by Many, is in some repects worse than by Few, and
in some not all so bad. The sins of many has more guilt than of one: Their ill
success is like to be greater: Those will fall in with the multitude, who would
despise a singular tempter. The Donatists prevailed in Africa by their number:
It seems by their Bishops in their Councils, that they were the greater part:
It is not impossible for the far greater number to be the Schismatics. But yet
the guilt of singularity is more upon a single Separatist, or few, that dare
separate from the whole, or most of the Churches.

Sect. VI. 2. The Bishops and Pastors are liable to the sin of Schism, as well
as the ignorant people: Yea, as Mutinies seldom happen in an Army, at least to
any great danger, unless they be headed by some Commander; so seldom has there
been any Heresy or Schism in the Church, of which some Bishops have not been
the Leaders, or Chief Promoters, since Bishops were great in the world at
least; and before, they, or some Elders were the Chief.

To instance in Paulus Samosit. Apollinarius, Novatus and his followers,
Maximinus, and the Donatists, Nestorius, Dioscorus, Severus, and the multitudes
more, which Church History mentions, and which made up the Councils at Ephesians.
2. Arrinene, Sinnium, Milan, diverse at Constantinople, Alexandria, and
multitudes more, would be but to suppose my Reader a stranger to such History,
which here I must not do; for then I cannot expect that he should take my word.

Sect. VII. It is a far greater sin in Bishops and Pastors to be Schismatics,
than in the People, because they are supposed to know more the Good of Concord,
and the Means, and the Mischiefs of Schism, and the Causes and Remedies: And it
is their Office to be the Preachers of Unity and Peace, and to save the People
from the temptations which would draw them into such guilt.

Sect. VIII. Bishops and Pastors have greater temptations to Schism than the
People, and therefore have been so frequent in the guilt: especially Pride and
Covetousness in them has stronger Faith. And 1. Striving who shall be
Greatest, and have Rule; 2. Who shall be thought Wisest and most Orthodox, have
been the cause of most of the Schisms in the world: And 3. Sometimes,
(especially with the Presbyters and People) it has been who shall be thought
the Best and Holiest persons: But the two former have done much more than this,
Goodness being that which corrupt nature does not so much contend for, or the
reputation of Holiness, as for Greatness and Wisdom, the commoner baits of
Pride. Therefore Controversies, and Power, and Riches, have been the usual
matters of Dissension.

Sect. IX. 3. True Learning tends to prevent and end Controversies, which
Ignorance cherishes (as it did with the Egyptian Monks, that turned
Anthropomorphites.) But a smattering in Learning, which amounts not to
solidity, and a settled mind, is the common cause of Heresies and Schism, while
praters must needs be taken for wise, and to know more than others, while they
know nothing as they ought to know.

Sect. X. 4. Yet when the very Matter of a dividing Heresy is laid upon much
Learning, or subtle Notions, or any words or things very hard to be understood,
it seldom spreads far, and lives long: Because it must cost men dear to
understand it; and humane nature is slothful, and multitudes will not be at
long and hard study to know what is right or wrong: Therefore such as the Rosy
Crucians, Behmens, etc. do but little harm.

Sect. XI. 5. It is not only separating from the Church, but causing divisions
and contentions in a Church, which in Scripture is reproved as sinful Schism:
And indeed this is the commonest acception of the word, as may be seen, Romans
16. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 3. 3. and 11. 18. Matthew. 12. 25. Luke 12. 52, 53. 2
Cor. 12. 25. They that by ill Doctrine, or abuse of each other; or causless
quarrels, do disturb the Churches Peace, and cause disaffection, murmurings,
and unbrotherly distance, are guilty of Schism, though they separate not.

Sect. XII. 6. Separating from a Church is sometimes a greater, and sometime a
less fault than dividing in a Church, and sometime no fault, but a duty: It is
a greater fault 1. When the Church is by the Separater falsely accused of
greater crimes; 2. And when it tends to greater hurt. It is a less fault when
a man removes from one Church to another, though causelessly, yet with less
accusation of that Church, and less detriment to the common Cause. It is no
fault when there is just cause, and it is done in a just manner.

Sect. XIII. 7. Separating from the Universal Church (which is the Universality
of Christians as Headed by Christ) is separating from Christ, and ever
damnable, and is Apostasy.

Sect. XIV. But to separate from some Accident or Integral part of the Church
Universal, is not to separate from the Church: To differ from Christians in any
thing essential to Christianity, is to apostatize, or separate from the whole
Church, and so it is (a materia) to renounce the universality of Christians:
But to differ from the whole Church in some accident or integral, is not to
separate from it.

Sect. XV. To separate from any one Church, upon a reason common to all, is so
far to separate from all; And upon a reason that is against the essence of all,
it is to separate from all as Churches.

Sect. XVI. To separate from any Church by denial of some one essential part of
Christianity, though all the rest be confessed, is Heresy in the strict sense,
and Apostasy in a larger sense: and to deny all Christanity, is Apostasy in
the strict sense: But the ancient Christians called it Heresy, when men
separated into distinct opposing Bodies as parties, from the generality of
Christians, for the cherishing of any dangerous error.

Sect. XVII. It is lawful to separate from particular Churches in all the
degrees and Cases following. 1. It is lawful to abate our esteem of any Church
or Pastor, as they are less worthy, or more corrupt or culpable, and to value
more the more worthy.

Sect. XVIII. 2. It is lawful to remove ones dwelling from one City or Parish
to another, for the just reasons of our worldly Affairs, and thereby to remove
from other Churches: And it is lawful to do the same for the good of our Souls,
when one Minister is bad, or less fit for our Edification, and one Church more
corrupt and culpable, and others more sound and pure, and their Communion more
conducible to our Salvation.

Sect. XIX. 3. Parish bounds being but humane Institutions for order sake, it
is lawful to be of a Church in a neighbor Parish, instead of ones own Parish
Church, in case we have the allowance of the higher Powers; or without that, in
cases of true necessity, or when consideratis considerandis, the Benefit is
evidently greater than any hurt that it is like to do. For no man has power to
bind me to that which is to the danger or detriment of my Soul, unless (at
least) some greater notorious interest of the Community require it.

If my Parish have an ignorant, unsound Teacher, or a weak, dull, dangerous, or
unprofitable, careless, or scandalous, vicious Pastor, yet tolerable rather
than to have none, or judged tolerable by the Rulers; and the next Parish have
an able, holy, faithful Pastor, by whom I am more abundantly edified; I am not
bound by Man's Commands to trust the conduct of my Soul with the former, or to
deny my self the benefit of the latter, when I cannot remove my dwelling: For
men's power is not to destruction, but to edification; and Order is for the
Thing Ordered, and not against it. My Soul is more Christ's and my own, than the
Rulers. And I am not unthankfully to neglect the helps offered me by Christ (
who ascended to give gifts to men for the edifying of his Body) merely because
a man commands me so to do.

Sect. XX. 4. Even Pope Nicholas and some of the Popish Councils forbad all men
to hear Mass from a fornicating Priest: Protestants should not be less strict:
And it is as lawful to depart from the Parish Priest for being a Drunkard, a
Scorner at Godliness, a Persecutor, an insufficient Guide of Souls, as for
being a Fornicator. And many Councils forbid me hearing Heretics.

Sect. XXI. 5. There is so great difference between Teachers and Teachers that
are tolerable, that some by unsuitableness are to some persons almost equal to
none: some that preach only in high Language fit for learned ears, and withal
never speak to the people singly in any private oversight, do little or no more
good to some of the ignorant, than none: And God uses to work on Souls by
Means, and according to the aptitude of Means: and therefore Heathens that have
no Preachers are unconverted. And men are not to forsake the ordinary helps and
hopes of their Salvation for Parish-Order, or men's Commands: Christ twice sent
the Pharisees to learn the meaning of [ I will have mercy and not sacrifice.]
Souls are better than Ceremonies, as the Redeemer of Souls will judge.

Sect. XXII. 6. Where we cannot join with any Congregation without sin, imposed
on us, by Profession, Subscription, Covenants, Oaths, Declaration, Practice or
Omission, it is a Duty not to join with such.

Sect. XXIII. 7. When the Pastor is an Usurper, and has no true title to that
place, it is no Schism to desert him: By many Canons of Councils, and it
seems to me by Scripture, the Bishop is an Usurper who has not the consent
of his Flock, and of the Ordainers. Much more he that is utterly intolerable by
Insufficiency, Heresy, Tyranny, wickedness or Malignancy against that Piety
which he should promote.

Sect. XXIV. 8. Where one Diocesan Bishop has many hundred Parishes under him,
which have no other Bishop, and so are not taken for Churches but for Chapels
or parts of a Church, (by them that take a Bishop to be a constitutive part of
a Church) there he that goes from his Parish, but not out of the Diocese, nor
separateth from his Diocesan, does not separate from that particular Church, as
they esteem it.

Sect. XXV. 9. If the Temples and Tithes be given to a Priest or Bishop not
lawfully called, nor consented to by the Flocks, and another be lawfully
called, whom the Magistrate casts out of the Temples and Tithes, or denies
them to him, it is the Peoples duty to adhere to the Pastor that is justly
called: And it is not always a duty to adhere to him whom the Magistrate
imposes, nor a sin to withdraw from him. The Churches met against the
Magistrates will above three hundred years.

Sect. XXVI. 10. If a lawful Bishop or Pastor be set over the Flocks, and
either Magistrate or Synod unjustly depose him because he refuses some heresy
or sin, and set up another in his stead, especially, one justly suspected of
unsoundness, the People are not hereby disobliged from their first Pastor; nor
obliged to the latter: But yet if the latter be tolerable, the Magistrates
Countenance may be so great an advantage to the one, and disadvantage to the
other, especially in case of Persecution, as may make it their duty in point of
Prudence for the first Pastor and People to consent to the Change. And the same
is to be said of the abusive deposition by a Synod.

Sect. XXVII. 11. If the Parish Minister be lawfully called, and the Pishop not
so, he that separateth only from the Diocesan and not from that Parish Church,
is not guilty of Schism: The same I say of separating from an unlawful
Archbishop or Metropolitan.

Sect. XXVIII. 12. If the species of the Office, Church-Policie or Form be
unlawful, it is a duty to separate from that species: On which account we
separate from the Papal Church, the species of an Universal Church as Headed by
one Man without Christ's Institution being unlawful; though we separate from no
Material part of Christ's own universal Church, as such, and so related. And as
the Mass Sacrifice seems to be of another species than Christ's Sacrament; so
the Mass-Priest seems to be a new species of Office (and unlawful) The case
of Patriarks and other Church-Offices and Forms of man's invention, is after to
be spoken of.

Sect. XXIX. 8. There is a great deal of difference between the several local
separations of men, according to their several reasons and mutual separations:
No mere local separation without the mental is Schism, or sin. A man can be but
in one place at once, and is locally separate or absent from all Churches in
the World save one.

Sect. XXX. He that separateth from a true Church, accusing it to be no true
Church, caeteris paribus, is of the highest degree of Separation, except that
which is from all, or from many. And he that separateth as falsely accusing the
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or Conversation of the Church to be such as that
a good Christian may not lawfully hold Communion with them therefore, is in the
next degree of Schism: But he that withdraws from one Church only for a
greater convenience or profit, or for purer Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or
Practice in another, is guilty either of no Schism, if he have just cause, or
of little, if he have not just cause; while he no further accuses the Church.

Sect. XXXI. To separate unwarrantably from a pure and sound Church, is a worse
Schism ( caeteris paribus) than to separate from an impure, unsound, maculated
and undisciplined Church. And to separate from many (caeteris paribus) is worse
than from one.

Sect. XXXII. If the Magistrate cast true Pastors and Churches out of his
favor, and out of the Temples and Tithes, and forbid their Meetings, and
persecute them unjustly, it is schismatical in any to call these men
Schismatics, and to deny Communion with them, as holding and calling them
unlawful Conventicks, as long as it is not so. To separate from a prohibited
Church may be Schism, as well as from an allowed one, when it is unjust.

Sect. XXXIII. 9. To separate in mind from the Doctrine of Faith, or in heart
from the Love of Truth, Worship, or Brethren, is dangerous mental Schism in
those that ordinarily assemble with them.

Sect. XXXIV. And all dividing Opinions, and Doctrines, and Practices, tending
to open Schism, are schismatical according to their degree; such are false
accusing thoughts of the Churches Doctrine, the Ministers Preaching, the
Churches Worship, Order or Government, or of the persons of the Pastors or the
People.

Sect. XXXV. 10. Secret ignorance or unbelief of necessary things, is
inconsistent with that internal union that makes the Church Mystical.
Negatives may be Schism as well as Positives.

Sect. XXXVI. 11. It is also internal Schism, when men hate, or love not Gods
Word and Worship, and the Communion of Saints, and the Servants of God, but
love Pleasures, Sin, Deceivers and Dividers better.

Sect. XXXVII. 12. Censuring, reviling, slandering, defaming Rulers, Teachers
or People, or other Churches of Christ, by tongue or writing, in Pulpits or in
common talk, especially by published false Invectives, is Schismatical: Of
which many Controvertists and Disputants are guilty, and many that reproach
oppressed Churches and Persons, are schismatical, in calling others
Schismatics and Heretics.

Sect. XXXVIII. 13. Printing, preaching or publishing Heresies, or any false
dividing doctrines, is in its degree schismatical.

Sect. XXXIX. 14. Making ones self incapable of Communion, and doing that which
deserves Excommunication, is a rending ones self morally and by merit from the
Church.

Sect. XL. 15. Causeless renouncing Communion with true Churches, especially
also setting up Anti-churches unwarrantably against them, is Schism, according
to the degrees before described; yea to hold Churches in other Countries
incapable of Communion, and unjustly condemn them as Heretics, is Schism.

Sect. XLI. 16. The more men draw with them into Schism, the more caeteris
paribus it is aggravated: And the Leaders and zealous Promoters are most guilty.

Sect. XLII. 17. It is aggravated Schism to oppose Reconcilers, or the healing
Doctrines and Practices that are the proper means of unity, and to reproach,
vilify or resist them.

Sect. XLIII. 18. The greatest and commonest Schism is by Dividing Laws and
Canons, which causelessly silence Ministers, scatter Flocks, and Decree the
unjust Excommunication of Christians, and deny Communion to those that yield
not to sinful or unnecessary ill-made terms of Communion: And Persecution, and
Excommunications in the executing of such Laws, are Schism in its virulent
exercise.

Sect. XLIV. 19. It is therefore schismatical to deny necessary toleration of
Dissenters, and Liberty for such to worship God in several places, who by
unavoidable difference of judgment in things tolerable, cannot without
violence to their Consciences meet in the same place.

For instance, suppose the Parish-Churches have the use of Organs, and some
cannot be persuaded but it ^s sin: As the rest will not be deprived of the
Music ^for their sakes, so it is unjust and schismatical that they should be
denied leave to worship God elsewhere without it. So if a Church will cast men
from the Sacrament, because they dare not sit, or stand, or kneel, and will not
allow them otherwise elsewhere to receive it. There is no possibility of
Concord without tolerating some differing persons and Assemblies.

Sect. XLV. 20. The worst Schism being that which is a separation from the
universal Church, it follows, that the most schismatical Church-Tyranny is
that which unjustly excludes men from the universal Churches visible Communion
(for from the spiritual they cannot) such are, 1. The Anabaptists, that
undisciple all Infants: 2. Those that deny Christendom to such as dare not use
or receive the transient Image of the Cross as the engaging dedicating Symbol
of Christianity, or the Children of such whose Parents dare not so present
them, nor yet commit the Covenanting for them to men called Godfathers instead
of themselves. 3. The Seekers, that say, all the Visible Church is lost. 4. But
the greatest Schismatics are the Pope and Papists, who unchurch all the
Christian World save the Sect or Subjects of the Pope. To cut off Christ's
members from his Body Visible, or deny men their place in the universal Church,
is a far heinouser Schism than to cast them out of, or rend them from a
particular Church only. 5. And the same guilt is on them that by unjust
Excommunications pretend to cut men off from the Church universal: especially
by unjust hereticating whole Parties, Countries or Kingdoms, or interdicting
whole Kingdoms Gods public Worship, as the Pope has often done. And
especially, when on such Pretenses they excommunicate Kings, and raise wars
in Kingdoms, and embroil the Christian World in blood.

Sect. XLVI. The greatest Causes of Schisms, I have opened in the foresaid
Scheme, and the Preface to my Cathol. Theology, viz.

I. For Persons, 1. A Contentious Clergy, 2. Unwise and wicked Rulers, 3. The
deceived people.

II. For Qualities, (1) Remotely, 1. Selfishness and Worldliness in Hypocrites:
2. Hasty Judging of things not well understood (the common vice of Mankind.) 3.
Slothfulness in Students. (2) Nearly: 1. Pride, or want of Self-acquaintance:
2. Ignorance and Error: 3. Envy, Malice and Bitterness.

III. The instrumental Engines of Schism are, 1. In General, Corrupt departing
from the Christian Simplicity: 2. Particularly: 1. From Simplicity of Doctrine
by Dogmatists Words and Notions: 2. From Simplicity of Practice by
superstitious Additions: 3. From Simplicity of Discipline by Church-Tyranny and
dividing Laws and Impositions.

Sect. XLVII. The mischievous Effects of Schism I have also there named. 1. The
Corruption of Doctrine by Wranglings. 2. The Corruption of Worship by faction,
partiality and wrath. 3. The Corruption of Discipline by Tyranny or Partiality.
4. Self-deceit by false Zeal: 5. The destruction of Holiness and a heavenly
Conversation. 6. The Destruction of Love, and the life of Wrath, and manifold
injuries. 7. The corrupting and undoing of Civil Rulers, by oppression,
partiality, injustice, persecution, and wars. 8. Exposing the innocent to
slanders, hatred and persecution. 9. Hardening the ignorant, unbelieving and
ungodly to their perdition. 10. Hindering the Success of the Gospel. 11.
Corrupting the Churches, weakening them, shaming them, and strengthening their
enemies, and drawing down Gods Judgments on them. 12. Shaking the Civil peace,
grieving good Rulers, Teachers and People. 13. Cherishing all Vice, and
hindering all men of the comforts and benefits of peaceable Communion with God
and one another. Whoever are guilty of true Schism or Divisions, are guilty of
all these consequent mischiefs in a respective degree.

CHAP. II.
The true Preventions and Remedies of Schism.

Sect. I. TO tell men what should be done for Unity, and Peace, and for
Salvation, is far easier than to bring men to the Practice of it. And as it is
hard to prevail even with one man, for all the Requisites hereto, so if most of
the Christian World were so happy as to be thus qualified, yet as one diseased
part does trouble and endanger the whole body, so the rest of the world by
their badness would keep up common disquietments and troubles; so that it is no
more a perfect Concord, than perfect Knowledge and Holiness, which we can hope
for in this World.

Sect. II. 1. It is presupposed, that Christ the great Peacemaker has done
much (and most) to this work already. He has reconciled us to God; he has
made himself the Center of our Unity: He has given us sound Doctrine to lead
us out of dividing Darkness: He has made us such just and holy Laws, as all
tend to Unity, Love and Peace: He has left us his own perfect and imitable
example: He has prescribed the just terms of our Unity and Peace: He has made
Love, and Meekness, and forbearing, and forgiving, and all healing Principles
and Practices, the Conditions of his Promises, and the great Duties and Marks
of his Disciples: He has disgraced and strictly forbidden all dividing
qualities and actions; all uncharitableness, censuring, wrath, malice, envy,
backbiting, evil-speaking, discord, contention, revenge, etc. He has threatened
to shut out the guilty from his Kingdom: He has instituted Church Discipline
to shut them out of his Church till they repent: He poured out the Spirit of
Love and Concord, miraculously at first on his Disciples, making them of one
heart and mind, even to a voluntary Community of their goods: He prayed that
they all might be One in him: He has appointed his Ministers to preach up
Love, Concord and Peace throughout the world: He has instituted particular
Churches for the exercise of Love, Concord and holy Communion: He gives to all
true Christians the Spirit of Love and Peace, and every one has so much of
these (as a new Nature) as they have of his Spirit and saving Grace. All this
and more has Christ done himself for his Peoples Unity, Love and Peace.

Sect. III. 2. Under Christ the chief Instruments of Concord must be the
faithful Ministers of Christ, whose duty hereto I have before described.
Particularly, 1. They must be men of more eminent knowledge and gifts than the
higher sort of the Flock: or else if the People once perceive that they are
equal to them, they will despise them, and turn Preachers, and set up for
themselves: 2. And then such Ministers being not able to deal with Sectaries
and Heretics, will betray the Cause of God, and the adversaries will carry
away the Hearers: And it will be easy to bring such persons into Contempt, and
then the Truth will suffer with them: God fitteth men to do the work that he
will bless them in: Not that every Congregation must needs have such an eminent
man; for a great Light will shine to other Parishes, and an able man in one
Parish may be ready to help the next, and to confute Gainsayers, and may keep
up the Credit of the Ministry: But it is such that must preserve the Unity and
Concord of Believers, and preserve the Church from Schism.

Sect. IV. 2. And if Ministers do not also live in holiness, justice, charity,
free from fleshly lusts and pleasures, and unspotted of the world, as freer
than other men from a proud, a worldly and a covetous mind, dividers will
despise them, and ignorant people will suspect the Cause for their sakes, and
many unsettled well-meaning persons will fall from them, and turn to them that
they think live a more strict and pious, and humble and charitable life. The
Ministers Life as well as Doctrine is needful to remedy Schism. As men fly from
a Carrion or a stinking place in the house, so will the people from Priests of
a corrupt Conversation.

Sect. V. 3. And it is necessary, 1. That a Preacher be skilled in the
particular Controversies that the Church is in danger of: 2. And that he
skilfully, zealously and frequently preach up the necessity and excellency of
Unity, Love and Peace, and the sin and danger of the contraries: That men may
by right Reason and the Fear of God, be taught to make as much Conscience of
these as they do of other great Duties and Sins, and may not be without
preserving Fear.

Sect. VI. 4. And it is specially necessary, that a Preacher know how to deal
with the Persons as well as with the Cause: and that is not to rail at them,
and render them shameful and odious whom he would win, nor publicly to expose
them to contempt, much less to slander, abuse or oppress them; But with
Evidence managed with meekness, love and tenderness to convince them, and make
them feel that all comes for their own good, from unfeigned Love; as Musculus
won the Anabaptists by feeding and relieving them in Prison, till they sought
to him for instruction, and were disposed to hear it. Nature flies from
hurtful things and persons: Had the Enmity been put at first between the Woman
and the Serpent, Eve had not been so easily seduced. Too many Bishops and
Preachers go about to cure Schism as a man would bring Birds to the Net, or
Fishes to the Bait, by shouting and throwing Stones at them; or as one would
get the swarm of Bees into the Hive by beating them; or as one that would get a
Wife by deriding and railing at her; or as a Physician that would get practice
by mocking his Patients instead of medicining them. Men know better than so,
how to bring an Ox to the Yoke, or a Horse or Dog to hand, or to tame any Bird
or Beast that is wild and frightful. It Is true, that as a Malefactor is hanged
for the good of the Commonwealth rather than his own, so a desperate seducing
Heretic or Divider may be justly rendered as contemptible as he deserves, to
keep others from being deceived by him: But all that we hope to win must be
otherwise used. Reproach and disgrace makes the Medicine so bitter (which
should be sugared) that with one of many it will not go down. Scorn and
reviling is the way to drive them further from us.

Sect. VII. 5. And Ministers Patience with tolerable Dissenters, while they
worship God with some difference from them, in their own Assemblies, is a
necessary prevention of worser Schism. Thus some peaceable Bishops kept peace
and love with the Novatians, when others by contrary means made more Schisms;
(As Epiphanius says Audius by intemperate foolish opposition was driven from
the Church:) What hurt will it do me, to let people hear another Teacher, whom
they prefer before me, and can more profit by? If I am for Organs, for
Images, for Crossing, etc. what hurt is it to let others meet and worship God
without them? But when Preachers have not personal worth to keep up their
Reputation, and then rail at those that do not value them, they do but make
themselves more vile: And when they are so proud, that if people leave them,
and prefer another, they cannot bear it, but think to remedy it by making
odious or vilifying those that undervalue them, they do but as all proud men
do, even cross and more debase themselves, and make that a Schism which was but
a personal neglect.

Sect. VIII. 3. And the Christian Magistrate must be a principal Instrument of
remedying Schism. And very much may he do by wisdom, moderation and right
means, which I have mentioned before; when wrong ways do but increase the
Schism.

Sect. IX. 4. And the ancient and wisest sort of good Christians must be great
Instruments herein; They must be Examples to the Younger of Love, Peace and
Concord: They must often tell them how good and amiable a thing it is for
Brethren to dwell and meet together in Unity, and open the sin and danger of
Division. Age, Grace and Experience mellow and sweeten the Spirits of ripe
Christians, when the Young are green and harsh and sour.

Sect. X. But among all these there are some men in all Ages, whom God stirs
up to a special zeal for Christian Concord; And though the state of the place
and times which they live in, or their own weakness, may make some of them
propose some terms which in better times would be unreasonable (as Erasmus,
Cassander, Wicelius, and others did) yet it is that healing Spirit that must be
a prime mover in all the work, if ever Concord be obtained: Such have been
Mel^ncton, Musculus, Bucholzer, Junius, Job. Ger. V^ssius, Camero, Ludovicus
Capellus, Placaeus, Testardus, Am^raldus, Blondell, Dallaeus, the Breme and
British Divines at Dort, and by their means, the Decrees of the Synod are
Pacificatory; Calixtus and his Associates Johan. Bergius, Conrad. Bergius,
Ludov. Crocius, Iselburge, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, Dr.
Ward, Dr. Preston, Mr. Whately, Mr. Fenner, Chillingworth, and many more: But
before all, John Dury and Mr. Le Blanke. As some men that study the Revelations
or Chronology, or Genealogies, etc. are readier in those particular Subjects,
than other men though of greater parts; so they that study the Churches peace,
and the Concord of differing Christians, usually are fitter for that work than
others.

Sect. XI. There is one sort of men that have written many things excellently
for Peace, even the Socinians, who being Heretics, have thereby done much
harm. Diverse of them have laid down in general those Rules and Terms which
might much have furthered the Churches Peace, if the same things had been
written by men of Name and Reputation. What Acontius was, or what Rupertus
Meldenius was, I am not sure; some say they were Socinians, and some deny it:
But I am sure, if they were heretical, their excellent Precepts for Love and
Peace may rise up in judgment against Orthodox Persecutors, Schismatics, and
Revilers: Many that are known to be Socinians, have written much for peace; and
Satan has made great advantage of it, to bring all earnest motions for peace
into suspicion: so that a man can now scarce write for the retreat of
Church-warriours, and for the quenching of our consuming flames, but he is
presently suspected to be guilty of some Heresy, and to have specially need of
Charity or toleration himself; Like the Fox, that having lost his Tail, would
have all Foxes tails cut off. Or if it be about any point that Papists are
concerned in, that a man calls men from erroneous Extremes, to Truth and
Peace, he is presently suspected to be of the mind of Cassander, Wicelius,
Grotius, or such as they: Even Jacob Behmens writing so much for Love, and
against Wrath, has made some suspect a Treatise that is written for any
extensive Christian Love: Could Satan but engage a man of ill fame to preach
and write fervently for any fundamental point of Religion, I am afraid with
many it would make it suspected.

Sect. XII. It is also of great moment for the preventing or remedying of
Schism, to choose a sit season to manage the remedies. Were not men very proud
and selfish, the fittest season would be times of Civil peace and prosperity:
And indeed a common peace of many Countries will hardly be well prosecuted in
any other times; because it needs sedate minds, and quiet intercourse, and
friendly communication; which wars and exasperations are against: Nor is it a
fit time to heal a particular person, when he is fined, imprisoned, persecuted,
or oppressed: For his sense and passion will stop his ears, and drive him
further from those that he suffers by: (so far are they mistaken who take
violence and severity to be the way). But yet Pr^sperity has greater
hindrances of Love and Peace than Sufferings: for then usually the lovers of
the World (called in Scripture the Enemies of God) as they strive most for
wealth and power, do obtain it; and being made Lords and Prelates, they think
there is no sure and honorable Peace, but by all men's submission to their
wills and dictates: Pride never knows the way of Peace, but trusts to
insulting passionate violence, which cures Schism, as Brandy will do a burning
Fever: which may rarely be lodged in such frigid matter as may accidentally
cure it, which ordinarily would kill: And a Schismatic may be such a timorous
worldling, as that suffering may drive him into outward compliance: But
Conscience so respects God, as to count man and all that he can do as
nothing. Religion is a worshipping and obeying God as God: and whoever
prefers any man's Power or Interest before him, so far has no true Religion
at all.

But if a sufferer be to be cured, it must not be by him by whom he suffers,
but by another that pitieth him and lamenteth his sufferings. But usually Pride
and carnal Confidence in Prosperity hinder men from that condescension and
moderation which is absolutely necessary to Love and Peace: Wantonness and
Contention are the usual fruits of greatness, fullness and worldly ease: so
that Civil Peace and Religious are too often strangers; and being dried in the
Sunshine we are crumbled to dust. And it is Gods ordinary way to cast
contentious Wranglers into the Furnace, and melt them till they may be cast
into one mold: Ridley and Hooper were reconciled in Prison. When men that fell
out are all taken Captives by a common Enemy, they are sooner reconciled. When
men all suffer for the same common Cause, and are together in Gaols, or
Banishment, or reproach, then go try whether they will hearken to peace. It
was the great shame of the English Fugitives in Qu. Mary's days to fall out at
Frankford in their Exile. In a word, both Prosperity and Adversity have their
proper helps and hindrances of Concord; but usually, times of common Civil
Peace, are the hopefullest times to treat for a common Religious peace; but for
smaller quarrelling parties, common suffering is a better time.

Sect. XIII. Whoever will be the Instruments of healing Schisms, must
necessarily preserve his Reputation with those that he would heal, or at least
with the common sort of religious persons: For if once he be commonly ill
spoken of, the best things which he says, will be despised: If he be a Prince,
if he be commonly reputed a sound and a good man, all that he does will have a
good interpretation: But if he be taken either for an enemy to Piety, or to the
Doctrine which prevails, all that he does will be suspected for acts of
malice. Constantius is praised by Hilary himself and many others, for a man of
laudable disposition and conversation; and yet his being for the Arians, made
all ill taken that he did, and he did much that deserved it: Theodosius junior
and Anastasius were very pious Emperors, and great lovers of Peace, and
strenuously labored to have kept the Bishops from Schism and Church-warrs; but
being supposed to favor most that party which the others called Heretics, all
that they did was ill interpreted, and suspected to be in favor to the
Heretics. It is therefore very necessary that a Peacemaking Prince be
downright honest and impartial, and show himself conscionable in all his
Actions, and a lover of Mankind, and injurious to none, but a special favourer
of the good, and an enemy to Wickedness, Debauchery and Malignity in all. For
this will make people love and trust him, without which nothing will be done.

And what I say of Princes, I must say of Pastors and Preachers: If a man be
never so zealous for Concord, if he be commonly supposed to be an ignorant man,
or a wicked man, or an unconscionable crafty Politician, or a Heretic, or
dangerously erroneous, or one that is partial, or has any ill Principles or
Designs, or a Persecutor, or whimsical Fanatic, all his Endeavors are like to
do but little good: The general love and honor that Archbishop Usher, Bishop
Davenant, Dr. Preston, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Watton, Dr. Stoughton, etc.
had with all sorts of sober men in England, made those conciliatory, moderating
Principles to be regarded, which from other men have been received with
suspicion, if not contempt and scorn.

Sect. XIV. Were there no more said of all this subject but that of Rupertus
Meldenius cited by Conradus Bergius, it might end all Schisms if well
understood and used, viz. Si in NECESSARIIS sit UNITAS, in NON-NECESSARIIS
LIBERTAS, in UTRISQUE CHARITAS, optimo certe loco essent res nostrae. Unity in
things necessary, Liberty in things unnecessary, and Charity in both, would do
all our work.

Sect. XV. Or briefly, all must be done, 1. By the LIGHT of Reason and Sacred
Truth adapted to the Understandings of the people, and seasonably proposed with
good advantage to convince them. 2. By the LOVE of Pastors, Rulers and
Dissenters, heaping coals of Fire on their heads. 3. By the POWER of
Magistrates, encouraging men of Truth, Piety and peace, and restraining men
from propagating intolerable Errors, and all sorts from violating the Laws of
Humanity, Christian Sobriety and Charity, and the public peace, and not
permitting them on pretense of Religion openly to revile and abuse each other,
so as to keep up mutual hatred and diabolical Calumny, and by licentious
tongues to wrong each other.

These few things would better heal the Churches, than all the violent and
compound Medicines which worldly Jug^ers and unskilful Mountebanks have long
tried in vain.

CHAP. III.
More of the same subject; Twenty things necessary in all that will deliver the
Church from Schism.

Sect. I. BEcause this dividing Spirit goes not easily out, I shall repeat and
sum up the common Duties of all men that will herein successefully serve the
Church: for it is not every man that is fit for so excellent a work, though
every man be bound to it in his place: The sad Experience of the World assures
us, that hitherto few skilful and effectual Physicians have been found.

Sect. II. In short, all men that will promote the Churches concord, whether
Magistrates, Pastors or People, must observe all these following things, as the
necessary means, which if they be wanting, yea but one of them, the Churches
will be so far disquieted, and diseased.

1. The foresaid simple Terms of Union must be understood and received, and
false and ensnaring terms must be avoided.

2. Magistrates must prefer Christ's interest before their own, and see that
their own lies in preferring his: and must value conscionable upright men,
though dissenters in tolerable cases, and not encourage their unconscionable
enemies. And must keep peace among the Clergy and among all.

3. Men must be taught to place their Religion in worshipping God in Spirit and
Truth; and to study the power and practice of Godliness, Sobriety, Justice and
Charity, more than Opinions, self-exalting or Will Worship: and to love their
Neighbors as themselves, and do as they would be done by.

4. Men must learn of Christ to see the amiableness of Sincerity and Holiness
under many differences and weaknesses, and so love what is amiable, and bear
with what is tolerable, and pardon what is pardonable in all: and to receive
the weak, even in the Faith, but not to doubtful Disputations: and to speak
more of the Good that is in upright men than of the Evil: yea never speak evil
of any man till they be certain of the truth: nor then till they be well
satisfied, that it is like to do more good than harm.

5. Men must labor to know themselves, and be acquianted with their own
fallibility and defectibility, mutability and insufficiency, and to remember
how much they have to be pardoned and tolerated, and so to cast the first stone
at themselves; to fly from Pride, and know how unmeet they are to be the Rule
of all men's Judgments and Practices, or to seem so wise, as that none shall be
tolerated that differ from them, nor speak publicly to God, but in the words
which they prescribe.

6. Men must not be too strange to one another, nor keep too distant; for
neerness and acquaintance reconcileth, and distance cherishes false reports
and suspicions, and men take liberty to hear, think and speak ill of strangers
behind their backs, which familiarity would cure.

7. None but Volunteers must be taken for true Christians, nor admitted to holy
Communion, to receive the Seals of Pardon and Life.

8. To use more a friendly discoursing way for convincing Dissenters, than
disgraceful, passionate, militant disputations, (Though dangerous seducers
must be confuted by necessary disputation.)

9. To abhor Envy and Emulation (the Offspring of Selfishness and Pride) and
not to grudge at other men's esteem, that are preferred before us; especially
that Preachers and Pastors envy not the preference of other Teachers, nor
murmur at their liberty, honor or success; but rejoice with Paul, Phil. 1.
that Christ is preached, though it be by Contentious men, that do it in Envy
and Strife, to add affliction to the afflicted.

10. To dread Persecution and unjust violence to men of Conscience, and not to
force them to sin and damnation, by bearing down Conscience in unnecessary
things.

11. To be well furnished with holy Reason and Love, and for Ministers to be
confined to the use of these, from all use of Violence by the Sword; and kept
to their proper work and Government by the Word and Church-keyes.

12. To rebuke and frown away malignant and Religious Calumniators, Whisperers,
Censurers and Backbiters.

13. To teach the People wherein the uniting Substance of Religion does
consist, and what a sin it is to be censorious and separate causelessly from
others, and represent their different Opinions, Modes and Circumstances of
Worship unjustly odious, to stir up other men's hatred and separating
distastes: and how great a sin and danger Schism or Division is.

14. To avoid all needless novelties and singularities, and to keep to Vincent.
Lerinensis's Measure, of holding to that which has ever been received as
necessary by the whole Church, and was the primitive Faith and Religion.

15. To avoid contending about mere ambiguous words, and ever to agree of the
sense of all the terms before you enter on further disputation: and to suspect
such ambiguity in all debates.

16. As Magistrates must be just and impartial, so people must be taught to
obey them under Christ, in all lawful things belonging to their Office, and
that as a part of their Obedience to God.

17. Peacemakers must be men of Piety and blameless Lives, that may honor
their works, and not by scandal harden adversaries, nor lay Stumbling Blocks
before the weak: and such as study to do good to all.

18. They must submit to men of the lowest and weakest ranks, and not despise
them, and the strong must bear the Infirmities of the weak, restoring the
fallen with the spirit of meekness, remembering that they also may be tempted.

19. They must not expect such a degree of Concord on Earth as is not to be
expected, lest for want of it they be tempted to murmur at God, doubt of
Religion, and make the breach wider by unjust severities against the weak.

20. When any are accused of Heresy or Scandal, they must be ready with
patience to give satisfaction to others, to the Churches, to Rulers, to Equals,
or Inferiors, Referring them to their Profession of Faith, and answering what
is charged on them, and willingly amending what they are convinced is amiss.

But all this and much more I have formerly written in a Book called, The Cure
of Church-divisions.

CHAP. IV.
Popery (or the Papacy) will never unite the Church.

Sect. I. I Come now to prove the insufficiency and ineptness of the terms of
Union which many men have devised, and obtruded on the Churches: Repeating,
that few things more divide, than false Means of uniting, while these engage
men to set against all that cannot yield to them. And I shall begin with the
terms of the Papal party, as being the chief Pretenders.

Sect. II. The Papists think, that the way of Union and avoiding Schism is, for
one Man, the Pope of Rome, to be taken for the Universal Vicar of Christ on
Earth, even the governing Head under Christ of all the Christians on Earth,
yea, and of all the World, in order to make them Christians; and that the
Church on Earth is one such politic Body, of which Christ is the invisible
Head of influence, and the Pope is the visible Head as to Government: And that
none are of the visible Church that are not the Popes Subjects, and that they
that refuse such Subjection are Schismatics or Heretics or Infidels: And that
all that own Christ, should be compelled by Sword or torment to own the Pope as
his Vicar General.

Sect. III. Campanella, de Regno Dei, opens the Mystery of the Fifth
Monarchy, and alleges the texts that are brought for it, as intending Christ's
Reign on Earth by the Pope as his Viceroy: And indeed it is an Universal
Kingdom or Monarchy which they plead and strive for, under the name of the
Universal Church: But in this they greatly differ, whether the Pope have the
universal Power of both Swords, or but of one, that is, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and be really the King of all the World: And herein they are of
three Opinions as to the Subject of this Power, and of three Opinions as to the
degree.

Sect. IV. As to the Possessor of this Authority, 1. One party say that the
summa Potestas is in th^^ Pope; 2. Another says, it is in the Pope presiding
in a General Council, or in the Pope and Council agreeing; 3. And another party
hold that it is in a General Council alone, yet so as that the Pope is the Head
of the Universal Church, as the chief Prelate, and Ordidinary Governor, though
subject to the Legislative and Judicial Power of the Council.

Sect. V. And as to the Degree of Power, 1. Some hold that the Pope is the
Monarch of all the Earth, having the chief Power of both Swords, and that the
World is his Kingdom, as Gods Vicegerent.

2. Others hold, that he has directly only the Ecclesiastical Power, but
indirectly and in order to Spirituals he has also the Temporal power (of the
Sword): Or, as the most hold, that in his own Territories he has both Powers
as to Personal exercise; but in other Kingdoms, he can himself only execute the
Church Power, but he may command Kings to execute the power of the Sword for
Religion, according to his and his Bishops decrees: and may force them to it by
Anathema's, and releasing their Subjects from the Bonds of Fidelity, and giving
their Kingdoms to others: As some say, that the King may not be personally
Judge in the Courts of Justice, but he may make Judges, and force them to their
duty, and depose them if unworthy. This differs little from the former: The
Monarchy is nevertheless absolute, though Kings be the Popes Officers or
Lictors.

3. But some few hold that the Pope and Bishops have no Power of the Sword at
all, nor of forcing Kings to use it; The Controversy was hotly handled when
Popes and Emperors were in Wars: The Volumes written on both sides are
published by Goldastus, to which William Barkley and some others in France have
added more.

Sect. VI. Rightly therefore does the Geograph. Nubiensis call the Pope A King;
The Name of a Church makes not a difference in the thing: There be some that
think that all Kings should be also Priests, and the Popes will grant it so far
as to hold, that all Bishops should be Magistrates, and the Chief Priest be
Univer^al King^ Cardinal Bertram in Biblioth. Patr. says, God had not been
wise, if he had not set up such a Monarch under him over the World. And in
(...) seu Bulla Sixti quarti Philippo Palatino Rh^ni in ^rehero, Vol. 2. page
162. you may see their Claim in these words: [ Universos Christianos Principes
ac^omnes Christi fideles requirere eisque mandare vice Dei, cuius locum quamvis
immeriti tenemus in terris.] To require all Christian Princes, and all faithful
Christians, and to command them in Gods stead, whose place on earth we hold,
though unworthy.]

The Twelfth General Council, viz. at the Laterane, sub Innoc. 3. and some at
Rome under Greg. 7. and many others, put this Claim of theirs past doubt.

Sect. VII. Now that the Universal Church will never unite in the Roman Papacy,
I prove undeniably as follows:

1. Because Christians will never unite in an Agreement to forsake the
Scriptures as Gods Word and Law: where they will still find that he never
instituted such a Roman Monarch. The Papists contrary Assertion will never
convince the World, when the Book it self is open before them. They will there
find no one man that ruled all the rest; no one to whom Appeals were made: no
one that ever claimed such a power; much less that settled any such at Rome; or
that ever a word was left by Christ to direct the Church to center in the
Bishop of Rome: Nor that ever the Apostles preached this to the Churches, which
they must needs have done, had it been essential to the Church Catholic, or
half as necessary as the Papists make it.

Sect. VIII. 2. Because in Scripture, Christians will (not only find nothing
for it, but) much against it: which many Volumes having largely proved, (
Chamier, Whitakers, White, and abundance more) it would be vain here to repeat.
I commend to the English Reader now but Dr. Challoners small Book, of the
Catholic Church.

Sect. IX. 3. Because, were it but as dark and doubtful and uncertain as common
Reason and Disputers experience proves it, the universal Church can never
unite in a thing which so few can see any certainty in, or evident proof of.

Sect. X. 4. Because the greatlyest reverenced General Councils are against it,
limiting the Popes power to his Diocese, as Nice first does; and declaring him
to be National, and of humane Institution as being Bishop of the Imperial City,
and advancing Constantinople, from the same Reason as does the Council of
Chalcedon: Of which I have largely written against Terret.

Sect. XI. 5. Because the Greek Church has ever held the Papacy to be of
humane Institution: Proved briefly; 1. Because they ever held the Popes power
to stand on the same Foundation with the other Patriarchs: But they ever held
the other Patriarchs to be of Humane Institution; which needs no proofs to men
of Reading. 2. Because they set up Constantinople first next him, and then
equal to him, and then above him: which they had never done, had they taken the
Papacy to be of Divine Institution: For they never pretended any such
foundation for the Bishop of Constantinoples power; and they were never so
desperate as to set up Man's Ordination above Gods. 3. Because they took his
Power to be limited by the Laws of the Empire, and him to be subject to the
Emperors: All which is known to men that know Church History.

Sect. XII. 6. Because the common Reason of Mankind will still discern that a
humane Monarchy of all the Earth, is a dream and Impossibility; and that no man
is naturally capable of exercising such a power.

Sect. XIII. 7. Because while Baronius, Binius, Crab, Surius, and other
Histories of the Councils are extant, and Platina, Anastasius, and other
Histories of the Popes, and while all the old Church History is extant, and all
the German, French, Italian, Belgic, English, and other later Histories, the
horrid wickedness of Popes, and the Mischiefs they have brought upon the World,
and the blood they have shed to settle their Kingdoms, will be known to
Mankind, and will not suffer men universally to believe that God ever made such
Governors essential to his Church, or necessary to its Unity.

Sect. XIV. 8. Because Kings and States will never become all so tame and
servile, as to resign their Kingdoms so far to an universal Monarch, and to
become his Subjects, especially after the sad experience of his Government.

Sect. XV. 9. Because if the people were never ^o blind, there will in all
generations arise wise and Learned persons, who will know all these things, and
never consent to Popery.

Sect. XVI. 10. Lastly from Experience: The Universal Church now does not, nor
ever did unite in the Roman Papacy, and therefore never will do. That now they
do not, is past doubt with those that know the Papists are but the third or
fourth part of the Christian World. Bishop Bramhall says they are but a fifth
part. The great Empire of Ethiopia, the Christians in Egypt, Syria,
Mesopotamia, that are falsely called by them Nestorians and Eutychians or
Jacobites, who parted from the Greeks upon the ejection of Diosecrus by the
Council of Chalcedon, the Armenians, Circassians, Mengrelians, Georgians, those
scattered in the Persian Empire, the Greeks scattered throughout the Turkish
Empire, the Empire of Moscovie, the Kingdoms of Sueden, Denmark, England,
Scotland and Ireland, the Subjects of the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburgh,
Lunenburgh, Hanover, Osnaburgh, Holstein, the Prince of Hassia, the Palsgrave
of the Rhine, Ducal Prussia, Curland, Transylvania, all the Protestant free
Cities in Germany, Dantzick, and others tolerated in Poland, those in Hungary,
some in Walachia and Moldovia; Belgia, called the Low Countries, with
Friesland, Embden, Geneva, etc. the Protestant Cantons of Helvetia; those in
Rhoetia, in Piedmont, etc. and those tolerated in France: Our Plantations in
the West Indies or America, viz. New England, Virginia, Barbados, Bermudas,
Jamaica, and the rest; All these are Christians that unite not in the Pope, nor
are subject to him.

I know they say that these are Heretics and Schismatics, and no parts of the
Church: But that is too easy a way of arguing, and no Cure at all for
Christians discord. By this way of reasoning they may prove that all the
Christian Church or World is united in the Pope, if he had but ten Subjects,
because all the rest are no part of the Christian Church or World: as a mad man
proved that all the World was his, because he thought his House and Land was
all the World. But Christ will not so easily lose his Church, nor be disputed
out of his Inheritance by so gross a fallacy: If you argue [None are parts of
the Christian Church but the Popes Subjects: All the Popes Subjects unite in
the Pope: Ergo, all parts of the Christian Church are united in the Pope,] You
must prove your Major to Christ better than ever you did, before he will be so
deposed from his Kingdom, and lose those whom he so dearly bought. The Bishop
of Constantinople, Alexandria, Ephesus, Canterbury, may say the like, that none
are Christians but their Subjects, but this is it that I say the World of
Christians are not united in.

Sect. XVII. And as it is so now, it was so in the last Age: And though some of
them cheat Women by telling them that all the Christian world before Luther
were united in subjection to their Popes, they must burn all their own Church
History and Councils, and make men ignorant of what is past in former ages,
before this will be believed by men that can read Latin and Greek; certainly
they do not believe it themselves: They cannot though they would: Was all the
West subject to the Pope, when so many hundred thousand were murdered for being
against him? When the Bohemians were so persecuted by wars? when Spain it self
has been accused of such Heresy? when most of Germany stuck to the Emperors,
and despised the Popes? when France and England have been censured and
Interdicted by him, and obeyed not his Interdicts? when for many Ages most of
Italy has been a Field of war, and fought against him? when Rome it self has
so often driven him away? But especially when upon the Constantinopolitane Decree
de tribus Capitulis, Pope Vigilius was forsaken by much of Italy and the West,
and all his Successors for about an hundred years, and the Patriarch of
Aquileia set up as their Head instead of Rome, till Sergius after reconciled
them? And all this while were not the Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Syrians,
Abassines, and all the rest before mentioned in Asia and Africa, etc. from
under the Pope?

I have often asked, and ask again, was all Christendom subject to the Pope, of
whom their Melchior Canus says (Lecd Com. cap. 7. fol. 201.) That not only the
Greeks, but almost all the rest of the Bishops of the whole World have fought
to destroy the Privileges of the Church of Rome; and indeed they had on their
side the Arms of Emperors, and the Greater number of Churches: and yet they
could never prevail to ab^^gate the Power of the One Pope of Rome?]

Was all the Christian World under him, when their Raynerius says, (cont.
Wald. catal. in Bibl. Patr. To. 4. p. 773.) [The Church of the Armenians, and
Ethiopians, and Indians, and the rest which the Apostles converted, are not
under the Church of Rome?]

Was all the Church under him before the Turks conquered the Greeks? when the
Greek Church alone, and the rest in the Eastern Empire, were twice as many as
all the Western Churches: and Abassia, and all in the East and South without
the Empire, were also from under him?

Yea and when their own Jacobus de Vitriaco writes (Histor. Orient. c. 77.)
who dwelt at Jerusalem, [That the Churches of the Easterly parts of Asia,
alone, exceeded in number the Christians either of the Greek or Latin Church.]
And their Brochardus, that lived also there, says, that [Those called
Schismatics by us, are far better men than those of the Roman Church.

Sect. XVIII. If they say, that at least for the first six hundred years all
the Church was governed by the Pope? I answer, It is more probable which
Marnixius and many Protestants affirm, that for the first six hundred years
there was not one Papist in the world, See all this fally proved in my Books
against J^hnson, of the Visibility of our Church, especially in my last called
[ Which is the true Church.
that is, One that took the Pope to have the Governing power over all the
Church on Earth. The often cited words of Gregory the first and Pelagius plainly
show, that they abhorred the Claim: The Pope was from the year 300. till 600.
and after the first Bishop in the Roman Empire, 1. Under Councils and
Emperors; 2. Not Ruling the other Patriarchates, but sitting before them in
Councils; 3. And this by M^ns Ordination, only in one Empire; 4. And had no
Rule in any of the extraimperial Churches in the World: even here with us the
Britains rejected them, and the Scots would not eat or converse with them. The
Abassine Empire was never under them, nor those of India and Persia: And the
Councils in which they had the first seat were but of one Empire, as is after
proved.

And as for the first three hundred years under Pagan Emperors, their own
Writers confess the Church of Rome was little set by; that is, it had no
governing power over the rest, nor is there any pretense to think they had.

The first that talked very high, was Leo the first, who called himself the
Head of the Catholic Church: But by [ Catholick] was then meant usually the
Churches in the Empire only, and by Head he meant the prime Bishop in order,
but not the Governor of all: Nor was his claim, if he meant any, more
approved, by the Churches in that Age. Though the Council of Chalcedon highly
applauded him and his Epistle, as an advantage to carry their Cause against
Dioscorus (who had excommunicated the Pope) and took him for the prime member
of their Council, yet they thought meet in their Canons to declare, that it was
but by humane, mutable right in the Roman Empire.

Let them show us if they can, when and where the universal Church on Earth
ever subjected themselves at all to the Pope. Much less can they bring any
pretense of it for the first three hundred yeas: Had they any Meeting in which
they agreed for it? Did they all receive Laws, Ordination or Officers from
Rome, or from its Emissaries? If we were so foolish as to believe that his
precedence in General Councils was a proof of the Popes Monarchy; yet it is
easy to prove 1. That for 300 years there was no General Council; 2. And that
it was not the Pope that presided at Nice; 3. And that those Councils were but
Imperial, and not truly Universal.

But if all the Church ever had been subject to the Pope, as being at first
(except Abassia) almost confined to the Roman Empire, it does not follow, that
it will ever be so again when it is dispersed into so many Kingdoms of the
World: The Jesuits at first were all under the King of Spain, and the
Mahometans at first all under one Prince, but they are not so now: Is it likely
that ever all Christian, Mohammedan and Heathen Kings will suffer all their
Christian Subjects to be under the Government of a Foreign Priest?

But their own Writers agree, that the Apostles at first were dispersed into
many Countries besides the Roman Empire, and that Ethiopia was converted by the
Eunuch mentioned Acts 8. initially (its like before Rome,) and fullyer by St.
Matthew: And you may see in Godignus, Alvarez, Damianus a Goez, and others,
full evidence that they were never Subjects to the Pope of Rome.

I conclude then, 1. That Rome is not owned this day as the head of Unity by
all Christians: 2. That it never was so taken for the Governing and Uniting
Head; 3. And that the reason of the thing fully proves that it never will be
so.

I may add, that indeed it is not known among themselves who are the
consenting Subjects of the Pope, or Members of their Church: It is indeed
Invisible, or a Church not knowable. For, 1. They are not agreed, nor ever like
to be, what is the essential qualification of a Member of the Church: Or what
that Faith is that must make a Member: Some say, it must be the Belief of all
the Creed explicitly; others, of some few Articles; others, that no more is
necessary ad esse than to believe explicitly that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of good works, and to believe that the Church is to be believed: Of
which see Fr. a Sanct. Clara in his Deus, Natura, Gratia.

2. And their forcing men into their Church with Tortures, Fire and Sword,
leaves it utterly uncertain who are Consenters, and who are in the Church as
Prisoners, to save Limbs and Life.

And if they ever recover England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, and the other
Reformed Churches, it must be by the Sword, and Wars, and Violence, and never
by force of Argument: And if they should conquer us all (which is their hope
and trust) it will not follow, that men are of their minds, because they cannot
or dare not contradict them, no more than because they are dead.

Experience, Reason and Scripture then do fully prove to men that are willing
to know the truth, that the Universality of Christians will never be united to
the Roman Papacy: Yea, that this Papacy is the greatest of all Schisms, 1. By
setting up a false Head of Union; and 2. By cutting off or renouncing three
parts of the Christian World, even all Christians except the Subjects of the
Pope.

CHAP. V.
The Universal Church will never unite in Patriarchs, or any other humane Form
of Church Government.

Sect. I. WHether or how far such Forms may consist with Union, is a Question
that I am not now debating, any further than shall be anon intimated by the
way. But that they will never become the Bond of Union, or be received by all,
and that to make any such thought Necessary to universal Unity, is Schism, I am
easily able to prove.

Sect. II. And this needs no other proofs than what are given against uniting
in the Papacy, in the former Chapter. As, 1. Patriarchs and other humane
Institutions being not of God but Man, the whole Church can never unite in
them, 1. Because they will never all agree that any men have true Authority
given them by God, to make new Church Officers and Forms that shall be
necessary to the Unity or Concord of the Church Universal.

2. They will never agree who those men are that God has given such power to,
if they did suspect that such there are. A Prince has no Power out of his
Dominions.

3. They will never agree, that if man made such Forms or Offices, they may not
unmake them again if they see cause; or that their Acts bind all their
Posterity never to rescind or change them.

4. They will never find that all the Christian World ever agreed herein, and
so in all Posterity is obliged by their Ancestors.

5. Much less will any ever prove that the Institution was Divine.

Sect. III. If any say, that the Apostles settled this Form by the Spirit, the
Universal Church will never believe it: For, 1. No Scripture says so: 2. No
true credible History says so: 3. If the Apostles settled Patriarchs, it was
either as their own Successors, or as a new Office: And it was either by joint
consent, or man by man, each one apart: But 1. Had they settled them as their
Successors, they would have settled twelve or thirteen; But there were but
five settled at all, besides some new petty Patriarchs (as at Aquileia when
they cast off Rome.) 2. No Writer tells us of any meeting of the Apostles to
agree of such a Form. 3. No nor that ever they settled them. 4. History
assures us that they were settled only in One Empire, and not in the rest of
the World. 5. And that the Emperor and Councils of that Empire made them. 6.
And therefore when they were at first but three they added at their pleasure
two more, Constantinople and Jerusalem. 7. And none of all these pretend to
Apostolical Institution and Succession but Antioch, that claims to be St.
Peter's first Seat, and Rome to be his second, and that but as Bishops, (when
that also is a frivolous pretense.) Alexandria claims succession but from St.
Mark, and Jerusalem from that St. James who (says Dr. Hammond and others) was
none of the Apostles, and Constantinople from none at all, though above the
rest. Councils (as Constant. and Chalced.) professing that the Fathers and
Princes made them what they were.

Sect. IV. It is certain, that the Christian World is not now united in
Patriarchs, nor ever was, nor ever will be. The Patriarchs of the rest of the
Empire are all now broken off from the Church of Rome: Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, are all against him: The East had four, and
the West but one, and are now at odds condemning each other. The rest of the
world have none, and had none. And it is commonly confessed, that as men set
them up, so men may pull them down again. Yea, even in the old Empire many
Churches were from under all the Patriarchs, as is commonly known.

Sect. V. And how should these Patriarchs unite all the Church? It must be
either by meeting or at distance. As for their meeting, Princes that are some
Mahometans, and some Christians, of diverse Interests and Minds, will not suffer
it: And neither by meeting or distance can we be secured that they will agree,
when even under one Emperor that labored to unite them, they were among their
Clergy like the Generals of so many Armies, distracting (and at last
destroying) the Empire by hereticating and persecuting one another. Those that
have divided and undone that Empire, are never like to unite the Christian
World.

Sect. VI. And what I say of Patriarchs, I say of all humane Forms of Churches
or Church Government; and so of such an Episcopacy as is not necessary to the
being of the Church. There are here three distinct questions before us: 1.
Whether the Pastoral Office be necessary to Church-unity? 2. Whether Parochial
Episcopacy be necessary to it? 3. Whether Diocesan Bishops distinct from
Archbishops be necessary to it? And you may add a fourth, Whether Archbishops
be necessary to it, (not disputing now the lawfulness of any of all these?)

Sect. VII. 1. Of the first I have spoken before: No doubt but Christ's
universal Church has ever had Teachers and Pastors as the most noble organical
part; And a Body may as well be without a Stomach, Liver or Lungs, as the
Church be without them. And to a particular Church as political, organized, or
Governed, they are a constitutive part. But I have before showed reasons to
doubt whether yet it be necessary to salvation to every individual Christian to
know that the Ministry is an instituted Office, and to own such: But this
little concerns our Cause.

Sect. VIII. 2. Parochial Episcopacy, that is, the preeminence and government
of one Presbyter called a Bishop over the rest in every single Church, was
early introduced to avoid the discord of the Presbyters and the Flock: In the
time when Ignatius's Epistles were written, he tells us, That every Church had
One Altar, and one Bishop with his fellow-Presbyters and Deacons. Whether this
was of Apostolical Institution, or a humane Corruption, is disputed in so many
Volumes (by Petavius, Sancta Clara, Faravia, Whitenitto, Downham, Hammond,
Hooker, Bilson, etc. on one side: And Gersom, Bucer, Beza, Cartwright,
Salmasius, Didoclane, Jacob, Blondel, Parker, Paul Baine, etc. on the other,)
that I think it not meet here to interpose my thoughts. But that it is not
essential to a Church, and that all the Church will not unite in it, appears
as follows.

Sect. IX. 1. They are not united in it now: The Reformed Churches in France,
Belgia, Helvetia, and many other parts, are against such Bishops as necessary,
and a distinct Order. And in England, Scotland, and Ireland, New England, etc.
they are by some approved, and by others not.

2. Former Ages have had many pious Christians against them, especially in
Scotland, and among the Waldenses.

3. The Schoolmen and other Papists are not themselves agreed, whether Bishops
and Presbyters are distinct Orders.

4. The Church of England even while Popish denied it, and said they were but
one Order, as you may see in Spelman Aelfreds Laws or Canons.

5. Hierome and Eutychius Alexandrinus tell us how and why Episcopacy was
introduced at Alexandria, and that the Presbyters made them there.

6. The Scots were long governed without them, (as Major and Beda tell us.) And
their Presbyters made the first Bishops in Northumberland; as Pomeranus a
Presbyter made those in Denmark.

7. Almost all the Churches in East and West as far as I can learn, have cast
off Parochial Bishops (of single Churches) and in their stead set up Diocesans
over multitudes of Parishes without any Bishops under them, but Curats only.

8. While there is no hope of all agreeing whether it be a Divine Institution,
and that of essential necessity) there is no probability that ever the
Universal Church will unite in them.

9. The Diocesans we find will never yield to them.

10. The reception of them will not unite the Church were it agreed on, it
being more and greater matters that they differ about.

I confess that the ancient reception of them was so general, and the reason of
the thing so fair, that I am none of those that accuse such Episcopacy as
unlawful or Schismatical, but rather think it conduces to prevent Schisms:
But, 1. I am satisfied that it will not be agreed to by all, 2. Nor serve for
universal Concord were it agreed on; 3. And that it is Schismatical to make
them more necessary than God has made them, and to cut off Christians or
Churches that cannot receive them.

Sect. IX. Diocesan Episcopacy (by which I mean a single Bishop over many
hundred or score Parishes and sacred Assemblies that have Altars, and are large
enough to be single Churches, or at least Many such, without any Bishops under
him of those Churches) will much less ever unite the Universal Church, however
it has obtained over very much of the Christian world. For first more Churches
by far at this day are against it, than against Parochial Episcopacy, and more
Volumes are written against it; and Men have a far greater aversness to it, as
more dangerous to the Church.

Sect. X. 2. It is contrary to the Scripture Institution, which set up Bishops
in all single Churches, (whether the same with Presbyters I now dispute not,
but they were such as then were received;) And those that think such Single, or
Parish, or City Bishops necessary, will never agree to put them all down.

Sect. XI. 3. They turn all the Parish-Churches into Chapels, or mere parts of
one Church, and Unchurch them all, in the judgment of those that take a Bishop
to be essential to a Church: And all will not agree to Unchurch all such
Parishes.

Sect. XII. 4. It makes true Discipline as impossible, as is the Government of
so many score o^ hundred Schools by one Schoolmaster, or Hospitals by one
Physician, without any other Schoolmaster or Physician under him, (but Ushers
and Apothecaries; which all Christians will not agree to.

Sect. XIII. 5. It is contrary to the Practice of the Primitive Churches, and
casts out their sort o^ Parochial Bishops, as I have elsewhere fully proved.

1. From the Testimonies of many, such as that o^ Ignatius before cited.

2. From the custom of choosing Bishops by all the People.

3. And of managing Discipline before all the Church.

4. By the custom mentioned by Tertulli^^ and Justin Martyr, of receiving the
Sacrament only from the hand of the Bishop, or when he Consecrated it.

5. By the custom of the Bishops only Preaching, except in case of his special
appointment.

6. In every Church the Bishop sat on a high Seat with the Presbyters about
him.

7. The Bishop only pronounced the Blessing.

8. Many Canons after, when the Churches grew greater, command all the People
to be present, and communicate with the Bishop on the great Festivals. These
and many more Evidences prove, That in the Primitive Times the Bishops had but
single Churches, and every Altar and Church had a Bishop.

Sect. XIV. 6. The very Species of the old Churches is thus overthrown, and the
old office of Presbyters therewith, which was to be assistant Governors with
the Bishop, and not mere Preachers or Readers. And all these Changes all
Christians will not agree to.

Sect. XV. 7. Especially the sad History of Councils and Prelacy will deter
them from such Concord; when they find that their Aspiring, Ambition and
Contention, has been the grand Cause of Schisms and Rebellions, and kept the
Church in confusion, and brought it to the lamentable state in East and West
that it is in.

Sect. XVI. 8. And constant Experience will be the greatest hinderance: As in
our own Age many good Men, that had favorable thoughts of Diocesans, are quite
turned from them, since they saw Two thousand faithful Ministers silenced by
them; and that it is the work of too many of them to cast out such, and set up
such as I am not willing to describe: And such Experience After-Ages are like
to have, which will produce the same effects. When Experience persuadeth Men,
That under the name of Bishops, they are Troublers, Persecutors and Destroyers,
they will account them Wolves, and not agree to take them for their Shepherds.

It will be said, That Good Bishops are not such: It Is true, and that there are
Good Ones no sober Man doubts: But when 1300 years Experience has told Men,
That the Good Ones are few, in comparison of the Bad Ones, ever since they had
large Dominions and Jurisdictions: And when Reason tells Men, That the worst,
and most worldly Men, will be the most diligent seekers of such Power and
Wealth; and that he that seeks them, is liker to find them, than he that does
not; and so that Bad men are still likest to be Di^cesans: And when the
divided, scattered, persecuted Flocks, find that the work of such Men, is to
silence the most conscionable Ministers, and to be Thorns and Thist^es to the
People, though they wear Sheeps clothing, Men will judge of the^ by their
fruits, and the Churches will never be united in them.

Sect. XVII. 9. The greatest Defenders of Episcopacy say so much to make Men
against them, as will hinder this from being an uniting course. I will instance
now but in Petavius, and Doctor Ham^^d who follows him, and Scolus, who
says, (...) Clara led them the way: These hold, That the Ap^st^^s settled a
Bishop without any subject sort of Presbyters in every City and single
Congregational Church: And Doctor Hammond (Annot. in Act. 11. and Dissertat.
adversus Blondel) says, That it cannot be proved that there were any subject
Presbyters in Scripture-times; but that the word Presbyter every where in
Scripture signifies a Bishop: And if so,

1. Men will know that the Apostolical Form was for every Congregational Church
to have a Bishop of its own.

2. That no Bishop had more settled Congregations than one: For no such
Congregation could worship God, and celebrate the Sacrament of Communion, as
then they constantly did, without a Minister; And one Bishop could be but in
one place at once, and so without Curates, could have but one Assembly.

3. And Men will be inquisitive, By what Authority Subject Presbyters, and
Diocesan Bishops and Churches were introduced after Scripture-times? in which
they will never receive universal satisfaction. If it be said that the Apostles
gave Bishops Power to make a subject order of Presbyters, and to turn Parish or
Congregational Churches into Diocesan, and so to alter the first Forms of
Government, when they were dead; this will not be received without proofs,
which never will be given to satisfy all: Nay, it will seem utterly
improbable, and Men will ask,

1. Why did not the Apostles do it themselves, if they would have it done? Was
not their Authority more unquestionable than theirs that should come after? If
it be said that there were not qualified Men enough, it will,

2. Be asked, Were there not like to be then greatest Choice upon the
extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit?

3. Do we not find in Corinth so many inspired gifted persons in one Assembly,
that Paul was put to limit them in their Prophesying, yet allowing many to do
it one by one? And Acts 13. there were many Prophets and Teachers in Antioch:
And at Jerusalem more, and at Ephesus, Acts 20. and at Philippi, Phil. 1. 1, 2.
there were many Bishops or Elders; And such Deacons as Stephen and Philip, etc.
would have served for Elders, rather than to have none.

4. Does not this imply, that aftertimes that might make so great a change,
may also do the like in other things?

5. And that Diocesans and subject Presbyters be but humane Institutions, and
therefore Men may again change them?

6. Does it not dishonor the Apostles, to say that they settled one Form of
Government for their own Age, which should so quickly be changed by their
Followers into another species? All these things, and much more, will hinder
Universal Concord in Diocesans.

Sect. XIX. Yet I must add, that there is great difference between Diocesans
both as to their Government, and their Persons, whence some Churches may
comfortably live in Concord under them, though (...) be divided and afflicted
under them.

1. Some Diocesans have Diocesses so small, that Discipline is there a possible
thing: Others (as ours in England) have some above a thousand, some many
hundred, or score Parishes, which makes true Discip^^^ impossible.

2. Some Diocesans exercise the Church Keys of Excommunication and Absolution
only themselves. Othe^^ delegate them to Presbyters, (and thereby tell the
People that Presbyters are capable of them.) Others (which is the Case with us
in England) do commit them to Lay-Chancellors, who Excommunicate and Absolve by
Sentence, commanding a Priest to publish it.

3. Some Diocesans may, if they please, allow the Parish Priest to be Episcopus
Gregis, and to exercise so much of his true office in his Parish, as shall keep
up some tolerable Purity, Order and Discipline, themselves receiving Appeals,
and being Episcopi Pastorum. (...) this is rare, I know none such: But they
leave the Parish Priest no power so much as to suspend his own Act in
administering Baptism, or the Eucharist, or pronouncing decreed Excommunications
or Absolution^ when it is against his Knowledge and Conscience, no though the
People profess that they take him not for their Pastor or Guide at all, or
refuse to speak with him in case of Ignorance, suspected Heresy or Scandal.

4. Some Diocesans are learned, good and holy Men, and set themselves to
promote Godliness, and encourage the best Ministers: such we have had in
England, (as Grindall, Jewel, Usher, and many more excellent Men.) But others,
in jealousy of their places, power and interest, suspect and set themselves
against painful Preachers, and strict Men, especially if they dissent from
them, and take them for dangerous Enemies, and persecute them, and countenance
the ignorant Rabble, to strengthen themselves against them: So that particular
Concord will be promoted by some Diocesans, but Universal Concord will never be
so attained by them.

Sect. XX. There are many Learned Divines, who think that Forms of
Church Government are mutable, and not necessary to all times and places: and
that as Prudence may change other Rites, Circumstances and Orders, so it may do
this: And some Papists are of this mind; Read Card. Cusanus de Concordia, and
Gorson de Auferibilitate Papae; And the Italian Bishops at Trent, were for the
dependence of Bishops on the Pope, as the Maker of their Order, or Giver of
their Power. And if so, it is not capable of being necessary to Catholic
Unity, which may it self be changed. And most Protestants and Papists hold,
that Men may turn Diocesan Bishops again into Parochial, if they saw cause. And
all confess, that Man may set up Bishops (...), in every City, which in the old
sense was in every great Town, like our Corporations, or Market Towns, which is
greatly different from the Roman, or the English, or the French, or the Italian
Diocesses.

Sect. XXI. Yea, there are very Learned Divines, that think no Form of
Church Government is Jure Divino, or of Divine determinate Institution; so
though Doctor Edward Reynolds, late Bishop of N^rwich; and Doctor Stillingfleet
does not only think so himself, but has cited great and many Patrons of that
opinion, and brought a great many of Arguments for it in his Irenicon: Be these
in the right or wrong, no Man of this opinion can believe any one Form of
Government necessary to the Unity of the Church, or fit to be the terms of
Universal Concord. And it is certain that some will still be of their opinion
(besides those that account Diocesans unlawful.)

CHAP. VI.
The Universal Church will never unite in General Councils as their Head, or as
necessary to Union.

Sect. I. THose that are not for the Absolute Sovereignty of the Bishop of Rome
over all the World, do yet many of them think that they are very moderate Men,
if they hold but the Superiority of Councils above the Pope, or limit the Popes
power to the advice and consent of Councils; taking them to be necessary to
Unity: But the contrary is very easily proved; much more their insufficiency.

Sect. II. 1. It is certain, that the Church had Union before there was any
General Council: The first at Nice was 310 years at least, if not more after
the Birth of Christ. There is none pretended to be before that, by any
judicious men. They that instance in the Consultation of the Apostles, Elders
and Brethren at Jerusalem, Acts 2. may easily see reason to convince them, that
those were but the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, that were ordinarily then
resident at one City and Church: And such as pretended not to be Governors of
all the Apostles, Elders and Brethren who then were absent, about the world.
The Popes and his Cardinals may say they are a General Council; but who will
believe them? These at Jerusalem were not sent from all the Churches, but one
of the Churches sent to them, as fittest to advise them, and as being men most
certainly, and eminently inspired by the Holy Ghost.

It Is true that Christ and his Apostles had a Governing power over all the
Church: And if they will impose on us no other sort of General Councils as so
necessary, but such as have such office, power and infallibility, and dwell
together in one house or place, and are not sent from other Churches as their
Representatives, and can prove such a Power, we shall submit to such a Council.
Pighius has said enough of that Novelty, and against the Governing power of
General Councils: That which was not essential to the Church 310 years, is not
so now.

Sect. III. 2. If General Councils be the necessary means of Union, it is
either for their Laws, or their Judgment; and it is either past Councils, or
present ones, or both.

1. If it be the Laws of past Councils, then one Council that can make Laws
enough at first, may serve without any After-Councils: And if it be enough that
there have been General Councils, why is not the Church united by them? Then it
is no matter if there never be any more. And why may not Christ's own Laws serve
for Church Union?

2. But if it be present Councils that are necessary for Laws or Judgment, then
the Church is now no Church without them.

Sect. IV. 3. There is now no General Council in the world, and yet the Church
has essential Union. Nay, as it is long since there was one (in their own
account) so we know not whether ever there will be more: the Interest of the
Pope being against it.

Sect. V. 4. The great disagreement that is about Councils in the Christian
World, proves that they can never be the terms of Universal Agreement.

1. It is not agreed who must call them.

2. Nor out of what Christian Countries they must come; whether all, or but
some; and which; the Papists saying that three parts of Christians may be
absent, or have no right to send, being Heretics or Schismatics; and others
think Papists to be Heretics, Schismatics, and Antichristian.

3. Nor what Number are necessary to make a Council.

4. Nor in what Country they must meet.

5. Nor what their work is.

6. Nor what Power they have.

7. Nor how far they are to be believed.

8. Nor which are to be taken for approved Councils, and which not.

9. Nor what to do if they contradict each other, or the Pope, or the
Scriptures.

10. Nor whether any more Councils be necessary, than what are past already.
But the Papists themselves hold, That they are not the stated Head, or
Governing Power of the Church, (else there were now no Church, because there is
no General Council; but as a Consultation of Physicians in extraordinary (...)
of the Churches maladies.

Sect. VI. 5. It is certain, That the Univer^^^ Church was never united in
their subjection to Councils; yea, that even at the greatest Councils called
General, at Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, and the rest, there
were not Delegates from all the Churches without the Empire; nor did they all
subject themselves unto them: yea, it is certain, That there never was an
Universal Council of the Church throughout the World: but that they were only
called General, as to one Empire, and so were but as National Councils; This I
have elsewhere proved at large, in my Answer and Reply to Johnson for the
Churches Visibility.

1. By the names that did subscribe the Councils: One Johan: Presidis at Nice,
is an Exception there easily answered.

2. Because the Roman Emperor called them (whatever Papists say against it to
the Ignorant) who had no power but of the Empire.

3. Because no Summons was sent to any (much less to all) out of the Empire, as
History acquainteth us.

4. They were all under the five Patriarchs, and the Metropolitanes of the
Empire: The Abassines subjection to Alexandria, was since the revolt of
Dioscorus.

5. We read of no Execution of their Canons out of the Empire, by either
casting out Bishops, or putting them in.

6. Theodoret gives it as the reason, why James Bishop of Nisibis was at the
Council of Nice, because Nisibis then obeyed the Roman Emperor, and not the
Persian, Hist. Sanct. Pat. cap. 1.

7. The Emperors often decided their differences, and set Civil Judges among
them, to keep order and determine, and corrected them, and received Appeals,
and cognizance of their proceedings; All which, and more, prove evidently, that
they were but Universal as to that one Empire, (^ay rarely, or never so much)
and not as to the world.

Sect. VII. It is probable, if not certain, that there never will be an
Universal Council; unless (which God forbid) the Christian Society should be
reduced to a small and narrow compass, when we are hoping its increase: For,

1. The differences who shall call them, and the rest before named, are never
like to be agreed.

2. Turks, Heathen and Nations in War against other, or hating Christians, will
never all consent and suffer it.

3. The jealousy that Christian Princes have of Papal Tyranny, will never let
them agree, to send their Subjects to it: The Case of the Abassines, Greeks,
Armenians, Moscovites, Protestants, etc. proves this.

4. The distance is so vast, that the East and West Indians, and Ethiopians,
cannot come so far to answer the Ends of a General Council.

5. Should they attempt it, their Number must be so unproportionable to the
nearer parts, that it would be no true General Council, to signify by Votes
the Churches sense.

6. They could not all meet and consult in one room, if they were truly
Universal.

7. They could not all understand each other, through diversity of Language.

8. Their present difference, and old experience, assures us, that they would
fall altogether by the ears, and increase the Schism.

9. They would not live to get home again so far, to bring and prosecute the
Concord.

10. The People and Priests at home would not agree to receive them.

Sect. VIII. Yea, it is certain, that it would be a most heinous sin to call a
true Universal Council, worse than an hundred Murders. For,

1. If young Men came in no just proportion, it would but mock the world, and
prepare for Heresy, or Tyranny. If experienced aged Men came from America,
Ethiopia, Armenia, etc. and the Antipodes, the Voyage and Labor would murder
them.

2. Their Losses would be unspeakable to their Churches.

3. Yea, their absence so many years, would be to their Churches an
unsufferable loss.

4. The benefits were not like to countervail the loss: (if they did not hurt
by differences, or error, or tyranny, it will be a wonder.)

Sect. IX. The sad History of Councils too fully proves, that they have been
so far from being the causes of Concord, and Preventers or Healers of Schisms,
that they have been one of the most notorious causes of division and
distraction. Having proved this in a peculiar Treatise, ( A Breviate of the
History of Bishops and Councils,) I must not here repeat it. The Council of
Nice did best: But as Constantine was fain to keep Peace among the Bishops in
person, and burnt their numerous Libels against each other, so wise men think
he might another way have better suppressed Arianism, and prevented the many
contrary and divided Councils, which this one did by one word occasion, and
have prevented the Persecutions which Valens and Constantius exercised: And had
the time of Easter been left at liberty, perhaps it had as much made for Peace.

What the first Council at Constantinople did, the sad Case, and sadder
description of Gregory Nazianzene tell us, whose character of the Bishops (not
Arians as some talk) should not be read without tears by any, whence he learned
the danger of Councils, and resolved never to come to more.

What all the Bastard Councils did at Ariminum, Sirinium, Alexandria, Milan,
etc. I need not tell.

And what Schism and Bloodshed was occasioned by the first and second Council
at Ephesus: yea, what streams of Blood, Desolation, Schism, and many Ages
deplorable enmity and confusion were caused by the Council of Calcedon, I need
tell no one that has read Church History. It is true indeed, that the
Nestorians and Eutychians were condemned in these, and the M^nothelites in many
following: But whether mutual understanding might not have made a better end, I
appeal to a Thousand years experience, and to the nature of the Heresies there
condemned, which seem to be much formed in and by ambiguous words, which a good
Explication might have better healed, than Anathema's and Bloodshed. Of this I
spoke before (and often.) The Nestorians said, that Mary was not to be called
the Mother of God, but of Christ. The Orthodox said the contrary: when the
Orthodox never meant that she begat the Godhead, Of this more before.
and the Nestorians never denied that she begat him that is God. Where then is
the difference but in words, one speaking of the Abstract (Deity) which the
other never meant?

The Nestorians were charged with holding two Persons in Christ, instead of two
Natures: which yet Nestorius plainly denies, but Cyril charged it on him by
consequence, because he refused the name (...) on the foresaid account;
thinking that denomination a ratione formali, is most apt. And it seems one
took Nature in the same sense, as others took Person, meaning the same thing.

The Eutychians asserted one Nature only, but they meant that Christ had but
one Nature, as undivided, (which the Orthodox granted) but denied not that the
Godhead and Manhood were distinct. And what was the difference then, but
whether the undivided Godhead and Manhood should be called one Nature, or two;
which truly in one sense was two, and in another one. The like was the
Monothelites Heresy (for and against which were many Councils) about one or
two Wills and Operations, no more disagreeing than as aforesaid, about the
sense of [ One] and [ Two.] And had not a wise Explication, and patient
Reconciliation, done better service, than Cursing did, whose doleful effects
(Hatred, Hereticating and Schism) continue to this day.

Should I come to the Councils about Images, and that at Constantine, that
decreed the Tribus Capitulis, and the multitudes since that have deposed
Emperors and Kings, raised Wars, set up Popes, and Anti-Popes, etc. Alas how
sad a History would it be, to convince us that Councils of Bishops have caused
most of the Schisms, Church-Tyranny, Rebellions and Confusions in the Christian
world. And if the Popes have been restrained, or deposed, or Schisms at Rome
partly stopped by any, the flame has quickly more broke out; and condemned Popes
have often got the better of them: And if one Council has said, That the Pope is
responsible, another has determined the contrary: If Basil and Constance
decreed, That a Council be called every ten years, it was not done, but was a
mockery in the event. In a word, Councils of Bishops have been but
Church-Armies, of which at first the Patriarchs were Generals, and afterward
Popes and Emperors, and came to fight it out for Victory, the sequel being
usually Schism and Calamity. And must this be the only way of Universal Peace?

CHAP. VII.
The Universal Church will never unite in many pretended Articles of Faith, not
proved to be Divine: nor in owning unnecessary doubtful Opinions or Practices
as Religious, or Worship of God; notwithstanding the pretense of Tradition.

Sect. I. I Need say no more for proof of this than is said in the first Part.
If Preachers say that this or that is an Article of Faith; If Popes say it; If
Councils say it, this saying will never unite all Christians in the belief of
it. It is no belief of God whose object is not revealed by God, and perceived
so to be, and received as such. That the sacred Scriptures are written by
Divine Inspiration, Christians are commonly agreed; But that Popes, Prelates or
Councils speak by Divine Inspiration, even when they expound the Scriptures,
all Christians neither are agreed, nor ever will be; And till a man perceives
that it is God that speaks, or that the word spoken is Gods Word, he cannot
believe it with a Divine Faith, which is nothing but believing it to be Gods
Word, and trusting it accordingly. God is true, but men are Liars, Romans 3.

Sect. II. Before we can receive any thing as Truth from Man, we must have
evidence that it is true indeed: And that must be, 1. Either from the nature of
the thing, and its causes; 2. Or from some testimony of God either concomitant
(as Miracles were) or subsequent, (in the Effects;) 3. Or from our knowledge of
the Veracity, Authority, Inspiration and Infallibility of the Instrument or
Speaker. If therefore any Church or company of men shall tell us, that this is
a Divine Truth or Article of Faith, no more of the World can be expected to
believe them, than are convinced of it by one of these three proofs: The first
is the case of natural Revelation, and not now questioned: The Second none but
the Church of Rome do plead for their own belief, viz. that they work Miracles,
and therefore are to be believed in whatever they affirm to be the Word of God.
Knot against Chillingworth, and others of them do ultimately resolve their
Faith, or their proof of the truth of their Religion into the Miracles wrought
in the Church of Rome, by which God testifies his approbation of their
Assertions: Other Christians that may have more miracles than Papists, yet
resolve not their proof of Christianity into them, but lay more stress on other
Evidence, and particularly on Christ's and his Ministers miracles attesting the
holy Scriptures and Gospel to be of God. And when we can find just proof of the
Papists Miracles, we shall be willing to study the meaning of them: But
hitherto we have not found such proof. If any Council in Rome, France, Germany
or England shall say, These are Divine revealed Truths, and as such, you must
believe, subscribe or swear to them, the world will never agree in believing
them, when no sober man is bound to believe them, but as humane, uncertain and
fallible witnesses, according to the measure of their Credibility.

Sect. III. Long experience fully proves this: No Age of the Church did ever
agree in Articles of mere humane Assertion; (for that had been but a humane
Faith.) That which the Council of Nice said, was denied by the Councils at
Sirmium, Ariminum, etc. That which the Council at Ephesus the first, and at
Chalcedon affirmed, they at the Council of Ephesus the second denied: That
which the Monotholites under Philippicus (innumerable Bishops says Binius)
affirmed many other Councils condemned: That which the Council at Nice the
second decreed for Images, was condemned by many other Councils: That which the
Councils at ^isa, Constance and Basil decreed to be Articles of Faith, the
Council at Florence and others abhor. Much less will a Provincial Synod, or a
Convocation, or a Parliament be taken by all the Christian world to be
infallible.

Sect. IV. And indeed the obtruding of ^alshoods, or Uncertainties on the
Churches, is a notorious cause of Schism: For what can you expect that men of
Sobriety and Conscience should do in such a case? Discern the certainty of the
thing they cannot; nor can they believe that all must needs be true, that is
said by a Synod, a Convocation or a Parliament: And they dare not lie, in
saying they believe that which they do not: And to take all for Schismatics
that dare not deliberately lie, or that set not up (...) men as Lords of their
Conscience instead of God, is Schismatical, unchristian and inhumane.

And as men's mere wills ought not to rule their understandings, nor the will of
Synods, of Bishops, or others, to be the rule and measure of our wills, so
though we were never so willing to believe all to be true that Councils of
Bishops or Princes say, (...) are not our understandings in the power of our
(...). We cannot believe what we list. To know or believe without evidence of
truth, is to see without light. False Hypocrites may force their tongues to say
that they believe this or that at the Command of man; but they cannot force
themselves indeed to believe (...). How then can a book of Articles or the
Decrees of a Council, or the Laws of a Prince, bring the World to any unity of
Belief, in things not evidently of God?

Sect. V. What I say of Divine Faith, I say of Points of Religious Practice:
For though all things believed be not to be done, yet all things to be done as
commanded by God, must first be believed to be commanded by him: And to believe
and do, is somewhat more than only to believe.

Sect. VI. But it is one thing to say, This is Gods Command; and another to say,
This is our Command. The first none will agree to, that see not evidence to
believe it. The second is, 1. Either according to Gods Command (to drive Men to
obey it.) 2. Or beside his Command. 3. Or against his Command.

1. Those Laws of Men which are according to Gods Laws, those only will obey
who discern them so to be, on that account: Therefore it must be in evident
Cases, or they will be no measure of Concord as such.

2. Those that are but besides Gods Laws, Men should obey, so far as they can
find that the Commanders have power from God to make them; And how few such
will be matter of Universal Concord?

3. Those that are against Gods Laws, no good Christians will knowingly consent
to.

Sect. VII. And I have before truly told them, what great diversity of
capacities and understandings there be in the world, so that even in common
matters that are still before our eyes, at least in many or most, few persons
long agree: In matters of Fact at any distance, or matters of Prudence, Husband
and Wife, Parents and Children, Master and Servants, daily differ: Men's faces
scarce differ more than their understandings: It is only in few, plain, easy
things, that all Men are agreed: And are ever all Christians like to agree in
many humane, dark opinions? Or will it be taken for certain to all Men, because
it is so to some of clearer understandings? or because a self-confident Imposer
vevehemently asserteth it? They know not themselves, they know no Man, that
presume to unite the Church this way.

Sect. VIII. Therefore the Popish numerous Decrees de Fide, are but so many
Engines of Schism made on the pretense of declaring Points of Faith. If they
were Articles of Faith before, they may be mani^est to be so in the Divine
Revelation, that is, the Holy Scriptures: But for the Council to tell a Man, [
This or That is in the Bible, but we cannot show you it there, nor can you find
it if you search, but you must take our words as infallible:] This is not a
center that the Christian world will ever unite in.

And if it be an Article of Faith, either the Church held it before the Council
declared it, or not: If they did, then it was known without a Councils
Declaration. And what need a Council to declare that which all the Church did
hold before, and was in possession of? But if not, then either it was an
Article of Faith before, or not. If it was, then the Church before held not
that Faith, and so was Heretical, Corrupt, or wanted Faith, and so by their own
reckoning (who will not endure the distinction of essentials from the rest) was
no Church. If not, then the Council declared that to be an Article of Faith,
which was none: It must be such, before it can be truly declared such; else a
false Declaration that it was such, did now make it such: But if they had
openly professed, That by Declaring it an Article, they meant the Making one,
they must prove,

1. That they are Prophets, and have new Revelations even of Faith.

2. And that the Scriptures were not sufficient measures of the Churches Faith
to the end of the world.

3. And that the Churches Faith is alterable and crescent, and the old Church
had not the same Faith which the present Church has. And will the Christian
world any more agree in such absurdities, than in a Quakers of Familists
professing, that he speaks by Inspiration? If the Members of the Council
before they came thither, were no wiser nor honester than other Men, nor their
words more credible, how shall we know that when they are there, they are
become inspired, and their words are Gods own words?

But if it be said, That they neither make new Articles of Faith, nor declare
what is in Scripture by Exposition, but declare the Verbal Tradition of the
Apostles; I ask,

1. If so big a Book as the Bible, contain not so much as all the Churches
Creed;

2. Where has this Traditional Faith been kept till now? If by all the Church,
then it was held, possessed and known before that Declaration: If but by part
of the Church, then it was but part of the Church that had the true Faith, and
one part was of one Religion, and another part of another.

And which part was it that kept this Tradition? And how come we to know that
they were righter than the rest, that had it not? If it was Rome only, then
they had a Faith different from the rest of the Churches; And how shall we know
that they are not as true and sound as Rome?

But how has this Tradition been carried on, and kept right? Was it by
Writing, or by Word? If by Writings, why are they not cited, seen and tried?
Other men can read as well as Popes and Councils: If unwritten, was it by
public Preaching, or private Talk? If the former, then it was commonly known
and declared, before the Council declared it. If by private Talk, how shall we
be sure,

1. That they were honest men that would keep private the Public Faith,
especially being Preachers that by office were to publish it.

2. And that it has been well remembered and carried on without alteration. And
were it preached or whispered, man's memory is so frail, and words so uncertain,
that for the Church, or a piece of the Church to carry down from the Apostles
from Fathers to Children so many Articles, (more than are in all the Bible) and
so hard and mysterious, and by many now controverted, and this not by writing,
and to be sure that no mistake has been made by oblivion, or misexpression,
this is a thing that the Church will never unite in the belief of.

And was it in a set form of unchangeable words, that all these Articles (or
Expositions) were carried down till now, or not? If yea, we should have had
that Form delivered us, as we have other Forms ( the Creed, Lords Prayer, etc.)
If not, how shall we know that the Fathers and Children had the same
understanding of the matter, and changed not the Faith by change of words? And
it is like that all the Churches, since the Apostles, delivered not these
Articles down in the same words, when in several Countries and Ages they spoke
not the same language. And it is a wonder that they would never write their
Faith, for their Children to learn, when the Jews, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. were
commanded to teach their Children, by writing the Law upon the very Posts of
their Houses, and their Gates: And it is a greater wonder, that Parents and
Children should through so many Generations and Countries have so unerring sur^
a memory.

And it is strange how their own Commentators come to differ about the sense of
Thousands of Texts of Scripture, if the Churches Tradition have publicly and
notoriously delivered down the meaning of them. If not, how Councils come to be
the infallible Commentators, and Declarers of the Sense of Scriptures.

But if really such men believe themselves, it will be long before either by
fraud or force, they can make all others believe such things.

Sect. IX. Gods wisdom appointed a few great and necessary things to be the
terms of the Churches Unity and Love; but Ignorance and Pride, by pretenses of
Enmity to Error and Heresy, have plagued and torn the Churches by Decrees and
Canons, and led us into a Labyrinth, so that men know not where they are, nor
what to hold, nor what the Christian Religion is, nor who are Orthodox, and who
are not; so great a work it is to understand such Voluminous Councils, and then
to be sure that they are all right, even when they condemn and damn each other.
That which has been the chief Cause and Engine of Division, will never become
the means or terms of the Unity or Concord of all the Churches: But such are
the multitude of unnecessary, uncertain humane Decrees, Laws and Canons of
Faith and Religion, whatever the proud and ignorant say to the contrary.

CHAP. VIII.
The Universal Church will never Unite, by receiving all that is now received
by Greeks, Latins, Armenians, Abassines, Lutherans, Calvinists, Diocesane,
Presbyterians, Independants, Erastians, Anabaptists, or in full Conformity to
any of the present Parties, which adds to the Primitive Simplicity in her
terms of Communion or Concord.

Sect. I. I Must expect that the Evil Spirit which has long torn the Church,
and made multitudes tear themselves, and foam out Reproach, yea, and Blood
against each other, will presently meet the very Title of this Chapter, with a
charge of Pride against the Writer, and say, What are you, that you should know
more than all the Churches in the World? And pre^ume to charge them all with so
great Error, as not to know the terms of Christian Concord, nor the way of
Universal Peace?

But I answer, 1. Is the Church now United in any of these terms or ways? Are
they all Papists? Are they all of the Greek Church, or Armenian, Abassine, etc?
Are they all Lutherans, or Calvinists, etc? If not, why should you conclude
that ever they will be? Or that any of these are congruous terms of Concord,
and that the same that does not heal, will heal them? Will not Christians be
the same as now?

Sect. II. They never were United on any of these terms. I have proved that
they were never all Papists. And it will be easily granted of the rest (that
they were never all Greeks, Lutherans, etc.) And that which never did unite the
Church, never will do.

Sect. III. If you think all must be united in any of these ways, which of
them is it? And why that, rather than any of the rest?

1. Must they all be of the Greek opinions? You see that the Papists condemn
them for Schismatics: And other Churches lament their manifold Corruptions:
And the Eastern Countries long since divided from them. We have here in London
a Greek Church new built, and Tolerated; and their work is done so ignorantly
and unreverently, that they have usually not twice the number of the
officiating or present Priests who join with them.

2. Must they all be Papists? Never was more Policy and Cruelty used to
propagate and prop up any Church under Heaven; and yet they cannot prevail for
Universal Subjection. Nay, many Kingdoms and Countries are fallen from them,
while they used such means to keep them, insomuch that by many of the soundest
Churches, they are taken for no better than Antichristian Heretics. And even
the Greek Church separateth from them, and pronounces them Schijmaticks, and
Excommunicates them every year; And they can never obliterate the History of
their horrid Schisms and Usurpations, and inhumane Butcheries, which will
alienate many from them. Will all the world ever agree to the Dominion of one
Usurper? Will they all believe the Monster of Transubstantiation? Will they all
agree, That all the Senses of all men are deceived, who think that they see and
taste Bread and Wine, and there is none? And that it is necessary to Salvation,
to renounce all our Senses, and the Scripture, that often calls it Bread after
the Consecration, 1 Cor. 11. Will all agree, That God, who cannot lie by
Supernatural Revelation, is the Father of all the lies to Sense, that perceive
real Bread and Wine, and deceives them all by his Natural Revelation? Will all
men believe. That every lying, fornicating, proud and covetous Priest, even
many Thousands of them, can work Miracles at their pleasures every day in the
week, by making Bread no Bread, and turning it into Flesh and (...). And that
there are visible Accidents without a Subject, even, a round nothing, a white
nothing, a sweet nothing, etc. And that there are no substantial s^^ns in that
Sacrament of the thing signified? And that Christ's true Flesh was broken, and
his Blood shed by himself in the Sacrament, before it was broken and shed on
the Cross? And that two General Councils, who decree as de Fide, that Christ
has not now Flesh in Heaven, has yet heavenly Flesh in the Sacrament. I know
that Augustine retracted somewhat as an oversight that looked that way: But two
General Councils (that at Constantinople, called the 7th General by some, and
that at Nice 2d) which damned one another about Images, yet agreed in this,
That Christ has not Flesh in Heaven.

The words are, (Bin. p. 378. defin. 7.) [Siauis non confessus fuerit Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum post Assumptionem animatae, rationalis and intelle^^^^
carnis simul sedere cum Deo and ^atre, atque ita quique rursus venturum cum
Paterna Majestate, judicaturum v^vos and mortuos, non amplius quidem Carnem,
neque incorporeum tamen, ut videatur ab i^s a quibus conpunctus est, and maneat
Deus extra crassitudinem Carnis, Anathema.

And in this they say, that the Constantin. Council which they are condemning,
was in the right; so that they anathematize the Church of Rome, which think
that Christ has Flesh in Heaven, and in the Eucharist, which they deny, yet
saying that he has a Body. And let those that would pervert the word [
Crassitudinem] note, that he does not distinguish of Christ's flesh and ours as
two sorts, and say, extra carnem Crassam, but, deny him to have flesh, and say,
extra crassitudinem carnis, as an essential property of flesh: And one of these
Councils the Papists own.

Will all Christians agree that every Priest must first make his God, and then
eat him? or that he must communicate alone without communion with the People?
or that he must worship Bread and Wine as his God? or that he may give a
half-Sacrament of Bread without Wine, contrary to Christ's Institution, the
Apostles Doctrine, 1 Cor. 11. and all the Churches constant practice till of
late. And that instead of a Commemoration he offers a real present Sacrifice
for the quick and dead? Will all agree to their Imageworship? Why then did so
many Councils condemn it? Will all agree that the Assemblies pray in an unknown
tongue? He is mad with error who believes that ever the Church Universal will
receive all these and the rest, which pretended Infallibility makes to be
uncurable Errors in the impenitent Roman Sect.

3. And briefly as to the rest, there is no Calvinist believes that ever all
the Churches will receive the Lutherane Consubstantiation or Church-Images? Nor
any Lutherane that believes that ever all the Church will be of the way called
Calvinism; a Name even here in England honored by many (that yet disown it as
a note of Schism,) and reproached with the bitterest scorn and accusations by
others.

Indeed the Behmenists, the Quakers and some Anabaptists have said, that all
the Churches would at last (and shortly) be of their mind; But few others
believe them, nor have cause.

Sect. IV. That which has divided the Churches will never be the cement of
their Concord: But every one of these parties as Sects, by that whence others
denominate and oppose them, have done something to divide the Churches: what
the Greeks, Arm^^ans, Nestorians, Eutychians or Jacobites have done, the
Papists and others tell you at large: what the Abassines do, by their
Baptizings, and other Fopperies, I need not declare. What the Papists do above
all o^^ers, I have opened before. What the Anabaptists do, by differing from
almost all other Christians, is known. What the Diocesans have done in
Councils, and by silencing others, etc. enough have showed. What Independents and
their way have done toward Divisions and Separations, it is in vain in this
Age in England to recite: And many wise men think, that the Presbyterians over
violent rejecting of all Episcopacy, setting up unordained Elders, and National
Churches as headed by National Assemblies, etc. are divisive and unwarrantable;
As the same men think their making by the Scots Covenant the renouncing of the
Prelacy to be the test of National Concord, also was.

And who can think that Erastianism, deposing the true use of
Church Government, as it has begun, will not still more divide than heal?

Sect. V. I deny not but Universal Concord may take in almost all such parties:
but not as such, by receiving any of their Errors, but as Christians, who
agree in the common Essentials of Faith and Piety. We can unite with sober
Anabaptists, but not by becoming Anabaptists. Christianity is our Religion, and
with all that hold the Essentials of Christianity, we can hold essential Unity:
And with those that hold the Integrals most purely, we have more and nearer
Concord than with the rest, that have more errors: And if any of these parties
be sounder than the rest, we love and honor them above the rest, and prefer
their Assemblies for our local Communion. But though my Parlour or Bedchamber
be a cleaner part of my house than my Kitchen, or my Co^-house, I will not say
therefore that the whole house must be a Parlour or Bedchamber; or that the
hand and the foot are no parts of the body because they are not the head or
heart; or that all the body must be an Eye or one of the Noblest parts: St.
Paul has taught me better than so, 1 Cor. 12: We must expect that each party
should labor to propagate that which they take to be the truth: But to force
all to their sayings, or persecute or cast off all Dissenters, is schismatical,
whatever be pretended.

CHAP. IX.
The pretended Necessity of an uninterrupted Canonical or Episcopal Ordination
will never unite the Church, but is Schismatical: Mr. Henry Dodwells
S^hismatical Treatise against Schism considered and confuted.

. 1. BEcause the City of Rome has not been conquered and kept by Infidels, nor
Christianity thence ejected, the Papists think that they excel other Churches
in an uninterrupted Succession of ordained Pastors; and therefore they bend
their wits to prove this necessary to every true Church, and then to prove
others to be no true Churches or Ministers of Christ that want it.

And because they think that our Pastors can prove no such continued
Succession, unless as derived to us from Rome, and that to acknowledge such a
derivation, is to acknowledge them a true Church, on which we have and must
depend, therefore they most earnestly manage this Argument against us as their
strength.

Sect. II. And there is lately a young unordained Student of Trinity-Colledge
near Dublin, come out of Ireland, to propagate this and such like Doctrines in
London; to which end he has lately written a large and wordy Volume, as if it
were only against the Non-conformists: Which being new, and the most audacious
and confident attempt that ever I knew made against the reformed Churches, by
one that says himself he is no Papist, and being the most elaborate
enforcement of the Papists grand Argument on which of late they build their
cause, I think it needful to the Readers satisfaction not to pass it by, though
it will not stand with the order of this undertaken work, nor with my want of
leisure, to write a particular Answer to all the words of so exceeding prolix
and tedious a discourse.

Sect. III. I have often handled this case already, especially in my Disput. of
Church Government, Disp. of Ordination; and in my Ecclesiastical Cases in my
Christian Directory, and that more largely than I must here do: And the Reader
that would see more, may read the Protestants Cause fully vindicated against
Cornelius Jansenius (a stronger adversary) by Gisb. Voetius in a full Volume de
desperata causa Papatus. But I shall here first briefly assert the Truth.

Sect. IV. 1. Christ and his Spirit in his Apostles have already instituted and
described the Office of the sacred Ministry, and determined what Power and what
Obligations to the work it does contain; and what the work is to which they are
designed: so that it is not left to any Church now to make or amend, or change
the O^^^ce: what it is I have described in the Second ^art.

Sect. V. 2. Christ also, and his Spirit in his Apostles, have told us what are
the necessary qualifications of such as shall receive this Office, and be
received into it: viz. what is necessary to the Being, and what to the
Well-being of a Minister of Christ. And consequently who are utterly incapable;
so that Men may by Canons enforce the Execution of these Canons of Christ, and
may instruct each other how to understand them; but they cannot make a Pastor
of an incapable unqualified person, no more than they can make current Coin of
forbidden Metal, or Meat of Stones, or a Wife of a Male; ^orma non recipitur
nisi in materia disposita; As he that must profess Physic, or Philosophy, or
Law, or Grammar, or Music, must be tolerably qualified to do what he
professes, or else he is but equivocally called a Physician, Philosopher,
Lawyer, Musician, etc. whatever Title, License, or Commission he has: so is it
here.

Sect. VI. 3. God has told us in Scripture, that these special qualifications
are Christ's own Gifts, conferred on Men for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians.
4. 8, 9, 10, etc. 1 Cor. 12. And that the qualifying Men thus, is Gods calling
them to the Office, and the Holy Ghost is said to set them over the Church by
his special Gifts.

Sect. VII. 4. But for preserving Order, and avoiding Usurpation, God has
described how these Qualifications shall be discerned and judged of, which is
called the External Call; which is,

1. That the Person shall discern them in himself, viz. competent Faith and
Knowledge, Willingness and Desire, and Ability for utterance and practice: For
he that thinks not himself capable, cannot consent; and he that consents
not, is no Minister. But no Man is to be the sole Judge of his own fitness;
else the most self-conceited would be the Invaders of the Office.

2. Therefore the Senior Pastors are ordinarily to try them, and judge of their
fitness, and by Ordination invest them, by delivery, with the power.

3. The Peoples need of them, must make them capable of the Correlation, and
their consent is necessary to their Reception: For no Man can be a Teacher to
those that will not hear, nor a Pastor to those that consent not to take him
for their Pastor.

Sect. VIII. 5. The Person r^c^ipient being truly found and determined of, Gods
own Law does of a self give him his Power, and Oblige him to his work. As it is
not left to the Ordainers, to judge whether the Churches shall have Pastors or
nene, or what the Power and Works of the Office shall be, nor what
Qualifica^ons shall be necessary to reception; but only to discern who are the
Men that God chooses, and makes most receptive, and so to discern Gods Will,
which is the Person, and declare it and invest him; so it is not the Ordainer
nor People that have the Office or Power to give to him that they ordain and
choose, but it resists directly from Christ's concession in his Law: As a
Woman chooses her Husband, and the Minister celebrateth Marriage for Order
sake, but Gods Law gives the Husband his power over the Wife. And as in a
Corporation or City, the King by his Charter says, [ Every Year on such a day,
such Persons shall Choose a Man thus qualified, to be their Mayor, and the
Recorder shall swear him and invest him, and I hereby grant him, thus Chosen
and Sworn, such and such Power, and Command him to do thus and thus.] Here the
Electors do but determine of the qualified recipient Person, and the Recorder
invest him, but his Power arises immediately from the Kings Char^er: And if
the Choosers or Invester say it shall be more, or less, or other, it is null
that they say, and shall not infringe or change his Office.

Sect. IX. Now it is supposed, that if a point of Order be omitted; If the
Election day by Fire or Plague, or War, be overpast; If the Recorder be dead,
or refuse his Office, that this does not totally Null the Charter: One chosen a
week after, in case of necessity, may have the Power: Or if that Years Election
should hereby be made void, the Charter is not void, but will the next Year
authorize the Person chosen. Interruption will not hinder this. And if one that
had not a just Election, or Investiture, should intrude this Year, the Charter
will authorize the next notwithstanding: Or if the Recorder that invested the
last was an Intruder, the next may yet be truly authorized: Or if the Charter
were, that every former Mayor shall invest the next, it would not hinder a
Succession, if a former had usurped: For the Charter still reviveth it, and is
supposed to appoint such means as are sufficient, if a circumstance fail.

So is it in the present Case: If a Bishop were an Usurper, conterfeiting his
own Ordination; or if a Presbyter pretend himself a Bishop, or to have
Ordaining Power when he has not, or if an unjust Choice be made, the next Man
has still a due way of entrance; yea, and want of such a point of Order, when
it is not fraudulently contemned or refused, Nulleth not the Office Power.
Order is for the thing ordered, and for the common good, and not to be
pretended against it. If the Pharisees that sat in Moses Chair were to be
heard, and the Highpriests that were then unlawfully called (out of the true
line, and buying the Office of the Romans for money) were to be submitted to in
their Office, much more a Christian Pastor truly qualified by God, and chosen
by the Flock, and approved by Senior Pastors, though there were some point of
Order wanting.

Sect. X. Yea, in case of necessity were there no Ordination, but just
Qualification and Election, it wou^d not nullify the Office; nor has God
promised that no place shall fall under such necessity: For Christ has taught
us, That He will have mercy, and not sacrifice; and that the Sabbath was made
for man, and not man for the Sabbath; and Paul and Apollo are for the Church.
And as in Physic, or Soldiery, or Re^^ of the Poor, that must be done by the
Law of Nature, which cannot be done according to all the Points of an Ordering
Law of Man; so is it here: It is meet for the safety of Men's Health, that none
practice Physic but a Licensed Physician; But in Cases of Necessity, (when
Physicians are wanting) every one that has skill may use it, and an able Man
may be a Physician unlicensed, rather than see Men perish whom he may help. It
has been my own Case: In a great and poor Town where was no Physician, came an
Epidemical Plurisie; had they been neglected, most had dyed; Necessity
constrained me to advise them, and they all recovered: Thereupon their Poverty
and Importunity constrained me to practice Physic many Years (only gratis) and
God by it saved the lives of multitudes; should I think, in this case of
Necessity, that I sinned, because I took not a License, (which resolving not to
continue the Practice, I could not do:) So I have known some skilled in Law,
that have helped many by Council, though they were no Lawyers.

So none may take up Arms as a Soldier without the King's Commission: But in
case Traitors and Rebels suddenly endanger King and Kingdoms, or Enemies invade
the Land, every Man is a Soldier by the Law of Nature; which also enableth
every Man to defend his Life, Purse, House, Parents, Neighbors, against Thieves
and Murderers.

The Law of the Land orders, That the Poor be kept by the Parishes from
Begging, and that we relieve not Beggars otherwise. But if the Parishes through
Poverty or Uncharitableness neglect them, the Law of Nature binds us to
relieve them, rather than see them perish.

All Laws, for the mere Ordering of any Duty, suppose that the Duty must be
done, and that as tends to its proper end, and not that on pretense of Order
it be undone. If the Coronation of a King be not performed regularly, he is
King nevertheless by Inheritance, or Election; and he is King before his
Coronation. Marriage is valid before God, by mutual consent, before the
Matrimonial Solemnization; and where this cannot be had, it is no Duty. If a
Priest would not marry Persons, unless they will make some unlawful Promise, or
do some unlawful thing, it is lawful (and may be a Duty) to marry themselves,
declaring it publicly to avoid Scandal, unless the severity of the Law of the
Land do accidentally make it unlawful: And in some Countries the sinful course
of Priests may make this an ordinary Case. And no reason can be given, but that
here it may be so.

Sect. XI. Many Cases may fall out in which no Ordination, by Imposition of
Hands, or present Solemnity, may be necessary to this Office.

1. In Case a Company of Christians be Cast upon a remote Island, where no
Ordainer can be had, and yet some of them are qualified Persons: It is sinful
for them to forbear Gods Public Worship, therefore they must choose the
fittest person to perform it, viz. Preaching, Prayer, Praise, Baptizing, and
the Lords Supper: And that Election sufficiently designeth the person, that
from Christ's Charter shall receive the Ministerial Power, and be obliged to the
Duty (if he consent.)

2. In Case the Person be remote, and the Ordainers and he cannot meet, or
Persecutors, or Tyrants, or other Accidents, hinder their Meeting, he may be
Authorized by Letters, without any other Ordination: It is well known that this
has of old been practiced, and Bishops have sent such Letters of Ordination,
to those absent Persons that have fled from Ordination, and so made them
Bishops. And it being but the designation of the recipient Person on whom
Christ's Law shall confer the Office, that they have to do, there is no reason
to be given why they may not do it effectually by writing.

3. In Case that Death or Persecution has left none to Ordain, that are within
reach of the Person to be Ordained: If Ordination by Diocesanes were ordinarily
necessary, yet in those Kingdoms or Countries where there is none, it cannot be
had; as in New England, and lately in Britain, in Belgia, Helvetia, and other
Countries.

Some may say, You ought to go for it, though as far as from America hither,
and to seek it Beyond the Seas, and in other Lands, or stay till it may be had.
But I answer,

1. In some Countries the Governors will not suffer Diocesane Ordination.

2. Words are soon spoken, but to sail from America hither, and that for every
Man that is to be Ordained, is not soon done; some have not health to bear it
at Sea; some have not money to pay for the Voyage charge.

3. It is a sinful loss of a Years time, in which they might do God much
service.

4. A Years Voyage by Sea to and fro, may hazard their Lives, and so frustrate
all their end.

5. Some Princes and States forbid their Subjects to be Ordained in Foreign
Lands, as we forbid Romish Ordination, lest it draw a Foreign Power on them.

6. It is not lawful to deny God his Public Worship, and our selves the
benefit, by so long delay.

7. It is contrary to the temper of the Gospel, which ever subjecteth Ceremony,
Rites and External Orders, to Morals, and to Man's good, and the great Ends.

8. And it is a wrong to the honor of the Divine Nature, for Men to feign,
that the Great, Wise, and Merciful God, lays so great a stress upon a
Ceremony, or Rite, or outward Order, as to damn Souls, and deny his own
Worship, where it cannot be had.

4. And this Ordination is not necessary, in Case the Ordainers be grown so
wicked, or heretical, as that they will ordain no good and orthodox Men, but
only such as are of their own sinful way.

5. And in Case the Ordainers require, as necessary, any one unlawful thing,
Subscriptions, Profession, Vow, or Practice.

If any say, That God will never permit us to fall under such Necessities, they
must prove it; and Experience disproveth it.

Sect. XII. And if in all such Cases no Ordination be necessary, much less is
Diocesane Ordination necessary in all Cases and Places: As,

1. In Countries where no Diocesanes are, or are near.

2. In Countries where they or their Ordination is not endured by the Governors.

3. In Countries where the People being in judgment against it, will have no
Pastor so Ordained: It is not better to have none at all.

4. In Countries where Wars do hinder it.

5. When the Diocesanes themselves will not venture to Ordain, for fear of
suffering for it.

6. In Countries where the Bishops are so corrupted, that they refuse all that
are truly fit.

7. Or where they refuse all whom the People either choose, or will consent to;
and the Bishops and People cannot agree on the same Man.

8. Or wherever the Diocesanes impose unlawful Covenants, Promises,
Professions, Subscriptions, Vows, Oaths, or Practices, without which they will
not Ordain.

On some or other of these accounts, a Romanist would not be Ordained by a
Greek, or Protestant, or Armenian, etc. and a Greek, or Protestant, would not
be Ordained by a Papist; supposing something to be unlawful.

9. But when a Parochial Bishop may be the Ordainer, in such Cases, the
Validity will not be denied by most Episcopal Divines.

10. And it is truly as valid in such Cases, when, 1. Senior Presbyters, 2.
that are authorized by the Magistrate, 3. especially that are chief Pastors in
Cities, and have Curates under them, do Ordain, though some deny to call them
Bishops.

11. As the Erastians think that the Christian Magistrate may design the
person, by the Peoples consent, without any other Ordination; so Musculus and
some other Protestants think, that a fit person designed by the Magistrate, and
accepted by the People, need not question his Call to the Office; And it is hard
to disprove them.

12. If the Opinion of many Papists, and Protestants hold true, That a Bishop
differs not from a Presbyter in Order (or Office) but in Degree, as the
Foreman of a Jury, or the President of a Synod (...) College, or Council of
State, etc. then I see no reason but the Magistrate may make a Bishop of a
Presbyter, as he may make a President of a College, or a Mayor of a
Corporation: For then the difference being but in the Accidents of the Office,
and the King being Governor of the Church, as far as the Sword is to govern,
and specially the determiner of mere Accidents and Circumstances, circa sacra,
why may he not set one Presbyter in degree above the rest? Did not all the
strife of Emperors for the power of investing Bishops, signify this much
against the Popes opposition? Both sides granted that the People and Clergy
were to be the Choosers of a Bishop. And it was the old Canon, that no Bishop
should remove from Seat to Seat; so that only Presbyters, and no former
Bishops, were made Bishops of any particular City, (or Deacons, or Subdeacons
sometime at Rome.) By which it appears, that the Emperors power of
Investiture amounted to a Negative voice, in the making of a Bishop. The Kings
of Israel sent Levites to teach the People, and Solomon chose who should be the
High Priest: And when the Romans after sold the Office, Christ bids the
cleansed Lepers, Go and show themselves to the High Priest, and offer, etc.

Sect. XIII. The Case of the Reformed Churches nullified by the Papists, and
whose Ministers Office and Authority is denied by them, is as follows.

I. The old Bohemians and Waldenses had different degrees of Pastors, of which
the Superior were called Conseniors and Seniors of one Order, who presided
among the Elders, but took not the Government of the Flocks out of their hands,
nor ruled without them, and were chiefly above others in judging what Elders
(or Ministers) were to be removed from lesser places to greater: whose Form of
Government, most like the Ancients, you may see at large in the Descriptions of
Lascitius and Commenius.

II. The Churches called Lutherane, ( Denmark, Sueden, Saxony, etc.) have for
the most part some Episcopacy called Superintendency; but their Bishops take
not the power of the Keys from the Pastors of the several Parishes. And they
take not the power of Ordaining to be proper to the Bishops: For the Bishops of
Denmark were made such by Bugenhagius Pomeranus a Presbyter; which they suppose
does null their Successive Power.

And the English have Diocesane Bishops and Ordination by them, and as good a
Succession, at least of Regular Ordination, as Rome has had.

III. The Churches called Presbyterian in Holland, France, Scotland, and other
Countries, have Ordination by a Synod of the Pastors of particular Churches, of
which some are the chief Pastors of Cities, and have Curates, or assisting
Presbyters, and therefore are such Bishops as the Scripture, Ignatius,
Tertullian, yea, and Cyprian describe: so that,

1. They think that as in Generation a Man begets not an Ape, or Dog, but a
Man, and an Hors^ begets an Horse, and every thing propagateth its own
species; And as Physicians make Physicians, and Lawyers make Lawyers, etc. So
Pastors make Pastor^ as far as belongs to an Ordainer; that is, preparing and
determining the Receiver whom God shall give the Power to, and oblige to the
duty of that Office.

2. But yet in the same Order they think they have a true Episcopacy as to
degree, first, in the foresaid City Pastors that have Curates; secondly, in the
President of the Synod.

3. And they think that those Writers, Papists and Protestants, are in the
right, who expound the word [ Presbytery] which laid hands on Timothy, of a
Session of Presbyters, and therefore that such have power to Ordain.

4. And they think that if after their faithfullest search, they should in this
be mistaken against their wills, God will not therefore disown their Churches,
Ministry and Worship, no more than he will reject the Prayers of private
Christians for their Errors and Imperfections.

IV. Those that at present are called Nonconformists in England, who were
(about 2000 Ejected and Silenced, Anno 1662. Aug. 24.)

1. Many of them, (yea, most that were above 44 years old) were Ordained by
Bishops, (of whom I am one.)

2. The Generality of the rest lived, when by the Rulers that had such
possession as they could not resist, Diocesane Ordination was forbidden, and
another set up, and we heard not of five Bishops in England that did Ordain,
and hardly knew how to procure it of these. And the Oath of Allegiance might
have cost both the Bishop and the Ordained their Lives, or Liberties at least,
in the Times of Usurpation.

3. They were Ordained by a Classis, or Synod of Ministers, of whom some were
chief City Pastors that had Curates, (which says Grotius, de Imper. Sum. Pol.
were a sort of Bishops) and they had a President.

4. Some were not satisfied with this, and were secretly Ordained by the
deposed Bishops.

5. Some desired Confirmation of their Ordination aforesaid by the Synods, from
such Bishops as owned it, and had it (from Bishop Usher at least, of others I
am uncertain.)

6. The Generality of them that had any Parsonages or Vicarages, or any endowed
Cures in England, from the Year 1646, till the time that the Westminster
Assembly was Dissolved, had a formal authorizing Instrument of Approbation from
the said Assembly, or National Synod (chosen by the Parliament;) of which the
Catalogue in their Ordinance shows us, that diverse Bishops were, by the
Parliament, chosen Members. If any or all refused to be there, the Country
Ministers knew not that, but justly took them to be parts of the Synod: And
though this was not an Ordination by Imposition of Hands, they supposed that it
was as valid to authorize them, as the Acts beforementioned of some ancient
Bishops, who ordained absent Men. And the main Body of the late Ejected
Ministers (very few excepted) were thus called, confirmed, approved, and put
in, having also the Consent or Election usually of the Patron, and the People,
and the then Rulers.

Sect. XIV. And there were many that in those Times were only Ordained Deacons,
and took the Synods Letters of Approbation, for the substance of an Ordination
to be Presbyters, but wanting the Formality, submitted to Diocesane Ordination,
when the Diocesanes returned (of whom Dr. Manton was one.) Yea, diverse
submitted to be Re-ordained by the Diocesanes that had been Ordained Presbyters
before. This is the Nonconformists Case, except some few Independents, that
were not for formal Ordination, at least so much as the rest: yet even of them,
such as had Benefices in Anno 1646, 1647, 1648, had the Synods Approbation.

Sect. XV. To all this I must add, That by the Diocesanes Silencing multitudes
of those Ministers, whom the most Religious accounted the most able, holy,
powerful Preachers (in the days of Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles I.
besides the 2000 Silenced in the beginning of King Charles II.) the People that
were most serious in matters of Religion, were (except a few) so alienated from
the Diocesanes, that most of the stricter Religious Sort, would not choose a
Minister that was for them and their Ordination, and so it would have made a
more dangerous Schism than was made.

Sect. XVI. And as to the present state and practice of the Nonconformists,
(premising that I speak only of mere Nonconformists as such, and not Men of
other Principles and Parties that Conform not, as Jews, Turks, Socinians,
Papists, Familists, Quakers, etc.) let it be understood,

1. That they take all the Parishes and Congregations of true Christians that
have true Pastors to be true Churches of Christ: And they take such Ministers
as Conform, to be notwithstanding that true Ministers, though culpable; and
therefore they separate not from any such Churches as no Churches, or from such
Ministers as none.

2. They take particular Churches associated under Diocesanes, Archbishops, and
Nationally under one King, and represented in one Convocation or Synod, to be
still true Churches, and such as may be lawfully communicated with; and these
Diocesane, Provincial and National Associations to be laudable as they are mere
Associations for Concord, and though culpable in some other respects, yet such
as good Christians may lawfully live under submissively, and in peace.

3. They think it lawful to preach and administer the Sacraments in the Parish
Churches, and have these 17 years been cast out, and kept out much against
their wills, and labored, and hoped, though in vain, for Restoration.

4. It is not Communion with any Christian Church in Faith, Love, or Holy
Worship, or any thing of Gods Institution, no nor any thing of Man's commanding,
but what they believe God has forbidden them, which they deny. To deny to take
many Covenants, Oaths, Professions, or to do some Practices which upon their
best enquiry they verily believe to be great Sins, this is not separating from
any thing of God.

5. They do not depart from the Churches, but are cast out. The Ministers are
Silenced and ^^^cted, as they verily believe, for not sinning and hazarding
their Souls. Ministers and People are expressly by the Canon of the Church,
Excommunicated ipso facto, (which is sine sententia judicis) if they but say
that there is any thing in the Conformity, which a good Christian may not with
a good Conscience do: The Canon is visible and plain; so that they cannot
possibly avoid being cast out, and think that the Ejecters are the Schismatics.

6. When they are thus cast out, or driven away, they yet hold distant
Christian Communion with all Christians in one universal Church, one Spirit,
one Lord, one God, one Faith, one Baptismal Covenant, and one Hope, Ephesians. 4.
But local Communion they can have but in one place at once; and none are said
to separate from all the Churches, where they are not present.

7. The King by his License allowed them for a time to hold their own
Assemblies; and the Conformists themselves swear the Oath of Supremacy, and
take the King to be Supreme Governor in all Causes, and over all Persons
Ecclesiastical and Civil: And yet then accused the Licensed of Schism.

8. Though there be some things in the Liturgy which the Nonconformists dare
not Declare Assent and Consent to, (and therefore suffer,) yet they hold it
lawful both to join in Hearing, Prayer and Sacraments with the Parish Churches
and Conformists, in the Lords days Worship and use of that Liturgy; and many of
them do so ordinarily: And others do not hold it unlawful, but are hindered by
Preaching themselves where they can, which they dare not forbear: And the
People that hold it lawful, yet hold that better is to be preferred when they
can have it. And he that prefers a Minister which he finds most
Edification by, does not therefore separate from all others, because he is
absent from them.

9. The Nonconformists have in their appointed Treaties for Concord, offered to
use the Liturgy with some Emendations, and to submit even to the present
Archbishops, Bishops, and other parts of the Church Government, as is expressed
in the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs. By which (visible in
Print) it may be seen how far they were from separating inclinations, but it
could not by the Bishops, be accepted.

10. But it is true withal, that many of the Common People having constantly
preferred that which they thought they were bound to prefer, and seeing their
former Pastors cast out and silenced, thought they ought notwithstanding to
adhere to them, and grew into so hard thoughts of the Bishops that silenced
them, (about 2000 at once) that they are more alienated than before from them
and their Assemblies; as Chrysostoms Joannites were at Constantinople, till the
kindness of Atticus and Pr^^lus brought them back to the old public Church.

Sect. XVII. It is commonly confessed by their sharpest Accusers, that the
Nonconformists do well to forbear all that can be proved to be sinful: And if
they prove not Conformity sinful, they are content to suffer as real
Schismatics.

Sect. XVIII. We all agree of the necessity of a continued Succession in the
Universal Church, of the same Faith, Religion, and Ministerial Office which we
profess and possess: We have no one new Article of Faith or Religion, nor any
that have not continued in the Church; we have no new Office: But that the
Office and Administrations cannot pass as valid, unless the particular Minister
can prove, that he had Canonical Ordination from one that had the like, and he
from one that had the like, and he from another that had the like, and so up to
the Apostles; this we suppose irrational, schismatical, false, and of malignant
tendency against the Church and Interest of Christ.

Sect. XIX. Mr. Henry Dodwell is the Man that has newly and copiously promoted
this Schismatical Error, in a Book pretended to be against the Nonconformists
Schism, but disowned by the Conformable Doctors themselves, (many of them.) And
indeed, notwithstanding the tedious wordiness of it, it has little in it, in
comparison of Jansenius long ago, fully answered by Voetius. And though I told
him over and over first, that if he did not answer Voetius, and my dispute of
Ordination, we should take him but to labor in vain, as to our use, yet has he
taken no notice of either of them at all. If he intend it in any following
Book, it is but fraudulent to send out this great Volume first, to do his work
before he gave any notice of what is already said against him. Must we write
the same things as often as Men arise that will repeat the Arguments so often
confuted?

Sect. XX, His Design and Schismatical Doctrine is thus laid.

1. That the ordinary means of Salvation, are, in respect of every particular
person, confined to the Episcopal Communion to the place he lives in, as long
as he lives in it.

2. That we cannot be assured that God will do for us what is necessary for
Salvation on his part, otherwise than by his express promises that he will do
it.

3. Therefore we must have interest in his Covenant.

4. Therefore we must have the Sacrament by which the Covenant is transacted.

5. These as Legally valid, are to be had only in the external Communion of the
Visible Church.

6. This is only the Episcopal Communion of the place we live in.

7. The Validity of the Sacraments, depends on the Authority of the persons by
whom they are administered.

8. No Ministers have Authority of administering Sacraments, but only they that
have their Orders in the Episcopal Communion.

9. This cannot be from God, but by a continued Succession of persons orderly
receiving Authority from those who had Authority to give it them, (viz.
Bishops) from those first times of the Apostles, to ours at present.

10. That the Holy Ghost is the Instituter of this Order, and to violate it, by
administering without such Ordination, is to sin against the Holy Ghost, the Sin
that has no other sacrifice, and promise of pardon.

11. That the Ordained have no more or other power, than the Ordainers intend
or profess to give them.

12. That it is certain, that the Bishops of all former Ages intended not to
give Presbyters power of Ordaining or Administering out of their Subjection:
Ergo they have it not.

Sect. XXI. This, and a great deal more to this purpose, is his matter.

To gather all the Confusions, Contradictions and Absurdities of that wordy
Volume, would be tedious, and little profitable to the Reader; only these three
things in general I tell such as may be in danger of infection by it.

1. That he never agrees with his Adversaries of the state of the question,
nor so much as explicateth the terms, nor does any thing beseeming a Disputant,
to make himself understood.

2. That not only by denied (false) Suppositions, he makes all his Discourse
useless to the Nonconformists, but also at the first gives them their Cause,
and confirms them.

3. That while in his Preface he disowneth Popery, it is the very sting of
their Argumentation which he uses: And that which yet by consequence
overthrows not only the Churches, Ministry, Sacraments and Salvation of the
Protestants, but of all Christians on Earth, and of none more certainly, than
of the Papists: All which I undertake, when called, to prove.

Sect. XXII. It were tedious to mention all his ambiguous confounding terms:
For a few;

1. He that lays so great a stress on Episcopacy, never tells us what he
means by a Bishop; when he ought to know, that with the chief of his
Adversaries the Controversy is very much in that: For (as Grotius de Imper.
Sum. Pol. and many others) they take the chief Pastor of every Parish Church
(especially that has Curates under him) for a Bishop; See my Last Book against
Johnson of this.
at least if he be Pastor of a City, or Town so called of old ((...)) when
others deny him to be a Bishop that has not many Altars or Parishes under him.

2, Some take him for a Bishop that is but the prime Presbyter, or different
from the rest but Gradu, non ordine, called Episcopus Praeses: And others deny
him to be one, unless he differ Gradu, as another Officer in specie.

3. Some take him to be a Bishop, that has no Presbyter, but Deacons under
him, and that in a single Assembly (as Doctor Hammond on Act. 11. and
Dissertat.) Others deny him to be one, that is not over Presbyters.

4. Some take him to be no Bishop, that is not elected or consented to by the
people, (and the Clergy, if there be any;) Others hold him to be one, that has
the consent of neither, but only the Pope, or the Archbishop, or the King
electing and imposing him, and some Bishops consecrating him.

5. Some hold him to be no Bishop, unless three Bishops Consecrate him; Others
say, one may make him Bishop.

6. If three Bishops Consecrate one, and (...) another, he tell^ (...) that
Church* (...) see examine^ (...) Church, against (...)

Sect. XXIII. (...) repeateth the necessity of being in, an (...) by it; when
he must need^ (...) that the (...) or definition of it, is the very first point
of (...) between us and the Papists. By the tenor of his discourse, the Reader
may suspect that he means some Universal Society of Men on Earth, under some
one visible humane Head, either Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or
Democratical, a Sovereign who is ^ersona Civilis, and Pars Imp^rans
Constitutiva. But, if so, Protestants (we at least) deny any such, thinking
this the prime essential difference between us and the Papists, (the second
being whether the Pope or his Council be this Head;) and he never tells who
this supposed Head is.

So he frequently talks of necessary Communion with a particular Church, and
never tells us what he means by it: Nor can I gather often, whether he means
a Diocesane Church, or a Provincial, or a National. But I perceive that he
means not a Parochial; when yet he knew that the Adversaries take those for
particular Churches.

Sect. XXIV. 1. So he often talks of the necessity of Successive Canonical
Ordination, and never defines either Ordination, or Canonical Ordination; when
he must know that some take Imposition of Hands to be essential to Ordination,
and some deny it, and hold that Letters may do it on the absent, besides other
differences.

2. And some take those to be obligatory Canons, which others contemn as of no
authority. The Papists are not agreed what Canons are valid: And the Dissenters
and this Disputer are not agreed in England: Many, besides Dr. Heylin, say,
That the Popes Canon Law is yet in force in England, except some Particulars
that were cast out: Others believe not this; what is said against the Authority
of the English Canons, I will not recite.

3. And some take it for Canonical Ordination, if it be done by one Bishop and
Presbyters; Others say No, unless by three Bishops.

4. Some say it is not Canonical, without the Clergies and Peoples Election or
Consent, (as aforesaid) and others find it necessary to their Cause to deny
this.

Sect. XXV. He calls Men often to Catholic Unity, and never tells us what it is,
or how it may be known Abundance more such Ambiguities make his Disputes to me
unintelligible.

Sect. XXVI. Or if he be to be understood in these and such like, then he goes
all along by a begging of the questions, which are denied.

1. He should have rather proved, than taken it as granted, that those are not
Bishops, whom we hold to be such.

2. And that it is not the Visible Church, which we take for such.

3. And that it is not a Particular Church, which we take for such.

4. And that it is no Regular Ordi^^tion, which we take for such.

5. And that it is no Catholic Unity, which we take for such: And so of the
rest.

Sect. XXVII. 2. He supposes that there is but one Episcopal Communion in the
places where Men live; or never tells us, if there be diverse Bishops, which it
is whose Communion is so necessary: when he knows that Grotius thought that
of old Churches were formed in imitation of the Synagogues, and that one City
had diverse Churches and Bishops, as well as diverse Synagogues. And Dr. Hammond
thought that Rome, Antioch, and other Cities, had two Churches and Bishops, one
of Jews, and another of Gentiles; and that Peter and Paul had two Churches at
Rome: And he knows, I suppose, not only that there were Novatian Bishops in
the same Cities with the Orthodox, but that often and long, Constantinople,
Anti^ch. Alexandria, and many other places, had two at once by their Divisions,
but none of them so long as Rome.

But perhaps he takes it to be enough to Catholicism, or the Validity of
Ordinances, if we be subject to the species of Bishops, and so to any one that
is Consecrated rightly or wrongly; and so that in Schisms both are true
Bishops. But lest he deny this, I will spare to recite its Consequents.

Sect. XXVIII. 3. He in his Preface, and all along, supposes, That no unlawful
thing is (...) the Nonconformists, as necessary to their Ministry or Communion;
which will as much satisfy them, as if he had told them, That Lying, Perjury,
Covenanting deliberately against Gods Precepts, and for the corrupting his
sacred Doctrine, Worship, Order, and Discipline, are lawful things. Did he ever
hear them, and confute their Reasons?

Sect. XXIX. 4. In short, he never proves, but beggeth,

1. That when Gods Word describes the Sacred Ministerial Office, yet the
Ordainers will and words can alter it.

2. That the chief Pastors of particular Churches, (even Cities that had all of
old their several Bishops) are not true Bishops, unless Men purpose them to be
so in Ordination.

3. That Presbyters who ordain with Bishops, may not in cases of necessity
ordain without them; or if they do, it is a nullity.

4. That in Cases of Necessity, Ability, Consent, Election and Opportunity may
not design the person that shall receive authority and obligation directly from
Gods Law, without other Ordination.

5. That any Church on Earth can prove an uninterrupted Succession of Canonical
Ordination, by Bishops themselves so ordained.

6. That such a Succession is necessary ad esse Officii.

7. That the Covenant of Grace secureth not true penitent Believers of Pardon
and Salvation, where they cannot have the Sacrament.

8. That the Sacrament is null as to Men's Pardon and Salvation, if the Priest
be not truly called, or have not successive Episcopal Ordination.

9. That if a presumptuous Title (as ^e says may yet make all valid when Men
seem Episcopall^ dained, and are not; Whether able godly Men ordained by such
like City Pastors or Presbyters in a Synod, and chosen by Religious People, and
solemnly dedicated to Gods Ministry in the face of the Congregation, have not
a better presumptuous Title, than notorious ignorant and vicious Men, that say
they were ordained by a Bishop, when their Orders were forged, (of which sort
there have been many?)

10. Whether he can prove that it is not Anabaptistry, to baptize all again
that are baptized in the Reformed Churches, that have no Diocesanes?

11. Whether he abuse not Gods Word and Churches, in feigning all such Reformed
Churches, to live in the Sin against the Holy Ghost, for serving God without a
Succession of Episcopal Ordination?

12. Why is it that I cannot entreat him to answer Voetius, de desperata Causa
Papatus, that has long ago confuted Jansenius, a far stronger Adversary than
he? Nor my Dispute of Ordination Twenty Years ago written, and yet unanswered?
when* I tell him we have not leisure to write over the same things, as often as
Men provoke us to it.

Sect. XXX. I will now cast before him these following Notes.

1. What proof has he of Sacraments (besides Sacrifices) before Abraham's
days? And was there then no pardon of sin?

2. Were Women damned that were not circumcised? Or were the uncircumcised
Children in the Wilderness none of the Church?

3. Were not Infants in the Covenant of Grace, before Circumcision entered
them, into the Covenant of Isreal's peculiarity?

4. Why did Abraham think there had been Fifty righteous persons in Sodom? And
in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him, Acts 10.

5. Though Sacraments under the Gospel convey greater benefits, can he prove
that it places greater necessity of them, than the Law did?

6. Seeing Christ was not baptized till about thirty years old, was he not
Holy, and the Churches Head before?

7. Can he prove that the Apostles were ever baptized? Or were they not before
true Christians?

8. The Apostles had not the Lords Supper till near Christ's death, and yet had
part in him before.

9. Was Paul of this Man's mind, that said, He was not sent to baptize, but
preach, and thanked God that he had baptized so few.

10. Is not that Promise true, That whoever believes, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life; and that the pure in heart shall see God, etc? And will
want of a Sacrament then frustrate all?

11. He presumes to say, That God is obliged to make good the Sacraments of
those that have but a presumptuous Ministry, seeming to have Episcopal
Ordination, when they have not. And is not the reason as strong from the
Peoples impossibility of avoiding the danger, when they can have no Sacraments,
or none but from Ministers that had not Episcopal Ordination?

12. What if the Succession have been interrupted long ago in Armenia, Egypt,
Syria, or elsewhere? Are all damned that were born since? Or which way shall
particular persons there remedy it, they cannot send to Europe for Ordainers?

13. If Laymen (as Frumentius and Edesius) convert persons in India, are they
all damned that dye after Conversion, for want of an ordained Priest, and
Sacraments?

14. If Baptism give the first sanctifying Grace, then none but unholy persons
are to be baptized; and that is impenitent, unconverted Infidels, or wicked men.

15. It is confessed that the Lords Supper is for Confirming Men in the Faith
they had before: And are not both the Sacraments of the same general nature?
one to declare and confirm our initial Faith, and the other our progressive.

16. The Sacraments are to Christianity, what Solemn Matrimony is to Marriage;
which is valid before God upon private consent, but is necessary for order, and
preventing Fornication, to satisfy Men: ou^ Church Title ordinarily depends on
Baptism, but God knows and accepts heart consent.

17. God says, Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy, 1 Cor.
7. 14. Therefore it is not the Sacrament that first makes them holy. And the
seed of the Faithful have such Promises as we make good against the Anabaptists.

18. Children may dye before they can be baptized, and are they by that natural
necessity damned?

19. If a Man live where the Priests will not baptize, or give the Lords
Supper, but on condition that we profess some falsehood, or commit some sin, (as
in the Church of Rome,) Must we commit that sin, or be damned, for want of the
Sacrament?

20. Does not this lay a necessity upon all the Protestants in Italy, Spain,
France, Austria, Batavia, Portugal, yea, Mexico, Peru, etc. to leave their
Countries, and travel to some Land where they may have Sacraments without
sinful Conditions, and may have it from Men of right successive Ordination? And
how shall all these be able so to travel? And where will they find that Land on
Earth that will answer their expectation, and can and will receive them all?

21. What if a thousand honest weak Men mistake, and think, that the things
imposed as necessary to their Sacramental Communion, are great Sins, and it be
not so, (as our Doubts against Conformity are thought to be Mistakes, yea, the
Anabaptists Error:) Can he prove that all such are damning Errors, for want of
Sacraments?

22. Gods Oath is also to confirm our Faith: And if a Man may be saved that
be^ieveth Gods (...), and knows not of his Oath, why not he that believes
it, and knows not of the Sacrament?

23. Does not his Doctrine make the Priests the absolute Lords of all Men's
Souls, that can deny Salvation to any, or all Men, by denying them the
Sacrament? Is this the sense of their having the Power of the Keys?

24. Is not this abuse of Tibi dabo Claves, and the office of Key-bearing, the
knack by which Popes have subdued Kings and Kingdoms.

25. Is not the Argument which this Man manageth against the Reformed Churches,
to prove them ^o Churches, and to have no Ministry and Sacrament the Achilles
of the Papists, in which is their chief confidence, but often baffled (as by
Voetius against Jar^nius aforesaid.)

26. Nay, the Papists themselves are far more moderate than this Man; for they
take a Laymans Baptism, yea, a Woman's to be sufficient to salvation, when this
Man denies it of all the most learned and holy Pastors, that have not
uninterrupted Episcopal Ordination.

27. Bishops have too often conspired to corrupt Gods Sacraments, (witness the
Lateran Council sub Innc. 3.) and to interdict Kingdoms, and oppress Princes
and People, and may do so again: And have the People no remedy against them?

28. A Minister justly ordained, and unjustly suspended, or silenced by a
Bishop, has more authority than Laymen, and their Sacraments are not Nullities
by the Romanists Confession.

29. Is not this Man's Doctrine far grosser than Cyprians, and the Africans,
(yea, the D^natists) that denied the validity of Heretic Baptism.

30. A Lay-Chancellor, in these men's judgments, uses the Keys of
Excommunication and Absolution validly, and yet are not the Sacraments or
Ordination of the Reformed Churches aforesaid valid?

31. Surrogate Priests, by the Bishops consent, validly Excommunicate, that are
no Bishops.

32. No People can be sure by this Man's Rule, that they have Sacraments, or
shall be saved, (except by fa^lible presumption) not knowing that their Priest
has uninterrupted successive Ordination.

33. When your presumptuous Ordination is discovered to be Null, must all the
People be Rebaptized?

34. The Church of England gives none the Lords Supper till 16 years old. Does
it become absolutely necessary to Salvation, just at that Age, and not before?

35. The Burial Office pronounces all saved that never Communicated, so they
be Baptized, and not Excommunicate, nor kill themselves.

36. What work would this Man make for Rebaptizers, if all the Protestan^s of
all Nations must be Rebaptized, that have not the foresaid Ordination?

37. Is it suitable to the description of God and his grace in Scripture, to
believe that he lays all men's Salvation upon Sacraments performed by men
Ordained, as he describes?

38. Are not we Reproached Silenced Ministers, as like to be good Protestants
as such men as this, that say, that,

1. The Reformed Churches that have not Episcopal Ordination from uninterrupted
Succession, are no true Churches.

2. Have no true Ministers.

3. Nor true Sacraments.

4. Nor part in the Covenant of Grace.

5. Nor hope of Salvation by promise from God.

6. That their Ministry and Sacraments is the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

7. That the Church of Rome has this uninter rupted Succession (as he tells
me.)

8. That, as will hence follow, the French Protestant: were better turn
Papists, than be as they are.

Sect. XXXI. There are as many and greater Objections that I should lay before
him, about his Doctrine of an Universal Church-Policy, and that sort of
Episcopacy which he rather supposes, than proves necessary, and such other
Points: But I will no more tire the Reader herein.

Sect. XXXII. All the definition of the Protestant Religion that I can extort
from him, is, Communicating with the Church of England, and those that it holds
communion with.

1. And so did the Papists, says Dr. Heylin, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, till the Pope forbad them.

2. The Church of England never renounced Communion with the Reformed Churches,
which he renounceth.

3. A particular Church is no Standard of Religion: Nor England more than the
rest.

Sect. XXXIII. If he renounce Communion with all these Reformed Churches, and
with the Romans also, what a Separatist is this Man, and how narrow is his
Communion, and into how small a number has he reduced the Universal Church? If
neither Papists, nor any Churches that have not Ordination from uninterrupted
Succession, be parts of the Catholic Church, it is very little, if not
invisible.

Sect. XXXIV. He thus teaches almost all the Christian world, instead of Love
and Concord, to Unchurch, Unchristen, and Condemn each other: The Romans, on
such accounts, already Unchurch all the rest. The rest will far more easily
prove, that Simony, Heresy, uncalled Popes, incapable ones, and manifold
Schisms have often interrupted his described Succession at Rome: And so Turks and
Heathens have matter given them against us all. Already by such kind of
Schismatical Principles, there are few parts of the Church on Earth, that are
not by others Unchurched, and Unchurch not others: But yet it is but few of
them that have proceeded to that Anabaptistical height, as to nullify all
their Sacraments, and to expect that almost all the Christian world should be
again baptized. Yea, this is far more Schismatical than common Anabaptism: For
the Anabaptists with us Re-baptize not them that were baptized at age by such
Ministers as this Writer, and such others degrade; much less do they damn
almost all the Christian world, or other Reformed Churches, and say, They have
no part in Gods Covenant of Grace, and Promise of Salvation, and that they sin
against the Holy Ghost, as this Man does.

CHAP. X.
None of these terms will unite a National Church, or any Associated Churches,
nor well any single Church: Though by other means, a competent Union may be
kept in some Churches, notwithstanding such Schismatical Courses.

I. THE same Reasons which prove that none of these terms will ever unite the
Universal Church, but that all are fitted to promote Divisions, will prove
also, that they tend of themselves to the dividing and distracting of all
lesser Church Societies and Communions: Though yet we do not deny, but de
facto, a particular Church may easilier agree in an Error, or be kept in some
Concord under the same Pastor, where a Sin or Error prevails, than the
Universal Church on Earth can. As the Church of Rome may agree in Popery, but
all the Christian world will not: And as a great part has agreed in Arianism,
(called Christians,) and a great part in Nestorianism, and to this day in
Eutychianism, and in the M^n^thelites Error, and a great part for
Image Worship; and as now many Churches of the Protestants agree in
Consubstantiation and Church-Images, and many in rejecting Prelacy, and many in
asserting it; but all agree not in any of these (though the eldest sort of
Episcopacy, for ought appears, almost all in many ages did acknowledge and
agree in:) But yet that which never united the Universal Church, but tended to
discord, will have everywhere usually no better a tendency.

II. Yet I have before enumerated diverse Particulars, which are needful and
useful to the Concord of a particular Church, which are not so to the
Universal: As that all the Members have the same Numerical Pastors, the same
Translation of the Scriptures read to them, the same Versions and Tunes of
Psalms, when they meet together, the same place and day, and hour of meeting:
Because these in the nature of the thing are necessary to Concord, and avoid
Discord and Confusion. And if diverse Churches associated, or all in a Kingdom,
or diverse Kingdoms, can agree in the same convenient modes and circumstances
(as the same Translation of the Bible so far as they have one language, the
same day of Easter, Anniversarily to Commemorate Christ's Resurrection, as they
do weekly on the same first day, and some such like) it will be laudable, so it
be done by voluntary consent, as a thing of convenience, and not of necessity,
and without tyrannizing over one another, or persecuting or despising those
that differ, or turn it into an Engine of Rents and Schism, by making it
necessary to their communion, which is the unhappy end of most humane
impositions of indifferent unnecessary things. He that thinks he has hit on
the fittest Ceremonies, ^ites or Modes, is seldom ever content with liberty to
use them, but he must force all others if he can to his way, and take away the
liberty of all that differ from him: We see it by sad experience, that men
think their Forms and Ceremonies cast out, if all may not be compelled to use
them, though many think them sinful; and they had rather have none of them,
than have them upon terms of mere liberty; lest they be disgraced by the disuse
or contradiction of those that do forbear the^. And such men are never content
with Union and Concord in Gods own Institutions, and in circumstances that are
in genere necessary.

III. But some men are stiff in the Schismatical Opinion, that though Churches
of many Kingdoms may charitably differ in Ceremonies, and indifferent things,
yet none in the same Kingdoms should be suffered so to differ (of which I spoke
before.) But,

1. Christ has given us no such different measures of our Charity, Forbearance
or Communion.

2. The old Churches were quite of another mind, as Socrates and Sozomen show
in several instances. And it is known that in the same Empire, every Bishop had
power to use his own Liturgy, and other Modes, (as I instanced in the Canon
that requires every man to bring his Form first to the Synod to be tried, and
in the contention between Basil and the Church of Neocesarea, and the strife
about Gregory's and Ambrose's Liturgy, and such like.)

3. It was the Pastors and People of the same Church of Rome, that St. Paul
gives the Precepts of Forbearing and Receiving Dissenters in things
indifferent to. And still mark, that he wrote not only to the Laity, but to the
Rulers, (as is evident,) and therefore forbids them such narrowing
impositions; being himself also a chief Pastor, (an Apostle) and so declares
his own judgment, as one that would himself make no such uncharitable
impositions.

IV. We deny not but some Churches have a while continued in laudable Concord,
notwithstanding such ensnaring Impositions. But,

1. It has been but for a time, and this Worm has fretted them, and it has
ended in their great detriment at least.

2. And it was not by these means, but by better causes, notwithstanding these
diseases: so that as we answer the Question, Whether a Papist may be saved? so
do we answer the Question, Whether such Churches may have prosperous Concord?
viz. 1. If the Essentials of Christianity in Papists, and of Communion in such
Churches, be practically held, so as to be more powerful than their Contraries.
2. But not by their Contraries, but by overcoming them, one may be saved, and
the other have peace; even as we answer the Question, Whether a Man may live
that takes Poison, or has the Leprosy? 1. Not if it be prevalent according
to its malignant nature. 2. But yea, if it be overcome by natural strength or
medicine.

V. Chillingworth (our powerfullest Disputant against the Papists) has fully
laid down the true Principles of Christian Concord) and the Causes of Schism,
even the making more necessary to Salvation or Communion, than is necessary
indeed. And the famous Hales, though too bold, and sometime going a step too
far, has said more against these true Causes of Schism, with great Truth and
Reason, than the Authors of it can well bear. But wisdom is justified of all
her children.

CHAP. XI.
The Severity and Force of Magistrates, denying necessary Toleration, and
punishing the Refusers of unnecessary uncertain suspected things, will never
procure Church Unity and Concord, but in time increase Divisions.

I. HAles of Schism, speaking of having two Bishops in a Diocese, says (page
223.) Neither does it any way savor of Vice or Misdemeanor (instancing in
Austin's doing it ignorantly;) their punishment sleeps not, who unnecessarily
and wantonly go about to infringe it.

The most pious and wise Church Historians extol the two peaceable Bishops of
Constantinople, that quietly bore the Novatian Bishops by them, and ge^t^y
reduced Chrysostom's Followers the Joannites; and d^spraise Nestorius, and such
other turbulent Prelates that persecuted them, on pretense of zeal against
Error, and some of them proved more erroneous themselves.

II. This crying out for the drawing of the Sword against those that differ in
unnecessary things (...) a great dishonor to the persons that tell men how
conscious they are of their own insufficiency for their proper work; and a
reproach to the power of the Keys, as if it signified nothing without the
Sword: And in all Ages, Men of Ambition, and Insufficien^^y and
Uncharitableness, have been thus calling to the Magistrate to do all, when yet
in general claim they have set themselves far above him, as being for the Soul,
when he is but for the Body.

III. But Experience has still confuted them, and that which one Age (or year)
thus built, the next has ordinarily pulled down. Not but that orthodox pious
Princes are an unspeakable blessing to the Church, and the want of such are
ordinary causes of sin, distraction, and misery: But such must know and do
their proper work, and not serve the pride and humor of ambitious ignorant
Clergymen, nor be their Lictors or Executioners, nor lend them the Sword to
execute their wills.

IV. Constantine defended the Orthodox (yet offended greatly at their
unpeaceableness, and at last tempted to favor some Arians, merely because being
suppressed, they were the greater pretenders to Peace;) but his Son pulled down
what the Father had set up. One Emperor suppressed the Eutychians, another set
them up, and others proclaimed and endeavored pacification. One Emperor pulled
down the Mon^thelites, and another set them up. One Emperor pulled down
Church-Images, and another set them up, and General Councils changed with them.
And so on in many other instances. If this forcing course were now generally
taken, how many Kingdoms would fare the better for it? or now do? not four
sixth parts of the world that are Heathens: nor above the fifth part of six
that are Mahometans: not most of the other sixth part that are Papists: The
Presbyterians like it not in England: The Prelatists are not for it where the
Presbyterians rule. How few Countries are just of our mind? and therefore in
how few would it please us, or accommodate us.

V. And those that are of the same mind in the main, yet rarely long agree in
all things. I have before proved, and the notorious state of Mankind proves,
That there is such a wonderful diversity of mental capacities and
apprehensions, that the best will never all agree in any, but few plain certain
things. To endeavor by right means to bring all men to be wise, and to agree in
all right Thoughts, Affections and Practices, is very good: But he that will
resolve to tolerate no Errors, (much more dissent about suspected unnecessary
things) shall be a heinous oppressor of mankind, even of Christians for being
but men. How few Subjects must such a Prince expect to have, that will cut off
all that are not of one intellectual complexion?

VI. And, as is aforesaid, when men think that God obliges them to dissent,
the more honest and conscionable they are, the more resolutely they will bear
all sufferings, and never yield to man, against the Conscience of their Duty to
God; so that if you begin to punish such, there is no ending, till you have
killed them, banished them, or kept them close Prisoners. And let all sober
Magistrates think, what Counselors such Clergymen are to them, that would have
them,

1. Choose out the most Conscionable and Religious for their Punishments.

2. And not cease till they have destroyed them.

VII. And does not this tend to drive out true Conscience and Religion from the
Land, when men that have no Conscience, shall pass for the obedient laudable
Subjects? And such being capable still of Preferment, shall possess the
Churches, and be Rulers of the rest; and then what can we expect, but that such
will use Religious Dissenters as their Enemies, and reproach them with all
malicious names? And O what a state is such a Land in!

VIII. And (you are not infallible, Councils have erred) what if it should
prove, That these you destroy are in the right, and you must be judged of God
as Persecutors? Let not Spleen or Pride make you fearless of such a sin and
judgment.

IX. Yea, if they should prove in the wrong, yet you may be Persecutors, if the
Error be such that good men should bear with in each other; and God is the
Avenger of all the wronged and oppressed. And it is not disregardable that they
do and suffer all for him, though they mistake, as Paul says, Romans 14. He that
eats, eats to the Lord; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not:
It is God that he intended to obey and please. And one has need to look well
about him, before he destroy such. I dare say, That that man has truly no
Religion, that prefers it not before the pleasing of men, and all worldly
interest; for Religion is our devotedness to serve and please God: And God is
not taken for that man's God, that prefers any thing before him, (as I said
before.)

X. However it is certain, That thus to set Princes in a constant Conflict
against Conscionable godly men, is liker a War against God and Conscience, than
any way to Peace and Concord. The Law will not yield, and Conscience will not
yield; and God will keep up a Succession of Conscionable men in the world, when
Popes and Persecutors have done their worst: And humane frailty and sin will
keep up a Succession of so much weakness, as that the best, much more the
weakest, will have vain Scruples, Ignorance and Errors, which Prisons or
Penalties will not cure; yea, usually greatly increase the malady by
Exasperation; and wise men will foresee a probability of the end, before they
begin. Hypocrites may yield to save their skins, but the truly Conscionable
will not: For to yield to what they think to be sin, is, in their judgment,
wilfully to choose damnation.

XI. Let not the Clergy Tyrants still cant their vain Objection, [ Then
Conscience will be a pretense for any Villainy, which was not made to be a cloak
for sin.] For it is not liberty for any Villainy that we are pleading for: who
knows not that abused Reason is the pretense and plea for almost all Villainy
in the world? What then? Must not Reason be regarded? The use and honor of it
kept up, while man is man? And all men have leave to plead Reason in their
Cause: And yet not all tolerated that Reason is pretended or abused for. And
what Reason is to Man, that Conscience is to Religious Men. Some Evils are so
great and inconsistent with the public good, that it is better all those were
banished or destroyed, who pretend either Conscience or Reason for them, than
that they should be Tolerated; and these are intolerable Evils. But what man
thinks that it is so with all Error or Faults? much less with all things
indifferent, which some men have a mind to exercise their mastership in
commanding. Put first the question to sober Conscionable men; Is it more to
common good, and interest of Honesty and Conscience, that all the Persons in a
Nation be imprisoned, banished or killed, that dare not swear, say and practice
all that is imposed on them, than that the Impositions be altered or they
forborne?

XII. And I must again say; That this Church-Tyranny, as most other sin, is
most against the Own^rs of it: For if the faults of godly men that scruple to
subscribe to Popes, Patriarchs, Diocesanes, Synods, Liturgies, or Ceremonies,
are not to be Tolerated, how much less a proud and persecuting Clergy, or such
as abuse or exclude Church Discipline, or by sloth, or ungodly carnal Lives, do
wrong their Office, and betray the Flock?

XIII. And again I remember them, That Pastors must govern the Flock, much like
as men do their Wives: And let men but try how far weak and passionate Wives
must be Tolerated by them that will not do or suffer worse, and here practice
accordingly.

CHAP. XII.
Excommunicating and Anathematizing in any of the foresaid Cases, is
Schismatical, and not the way to Peace.

I. THere need not much more be said of this; it is already proved, That Christ
himself has in his Law, made the terms of the Union and Communion of his
Members: As the same Nature that forms all our members in the womb, is also
the placer and uniter of them: Therefore that which is contrary to Christ's
terms, yea, which is none of them, cannot prove the true terms and means of
Concord.

II. Indeed no man ought to be Excommunicated otherwise than by Ministerial
Declaration and Judgment, how far he has first departed from Union, and cut
off or Excommunicated himself. An impenitent Fornicator, Drunkard, Persecutor,
does cut off himself from the favor of God, and his part in Christ, and the
rights of his true Church: Therefore the Pastors may declare that he does so.
And if it become a Controversy either de facto, whether he be such an one; or
de jure, whether this be true; the Pastors are the proper Judges, so far as to
resolve the Consciences of the Flock, whether they must avoid that man, or
communicate with him. And this I think the Rational Mr. Hales would not have
denied, though in his Treatise of the Keys, he asserteth only a Declarative,
and denies a Judicial Power: For his Reasons show that he only meant, that the
Church has no efficient Judgment to cut off any man from Christ or his Body,
further than he first cuts off himself. And far be it from any Friend of the
Church to say, That it is the Bishops Office to undo Souls, and to separate any
from Christ, save only by declaring and judging that they wilfully separate
themselves; and therefore requiring the People to avoid them, and binding them
over to answer their sin at the Bar of God: The rest is the Devils work, and
the impenitent Sinners, and not the Pastors of the Church.

III. And what is said against the Magistrates unseasonable force, will mostly
hold against such undue Excommunication. 1. If the person believe that he is
cast out for not forsaking his duty to God, he will rejoice that he is counted
worthy to suffer for righteousness sake, remembering that Christ said, They
shall cast you out of their Synagogues: And this will bring no man to
Repentance.

IV. And, 2. Then the Pastors will fall under the imputation of Tyranny and
Persecution, and be taken to be Haters and Hinderers of Conscionable men, and
grievous Wolves that devour the Flock.

V. And, 3. The Parties Excommunicate, will think that this does not excuse
them from the duty of worshipping God; and therefore they will assemble by
themselves for such worship; and there they will think, That they are a better
Church than those that cast them out; and perhaps may Excommunicate their
Excommunicaters, as the Bishop of Alexandria and Constantinople have done by
the Bishop of Rome: Or, more likely, despise their Censure, and go on, unless
the Sword be drawn to suppress them, (to which only such Excommunicaters use
finally to trust:) And then what will follow, I have showed before.

VI. And indeed we need no greater proof of the ineffectualness of
Excommunication in such cases, than the open confession of the Users of it;
who, if they have not an Act for Horning (as they call it in Scotland) or to
imprison the Excommunicate, or punish him by the Sword, confess that their
Sentence will be contemned: which is most true.

VII. Yet sad Experience further assures us, That Papal Anathematizings, yea,
and those of General Councils, have been no small cause of Schism, Confusions
and Rebellions: The History of this would fill a Volume. Alas! what did the
Councils of Ephesus, Constantinople, Chalcedon, and many others, by their
Anathemas? The state of Syria, Egypt, and Abassia, etc. of those called
Jacobites and Nestorians, tells us to this day: And these Thunderbolts have
been the Popes great Engines, to beat down Kings, and batter Kingdoms. It is
the admiration of the world, next to the success of ignorant Mahomet, That a
company of old Usurpers (many of them successively being notoriously wicked
men, and so judged by Councils, and their most flattering Historians) should
conquer Christian Kingdoms and Empires, by sitting at home, and ^ursing men,
and telling them, [ St. Peter is angry with them, and will keep them out of
Heaven, if they be not obedient to the Pope.] But men that will be the Slaves
of Sin, deserve to have their Reason so forsaken, to make themselves the Slaves
of Subjects.

VIII. Yet we are far from thinking, That just Excommunication is of no use;
God would not have the Church of Christ to seem no better than the world; it is
a Society gathered out of the world by the sanctifying Word and Spirit, and as
holy devoted to the most holy God. And he would have the Church Visible, to be
visibly the womb of the Triumphant Church, or the Sheepfold of Christ,
containing such as have a seeming or visible right to salvation, however
Hypocrites do intrude: And therefore the Keys of the Church should be much of
Kin to the Keys of Heaven, so that he that is taken in or shut out, may seem to
the Christian judgment of probability to be taken into, or shut out of a right
to salvation. And therefore as impenitent wicked men should not be deluded in
vain hopes, by being received to Church Communion; so neither should godly men,
for pardoned or tolerable infirmities, be shut out of the Church, while God
continues their visible Title to salvation; much less a Lay-Chancellor, or a
Bishop, Excommunicate Christ's Members, for not paying their Fees, or for not
kneeling at the Sacraments, or for not submitting to unnecessary Impositions,
or for holding such Things unlawful, or such like. This way will never heal our
breaches, or unite the Churches.

CHAP. XIII.
Any One Unlawful, Uncertain Doctrine, Oath, Covenant, Profession,
Subscription, or Practice, so imposed as necessary to Communion, will be a
dividing Engine.

I. THis is proved in what is said before: For a Conscionable Man will not
wilfully and deliberately commit One Sin, to save his Liberty, Estate or Life;
though many Sins be worse: For he that wilfully commits one, virtually
commits many: And, as St. James says, Breaks the whole Law.

II. Yea, though the matter of the Sin seem little, a Believer will not think
it a little Sin, to do it deliberately, and stand to it by Covenant consent.
The high places among the Jews seemed no great matter; but a good man would not
have Covenanted never to endeavor any Reformation of them.

III. A peaceable Man will live quietly in a Church that has many Sins and
Errors; but he dare not deliberately own or justify the least. I should
communicate with no Church on earth, if I thought all the Ministers or Peoples
Sins, yea, all the Faults in their Prayers, or Doctrine, or Discipline, were
made mine by it; I will live peaceably with a Church that has a faulty
Doctrine, Liturgy and Discipline in Things Tolerable; as if it were
Lay-Chancellors power of the Keys, or Diocesanes too large Churches ( infi^^^^
speciei:) But I will not profess, That I Assent, Consent to, and Approve all
these Faults, or any One of them; nor will I Covenant never to endeavor in any
place and calling to reform them, nor justify all that are guilty of them.

IV. If one sin of David's in numbering the People, was so sorely punished; and
one sin of Achans, of the Bethshemites, of Uzzahs, of Uzziahs, of Josiahs, of
Ananias, and Saphiras, yea, at first of Adam and Eve; if one false Article of
the Arians so troubled the Church of Christ; and one Error about Images in
Churches, so corrupted the Church, and made such sad work in Councils and
Kingdoms, a wise Man will not wilfully own one sin.

V. And indeed Christ has determined, That he that breaks one of the least
of his Commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 5. As he that truly believes God in one thing, will
believe him in all which he knows to be his word; so he that obeys him
truly in one thing, will obey all that he knows to be his Command, whoever be
against it.

VI. And it is dangerous for a mortal Worm to set his law or will against his
Makers, and destroy or punish a Man for obeying God; sufficient means should be
used first to convince all Men, that the thing is evil, and that it is not God
that does command it; else it is a setting up ones self above God, and against
him, and saying, You shall not obey God, but me: But when death comes, can you
save either your self, or him, from the justice of that God, whom both you
should have obeyed?

CHAP. XIV.
Unlimited Toleration will wrong and divide the Church.

I. ALL sober Men are so far agreed in this, that I need not say much of it; no
doubt there are intolerable Errors and Sins. And though Mr. Hales and others
say, See Sir Thomas Overbury's late Plea for Toleration, in Answer to Ataxiae
Obstaculum, Renouncing Unlimited Toleration.
It is not Heresy, unless it be wilful, and we seldom know the wilfulness of
another; Yet in truth, 1. It is not only formal subjective Heresy, which
makes the Man an Heretic, which we must resist and restrain, but also
material objective Heresy; whatever be the Divulgers mind. 2. And also there
is a wilfulness which is Privative, when the Will does not its duty to discover
Truth and Error, as well as a positive willingness to err (which Augustine
says, That few or none can have:) And no man's will is wholly innocent in any
culpable Sin or Error.

II. Doubtless man's Conscience is not properly his Lawmaker, nor his Law,
(though some unaptly say so) but only his discerning of that which is his Law;
no more than the Lawyers eye, or reason, or skill, is the Law of the Land. And
therefore to have an erring Conscience, taking that for Gods Law which is not,
is a Sin (where it was possible to know it.)

III. And therefore Gods Law is not suspended, but violated by man's Error; God
has not as many sorts of Law as men have Opinions of it, or Consciences in
Error. If a man should think that God binds him to kill, steal, slander, etc.
this would not make any of these no sin, but it would be no small sin in him,
that would father such wickedness on the most holy God, and on his Law. If an
erring Conscience think that God forbids our duty to Princes, Parents,
Children, Neighbors, Justice, Charity, etc. This would not dissolve any of his
Obligations, but be an added sin in slandering God: Far be it from any sober
man to think, That the Magistrate must let all men do all the Evil which they
will but pretend God and Conscience for.

IV. Nor is the Papal Doctrine true or tolerable, That Priests only are for
men's Souls, and Princes but for their Bodies, and Temporal Concerns; and so
that the Priest is as much higher than the Prince, as the Soul is than the
Body. Indeed the Minister of Christ is to manage only the Word, which works
on the Soul by the way of Sense, and not of the Sword; but yet it is to be
finally for the good of Souls, that the Magistrate uses the Sword: As the
voice touches the Ear, so does the Sword the Flesh for the benefit of Souls,
either the sinners, or other men's. And verily he that says otherwise, and
places the bonum publicum, which is the end of Government, merely in the
bodies prosperity, dishonors and debaseth Magistracy, and sets Princes
lower than Priests, Parents or Friends. Godly men that believe the vanity of
things Transitory and Corporeal, would have as low an esteem of the Means, as
of the End, and so of all Civil Rules, if they believed this. But he that is
the King, as well as the great High Priest of the Church, for holy Ends, and
for men's Salvation, has made Princes his Officers subordinate to him for those
Ends, as well as Pastors. I will not stand here to confute one or two Scottish
Divines that have written against me, for saying, That Princes and Magistrates
are now the Mediators Officers, and have their Power from Him, into whose Hands
all Power in Heaven and Earth is given. Sober Thoughts in wise Christians will
save me that labor.

V. And he that says, By me Kings reign, and will have Kings to be the
Churches Nursing-Fathers, will not take it for an excuse of their neglect, to
say, We were authorized only for men's Bodies: It is not equally for all that
have Bodies, nor for bodily Ends, but to see to the execution of Gods Law, by
their Bie Subordinate Laws; and Gods Laws all look to higher Ends.

VI. And he that said, They are the Ministers of God to us for good, meant true
and durable good, no doubt: And when he says, That they are a Terror to evil
doers, he means such as is contrary to the well-doing which they must
encourage. And is Piety and Christianity none of that? He does not except
Blasphemy, Idolatry, Opposition to God, Christ, Holiness, Heaven, Justice or
Charity, from the number of Evil Works, which are the worst of them. It is
therefore certain, That Princes may and must punish many sins against the First
Table, and such against the Second as would shelter themselves under pretense
of Conscience.

VII. But all the doubt is, What bounds here to set, where it is so dangerous
to go too far. And it is one of the most necessary Cases of Conscience, which a
Christian Prince has to study and resolve; in which he must neither hearken to
a proud, envious, idle, worldly Clergy, nor to injudicious Zealots, nor to
licentious Heretics, but avoid Extremes.

VIII. In short, what I have before said, decideth the Case.

1. He must Tolerate no one Sin how small soever, which is within his
Cognizance and Jurisdiction, which he can indeed cure by righteous means, which
will do more good than hurt.

2. Thoughts, Heart Sins and Secret Sins are not within his Cognizance.

3. To do the work of Parents, Pastors, Tutors, or Physicians, is no part of
the Office to which he is appointed and authorized.

4. But he may drive on all these to do their duties by due means.

5. It is unlawful to seek to cure a lesser Evil, with a greater: That is to be
numbered with the things which the Prince cannot do, which he cannot do by
lawful means, or such as do more hurt than good.

6. The Mischiefs before enumerated against the Princes Safety and Honor, and
against Love, and Justice, and Conscience, and Religion, are so great, as that
no Severity must be used which procures them, and does not a greater good.

7. The punishing of small Faults by great Punishments, is Injustice, and
Unlawful.

8. Abundance of Infirmities, and humane Frailties and Errors, are such as must
be endured, so they be but by Doctrine, Love and gentle Reproofs, rebuked and
disowned, without Punishments Ecclesiastical or Corporal; else there will be no
Love or Peace.

9. Preachers must not be suffered to persuade Men from the Faith, Love or
Obedience of God in Christ, against any Article of the Creed, or Petition of
the Lords Prayer, or Precept of the Decalogue, or any essential part of the
Christian Religion.

10. If such speak a damnable Error or Heresy by Ignorance or Heedlesness,
they must have a first and second Admonition, and they (...) repent. But if
they forbear not upon. Admonition, they do it studiously and wilfully; and such
are to be Silenced till they Reform, because the Preaching of one that opposes
an essential Point of Religion, will do more harm than good, except among
Heathens, or where no better Preachers can be had.

11. It will not be unmeet for the Rulers to draw up either a Catalogue of
integral Points of Religion of great moment, which all shall be forbidden to
Preach or Dispute against; or else a Catalogue of Errors contrary to such,
which none shall have leave to propagate: But it is not every one that
violateth the Law, that is to be forbidden to preach Christ's Gospel; but lesser
pecuniary Mulcts, may be sufficient punishment to many; and the bare denying
them preferment or maintenance, and casting them among the disowned that are
but tolerated, may be better punishment, and more effectual in case of
tolerable Faults, than the more severe.

12. Rulers should do much more to restrain from Evils, than to constrain to
Religious Duties: And those Evils are of these sorts.

First, Such as blaspheme God.

Secondly, Such as draw the Hearers Souls into damnable Error or Sin.

Thirdly, Such as tend to overthrow the Honor and Safety of the Governors.

Fourthly, Such as tend directly to breed Hatred in men against each other, and
kindle the fire of Contention and Enmity.

Fifthly, Such as draw men from the common duties of Justice toward Neighbors,
or Relations, into Fraud and Injury.

13. It is the greatest part of the Magistrates duty about Religion,

First, To see Gods own Laws kept in Honor.

Secondly, And to keep Peace by Church Justices among Clergymen and People,
that are apt to take occasion from Religion, to abuse and calumniate one
another.

14. Yet Rulers may and must compel Persons that are grossly ignorant or
erroneous, to hear what can be said against their Error, and for their
Instruction: As Parents (so Magistrates) may compel Children (and Subjects) to
be Catechized, and to hear Gods Word; and may compel them to hear such Teachers
as have the Rulers License, either as Approved, or Tolerated to Teach.

15. Men ought not to be compelled to receive the Sacraments of Baptism or the
Lords Supper, by the Sword or Force; because it is to receive a sealed Pardon
of Sin, and Donation of Christ and Life; which no unwilling person has right
to, or does receive: For to say I am unwilling, is to say I receive not; and so
the reception of the outward sign is Hypocrisy, Profanation, and taking the
Name of God in vain.

16. Yet those that being Baptized, and at Age, avoid Communion, are, after
Admonition, to be taken for Revolters so far, and to be declared such as so far
cast themselves from the Communion of the Church: And the Christian Magistrate
may well deny them many Privileges in the Commonwealth, which he should
appropriate to sound persevering Christians.

17. Places in Government, Trust, Burgess-ship, and Votes in Elections of
Governors, and such like, are best appropriated to the Approved part of
Christians, and some the Tolerated; but never granted to Apostates, proper
Heretics, or any that are intolerable.

18. Pastors of the Churches should not be constrained to give the Sacrament of
Baptism, or the Lords Supper, to any one against their Consciences; because,

First, It is their Office to be Judges, who is to be Baptized, and to
Communicate. This is the power of the Keys.

Secondly, If they may not judge of the very Act which they are to perform,
they have not so much as that judicium discretionis, which belongs to every
man as a man, and so must act brutishly.

Thirdly, If they may administer against Conscience when they think it Sin, the
same reason would hold for all men to sin, whenever a Ruler commands them
that judges it no Sin: what Bounds shall be set against absolute blind
Obedience?

Fourthly, Whereas the Objection is from Inconveniences, As, [ Then every
Pastor may deny Men Sacraments.]

I answer, 1. So every Tutor, Physician, etc. may abuse his Trust.

2. Therefore men must have care whom they choose and trust.

3. There are better Remedies than sinful slavery in the Minister, even
consulting with Synods of Ministers, or where Bishops rule, appealing to them.

4. The persons that expect the Sacrament, may have it from some other Pastor
that is willing. It is a less inconvenience that a single person remove, or
else communicate in another Assembly, than that the Pastor, whose Office is to
use the Church Keys, be enslaved to sin against his Conscience.

5. We suppose that of ancient right, the Church is not to have a Pastor over
them, whom they consent not to: Therefore if the Church find themselves wronged
by the Pastors Fact, they have their Remedy. They may admonish the Pastor, and
if he hear not, tell the Bishop, Synod or Magistrate (for I am not now
determining the case of superior Bishops, but tell what is the actual Remedy
where such bear Rule:) And if he hear not the Church, Synod, Bishop or
Magistrate, they may desert him, and choose a fitter Pastor, and yet neither
Excommunicate nor Silence him, but the same man may be more suitable to another
Flock which will desire him.

They that object Inconveniences in this motion, should consider,

First, That a Mischief and Sin is worse than an Inconvenience.

Secondly, That there is nothing desirable here without Inconveniences, which
may furnish an unwise Contender with Objections.

Thirdly, That they that cry up the Canons and Traditions, Custom or judgment
of Antiquity, Bishops, Councils, Fathers, and the Catholic Church, should not
hastily set their own Wit or Authority against them all, who for 600, if not
nearer 1000 years after Christ, did not only judge that Bishops must come in by
the Peoples Election and Consent, but that he was to be accounted an Usurper,
and no Bishop of theirs, that had it not.

Fourthly, And we have reason to think St. Cyprian, and the Carthage Council of
Bishops, as wise as the Objectors, who, in the Case of Martial and Basilides
before described judged, that the People ought to forsake an incapable
scandalous Pastor, though other Bishops (even he of Rome) absolved him: And
that the chief power of choosing or forsaking was in them, and if they did
otherwise, it was not the contrary Sentence of Bishops that would excuse them
before God. It is easy to say [ St. Cyprian erred, and we are in the right and
this would overthrow all Government:] But neither the persons that object, nor
their Reasons, have ever yet seemed to me sufficient, to make me prefer their
judgment even in this before Cyprian, and the African Fathers.

XI. In all probability FREE SACRAMENTS administered by such Ministers of Christ
as by the Christian Magistrates License are either Approved or Tolerated, would
heal most of all the Discords about Religion in England, I mean, Sacraments not
constrainedly, but freely given and received.

I shall tell you why I think so, by instances.

1. The Thing called Strict Presbytery, [ with a power of Classes and National
Assemblies, composed of Ordained and Unordained Elders, as a Judicature, whose
Excommunication is to be enforced by the Magistrates Sword] is approved by few
of my acquaintance in England: But those that Prelatists cal^ Presbyterians
here, commonly are Ministers that desire but the exercise of so much of their
proper Office, and the freedom of a Christian and a Man, as not to be forced to
administer Sacraments against their knowledge and conscience to the incapable,
because a Lay-Chancelor or a Diocesane that knows not his Neighbors and
Flocks so well as he, shall say that they are worthy, and command him to
renounce his knowledge in obeying them. And if God had made all such Ministers
to be only the Lay-Chancellors, or the Diocesanes Agents or Servants, to
Baptize, and give the Lords Supper only in the Chancellors or Bishops name as a
Messenger, and if it be done amiss, that not we, but the Chancellor or Bishop
should answer it to God, then we could joyfully thus obey them. But while we
believe, That we must answer our selves for our own actions, and that we must
Baptize, and give the Lords Body and Blood, in Christ's Name, and not the
Bishops, we dare not obey Men before God, nor renounce our own judgment in the
matters of our own Office and Trust: Therefore it would satisfy us, had we but
freedom in our Ministerial action, not to go against our Conscience, however
blind malice would make the world believe, that it is some Papal Empire, even
over Princes, that we desire. Nay, we desire, That if the Magistrate will allow
us Parish-Churches, and Maintenance, and Countenance in our work, that any
person that cannot remove his dwelling without great detriment, and cannot be
satisfied in our Order of Worship and Communion, but can receive more
Edification from another Minister, may have leave to join in Communion with any
other Approved or Tolerated Church, keeping the Laws of Loyalty and Peace: Why
should I envy another desires or benefits? Or think it hard, that any can
profit more by another, than by me? Or why should I be against it?

And we desire (not that the People may be Ordainers, or Church-Governors, or
have the power of the Keys, but) that if any Flock cannot be satisfied, after
full hearing, to rest under the conduct of our Ministry, they may freely
choo^e another, and remove us. And for my own part, as I never did, so I wonder
how any ingenious Minister can obtrude himself on any People, and pretend to be
their Pastor against their wills. As my Conscience condemns it as against God
and them, so I confess my Prudence is against it for my self, and I am not so
base as to endure such a life.

2. And as for the Party called Independent, I have reason to think that it is
the main of that Toleration which they desire. For Mr. Philip Nigh, who led them
more than any one man known to me, did purposely write to prove, That the
Christian Magistrate may set up Teachers, all over his Dominions, whom the
People, upon his Command, are bound to hear: But that to take any for their
Pastors, he thought they might not be compelled.

3. And even the Anabaptists would be contented with the same liberty, if they
be but near as peaceable as Mr. Tombs was, who wrote for even Par^chial
Communion, and persuaded the Anabaptists to it: Though few so far followed him,
most, I think, would be contented with Free Sacraments, in which I include the
Eucharistical Lord's Day worship.

X. And what harm will this do, where Love prevails, and where Pride and Envy
make not (...) Priests to think all wrong them, that do not Adore or Idolize
them, or give them more than is their due? What harm will it do me, if an
hundred of my Parish hear and prefer another man, by whom they can profit more
than by me? What if they worship God in other (sound) words, or in Clothes of
another make or color, as long as they are restrained from reviling, and the
breach of Peace? Are they any better in my Auditory with censuring or
dissenting ^^dgments, hearing me against their wills, than where they can
freely join in Love and Peace? If a bad or weak Minister grudge at all that go
to an able Conformist in the next Parish, few wise men will think that he does
it more for God, or for his Brothers Soul, than for himself: and yet that
person breaks the Canon that goes to the next Parish, as well as he that
goes to a Nonconformist. And why should we be more impatient with this man,
than with that?

XXI. The Pamphlets that are spread abroad for Rigor and Severity of late,
under the pretense of Conformity, do many of them savor so rankly of
Church-Tyranny, and a bloody Mind and Principles, and are made up of such
Reasons, as give us just cause to suspect, that more of them are written by
Papists, than some think. I instance in one called, [ A Representation of the
State of Christianity in England, and of its decay and danger from Sectaries,
as well as Papists. Printed 1674, for Benjamin Took.] in which the Sta^e of
Religion here is unworthily slandered, and the Follies of some few, such as the
Quakers, pretended to be the State of our Religion, and words beseeming
Madmen, (which we never hear) fathered on those that he please^ to call
Sectaries; and they are represented as (...) of the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Commandments, and what not, that is reverend, good and holy, and the Papists
much preferred before them saying, [ That for one infallible old Gentleman at
Rome we have Thousands of Hot Spirits in England, that pretend to more of the
Divine Perfections than ever he did: For if the Holy Ghost does personally
indwell in Sectaries, then they are personally possessed with all the glorious
Attributes of the Godhead, page 26. And 28. The Idolatry of the Papists will be
as excusable at the great day of Accounts, as the unreverent Rudeness, and
superstitious Sowreness of the Sectary. And p. 29. The gross Usurpation and
Invasion of the Priestly Office by Sectaries, to erect Churches, etc. throws
more dirt upon the Christian Religion, than the grossest Errors in the Roman
Church, etc.

Answ. 1. I know none so worthy of the Name of Sectaries as the Papists, that
damn all Christians save themselves, and feign themselves only to be all the
Church.

2. It Is like by these Sectaries, he means those that are not Re-ordained, or
have not (uninterrupted) Episcopal Ordination. And if all such Reformed
Churches are so much more dirty and injurious to Christianity, than the
grossest Errors of the Papists, it is better be of the Papal Church, than of
them.

3. Does pretending to the help of Gods Spirit in Praying, and Preaching, and
Living, arrogate more than pretending to Papal Infallibility in the Office of
an Universal Monarch, and Judge of the sense of all Gods Word? The word [
Personal] I have heard used by none but this, and such Accusers: But what he
means by it, who can tell?

First, If it refer to the Person of the Receiver, how can the Holy Ghost dwell
in any man, and not dwell in his person?

Secondly, If it refer to the Person of the Holy Ghost, what Christian, before
this man, did ever doubt, (that took the Holy Ghost to be God) whether the
Person as well as the Essence of the Holy Ghost, be every where? Does not the
Scripture say, That the Holy Spirit dwells in Believers? Romans 8. 11. 1 Cor.
3. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 14. etc. and God dwells in us, 1 John 4. 12. 15, 16. And
that we are an habitation of God by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. Is Gods Word
worse than Popery? Or is not this to reproach God and his Word, and Spirit,
more than the Reformed Churches do by not having Bishops, who are accused by
Mr. Dodwell, to sin against the Holy Ghost?

Thirdly, But if [ Personal] should mean the mode and title of Union, as if by
Hypostatical Union like Christ's, the Holy Ghost and Believers be made one
Person, who are those Sectaries that hold such a thing, who show the state of
the English Religion? And this is one of the men that cry out against
Toleration, and tells us, that [ There can be no stability of Government in
England, till there be a settlement in Religion; No settlement of Religion, but
by uniting Affections; No uniting Affections, but by unity of Religion.] And so
on: Therefore Rulers must force all to be of one Religion.

Next to the thought of the Heathen and Apostate Nations case, it is one of the
saddest to me, that Rulers and People that have too little studied such
matters, should lie under the temptation and horrid abuse of Clergymen, that
write and talk at such a rate as this man does.

1. Will he maintain, That there is no Union of Religion, wherever men are not
of one opinion, form or mode, in every Circumstance, Rite or Ceremony, or every
accident or integral of Faith? Are any two men in the world then of one
Religion, any more than of one visage or slature, etc?

2. If this man had Rulers that differed from him, as much as he does from the
Nonconformists, would he, and could he, presently change his judgment? or would
he falsely profess a change, lest he should not be of one Religion with his
Prince? or rather must it not be he, or such as he, that must be the standard
of that one Religion to all?

3. Does he believe, That Prisons or Flames will make men of one Affection?
Would such usage win himself to love the judgment and way of those that he
suffered by?

4. Or if men of many Opinions and Affections be forced into the same Temple as
a Prison, does their corporal presence make them of one Religion and Affection?
It is a doleful thing to hear Preachers of the Gospel cry out for Blood,
Flames, or Prisons, to make whole Kingdoms of one Religion, confessing how
unfit they are to do it themselves, who have undertaken the Office that should
do it: Woe to the Princes, Church and People, that have not wit and grace to
escape the snares of such ignorant Tyrannical Counselors.

Abundance more such Pamphlets have lately endeavored to destroy Love and
Peace, and infect the Land with Malice and Cruelty.

XII. The Roman Doctrine and Laws for exterminating, and burning Heretics, is
the top and perfection of this hypocritical wickedness, which murdereth Gods
Servants, and depopulateth Countries, on pretense of Charity, Unity and
Government. And when so many Princes became guilty of serving this bloody
Clergy, (that never knew what manner of spirit they were of) it was Gods wisdom
and justice to permit the same Councils of Bishops, and the same Popes, to
decree their Deposition, which decreed their Subjects extermination ( Lateran.
sub Innoc. 3.) what can be more contrary to Nature? to Humane Interest? or to
the Doctrine, Example, and Spirit of Christ? And whose blood is safe, while
such blood-sucking Leeches are taken for the Rulers of the world, and the
Physicians of Souls?

XIII. All this, I perceive, is on occasion of Objections, but superadded to
what I fullier said before, Part II. Chap. 8. But I still say, That Toleration
must have its due bounds, and not extend to intolerable Doctrines, Practices or
Persons.

To proceed then, Every one that will, must not be Tolerated to be a public
Pastor and Preacher, no not of the Truth. For some insufficient men may by that
manner bring a scandal or scorn on the sacred Doctrine and Worship of God; and
taking Gods Name profanely and in vain, is worse than silence: much less should
men be suffered to preach or dispute down anys Point of Christian Faith or Duty.

XIV. In a word, The Prince that will escape the dangerous Extremes of
Licentiousness, and oppressing Persecution, must.

1. Have an eye to the Holy Scripture, and Apostolical Institution, and to the
Law of Nature together, as his Rule.

2. He must make the true public Good, which lies in men's spiritual welfare,
his end.

3. He must make the promoting of Obedience to God and his Laws, the chief work
of his Office and of his own Laws.

4. He must abhor and avoid all carnal Interests, contrary to the Interest of
Christ, and men's Souls.

5. He must do all with Caution from a Spirit of Love, and a Care to preserve
men's fear of God.

6. He must take heed of Partiality, or harkening to the counsel either of
Atheists, profane men, or of an ignorant, proud, and cruel Clergy: And must
hearken to wise, pious, considerate, peaceable and experienced Counselors, and
avoid the examples both of Rehoboam, and of Jeroboam, and be neither an
Oppressor nor a Corrupter.

XV. And to conclude, good and wise men may well know their duty, whom to
silence and eject, and whom to tolerate, if they are but true to God, by this
one Rule: They may, by hearing all the case and knowledge of the Persons,
discern whether that man's Preaching, consideratis considerandis, is clearly
like to do more good or harm: and do accordingly.

But then they must not judge of good and harm, by carnal sinful lusts and
interests, and by the counsels of selfish partial men, but by wise and just
reason, guided by the Word of God.

XVI. And in all doubtful Cases, choose the safer side; and when the danger of
overdoing is the greater (as in case of Persecution) rather do too little, than
too much: And prefer not Ceremonies before Substance, nor tything Mint, Annise
and Cummin, before Love, Truth and Judgment, and the great things of the Law:
And be sure that you learn what this means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice,] that you may not condemn or accuse the Guiltless.

CHAP. XV.
The Catholic Church will never unite in a Reception and Subscription to every
Word, Verse, or Book of the Holy Scripture, as it is in any one Translation, or
any one Copy in the Original now known.

I. THis needs no other proof than the reason of the thing, and common
experience.

1. All Translations are the work of imperfect fallible men; we have none made
by the Spirit as working infallibly in the Apostles, (unless, as some think,
the Greek of St. Matthews Gospel be a Translation.) The pretenses of
Inspiration of the Seventy two that are said to be the Authors of that Greek
Translation of the Old Testament, is not yet agreed on in the Church; nor
whether it was more than the Pentateuch which they Translated. The Authority
and Reasons of Hierome still much prevail.

Sect. II. And the Vulgar Latin, most valued by the Papists, is yet so much
matter of Controversy between them, that when Sixtus Quintus had stablished a
corrected Edition, Clement the 8th altered it in many hundred places after.

Sect. III. And all Protestants acknowledge the imperfection of all their own
Translations, English, Dutch, French, etc.

And in the same Church of England, we have the public prescribed Use of two
different Translations of the Psalms, one sometime directly contrary to the
other, as Yea and Nay, and one leaving a whole Verse which the other has.

Sect. IV. And we know of no man that pretends to be sure that he has a Copy
of the Hebrew and Greek Text, which he is certain is perfectly agreeable to the
autography or first draught: And the multitude of various Readings put us out
of all hope of ever having certainly so perfect a Copy: All therefore have the
marks of humane frailty, which cannot be denied.

Sect. V. And no wise and good man should deliberately deny this, and so
justify falsely every humane slip. But yet there is no such difference among
Copies or Translations, as should any way shake our foundations, or any point
necessary to salvation does depend upon: For in all such points they all agree.

Sect. VI. Object. But if Copies and Translations differ and err, how can we
make them our rule of judgment?

Answ. I say again, They agree in as many things as we need them for, as a Rule
of Judgment: And where they differ, it being in words of no such use, and
moment, that hinders not our being Ruled by them where they agree. The Kings
Laws may be written in diverse Languages for diverse Countries of his Subjects:
And verbal differences may be no hinderance to their regulating use; no more
than the King himself does lose his authority, if his hair turn white.

Sect. VIII. Object. 2. But what then, must all subscribe to, if not to all the
Bible? Have you any other measure or test?

Answ. We must subscribe, That we believe all Gods Word to be true, and all the
true Canon of Scripture to be his Word, and that we will faithfully endeavor to
discern all the Canon: And we must expressly subscribe to the Essentials of
Christianity, of which before and after.

Sect. VIII. It was a considerable time before many Churches received the
Epistle of James, the 2d of Peter, that to the Hebrews, the Revelation, etc.
And no doubt they were nevertheless true Christians: And if now any believe all
the Essentials of Religion, and should doubt only whether the Canticles, or the
Epistle to ^i^^mon, or the two last of John, or that of Jude, were Canonical,
he might for all that be a true Christian, and more meet to be a Bishop, than
Synesius was before he believed the Resurrection, or Neclar^us before he was
baptized, etc.

Sect. IX. The Churches are not fully agreed to this day about the Canonical
Books of Scripture; more than the Papists call some Books Canonical, which we
call Apocryphal. And it is said that the Abassines, and Syrians have diverse not
only as Ecclesiastical, but as Canonical, which we have not, nor know not of:
Though we have good cause to judge best of our own received number, (by the
proof well produced by Bishop Consins, and many others) yet have we no cause to
unchurch all Churches that differ from us.

Sect. X. No Church therefore ought to cast out all Ministers that doubt of
some words in any Translation, or Copy, or of some Verse, Chapter, or Book, who
hold the main, and all the necessary Doctrines. No such Test was imposed on the
primitive Christians: And it is sad to hear the report that even the sound and
humble Churches of Helvetia, should lately make it necessary to the Ministry,
to subscribe to the antiquity of the Hebrew points; though it may be a true and
useful Assertion.

CHAP. XVI.
The Catholic Church will never unite in the subscribing to any men's whole
Commentaries on the Bible.

. I. THis is yet more evident than the former. 1. They do not at this day, nor
ever did agree in any men's Commentary: They have great respect to the
Commentaries of some of the Ancients, and others, but subscribe them not as
infallible: Though the Trent Oath of Pope Pius, swear men not to expound the
Scriptures otherwise than according to the agreeing Exposition of the Fathers;
it is well known,

1. That they never told and proved to us, who are to be taken for Fathers, and
who not.

2. It Is known that few of them have written large Commentaries, and fewer on
all the Bible, if any.

3. That they often differ among themselves.

4. And the best have confessed their own Errors.

5. And more have been found erroneous by others, and are by us at this day.

6. Yea, they have cast out, and condemned one another; as the Case of
Nazianzene, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Theophilus Alexand. Cyril, and Theodoret,
and many more besides Origin shows.

6. The Papists ordinarily take liberty to differ from the Commentaries of
diverse of the most Renowned of the Fathers.

7. And the learned men of the Papists themselves do differ from one another.

8. And no General Council that pretend to be the Judge of thesense of the
Scripture, durst ever yet venture to write a Commentary on it.

9. No nor any Pope; nor any by his appointment, or a Councils, is written by
any other, and by them approved as infallible. By all which, and much more, it
is evident, That subscribing wholly to any Commentary, will never unite the
Churches of Christ.

Sect. II. And no wonder, when that, 1. God has composed the Scripture of such
various parts, as that all are not of the same nece^sity or intelligibility;
but some are harder than the rest to be understood, and many hundred Texts are
such, that a man that understands them not, may be saved. 2. And Pastors as
well as People, are of various degrees of understanding, and all imperfect, and
know but in part.

Sect. III. Yet are good Commentaries of great use, as other teaching is; but
not to be subscribed as the terms of the Unity or Liberty of the Churches.

Sect. IV. Nay, those particular Expositions which General Councils (the
Pretenders to deciding judgment) have made, are not to be subscribed as
infallible, as I have before proved by the quality of the men, and by their
many Errors, and contradicting and condemning one another.

CHAP. XVII.
A Summary Recital of the true Terms of Concord, and some of the true Causes of
Schism.

THE Sum of all that is said of Schism and Unity, is this.

I. Schism is an unlawful separating from one, or many Churches, or making
Parties and Divisions in them, and is caused usually, either

1. By unskilful, proud Church-Tyrants, Dogmatists, or Superstitious Persons,
by departing from Christ's instituted terms of Concord, the Christian Purity and
Simplicity, and denying Communion to those that unite not on their sinful or
unnecessary self-devised terms, and obey not their ensnaring Canons or Wills;
or malignantly forbidding what Christ has commanded, and excommunicating and
persecuting men for obeying him.

2. Or else by erroneous proud self-conceited persons, that will not unite and
live in Communion upon Christ's instituted terms, but feigning some Doctrine or
Practice of their devising to be true, good and necessary, which is not; or
something to be intolerably sinful that is good or lawful, do therefore cast
off their Guides, and the Communion of the Church as unlawful, on pretense of
choosing a better necessary way.

II. 2. The necessary means of Unity and Church Concord, are these.

1. That every Catechized understanding person, professing Repentance, Belief
and Consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and the Children of such dedicated by
them to Christ be Baptized. And the Baptized accounted Christians having right
to Christian Communion, till their Profession be validly disproved by an
inconsistent Profession or Conversation; that is, by some Doctrine against the
Essence of Christianity, or some scandalous wilful sin, with Impenitence after
sufficient Admonition: And that no man be Excommunicated, that is not proved
thus far to Excommunicate himself: And that the Catechized or Examined person
be put upon no other profession of Belief, Consent and Practice, as
interpreting the Sacramental Covenant, but of the Articles of the Creed, the
Lords Prayer and Decalogue, understood; and the general belief of, consent to,
and practice of all that he discerns to be the Word of God.

2. That in Church Cases and Religion,

I. The Magistrate have the only public judgment whom he shall countenance
and maintain, or tolerate, and whom he shall punish, or not tolerate nor
maintain: and never be the Executioner of the Clergies Sentence, without, or
against his own Conscience and Judgment.

II. That the Ordainers (being the senior Pastors, or a Bishop or President
with other Pastors, which is to be left to the concurrent judgments of
themselves, and the people) be the Judges of the fitness of the Ordained person
to be a Minister of Christ, and the said Pastors in their respective particular
Churches, be the Key-bearers, or Judges, who is to be Baptized, and admitted to
Communion in the Church, and who not; and not constrained to Baptize, or to
give or deny Communion there, by the judgment of others against their
Consciences, (though in case of forfeiture, or just cause, they may be removed
from that Church, or from the sacred Office.)

III. That the People of that Church be the private discerning Judges, who
shall be their Pastors, to whose conduct they will trust their Souls; if not so
far as to be the first Electors, at least so far as to have a free consenting
or dissenting power; and they be not forced to trust their Souls with any man
as a Pastor against their Consciences: And that every man be the private
discerning Judge of his own Duty to God and Man, and of his sin forbidden; and
of his own secret Case, whether he believe in God and Christ, and purpose to
obey him, or whether he be an Atheist, or Infidel, or secretly wicked, and so
fit or unfit for Baptism and Communion; so that though he be not to be received
without the judgment of the Pastors, yet he may exclude himself, if conscious
of incapacity; and therefore that none be forced by corporal Penalties or
Mulcts, to be Baptized, or to Communicate.

3. That the Christian Magistrate make three sorts of Laws, one for the
approved and maintained Churches and Pastors; another for the Tolerated; and a
third sort for the Intolerable.

I. And that a sufficient number of the ablest, soundest, and worthiest
Ministers, be made the public, approved, maintained Preachers and Pastors. And
where Parish Bounds are judged necessary, that all persons living in the Parish
be constrained to contribute proportionably to maintain the Parish Ministers,
and Temple, and Poor; and to hear public Teaching, and to worship God, either
in that or some other Approved or Tolerated Church, within their convenient
reach or neighborhood.

II. And that the Tolerated Ministers (tried and licensed) have protection and
peace in the public exercise of their Ministry, though not Approbation and
Maintenance.

III. But that the Intolerable be restrained by suitable restraints.

4. That the Approved and Maintained Ministers be put to subscribe their Belief
of, Consent to, and resolved practice or obedience of all the Sacred Canonical
Scriptures, so far as by diligent study they are able to understand them; and
more particularly of the Christian Religion summarily contained in the
Sacramental Covenant, and in the ancient Creeds received by the Universal
Church, the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue, as it is the Law of Christ, and
expounded by him in the Holy Scriptures: And that they will be faithful to the
King and Kingdom; and as Ministers will faithfully guide the Flocks in holy
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Example of Life, laboring to promote Truth,
Holiness, Love, Peace and Justice, for the salvation of men's Souls, the
edification of the Church, and the glorifying and pleasing of God our Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier.

And that the said Maintained Ministers be tied by the regulating Laws which
determine only such circumstances as in genere are necessary to be agreed in
for Uniformity, and common harmony: As of Time, Place, Parish Bounds, what
Translation of Scripture to use, what Version of Psalms, what decent Habit,
etc. not put to profess Approbation of all these, but required to use them, and
censured if they do not.

5. That the Tolerated Ministers subscribe all the same things, except these
last Regulating Laws for Circumstances of Order.

6. That either a Catalogue of Errors and Sins be drawn up in the Law which no
Minister shall preach; or else it be left to the Judges to discern when any is
proved to preach against any necessary Article of his subscribed Profession:
And it is meet that the Catalogue prohibited to the Maintained Ministers, be
larger than that prohibited to the Tolerated, some Errors being tolerable,
which are not approvable. And it is not the first fault that should suspend or
silence either of them, but obstinacy after a first and second admonition. Yea,
many lesser Errors must be punished only with congruous Mulcts, or Rebukes, or
after that with loss of Maintenance, that are not to be punished with Silencing.

7. That no other Test, Profession, Covenant, Subscription or Promise be
required of any, as necessary to Ministry or Communion, which may become
dividing Snares and Engines: But only that where Papal Tyrannies, or any other
Usurpers, claim it dangerous to the Church and Kingdom, the Essentials of that
Papacy or Usurpation be expressly renounced by all that will have Maintenance or
Toleration; yet not on this pretense making every claim of Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, Councils, or Synods of Presbyters, which others think to
be a Usurpation, to be so dangerous as the Papacy, and so the renunciation of
them as necessary; because such existent persons claim not such Power, nor make
such Laws, for deposing Kings, and murdering or exterminating Dissenters: which
if they do, they must be expressly renounced: else the keeping out usurping
practice is enough.

8. The Christian Magistrate must keep Peace among all, both the Approved and
Tolerated, and not suffer any unpeaceable Preaching or Disputes; which tend to
destroy Love, and Quietness; nor suffer railing Calumnies against each other,
to be published or printed.

III. 1. Particular Churches and their Pastors should be so far Associated, as
is necessary to their mutual peace, concord and strength: And therefore should
keep frequent Synods for Correspondency to these Ends; and by Messengers and
Letters also keep up their Brotherly Concord.

2. But whether these Associations of single Churches should be headed by
Diocesanes, Metropolitanes, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, most think is a
matter of mere humane Prudence.

3. But certainly the Magistrate must see, that neither the Synods, nor their
Heads or Presidents tyrannize; (...) instead of Assemblies for Concord, become
an Aristocratical or Monarchical Church Government; nor force not any to
approve of them, or such humane Forms of Churches; much less that they infringe
not the Rights and Liberties of the Churches formed by the institution of
Christ and his Apostles.

IV. Yet more briefly, 1. Approving the be^^. 2. Tolerating the Tolerable. 3.
Sacraments fre^, (...) not forced. 4. The Intolerable restrained. 5. The test
of Toleration being this, Whether such Tolerated Worship do more good or hurt
in true impartial judgment. 6. Magistrates keeping all in peace] would heal us.

FINIS.

