A TREATISE OF EPISCOPACY; CONFUTING BY SCRIPTURE, REASON, and the CHURCHES
TESTIMONY, that sort of Diocesan Churches. PRELACY, and GOVERNMENT, Which
casts out The Primitive Church-Species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline,
and confounds the Christian World by Corruption, Usurpation, Schism, and
Persecution. Meditated in the Year 1640. when the Et caetera Oath was imposed.
Written 1671. and cast by. Published 1680, by the importunity of our
Superiors, who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity. By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons at the Three Cocks at the West end of S.
Paul's, and Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street. 1681.

The History of the Production of this Treatise, with its Design and Sum; to
prevent misunderstanding.
BEcause many of late, as well as Justice Roger L'Estrange, do seem to believe
themselves in their accusation of me, as changing with the Times; though I
greatly affect the change of a Proficient, and know not at what age it is that
such men would fix us that we may grow no wiser, nor ever repent of former
Ignorance or Error; yet I will here confess to them that if what I here write
against be good and right, I have been forty years unchanged in my Error.

My mutability has been little to my advantage for this world, For further
than I was for the King, I never was one year on that which was called the
upper or stronger prevailing side, as far as I understand it. Nor to the very
day that I was turned out of all, did my Preferments, or Riches ever serve me,
so much as to have a House, or keep a Servant man, (save in Travail) or Woman
(save one aged Woman that provided me necessaries, in a few top rooms of
another man's House;) which I mention for the sake of the mistaken French
stranger, Mr. Durel, that tells the World another story.

And as to this Subject, this is the Breviate of its History, ab origin. I was
in my Child hood, first bred up under the School, and Church-teaching, of eight
several men, of whom only two preached once a month, and the rest were but
Readers of the Liturgy, and most of very scandalous lives. After that I fell
into the hands of a Teacher, that studied for preferment, and reviled
Puritanes; and after that I fell into the happier acquaintance of three ancient
Divines, that were called then Conformable Puritanes; and all of them bred in
me an Opinion, that Nonconformists were unlearned men, addicted to humorous,
causeless Singularity: For I knew but one Where Dr. Allestree was bred: His
next Neighbor.
who was an honest plain Preacher but of little learning: And to settle me, the
Divines that I followed, made me read Bishop Downame's Defense, Bishop Andrews,
and others for Episcopacy, and Mr. Sprint, Dr. Burges, and others for the
Ceremonies: And I verily judged them to be in the right: But as soon as I was
ordained, I removed into a Country where were some Nonconformists, some few of
them Learned Ministers, and many Laymen; of whom, one in the house with me, was
often disputing the Case with me, and I thought I had still the better: And the
Nonconformable Ministers there, were men of so much Holiness, and Peace, that
they would scarce ever talk of the matters in difference, but of Holiness and
Heaven, and repressing the overmuch heat of the Lay men: And the famous
William Fenner being lately of the next Parish, a Conformist of learning, yet
plain and affectionate in preaching, God had blessed his Ministry with so great
success in the Conversion of many ungodly Persons; as that the reverence of
him, kept up the honor of Conformity among the Religious people thereabouts*

But in 1640. I was removed to Brignorth, and the Canons newly made, imposed on
us an Oath, which had these words, [I A. B. do swear that I do approve of the
Doctrine, and Discipline, or Government of the Church of England, as concerning
all things necessary to Salvation -- Nor will I ever give my CONSENT to alter
the Government of this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and
Archdeacons, etc. As it stands now established, and as by right it ought to
stand -- And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words,
without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever;
And this I do heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the Faith of a Christian: So
help me God in Jesus Christ.]

Though every Minister in the Country, as well I, was for Episcopacy, yet this
Oath so startled them that they appointed a meeting at Brignorth to consult
about it. It fell out on my Lecture day, and at the meeting, it fell to my lot
to be the Objecter, or Opponent, against Mr. Christopher Cartwright (a good
Man, incomparably beyond me in Learning, the Derender of K. Chapter 1. against the
Marquess of Worcester, and the Author of the Rabbinnical Commentary on Genesis
whose Papers of Justification, I since answered) He defended the Oath; and
though my Objections were such as were none of the strongest, the Ministers
thought he failed in answering them, and we broke up more dubious than before.

I had a little before set my self to a more serious study of the Case of the
Ceremonies than before; and upon the reading of Dr. Ames Fresh suit, and some
others (having before read little on that side) I came to see that there was a
great difference between the determination of such Circumstances of Order as
the Law of Nature, or Scripture allow and oblige men to determine one way or
other, the Genus being necessary, and the making of new mystical significant
teaching Ordinances, and Symbols of Christianity (of which see Bishop Jer.
Tailor cited in my 2d. Plea.) And hereupon I had settled my Judgment only
against the imposed use of the Cross in Baptism, and the abuse of undertaking
Godfathers.

But now I resolved before I took such an Oath as this, to study over again the
Controversy of Episcopacy, (which else I think I should scarce have done) For
I saw 1. That such an Oath and Covenant, so Universally imposed, was made the
test and terms of Church concord, and so would be an Engine of division by
shutting out all that could not take it. The Scotch Oath, and Covenant was not
the first imposed on us: The Bishops Oath and Covenant to the contrary went
here before it. 2. I saw that the whole frame of the present Church Government,
was about to be fixed, as by an Oath of Allegiance, on the Land, as if it were
as necessary as Monarchy, and to be woven into the fundamental unchangeable
constitution, and it were true, No Bishop, no King. 3. I asked, What was the
meaning of the Et caetera, and could have no solution, but from the following
words [ As it stands now established] And understood not well how far Lay
chancellous, Officials, Surrogates, Registers, Proctors* Advocates, were part
of the established Government; but I saw it certainly included, Archbishops,
Deans, and Archdeacons. 4. I asked whether the King and Parliament had not power
to set up a Bishop in every Corporation? and to take down Deans, Archdeacons,
Chancellours, Officials, etc. and sew denied it. 5. I asked my self i^ the King
and Parliament make such a change, and command my Consent, whether I must
disobey them, and forestall my obedience by a Covenant and Oath? 6. I thought
that what is imposed on all the Clergy to day, may be imposed on the Laity
next; And then all Parliament men will be Sworn and Covenanted never in
Parliament so much as to Consent to change any of the Church Government now
established. 7. I found that I must also swear [ That it ought so to stand.]
which could mean no less, than by a Divine Law, when Man's Law may not alter it.
8. I found such Heartiness, Willingness required in the Swearer, as required
very full satisfaction in all this. And that with the terrible re-nuncication
of the Help of God in Christ, if I do not all that I swear to. 9. And I must be
deprived of my Office (for Benefice I had none) and cast out of the ministry,
if I refused to take this Episcopal Covenant and Oath. 10. And I knew that he
that made no Conscience of deliberate Perjury, had little reason to hope that
he had any good Conscience, true Grace, or Honesty; and specially if he
concurred to involve all the Clergy, or Nation in the guilt.

Upon these Considerations, I set my self to a more searching study of the
matter: I read Gersom Bucer, Didoclaue, Jacob, (and after Parker, Bains,) and
others on one side, and all that I could get on the other, ( Downam again,
Bilson, Hooker, Saravia, Andrews, and many more) And the result of my search
was this, I wondered to find so many write for and against Episcopacy, without
distinguishing the sorts of Episcopacy: For I found reason to think one sort at
least Tolerable, yea, desirable; but that which the Oath of 1640. would have
bound me to, I found great reason to judge to be but what I have described it
in this Book: And I here give notice to the Reader, that wherever he finds
me speak, as against the English Diocesane Prelacy; I mean it as described by
Cousins, and Dr. Zouch; and as relating to that Oath and Canon, and not in
opposition to the Laws of the Land.

This Judgment then settled, I never could see cause to change, but the more I
read of the Ancients, Church History, Counsels, etc. And many other Writers for
Episcopacie, ( Petavius, Sancta Clara Spalatensis, Dr. Hamond and many more)
the more was I confirmed in it to this day. When Usurpation was at the highest,
I wrote accordingly in my book, called Disputations of Church Government. When
the King came home I accordingly used my Endeavors as a Reconciler with the
Ministers here called Presbyterians, who seemed mostly of the same mind, And
how little an alteration of the Church Government in the Kings Declaration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, did we receive with thankfulness, and it would have
been with a conforming joy, but that we knew the leading Men, that treated with
us, too well to hope that they had any intention to continue it, but to use it
-- they knew to what, till they had done their work and got this Act of
Uniformity.

In 1668. After I had been in the Goal, and yet men called for the reasons of
my Nonconformity, I drew up some of my thoughts rudely: And in 1671. The call
being renewed I wrote this Book, as now it is (saving a few additional Notes):
But cast it by my Friends and my experience persuading me, that the Bishops,
and their Parliament adherence could not patiently bear it.

Many years after some Letters past between Mr. Henry Dodwell (then of Ireland)
and me: And his last being tedious, and he seeming not to intend or desire a
publication of them, I gave him but a short general return, instead of a
voluminous particular Answer, especially because I had this Book written by me,
in which I had more than answered him, and was not willing or at leisure to
write over the same things again: But when I had lately wrote in my Book of
Concord a summary consutation of Mr. Dodwels schismatical Volumne, in which he
degradeth, unchurcheth, if not unchristeneth, so many of the Protestants, as
having no Sacraments, no Covenant right to Salvation, but sinning against the
Holy Ghost; and all for want of a Ministry derived by an uninterrupted
succession of Episcopal Ordination from the Apostles, (and could not by
importunity prevail with him to answer Voetius de desperata causa Papatus, or
my Dispute of Ordination, at last I received a Letter from him, signifying his
purpose, upon his Friends desire to Publish his long Letter written to me out
of Ireland: So that I saw a necessity of Publishing my Treatise which contained
more than an Answer to him: And the rather because some R. Reverend Bishops and
others had urged me, to give an Account of the Reasons of my Nonconformity: So
that I had not leave to suppress this book, nor be longer silent. And yet I
fear that they that so called for it, will not easily bear it.

The sum of Mr. Dodwels Letter to me, now in the press, is to prove the
possibility of right Discipline, by our Diocesane Government as it is, 1.
Because Magistrates can exercise theirs by as few: 2. Because the Ancients de
facto did it by such: Therefore it may be done.

To answer these two is to answer his Letter, which one would think should be
so easy, that no Scholar should have need of help to do it.

1. If any man canby an harrangue of words be brought to renounce his reason
and experience, so far as to believe that the Office of a Pastor may be
performed to as many Parishes, as the Office of a Major or Justice of Peace
may, and that Pastors have no more to do in watching over particular Souls,
instructing, exhorting, convincing, comforting, visiting, worpshing, Governing,
etc, than the works of a Justice of Peace amount to, and that Dr. Stillingfleet
( e. g.) shall be excused if he do no more for his Parish, than Justice Rog.
L'Estrange does, I undertake not to convince that man of any thing. Read over
the work of a Bishop as I have here discribed it from the Scripture and Dr.
Hamond and compare it with a Justices work, and if you can yet be deceived by
Mr. Dodwel be deceived.

And yet I think there are in diverse Parishes about us many Justices for one
Pastor: I am confident London Diocese has a great number for one Bishop.

And either our Justices are bound (besides what now they do) to labor as
much to bring some to Repentance, and such other work, as the Pastors are bound
to do, or not: If not, it will not follow that as large a Circuit may be
Governed by one Pastor as by one Justice: If yea, then he does but condemn the
Justices for unfaithfulness; which will not prove, that a Pastor must be as bad.

2. And as to his appeal to the discipline of the Ancients; I leave the Reader
to the deceit of this man's arguings, 1. If he cannot find it fully proved in
this Book, that the Churches of the ancient Bishops were not so big as our
greatest Parishes, as to the number of Souls, much less as our Diocesses. 2.
And if in my abstruct of Church History of Bishops and Counsels, I have not
fully proved, that Discipline was neglected corrupted or overthrown die degrees
as Bishops-Churches overswelled. When we read such doleful complaints in
History, Fathers, Counsels and their Canons of the corruption of the Churches,
is this the true use to be made of all, that we must be like them, and not
blame them, lest we open the nakedness of our Fathers? 3. And if men can make
themselves willingly so blind, as by a story that the Fathers did such things
among People and circumstances which we know not, to renounce common experience
that it is not now any where done, nor can possibly be done; If men can be so
ignorant what our Parishes and Diocesses are, and what a Bishop and Chancellor
do and can do, Let such err, for I am unable to cure them, any more than if
they were confident, that my Lord Major can Govern all the Families of London
as their Masters, by stewards, without Family-Masters, or that one Physician,
or one Tutor, could serve instead of many for the City.

Indeed they that have as low an esteem of true Discipline, as Mr. D. in his
Letter seems to have, may easily believe that a few men may do it. And those
Papists that can let the Church be the sink of common uncleanness, and a
Nursery of Ignorance, Vice, and Profaneness; so they may but keep up their
Wealth, and Ease, and Honor, by crying up Order, Government, and Unity, may
accordingly believe, that no more knowledge, Piety or Discipline is a duty,
than serves the ends of their worldly Dominion.

I must again give notice to the Reader that whereas the Common Objections of
the greatness of Bishops Churches in the second Centurie, are fetched from the
instances of Rome, and Alexandria, I have answered even those two in the
beginning of my Breviate of Church History, to which I must refer you, and not
again repeat it here.

I know that poor ingnorant Persons must expect such a shameful Cant of old
reproach as this, to cheat them into the hatred of Christ's Church order and
Government, into a love of Clergy bondage, a scornful smile shall tell them
[Mr. Baxter would have as many Bishops as Parishes, and a Pope in every Parish;
when men think one in a Diocese too much: When every ignorant or rash Priest
shall be the Master of all the Parish, and you have no remedy against his
Tyranny; what a brave reformation will this be?] And such a deceitful scorn
will serve to delude the ignorant and ungodly.

But if they truly understood the case, they would see the shame of this
deriding objection. 1. A Pope is a Monarch or Governor of the world, and a
Diocesan of a multitude of Parishes. And sure he usurpeth not so much, who will
be but the Church-guide of one? A man is abler to guide one School, College,
Hospital, or Family, than a hundred or thousand, without any true Master of a
Family, School, College, etc. under him.

2. Why is not this foolish scorn used against these foresaid relations also?
Why say they, not every Master makes himself a Pope or Bishop to his own
house, and every Schoolmaster to his School, whereas one Master over a
thousand would do better with bare Teaching Ushers, that had no Government.

3. Let it be remembered that we would have no Parish Pastor to have any
forceing power, by Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments, etc. But only to prevail so
far as his management of Divine authority on men's Consciences can prevail: And
we would not have Magistrates punish men merely because they stand
excommunicate, or because they tell not the Clergy that they repent. True
excommunication is a heavy punishment fitted to its proper use, and not to be
corrupted by the force of the Sword, but to operate by it self; And valeat
quantum valere potest. He that despises it will not say he is enslaved by it.
But is this all that the Bishops desire?

4. We would have no man become the Pastor of a Church without the peoples
consent (if not choice) no more than a Physician should be forced on the sick.
And as the Servant that consents to be a Servant, consents to his Masters
Authority, and he that consents to a Physician, consents to be ruled by him
for his health, and neither take this for a slavery: So he that consents to a
Pastor, consents to his Pastoral conduct: And if he think it to his injury,
he may choose.

5. And yet we believe that the Magistrate may constrein Atheists, Infidels,
and such as refuse all proper Church Communion, to hear Gods word Preached, and
make all the Parish allow the Teacher his tithes and maintenance due by Law:
But he may force no man to Receive the great gift of the Body and Blood of
Christ, or a pardon delivered and sealed by Baptism or the Eucharist, and to be
a member of the Church as such, against his will. For none but desirous
consenters are capable of the gifts, so that the same Minister may be the
common Teacher of all the Parish, and yet the Church-Pastor only of fit
consenters. And when Sacraments are free and no Minister constrained to deliver
them against his Conscience, nor any unwilling man to receive them, who is by
this enslaved?

6. And if a Church-Pastor do displease the Church, and the main body of them
withdraw their consent, we would not have any man continue their Pastor while
they consent not, but disclaim him. Though in case of need the Rulers may
continue him in his Benefice as the public Preacher, if the people be grossly
and obstinately culpable in refusing him.

7. And we would have that Parish Pastor to have no power to hinder any other
Minister from giving any one the Sacrament whom he denies it to, or that
refuses it from him: Though he that for a common cause is cast out of our
Church, should not be received by others, till he repents, yet that holds not
in all private causes, between the particular Pastor and him; nor in case of
unjust excommunication: And other Ministers must judge of their own actions,
whom to receive; and an injuring Minister may not hinder any other, nor the
injured person from communicating elsewhere.

8. And we would have Parish Churches be as large as personal communion does
require or allow, and every Church to have diverse Ministers; and if one be
chief or Bishop, and the rest assistants, and if three or four small Parishes
make one such communicating Church, we resist not.

9. And we desire frequent meeting or Synods of neighbor Pastors; and that
there every single Pastor be ready to give an account of his Ministry, and to
answer any thing that shall be alleged against him: And that the vote of the
Synod obliges all against unnecessary singularity.

10. We refuse not that one in every such Synod be the moderator; and if as of
old every City ((...)) or Corporation had a Bishop, so if but every Corporation
or market Town, or every circuit that has as many Communican^^ as can know one
another by neighborhood and some conversation and sometimes assembling (like a
great Parish with many Chapels) had but so much power as is essential to a
true particular Pastor and Church; yea or but the power that a free Tutor,
Philosopher or Physician has, to manage his office by his skill, and not as an
Apothecary or mere executor of a strangers dictates, we should quietly submit.

11. And as we refuse not such Bishops (even durante vita and capacitate) in
every Church or City that is Corporation; so if it please either the King, or
the Churches by his permission to give one grave and able man a general care of
many Churches, (as even the Scots superintendents had at their reformation, as
Spotswood of Lothian, etc.) not by violence to silence, and oppress, but by
mere Pastoral power, and only such as the Apostles themselves used to instruct
junior Pastors, to reprove, admonish, etc. we resist not: And so if Godly
Diocesans will become Archbishops only of this sort, and promote o^r work
instead of hindering it, we shall submit, though we cannot Swear approbation,
it being a thing that Christian Ministers may doubt of, and no Article of our
Creed.

12. And if the King do cumulate wealth and honor on them, and give them their
place in Parliaments, to keep the Clergy from contempt, yea, or trust any of
them under him as Magistrates with the Sword, whether we like it or not, we
shall peaceably submit, and obey them as Magistrates.

13. And if for order sake these Diocesans should have a negative voice (unless
in cases of forfeiture or necessity) in the ordination of Ministers to the
Church universal, not taking away the power of particular Churches to choose,
or at least freely consent or dissent, as to the fixing of Pastors over
themselves, we would submit to all this for common peace. Specially if the
Magistrate only choose men to Benefices and Magistracies, and none had the
Pastoral power of the Keys, but by the Election of the Clergy and the peoples
consent, which was the judgment and practice of the universal Church, from the
beginning of Episcopacy till of late.

14. And lastly we hold the Magistrate the only Governor by the Sword, as well
of Pastors as of Physicians and all others: And though he may not take the work
of our proper calling out of our hands no more than the Physicians, yet he may
(by justice and discretion) punish us for maladministration, and drive us to
our duty, though not hinder us from it; And we consent to do all under his
Government: Judge now whether we set up Popes or Tyrants.

By all this it is apparent that it is none of the design of this Treatise to
overthrow or weaken the Church of England; but to strengthen and secure it
against all its notorious dangers. 1. By reforming those things, which else
undoubtedly will cause a succession of dissenters in all generations, though
all we the present Nonconformists are quickly like to be past troubling them,
or being troubled by them, even of themselves many will turn upon the same
reasons which have convinced us. 2. By uniting all Protestants, and turning
their odious wrath and contentions, into a reverence of their Pastors, and into
mutual Love and help.

This Treatise being hastened in three presses since Mr. Dodwel sent me his
Letter that required it, I have not time to gather the Printers Errata, but
must leave them to the discretion of the Reader. Only for [ English Prelacy]
before the first Chapter and in many other places should be [ The described
Prelacy].

I will end with the two following Testimonies, One ad rem, the other ad
hominem.

The Lord pity his Ship that is endangered by the Pilots.

October 14. 1680, Richard Baxter.

Justin Martyr's Apolog. We had rather die for the confession of one Faith,
then either lie or deceive them that examine us: Otherwise we might readily use
that Common saying, my Tongue is sworn, my mind is unsworn ( vid. Rob. Abbot:
old way p. 51.)

Thorndike of forbearance of Penalties. It is to no purpose to talk of
reformation in the Church unto regular Government, without restoring the
Liberty of choosing Bishops, and the Privilege of Enjoying them, to the
Synods, Clergy and people of each Diocese. So evident is the right of Synods,
Clergy and people in the making of this of whom they consist, and by whom they
are to be governed, that I need make no other reason of the neglect of
Episcopacy, than the neglect of it.

THE CONTENTS.
PART. I.
Chap. 1. THe Reasons of this Writing. Chap. 2. The English Diocesane Prelacy
and Church Government truly described, that it may be known what it is which we
dissent from. Chap. 3. Our judgment if the History of the ancient Church
Government, and of the rise of the Diocesane Prelacy. Chap. 4. The judgment of
those Non Conformists now silenced, who 1660 addressed themselves to King
Charles II. for the matter in Church Government: What they then offered, and
what those of the Authers mind now hold, as to the Right of what is before but
Historically related. Chap. 5. Concerning the several Writers on this
Controversy, wherein there are sufficient animadversions on some, and
sufficient Confutations of the Chief, who have written for the Prelacy which we
dissent from. As 1. Whitgift. 2. Faravia. 3. Bilson. 4. Hooker. 5. Bishop
Downams Defense. 6. Bishop Hall. 7. Petavius. 8. Bish. Andrews. 9 Bish. Usher
in some passages. 10. Of the Dispute at the Isle of Wight. 11. John Forbes. 12.
The two Books of the Bohemian Discipline consented to. 13. Grotius applauded.
14. J. D. 15. M, A. de Dom. Spalatensis considered, and much of him approved.
16. Doctor Hammond answered, viz. his Annotations, his Dissertat. against
Blondel, etc. who have written against Prelacy. Chap. 6. It is not pleasing to
God, that Cities only should have Bishops, and Churches with the Territories.
Chap. 7. The Definition and Reasons of a Diocesan Church considered and
confuted. Chap. 8. Whether the Infidel Territories or Citizens are part of a
Diocesane Church Chap. 9. Whether converting a Diocese give right to their
Converter to be their Bishop and Ruler. Chap. 10. That a particular Church of
the first or lowest order, must consist of neighbor Christians, associated for
personal Communion in local presence in holy worship and Conversation, and not
of Strangers so remote, as have only an internal heart Communion, or an
external Communion by the Mediation of others. Chap. 11. That a Bishop or
Pastor of a Particular Church of the first rank aforedescribed, must govern it
statedly as present, by himself, and not absent by others. Chap. 12. The just
opening and understanding of the true nature of the Pastoral Office, and Church
Government, would end these Controversies about Prelacy. Chap. 13. That there
is no need of such as our Dioces^nes for the Unity, or the Government of the
particular Ministers, nor for the silencing of the unworthy. Chap. 14. The true
original of the warrantable sort of Episcopacy in particular Churches, was the
notorious disparity of abilities in the Pastors. And tho original of that
tyrannical Prelacy into which it did degenerate, was the worldly Spirit in the
Pastors and people, which with the World came by prosperity into the Church.
Quaere, Whether the thing cease not when the Reason of it cease.
PART. II.
Chap. 1. THe clearing of the State of the Question. Chap. 2. The first
Argument against the aforedescribed Diocesanes that their form ( quantum in se)
destroys the particular Church form of Gods institution, and sets up a
humane form in its stead. Chap. 3. That the Primitive Episcopal Churches of the
Holy Ghosts Institution, were but such Congregations as I before described.
Proved by Scripture. Chap. 4. The same proved by the Concessions of the most
learned Defenders of Prelacy. Chap. 5. The same proved by the full Testimony of
Antiquity. Chap. 6. The same further confirmed by the Ancients. Chap. 7. More
proof of the aforesaid Ancient Church limits, from the Ancient Customs. Chap.
8. That the Diocesanes cause the Error of the Separatists, who avoid our
Churches as false in their Constitution, and would disable us to confute them.
Chap. 9. The second Argument from the deposition of the Primitive species of
Bishops, and the erecting of a humane inconsi^tent species in their stead. A
specifi k difference proved. Chap. 10. Whether any form of Church Government be
instituted by God as necessary or all be left to humane prudence and choice,
Chap. 11. Argument third from the destruction of the Order of Presbyters of
divine Institution, and the invention of a new Order of half Sub-presbyters in
their stead. Chap. 12. That God instituted such Presbyters as had the foresaid
power of the Keys in doctrine, worship, and discipline, and no other proved by
the Scriptures Chap. 13. The same confirmed by the Ancients. Chap. 14. And by
the Confessions of the greatest and learnedest Prelatists. Chap. 15. Whether
this Government belonging to the Presbyters be in foro Ecclesiastico exteriore,
or only in foro Conscientiae, vel interiore. Chap. 16. That the English
Diocesane Government does change this Office of a Presbyter of God's
institution, quantum in se, into another of humane invention. The difference
opened. Twenty instances of taking away the Presbyters power from them. Chap.
17. That the great change of Government hitherto described (the making of a new
species of Churches, Bishops and Presbyters, and deposing the old) was sinfully
done, and not according to the intent of the Apostles. Chap. 18. Argument
fourth from the impossibility of their performance of the Episcopal Office in a
Diocesane Church: And the certain exclusion and destruction of the particular
Church Government, while one man only will undertake a work too great for many
hundreds, when their work is further opened in perticulars. Chap 19. The same
impossibility proved by experience. 1. Of the ancient Church 2. Of the Foreign
Churches. 3. Of the Church of England. 4. Of our selves. Chap. 20. Objections
against Parish discipline answered. The need of it proved. Chap. 21. The
Magistrates sword. 1. Is neither the strength of Church discipline. 2. Nor will
serve instead of it. 3. Nor should be too much used to second and enforce it.
The mischeifs of enforcing men to Sacramental Communion, opened in twenty
instances. Chap. 22. An Answer to the Objections, 1. No Bishop, no King. 2. Of
the Rebellions and Seditions of them that have been against Bishops. Chah. 23.
Certain brief consectaries, Chap. 24. Some Testinonies of Prelatists themselves
of the late state of the Church of England, its Bishops and Clergy, lest we be
thought to wrong them, in our description of them, and their fruits. Chap. 25.
The Ordination lately exercised by the Presbyters in England, when the Bishops
were put down by the Parliament, is valid, and Re ordination not to be required
jure divino, as supposing it null.
A TREATISE OF EPISCOPACY. Confuting, by SCRIPTURE, REASON, And the CHURCHES
TESTIMONY, That sort of Diocesan Churches, Prelacy and Government, which
casts out the Primitive Church-species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline,
and confounds the Christian world by Corruption, Usurpation, Schisms, and
Persecution. Meditated 1640 when the etc. Oath was imposed: Written. 1671 and
cast by: Published 1680 by the Call of Mr. H. Dodwel, and the Importunity of
our Superiors, who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity.

The design of this book is not to weaken the Church of England, its
Government, Riches, Honor or Unity: But to strengthen and secure it, 1. By the
concord of all true Protestants who can never unite in the present Impositions:
2. And by the necessary reformation of Parish-Churches, and those abuses, which
else will in all ages keep up a succession of Nonconformists. As an Account why
we dare not Covenant by Oath or Subscription never to endeavor any (amending)
alteration of the Church Government (by lawful means, as Subjects) nor make
our selves the justifying vouchers for all the unknown persons in the Kingdom,
who vowed and swore it, that none of them are obliged to such (lawful)
endeavor, by their vow. By RICHARD BAXTER, a Catholic Christian, for love,
concord and peace of all true Christians, and obedience to all lawful commands
of Rulers; but made, called and used as, a Nonconformist.

London, Printed for Nevil Simmons at the three Cocks at the West end of Saint
Paul's, and Thomas Simmons at the Prince's Arms in Ludgate Street, MDCLXXXI.

These Books following are printed for, and sold by Nevil Simmons at the three
Golden Cocks at the west end of St. Paul's.
A Christian Directory, or sum of practical Theology, and cases of Conscience,
directing Christians how to use their Knowledge and Faith, how to improve all
helps and means, and to perform all duties how to overcome temptations, and
to escape or mortify every sin, in four parts, 1. Christian Ethics, or
private Duties. 2. Christian Oeconomicks, or Family Duties. 3. Christian
Ecclesiastics, or Church Duties. 4. Christian Politics, or Duties to Our
selves and Neighbors. in Folio.

Catholic Theology: Plain, Pure, Peaceable, for Pacification in three Books.
1. Pacifying Principles, etc. 2. Pacifying Praxis, etc. 3. Pacifying
Disputations, etc. in Folio.

The Life of Faith in three Parts: The first Sermon preached before his
Majesty, etc. The Second, Instructions for confirming believers in the
Christian faith. The third directions how to live by faith, or how to exercise
it in all occasions in Quarto.

Naked Popery; or the naked Falsehood of a book called the Catholic naked
Truth, or the Puritan convert to Apostolical Christianity, written by W. H.
opening their fundamental errors of unwritten tradition, and their unjust
description of the Puritan, the Prelatical Protestant and the Papist, and their
differences, etc. To which is added an examination of Roman Tradition, as it is
urged as infallible, etc. In answer to a book called A rational discourse of
Transubstantiation. in Quarto.

A Key for Catholics, to open the Juggling of the Jesuits, and satisfy all
that are but truly willing to understand, whether the cause of the Roman, or
reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the readerutterly unexcusable, that
will after this be a Papist. in Octavo.

A Treatise of Justifying Righteousness in two books. in Octavo.

There are lately published of this Authors these two Books following, and sold
by Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgatestreet.
Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils, Abbreviated.
Including the chief part of the Government of Christian Princes and Popes, and
a true account of the most troubling Controversies and Heresies till the
Reformation. Written for the use especially of them, I. Who are ignorant or
misinformed of the state of the Ancient Churches. II. Who cannot read many and
great Volumes. III. Who think that the Universal Church must have one Visible
Sovereign, Personal or Collective, Pope or General Councils. IV. Who would know
whether Patriarchs, Diocesans, and their Councils, have been, or must be the
cure of Heresies and Schisms. V. Who would know the truth about the great
Heresies which have divided the Christian World, especially the Donatists,
Novatians, Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, etc. By
Richard Baxter, a Hater of False History.

A Moral Prognostication, I. What shall befall the Churches on Earth till their
Concord, by the Restitution of their Primitive Purity, Simplicity and Charity.
II. How that Restitution is like to be made, (if ever) and what shall befall
them thenceforth unto the End in that Golden Age of LOVE. Written by Richard
Baxter, when by the Kings Commission, we (in vain) treated for Concord, 1661.
And now published not to instruct the Proud, that scorn to learn; nor to make
them Wise, who will not be made Wise: But to Instruct the Sons of Love and
Peace, in their Duties and Expectations. And to tell Posterity, That the Things
which befall them, were Foretold: And that the Evil might have been prevented,
and Blessed Peace on Earth attained, if Men had been but willing; and had not
shut their Eyes, and hardened their Hearts, against the Beams of Light and Love.

THE English Diocesan AND PRIESTHOOD TRIED, etc.
CHAP. I. The Reasons of this Writing.
I Am not ignorant how displeasing it will be to the Prelates, that I publish
these Reasons of my Nonconformity to the Subscriptions and Oaths by which they
would have me become an obliged Approver of their Function. Nor am I ignorant
what Power, Wit and Will they have to express and exercise their displeasure:
And consequently, how probable it is that I shall suffer by them for this work.
And I well know that peaceable subjects should not unnecessarily say any thing
against that which is required by their Rulers Laws, nor cherish the Peoples
discontents, but do all that is lawful for the common Peace: And I am not of so
pugnacious or self-hating a disposition, as to be willing of men's displeasure,
especially my Superiors, or to be ruined in this World, and all that I may but
vent my Opinion, in a case wherein I have published already so much that is
still unanswered, as in my Disputations of Church Government is to be seen.

And upon such Reasons (but above all, that I might not cast away my
opportunity for some more useful writings, nor put an end to my own labors
before God put an end to them) I have been silent in this Cause since our
public debates in 1661, above ten years. I have lived peaceably; I have
endeavored to preserve the due reputation of the public Ministry, and to
persuade all others to due subjection, love and quietness: I have by Word and
Writing opposed the Principles of such as are exasperated by their sufferings
into the Dividing and Separating extreme; Though I knew, that by so doing, I
was like to incur the displeasur and b^tter cen^^^e of the Separatists, as much
as I had before of the Prelates, (though not to suffer so much by them.) And I
thought that the Prelates themselves who would not understand the true state of
the People, nor the tendency of their way, by our informations, and evident
Reasons, might yet come in time to know all by experience, and so to amend what
they have done amiss.

But now I dare be no longer silent for the Reasons given Apol. chapter 1. which I
will ^tay the R^^der b^ie^y to sum up. 1. I find that experience it self does
not Teach some men, but Harden them.

2. I perceive that those that are now convinced by experience, and wish they
had taken another course, and rather have united the Ministry, than silenced
them, are not able to undo what they have done, nor to amend what is done
amiss, much less to retrieve all the doleful consequents; but the matter is
gone out of their hands and beyond their power.

3. I see that while we wait, the Devil's work goes on, by the silence and by
the Divisions of the Ministers: Popery greatly increases; Quakers multiply;
Atheism and Infidelity* go ba^e* faced among those that are accounted men of
reputation: Malice, and bitter hatred of each other, with common backbitings,
censurings and slanders, instead of sweet Love and Concord, do notoriously
increase. Thousands are every day committing these sins, to the increase of
their guilt, and the hastening of Gods judgments on the Land: The sufferers
call the Prelates persecuters, and wolves in sheeps cloathings, who are known
by their fruits, their teeth and ^laws. The Prelatists still say that the
Nonconformists are unreasonable, discontented, peevish, factious, unpeaceable,
unruly schismatics; that will rather see all confounded than they will yield
to things indifferent. And shall we still stand by, and silently see this work
go on?

4. And to love and defend Truth, Honesty and Innocence is to be like to God.
It is pity that those that Christ has done so much to justify, and will so
gloriously justify at the last, should have nothing said on their behalf by
men. But we are much more obliged to justify a righteous cause, than righteous
men; For all men have somewhat that is unjustifiable, but so has not the truth
of God.

5. And he that in his Baptismal Covenant is engaged against the Flesh, the
World and the Devil, should be loath to see all their work go on and not oppose
it; and to see, that which he takes to be no better than deliberate Lying, or
Justifying sin, and Perjury it self, and covenanting never to obey God in
lawful and necessary Church-reformation, to be all called; Things indifferent.

6. Nature and Scripture teach us to have a due and moderate regard of our own
reputation as men; but much more as Ministers of Christ; seeing the doctrine of
Christ which we preach or write, is usually dishonored in the Ministers
dishonor and the edification of the souls of them that hear us or read our
writings, is greatly hindered by it.

7. While Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, conformable Clergy men, and many others
of all Ranks, are possessed with these thoughts of us, that we are persons who
hypocritically pretend to Godliness, while indeed we are so humoursome, that we
will forbear our Ministry, and our Maintenance, and suffer any thing, and
divide the Church, rather than yield to indifferent things* this is a scandal,
a grievous scandal, either given or taken, and tends to wrong their souls
that are scandalized: And if we give them this scandal, it is our heinous sin*
But if they take it by misinformation, we are obliged to do our part to heal
it: Souls are precious; and scandal does endanger them, even to distaste
Religion it self, for the sakes of such as they take us to be: And we must not
stand by and see men perish, if we can do any thing to save them.

8. The sufferings of many of the Ministers are very great, that have not bread
for their children, nor clothes to cover them, and are ashamed to make known
their wants: And if with all this, we suffer the burden of unreproved calumny
to lie on them, and keep them not to the necessary comfort which conscience
should find in sufferings with innocence, we shall be guilty of
uncharitableness our selves.

9. It is part of our Honoring the King and Parliament and other Magistrates,
not to despise or slight their censures: And the judgment which they have
publicly passed on us, in an Act of Confinement, which imposes the Oath for
Prelacy, is so hard and grievous, that if we are guilty, it is fit we should be
made the common reproach of men; And if we are not, (as Non-conformists) it is
our duty to rectify the judgment of our superiors where they are misinformed.
And as Augustine says, that no good Christian should be patient under an
imputation of Heresy; so I may say that no good Subject should be senslesly
patient under an imputation of disloyalty and sedition: That better beseems
the anarchical and truly disloyal and seditious, who take it for no crime.

10. And we know how pleasantly the Papists insult to hear us stigmatized for
Villains and seditious Persons by our brethren, and what use they will make of
it at present and in future History to the Service of their malice, and injury
to the truth: which we ought not silently still to suffer; while we see how
hereby they do already multiply.

11. And how unlikely soever it be, it is not impossible, that our Superiors,
that at once deposed and silenced about 1800. Ministers of Christ, when they
see what Reasons we have for our Nonconformity, may be moved to restore those
that yet survive: And then how many thousand souls would have the joy and
benefit?

12. Lastly, Truth and the just information of Posterity, is a thing
exceedingly desirable to ingenuous minds: It is a great trouble to think that
the Ages to come, should be injured by false History. Therefore we must do our
best, that they may but truly know our Case; and then let them judge of the
Persons and Actions of this our Age, as they shall find Cause, when Truth is
opened to-them.

Upon all these Reasons, though to my own great labor, and to the greater
contradiction of my natural love of silent quietness, and to the probable
incurring of men's displeasure, I take it to be my duty to give my Superlours,
Neighbors and Posterity, a true Account of the Reasons which have moved my
self and others of my mind, to refuse to Subscribe and Swear to the present
English Diocesan Prelacy: Committing my Life and Liberty to the pleasure of
God, in obedience to whom I have both refused to Conform, and written these
Reasons of my Nonconformity.

CHAP. II. The English Diocesan Prelacy, and Church Government, truly
described; that it may be known what it is which we disown.
IT being not Episcopacy in General, but (the Popish and) the English Species
of Prelacy, which our Judgments cannot approve, and which we cannot swear to as
approvers, it is necessary that we tell strangers, what this Prelacy is, that
the subject of our Controversy be not unknown, or misunderstood. But the
subject is so large, that the very naming of the parts of our Ecclesiastical
Government, in Tables by Dr. Ri. Cosins, makes up a Volume in 16 Tables, and
many hundred branches. Which being written in Latin I must refer the Foreign
Reader to it; Not at all for the understanding of our Practice, but only of our
Rule, or Laws with our Church-Constitution: seeing it would take up a
considerable Volume to open but one half of his Scheme. All that I shall now do
is to give you this brief Intimation.

That in England there are 26 or 27 Bishoprics: of which two are Archbishops:
In all these set together there was when Speed numbered them, nine thousand
seven hundred twenty five Parish Churches, but now many more. In the Diocese
that I live in ( Lincoln) there is above a 1000 or 1100. In very many of these
Parishes, besides the Parish-Churches, there are Chapels, that have Curates, in
some Parishes one Chapel, in some two, in some three, if not more. In these
Parishes the number of Inhabitants is various, as they are greater or lesser:
The greatest about London, such as Stepny, Giles-Cripplegate, Sepulchers,
Martins, etc. have some about 50000 persons, (some say much more) some about
30000, some about 20000, etc. But ordinarily in Cities and Market Towns through
the Country, the number is about 2000, or 3000, or 4000, or 5000 at the most,
except Plymouth, and some few great Parishes that have far more. And in
Villages, in some 2000, in some 1000, in some small ones 500, or 300, or in
some very small ones fewer. There are in England 641 Market Towns (says Speed)
which are of the greater sort of Parishes, and such as in old times were called
Cities, though now a few have got that title; at least a great number of them
are equal, and some much greater and richer than some that now are named
Cities. The Diocese that I live in is about six-score Miles in length. By all
this you may conjecture how many hundred thousand souls are in some Diocesses,
and at what a distance from each other: and what personal Communion it is that
they are capable of: I my self who have traveled over most of England never
saw the face or heard the name of one Person (I think) of many thousands in the
Diocese that I live in: Nor have we any other Communion with the rest of the
Diocese (even with above a thousand Parishes in it) than we have with the
People of any other Church or Diocese in the land about us, save that One
Bishop and his Chancellor and other Officers, are over us all.

The Magistrates Civil Governmeut of the Church I shall not meddle with, as
having no exceptions against it. The Sacerdotal or Spiritual Power, called the
Power of the Keys, determines who shall be Members of the Church, and partake
of its Communion, and exercises other acts of Spiritual Discipline, of which
more anon. This power is said to be in Archbishops and Bishops in foro
ecclesiae publico vel exteriore, though also in the Governed Presbyters, in
foro privato interiore, as they may privately comfort a penitent person, and
declare God's promise of the pardon of his sin. [ Cosins Tab. 3.
] The Archbishops have it in eminency: As also the power of confirming the
Election of the Bishops of their Provinces; and the power of Consecrating
Bishops with two others: and the power of Convocating Provincial Synods upon
the Kings Prescript; and of moderating in them. The power of receiving Appeals,
and of Visiting the whole Provinces: yea to receive Appeals from the lower
Judges, omiting the middle ones; and to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
any vacant Diocese under them. They have [ Cosins Tab. 4.
] power of Dispensation in all Causes (not judged contrary to Gods word)
wherever the Pope had power; and where the Pope had not power, if the King or
Council permit it them. They may dispense with the Eating of flesh on
Fasting-days, with Marrying without previous publication; with diverse
irregularities, and sometime may abolish simoniacum ambitum. They may grant
Commendams, and Dispense with Non-residence, and with the keeping of diverse
Churches called Benefices, in several Cases, and with a Sons succeeding his
Father, and with Laymens possessing the Church-maintenance, called Prebends.

The Bishops (who take place in Parliament of other Barons, as the Archbishops
do of Dukes) [ Cosins Tab. 5.
] are all chosen really by the King, who nominateth in a Writ to the Dean and
Chapter the man whom they must choose; who pro forma do choose him, never
contradicting the Kings Nomination.

Their proper Office consists in the powers of Order and of Jurisdiction, (as
they distinguish them:) Their power of Order is threefold, 1. To Ordain Priests
and Deacons. 2. To Consecrate Churches and Burying places; 3. To Confirm
Children after Baptism, when they can speak and say the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, and others that were not Confirmed in their Childhood. Besides, that
they may be Privy-Counsellors, Lord-Keepers of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurers,
Ambassadors, etc. Their ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction extends, 1. to
the Interdiction of Divine Offices; 2. to public Admonitions and Penances, 3.
to suspension from the Sacrament, and from ingress into the Church, and 4. to
Excommunication and Absolution, and 5. to Anathematisms. And as to Ministers,
1. They may Sequester Benefices. 2. They may Suspend ab officio and beneficio,
and forbid them to Preach or Pray; Or grant License to such as shall be
tolerated to Preach. 3. They may deprive; 4. And depose Ministers by sentence
verbal, and degradation actually.

This Church Jurisdiction of Bishops is distinguished into Voluntary and
Contentious; [ Cos. Tab. 6.
] The Voluntary extends to abundance of things granted them by Statute, and
by Common Law, which I pass by: That which they claim both by Municipal Law and
Ecclesiastical, is, 1. The probate of the Testaments of the dead; 2. The
granting Administration of Goods to the next of Kin, 3. Keeping the bona caduca
where none claims the Inheritance, 4. To receive Reasons of Administering, and
to be Judges of them. 5. To confer Benefices, or Institute such as others
present. 6. To grant Induction to the Instituted. 7. To receive the Fruits of
vacant Benefices. 8. To allow the Vicar a fit proportion. 9. To grant Letters
Dimissory, or Testimonial. 10. To Visit their Diocese once in three years. In
which Triennial Visitation, they usually go to one Town in a County, (and never
see the face of the people in the many score or hundred Churches about them;)
and thither they summon the Ministers, and the Churchwardens and Sides-men;
Where one Minister preaches, and then the Ministers must dine with the Bishop;
and in Court he (or his Officer) gives a Book of Printed Articles, containing
a multitude of particulars, which the Churchwarden must swear to present by,
where because of the quality of them some Churchwardens refuse, and others
because of the number; some saying it is unlawful to undo their Ministers and
Neighbors by such Presentiments (as for omitting a Ceremony, for preaching or
keeping a Fast in private, etc.) and some saying it is impossible to keep the
Oath, and some saying that if they do it, they shall be hated of their
Neighbors: Whereupon those that refuse are prosecuted to punishment; And the
rest take the Oath and Articles; but not one of many does present accordingly;
though the Canon enquires after the perjured. And many that fear perjury or
persecution themselves, do hire some poor man to be Churchwarden in their
stead, that will venture upon all. I must entreat the Reader to peruse some of
their Books of Articles (especially such as Bishop Mountagues and Bishop Wrens)
to see what was then enquired after. Dr. Zouch de Jud. Eccless. p. 37.. 1.
Part. 3. says, Ad judices quod attinet statuto ordinatum, quod personae
conjugatae dummodo Doctores Juris Civilis fuerint, qui ad officium Cancellarii,
Vicarii Generalis, Officialis, vel Commissarii a Majestate Regia,
Archiapiscopo, Episcopo, Archidiacono aut alio quocunque potestatem habente
deputati sunt, omnem Jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam exercere, and quam libet
censuram sive coercitionem ^rrogare possint.

This Jurisdiction of Bishops is exercised either Universally by a Vicar
General, usually a Layman; or qarticularly by a Commissary. [ Cos. Tab. 2.
] And when he please the Bishop may do it himself.

The other part of their Jurisdiction is called Contentious; And here the
Bishop may himself judge in some Cases Cos. Tab. 8.
but in the ordinary course of Jurisdiction, a Civil Lawyer called his
Chancellor is the Judge: This Chancellor is and must be a Layman, which even
Bishop Goodman of Gloucester, [ Mist. Rel. Epist. I have it and can produce it
at this time, under the Kings own Hand and Seal, wherein he forbids that any
Churchman or Priest in Holy Orders be a Chancellor: and this was the occasion
of all the corruption of the Spiritual Courts: For Chancellors live only on the
Fees of the Court: and for them to dismiss a Cause, it was to lose so much
blood. See further in him.] a Papist Bishop of a Protestant Diocese,
complains in Print, that he could not get Reformed. This Chancellor keeps
an Ordinary Court, in the form of a Civil Court, where are Advocates for
Council, and Proctors for pleading: Cos. Tab. 2. and Tab. 8.
Certain men called Apparitors (whose name is commonly a scorn among the
people,) do from abroad the Country bring them in Accusations, and Summon the
persons accused; besides those that by Plaintiffs are accused. Here are judged
Causes about Church Materials, and Causes Criminal; which he that reads the
whole Book of Canons and the Visitation Articles may see, they being too many
for me to recite. Cos. ibid.
Besides a multitude of Cases about Marriages (to be contracted, dissolved,
separation) and Testaments, and the Goods of Intestate persons. Cos. ibid.


Priests, Deacons and Laymen are judged in these Courts; The final
constraining penalty is Excommunication, or before that Suspension, and other
degrees of Church punishment before mentioned as belonging to the Bishop: The
supposed offenders are no otherwise dealt with to bring them to true
Repentance, than as in Civil Courts by other Lay-Judges. They that appear not,
and they that pay not the Fees of the Court and Officers, are Excommunicate,
and they that obey not the Orders of the Court. In Excommunications and
Absolutions the Lay-Chancellor is Judge, but he writes the Decree in the
Bishops name: And (at least sometimes) pro forma, some Priest or other is
procured to be present (no Bishop,) to utter the Sentence which the Lay Judge
Decrees: This Sentence is sent by the Chancellor to the Minister of the Parish
where the offender lives, who must publish it in the Church openly (as the
Crier does the Kings Proclamation;) But if it be the Minister himself that is
Excommunicated, another Minister reads it. The whole process of their
Judicial Trials, Sentences and Executions you may see in Cosin's, Tab. 9. 10.

Besides the Chancellor's Courts (called the Bishops) the Archdeacons have
certain inferior Courts, where they enquire after faults, and return the great
ones to the Bishops Courts. Cos. Tab. 2.
And they Induct or give possession of Benefices.

As for the Parish Priests or Ministers, ordinary Parishes have but one to
each; but Great Parishes cannot be served (as they call it) without a Curate;
and each Chapel has a Curate; but all under One, that has the sole possession
of the Benefice, whether he be Parson or Vicar. These Priests are Ordained by
the Bishop (some one, two, or three Presbyters if present also imposing hands:)
They are chosen to the Church and Benefice by the Patron who presents them to
the Bishop; who gives them Institution for Title, and Induction for
possession. When he is Ordained, Instituted and Inducted, he must not Preach to
his People, till he has got a Act of Uniform.
License from the Bishop of that Diocese; no though he were before Licensed in
another Diocese: Nor must he Preach or Officiate, or have any Benefice or
Church, till he have subscribed, That Parish Priests have no Governing power,
see Dr. Zouch; as also that the King is the Ecclesiastical Supreme.
and done as is expressed in the Act of Uniformity: And he must declare his
Assent and Consent to all things contained in and prescribed by three Books
(the Liturgy, the Book of Ordination, and the Articles.) And he must swear
obedience to his Bishop.

His Office is (when after Licensed) to Preach, to Read the Scriptures, and the
Apocrypha, and many Acts of Parliament, and Homilies, to read the Liturgy or
Prayers; To give notice of Holy Days and Fastingdays: To Baptize all Children,
without exception, that are offered him, by Godfathers and Godmothers (the
Parents not Covenanting for them, but others;) To Marry persons; To Church
Women after Child bearing; To hear Children in Church say the Catechism that is
in the Liturgy (but many have been forbidden by the Bishops to expound it, or
tell the Children the meaning of the words which they say by rote:) To
celebrate and give the Sacrament to the Parishioners: To visit the Sick, and
absolve them, if they say they repent: To bury the Dead, affirming of them all
that God in mercy has taken their souls, as our dear brethren, to himself;
excepting only, 1. Those that die unbaptized (though Children of Princes or
godly Parents) 2. Those that are Excommunicate (usually such as durst not
Conform to them:) 3. And those that kill themselves (though in a Frenzy:) To
use the Cross, Surplice, and other Ceremonies of the Church: And to join with
the Churchwardens (if they please) in presenting such to the Bishops Courts,
as break their Laws; And if he deny any notorious offender the Sacrament, he
must become his Accuser before the Chancellor, or Bishops Court. Cos. Tab. 13.
This is the Office of a Parish Priest.

Where you must note 1. in general, that he has no Judicial Administration in
the Church: Cos. Tab. 11.
They ordinarily say, that he has no Jurisdiction, but mere Priestly Orders;
As if they knew not that Priestly Order is nothing but the Sacred Office; and
that that Office is the Power of the Keys, or essentially contains the Power
of Guiding the Flock in Teaching, Worship and Discipline, under Christ the
Chief Prophet, Priest and King. Civil Jurisdiction over the Church is the
Kings, and Spiritual is part of the Priestly Office or Order (as to the subject
people to be governed.)

2. Particularly note, 1. that the Minister has in England no power to Judge
whom to Baptize, and whom not, but must Baptize all that are offered, though
the Children of Jews, Infidels, Turks, Apostates.

2. That he has no power to hinder the admission of any so baptized, into the
state of adult Members by the Bishops Confirmation. For though it be said
Children shall bring his Certificate, that they can say the Catechism, yet 1.
those Children may go without it, and do ordinarily: When I was confirmed my
self, none was required, nor did I ever see any given. 2. And if it were, the
poor Children seldom understand any thing that they say, or much. 3. There is
not one of multitudes in our Churches that ever sought or minded such
Confirmation, because of its abuse.

3. That he has no power to hinder any confirmed, or adult persons from the
Sacraments, on the account of the grossest ignorance or infidelity: when
multitudes among us know not what the Sacrament is, nor know the essentials of
the Christian Faith.

4. He has no power to convent any open offender before him, to call him to
repentance: They may choose to come to him, or to open their doors to him, or
speak to him, if he come to them.

5. He has no power to call them to Repentance openly before the Church, or
pray by name for their Repentance; or admonish them.

6. He has no power to judge any person to be Excommunicate.

7. Nor to absolve any that is penitent after Excommunication; But only to read
the Lay-Chancellours sentences, sent him in the Bishops name.

8. He has no power to forbear giving the Lords Supper to any one how
notorious an offender soever, unless he will prosecute him at the Bishops
Court, nor then, but for once: So that if he pay his Fees and be Absolved
there, though the Minister know him to be never so bad, he must give the
Sacrament the next time. And the prosecution is so odious and fruitless that I
never knew any do it, except against the Nonconformists.

9. He that sees never so great signs of Impenitency in any man that is sick,
or will but say that he is sick, has no power to deny him private Absolution
and the Sacrament, if he do but say, I Repent.

10. He has no power to forbear pronouncing of all Traitors, Murderers,
Adulterers, Perjured, Atheists, etc. that never professed Repentance, at their
Burial, that God has of his mercy taken to himself the soul of this our dear
brother; except the unbaptized, etc. aforesaid.

And note, 1. that the Parish Priest has no power to do these things either by
himself, or in conjunction with the Bishop, or any other.

2. And that there is not one Suffragan Bishop or Chorepiscopus in England
under the 26 Bishops, to do any part of their work in these 97025 Parishes.

CHAP. III. Our Judgment of the History of the Ancient Church Government, and
of the rise of the Diocesan Prelacy.
I Shall anon show more fully, that there are two things especially in which we
think the very Species of our Diocesan Prelacy to be altered from the ancient
Episcopacy. One is in the Extent of their Office, as to their subject Charge, a
Bishop infimae speciei, of the lowest species, having then but One Church, and
now a Bishop infimae speciei having many hundred Churches made into one, or
nullified to make One. 2. In the Work of their Office, which was then purely
Spiritual or Pastoral, and is now mixed of Magistratical and Ministerial,
exercised by mixed Officers in Courts much like to Civil Judicatures. The
History of their rise I suppose is this.

1. Christ made a difference among his Ministers himself, while he chose twelve
to be Apostles, and special Witnesses o^ his Doctrine, Life, and Resurrection,
and Ascension, and to be the Founders of his Church, and the Publishers of his
Gospel abroad the World.

2. As these Apostles preached the Gospel themselves, and planted Churches, so
did many others as their helpers, partly the seventy sent by Christ, and partly
called by the Apostles themselves; And all these exercised indefinitely a
preparing Ministry, before particular Churches were gathered abroad the World,
and afterward went on in gathering and calling more.

3. Besides this preparing unfixed Ministration, the same Apostles also Acts
14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.
placed, by the peoples consent, particular fixed Ministers over all the
several Churches which they gathered.

4. These fixed Ministers as such, they named indifferently, Bishops, Elders,
Pastors and Teachers. Whereas those of the same Office in general yet unfixed,
are called either by the General name of Christ's Ministers, or Stewards of his
Mysteries; And in regard of their special works, some were called Apostles,
some Prophets, and some Evangelists.

5. These Apostles though unfixed and having an Indefinite charge, yet went not
all one way, but as God's Spirit and prudence guided them, they dispersed
themselves into several parts of the World.

6. But as they did many of them first stay long at Jerusalem, so afterward in
planting and settling Churches, they sometimes stayed several months or years in
one place, and then went to another. And so did the Evangelists or Indefinite
Assistants whom they sent forth on the same work.

7. While they stayed in these newly planted Churches they were themselves the
chief Guides of the People: And also of their fixed Bishops.

8. This abode in settling the particular Churches and their particular Bishops
or Elders, occasioned Historians, afterward to call both Apostles and
Evangelists (such as Timothy, Titus, Silas, Silvanus, Luke, Apollo, etc.) the
Bishops of those Churches; though they were not such as the fixed Bishops were,
who undertook a special Charge and care of one particular Church alone, or
above all other Churches.

9. On this account the same Apostle is said to be the first Bishop of many
Churches; (as Peter of Antioch, and Rome; Paul of Corinth, Ephesus Philippi,
etc.) When indeed the Apostles were the particular fixed Bishops of no
Churches, but the Bishops equally of many, as a sort of unfixed Episcopacy is
included in Apostleship.

10. On this account also it is that Timothy is said to be Bishop of Ephesus,
because he was left there for a time to settle that and other Churches of Asia
near it, as an Assistant of the Apostles: And so Titus is called the Bishop of
Crete, because he staid in that Island (which was said to have an hundred
Cities) on this work, which belonged not to a particular Bishop, but to the
more indefinite Ministry.

11. How many such fixed Bishops, Elders, Pastors, or Teachers, each particular
Church must have, the Apostles never determined by a Law: But did de facto
settle them according to the number of souls, and store of qualified persons:
In some Churches it is possible there might be but one (with Deacons:) In
others it is evident that there were many; as at Jerusalem, Corinth, etc.

12. The particular Churches which were the charge of these fixed Bishops or
Elders were Societies of Christians conjoined for Personal Communion in God's
Worship, and mutual assistance in holy living: And though for want of
convenient room, or liberty, they did not always meet all in the same place,
yet were they ordinarily no more than could meet in one place when they had
liberty: and never more than could hold personal Communion, if not at once, yet
at several times in public worship: (As it is now in those places where one
part of the Family goes to Church one part of the day, and another on the
other part.) And those by-Meetings which any had that came not constantly to
the public Assemblies, were but as our House-Meetings, or Chapel-Meetings, but
never as another Church: Nor were their Churches more numerous than our
Parishes, nor near so great.

13. At the first they had no Consecrated nor Separated places for their
Church-Meetings, but Houses or Fields, as necessity and opportunity directed
them. But as soon as they could, even nature taught them to observe the same
appointed and stated places for such Assemblies: Which as soon as the Churches
had peace and settlement, they appropriated to those sacred uses only, though
they had not yet the shape or name of Temples.

14. Though the Pastors of the Church were all of one Office, now called Order,
being all subordinate Ministers of Christ, in the Prophetical, Priestly and
Regal parts of his Office, in the Power and Duty of Teaching, Worshipping and
Government; yet was the disparity of Age, Grace and Gifts to be observed among
them, and the younger Pastors (as well as people) owed a meet reverence and
submission to the Elder, and the weaker to the stronger who had notoriously
more of God's Grace and Gifts. So that in a Church where there were many
Pastors it was not unlawful nor unnecessary, to acknowledge this disparity, and
for the younger and weaker to submit much to the judgment of the elder and more
able.

15. While they kept only to the exercise of the mere Pastoral work of
Teaching, and Worshipping, and that Government which belongs hereunto, they
had little temptation (comparatively) to strive for a preeminence in Rule, or
for a Negative Voice; But aliene or accidental work, did further that as
follows.

16. The Apostles did reprove those Worldly contentious and uncharitable
Christians, who went to Law before Heathen Judges: And the thing showed so
little of the Christian Spirit of Love, and was also of so ill consequence, by
scandals and dissentions, that it was worthy to be reproved, especially in
Christians that were persecuted by those Magistrates. Therefore almost all the
differences of Christians were necessarily decided by Arbitration: And none
were thought so fit to be the Arbitrators, as the Elders or Pastors of the
Churches. By which it came to pass, that where Churches were great, and the
ceasing of persecution (which came but as storms that passed away) did restore
that peace which cherished dissentions, the work of the Elders in these
Arbitrations, was not small; especially as added to their greater proper
Office-work.

17. At the same time many Heresies arose, which occasioned Divisions in the
Churches, and sometimes among the Officers themselves.

18. And the Ministers being, though holy, yet imperfect, as well as other
Christians, the remnants of self-conceitedness and pride, occasioned also the
trouble of the Churches: For when the Apostles themselves while Christ was with
them strove who should be the Greatest, and have the highest place, it is no
wonder if they did so afterward, who had not so great a measure of Grace as
they.

19. Besides all this, when the Apostolical Virtues ceased, there were few
Philosophers or Learned men that turned Christians, and few that had excellent
Gifts of Oratory, fit to be Teachers of the Churches; And the most of the
Elders were good men but of inferior parts; Like the better sort of our
unlearned godly Christians. By which means it came to pass, that some one of
the Clergy in every Church, (when there were many) having so much Knowledge,
and Oratory as to overtop the rest, he was ordinarily more esteemed than the
rest.

20. By these four means conjunct it quickly came to pass, that in every Church
that had many Elders, some one was chosen by the rest and by the people, to be
the chief, and to have some special power of Church affairs: And 1. In cases of
frequent Arbitration, there seemed a kind of necessity, that some One be
Umpire: For if half go one way and half the other, there can be no end: 2. And
in case of Heresies and different Opinions in Religion, if One had not in each
Church some deciding, overruling power, or Negative Voice, it is no wonder if
Divisions were the hardlier prevented, and the Churches Unity hardly kept. 3.
And especially when some One was really wiser and abler than the rest, it was
thought but suitable to Nature, that he rather ruled the juniors and weaker
sort, than that their Votes should rule him, or rule without him. 4. And when
all men have too much self-love and Pride, which enclineth them to desire
pre-eminence, and makes them judge too high of themselves, it was thought
safer for all the Clergy and People, to judge who among them was really the
best and wisest man, than to leave every man to be judge of himself and of the
rest: For so it was too likely that every man would think himself the wisest.
Therefore one was chosen as supposed by others (even by the whole Church) as
the fittest man to have a deciding and overseeing power among the rest, to
avoid contention, which their own strife about pre-eminence would cause.

21. And there was a fifth cause, which was not much less than any of the rest:
which was, that often through the scarcity of fit persons, One man was first
settled over a new-gathered Church, before any others could be had to join with
him. And therefore he being there first alone, and that in sole power, it was
thought unfit that any that came after him, should come in without his consent
or Ordination, because he was the sole Governor; so that, 1. because they came
after him, 2. and that by his Will, if not Ordination, it must needs follow
that he would usually have the pre-eminence. As it is now among us, where the
Rector of the Parish where there are diverse Chapels, choosing his Curates, who
are usually his Juniors, he is constantly of greater power than they, and
rules them accidentally, though his Office be the same as theirs.

22. As by these means one Pastor got a pre-eminence of esteem and power above
the rest, so in a short time he got the title of Episcopus, Bishop, to be
appropriated to himself alone, leaving the name of Elders, and Pastors, and
Priests unto the rest in common with himself: For he was now become the prime
Overseer of the whole Church, both people and Elders.

23. Our own experience shows us how it came to pass, that the people
themselves not only consented to all this, but also desired and promoted it:
(especially then when the effects of Clergy-ambition had not fully appeared to
the World:) For even now when a great Parish can get one Learned able Pastor,
they say, we will allow you so much, but your Curates must take less: And they
will not endure that the young and weak Curates, have either equal maintenance,
or equal honor or power over them, as the chief Pastor of the Parish has; so
that the people themselves are against an equality of power, where there is not
an equality of worth.

24. Though we cannot prove that this fixed Episcopacy was either set up by the
Apostles, or countenanced by them, nor yet that it was begun and in being in
their days; yet it could not be long after their days that it begun; And if
Hierome mistake not, it began at Alexandria some years before the death of St.
John the Apostle.

25. All this while the Bishop was not supposed to be of a distinct Office, or
species of Ministry, (now called An Order) but only an Overseer and chief of
persons in the same Office with him; being in common with the rest, Episcopus
plebis, and extraordinarily, Episcopus Cleri vel Episcoporum seu Presbyterorum.
As one of the Monks is made Abbot in a Monastery, or as one Justice among many
is of the Quorum, or one Judge on the Bench is the chief Justice: Or as the
President in an Academick College.

26. The chief thing in which a special power was given to the Bishops above
their fellow Presbyters was in Ordination, that none should be Ordained without
them; It being a matter of exceeding great consequence to the Churches, what
Ministers were set over them, and therefore put chiefly in the power of these
chosen men. And the next part of their power was in having the chief disposal
of all Church affairs, as our Parish Pastors have now among their Curates: so
that nothing was to be done in the Church without and against their consent and
pleasure.

27. This Episcopacy did so universally obtain, that I remember not to have
read of any sort of Christians, Orthodox or Heretical, Catholic or
Schismatical, who ever refused it, or spoke against it, till Aerius's time. And
even he spoke not against it as flatly unlawful, but as unnecessary, as far as
I can gather from Epiphanius. And after him all sorts and Sects of Christians
still owned it: Even the Donatists and Novatians, who had their Bishops as well
as others.

28. In Scripture times we read not of any mere fixed Bishops of particular
Churches, who Ordained either Bishops or Presbyters; but only Apostles and
their unfixed Assistants, who had an equal charge of many Churches. Not that
the Office of the Indefinite unfixed Ministry was not the same with the Office
of the fixed Bishops in specie: (For both had power to do all the Ministerial
work, as they had a call and opportunity to exercise it.) But because it being
the employment, of the Indefinite or unfixed Ministers to Gather and plant
Churches, before they could be Governed, the Ordination of Elders over them,
was part of the planting of them; and so fell to their lot, as part of their
constituting work.

29. How it came to pass that the Itinerant or Indefinite exercise of the
Ministry for planting Churches, so quickly almost ceased after the Apostles
days, is a matter worthy to be enquired after: For whereas some think, that de
jure and obligatione, it ceased with the Apostles, as being their proper work,
that cannot be true, 1. Because many others were employed in the same work in
the Apostles days: 2. Because it is Christ's own description of that Ministry
to whom he promises his presence, to the end of the Age or World, Mat. 28. 19,
20. 3. Because to this day, there is still lamentable necessity of such: Five
parts in six of the World being yet Infidels.

30. It is most probable that this service abated and withered gradually by the
sloth and selfishness of Pastors. And that it was the purpose of the Apostles,
that the fixed Bishops should do their part of both these works; that is, Both
to preach for the Converting of all the Infidel Countries near them, and also
Govern their particular Churches (yet not but that some others might be deputed
to the Gathering of Churches alone.) And then these Bishops finding so much
work at home, and finding that the Itinerant work among Infidels, was very
difficult, by reason of Labor, Danger, and their want of Apostolical gifts,
hereupon they spared themselves, and too much neglected the Itinerant work. Yet
I must confess that such Evangelists did not yet wholly cease. Eusebius Hist.
lib. 5. cap. 9. says, Pantaenus is said to have showed such a willing mind
toward the publishing of the Doctrine of Christ, that he became a Preacher of
the Gospel to the Eastern Gentiles, and was sent as far as India: For there
were, I say there were then, many Evangelists prepared for
this purpose, to promote and plant the Heavenly Word with Godly Zeal, after
the manner of the Apostles.

31. It was the ordinary custom of the Apostles to preach and plant Churches
first in Cities, and not in Country Villages. Because in Cities there were, 1.
the greatest number of Auditors, and 2. the greatest number of Converts; And so
there only were found a sufficient number to constitute a Church. Not that this
was done through any preeminence of the City, or ignobility of Villages; but
for the competent numbers sake. And had there been persons enough for a Church in
Villages, they would have placed Churches and Pastors there also (as at
Cenchrea it seems they did.)

32. When there was a Church of Christians in the City, and a few Converts in
the Country Villages that joined with them, they all made up but one full
Assembly, or Church, fit for personal Communion, for a long time after the
Apostles days; the main body of the people being still Infidels: so that the
Christian Churches stood among the Infidels as thin, as the Churches of the
Anabaptists, Separatists and Independants did among us here in England, in the
days when they had greatest Liberty and countenance.

33. Though at first the Bishops being men of the same Office with the other
Presbyters, were not to do a work distinct and of any other kind than the
Presbyters might do, but only Lead them and Preside among them in the same work
as their Conductors (as I said before of a chief Justice, etc.) Yet afterward
the Bishop for the honor of his calling appropriating certain actions to
himself alone, the Presbyters not exercising those acts in time, the not
exercising them seemed to signify a want of Office or power to exercise them;
and so subject Presbyters (who were never made by the Apostles that can be
proved, nor by their command) were like a distinct Order or Species of
Church Officers, and grew from syn-Presbyters or assessours of the same Office
in specie to be as much subjects to the Bishops, as the Deacons were to the
Presbyters.

34. All this while the Bishop with his fellow Elders and Deacons dwelt
together in the same City, and often in the same House, and met in the same
Church, the Bishop sitting in the midst on a higher seat, and the Presbyters on
each hand him in a semicircle, and the Deacons standing; And the Presbyters
Preaching and otherwise officiating as the Bishop appointed, who ruled the
action. And the Converts of the Villages came to this City Church as Members of
it, and joined with the rest. In the days of the Author of the Epistles
ascribed to Ignatius, every Church had but One Altar, and One Bishop with his
Fellow Elders and Deacons as the note of its Unity; or Individuation. For so
many people as had personal Communion at One Altar, with the Bishop or Elders
were the constitutive parts of the Churches.

35. Thus it continued also in the days of Justin, Tertullian and Cyprian; no
Bishop having more than one Church or Altar, without any other formed
selfcommunicating Church under him, but only Oratories in City or Country.

36. The first that brake this Order were Alexandria and Rome, where Converts
soon multiplied to a greater number than could meet in one place, or
Communicate at one Altar: wherefore sub-assemblies with their particular
Presbyters, were there first formed, who Communicated distinctly by themselves.
(Though there is no proof that they Communicated there in the Sacrament of a
long time after that they met for Preaching and Prayer.) Yet even in Rome and
Alexandria the only places that had more than one stated Assembly for 200 years
or more, there were not so many Christians then as in the Parish that I now
live in; See more of my Proof in the beginning of my Church History abridged:
whose first and second Chapters belogn specially to this Treatise, and
therefore I must refer the Reader to them.

37. Even in Epiphanius time about 370 years after Christ, it is noted by him
as a singularity in Alexandria, that they had distinct Assemblies besides the
Bishops; whereupon Petavius himself largely gives us notice, that in those
days, except in a few very great Cities, there was but one Church-assembly in a
Bishops charge.

38. After that in Cities, or Country Villages, the Converts multiplied into
more than could meet in one Assembly, and had allowance to Communicate in their
sub-assemblies; yet were they appointed on certain great and solemn Festivals,
to Communicate all with the Bishops at the chief City Church, which shows
that the sub-assemblies then were few and small.

39. Thus was the Apostles Order by degrees subverted; and whereas they settled
distinct Churches with their distinct Bishops, no Bishop having two Churches
under him, (that had not also their proper Bishop) now One Church was made of
many without many Bishops; sub-Presbyters first in the same Church being
introduced, at last sub-Churches also were set up. And when they should have
done as we do with Bees, let every new Swarm have a new Hive, and should have
multiplied Bishops and Churches, homogeneal, as sufficient numbers of Converts
came in, instead of this, the City Bishops kept all under them as if they had
been still one Church (yet not as Archbishops that have Bishops under them) and
kept their sub-Presbyters as their Curates to officiate in the several Churches
that had all no Bishops but One.

40. The causes of this were apparently most of the same which are mentioned
before for the making of sub-Presbyters: Especially, 1. The selfishness of the
Bishops, who were loath to let go any of the people from under their
superiority: Because it was more honor to rule many than one single
Congregation; and he was a greater man that had many sub-Presbyters and whole
Assemblies at his command, than he that had not: And also many afforded greater
maintenance than a few. And 2. the same Reasons that made men at first set up
one Presbyter as Bishop over the rest, to avoid Divisions, and to determine
Arbitrations, did now seem strong to them, for the keeping up the Authority of
the City Bishop over the sub-Assemblies round about them. 3. And Cities only
having been possessed of Bishops for many Years if not Ages, before there were
Christians enough to make up Country Churches, both the Bishops and the City
Inhabitants, (easily overlooking the Reason of it) took this for their
Prerogative, and did plead Prescription; As if Schools being Vid. Epist. 2.
Edict. Anacleti de forma provinciali, Metrapol. etc. Turrian. pro Epist. decr.
c. 24. De novitate hujus formae leg. Blondel. cont. Decr. p. 1. 27. who gives
full testimony of it, cont. Anaclet. Ep. 2. 41.
planted only in Cities first, the Cities and Schoolmasters should thence
plead, that none must be settled in Country Villages, but what are ruled by the
City Schoolmasters. And thus the Cities being far the strongest, and the
Interest of the Citizens and Bishops in point of honor being conjunct, and
none being capable of a Country charge, but such as the City Bishops at first
Ordained to it (because then there were no other Bishops,) without resistance
it came to pass that both Churches and Presbyters were subjected to the City
Bishops. 4. And it greatly advanced this design that the Churches which were
planted in the Roman Empire, did seek to participate of all secular honor that
belonged to the place of their Residence: And (as Dr. Hammond has largely
opened, though not well justified) did form themselves according to the Model
of the Civil Government: so that those Cities that had the Presidents or chief
Civil Rulers and Judicatures in them, did plead a right of having also the
chief Bishops and Ecclesiastical Judicatures: And thus not only Cities ruled
the Country Villages, but in time the distinct powers and pre-eminences of
Archbishops, Metropolitans, Primates, Patriarchs, and the Roman chief Patriarch
or Pope came up: And the Pagan Commonwealth and Christian Church, within the
Roman Empire, (and the neighboring parts that were influenced by them) had a
great resemblance.

41. But that which most notably set up this exsort swelling and degenerate
Leg. Vita^ Ambros* per Baron. and August. li. de opera Moneche^^^n.
Prelacy, was the mistaken zeal of Constantine, together with his Policy, and
the ambition of Christians and Bishops that were gratified by it. For, 1. As
Constantine perceived that it was the Christians that were his surest strength,
and when the Heathen Soldiers turned from one Emperor to another, as they were
tempted, he knew that if he only did own the Christians they would unanimously
own him, and be constant to him; so also his Judgment and Zeal for Christianity
did concur with his Interest and Policy: And as all the Secular and Military
Rulers depended on him for honor and power, throughout the Roman world, he
thought it not seemly to give the chief Christians who were the Bishops, less
honor than he did to the Heathens, and to common men: Nor did he think meet to
deny to the Christian Churches such privileges, as might somewhat set them
higher than his other subjects. 2. And the Bishops and Christians coming from
under long scorn and contempt, and coming newly from under the cruel
Persecution of Dioclesian, and affrighted anew by Maxentius, and Licenius, they
were not only glad to be now honored and advanced, but greatly lifted up with
such a sudden wondrous change, as to be brought from scorn and cruel torments,
to be set up above all others: As we should have been, had we been in their
case, and it is like should no more have feared the ill consequents of too much
exaltation than they did. 3. And the Christian people thought that the
exaltation of their Bishops was the honor and exaltation of their Religion it
self, as well as of their persons.

42. Whereas (as is aforesaid) the Christians had commonly stated the power of
Arbitrating all their Civil differences in the Bishop alone (when the Apostle
intimated that any Wise man among them, as such, was fit for that business) it
grew presently to be accounted a heinous crime or scandal, for any Christians
to go to Law, before the Civil Magistrate. And Constantine finding them in
possession of this custom, did by his Edict confirm it and enlarge it:
decreeing that all Bishops should be Judges of all the Christians causes by
consent, and that no Civil Judge or Magistrate should compel any Christian to
his bar: Insomuch that in Theodosius his days, when one of Ambrose his Invit.
Ambros. per Baron.
Presbyters had a cause to be tried, he denied himself to be a Christian, that
he might have it decided by the Civil Magistrate, that was Christian also. So
that even Christian Magistrates might not judge unwilling Christians but the
Bishops only. Yet had not the Bishops then the power of the Sword, but decided
all as Arbitrators, and enforced their Sentences with rigorous penances and
Church Censures: By which means, 1. many the more turned Christians (without
the Faith and Holiness of Christians) that they might both partake of the
Christians honor and immunities, and specially that they might be free from
corporal penalties for their crimes. (And who would not do so, if it were now
our case.) 2. And by this means the rigorous penalties of the Church by
penances were the more easily submitted to, as being more easy than corporal
pains and mulcts. And when thus by the Laws and countenance of so great an
Emperor, the Bishops were made the Judges of all that were Christians at
present, and all that would turn Christians that desired it, it is easy to
understand, 1. what a Lordship they must needs have as to the kind of power; 2.
How their Office must degenerate from purely spiritual, into secular or mixed:
3. And how numerous their Flocks, and large their Provinces would soon be.

And here you must note these things, 1. That the Bishop of every Church was
made Judge of these causes; not alone by himself, but with his Presbyters or
Clergy, who judged with him. 2. That yet this power was not then taken to be
any essential or integral part at all of the Pastoral Office; but an Accidental
work, which Laymen might do as well as Pastors; and that it was committed to
the Bishop only as the best able for Arbitration; because of his abilities and
interest, and that as a matter of mere convenience; and also for the honor of
his place. 3. That therefore this Judging power for ending strife and
differences, might be alienated from the Clergy and done by Laymen, where
there was cause. 4. And that the Bishop had so much more power than the
Presbyters that he could commit it from them to Laymen. All this that one
instance of Silvanus in Socrates, lib. 7. cap. 37. (and in Hanmer, cap. 36.)
whose words were thus [Silvanus also no less expressed in his other acts and
dealings, the good motion of his Godly mind. For when he perceived that the
Clergy respected nothing but gain in deciding the Controversies of their
Clients, (O woeful Clergy!) he thenceforth suffered none of the Clergy to be
judge, but took the supplications, and requests of suitors, and appointed One
of the Laity, whom for certain he knew to be a just and godly man, and gave him
the hearing of their causes, and so ended quietly all contentions and
quarrels.] (And the likeliest way it was.) You see here, 1. that when Princes
will needs make the Clergy Magistrates to honor them, the wise and good men of
the Clergy will return such power to the Laity, as usually fitter for it. 2.
And that it is no wonder that when Law-business is cast upon the Clergy, if
they grow worse than Lawyers in covetousness and injustice. 3. And yet this was
not a making Laymen to be Chancellors that had the power of the Keys! For
Silvanus did only appoint Laymen to do Laymens work; to arbitrate
differences: but not to excommunicate, nor to judge men to excommunication, as
they do now. 4. And this was not a making of Ecclesiastical Elders that were
not Pastors: and therefore it is no countenance for such: but it was a prudent
casting back that work on the Laity, which good Emperors had in imprudent
piety cast upon the Clergy, that each might do his proper work. 5. But this was
but one good Bishop that was so wise and honest; and therefore it proved no
general reformation.

This Judicial power went so far and took up so much of the Clergies time, that
the Synod Taraconens. was after this put to Decree, Can. 4. that the Clergy
should not judge Causes on the Lords day; and Can. 10. that no Bishop or
Clergyman should take rewards or bribes for Judgments.

And the Canons so deterred Christians from seeking Justice from the Civil
Judicatures, that they had few but Heathens to be Judges of. Yea the Christians
thought so hardly of the Judges themselves (for punishing men by the Sword,
when the Bishops even for murder it self did punish them but with Penance,)
that they doubted sometime whether those Christians that exercised Magistracy
or Civil Judgment after Baptism, were not therefore to be taken for sinners;
as is visible in Innocent 1. his Epist. to Epist. 3. to Exuper. Tholesan. cap.
3. in Crab. Tom. 1. p. 459.

And before in Silvester's Council. Romans apud Crab Vol. 1. p. 280. Can. 16. it
is Decreed [ Nemo Clericus vel Diaconus aut Presbyter propter causam suam
quamlibet intret in curia, quum omnis curia a cruore, dicitur, and immolatio
simulachrorum est. Quod siquis Clericus in curiam introicrit, anathema
suscipiat, nunquam rediens ad matrem Ecclesiam: A Communione autem non privatur
propter tempus turbidum. And Constantine is said to be a Subscriber, with 284
Bishops, 45 Presbyters, and 5 Deacons. And in former Counc. sub Silvest. [
Nullum Clericum ante judicem stare licet.]

I know that Duarenus and Grotius describe not the Bishops power as so large as
the Canonists do. But Duarenus confesses that Theodosius made a Law, that
lites omnes and controversiae forenses ad judicium Ecclesiae remitterentur, si
alter uter litigatorum id postularet. That all strifes and controversies
forensick should be remitted to the judgment of the Church, if either of the
contenders required it: And that Charles the Great renewed and confirmed the
same Law: Duar. lib. 1. p. 8. And Grotius de Imper. sum pol. p. 236. says,
This Jurisdiction by consent the Bishops received from Constantine, with so
great power, that it was not lawful further to handle any business which the
Bishops sentence had decided; that is, says he, remota appellatione. And he
there shows that three sorts of Jurisdiction were by the Emperors given to
the Bishops: 1. Jure ordinario, and so they judged of all matters of Religion
(and which the Canons reached, which went very far in heinous crimes.) 2. Ex*
consensu p^rtium, when the parties chose the Bishop for their Judge ( Vid.
Council. Chalced. c. 9.) 3. Ex delegatione: which yet went further: And even to
the Jews such kind of power had been granted.

But of this whole matter of the Rise of such Prelacy, their Courts and power,
Pardre Paulus has spoken so well and truly in his Histor. Council. Trident.
page 330, 331, etc. that I would entreat the Reader to turn to it and peruse
it, as that which plainly speaks our judgment of the History now in question:
Read also his History of Benefices.

43. The countenance of the Emperor with these honors and immunities, having
brought the World into the Church, or filled the Churches with Carnal
temporizers, the numbers were now so great, that quickly the great Cities had
many Parish Churches, and the Country Villages about had some; so that now
about 400 or 500 Years after Christ, most Bishops of great Cities had more
Churches than one, even several sub Assemblies, and Altars, as dependant on
their Mother Church.

44. Yet were their Diocesses (which at first were called Parishes) somewhat
bounded, by the Canon and Edicts, which decreed that every City where there
were Christians enough to make a Church, should have a Bishop of their own, and
that no Bishop (except two, who bordered one on Scithia a rude unconverted
Country, and the other on the like case, of which more in due place.)

45. And then every oppidum or populous Town, like our Market Towns and
Corporations, was called (...), a City, and not only a few among many that have
that name by privilege, as it is in England now. So that even at this height
of Prelacy, about 500, 600 or 700 Years after Christ, they were but as if every
Corporation or Market Town in England had a Bishop, who ruled also the adjacent
Villages. For though when they began to swell, it was once decreed by one
Council, that Villages and every small City should not have a Bishop, lest the
Name of a Bishop should grow vile or cheap; yet this was but with this
addition, [those Villages or small Cities where there was not a sufficient
number of Christians:] (whereas Gregory at Neocesarea thought seventeen a
sufficient number to have a Bishop.) And the Canons, that every City should
have a Bishop, remained still in force.

45. Yet was it for about 440 Years so far from these great Bishops to usurp
the Sword, or any coercive or coactive power, on men's Bodies or Estates, that
they unanimously held that the Magistrate himself was not to punish men's Bodies
for Heresy or a false Religion. Till at last the bloody violence of the
Circumcellian Donatists, did cause Augustine in this to change his mind, and
think them meet for the Magistrates coercion.

46. When Bishops grew carnal and ungodly, and more regarded the keeping up
their Power, Parties and Opinions, than Charity, they beganto distrust the
Spiritual Weapons of their warfare; and instead of true vigilance against
errors, and confutation of them, by clear reason and a holy life, they fled to
the Rulers to do it by the Sword. But though Ithacius and Idacius with their
Synod of Bishops, excited Maximus to take this Vit. Ambros. per Baron.
course against the Priscilianists; yet not only St. Martyn did therefore to
the death avoid their Synods and Communion, and petitioned the Emperor, for
the Heretics peace; but even St. Ambrose also at Milan would have no Communion
with those Bishops, that had done this thing.

47. About the Year 430, or after, Cyril at Alexandria did lead the way, and
actually used the Sword against the Lives, Estates and Liberties of Offenders:
An example which others quickly followed: And easily did he step from the great
Judicial Power before described, to a forcing power, the preparations being so
great, and the Emperor so ready to exalt them, and the people of Alexandria so
turbulent and inclined by pride and passion to such ways.

48. As the Prelacy thus swelled, so the Churches grew suddenly more corrupted
with all manner of Vice. The Bishops began with sorrow to confess unto the
Heretics, that the greater number in the Churches were naught. When they
should choose their Bishops they could seldom agree; but frequently instead of
holy peaceable Votes, did turn to Devilish rage and bloodshed, and covered the
Streets and Church-floors with the Carcasses of the slain; (especially in the
Case of Damasus and others at Rome, and often at Alexandria and Constantinople.)
Frequently they fell into fewds, and fought it out, and murdered people by
multitudes: Even the strict holy Monks of the Egyptian Deserts, were as forward
as others to fighting, bloodshed and sedition: Even in their ignorance, for
such a paultry and sottish an Opinion, as that of the Anthropomorphites, as
that God has the shape and parts of a man: so that they forced that deceitful
treacherous Bishop Theophilus Alexandr. to flatter them, and curse the Books of
Origin (not for his errors, but for the opposite truth) and to take on him to
hold as they did. When God tried them with a Julian (who did persecute them
very little,) they reproached him to his face, and tried his patience as well
as he did theirs. The Antiochians scornfully Socrat l. 3. c. 15.
bid him shave his Beard and make Halters of it. In a word, when Constantine
had brought the World into the Church, the Church grew quickly too like the
World.

49. But it was not the people only, but the Pastors, both Prelates and
Presbyters, that grew licentious, wicked, proud, contentious, turbulent, and
the shame of their Order and Profession, and the great disturbers and dividers
of the Churches: except here and there an Ambrose, an Augustine, a Chrysostom,
a Basil, a Gregory, an Atticus, a Proclus, and a few such that so shined among
a darkened degenerate Clergy, as to be singled out for Saints. Abundance got
these great and tempting Prelacies by Simony, and more by making friends to
Courtiers: And not a few by Carnal compliances with the people: what abundance
of most sharp Epistles did Isidore Pelusiota write to Eusebius the Bishop, and
to Sosimus, Martianus, Eustathius, etc. of all their horrible wicked lives, and
yet could never procure their Reformation? What abundance of Epistles did he
write against them to other Bishops, and yet could not procure their correction
or removal? What a sad character does Sulpitius Severus give of the Bishops
that prosecuted the Priscilianists, and in particular of their Leader Ithacius,
of his own knowledge? What abundance of Prelates are shamefully stigmatized, by
Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Euagrius, etc? When a Rebel rose up against his
Prince, and got but the stronger party, and possession, how quickly did they
flatter him and own him. I find but one Bishop besides St. Martin in all France
and that part of Germany, that disowned Maximus that murdered Gratian: The rest
applauded him for their own ends: Nor in that part of Italy I find not any
besides Ambrose and one Hyginus that disowned him: (Not that I think it my part
to condemn all the holy Bishops who professed subjection to Usurpers in
possession: Even holy Ambrose could write to the odious Tyrant Eugenius, [
Clementissimo Imperatori Eugenio] concluding [ Nam cum privato detulerim cord
intimo, quomodo non deferrem Imperatori.] When I honored thee a private man
from the bottom of my heart, how can I but honor thee being Emperor?] And how
far have the Roman Bishops gone in this, even to Phocas, and such as he?)

When good Gregory Nazianz. was chosen and settled Bishop of Constantinople,
and loved and honored by a good Emperor, yet was he rejected (though he
easily yielded) even by the Synod of Bishops, in the arrogance of their minds,
because that he came not in by them. With what pride, what falsehood, what
turbulency did Theophilus Alexand. carry on all his business with the Monks,
and for the deposing of Chrysostom? And how arrogantly and turbulently did
Epiphanius join with him? and even Hierome make himself partaker? And how
easily did he get a Synod even where Chrysostom lived to second them? such
lamentable instances are more easy than pleasant to be cited.

And that Episcopacy which was set up to prevent Heresy and Divisions, did
afford the Heads of most of the Heresies and Divisions that befell the
Churches. How few of all the Heresies mentioned by Epiphanius, after that
Prelacy was in force, were not Headed and carried on by Prelates? And when the
Arian Heresy sprung up by a Presbyter, the Prelates so numerously received it,
that they seemed to be the far greater part, if not the Theodoret Eccles. Hist.
l. 1. cap. 10. Leg. Valentiniani and Valentus; Legem seu Literas in Theodoreti
Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 7. and Hestor. Andaeanorum, c. 9. and Messalianorum c. 10.
cum interpretatione D. Hookeri, li. 7. p. 66. de Audio.
main body of the Imperial Church: Witness the perverting of many Emperors;
the many Councils at Sirmium, Ariminum, etc. And the many new Creeds which
Socrates and Hilary so shamefully enumerate and declaim against. So that it was
said that the World groaned to find it self turned Arian.

And their fewds and inhumane contentions were so many and odious, that it is a
shame to read them. Multitudes of Cities had Bishops set up against Bishops,
and some Cities had more than two, or three: The people reviling and hating
each other, and sometime fighting tumultuously unto blood, for their several
Prelates. The Christian World was made as a Cockpit, and Christian Religion
made a scorn, by the Contentions of the Bishops. Constantines wisdom,
conscience and interest, engaged him to use all his skill, his kindness and his
power, to reconcile them: And if he had not done what he did, how unspeakably
wretched would their odious contentions have rendered them? And yet he
professes his heart almost broken by their dissensions; and while he chid them
bitterly and exhorted them kindly, he could not prevail. His Sons that
succeeded him labored to unite the Bishops, (though in different ways) and
could not do it. Jovianus the little time he reigned, declared his hatred of
their contentions, and how much he loved a peaceable man: but that did not cure
them, even when they came new from under a Julian. I will look no lower, to the
more degenerate Prelacy; but recite the doleful words of Eusebius, even of
those that were not at the worst, and came but newly from under the
persecutions of former Emperors, when they had but a little prosperity,
immediately before Dioclesians persecution, they are thus described. [ How
great and what manner of glory and liberty the doctrine Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1. Dr.
Hanmer's Translat. p. 144, 145.
of piety due to Almighty God, preached in the World by Christ, has obtained
before the persecution of our time, among all mortal men both Grecians and
Barbarians, it requires more labor to declare, etc. The clemency of the
Emperors (when Heathen) toward the Christians was so increased, to whom also
they committed the Government of the Gentiles; And for the great favor they
bare to our Doctrine, they granted liberty and security to the Professors of
Christianity. What shall I say of them, that in the very Palace of the
Emperors, and in the presence of Princes lived most familiarly: which esteemed
of their Ministers so highly, that they granted them in their presence freely
to deal in matters of Religion, both by word and deed; together with their
wives and children and servants? And thus one might then have seen the Bishops
of all Churches in great reverence and favor among all sorts of men, and with
all Magistrates. Who can worthily describe those innumerable heaps, and
flocking multitudes, throughout all Cities and famous Assemblies, frequenting
the places dedicated to prayer: Because of which circumstances, they not
contented with the old and ancient buildings (which could not receive them)
have throughout all Cities, builded them from the Foundation wide and ample
Churches: These things thus prevailed in process of time, and daily increased
far and nigh: so that no malice could intercept, no spiteful fiend bewitch, no
wight with cunning at all hinder it, as long as the Divine and heavenly hand of
God upheld and visited his People, whom as yet he worthily accepted. But after
that our affairs through too much liberty, ease and security, degenerated from
the Natural rule of piety; and after that one pursued another with open
contumely and hatred; and when that we impugned our selves by no other than our
selves, with the armor of spite, and sharp spears of approbrious words, so
that Bishops against Bishops, and People against People, raised sedition; last
of all, when that cursed hypocrisy and dissimulation had swam even to the brim
of malice; The heavy hand of Gods high judgment after his wonted manner
(whilst as yet the Ecclesiastical Societies assembled themselves nevertheless)
began softly by little and little to visit us; so that the persecution that was
raised against us took first his Original, from the Brethren that were under
Banner in the Camp. When as we were touched with no sense thereof, nor went
about so pacific God, we heaped sin upon sin, thinking like careless Epicures,
that God neither cared, nor would visit our sins; And they which seemed our
Shepherds, Laying aside the rule of piety, practiced contention and schism
among themselves, and whilst they aggravated these things, that is,
contentious, threatenings, mutual hatred and enmity, and every one proceeded in
Ambition, much like Tyranny it self, then I say, then did the Lord make the
daughter of Zion obscure, and overthrew from above the glory of Israel, etc. --
c. 2. We saw with our eyes the Oratories thrown down: to the ground, the
foundations dug up, the holy Scriptures burned to ashes in the open
Marketplace, and the Pastors of the Churches some shamefully hid themselves.
-- Yet is it not our drift to describe the bitter calamities of these men,
which at length they suffered, nor to record their dissension and insolency
practiced among themselves, before the persecution, etc.]

Note that all this was before Arius his Heresy, even before Dioclesians
cruelties; but not before the beginning of Church-Tyranny and ambition, as is
said.

But after this, alas, how much greater were their enormities and dissentions,
when their Tyranny was much increased; It would grieve any sober Christian to
read how the Christian World has been tossed up and down, and the people
distracted, and Princes disturbed and dethroned, and Heresies fomented, and
horrid Persecutions, and bloodshed caused, by the pride and contentiousness of
Prelates: And most of all this, in prosecution of that Controversy, which
Christ decided so long ago, viz. Who should be greatest. It was not Religion,
says Socrates, l. 5. c. 22. that the two Arian Sects of Marinus and Agapius
was about, but Primacy: They strove which of them should be the chief:
wherefore many Clergymen under the jurisdiction of these Bishops, perceiving
the ambition, the rancour and malice of these proud Prelates, forsook them, etc.

Macedonius at Constantinople was so Tyrannical, that as he came in by cruelty,
so he caused more, by presumptuous removal of the bones of Constantine, to
another Church, that he might pull down that, and this without Constantius the
Emperors knowledge: where the people in Factions fought it out, till the
Church and Streets were full of Carcasses and streams of blood, says Socrates.
The same man set four Companies of Socrat. l. 2. c. 3. Id. ib.
Soldiers on the Novations in Paphlagonia, till he enraged the people with
Clubs and Bills to kill them all. And he was so Tyrannical in forcing
Conformity, that he not only forced men to the Sacrament, but gagged their
mouths and popt it in.

Nor was this only the vice of the Heterodox but the Orthodox, as is aforesaid.
And as the French and German Bishops aforesaid did against the Priscillinaists,
so for their own interest against one another, they flattered and restlesly
instigated the Civil power, even Uusurpers to execute their Wills: and favored
that power that most favored them. When the foresaid Maximus had killed
Gratian and reigned in France, and entered Italy, (after that Ambrose had stopped
him a while) Theophilus Alexandr. sends an Agent Presbyter with two Letters,
and a rich present, one to Maximus and one to Theodosius; ordering him to stay
the issue of the Fight, and give the Present with his Letter to him that proved
the Conqueror: But a Servant stole the Letters from the Priest, and opened the
whole business, and caused the Priest to fly and hide himself.

50. These contentions of the Bishops and corruption of manners, so distasted
the more Religious sort of the people, that it occasioned the multiplying of
separating Heresies: and greatly increased and confirmed others, especially the
Donatists, and Novations; because men thought them to be of better lives than
the Orthodox.

51. Yea, by their very abuse of good and holy men, they drove even the
Orthodox often to separated Societies, as thinking so bad Prelates unfit to be
communicated with. As in Constantinople their abuse, ejection and banishment of
Chrysostom caused great numbers of his faithful people to forsake the Church;
and meet only in separated Conventicles; And though they differed in no point
of Doctrine, Worship or Discipline from the rest, all that they could do by
tyranny and threats would never bring them again to the Church; but they were
called Joannites, and assembled by themselves; till Atticus by wise and honest
means first began the reconciliati^^, by the public inserting of Chrysostom's
name among their honored Bishops in the daily Liturgy of the Church, and
Proclus after wisely perfected it, by fetching the bones of Chrysostom with
honor, from the place of his banishment into the Church. But Theodoret, Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 36. ascribes it to that good Emperor Theodosius Junior: It Is
like a good Bishop Socrat. l. 7. c. 44.
and he consented. For says Socrates, c. 40. Proclus behaved himself fairly
toward all men, persuading himself that it was far easier for him by fair
means to allure men to the Church, than by force to compel them to the Faith.

52. The multitudes of Schisms and horrid enormities in the Church of Rome;
the grand corruption of Religion by them; the shameful divisions between the
Greek and Western Churches, began so long ago and continued to this day, with
much more such evidence, do tell the World that is willing to see, what all
this tended to as it is perfection.

53. And having thus showed how the Bishops of the Flock came to be Bishops of
Bishops, and how they grew from the Pastoral Office to a pompous denomination
mostly secular, and how the Bishops of single Churches, did grow to be the
Bishops of multitudes of Churches turned into one Diocesan Church of another
species, we shall leave it to those that are wise and impartial, to judge
whether a true Reformation must retrieve them, and what Age and state of the
Church must be our pattern, to which we should endeavor to return; and in what
point it is that it is meet or possible, for Christians unanimously to fix
between the Apostolical institution and the height of Popery? And what
satisfying proof any man can give that in a line of 1500 Years, that it is the
right point that he has chosen.

CHAP. IV. The Judgment of those Nonconformists (now silenced) who 1660.
addressed themselves to King Charles the Second for Concord in the matter of
Church Government: what they then offered, and what those of the Authors mind
now hold, as to the Right of what is before Historically related.
AS I have delivered our Judgment about the History of Prelacy, so shall I next
freely and truly express my own Judgment and those that have concurred with me
about the right of Church Government it self, (supposing those 100 Propos. ad
Lud. Molinaeum which I have published about the Nature of Church Power, and the
extent of the Magistrates power in Church Matters.) For Truth has great
advantage when it appears, 1. compact, and entire, 2. and in the open light.
Since the writing of this our judgment is more fully published in the
Nonconformists first and second Plea for Peace.

Prop. 1. Since the Fall of Man, as God has given a Savior to the Joh. 5. 22.
Genesis 3. 15. Joh. 17. 2. Mat. 28. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1. 21, 22.
World, by whom he has made a new Covenant with or for Mankind; so has he
delivered all things into the Redeemer's hands, and given him all power in
Heaven and Earth, making him the Administrator General, and Head over all
things to the Church.

2. Some things are under Christ as Utensils, viz, Inanimates and Braites; some
are under him as mere enemies subdued, as Devils; some are under him as
generally Redeemed, and subjects de jure, or quoad obligationem, to be Ruled
and used upon terms of Mercy; And so are all Mankind in general, till the day
of life and grace is past: some are under him as Visible Consenters, and
Professed subjects; so are the Baptized and visible professors of Christianity:
And some are under him as sincere Heart-Covenanters, Justified and Sanctified,
and to be Glorified by him.

3. As Nature it self is now delivered up to Christ, and the Law of Nature is
now part of his Law, and the Instrument of his Government, both for the common
good and order of the Redeemed World, and also as sanctified to the special
good and order of his Church; Even so is the Office of Magistracy now under
him, and derived from him, and dependant on him, in both these forementioned
respects. (Notwithstanding all the vain arguments which Mr. Brown a Scotch
Divine, Cont. Velthusium has written to the contrary; which need no
confutation to an intelligent Reader.)

4. But the Office of the Sacred Ministry is much of Grace and Institution, and
less of Natural original than Magistracy. For though it be of Natural
obligation, that one man teach another, and that there be some fitter persons
than the multitude to instruct the people and guide them in Gods Worship; Yet
that in specie there should be Preachers of the Gospel, and Administrators of
this instituted worship and Church Discipline, this is it self of Christ's
Institution, as the Doctrine, worship and discipline which are their
Office-work are of his Institution.

5. And though a great part of a Christian Magistrates work be also.
Instituted, viz. to promote Christ's Instituted Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, yet so much also of his work is natural, as that he may be called a
Magistrate, though he be not a Christian Magistrate, while he executes Gods
Laws of Nature, for the common good: But he is (at least) less fitly called a
Minister or Priest of God, who shall only teach the Law of Nature, and guide an
Assembly in mere Natural Worship, (omitting all that is by Institution:) Or if
any think otherwise, it being but de nomine, at least this is certain, that the
Christian or Evangelical Ministry is by Institution.

6. Therefore, though so far as the Mosaical Magistracy was founded in Nature,
or in any Revelation expounding the Law of Nature, we may under the Gospel
fetch proofs thence for the Christian Magistrates Authority and Obligation; Yet
can we fetch no Model of a Gospel Ministry, nor proof of our Authority or
obligation as instituted, from the Instituted Ministry of the Mosaical Church:
Because the Law of Moses is abrogate and indeed did never bind the Gentiles,
(as I have fullier proved in my Treat. of the Lords day.) Nor is it safe to
argue from parity of reason that we must now be or do as they did, in point of
pure institution, while we so little know the total reason of God's
institutions, and when he himself has taken them down and set up new ones we
must not then plead our Reason against the alterations which God himself has
made.

7. Therefore though Christ be now the Head and Fountain of Power, both to
Magistrates and Ministers, yet he did not institute a new Office of Magistracy,
but add new Laws for them to rule by as part of their Rule of Government;
Because their Office was so much founded in Nature, and so much of their work
lay in ruling mankind according to their common Natural Law: But a Ministry he
did institute anew, as to the species and great essentials of the Office.

8. Christ changing both the Instituted Mosaical Law, and Priesthood, did begin
himself in his own person as the Great Prophet, High Priest and King of his
Church, to exercise his Office in the Jewish Nation.

9. Being not to continue corporally on earth, nor his bodily presence being
ubiquitary, he designed that the Holy Ghost should be his Agent internally to
carry on his work in the World; And he appointed the Sacred Office of the
Ministry, that meet men might be his Agents externally, in the Teaching and
Governing of his Redeemed ones in a holy order, and in conducting them in holy
worship, in a Ministerial subordination to his Prophetical, Regal and Priestly
Office.

10. As he himself did Officiate among the Jews, so he first placed this
Ministerial Power in twelve chosen men, and seventy Assistants with some
relation to the twelve Tribes and seventy Elders of Israel, to whom he sent
them.

11. During the time of Christ's abode among them in the flesh, they were but
as Pupils and Learners while they were Teachers; and their Abilities,
Commissions, Office and Work, and so their success were all yet imperfect: They
were not yet authorized openly and commonly so much as to declare Christ to be
the Messiah and Savior, but only to prepare men for that belief: Because those
works were not yet done, which must be the Evidences of their Doctrine and the
Instruments of men's Conviction, viz. Christ's Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
and his sending the miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost.

12. When Christ was risen before his Ascension, he perfected their Commission,
both as to their Work and Province; but appointed them to stay till the descent
of the Holy Ghost upon them, (as the sealing and full delivery of it, giving
them full ability for their work) before they set themselves about the solemn
performance of it.

13. Their Commission and Office was, 1. to Teach men and make them Christians
(or Christ's Disciples,) 2. and then to Baptize them into the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and so to take them into his Covenant and
Church; and, 3. to Teach them as Covenanted and en-Churched persons, to observe
all his commands; The first part of their work was to be exercised unlimitedly
on all the World, as far as they were able; The second part on the new
Converted Believers (and their infant seed;) And the third part on the Baptized
(that were adult.) And he added the promise of his presence with them to the
end.

14. As he now enlarged their Commission to All the World as the object of the
first part of their Office; so he added one ( Paul) by a voice from Heaven,
unto the number of the Apostles, who was especially made an Apostle to the
Gentiles, to show the rest that they were no more confined to the twelve Tribes
of Israel.

15. Because these Apostles were entrusted not only with a common Preaching of
the Gospel, but as Founders of the Churches, to be the eye and ear witnesses,
of the life, miracles, resurrection and doctrine of Christ, and to acquaint men
certainly with the Laws of Christ, therefore he promised them the extraordinary
gift of the Holy Ghost, to lead them infallibly into all truth, and to bring
all things to their remembrance, which he had taught and given them in Charge,
and so to enable them to perform all their Commission, which he gave them
accordingly, and so made them the Foundations of his Church, and the infallible
deliverers of his Will to the World, by their preaching and practice first, and
afterward by their Writings.

16. Therefore since their miraculous reception of the Spirit, all their
Doctrines Writings and Establishments which were done in the Execution of their
Commission, are ascribed to the Holy Ghost: It was the Holy Ghost that ^ndited
the Sacred Scriptures; and it was the Holy Ghost that settled the Churches, and
that wrought the Miracles, and that bare witness of Christ, and the Christian
verity. For the Apostles spoke not of themselves, but as the Holy Ghost
inspired them.

17. As others in that time were employed as their assistants in propagating
the Christian Faith, so had they also the same spirit, though in several
measures, and gifts. And so far as they had that spirit, he was the seal of
their doctrine: But because it was the Apostles that had the promise of
Infallibility, we have greater assurance of the Infallibility of their
writings, than of others; It being their approbation, which is much of our
assurance that the writings of their Assistants were infallible, and the
testimony which they give of the persons that wrote them ( viz. Mark and Luke.)

18. These Apostles with their many Assistants, (Prophets and Evangelists) did
by preaching, holiness and miracles, (the effects of Divine Wisdom, Goodness
and Power) convert multitudes, and baptize them, and did not only thus gather
them into the Catholic Church to Christ, but also settled them in a holy Order
in particular Churches, for personal communion among themselves in holy worship
and holy living* And they made such regular Church Communion a duty to all that
could obtain it.

19. By the authority of Christ and the Holy Ghost they ordained others to the
sacred Office of the Ministry; The same office with their own as to the common
works of Preaching and Teaching the Gospel, Worshipping and Guiding the Churches
by holy Discipline; which are the common essentials of the sacred Ministry: But
not the same in respect of their extraordinary endowments and works before
described (as eye and ear witnesses, infallibly delivering the will of Christ.)

20. Though in the Nature of the Office all Christ's Ministers have the Power
before mentioned, (1. to convert men to the Faith by preaching, 2. to take them
into the holy Covenant and Church by Baptism, 3. to teach, worship and rule, in
particular Churches; or, 1. to gather Churches by preaching and baptizing, 2.
and then to teach and guide them;) Yet all are not called equally to the
exercise of all these parts; But some were by the Apostles and the Holy Ghost
indefinitely employed in an unfixed course, in converting men and gathering
Churches; yet officiating also in gathered Churches where they came; And others
were fixed in the stated relation of Pastors to particular gathered Churches,
to teach and rule them, and worship among them; yet so as also to Preach for
the conversion of unbelievers, as far as they had ability and opportunity.

21. The unfixed Officers were called Ministers in General, and Stewards of
God's Mysteries, and Evangelists: But the fixed Officers, were also especially
called Bishops, Pastors, and Elders: Though sometime ^arely the other also had
such Titles, because of their doing the same work transiently in the Churches
where they came.

22. They that were unfixed Preachers or Evangelists, had not that special and
particular Charge of all the souls in particular Churches, and in some one
Church above all the rest, as fixed Bishops or Pastors have: But they had a
greater Obligation than these Bishops to preach to Infidels, because it was
their ordinary chief work.

23. The Pastors of particular Churches had such a Charge of those particular
Flocks, above all other Flocks (materially,) as that they were not obliged
equally to do the same for others as they did for them: Though yet when they
had a particular call, they might transiently or occasionally perform the work
of the Pastoral Office, to other Churches.

24. This relation to their particular Flock, was not such as disobliged them
from their higher regard of the Universal Church: For our relation to that is
stricter and more indissoluble than to any particular Church: And we must
always finally prefer the Church Universal, though materially we are to labor
in our particular Churches principally (and sometimes only) because by such
Order the Church Universal is best edified.

25. The Apostles usually (but not only) planted Churches in great Cities;
rather than in Country Villages.

26. This was not that hereby they might oblige others to confine Churches to
Cities only, nor because they had any special honor for a City, but because
they were the places of greatest ^^^^course, and had best opportunity for
Assemblies, and most materials to work upon.

27. Neither the Apostles nor others for some Ages after Christ, did divide the
Countries about such Cities, and assign part of the^ to be the Diocese of one
Bishop, and the other part to the Bishop of the next adjoining City: Nor was
there any bounding of Parishes or Diocese, nor any determination, to which
Bishop such and such ground, or Villages of unconverted Infidels did belong.
Only as natural prudence guided them (and the spirit of God,) they so dispersed
themselves that none might hinder another in his work; but as most tended to
the propagation and orderly governing of the Churches.

28. Therefore no City Bishop had such a Particular Charge of the souls of all
the individual Infidels, either in his City or the Country round about him
(which some feign to have been his Diocese) as he had of the souls of the
Church which he was Pastor of. Though he was bound to do all that he could to
convert all as he had opportunity, he stood not in any Pastoral relation to
this or that individual Infidel, as he did to all the individual Christians of
his charge. Ignatius requires the Bishop to know all his Flock by name, and
enquire after them, even the servants; but not so of all Infidels in his City
or Circuit.

29. No man was therefore the Pastor of any Christians in a particular
Church*relation merely because he converted them: Nor was there ever any Law
made by Christ or his Apostles, that all should be members of that particular
Church whose Overseer did convert them; much less that at a distance they
should be the members of his Episcopal charge, though in another Church.

30. The Apostles settled in every particular Church, one or more with the
Pastoral power of the Keys, to teach and govern that Church, and to lead them
in public worship. And every such Body should still have one or more Pastors
with such power. And no Pastor or Bishop should have more particular Churches
under his special immediate Charge, than one, unless as an Archbishop who has
Bishops in those particular Churches under him.

31. A particular Church of Christ's Institution by his Apostles, is [ A sacrrd
Society consisting of one or more Pastors, and a capable number of Christian
Neighbors, consociate by Christ's appointment and their own consent, for
personal communion in God's public worship and in holy living.] In this
definition, 1. The Genus is [ a sacred Society] so called, 1. to distinguish it
from a mere community, or unbodied company of Christians; 2. and to distinguish
it from Civil and profane Societies, (For the Genus is subalternate, and the
species of a superior Genus.) 2. The constitutive parts are Pastor and People.
3. I say [ Pastors] as distinguishing it from all other societies as headed by
other Officers or Rulers; As Kingdoms by Kings, Colleges by their Governors,
Schools by Schoolmasters, Families by Parents, etc. For Societies are
specified by their Governors. 4. I say [ one or more] because it is the Office
in some person that is the constitutive part, the number being indifferent as
to the Beings, though not as to the well being of the Society. 5. The People
being the other material part of the Society, I call them [ Christians] that is
Baptized Professing Christians, to distinguish them from all Infidels, who are
incapable to be members. 6. I call them [ Neighbours] because the Proximity
must be such as rendereth them capable of the Ends of the Society, For at an
incapable distance they cannot have Church Communion. 7. I put in [ a capable
number] because too few or too many may be utterly incapable of the Ends* One
or two are incapable defectively: such multitudes as can have no Church
communion, are incapable through excess (of which more after.) 8. The form is
the Relative Union of Pastor and People, in reference to the Ends; Which I mean
in the word [ Consociate.] 9. The foundation or prime efficient, is [ Christ's
Institution.] 10. The Condition, sine qua non, is [ their mutual consent.] 11.
The end or terminus is their [ Communion.] 12. The matter of this Communion, is
both [ God's publickworship] and a holy*life; which distinguishes them from
such as associate for civil ends, or any other besides these. 13. The proper
species of this holy Communion is that it be [ Personal.] By which I mean such
as Pastor and People may ordinarily exercise in presence; to distinguish it
from that sort of Communion, 1. which we have only in spirit, in faith,
judgment and affection, with Christians in all parts of the World: And, 2. from
that external Communion which several Churches hold together by Messengers,
Delegates, or Letters. For if that kind of distant Communion would serve to the
being of a particular Church, we might be of the same particular Church with
men in the several parts of the World.

32. Deacons are subordinate Officers, or Ministers to Christ's Ministers, not
essential to the Church, but only Integral, as needful to its well being, in
such Churches, where the number and benefit of the People do require them.

33. The necessity of these Individual or particular Churches, is founded, in
the necessity of the foresaid public worshipping of God, and in the use of the
mutual assistance of Christian Neighbors in the matters of salvation, and in
the need of the personal inspection and conduct of the Pastors over all the
Flock.

34. The difference between this personal Communion, and the distant Communion
by Letters or Delegates, or merely internal in Faith and Love, is so great and
notorious, as must make those Societies specifically distinct, which are
associated for such distinct Ends.

35. Yet do we not hold that all true Churches do Assemble together in one
place; or that they consist of no more than can meet at once: For whole
Families seldom go all at once to the Assembly: Therefore if one part go to
day, and another the next day, they worship God publicly in personal
Communion, though not all at the same time. 2. And many may be sick, and many
infants, and many aged, and the great distance of some may make a Chapel or
subordinate Meeting often needful. And yet, 1. they may all come together in
one place at several times for Church communion. 2. And they may live so near,
that one may be capable of neighbourly converse with others, and of
admonishing, exhorting and encouraging each other, in their Christian Course.

36. Where a Church is so small as to need but one Pastor, Christ does not
require that they have more; And One can neither be superior or inferior to
himself.

37. But it is most desirable that a Church be as numerous or great, as will
consist with that sort of Communion which is the end of the Society; and
consequently that they have many Pastors; Because this tends to their
strength and beauty, and it is a joyful thing to worship God in full Assemblies.

38. The work of a Bishop or Pastor of a single Church is, (to mention it more
particularly) to Teach the Church the meaning of the Scriptures, especially of
all the Articles of Faith, and the things to be Desired in Prayer, and the
matters and order of Obedience to all the commands of Christ. To instruct the
Children in the Catechistical or Fundamental verities. To Baptize, to Pray in
the Assembly, to praise God, to celebrate the Lords Supper, to visit the Sick,
and pray for them: To visit the several Families, or personally instruct those
ignorant ones, that understand not public Preaching, as far as he has
opportunity: To watch over the Conversations of the several Members, and to
receive informations concerning them: To resolve the doubts of those that seek
resolutions, and to offer help to them that are so senseless as not to seek it,
when their need appears: To comfort the sad and afflicted: To reprove the
scandalous: To admonish the obstinate before all: To censure and cast out the
impenitent that continue to reject such admonition: To absolve the penitent: To
take care of the Poor: And to be exemplary in holiness, sobriety, justice and
charity. I pass by Marriage, Burials, and such other particular Offices. And I
meddle not here with Ordination, or any thing that concerns other Churches;
but only with the work of a Bishop or Pastor to the People of his proper Flock.

39. The ablest Man among us, for mind and body, may find full and needful
employment of this sort, among an hundred persons, especially such as our
common Christians are: But if he have five hundred or a thousand, he has so
much to do, as will constrain him to leave something undone which belongs to
his Office. Therefore our Market*Towns, and large Country Parishes, where there
are ordinarily two, three, or four thousand in a Parish, have need of many
pastors, to do that for which the Pastoral Office was ordained: Much more our
greatest City and Town Parishes that have ten thousand, twenty thousand, and
some above thirty, if not forty or fifty thousand in a Parish.

40. The office of a Pastor, containing the Power of the Keys, as subordinate
Ministerially to Christ in his Teaching, Ruling and priestly* work, is not by
man to be divided and part of it to be given to one sort, and part to another
(though they that have the whole power may variously exercise it, as there is
cause.) But every Church must have such as have the whole power, as far as
concerns the People of that Church.

41. To divide the essential parts of the Sacred Office, (as to give one the
power of Teaching only, another of Worshipping only; and another of Ruling only;
or any two of these without the third, is to destroy it, and change the
species, as much as in them lies that do it.) And as no one is a man without
his Animal, Vital and Natural parts; so no one is a true Pastor without the
threefold power forementioned, of Teaching, Ruleing that Church by Pastoral
means, and Conducting them in public Worship. He may be a Pastor that is
hindered from the exercise of some one of these or more; but not he that has
not the Power in his Office. Dividers therefore make new Church*Offices, and
destroy the old.

42. Churches headed by such a new sort of Officers, specifically distinct from
the old of Christ's Institution, are Churches specifically differing from the
Churches which Christ Instituted: Because the Society is specified by the
species of its Head or Governor.

43. To make a new sort of Church-Heads or Rulers, as their Constitutive parts,
is to make a new sort of Churches.

44. The three forsaid Essential parts of the Pastoral Office are not to be
exercised by any Layman, nor by any man that has not that Office: Nor may the
Pastors do that work per alios, or delegate Laymen, or men of another Office
to do it as in their stead. For the Office is nothing but just Authority and
Obligation to do that work: And if they convey such Authority and Obligation to
another, they convey the Office to another; And so he is no longer a Layman,
or of another Office only.

45. Therefore though many Pastors of the same Office may in a great Church
distribute the work among them, yet none of them must do it only as the
delegate of another, not having himself from God the Office which contains
the power of doing it.

46. But the Accidentals of the Pastoral Office may be committed to a Layman,
or one that is no Pastor (As to summon Assemblies, to keep Registers, or the
Church Books, Goods, Buildings, with many the like:) And so some think that the
Apostles instituting Deacons was but a communicating the Accidentals of their
Office to other men. Therefore if Chancellors did only these accidental works
(or Lay Elder either) and meddled not with the sacred power of the Keys, we
should not be so quarrelsome, as to condemn their undertaking, unless it were
for the abuse.

47. We doubt not but in a Church that has many Pastors, those that are young
and weak should much submit to the elder and more able, and be as far ruled by
them, as the difference of age, experience and abilities, without a difference
of Office, does require.

48. And we doubt not, but where Temples and Church-maintenance are at the
dispose of Patrons, People or Magistrates, they may give them to some one
Pastor as the present possessor, so that no other shall have part but by his
concession. And this difference there is between the Parson and his Curates in
our Parishes, and an accidental superiority and inferiority thereby, without a
difference of Office.

49. If Magistrates, or Councils, or Custom, should in each particular Church
that has many Pastors, give one a Governing, that is a negative voice among
the rest, in the management of the affairs of that Church, so that the rest
should not go against him or without him, as Archbishops now are over Bishops,
and Archpresbyters were formerly over Presbyters, and Archdeacons over Deacons,
and Presidents over Colleges, and Courts of Justice, without claiming a
distinct Office; though the sad experience of Men's inclination to
Church-tyranny, make us doubtful whether we should wish for such an inequality,
yet would we not unpeaceably disturb or quarrel with such an Order, when it is
settled: Our Parish Order aforesaid being indeed but such.

50. Whether God himself has appointed another sort of Bishops who may be
better called Archbishops, as Successors of the Apostles in the Ruling part of
their Office; and whether these have not a Power above particular Church
Pastors in Ordinations, and in the oversight of the Pastors themselves, and in
the Care of many Churches, I have long ago confessed, is a Case of too much
difficulty for me to determine. On the one side, though the Apostles have no
Successors in the extraordinary and temporary part of their Office, yet
Church Government being an ordinary and permanent part, as doctrine is, I can
hardly think that when we find one Form of Church Government instituted by
Christ himself, and continuing till the end of that Age, that we should presume
to say that this Form then ceased and another must succeed it without good
proof. What we find enacted and settled must stand, till we can prove it
abrogate. And unless it were a thing which in the nature of it were temporary,
it seems a harsh imputation of mutability, to feign Christ to set up a
Church Government which should be in force but for an hundred years. And on the
other side it puzleth me, 1. to find it so hard to prove, that the Apostles
themselves did indeed exercise any Office power over other Pastors, which one
may not do toward another, over and above that which accrewed to them from the
mere extraordinary advantage of their gifts and Apostolical proper work: 2. And
to find it so obscure, whether they settled any as their Successors in that
superiority of power which they had.

51. But being in such doubt, and being uncertain whether such Archbishops or
Apostolical Successors in the points of Ordination and oversight of many
Churches, be of Divine right or not, I resolve not to contend against any such
Order, nor to disobey any just commands of such, nor to reproach the custom of
the Churches.

52. And though I know that Pastors should not unnecessarily be diverted by any
aliene works, yet if it please the Magistrate to commit some of his power of
Church Government by the Sword, (about things extrinsick, to the Pastoral
Office) into the hands of some Ministers as his Officers, and if he call them
Bishops, and command us to obey them, and if he make them Barons, and endow
them with Lordships and great revenues, though I see the great peril to the
Church from hence, by reason of men's pride and worldliness; yet will I not
reproach this Order, nor deny any just obedience to any such Officers of the
King.

53. If any acknowledging the Pastors of each Church to have the whole Pastoral
Office, and power of the Keys of that Church which he overseeth, shall yet
affirm that the aforesaid superior General Bishops (or Archbishops) have a
superior power of the Keys, and therefore shall have the decision of
controversies that arise in particular Churches between the Pastors and the
People, and that appeals may be made by the people to them, and that they may
visit the particular Churches at their pleasure, and have power to censure the
particular Bishops (or Pastors) when they deserve it, or to Ordain Ministers,
remove them, and depose them as there is just cause, (by bare sentence, and the
peoples consent,) and all this jure divino, as Successors to the Apostles in
their Government, or to such Archbishops (or General Bishops) as Timothy and
Titus. I shall not contend against any of this, for the reasons aforesaid,
being uncertain of the thing in question. But if I must be put to subscribe,
that I believe all this to be true, (as if it were an Article of my Faith) the
same uncertainty would forbid me.

54. And here I must take occasion to say, that I take unnecessary
Subscriptions, Declarations, Promises and Oaths, to be one of the chiefest of
the Devil's Engines, to divide Christ's Churches, and to fish out those
Ministers that make conscience of perjury and lying, and to turn them out of
the work of Christ, and to leave in those that do not, (when Conscience can
find but any shifting pretense;) And how fit such are for the Sacred Ministry,
and whose servants really they are, and how they are like to do Christ's work,
and what a Case the Churches will be in that have such, and what the effects
will be with the common people, and how the lovers of Godliness will resent all
this, and what else will follow hereupon, I leave to the Reader that has the
brains of a man, or ever opened his eyes to mark what is done abroad in the
World, or that ever read with observation the things that in other Ages have
befallen the Churches, or that knows what relation light has to darkness,
good to evil, and Christ to Belial. I think that the Articles of our Faith and
the matters of our practice are so to be distinguished, as that there is a
necessity of Believing the former, and therefore we may be called to profess
that we do Believe them; And for the other, (the Agenda) we must be called to
Do them, (and if they be plain and necessary duties of our Religion, being to
be Believed to be Duties before we do them, we may sometime be put to profess
that Belief.) But duties of humane imposition, or of doubtful nature, may be
done as things lawful by thousands of peaceable men, that cannot say or swear
that they are duties; or may be done as of humane obligation by those that
cannot say they are of Divine obligation.

55. We hold that the first Churches that did divolve all arbitrations of
differences among Christians upon the Pastors, did that which brought no great
present inconvenience, when the People were but few and the Pastors had
sufficient leisure; but that which prepared for the degenerating of the
Ministry and the Churches lamentable corruption; And therefore that they should
have foreseen this, and done as St. Paul directed them, and referred matters to
any fit [ wise man among them.] And when they saw the mischief, they should
have quickly reformed it, as Silvanus Bishop of Troas aforementioned did: And
that if there were Lay Elders in any of the ancient Churches, (as one passage
in Origin, and one in Ambrose, and this of Silvanus in Socrates have made some
think) they were truly Lay, and appointed only to such Arbitrations as these,
and such other Animadversions over the rest, as Laymen may do; (A help that I
once tried and found to be very great.)

56. We hold that when Constantine gave the Clergy the sole Power of Judging
the Causes (Civil and Criminal) of all the Christians, he showed more ignorant
zeal, than true discretion, and did let in a pestilence into the Church; and
that instead of that he should have only left Arbitrations to man's free choice,
and have set up a Christian or Righteous Magistracy, to whom both Bishops and
all other Christians should submit.

57. We hold that when Christians so multiplied, as that they grew incapable of
Personal Communion, at one Altar, it was the duty of them and the Bishops, to
have ordered them into new Churches, whcih should every one have had its proper
Bishop, or plenary Pastoral Office among them; and not to have kept them all
still in the name of one particular Church ( infimi ordinis) when they were
incapable of the nature and end.

58. We hold that it was sinfully done, to make a new Office or Order of
subject Presbyters, that had not the Governing power of their particular
Churches, neither alone, nor conjunct; but had only the power to Teach and
Worship, the Government being reserved only to the Bishop of another (called a
Mother) Church.

59. But we believe that this came not in till many hundred Years after Christ,
and that but by slow degrees, and that after subordinate Churches and Altars
were invented, and set up, yet the Pastors under the name of Presbyters, had
much of the Governing power (of the Keys) though with and under the Bishop of
the Mother Church.

60. The deposing of all the first rank or Order of Bishops, which were before
over each particular Church, the making of a new Office of half Presbyters, the
making of Churches of a new species, as being under a new sort of Officers, the
making Archbishops, who should have many Churches and Bishops under them, to
become the Bishops of the lowest rank, having none under them; but above all
these, the making of the Pastoral work, especially discipline become utterly
impossible, by putting that into one man's hand, that cannot be done but by many
(or many hundred,) these and such like are the things that we can neither swear
to nor approve.

61. We hold that though the Magistrate may shape his part of the Church
Government variously, according to the Interest of the common good, yet that
the Spiritual or Pastoral part should not have been molded into the shape of
the Civil Imperial Government; And that so doing did give the Papacy that
countenance which is the ground of its usurpation.

62. For we hold that the essential constitution of the Pastoral Office, and
its work, and the essential constitution of the Church Universal, and of
Individual (or particular) Churches, are all of Divine unalterable Institution;
And that all Laws of Christ for such Constitution, and for Administration, are
unalterable by man: Though we hold that Circumstancials and Accidentals are
alterable, as being not settled by any Divine determination. (As e. g. how many
Ministers shall be in each Church, which of them shall be more regarded than
the rest, as being of greater wisdom, how ost and when and where they shall
assemble, with many the like.)

63. We hold that as all Christians (ordinarily) should have personal Communion
in particular Churches, so those Churches and their Bishops should hold such
Communion as is needful to their strength and concord, and the common good.

64. This Communion of Churches is to be held internally by Concord in the same
Faith and Love and Religion, and externally by the same profession, and
instrumentally, 1. by Messengers and Letters, and, 2. by Delegates and Synods
when there is need; (which as is said, for Time, Place, Numbers, Provinces,
Orders, are left to humane Prudence.)

65. If any that divide the Country into Provinces, will settle Synods
accordingly, and settle over them Presidents for the ordering of their
proceedings, and will give power to one above others, to call such Synods, and
will call these Provinces, or Nations, or Empires, by the name of Provincial,
National, or Imperial Churches, and the Bishops so exalted by the name of
Metropolitans, Primates, Patriarchs, etc. We contend not against this as
unlawful in it self (though we easily see the accidental danger, being taught
it by long and sad experience;) so be it, 1. that none of these be pretended to
be of Divine Institution, but of humane determination; 2. and that they meddle
with nothing but such accidentals as are left to humane prudence; 3. and that
they equal not their humane Association with the Christian Worshipping Churches,
which are of Christ's Institution, 4. and that much less they do not oppress
their brethren, and tyrannize, nor deprive the particular Pastors and Churches
of their proper privileges and work. But alas when were these Rules observed
by humane Churches?

66. The Canons of such Synods or Councils of Bishops, may be made Laws indeed
by the Civil power, and they are (if just) obligatory to the people, by virtue
of the Pastoral Authority of the Bishops: But as to the particular Bishops,
they are only Agreements, and no proper Laws (the Major Vote of Bishops being
not proper Governors of the rest) and bind only by virtue of Christ's General
Laws for Love and Concord.

67. The Pastoral power is not at all Coactive by secular force, on body or
estate, but only Nunciative and persuasive, commanding in Christ's name as
authorized by him, and executed no otherwise than by a Ministerial word, and by
withholding our own acts of Administration, and denying our Communion to
offenders: Nor did the Apostles themselves pretend to any other than this power
of the Word (for the Keys are exercised but thus) excepting what they* did by
Miracle. And if Bishops would go no further, they would work on none but
Volunteers, and their usurpations might be the more easily born.

67. And indeed we are fully persuaded, that none but Volunteers are ^it for
the great privilege of Church Communion, and that giving it to the unwilling
that had but rather endure it than a Prison, is a great profanation of it, and
a cheat to poor souls, and a horrid corrupting of Christ's Churches and
Ordinances.

68. If wilful Church-corruptions have made any places incapable of a present
conformity to Christ's Institutions, their incapacity must not become the
measure and rule of our Reformation; But a true Conformity to the Institution
must be intended and endeavored, though all cannot come up to it at the first.

69. We do not hold that every Corruption in Number, or Officers, or Order,
nullifieth a Church, or makes all Communion with it unlawful, as long as the
essential constitution does remain. Yea, though my own judgment is, that every
Church in Town or Country should have a Bishop, yet if they would but set up
one Bishop with his assistant Presbyters in every Corporation and Great Town,
with the neighbor Villages, according to the ancient practice, from the middle
of the third Century for many following; so that true discipline might but be
made possible to them that had a heart to practice it, I should greatly rejoice
in such a Reformation; much more, if every Parish Pastor were restored to all
the parts of his Office, though he exercised all under the Government of
Bishops.

70. We hold the Parish Churches of England, that have true Ministers (that
are, not utterly incapable through Ignorance, Heresy, Insufficiency, or
Wickedness,) to be true Churches of Christ; But that is, because we hold the
particular Ministers to be true Bishops ( Episcopos Gregis etsi non
Episcoporum,) and to have the power of the Keys over all their Flocks: And that
is, because we hold that it is not in our Bishops power to deprive them of it
though they would; And because we hold that when Christ has instituted and
described the Office of a Pastor or Presbyter, and the Ordainers ordain a man
to that Office, their power shall be judged of by Christ's institution, and not
by the Ordainers will, though he mistake or would maim and change it by his
wrong description. And that the Ordainer is but a Ministerial Invester,
delivering possession according to his Masters will and not his own: And as
long as Christ gives to Pastors the power of the Keys, and they themselves
consent to receive and use them, (especially if the People also consent to the
exercise of them) it is not the Bishops will or words that can nullify this
power. And if this Answer were not good, I confess, I were not able to Answer a
Brownist, who says, that we have no true Public Churches of God's
Institution, Diocesan Churches being but Humane, if they had Bishops in each
Church under them, and being sinful when they have none, and Parochial Churches
being Humane or null, as having no Bishops of their own, nor Pastors of
Christ's Institution, but half Pastors; and therefore being but part of a
Diocesan Church. But all this is sufficiently answered by our foresaid Reasons;
which no high Prelatist can soundly answer.

71. I do hold that those Parish Assemblies, that have no Ministers, [but such
as are incapable, either through notorious Ignorance, or Heresy, or utter
Insufficiency as to the Essentials of their Office, or by disclaiming
themselves any Essential part of the Pastoral Office, or by notorious Preaching
against Godliness, and opposing the Churches necessary good,] are indeed no
true Churches of Christ, but only are Analogically or Equivocally so called; As
you may call a Community of Christians that have no Pastor or Church, which is
no Organized or Political Society.

72. But yet I think it not simply unlawful to join at any time with such an
Assembly: For I may join with a Christian Family, or occasional Assembly,
though not as with a Church.

73. We hold that all the Christians in the World (in particular Churches or
out) do make up one Catholic or Universal Church: which is Mystical and
Invisible, in that, 1. the Faith of Men's minds is Invisible, 2. and Christ is
Invisible to us Mortals now he is in Heaven. But it is also Visible, 1. In
respect of the Members and their outward Baptism and Profession, 2. and because
that Christ the Head was once Visible on Earth, and is still Visible in Heaven
to the Glorified part (as the King is to his Courtiers, when the rest of the
Kingdom sees him not.) and will Visibly appear again to all.

74. We hold that this Universal Church is One in Christ alone, and that it
has no other King or Head; That he has Instituted no Vicarious Head, either
Pope or General Council; Nor is any mortal man or men capable of such an Office.

75. We hold therefore that the Roman Pope (and General Councils, if they claim
such an Headship) is an Usurper of part of Christ's Prerogative; which having
usurped he has used against Christ, and his interest; against the Sovereignty
of Princes, and against the true Unity, Concord, Peace and Holiness of the
Churches.

76. And we hold that it was the modelling of the Church to the Policy of the
Roman Empire, which gave the Pope the advantage for this usurpation: And that
the Roman Catholic Papal Church is a mee^ Humane Form, and an Imperial Church,
as much as the Archbishop of Canterbury as Superior to the rest of England is
of Man, and that Body so united is a National Church: And that the General
Councils were never truly General, as to all the Churches in the World* but
only as to the Roman Imperial Church; None considerable ever coming to such
Councils, but those that were or had been in the Roman Empire, or some very few
that closely bordered on them: Nor had the Roman Emperor (who usually called,
or gave his Warrant for such Councils, or Governed them) any power over the
Clergy of all the rest of the Christian World, (in Ethiopia, the outer Armenia,
Persia, India, etc.) Nor did the Imperial Pope then exercise any power over
them. And we are persuaded that the power of the Patriarchs of Alexandria,
Antioch, Jerusalem, Constantinople, and of the Metropolita^^, Primates, etc.
stood on the same foundation with the Primacy of the Pope, and that one is no
more of Divine right than the other; But that the Papacy is the far more wicked
Usurpation, as pretending to more of Christ's Prerogative.

77. We hold therefore that the Roman Church, as such, that is, as pretending
to be the Church-Catholick, Headed by an (Usurping) Universal Bishop, is no
true Church of Christ, but a Humane and traitorous Usurpation and conspiracy,
therefore by Protestants called Antichristian: Though those that are true
Christians among them are Parts of Christ's Catholic Church, and those that
are true Pastors among them, may be the Guides of true particular Churches.

78. We hold therefore that no Power on Earth, Popes, Council or Prince, has
power to make Universal Laws to bind the whole Church of Christ on Earth,
because there is no Universal Head or Sovereign but Christ.

79. By all this it is evident that we grant all these following disparities in
the Church: 1. The disparity of Age, standing, and Gifts among Ministers of the
same Order: 2. A kind of paternal priority where one was the Teacher, Educater,
or Ordainer of the other. 3. An accidental disparity, when one only by the
Patron or Magistrate has the sole possession of the Maintenance and power of
the Temple. 4. We will not unpeaceably contend against the guiding power or
negative Vote of One Bishop in a particular Church over the rest of the Pastors
of the same Office; Nor do we take such a power to make a distinct Office. 5.
We do not strive against the Presidency of one, in Synods, as Moderator; No
though it were durante vita (which Bishop Hall thought would serve to heal us.)
6. We do not deny Obedience to any Bishop, who is Commissioned by the King, to
exercise as a Church-Magistrate, his part of the Church Government. 7. Much
less do we strive against the Power of Kings and Lawful Magistrates Circa
Sacra, (of which Grotius has excellently written de Imper.) But we take the
Magistrate to be the necessary and only Ruler by the Sword, to keep Peace and
Order among Church*men, as well as among men of all other Professions. 8. Yea,
I do not contend against the Divine Right of General Bishops, (or Archbishops)
such as Timothy and Titus, nor will deny Obedience to them, who take care as
Visitors of Many Churches, which have every one their proper Bishop, one or
more, with true plenary Pastoral power of the Keys, to guide the people of
their charge. 9. We refuse not to receive Ordination from such General Bishops.
10. Nor do we refuse to be responsible to them, when we are accused of any male
Administration, or to admit of Appeals from us to them.

80. By all which it appears, 1. How falsely we are charged to be against all
Episcopacy. 2. And how falsely and deceitfully all those Writers state the Case
and plead against us, that only plead for a Congregational or Parochial
Episcopacy, or any of this which we grant; and how they cheat their Readers,
who make them believe, that our Controversy is, whether there should be any
Episcopacy, and not what kind of Episcopacy it should be. 3. What friends they
will prove to the Church, that will rather do all that is done against it, than
endure those that grant all this which we do grant them.

81. That I am not singular in all this, I prove in that it was only Archbishop
Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy to the Primitive state, which the
Nonconformists, (maliciously called Presbyterians) did offer to his Majesty and
the Bishops, 1660. as the means of our Concord, and which was rejected: Yea,
that they The London Ministers Thanksgiving to the King is to be seen in Print:
As also their desire of B. Usher's Primitive Model of Government.
thankfully accepted (though not totally approved) that higher Model expressed
in his Majesty's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs.

And now, I suppose, I have given Strangers and Posterity a truer Description
of the Judgment of the present Nonconformists, than malicious turbulent
ambitious Persons use to give of them, or than the extremes and freaks of a few
Sectaries would allow men to receive.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Writers of this Controversy; With a Summary Answer to
the Chief that write against the Cause which I defend.
I Have not been altogether negligent to read the Controversies on this
Subject, nor I hope partial in Reading them; If I have, it has been because I
had rather have found Conformity to the Prelacy to be lawful; for then I had
not above Now 18 years, this being written 9 years ago.
nine years been silenced, and denied not only all Church maintenance, but
leave to preach Christ's Gospel, nor had I been exposed as I have been to so
much wrath and malice, expressed in so many scurrilous lying invectives and
libells, besides other ways. Even when I doubted of the use of the transient
Image of the Cross, I was of opinion that Prelacy was lawful, and so was likely
to continue, if the Prelates would have given me leave: But in 1640, they put a
New Oath upon us, Never to Consent to the Alteration of the present frame of
Prelacy, as under Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. and that it
ought so to stand. And I thought it was then time, when I was put to such a
solemn Oath, to search more thoroughly into all the matter before I swear. And
in searching, I found in general that almost all Writers for Episcopacy, either
confound Diocesan Prelacy, such as ours, with the Episcopacy of a single
Church, or at least all their proof extends to no more than I have here
granted. When they offer us the definition of a Bishop (which few of them do)
it is such as neither supposes any more Churches than one to be his Charge,
nor any Presbyters under him at all; but only a Power of Ordaining Presbyters,
and ruling them when he has them, whether in one Church or more.

And I find that they are so far from proving that ever the Apostles appointed
a distinct Office of Presbyters which had not the power of the Keys over the
People, in foro interiore and exteriore (as they call them) but had only power
to Teach and Worship, under Bishops as a superior Office or Order, as that they
prove not any such to have ever been under the Apostles themselves; and some of
themselves do plainly deny it: Nor do they prove that long after the Presbyters
were any more subject to the Bishops, than the Deacons are now to the
Archdeacon, or the Bishops to the Archbishop, who are of the same Order. So
that whoever else they speak to, they say nothing to me, and seem not to know
where the Controversy lies, viz. 1. Whether a Bishop of the lowest rank
(being no Archbishop, or having no Bishops under him) over many Churches, (or
Societies of Christians stated under their proper Pastors, or Presbyters, for
ordinary personal Communion in all God's public Worship,) be of Divine, or
Lawful Humane, Institution? 2. Whether an Order or Office of Presbyters that
have not the power of the Keys even in foro exteriore, be of Divine, or Lawful
Humane Institution? (whom for brevity I shall hereafter call half-Presbyters.)
So that the Question is not, whether one Man was after sometime called
peculiarly the Bishop, and in the same Church sat over Presbyters of the same
Office, as Archpresbyters, or as Archdeacons over Deacons, or Archbishops over
Bishops; Nor yet whether there were or should be a General sort of Bishops (or
Archbishops) over the Bishops of particular Churches? But whether any stated
Body of Worshipping Christians, as before described (like our Parish Churches
that have unum altar) should be without a Bishop of their own, or without a
Pastor that has the threefold power before described, of Leading the People in
Doctrine Worship and Discipline, called the power of the Keys? And whether he
be a true Presbyter or Minister of Christ that wants this power? And whether
they that depose the Parish Ministers of this power, do not degrade the
Presbyters, nullify the Churches under them, and depose the ancient sort of
Episcopacy quantum in se? and set up another Humane sort of Churches called
Diocesan, and of Archbishops turned into Bishops, infimi gradus, in their
stead, together with a new Species of halfPresbyters?

1. How far Whitgift's Disputations against Cartwright are guilty of this
Whitgift.
overlooking the true Question, I leave to the Reader: Only I must say for him,
that when his Adversary stands most upon the denial of all superior
Episcopacy, it was his part to prove what was denied. And I need say no more
than that Whitgift often professes (as Dr. Stillingfleet has collected out of
him,) that God has in Scripture prescribed no one sort of Church Government:
And therefore not the Prelatical.

2. I do not expect that ever this Controversy should be handled by ^a^avia.
two more judicious Adversaries than Saravia and Beza were. And as Beza
protests against a Parity, and pleads for a Prostasie, desires that which
he calls Divine Episcopacy, tolerating and submitting to that which he
calls Humane Episcopacy, and flatly opposing only that, which he calls
Satanical Episcopacy; So Saravia professes, p. 1, 2. and p. Defens. 4, 5. that
the General nature of the Evangelical Ministry, common both to Bishops and
Presbyters, contains these three things, 1. The Preaching of the Gospel. 2.
The Communication of the Sacraments, 3. The Authority of Church Government: And
only pleads that in this last, the Power of Bishops and Presbyters is not
equal, but the Bishops power is principal in Government. Which grants the
main Question which we Nonconformist now contend for. And I confess that
Saravia's Writings were the first and chief that brought me to suspect that the
Apostles have Successors in the point of Government, as being but an ordinary
and durable part of their Office: which Argument he has better managed than
any man else that I have seen. And p. 12. ib. He grants that the 70 Disciples
were not under the Government of the 12 Apostles. He grants that chosen
Seniors of the Laity may be great Assistants in the Government: Yea, Def. 1. 8.
p. 83. He says, that in Vid. and p. 104. and 110, 111. 120, 121.
the absence of Paul and his Assistants, the Churches of Crete were wholly
ruled, till Titus Ordained them Pastors, by such Elders. [ A senioribus quos
ratio and natura in quavis Societate dat, non Ordinatio: quales sunt natu
majores, and quotquot aliqua virtute in populo excellunt: quibus defer natura
omnes gentes docuit: quibus addo eos quos tunc temporis passim, dona Sp. sancti
venia excitabant, sed nulli loco alligabant.] And no wonder, for he affirms,
that in times of public corruption of Doctrine, any man that is learned and
able and fit, must propugne and defend the truth, as he has ability and
opportunity; or else be judged for hiding his talents as the unprofitable
servant, page 23. cap. 2. Yet does he most improbably imagine that Rome and
Corinth had no proper Pastors, when Paul wrote his Epistles to them. When as
Paul had dwelt a year and half at Corinth, when it was the practice of the
Apostles to Ordain Elders in every Church, and when among the Corinthians there
were so many Prophets, Instructers, Speakers of Languages, Interpreters, etc.
that Paul is fain to regulate and restrain them in their Church-meetings, that
they might not over-do, and hinder one another. And yet were these People
without any proper Pastor? Without a Prelate? it is like they were. Yea, when
Paul directs them to deliver the incestuous man to Satan, and to exercise
Church Discipline upon others that were scandalous, does not this intimate that
they had among them such as were empowered to do it? If only transiently and
occasionally, they could Worship God publicly and deliver Sacraments, and
Govern the Church but transiently and rarely: How did they spend the Lords
days, when those transient guides were absent? Did the major part of the
people, who Saravia thinks were to exercise the foresaid Discipline, also
Consecrate and Administer the 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
Sacrament, or publicly pray and worship God without a Pastor? Were they every
Lords day to deposit their Collections, and have no Pastors, and so no
Church Assemblies? Had they so many Sects and false Teachers to trouble them,
and yet no Pastors? When Clem. Romans so shortly after writes so much to
reconcile the Pastors and People that disagreed. And when Paul tells the Romans
and Corinthians what Officers God sets in the Church, is it like there was
none fixed among them?

And I must note how great a charge he lays on the Bishops, when, Resp. ad N.
p. 10. Art. 12. He says that [the Bishop is aeque imo magis proprius
singularum Ecclesiarum sua Dioceseos Pastor, illis qui ibi praesunt and
resident, utpote ad quem cura praecipua illorum locorum pertineat: The Bishop
has more Charge or Care of all the Parishes in his Diocese than the present
Pastors have: (O dreadful undertaking.) Ad quem prima and praecipua Cura omnium
incumbet: ita ut, ipse suum agnoscit gregem, and singulis quibus manus imponit,
etc. How many hundred thousand individuals then has the Bishop of London this
particular Charge of, whose names he never heard, and whose faces he never saw?
Oportet enim Episcopum omnes quantum fieri potest, qui ipsius curae commissi
sunt, nosse. The Bishop must know all his Flock, if possible; And must he have
a Flock then which he cannot possibly know, nor never saw one of a hundred or
thousand of them, with any particular knowledge at least?

And Cont. quaest. and Resp. Beza, p. 103. He approves of Zanchy's judgment
[that Ceremonies and things indifferent be left free] [and the Churches free in
them.]

And Defens. p. 286. He says, [ Primum Episcoporum omnium and Presbyterorum
unum esse Ordinem Constituo.] I maintain that there is one Order of all Bishops
and Presbyters.] Therefore they cannot differ but Gradu, as a Deacon and
Archdeacon. And again, ib. p. 286. Ministerii autem Evangelici unitas, probatur
ab horum unitate; and ut ita loquar, identitate: Eandem enim veritatis
doctrinam, omnes Orthodoxi docent, eadem Sacramenta Ministrant, eandem censuram
exercent; tantum Provinciarum est inaequalitas and graduum diversitas.] [The
Unity of the Gospel Ministry is proved from the Unity, or as I may say,
Identity of these: All (that are Orthodox) teach the same true Doctrine,
Administer the same Sacraments, exercise the same Censures; Only there is an
inequality of Provinces, and a diversity of degrees.] Thus the most Learned and
rational Defender of Prelacy gives away their Cause.

3. Bishop Bilson, a most Learned and judicious man also, says more Bilson
for Episcopacy than any of our late Writers; and in my judgment says more
against the Office of Ecclesiastical Elders distinct from Pastors, than can be
answered. But to our two main Questions beforementioned, (of a Bishop over
many Churches without Bishops under him, and of half-Presbyters) how little he
says the Reader will soon see (yea how much on our side.)

4. As for Hooker, till his 7th Book came lately out, we had nothing in Hooker
answered as far as our cause requires.
him considerable of this subject: And in that Book it self, so little to the
purpose, as to our foresaid two Controversies, as is next to nothing, nor
worthy a Reply. In his. 2. p. 4. He attempts (that which few do) to give us the
definition of a Bishop, which is [ A Bishop is a Minister of God, unto whom
with permanent continuance, there is given not only Remember also that Hooker's
third Book is written to prove that no one Form is commanded in Scripture:
Therefore not the Prelatical.
power of Administering the Word and Sacraments, which power other Presbyters
have, but also a further power to Ordain Ecclesiastical persons, and a power of
Chiefty in Government over Presbyters as well as Lay men, a power to be by way
of Jurisdiction a Pastor even to Pastors themselves.] And then he
distinguishes of Bishops at large or indefinite, and Bishops with restraint,
and says he means the later. And so you have what must be expected from Mr.
Hooker for the information of you, what Episcopacy he pleads for: Where it is
obvious how fraudulently (through oversight or partiality I know not) he
deals: For whereas he durst put no more into the definition of Episcopacy
about Jurisdiction but [ a power of Chiefty in Government over Presbyters as
well as Laymen.] yet would not tell us, whether Government of Laymen, (under
the Bishop) belong to the Presbyters or not: His words seem plainly to imply
it; what use else is there for his [ Chiefly] and [ as well as Laymen.] And
yet twice over he would name nothing but, Teaching and Sacraments which belong
to the Pastor as a Pastor in general; leaving it as a thing which he would
neither affirm nor deny, whether Pastors Governed their Flocks. Yet all that
Decantate Book turns on the Hinges of this lame Definition (which has other
defects which I pass by;) And without this we cannot know what Subject he
disputes of. Whereas Saravia well noted and acknowledged three Essential parts
of the Ministry in General, Mr. Hooker who leaves out one of them, and yet
durst not deny it, should have told us, whether he include it or not; seeing it
is the matter of most of our difference; and we take him for no Pastor or
Presbyter that is without the power of Government, nor that to be a true Church
( in sensu politico) that has no other Pastor.

2. And when as one part of his Adversaries deny not (at least) the Lawfulness
of one Bishops superiority in a single Church, as far as his description
speaks, but only in many Churches; no, nor one Archbishops power over many
Churches that have their own Bishops, but only his power to depose all the
Bishops of particular Churches and turn them all into one Diocesan Church; his
Definition visibly reaches to no other sort of Bishops, but such as we oppose
not; and so he says nothing at all against us, to any purpose through all his
Book: For where after he confidently tells us that the extent of his
Jurisdiction alters not the Species, it is but barely said, and by his leave I
shall fully prove the contrary anon. And page 4. l. 7. He confesses that de
facto. [ Many things are in the state of Bishops, which the times have changed,
Many a Parsonage at this day is larger than some ancient Bishoprics were.]
It Is well confessed: And I shall try among other things, whether the Name of a
Bishopric will make a Parsonage and a Diocese to be ejusdem speciei, and
whether magnitude do not make a specific difference, between the Sea and a
Rivulet or a glass of water, or between a Ship and a Nut-shel.

And whereas page 6. He undertaketh to prove a Coercive Power in Bishops,
either he speaks according to the common use of men, or not: If not, he would
not be understood: and Qui non v^lt intelligi, debet negligi: If he do, then by
Coercive he must mean, by Outward force upon the body; which is false, and is
proper to the Magistrate, Parents or Masters; and is disclaimed by all sober
Protestant Divines, yea by Papists, as not at all belonging to the Pastoral
Office. Though we easily grant that Pastors may Coercere by nord (and so may
Presbyters sure,) yet no otherwise but by word. For Excommunication and
Degradation as far as belongs to them, are but words (and an after forbearing
of their own acts of Communion.) But this is not the common use of the word
Coercive as applied to Government by way of distinction. How much wiselier does
the (more Learned and judicious) Bishop Bilson still distinguish by the Power
of the Word, as differing from the Magistrates Coercive or by the Sword?

Yet note that page 8.. 5. l. 7. He is brought to acknowledge [ that All
Churches by the Apostles erected received from them the same Faith, the same
Sacraments, the same Form of public Regiment: The Form of Regiment by them
established at first was, that the Laity be subject to a College of
Ecclesiastical persons, which were in every such City appointed for that
purpose: These in their writings they term sometime Presbyters and sometime
Bishops* To take one Church out of a number for a pattern, what the rest were,
the Presbyters of Ephesus, as it is in the History of their departure from the
Apostle Paul at Miletum, are said to have wept abundantly all; which speech
does show them to have been many: And by the Apostles exhortation it may
appear, that they How little does this agree with Dr. Hammond.
had not each his several Flock to feed, but were in common appointed to feed
that one Flock the Church of Ephesus, for which cause the phrase of his speech
is this Attendite gregi, Look to all that one Flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Bishops: These persons Ecclesiastical being termed then
Presbyters and Bishops both, etc.

And page 9. he says, [ The outward being of a Church consists in the having
of a Bishop.] Then the Brownists must carry it, that our Parishes are no true
Churches (but parts of a Church) because they have no Bishop: Only a Diocesan
Church has a Bishop: Therefore only a Diocesan is a true Church; (which anon
shall be proved to be but Humane.)

And page 12. He thus expounds Hierome, as holding Episcopacy alterable And
yet must I sweat never to consent to any alteration.
[ The Church has power by Universal consent upon urgent cause to take it
away; if thereunto she be constrained through the proud tyrannical and
unreformable dealing of her Bishop -- Wherefore lest Bishops forget themselves,
as if none on earth had authority to touch their states, let them continually
bear in mind, that it is rather the force of custom than any such true
heavenly law can be showed, by the evidence whereof it may of a truth appear,
that the Lord himself has appointed Presbyters for ever to be under the
Regiment of Bishops in what sort soever they behave themselves. Let this
consideration be a bridle to them; Let it teach them not to disdain the advice
of their Presbyters, but to use their Authority with so much the greater
humility and moderation, as a Sword which the Church has power to take from
them.] This is Mr. Hooker.

And page 14. He confesses that according to the Custom of England, and a
Council at Carthage, Presbyters may impose hands in Ordination with the Bishop,
though not without him: So that by this they have the the power of Ordination
to, though he have a Negative Voice in it. And indeed if all Ordination must be
done by one of a Superior Order, who shall Ordain Bishops, or Archbishops, or
Patriarchs, or the Pope?

And page 18. He says, [ Most certain truth it is that Churches Cathedral and
the Bishops of them are as glasses, wherein the face and countenance of
Apostolical antiquity remains even as yet to be seen -- ] Which is it that we
also affirm, every City or Church having a Bishop and Presbytery of their own.

And whereas page 19. He says, [ If we prove that Bishops have lawfully of old
ruled over other Ministers, it is enough, how few soever those Ministers have
been, how small soever the circuit of place which has contained them.] If this
be so, we grant you enough, when we grant Parochial Bishops.

But no where does he more palpably yield our Cause, than page 21, 22. where to
Cartwright's Objection, that [ the Bishop that Cyprian speaks of is nothing
else but such as we call Pastor, or as the common name is Parsons, and his
Church whereof he is Bishop is neither Diocese nor Province, but a Congregation
which met together in one place to be taught by one man.] He has no better
answer to this, than to tell us, that If it were true, it is impertinent; and
that it is not true, because Cyprian had many Presbyters under him, so as they
might have every day change for performance of their duty: And he never once
attempteth to prove that Cyprian had more Churches, yea, or Assemblies than
One; but only that he was over the Presbyters in one Church or Assembly; and as
an Archbishop was over Bishops. The same thing which I submit to; but nothing
against the things that I assert against him. A Parson may have diverse Curates
under him, and not diverse Churches, much loss a thousand that have no other
Bishop?

And whereas page 33. It is objected that many things are innovated in our
Discipline, as imposing Ministers on the People without their consent, Bishops
Excommunicating alone, Imprisoning, etc. His answer is, that the Church may
change her customs; And on that ground allows the Ordination of Presbyters
alone, because the Church can give them power: For he goes in Church Matters
as he does in point of Civil Government, on his false supposition, that all
Power is Originally in the whole Body, saying, page 37. [ The whole Church
visible being the true Original subject of all power, it has not ordinarily
allowed any other, than Bishops alone to Ordain. Howbeit as the ordinary course
is ordinarily in all things to be observed, so it may be in some cases not
unnecessary that we decline from the ordinary ways.] (What is more contrary
than Saravia ( Tract. de Obedient.) and Hooker in their Principles of
Government?) From hence also, page 38. He infers the no necessity of
continued Succession of Bishops in every effectual Ordination. And it is very
observable which he grants (for it cannot be denied.) [ The Power of Orders I
may lawfully receive without the asking consent of any multitude: but the power
I cannot exercise upon any certain People against their wills.]

And page 38. He cannot deny but the ancient use was for the Bishops to
excommunicate with the College of his Assistant Presbyters; but he taunteth
Beza for thinking that this may not be changed. These are the men that build
upon Antiquity, and the Custom of the Universal Church.

And page 69. when the Canons for Bishops spare course of living are objected,
he says, that those Canons were made when Bishops lived of the same Purse
which served as well for a number of others as for them, and yet all at their
disposing; Intimating the old Course, when every Church had its Bishop and
inferior Clergy. But Innovation is lawful for our Prelacy.

And now he that can find any thing in Hooker against the points which I
defend, or for that Prelacy which I oppose, any more worth the answering than
this that I have recited, let him rejoice in the perfection of his eyesight.
And if thus much be worthy to be confuted, or such as this, let them do it that
have nothing else to do. So ridiculous is the Challenge of one that glories to
write a Book with the same Title [of Ecoles. Policy,] who insultingly provokes
us to write a full Confutation of Hooker, who says so little to the main point
in Controversy, our Diocesan Form of Prelacy, and writes his whole Book in a
tedious Preaching style, where you may read many leaves for so much
Argumentation, as one Syllogism may contain; that I think I might as wisely
have challenged himself to con^^ue Mr. F^x's Book of Martyrs, or Baronius his
Annals, almost, or at least may say as Dr. John Burges does of Mr. Parker
(another sort of Parker) his Book of the Cross, which Dr. Ames says was never
answered, that if any will reduce that gaudy Treatise into Argument (it being
indeed almost all made up of the fruits of Reading, History, Sentences, etc. of
purpose to confute them that said the Nonconformists were no Scholars) he
should quickly have an Answer to it. So if any will reduce all that is in Mr.
Hooker's 8 Books (in tedious Discourses into Syllogism, (which is against what
I maintain,) I believe it will not all fill up one half or quarter of a page;
and it shall, God-willing, be soon answered. In the mean time the popular
Principles of his First and Eighth Book, subverting all true Government, I have
already confuted elsewhere (in my Christian Directory.)

5. Bishop Downame has said much more to the main Points, in the defense
Bishop Downame Answered.
of his Consecration Sermon, and as much as I can expect to find in any. But,
1. as to the mode he is so contrary to Hooker, that (being a very expert
Logician) he wastes so much of his Book about the Forms of Arguments and
Answers, that he obscureth the matter by it, and ensnareth He fell after under
the frowns of Bishop Laud himself, his Book of perseverance being prohibited.
those Readers, who do not carefully distinguish between Matter and Words, and
between the force of the reason, and the form of a Syllogism. And he so
adorneth (or defiles) his Style with taunts, insulting scorns, and
contemptuous reproaches, that it is more suitable to the Scold sat Billings-gate
than so learned and godly a Divine, and occasioneth his Adversaries to say, You
have here a taste of the Prelatical Spirit.

2. As to the matter of his first Book, I am of his mind (against mere ruling
Elders) He and Bilson have evinced what they hold in that. But as to the points
in which we differ he indeed says much to little purpose, and finally gives
away his Cause, or as he merrily tells his Adversary, page 62. l. 3. 6. 47.
he uses it as Sir Christopher Blunt's head was used, after his apprension,
first healed, and then cut off. For, 1. in his lib. 3. Where he speaks of the
power of Ordination, he not only confesses that it is in Presbyters with the
Bishops, and that the Bishops have but a superiority of power therein, but is
angry with his Adversary for supposing the contrary, saying chapter 3. p. 68. [ But
where good Sir, do I say, they must have the sole power in Ordination, which
you have so often objected, and now again repeat? make you no conscience of
publishing untruths? Cannot Bishops be superior to other Ministers in the
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, which is the thing which I maintain,
unless they have the sole power? so p. 64, etc. Therefore he grants, that
extraordinarily in case of necessity Presbyters may Ordain (that is without a
Bishop.) page 69. and page 108. he gives this reason for the validity of their
Ordination; Because Imposition of hands in Confirmation of the Baptized and
Reconciliation of Penitents, were reserved to Bishops as well as Ordination,
and yet in the absence of Bishops may be done by Presbyters. Ambrose in Ephesians. 4.
Aug. qu. in vet. and N. Test. q. 101. Cypr. l. 3. ep. 17. Council. Carth. Graec.
c. 43. Carth. 2. c. 4. Conc. Arausic. c. ^.
And that the Papists themselves grant that the Pope may license a Presbyter to
Ordain Presbyters: [ If therefore (says he) by the Popes license a Presbyter
may Ordain Presbyters, much better may a Company of Presbyters, to whom in the
want of a Bishop the Charge of the Church is divolved, be authorized thereto by
necessity.] And if all this be so, no doubt but the Power of Ordination is in
Presbyters, as such, though they are not to exercise it alone, nor without or
against the Bishop (And so formerly they were not to Preach, or Baptize, nor
Congregate the Church without him.) For why cannot a Layman Ordain with the
Bishop but because he has no such authority?

And Cap. 5. as to the power of Jurisdiction he says the same, p. 110. 111. [
I deny not Presbyters (which have charge of souls) to have Jurisdiction; both
severally in their Parishes, and jointly in Provincial Synods. And I have
confessed before, that Presbyters have with and under the Bishops exercised
some Jurisdiction. I grant that Godly Bishops, before they had the countenance
and assistance of Christian Magistracy The Prelates pretense for innovation:
All the cause is laid on Magistrates.
and direction of Christian Laws; used in all matters of moment, to consult
with their Clergy. This was practiced by Cyprian, Ambrose also ( in 1 Timothy 5.
1.) teaches, that there was a time when nothing was done without the advice of
the Presbyters; which therefore by Ignatius are called the Counselors and
Co-assessors of the Bishops: Which course if it were used still, as it would
ease the Bishops burden very much, so would it nothing detract from their
superiority in Governing. --

And page 115. [ The thing which I was to prove, if it had been needful, was,
that whereas Presbyters did Govern each one the People of a Parish, and that
privately, Does a public Church Pastor govern but privately? what means he
by that which can be good sense? A private man may rule privately, that is, by
Counsel: Judicium publicum is the Officers judgment.
the Bishop Governs the People of the whole Diocese and that publicly.

So that both Ordination and Jurisdiction belong to the Presbyters Office;
though in the exercise of it they must be governed themselves. Is not this the
very sum of Archbishop Usher's Model of Primitive Episcopacy, which we offered
his Majesty and the Bishops at first, for Concord, and the Bishops would not
once take it into their Consideration, nor so much as vouchsafe to talk of it,
or bring it under any deliberation? When, alas, we poor undertrodden Persons,
not only desired to be low our selves, but yielded to submit to all their
heights, their Lordships, Parliament dignities, grandeur, and to let them alone
with their (real) sole*Ordination and Jurisdiction over us poor Presbyters, and
to have taken as much care of the People as they would, so we could but have
obtained any tolerable degree of Government to be settled in each particular
Church, either in all the Presbyters or in one Bishop, and not have had all the
particular Churches deprived of Bishops and all the Pastoral Jurisdiction.

But our great Controversy is handled by Bishop Downame in his second Book,
wherein he labors to prove that the Bishops Church, or rather Charge, was
not a Parish, but a Diocese. And first, page 4. he gives us a scheme of the
Scripture acception of the word [ Church] as preparatory to his design: In
which there are many Texts cited, not only without any show of proof, that they
speak of what he affirms them to speak, but contrary to the plain scope of
the places. And he tells us that the word [ Church] is used in Scripture for
the Church Militant Congregated in an Universal or Occumenical Synod: And
offers us not one Text for instance, which he does though injuriously, for
all the rest: Nor is there any that so speaks.

He tells us that the word is used particularly to signify the Church of a
Nation in the singular number; but could name no such place as to any Church
since Christ, but only the Jewish Church, Acts 7. 38.

And he says, it is used to signify, particularly and definitely the Church
of a Nation in the plural number. And is not this a strange kind of Allegation?
The Scripture speaks of [ the Churches in a Nation.] Therefore it uses the
word for the Church of a Nation, in the plural number. Is one Church and many
all one with him: Would he have applauded that man that would have said, that
such an Author uses the word [ College] (for the College of an University in
the plural number,) because he named the College in an University? and this to
prove that an University is one College? Had it not been better said, The New
Testament never uses the word Church for all the Churches in one Nation (since
Christ) definitely, but ever calls them plurally Churches: Therefore to call
them all One (National) Church is not to imitate the Scripture.

His first Instance is, Romans 6. 4. All the Churches of the Gentiles. A sad
proof of a National Church! What Nation is it that the word [ Gentiles]
signifies? No doubt the Gentile Churches were in Gentile Nations: But that
does not prove that the Christians in any Nation are ever called in Scripture
(since the Jews Nation) One Church but Churches.

His next instance is, 1 Cor. 16. 1. The Churches of Galatia: And the rest are
all such, v. 19. 2 Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. 22. The Churches of Asia, Macedonia,
Judaea: But I hope he intended no more than to tell you that the Christians of
several Nations, are never called a Church, but Churches, as having any sort of
Union than National.

He gives many instances when the word [ Church] is used definitely to
signify the Church of a City and Country adjoining: But to prove it used to
signify several Churches in City and Country adjoining, but one only.

Two Texts he alleges to prove that the word [ Church] is used definitely to
signify these Churches Congregate into a Synod or Consistory: But I believe
his word of neither place. One is Mat. 18. 17. Tell the Church, etc. If I say
that [ tell the Church] signifies [ tell the Society containing Pastors and
Christians] though it is the Pastors that you must immediately speak to and the
offender must hear, I give as good proof of my exposition as he does of his. If
I speak to a man, and hear a man, though it be only his ears that hear me, and
his tongue that speaks to me, yet by the word [ man] I mean not only ears and
tongue. If the King send a Command to a Corporation to expel a seditious
member, though the Mayor or Aldermen only do it Authoritatively, and the People
but executively, yet the word [ Corporation] does not therefore signify the
Officers only. The other Text is, Act. 15. 22. But I will not believe him that
[ the whole Church] signifies the Synod only: For though they only decreed it,
I think the rest consented and approved it, and are meant in the word [ the
whole Church.]

I grant him that ( Romans 16. 1.) the word signifies the Church of a Village or
Town; But he will never prove that it is not meant of a Church of the same
Species as City Churches were. And as to the House or Family Churches which he
mentions, Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19. Col. 4. 15. Phil. 2. Dr. Hammond*
expounds, Col. 4* 15. of the Church that did meet in his house, and so some
do all the rest: But that we stand not for, nor does it concern us.

But when he adds a multitude of Texts, as using the word Church
indefinitely, not defining the place, Society of a Nation or City, quantity,
etc. most of the instances brought are of Churches definite, as to place, and
of the same Species as the Apostles Instituted; though when the Church of such
a place is said to do a thing, it is no determination what number of the members
did it. His first instance is Acts 4. 31. and next Acts 15. 3, 9, etc. The
Churches had rest through all Judaea, and Gallile, and Samaria: Acts 15. 3.
Speaks of the Church of Antioch, which v. 27. it is said they gathered together:
v. 4. mentions the Church at Jerusalem, v. 11. mentions the Churches of
Syria and Cilicia. Acts 18. 22. Speaks of the Church at Caesarea. Romans 16.
16. Speaks of the Churches where Paul lately traveled. v. 23. Gaius was the
Host of a definite whole Church, at Corinth. And when 1 Cor. 4. 17. he speaks
of his teaching in every Church, it is an Universal enunciation, but of
Churches of a certain or definite species, and so of the rest.

Then p. 5. he tells us what is truly and properly a Church on Earth; and
says, Every company of men professing the true faith of Christ is both truly a
Church and a true Church. Ans. Yes, As Canis caelestis is truly a Dog, and a
true Dog: but not properly, but equivocally: A Church in its most famous
signification is a Society constituted of the Pastor and Flock, as a School of
the Schoolmaster and Scholars: And an accidental meeting of Christians in a
Market or Ship, is no more properly called a Church, than Schoolboys meeting
in such places are a School: No nor occasionally praying together neither.

So p. 5. He concludes that the Christian People of one City, and Country
adjoining, whether Province or Diocese are one Church; yea of any Nation or
part of the World, not because under one Spiritual Government or Priesthood,
but because one People or Commonwealth ruled by the same Laws, professing the
same Religion. All this is de nomine only. But are we not likely to dispute
well, when we never agree of the Subject, or terms of the Question? We have no
mind to contend about Names: Let him call the World, or a Corporation, or
Kingdom, or Ecclesiam Malignantium by the name of a Church if he will, so that
we first agree what Church we dispute of. We talk not of any accidental meeting
or Community, but a Society before defined, constituted of the pars gubernans
and pars subdita. And of this sort we know of Divine Institution, an Universal
Church Headed by Christ, and particular Churches headed under him by their
Bishops or Pastors: A Church without a Head, (in Fair, Ship, or Temple) we talk
not of: Nor yet of a Church that has but an Accidental, Extrinsick, and not an
Essential Constitutive Head, to them, as they are Churches of Christ's
Institution: Whether it be the Emperor of Germany, or of Constantinople,
Mohammedan, Christian, Papist, or Protestant, we believe that every Sovereign is
so the Head, that is the Ruler of the Church, that is, of the Christians in his
Dominions. We denominate a forma: Bishop Downame may denominate whence he
please, a materia or ab accidente, etc. and say, They are one Church that are
under one Prince, Law, of one Religion. Do with your Equivocals what you will;
But forget not that it is a Pastoral particular Church of the Holy Ghost's
Institution that we Dispute about. Otherwise I deny not Diocesan, or
Patriarchal Churches, nor deny that the Papal Kingdom is a Church of a certain
species right or wrong.

And forget not his Concession p. 6. and we need no more, [ Indeed at the very
first conversion of Cities, the whole number of the People converted (being
sometimes not much greater than the number of the Presbyters placed among them)
were able to make but a small Congregation. But those Churches were in
Constituting, they were not fully Constituted, till their number being
increased they had their Bishop or Pastor, their Presbyters and Deacons,
without which, Ignatius says, there was no Church, etc.] Of w^^^h after.

He next, Cap. 1. labors much to prove that the words Ecclesia, Paraecia,
and Diocaesis, of old were of the s^^e signification; About words we have no
mind to strive: But all the proofs that he brings of the extent of a Church to
more than one Congregation or Altar, are fetched from later times, when indeed
Churches were transformed into Societies much different from those before them.

He cites Council. Carth. 2. c. 5. and 3. 42, 43, etc. that places that had no
Bishops before should not receive Bishops without the consent of the Bishop
whom they were before under. Indeed by these Canons we see much of the state of
the Church in those times, and partly how the Case was altered. Every Church
had a Bishop of its own: Those Churches were almost all first planted in
Cities: The multitudes were Heathens: but the City Christians with those in the
Country near them, were enough to make a Church or Congregation. In time so many
were Converted in the Country Villages, that they were allowed Assemblies like
our Chapels at home: And some of them had Country Bishops set over them: And
in many places greater Towns (which they then called Cities) were anew
converted. The Presbyters that were abroad among these new Converts or scatered
Christians, made them know that every Church should have a Bishop, and that
they might choose one of their own: And few Presbyters being then Learned able
men in Comparison of the Bishops, by this advantage of presence among them,
many raw and schismatical Presbyters crept into the Peoples affections, and
persuaded them to choose them for their Bishops: when they were chosen and
ordained, they encroached on the rest of the old Bishops Diocese, and also
refused to come to the Synods, lest their failings should be known, pretending
that they must stay with their own People. Now the Bishops that complained of
this, did not allege, 1. That no Bishop should be made but in a City, 2. Nor
that when Christians multiplied, they must not multiply Bishops accordingly,
but all be under their first Bishop only, 3. Nor that a new Congregation had
not as good right to have and choose a Bishop of their own, as the first City
Congregation had. But only to keep ignorant Schismatical Presbyters from
deceiving the People for their own exaltation, and from hindering Synodical
Concord, they Decreed that none in their Diocesses should have Bishops, without
the first Bishops consent; And that being so Consecrated they should frequent
Synods, and should be Bishops only of that People that first chose them, and
not encroach on the rest of the Diocese. And whereas he hence gathers that
the Country Churches [ ever from the beginning belonged to the City Bishops.]
There were no such things as Appendant Country Churches from the beginning of
the City Churches: But it is true, that from the beginning of the Country
Peoples Conversion, when they were not enough to make Churches themselves, they
belonged to the City Churches as Members (Even as now the Anabaptists and
Independent Churches consist of the People of Market Towns, and the adjoining
Country Associated into one Assembly.) After that the Country Meetings were but
as Oratories or Chapels: And when they came to be enough to make dinstinct
Churches of, some good Bishops had the Wit and Grace to help them to
Chorepiscopi, Bishops of their own; but most did choose rather to enlarge their
own Possessions or Powers, and set Subject Presbyters only over the People.

And that these new Bishoprics must be by the old Bishops consent, is
apparently a point of Order to avoid inconveniences (if not of Usurpation:) For
what power had the old Bishop to keep any Church of Christ without a Bishop of
their own, when it was for there good?

That he has some countenance from Leo, for the New Church-Form (without
Bishops) I wonder not, when Leo was one of the hottest that betimes maintained
the Roman Primacy, if not Universal Sovereignty.

And as the Care against placing Bishops in small places, ne vilescat nomen
Episcopi, came in late, so 1. It intimates that it was otherwise done, at
least by some before, 2. And it is but the Prelatical grandeur which
Constantine had pufft up, which is then alleged as the Reason of this
Restraint.

His Argument is, [ That which was judged unlawful by the Canons of approved
Councils, and Decrees of Godly Bishops, was never lawfully, regularly and
ordinarily practiced: But, etc. I deny the Major. Kneeling at Prayer or
Sacrament on the Lords day, the Marriage of Priests, the Reading of the
Heathens Writings, and abundance suchlike, were forbidden by such approved
Councils; especially a multitude of things depending on the new Imperial shape
of the Churches, which are now lawful, and were lawful, and ordinarily
practiced before: Paul Kneeled and Prayed on the Lord's day, Acts 20. etc.
Therefore the placing of Bishops in Country Parishes was not unlawful before,
because the Councils of Bishops afterward forbad it, nor was it ever unlawful
by Gods Law. Methinks a Bishop that subscribeth to the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, which mentions General Councils erring, even in matters of
Faith, should never have asserted that they cannot err in matter of
Government, nor retract and alter that which was well practiced before them.

His next Argument is this, If there were any Parish Bishops then, they were
the Chorepiscopi, But the Chorepiscopi were not such.

Ans. 1. I deny the Major: There were then many City Bishops that were but
Parish Bishops, or had but one Church, as shall be further proved. 2. Yet as to
a great number it is granted that their Diocesses had many Churches, at the
time of Council. Eliber. Sardic. etc. which he mentions. But it follows not
that therefore it was so with any in the time of Ignatius, or with many in
Cyprian's time. 3. If it were all granted de facto, it will not follow, that de
jure, it was well done, and that the old Form was not sinfully changed. 4. The
Chorepiscopi themselves might have many Congregations under them, like our
Chapels, and yet be Parish Bishops; And it is most probable that at first they
had no more than one of our Country Parishes, though afterward they had many
Churches under them, as City Bishops had.

His next Argument is, [ Churches endued with Power Ecclesiastical, sufficient
for the Government of themselves, having also a Bishop and Presbytery, had the
power of Ordination: But Country Parishes had not the Power of Ordination:
Ergo, etc.

Ans. 1. Government is Inferior or Superior: They might have sufficient
Inferior power of Government, though they had none of the Superior power,
such as belongs to Archbishops, to whom Appeals were made: As a Corporation
that has a Mayor and Assistants has sufficient Inferior power, but not
Regal, nor such as Judges, Lord Lieutenants, etc. have. And if it were proved,
(as some hold) that only General, or unfixed Ministers, like the Apostles, and
Evangelists, or Archbishops that were over many Churches, had the power of
Ordination, and not the Inferior Bishops of single Churches, it would not
follow that these Inferior Bishops had not the power of Governing their own
Churches with assisting Presbyters: And if he will prove for us, that every
fixed Bishop has the power of Ordination, who has but the Inferior power of
Governing his single Church, by Admonitions, Excommunications, and Absolutions,
he will but do our work for us.

2. I deny his Minor Propos. If by [Country Parishes] he mean [the Bishops of
Country Parishes] they had the Power of Ordination: And all that he says
against it, is only to prove, that de facto, they had not the Exercise of it in
the times he mentions, and that de jure humano, it was not allowed them by
Canons. But, 3. We grant so much of the Conclusion, as that de facto, few
Country Parishes had a Bishop and Presbytery: Because there were but few
Country Parishes in the World, till the third Century, that were really
Christian Churches, or fixed Societies of Christians that had ordinary
Church Communion together in the Sacrament, or had an Altar. But our Case is,
About single Churches, now called Parish Churches, and not about [ Country
Churches.] For they might be but single Parish Churches, though they were in
Cities only, and the Country Members joined with them in the Cities.

And his own Confession is, page 35. that besides Rome and Alexandria, that had
many Churches in the City, there is not the like evidence for multitude of
Parishes in other Cities, imediately after the Apostles times.] I suppose by
his Citations, he means till the third Century. And if this be granted us of
all the great Cities of the World, that they cannot be proved to have many
Churches, we have no great reason to look for many in the Country Villages.

His next Argument is, [ Churches containing within their Circuit, not only
Cities with their Suburbs, but also whole Countries subject to them, were
Diocesses. But the Churches, subject to the ancient Bishops in the Primitive
Church, contained, etc. Therefore they were Diocesses.

Ans. Either this is his Description of a Diocese, or we have none from him
that I can find: And let who will Dispute about the Names of Diocese and
Parish, for I will not. And if by a Diocese he means a Church consisting of
all the Christians in City and Country associated for Personal holy Communion,
having One Altar and One Bishop, this is that which we call a single Church, or
some a Parish Church, and if he call it a Diocese he may please himself.

But if he mean that in these Cities and whole Countries were several such
Churches, that had each an Altar, and were fixed Societies for personal holy
Communion, not having any proper Bishop of their own, but one Bishop in Common,
with whose Cathedral Church, they did not, and could not Communicate, (through
Number or distance) I deny his Minor proposed in this sense, as to the two
first Centuries; though not as to the following Ages. But if by [ Cities,
Suburbs, and whole Countries subject] he mean all the unconverted Infidels of
that space (for doubtless he calls not the soil or place, the Church) I deny
the very subject; There were no such Churches: Infidels and Heathens make not
Churches, (Though Heretics made somewhat like them, sicut vespa faciunt ^avos,
as Tertullian speaks.) If the Diocesan Churches Disputed for, be Churches of
Pagans and Infidels, we know no such things.

But if he mean that all the Heathens in that Circuit are the Bishops Charge in
order to Conversion, I answer, 1. That makes them no parts of the Church:
Therefore the Church is of never the larger extent for the soil or Infidel
Inhabitants. 2. The Apostles, and other General Preachers (like the Jesuits in
the Indies) may divide their Laborers by Provinces for the Peoples Convetsion,
before there be any Churches at all. 3. This distribution is a mere prudential
Ordering of an accident or circumstance; and therefore not the Divine
Institution of a Church Form or Species. 4. Neither Scripture nor prudence so
distributeth Circuits or Provinces to Preachers, in order to conversion of
Infidels, as that other Preachers may not come and Preach there, as freely as
one that claims it as his Province. For, 1. Christ sent out his Apostles by
two and two at first. 2. Paul had Barnabas or some other Evangelist or General
Preacher usually with him. And Peter and Paul are both said to be at Rome, at
Antioch, and other places: And many Apostles were long together at Jerusalem,
even many years after Christ's Resurrection. Christ that bid them go into all
the World, never commanded that one should not come where another was, nor have
power to Preach to Infidels in that Diocese.

And what is the Episcopal power over Infidels, which is claimed? It is not a
power to Ordain, or to Excommunicate them. It can be no other than a power to
Preach to them, and Baptize them when converted. And this is confessed to
belong to Presbyters. If the Bishops would divide the World into Diocesses, and
be the only Preachers in those Diocesses, it would be no wonder if the World be
unconverted. It is not Bishops that are sent by the Papists themselves to
convert the Indians.

But perhaps you may say that the Bishops rule those Presbyters that do it. I
answer, 1. It Is an imperfect kind of Government, which a Bishop in England can
exercise over Presbyters that daily Preach, as Mr. Eliat his helpers to the
Natives in a Wilderness many thousand Miles from them. 2. But if they do rule
the Preachers, that makes not the Soil nor the Heathens to be any parts of
their Church, but the Preachers only. Therefore a Diocese with them, and a
Church, must be different things.

His first Reason therefore, page 36. from the Circuit is vain. His second,
page 37. that the City Bishops had a right from the beginning over many
Churches, (that had no other Bishops) and did not after usurp it, he proves
not at all: For the words of Men three or four hundred years after Christ,
alleging ancient custom are no proof: When the 25 Can. Trull. cited by
himself, makes thirty years possession enough against all that would question
their Title. And abundance of things had Custom and Antiquity alleged for
them so long after, that were known Innovations.

His third Reason is from the Chorepiscopi, as the Bishops suffragan, which
shows no more, but that the City Bishops (whether justly or by usurpation)
were at last really Archbishops, or Rulers of Bishops: But of this before.

His fourth Reason, from Succession will be good, when he that affirms that
no Church was governed by the Parish Discipline, has proved that all, many,
yea, or any Bishops from the Apostles days, had many Churches under them that
had no Bishops of their own. Till then he says nothing.

As to his instance of the Scythians having but one Bishop, the Reason was,
because it was but little of their Country at first that were made Christians,
or that were at all in the Roman Empire: So that the Bishop was settled at
Tomis, in the borders of the Empire (in the Maritine part of the Euxine Sea,)
that thence he might have an influence on the rest of the Scythians over whom
the Romans had no power, and where there were many Cities indeed, but few
Christians: as may be seen in Theodoret, Tripart. Nicephor. and many others. Of
his other three or four instances, I shall after speak.

Chap. 3. lib. 2. He pretends to prove that the seven Asian Churches were
Diocesan, and not Parochial, and never defines a Diocese and Parish; which is
lost labor.

His first Argument is, [ Churches, whose Circuit contained Cities and
Countries adjoining, were Diocesses. But, etc.

This is before answered: Our Question is, Whether they were as our Diocesan
Churches, such as had in these Cities and Countries many Altars and Churches
without Bishops under them: Trees, and Houses, and Fields, and Heathen People,
make not Churches, nor yet scattered Christians, that were Members only of the
City Church.

His proof of the Minor is, 1. These Churches comprised all the Churches of
Asia.

Ans. If he mean that all the rest of the Churches of Asia had no Bishops but
Parish Presbyters under these seven Bishops he should prove it, (and confute
Dr. Hammond that is so contrary to him, (had he then lived:) Till then we take
it as a contemptible incredible assertion, that Asia had but seven Bishops, and
yet a multitude of Churches: If he mean only that these seven were Archbishops,
his impertinency is too palbable.

Particularly, he says, The Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. Contained a great
City, and the Country belonging to it, etc.

Ans. We talk of Churches under Churches, and he talks only of Cities and
Countries; Again, I say, Let him take his Diocese of Infidels, Houses and
Ground, we know no such Churches.

Page 46. He says [ Cenchrea was subject to the Church of Corinth, and never
had a Bishop of their own.] But not a syllable of proof: It is not a Family
Church, which we speak of, therefore he need not here have mentioned that: But
a Church associated for ordinary Communion in God's public worship, which
cannot be celebrated without a Pastor. Let him prove that Cenchrea was such a
Church and yet had no Bishop.

In. 6. p. 49. He would prove that the Circuit of a Church was in the Intention
of the Apostles, or first Founders, the same from the beginning, before the
division of Churches as after: Which I shall in due place disprove: His reasons
are, 1. Because the whole Church since the Apostles days has so understood the
intention of the Apostles.

Ans. 1. This is not proved. 2. I shall anon prove the contrary; that the
Apostles had no intention that Churches should be defined by the limits of the
place and Country: nor did they themselves ever appoint any such bounds to any
one Church, and say so far it shall extend: Nor did they ever take any but
Christians in any Circuits for Members of the Church. And I shall prove that
all Churches were but such as I described, single Churches with their Bishops
at the first, and that some Villages had Bishops four or five hundred years
after: And his own Reason that Churches followed the Civil Form, proves the
mutability of their bounds, seeing the Civil Forms were mutable.

His next Reason is because [ that division of Churches which was 300 or 400
Years after Christ, with their Limits and Circuits, were ordinarily the same
which had been from the beginning, as diverse Councils testify.

Ans. Those Councils mean no more, than that it had been an old or settled
Custom, (as many Learned men have proved.) And if they could be proved to mean
that from the Apostolical plantations the bounds of all the Diocese were set, I
marvel that any man could believe them. But they say no such thing, as were it
not tedious to the Reader, an examination of each particular would show. Else
no new Churches and Bishops must be settled in the World, but those that the
Apostles converted in any Cities between or near them; For the unconverted
Cities in the inter-spaces, were as much those Bishops Diocesses as the
Villages of equal distance: And then the making of new Cities would have made
one a Bishop of many Cities, contrary to the Canons.

His third Reason is, that the Distribution of the Churches usually followed
the division of the Common wealth.

Ans. 1. If so (as is said) they must be various and mutable. All the World was
not divided just as the Roman Empire was: And the Imperial divisions had great
changes. 2. I think it lost labor to dispute with him that holds this
assimilating the Church to the Civil Form, was of Divine Apostolical
Institution. If any can think so, let him give us his proof that the Church
Constitution must vary as Monarchical, Aristocratical and Democratical States
do; As Empires and free Cities do: And that from the King to the Constable, we
must have a correspondent Officer: And that the Papacy as Capital in the Roman
Empire, was of Gods Institution. And that an Emperor, King, or popular State
may change the Form of the Churches, as often as they may the Form of their
subordinate Governments. Are not these small Reasons to prove, that when the
Apostles planted Bishops in all single Churches, they intended that those
Bishops should be the sole Bishops of many hundred Churches, when they should
be raised in the Circuit of ground, which now is called their Diocesses. But
more of this in due place.

But next he appealeth to men's consciences, Whether it be not unlikely that
there was but one Congregation belonging to these famous Cities toward the end
of the Apostles days. Of which more afterward.

In Chap. 4. p. 69. He argues, [ The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles,
were appointed for Diocesses, and not to Parishes: Therefore the Churches
endued with the power of Ecclesiastical Government were not Parishes but
Diocesses.

Ans. Our Question is, Whether they were single Churches as before defined, or
only One Diocesan Church made up of many such single Churches: 1. If by
Presbyteries be meant many Presbyters, a College, or Consessus, I deny the
Consequence; because every Church that had Government had not such a
Presbytery; But one Bishop or Pastor did serve for some of the lesser Churches,
and yet that one had Governing power. 2. I deny the Major: It was single
Churches that had then many Elders set over them. 3. Reader, it seems to me
no small disparagement to the Diocesan Cause, that the grand Patrons of it so
extremely differ among themselves. Dr. Hammond holds that in all the
Scripture times, no one Church had any Presbyters at all, save only one single
Bishop. This Bishop Downame seems to hold, that every Governed Church had a
Presbytery. And [ no one] and [ every one] extremely differ: Yet either of them
would have censure him that had gain-sayed them.

His proof of the Antecedent is this. [ They who were appointed to whole Cities
and Countries to labor so far as they were able the conversion of all that
belonged to God, were appointed to Diocesses, not to Parishes: But, etc.

Ans. Is not here frustration instead of edification to the Reader, for want of
defining a Diocese and a Parish. I thought we had talked of a Diocesan Church;
and here is a Diocese described which may be a single Church, or no Church at
all as the Bishop pleases. Here is not so much as any Christians, much less
Congregations of them mentioned as the Bishops Flock: But many an Apostle,
Evangelist, and Converting Preacher, has been set over Cities and Countries to
labor men's Conversion, as far as they were able, before they had converted
any, or at least enough to make a Church; and after that, before they had
converted more than one Assembly. The Jesuits in the Indies thus labored in
several Provinces, before they were Bishops of those Provinces, or called them
Provincial Churches. But now we perceive what he means by a Diocese, even a
space of Ground containing Inhabitants to be converted if we can.

I will shorten my Answer to the rest of his Reasonings for such Diocesan
Churches.

I will put a few Questions, more pertinent than his Queries p. 67. about the
state of such Diocesan Churches.

Q. 1. Whether the Apostles were not, by this description, Bishops of all the
World as their Diocesses? And whether therefore it follow that there were no
Bishops under them in particular Churches?

Q. 2. Whether Apostles and Evangelists did not go from City to City, sometime
staying some Months or Years at one, and then passing to another? And whether
this made all the interjacent Countries their Diocesses, changing their Bishops
as often as they thus changed their Habitations?

Q. 3. Whether more than one such Apostle or Evangelist were not both at once,
and successively in the same place, to labor the conversion of all they could?
And whether therefore there were many Bishops to a Diocese?

Q. 4. Where we shall find the proof that the Apostles or Evangelists set the
bounds of Diocesses? And whether this description of his own do make Diocesses
bounded by circuit or space of Ground, or by the Abilities of the Bishop to
endeavor conversion?

Q. 5. When the Apostles forbad any other to labor men's conversion in their
Cities or Countries where they or others had been before them? And did not one
plant and another water, (and usually more than one at once?)

Q. 6. Whether ( Mat. 28. 19, 20.) Discipling or Preaching to convert men, and
then baptizing them, be not the way of gathering Churches, and therefore
proves that before conversion they are no Churches? and are not Christians
only members of the Church? And are those Diocesan Churches that are no
Churches?

Q. 7. If one be settled in a single Congregation in the City, with a purpose to
endeavor the conversion of the Country, is not a Diocesan Church there the
same as a single Congregation, though the Diocese be larger?

Q. 8. If when Congregations multiplied, Bishops were not multiplied, but one
would keep many Churches under himself alone, does it prove that this was well
done because it was done? and that God consented to this change?

His next Reason is, because Churches were not then divided into Parishes.
Which in due place I shall prove to be a sufficient Reason against him.
Churches were Societies constituted of Pastors and their Christian
Congregations, as before defined: And his inference is vain, that [ Presbyteries
were not settled in Parishes, because the Churches were not yet divided into
Parishes. For they were Parishes, that is, single Churches, without dividing.
The space of Ground called Parishes was not then marked out; Nor was a Diocesan
Church (like ours) that has no subordinate Bishops divided into Parishes; for
there were no such Diocesan Churches to be so divided. But the Universal Church
and the Apostolical Provinces were made up (or constituted) of Parishes, I mean
of particular Churches, as greater numbers are of unites, and as Villages are
of Houses. But to say that Churches were not divided into Parishes, in the
sense in question, is all one as to say, Churches were not divided into
Churches.

Our Controversy is like this, Whether all the Families in the Town should
have but One common Master? And he that affirms it, should argue thus;
Masters were not at first appointed to Families but to Villages; For Villages
were not at first divided into Families, (when there were none but single
Houses erected.) True; but Families were Families before there were Villages to
be divided. As Villages were not made before Houses, and then divided into
Houses, nor Cities before Streets, and afterward divided into Streets; nor
Kingdoms before Cities and Corporations, and then divided into Corporations,
(or inferior Societies) Nor Academies before Colleges, and then divided into
Colleges; so neither were Provincial, or Diocesan Churches made before single
Churches, and after divided into them; but were made by the coalition of many
single Churches; which should not have been changed for that use in specie, by
altering the species of their Pastors, and depriving them of their Proper
Bishops.

In his 5th Chap. He pretends to confute the Asse^tion that for the first 200
years, the City Churches were but single Congregations. Here we use to except
only Alexandria and Rome in all the World: And we confidently extend the time
to 150 years, and very probably to 200; and moreover say, that till the fourth
Century, most or very many Churches were no other, if not long after in many
Kingdoms.

All his talk, p. 80. against shallow giddy Heads, that see no further than
their Nose end, because it was denied that Pastors were set in single
Congregations to convert also the Infidels about, I have nothing to do with:
For I assert that as all Ministers are bound to endeavor the conversion of
such, if they have opportunity (not wanting power,) so those are most bound to
it that have best opportunity, which is the Neighbor Bishops. But till men are
converted they are no parts of the Church; no, nor of that particular Church,
eo nomine, because converted by that Bishop (as shall be proved,) without some
further consent and ground. The rest about the largeness of the Church of
Jerusalem, etc. shall be considered in due place.

In his Chap. 6. p. 104. I desire it may be noted that he says, [ I do not
deny but that at the first, and namely in the time of the Apostle Paul, the
most of the Churches so soon after their conversion, did not each of them
exceed the proportion of a populous Congregation. And p. 114. that
Metropolitans he thinks were intended by the Apostles, or at least, suadente
natura and necessitate flagitante, as Beza says: And I suppose a Diocesan
Church will find no better ground than a Metropolitan, viz. Humane Prudence, or
(I think intended.)

In chap. 7. He pretends to prove, that in the Apostles times Parishes began
to be distinguished under one only Bishop, etc. But what is the proof? Rome and
Alexandria are all the Instances. In my Treat. of the true way of Concord, I
have also disproved the Instances of Rome and Alexandria.
But, 1. his proof that Evaristus divided Parishes about An. 100 is worth
nothing, as having no sufficient evidence, but fabulous reports. 2. He allegeth
Eusebius, l. 2. ^. 15. saying of St. Mark, that he is said first to have
constituted the Churches of Alexandria. But this is no proof. 1. Because
Eusebius's following words out of Philo do make it most probable, that by [ the
Churches of Alexandria] he meant [ the Churches in and about Alexandria,] which
proves not many in the City it self. 2. If he had planted many Churches in the
City, it is no proof that he varied from the practice of the other Apostles,
who (as Act. 14. 23.) placed Elders (that is, says Dr. Hammond, Bishops) in
every Church: Or that the Elders of each Church had not the true Pastoral or
Episcopal power of Governing the Flock, (which is all that we plead for.) And
if it had been proved that Mark had been over them: it follows not that he
was not over them as an Archbishop, but as a mere Bishop only. 3. Grotius and
Dr. Hammond think they prove that Rome and other great Cities then had more
Bishops than one, by reason of the peoples diversity in Languages, etc. As
Peter of the Circumcision, and Paul of the Uncircumcision. 4. Eusebius
mentions not this as a certainty, but with an [ it is said] which is the usual
note of his uncertain reports (of which he has not a few, as is commonly
confessed.) 5. Dr. Hammond is so far from believing this (that many Parishes
were committed so early to Presbyters under one Bishop) that he thinks there
is no proof that any such Presbyters were in being in the Scripture times. And
though we confess that Alexandria and Rome had diverse Churches in them long
before other places, there is no proof or probability that it was so in the
Apostles days. And l. 3. c. 4. Eusebius expressly says, [ But how many and what
sincere followers have governed the Churches planted by the Apostles, it cannot
be affirmed, but so far as may be gathered from the words of Paul. And c. 19.
he mentions in the singular number the Church (not the Churches) of Rome,
Antioch, and Jerusalem. And l. 4. c. 11. he says Celadion succeeded Mark in
the Church of Alexandria.

But he says l. 5. c. 9. that Julianus was chosen Bishop over the Churches of
Alexandria: And c. 22. Demetrius came in his place. And l. 6. c. 1. Demetrius
took upon him the oversight of the Congregations there. And c. 35. Dionysius
received the Bishopric of ruling the Churches in or about Alexandria, etc.

Ans. 1. So long after it is not denied, but that Alexandria had more
Assemblies than one. 2. Yet it is most likely that by the Churches in and about
Alexandria, Eusebius meant the Churches under the Archbishop of Alexandria,
which had Bishops of their own. 3. Before they had a Temple there might be
several lesser Meetings in the City, which were but as our Chapels, or the
Independants Meeting in several Houses at once, when yet the Church was but
one, because they were associated for Personal Communion. 4. When the Parishes
were divided to several Presbyters, yet then each Presbyter had the true
Episcopal Office as to the People, though not the Name; and though they were
under a superior Bishop; that is, they had the whole Office of a Presbyter or
Pastor, to Govern the People as well as Teach them and Worship with them. And
so there was then no Parish like ours, which is but part of a Diocesan Church,
and no Church of it self (as the Bishops Form it) because it has but a half
Pastor. 5. And is not the case of all other Churches in the World, that to this
time were but single Churches, more considerable than the case of Rome and
Alexandria, which differed from all the rest.

Obj. But all the rest did the same, as soon as they had People enough to make
many Churches?

Ans. 1. I have told you Grotius and Dr. Hammond think that there were more
Bishops than one in a City for some time. 2. This multiplication was not till
long after in the third Century, and with most in the fourth, when it was no
wonder that the Church fell into the Imperial Form: And when they did so, the
Roman Primacy arose with the rest. 3. Yet even then the Presbyters were
Episcopi gregis, and had the true, full, Pastoral power as to their Flocks, as
aforesaid. So that there were no Bishops that yet deposed the Presbyters as now.

Page 125. He says, [ Neither was this a thing peculiar to the Bishops of
Alexandria, but common to others. -- Ignatius was Bishop not only of Antioch,
but of Syria: Irenaeus, the Bishop of Lions, was Bishop of the Churches in
France, etc.

Ans. 1. This opens the former case: These were not Diocesanes, deposing all
the Episcopos gregis, and become sole Bishops, but Archbishops that had under
them Bishops in each particular Church. Yet note, that it is the French Synod
of Bishops which Eusebius. ib. l. 5. c. 23. Iren. is said to oversee, as it is
said, ibid. that Palmas did so among the Bishops of Pontus in their Synod, and
that Victor was President in the Bishops Synod at Rome, and Theophilus of
Caesarea, and Narcissus of Jerusalem in the Palestine Synod: Which is nothing
to our case.

It is further said, that Optatus says, that in Rome were 40 Churches, and
that Theodoret had 800.

Ans. 1. It is granted, that in Optatus's days Rome had 40, which is nothing to
our case in hand. 2. In those 40 so late, there were no half Presbyters, but as
this Doctor confesses, they had not only a joint power in Governing the
Flocks, but in Ordination too. 3. I confess Theodoret's case seems strange,
and though of late date is so incredible as contrary to the case of other
Churches, that I do the rather for that clause believe that Epistle to Leo to
be a forgery, or corrupted at least. And besides this Reason, I have these also
for it. 1. Because he himself says, that Cyrus, where he was Bishop, was but
two days journey from Antioch, Hist. Sanct. Patr. de Juliano. And he that
knows how great the Diocese of Antioch was, will not easily believe that a
Town within two days journey (to Monks that went on foot) was like to have
eight hundred Churches in it at that time. 2. And we know out of whose shop
Theodoret's Epistles come. Nicephorus says, he read above 500 of his Epistles.
Baronius says there is a Book in the Vaticane containing 150 of them: Metius
translated these into Latin. But says Rivet. Crit. Sacr. l. 4. c. 21. p. 455.
the Reader must remember that they have been kept all this while in the
Adversaries Cabinets, and by them are brought into light and into Latin, so
that they have no authority, further than other History confirms them. 3*
Especially seeing Leontius de Sectis says, as Baronius confesses, that
Heretics fained Epistles in Theodoret's name; And Bellarmine de script. Eccl.
mentions one that has his name in Council. Ephesians. that neither Theodoret nor
any Christian is to be charged with. 4. And that this one Epistle to Leo should
be culled out of all the rest to be alone Printed after Theodoret's Works,
shows the design, and what credit is to be given to it. 5. And I shall anon
cite much out of Theodoret himself, to show the improbability that Diocesses
had then so many Churches.

And so much as a just confutation of Bishop Downame, not as referring to other
men with whom he dealt, but to the cause which we have in hand. And that I
answer not the whole Book, is because I know of no more in it than what I have
culled out, which needs an answer as to the cause which I defend: Of which I
make the judicious Reader Judge.

6. Bishop Hall's Defense of Episcopacy meddleth so little with the Bish. Hall.
point now in Question, that I have no need to say any thing to it, more than
is already said. And he grants all that I desire.

7. As for Petavius, I need not confute him; for he grants me most, Petavius.
as to matter of Fact, that I desire, as I shall after further show. His
Fundamental Assertion is, That the two Offices of Bishops and Presbyters, were
both placed in the same person, in the Apostles days; at which Salmasius justly
laugheth: For what is that but to say, that then there was no such person as a
Subject Presbyter (much less as our half-Presbyters:) And Salmasius justly
congratulateth his concession, [that solo confensu hominum and vitandi
schismatis gratia, unus enumero Episcoporum, eorundemque Presbyterorum, electus
est qui praeesset caeteris: Quod nemo dici prohibet -- Nam etsi Episcopalis
ordo jure divino introductus est, non eodem tamen illo jure decretum est, ut
unus in singulis civitatibus and Ecclesiis, esset Episcopus, sed Ecclesiae
authoritate conciliorumque sanctionibus. viz. [ It was only by Man's consent and
for the avoiding of Schism, that one was chosen out of the number of Bishops,
who also were Presbyters, to be above the rest: This saying none forbids.
For though the Episcopal Order was introduced by Divine Right, yet was it not
by the same right decreed, that One should be a Bishop in each City and Church,
but by the authority of the Church and the sanctions of Councils. Of this sober
Jesuit more anon.

8. The Learned Bishop Andrews in his Epistles to Pet. Molinaeus, has Bish.
Andrews.
said somewhat; but in his Scheme (Printed at Oxford, 1641. before the
Treatises for Episcopacy) much more. But as to his Description of the Jewish
Form, we dare not thence gather that Christians may imitate them, while we know
that the cessation of the Jewish Policy and Law is so largely pleaded for by
Paul, and that Christ is the perfect Lawgiver to his Church, and that we must
not add or alter on pretense of supposed parity of reason. And as to his
Reasons for Diocesanes from the New Testament, though the well ordering of them
make them very taking, yet when examined, they are no other but what we have
found and answered in others.

9. The truly Learned, Reverend, and Godly Primate Usher, in the B. Usher.
same forementioned Collection of Treatises has one of the Original of Bishops
and Metropolitans, and another of the Proconsular Asia. But, 1. The utmost
which he pleads for is no more than we acquiesce in, as that it was his Model
or Reduction (published since by Dr. Bernard) which we humbly offered to his
Majesty as the means of our common concord. And he has himself told me his
Judgment, that Bishops and Presbyters differ not as two Orders, but in Degree;
And that Ordinis est Ordinare, or that he that has the Order has intrinsical
power to Ordain; though he is regularly to do it under the Bishops oversight;
And therefore it is not invalid and null, but only irregular or schismatical,
when it is done disobediently against the Bishop (and so may be disabled in
foro exteriore;) which Dr. Bernard also has published of him; and Dr. Mason in
the same Treatise fullier proves. And he took Presbyters to be Governors of
the Flocks; and the Synods of Bishops to be but for Concord, and not to have a
proper Governing power over the particular Bishops, as he has himself
expressed to me. Him therefore that is for us, we need not confute. And yet I
must confess, that the great Argument which he and Bishop Andrews, and Saravia,
and all others use, from the title of Angel given to the Bishops, Rev. 2. and
3. did never seem of any weight to me; nor moved my understanding that way at
all: Believing that Tyconius his old Exposition mentioned by Austin Lib. 3. c.
30. de Doctrine. Christian. which Augustine seems to approve.
is liker to be true, and that indeed, it is neither one Prelate nor all the
Clergy, but the whole Churches that is meant by the Angel of the Churches.

For the Prophecy coming by Vision, the word [ Angel] is mentioned in the
Vision phrase, and often in that book is by all confessed to signify collective
Bodies, and more than single Individuals: As Usher (de Babilone) himself
holds, that by [ the false Prophet] in the singular number, is meant the
Roman Clergy. It would be more tedious than necessary to recite the instances
in that Book. I therefore who, because of its obscurity, am apt to be
distrustful of almost all Arguments that are fetched from the dark Prophecies of
Daniel, or the Revelations, am little satisfied with this from the name Angel.
And who can believe them that say Timothy was then the Bishop of Ephesus, and
so excellent a person, as that none was like minded, as described by Paul; and
yet that Christ had this against him, that he had lost his first love, and must
remember from whence he is fallen and repent, and do his first works or be
rejected, Rev. 2. 4, 5. And in a word, that the Apostles, who placed holy
persons in the Ministry, had set such over those eminent Churches, as were
neither hot nor cold, and had the rest of the faults that are mentioned by
Christ. And the whole style of the Text does easily prove this Exposition
against theirs, Rev. 2. 2, 4, 7. As the praises and dispraises there seem to
referr to the whole Church, so v. 7. what can be more express than [ Hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches.] And v. 10. Behold the Devil shall cast
some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation
ten days: be thou faithful, etc. And again, v. 11. He that has an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches] which is repeated and spoken to
every one of the seven. v. 14, 15. It is liker to be the whole Society than the
Bishop that is reproved for having false Teachers and Heretics among them, and
are called quickly to repent: And v. 20. that suffered the Woman Jezebel to
teach: For the Bishops could not hinder false Teachers, but by Excommunicating
them, and dissuading the People from hearing them: But the People could have
done more, even refused to hear them.

V. 23. And all the Churches shall know] seems to intimate that this was
written to the Church.

V. 24. Unto you I say, and to the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this
Doctrine, and have not known the depth of Satan, etc. Was this spoken to the
Bishop only?

Chap. 3. v. 1. Was it the Bishop of Sardis only that had a name to live and
was dead, and that was warned to be watchful and strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to die, whose works were not perfect before God? that
must remember how he had received and heard -- that had a few Names in Sardis,
etc. And so of the rest.

Obj. But it is said, Chap. 1. v. 20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the
seven Churches; and the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches.

Ans. And what can a man gather hence to satisfy himself in this point?
whether the sense be [ As the heavenly Angels, are the Guardians of the
Churches, so these Stars are those Angels, in whose Person I speak to the
Churches themselves that are signified by the Candlesticks:] Or [ As the Angels
are the Guardians of the Churches, so by that title, I signify the whole
Ministry that guide them, and by the Candlesticks the Churches, and I write to
the whole. For as every Message begins with [ To the Angel,] so it ends with
[ To the Churches.

Obj. The Bishop was to deliver it to the Churches.

Ans. This is precarious. 1. The Apostle wrote it, that both Pastors and People
might immediately read it, and did not entrust it as an unwritten tradition to
one, to be delivered to the rest. 2. All the Pastors were to deliver or teach
it to the People, and not one Bishop only. This therefore is no cogent Argument.

10. As for the Disputers for Episcopacy at the Isle of Wight, with King The
Dispute at the Isle of Wight.
Charles, they manage Saravia's Argument (fetched from the Continuance of the
Ordinary part of the Apostles Office) as he did before them (and many others)
so well, that for my part I cannot confute them, but remain in doubt; and
therefore have nothing to say against them. But that is nothing to our Case,
whether every particular Organized Church should have a Bishop or the full
Pastoral Office in it.

11. As to Joh. Forbes his Irenic. he maintains but such an Episcopacy John
Forbes
as we offered to his Majesty in Bishop Usher's Reduction: He pleads for such
a Bishop as is the Moderator of a Presbytery, p. 242, 243. and as must be
subject to censure himself, p. 145. and that shall do nothing of weight without
the Presbyteries consent, p. 145. and as is still bound to the Work of a
Presbyters Office, p. 146. And that an Orthodox Church that has no Bishop or
Moderator has but a certain Oeconomical defect, but is still a true Church,
and has the power that other Churches have that have Bishops, p. 158. And that
jure divino Presbyters have the Power of Ordaining as well as of Preaching and
Baptizing, though they must use it under the Bishops inspection in those places
that have Bishops, page 164. And he is more full for the Power of Presbyters
Ordaining, and the validity of it, than any man that I now remember.

12. The two Books of the Bohemian Government of the Waldensian Churches,
Written by Lascitius and Commenius, contain that very Form of Government, which
I think the soundest of any that I have yet seen.

13. The Learned and Judicious Grotius, (before he turned to Cassander's
Grotius*
and Erasmus's temperament in Religion) in his book de Imper. sum. pot. circa
sacra, in almost all things speaks the same which I approve and plead for;
though he be for some Episcopacy.

1. As to the Pastoral power, it self in whomsoever, he affirms it to be but
Nuntiative, Declarative, Suasory, and per consensum, and not any Imperium; Like
the power of a Physician, a Counselor, and an Ambassador.

Chap. 4. But then by Imperium he means that which is coactive by the Sword:
And he acknowledges the power of the Ministry by the Word upon Consenters, to
be of Divine Institution, so that they sin against God, who do reject it. And
if the Pastors of the Church did meddle with no other power, we should the
sooner be agreed. For my part I take the very power of the Keys, to be no
other, than a power of applying God's Word to the Consciences of the Penitent
and Impenitent, and the Church; and a power of judging who is fit or unfit for
Church Communion according to God's Word, which judgment we can no otherwise
execute but by the same Word, and by forbearing or exercising our own
Ministerial actions to the person: (As a Physician may refuse to Medicate the
unruly.)

In chap. 6. He speaks justly of the Princes power (as in the former.)

And so he does chap. 7. of the use and power of Synods or Councils.

Chap. 8. He well vindicateth the Magistrate, and denies to the Church or
Bishops, the Legislative power, circa sacra: and shows that Canons are not
proper Laws.

Chap. 9. He shows the Jurisdiction, properly so called, belongs to the
Magistrate, and not to the Pastors as such, (Though of old they might be also
Magistrates.)

He shows that the use of the Keys is called Jurisdiction, but by the same
figure by which Preaching is called Legislation (which is true as to the
Declaration who is bound or loose, in foro caeli; but Pastors more properly
judge who is to be taken into Church Communion or excluded.) The prescript of
Penance he says is no Jurisdiction, but as the Council of a Physician, or
Lawyer, or Philosopher. That the denying of the Sacraments is not properly
Jurisdiction, he thus (excellently) explaineth [ p. 229. As he that Baptizeth,
or as the old custom was, puts the Eucharist into ones mouth or hand, does
exercise an act of Ministry and not of Jurisdiction; so also he that abstaineth
from the same acts. For the reason of the visible signs, and of the audible is
the same: By what right therefore a Pastor denounces by-words to one that is
manifestly flagitious, that he is an utter alien to the Grace of God; by the
same right also he does not Baptize him, because it is the sign of remission of
sin; or if he be Baptized gives him not the Eucharist, as being the sign of
Communion with Christ. For the sign is not to be given to him that the thing
signified does not agree to; nor are pearls to be given to swine: But, as the
Deacon was wont to cry in the Church [Holy things are for the Holy] Yea it were
not only against Truth, but against charity, to make him partaksr of the Lords
Supper, who discerns not the Lords Body, but eats and drinks judgment to
himself: In these things while the Pastor does only suspend his own act, and
does Be it known to posterity that if the Prelates would have granted us but so
much liberty, our distracted Churches might have had Concord.
not exercise any Dominion over the acts of others, it is apparent that this
belongs to the use of Liberty, and not to the exercise of Jurisdiction. Such
like is the case of a Physician refusing to give an Hydropick water when he
desires it, or in a grave person who resuseth to salute a profligate fellow,
and in those that avoid the company of the Leprous. (Only it must be remembered
that this avoidance is by a Society governed therein by an Officer of Divine
Institution.)

Next he proceeds to the Churches duty, and shows, 1. That as Cyprian says,
The Laity that is obedient to God's commands, ought to separate themselves from
a sinful Pastor or Prelate (that is, that is grossly bad.) 2. That they ought to
avoid familiarity with scandalous Christians: As a Scholar may forsake a bad
Teacher, and as an honest Man may leave the friendship of the flagitious. As
for the names of Deposition and Excommunication, he says, That we must
interpret the name by the thing, and not the thing by the name; And that the
Church deposes a Pastor when they forsake him or refuse to use him, and
Excommunicateth a man, when they avoid his communion, (and declare him unmeet
for communion.) In all which the Church uses her own right, but takes not
away another man's.

Then for the Canonical Enquiries after faults, and impositions of Penence, or
delays of absolution, he shows that both the Canons and Judgments by them
being but prudential Determinations of Modes and Circumstances, bound none but
Consenters, without the Magistrates Law, except as the Law of Nature bound them
to avoid offenses. (He should add, [and as obedience in general is due to
Church-guides of Christ's appointment.]) And how the Magistrate may constrain
the Pastors to their duty.

Chap. 10. He shows that there are two perpetual Functions in the Church,
Presbyters and Deacons: I call them Presbyters (says he) with all the Ancient
Church, who feed the Church with the Preaching of the Word, the Sacraments and
the Keys, which by Divine Right are individual (or inseparable.) (Note. that.)

And. 27. He says, It is doubtful whether Pastors where no Bishops are, and so
are under none, though over none, are to be numbered with Bishops or mere
Presbyters.

. 31. His counsel for the choice of Pastors is, that (as in Justinian's time)
none be forced on the People against their wills, and yet a power reserved in
the chief Rulers to rescind such elections as are made to the destruction of
Church or Commonwealth.

Chap. 11.. 10. He shows that Bishops are not by Divine precept.

And. 1. That therefore the different Government of the Churches that have
Bishops, or that have none, should be no hindrance to Unity.

And. 10, 11. That some Cities had no Bishops, and some more than one: And that
not only in the Apostles ^ays, but after, one City had several Bishops, in
i^^tation of the jews, who to every Synagogue had an Archisynagogus. Page 357.
He shows that there have been at Rome and elsewhere long vacancies of the
Bishops See, in which the Presbyters Governed the Church without a Bishop; And
says, that all the Ancients do confess, that there is no act so proper to a
Bishop, but a Presbyter may do it, except the right of Ordination. Yet shows,
p. 358. that Presbyters ordained with Bishops, and expounds the Canon thus,
that Presbyters should Ordain none, contemning the Bishop.

And p. 359. He shows that where there is no Bishop, Presbyters may Ordain,
as Altisiodorensis says among the Schoolmen. And questioneth again whether the
Presbyters that have no Bishops over them be not rather Bishops than mere
Presbyters; citing Ambrose's words [ He that had no one above him, was a
Bishop] (what would he have said of our City and Corporation Pastors that have
diverse Chapels and Curates under them: Or of our Presidents of Synods: or such
as the Pastor of the first Town that ever I was Preacher in ( Bridgnorth in
Shropshire) who had six Parishes in an exempt Jurisdiction, four or five of
them great ones, and kept Court as ordinary like the Bishops, being under none
but the Archbishop.)

And. 12. He shows that there was great cause for many Churches to lay by
Episcopacy for a time.

And p. 360. he says [ Certainly Christ gave the Keys to be exercised by the
same men, to whom he gave the power of Preaching and Baptizing. That which God
has joined let no man separate.] (But then how should Satan have used the
Churches as he has done?) And he shows of mere ruling Elders (as he had done
of Bishops) that they are not necessary, but are lawful; and that it may be
proved from Scripture that they are not displeasing to God; and that formerly
the Laity joined in Councils. Only he puts these Cautions (which I consent to)
1. That they be not set up as by God's command. 2. That they meddle no
otherwise with the Pastoral Office, or Excommunication, than by way of Counsel.
3. That none be chosen that are unfit. 4. That they use no coactive power, but
what is given them by the Sovereign. 5. That they know their power to be
mutable, as being not by Gods command, but from man.

And Chap. 11.. 8. He delivers his opinion of the Original of Episcopacy,
that it was not fetched from the Temple pattern so much as from the Synagogues,)
where as he said before, every Synagogue had a chief Ruler.)

14. As for J. D. and many other lesser Writers, (Sir Thomas Aston, etc.) who
say but half the same with those forementioned, it is not worth J. D. etc.
your time and labor to read any more. Animadversions on them.

15. But the great Learned M. Ant. de Dominis Spalatensis deserves a more
distinct consideration: who in his very learned Books De Repub. Eccles. M. Ant.
de Dom. Spalatensis.
does copiously handle all the matter of Church Government. But let us consider
what it is that he maintains. In his lib. 5. c. 1. he maintains that [ the
whole proper Ecclesiastical Power is merely Spiritual. In cap. 2. that no Power
with true Prefecture, Jurisdiction, Coaction and Domination belongs to the
Church. In c. 3. he shows that an improper Jurisdiction belongs to it. Where
he overthrows the old Schoolmens Description of Power of Jurisdiction, and
shows also the vanity of the common distinction of Power of Order and of
Jurisdiction; and maintains, 1. that Power of Jurisdiction follows, ab
Ordine, as Light from the Sun: 2. That all the Power of the Keys which is
exercised for Internal effects, although about External Matters, (of Worship or
Government) belongs directly to the Potestas Ordinis: 3. That the Power of
Jurisdiction as distinct from Order, and reserved to the Bishops, is but the
power about the Ordering of External things, which is used Principally and
Directly for an External Effect (that is Church order.). 5. p. 35. 4. That it
is foolish to separate power of Order from any power of Jurisdiction
whatsoever, that is properly Ecclesiastical, it being wholly Spiritual. 5. The
Episcopal Jurisdiction (not properly Ecclesiastical) he makes to consist in
ordering Rites and Ceremonies and Circumstances, and Temporals about the
Church, and about such Modal Determinations about particular persons and
actions as are matters of humane prudence, (which have only a General Rule in
Nature or Scripture. 6. By which (though he hold Episcopacy Jure Divino) that
it is but such things that he supposes proper to the Bishop (which the
Magistrate may determine and make Laws for, as Grotius and others prove at
last, and himself after; and as Sir Roger Twisden has Historically proved to
have been used by the Kings of England, Histor. Def. Cap. 5. 7. That all
Ecclesiastical power whatsoever is fully and perfectly conjunct with Order.
page 36. 8. That this plenitude of power is totally and equally in all Bishops
and Presbyters lawfully Ordained: and that it is a mere vanity to distinguish
in such power of Order, Plenitudinem potestatis a part solicitudinis. 9. That
this equal power of the Bishop and Presbyter flows from Ordination; and is
the Essential Ordinary Ministerial power. 10. That this vain separating Power
of Order and Jurisdiction is the whole Foundation of Popery.. 7. p. 36. and
passi^^ 37, etc. 21. He frequently calls that [ the Essential power] in which
Bishops and Presbyters are equal, and so takes the rest but for Accidental.
12. He thus describes the Bishops power of Jurisdiction, c. 3. p. 39.. 13. [
About those things which are constituted in the Church, only by Humane
Ecclesiastical Right, there is in the Church true Jurisdiction not necessarily
depending on the Sacred Order it self, if there be any at all separate from
Order. Such as Licensing a Bishop to Ordain in another Diocese, etc. For these
acts are not Actus Sacri neque spirituales, neque attingunt direct quicquam
supernaturale, sed sunt mere temporales, and circa rem externam and temporalem
qua est mera applicatio, etc. These are not Sacred nor Spiritual, nor touch any
thing directly that is Supernatural, but are merely Temporal, and about an
External and Temporal matter, Et his solis verum est, etc. So that it is most
evident, that as God has left to Humane Prudence the Ordering of some Modes
and Circumstances of Worship and Discipline and Church Order, and by his
General Laws, so Spalatensis thought that all the Bishops proper Jurisdiction
lay in these things, which were of Humane Right, and that all things of divine
appointment were equally belonging to the Presbyters. Where again I desire it
may be observed. 1. That Magistrates may determine of such things, and so make
void or needless such an Episcopacy. 2. That it is most certain that many
things of External Order belong to a Presbyter to determine, as to one that is
the Conducter of the Sacred Assemblies: As what Text to preach on, what Method
to use, what Chapter to read: where and at what hour the People shall meet, how
long they shall stay, what Tune to sing a Psalm in, and abundance of the like.
So that even that Jurisdiction which he excepeth to the Bishop is common to him
with the Presbyter that officiateth: And all that can be pretended is that it
belongs to him, to determine such Circumstances as equally belong to many
Churches (which yet Synods of Presbyters may do as effectually for Concord.) 3.
That indeed there is no true Ecclesiastical act which tends not to Internal
Spiritual effects: Public Admonitions and Confessions as well as private are
for the humbling of the Sinner, and the exercise of Repentance; and
Excommunications and Absolutions in public are not only nor chiefly for the
external Order of the Church, but for the preserving of the peoples souls from
sin, and for the warning of others, and for the preserving in their minds a due
esteem of the holiness of our Religion, and the necessity of holiness in us,
and to convince those without, that God's Laws and Ways and People are more
holy than those of the World. This is a clear and certain truth: and therefore
according to Spalatensis, Presbyters must in public as well as private
Admonitions, and Absolutions, and Excommunications, have equal power with
Bishops, except as to the ordering of the Circumstantials of it. Which though
he sometime seem to reserve for the Bishop, yet (to do him right) when he does
so, he ^^th that it is a mixed power: As it is the exercise of the Keys, it is
Essential to the Sacred Office, common to both; but as it is a prudential
determination of Circumstances according to Humane Right, directly and
principally for outward and not for inward effects, it is the Bishops
Jurisdiction. So that really he makes the Bishop, as such, to be but the
Master of Order and Ceremonies, where the Magistrate does not do it himself,
and where it belongs not to the Officiating Pastor as such.

His cap. 4. is to prove that the power for Internal Effects of Grace in the
Church by External acts, is exercised only Ministerially, by Ministers as such,
Instanced cap: 5. in Baptism cap. 6. in the Lords Supper, cap. 7. in
Confessions and Penance; and cap. 9. in that Fxcommunication which is the
exercise of the Keys (for he mistaketh in excluding Baptism from the Keys,
which indeed is the first use for intromission.) Cap. 12. He again purposely
shows who are the Ministers of each Ordinance. And first again Vindicateth
his Uniting of Order and proper Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical as before.

. 4. p. 465. He confidently says, that to him it is a most certain thing that
the power of Order, is of the Word, Sacrament and Keys, and that it is, plena,
tota, integra, fully, totally, entirely in every Bishop and lawful Prosbyter.

. 22. p. 472. He says, that Confirmation is neither a true Sacrament, but a
part of the Ceremonies of Baptism; nor is it at all of Divine, but of humane
Ecclesiastical Institution; nor does it suppose any special power given by God
to him that administreth it, for any special supernatural effect* But the
Church for honor reserveth this Ceremony to the Bishop.

And. 24. He says, [ And why are Bishops so rigid that they will not permit to
their Parish Ministers the Faculty of Confirming, specially when they
themselves come very seldom Yea, never into one Parish of ten or twenty.
into those Parishes to visit. And verily those Bishops which have large
Diocesses of Christians in the Turkish Dominions, as my Archbishopric of
Spalato, ought (if this Ceremony were of any great account) to give their
Parish Ministers there living free power of Confirming: Yea, if the Bishops
deny it them, the Parish Ministers may and ought to exercise this Ceremony by
their own Authority.

And here I will tell Posterity, that if we could have but got our Prelates,
etc. to have Confirmed to us but one Word, which the King granted us, pre
tempore, only in his Declar. of Eccles. Affairs, viz. that Confirmation as a
solemn Transition from Infant Church State, into the Adult, should be but by
the Ministers [CONSENT] (as knowing his People better than the Bishop that
never before saw them, or heard of them, or examined them) it had healed one of
the greatest of our Breaches: But our Concord was not thought worth this little
price; Though there is not in all the places that ever I lived in, one Person
of an hundred (if five hundred) that I can hear of, that ever was Confirmed, or
ever sought it or regarded it. And yet their Rubric says, that we must not
give the Lords Supper to any that are not Confirmed, or ready for it: Yet have
we no power to require of any Man a Proof or Certificate of his Confirmation,
nor can we know whether he be Confirmed or not; Nor can we refuse any at the
Lords Table that refuses to be examined by us, whether he be ready to be
Confirmed, (save Infants.)

And in that 12. chap.. 25, 26, 27. p. 473. Spalatensis again shows, that the
Power of the Keys for binding and loosing, belongs to Bishops and Presbyters
as Ministers. And though he reserve the Public use of them to the Bishop, he
says, that he may commit it to a Presbyter. For it is Mixed, and has partly
the External Jurisdiction which the Bishop received by his proper Episcopal
Ordination; and partly, yea much rather (or more) the Internal, by the Keys,
which they have by virtue of their Presbyterial Ordination, in equality with
the Presbyters. The External, because it is External, may therefore be
delegated to another, even a Layman: (which is it, which the Parliament of
Scotland have lately declared to be in the King.) And does not all this show
what Episcopacy is? Even a Magistrates Office, Circa Sacra, vindicated by
Grotius and others. But (says he) they cannot delegate the inward power which
is properly of the Keys, because this depends of the Sacred Presbyterial
Order, both in fieri, in esse, in conservari and operari. For the Presbyterial
Order has always the Keys annexed. -- For when any is Ordained Presbyter, the
Keys are given him, and Jurisdiction, with Orders, by Divine Right.

And. 28. p. 474. Seeing the Apostles gave the Keys equally to all Bishops and
Presbyters, -- No man can by Divine Right, reserve part of the Keys to himself
alone, and leave another part to others.

Moreover in lib. 2. c. 3.. 61. p. 210. He shows that Clement, Linus, and
Anacletus, were all Bishops in Rome at once.

Lib. 2. c. 9.. 1. p. 282. He shows, that Bishops and Presbyters are wholly
equal in all Essentials, which belong to the Ecclesiastical Ministries to be
exercised toward the People. And that even in Government, the rest of the
Presbyters (without excepting any) in every Church make one College, of which
the Bishop is the Head; all Ordained to the same Cure and Government of Souls.
(So this Diocese has between a thousand and two thousand Ministers, living
some of them an hundred or sixscore Miles distance, to make a College to the
Bishop that is usually at London.) How the Bishop is bound to Govern with them,
see him,. 4.

And. 5. To be plainly understood, he says, We Bishops therefore must all
remember, that All the Presbyters are our Brethren, and Colleagues in the
Ministry; not our Servants or Slaves, and that by Divine Right they have no
less power in feeding the people of God than we have: And if we exercise any
External
ampler Jurisdiction over them, not properly Ecclesiastical, it is not of our
own power, but delegated from the Magistrates power, as I shall prove lib. 6.
and 10.

Yet plainer,. 8, 9. p. 285. These Parish Presbyters have by Divine Right, full
Power in the Ministry of Christ, and in these Parishes are the Ordinary
Ministers, but under the Bishop. For the Bishop alone has a General
Ecclesiastical Government to settle Ministers in their Diocese -- But being
applied to the Government of their Church, they have the ordinary power, but
Presbyterial in that Church. -- By positive Right only Bishops are deputed to
certain Seats. -- Yet Presbyters have so this Ordinary power, that they cannot
by Humane Eccl^siastical Right reduce it into Act, till applied by the Bishop
in his Diocese. --

And c. 9.. 11. p. 286. ^. 13. p. 287. He shows, that in Vacancies, or the
Bishops Absence, the Clergy of Presbyters have the whole Episcopal power of
Government.

And p. 288, 289. He labors to prove, that one Church had many Bishops, and
that it is but Ecclesiastical Law or Custom that one Church should have but
one Bishop.

And. 15. That if the Canons prohibited not, a Bishop might make all his Parish
Presbyters full Bishops, as (. 16.) in the Ministerial Essentials toward the
Faithful, they are by Divine Right equals. Vid. and. 20. page 291.

This is enough to say of Spalatensis, save that all that he says for Bishops
against us, is so little a part of what is said by the rest, that it can
require no new Answer. And if this great Moderator, (who returned to Rome,
though for a miserable imprisonment and end) because we are not yet near enough
to Antiquity, (or rather being flattered into covetous and ambitious hopes) be
able to prove no greater a difference between Bishops and Presbyters, we need
not think that any other is like to do it.

16. The last great, Learned, Sober Defender of Episcopacy, and the Dr. Hammond
answered.
last that I need to mention here, is Doctor Hammond, who in his Annotations,
and his Treat. of the Keys, and especially his Dissertations against Blondel,
and his Defense of them against the London* Ministers, has said much in this
Cause. But his way is new (save that he follows Petavius in the main
supposition:) He forsakes almost all the Fathers, and almost all the Patrons
of Episcopacy of later times (who have written for it) in the Exposition of all
the Texts of Scripture which mention the Elders and Bishops of Churches in
those times, supposing that they all speak of Bishops only.

In his Treat. of the Keys, he maintains that the power of them was given to
the Apostles only by Christ, and to Bishops as their Successors by the
Apostles. But I take it for undeniable truth, that the Bishops and Elders
settled in every Church by the Apostles in their own time, had this power, and
I need not expect a contradiction in it. And how fitly those are called the
Apostles Successors, whom they set over the Churches in their own time, even
from the beginning that they settled Churches, and with whom they continued in
the same Churches many Months or Years (as Paul in Asia, I leave to others to
judge.

But the Question is not whether Bishops have the power of the Keys, but
whether all Presbyters have it not also? And 1. He shows that (according to
the Canons,) the Presbyters might do nothing in this or in other Acts of
Ministration, without the Bishop. 2. That our English Ordainers, though they
say, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins you do remit, it shall be remitted,
etc. Do not give the Presbyters all the Power of binding and loosing but so
much as the Bishops or the Governors are presumed to have thought sit to
impart to them (which he says is. 1. The declaring in the Church the
absolution of penitents after the Confession. 2. The absolving them by way of
prayer before the Sacrament. 3. And by Baptismal washing, and 4. Upon
Confession to the sick, and in private Conference, and Confession, etc. Which
yet he says, [ Is by Christ's Authority committed to the Presbyters.] 3. He
says, [ All this will not extend to the absolving from the bond of
excommunication, or proportionably to such power of binding, any further (at
most,) thau to confer the first power of it; which if it be then given, does
yet remain (as the other Power of Preaching, and administering the Sacraments)
bound and restrained from being exercised, till they be further loosed by the
donation of a Second Power.]

Ans. But 1. Either he was not able, or not willing, to tell us whether this
Power be given the Presbyters or not. For he avoideth it, by saying [ at most]
and if it be given.] If not able, his ability must be plainly deficient as to
the decision of our main controversy of the difference between Bishops and
Presbyters, which depends on it: If unwilling, he was unwilling to give us
any solid satisfactory decision of this Case.

2. Being his Neighbor, I wrote in his Life time, a Confutation of that
Assertion, that the ordained received their Office and Power properly from the
Ordainer as the nearest Efficient of it, (in my Disput of Ordination, in my
Disput. of Church Government) and I proved that the Power or Office is
immediately from Christ, and that the Ordainers do but design the Person that
shall receive it, and Ministerially deliver him possession by an investing Sign.

3. Either the Office of a Presbyter is of Divine Institution, or of Humane:
Either fixed by the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, immutably; or made, and
alterable by the Bishops? If the Office be of Divine institution, and fixed for
the Churches constant use, whether by Christ immediately or by the Holy Ghost
in the Apostles,) than it is not in the Bishops Power to Altar it: And so
whatever the Ordainers please to give them, is none of the measure of their
Power: As the Archbishop may Crown or anoint the King, and yet not give him
what Power he please: Or rather as it is of Divine appointment, that the
Husband should be the Governor of the Wife: And she that chooses him, and he
that Marries them, cannot alter it, nor do they give him his measure of Power
as they please, but suppose him endowed with that by God, and do only choose
the Person that shall receive it; and Ministerially invest him in the
Possession of it. And if the Priest that marries them should by any words
Contradict, or limit this institution of God, it were a Nullity; and invalid.
If he do but say, I pronounce you Husband and Wife: He therefore pronounces
the man to have that Power of a Husband which God has given him, though he
vainly say after, you shall have but so much, or so much of it. And so it is in
present Case: If God have made the Ministerial Office, he has made it
something constituted of its essential parts; And if so what man has Power to
alter it. But if it be humane, yea, and made by the Bishops then I confess they
may alter it, or destroy it. And if a Presbyter have what power the Ordainers
please to give him, every Ordainer may alter the Office and make a new Species
of Church Ministers at his pleasure: Prove that and our dispute is at an end.
But Papists, Greeks, and Protestants are agreed against it.

4. If Presbyters receive that which he calls [ the first Power] (which he
would not deny, though he would not grant) it is all that at present I am
pleading for it: And it isall that in their ordination they receive (as he
says) as to the Word and Sacraments. If then the Office of a Presbyter
continue the same Power of the Keys as to Excommunication, and Absolution, as
it does of administering the Word and Sacraments, at present I rest satisfied
with this (In which Learned Spalatensis, and those that go with him, cannot be
confuted) For this proves that their Divinely-instituted Office Essentially
contains this Power of the Keys, though to be exercised under the inspection
of a Superior.

5. And if this Inspection would prove that they have not the Power or that
their Office, or Order is therefore distinct, it will also prove that Bishops
have not the Power of the Keys, because they exercise it under the Inspection
of Metropolitans, Archbishops, Primates, or Patriarchs: And also that they are
of a distinct Order from all these: And that a Physician has no Power to Guide
or Govern his voluntary Patients in order to Cure, and that he is off a
distinct Office from the College and President, because he is under their
inspection. And are not all Bishops under the Government of the King, as well
as Physicians and other Subjects: And have they no Power of the Keys, because
he rules them.

And as a Presbyter might do nothing without the Bishop, so no one Bishop could
do any thing without other Bishops: For he had no Episcopal Power till they
ordained him.

And as to after Government or that which he calls the grant of a Second
Power.

6. Is it any thing but Humane License to Exercise the Power of Office of
Divine institution before received? And is not the Magistrates License as
necessary to the Bishop and the Presbyter too, as the Bishops is to the
Presbyter.

7. And I take it for undenied among Christians, that humane Power of
Government, extends but to the Ordering and not the Nulling of a Function
instituted by God. It is not referred to King or Bishop, whether there shall be
a Preaching or none, Sacraments, or none, Church discipline and exercise of the
Keys, or none; no more than whether there shall be a Scripture, and Divine Law,
a Christ, a Heaven, and whether men shall be good or bad, saved or damned: But
only by whom, and when, and how, this Divine Function shall be so exercised, as
may best attain the end, as to those circumstances not determined of by God;
and not contradicting Gods Institutions. Therefore if the Bishops say that the
Preachers of the Gospel shall be silenced (perhaps by hundreds or thousands)
while the necessity of the Peoples Souls is undeniable, their Authority in this
should hinder no man from going to Preach (further than their violence
hinders.) And so by his own Rule it must be as to Discipline, if Discipline be
a Work belonging to a Presbyter. And as Spalatensis says of Confirmation, the
Presbyter should do it, though the Bishop rorbid him.

8. The Second Power which the Presbyter must receive from the Prelate for
Teaching, Worshipping, and Governing the Plock, is either, 1. For the exercise
of it in General to any fit persons, or else for the limitation of him to such
a particular Flock. 2. And it is either a General License or power at once
given to do all his Work, or to do this of Government whenever there is cause,
or else it is a particular License for each particular act.

1. We deny not, but that as a Physician Licensed to practice, is not thereby
made the Physician of this or that Person, Hospital or City, but have a
particular Call for such an Exercise or Application of his skill. So an
Ordained Minister of Christ has no prepared Object on which to Exercise a
Pastoral Office, but by a particular Call to such a Flock. But however you
Censure our simplicity for it, we are resolved to believe, till you say more
against it, 1. That the same may be said of a Bishop too; and therefore by your
Argument, when this Bishop is fixed in a particular Flock, he receives a
second power as you call it, and so without it has not the power of the Keys
any more than the Presbyter; and so must be of a distinct Order from the
Bishops that give him his second power: And who gives them theirs? And if* you
rise to a Patriarch or Pope, what Superior of another Order gives them their
second Power? 2. That institution or fixing a man (before Ordained) to a
particular Flock, does not make him of another Order or Office, nor is a new
Ordination; nor is he as often Ordained and made of another Office, as he
changes his Flock, or receives a new License from the Bishop or the King,
(from whom I had rather have it.) 3. That the People as well as the Bishop (if
not much more) do give the Minister this opportunity for the exercise of his
Office, (as the Patient chooses his Physician.) And yet it is my Opinion that
this will not prove that the People are his Governors, much less that they
give him a new Order or Office. And of old the People chose their Bishops
themselves: It will be as much honor for you Learnedly to prove that there
were no Kings in the World till Bishops made them, as to confute D. Blondels
Historical proof of the Peoples ancient choice of their Bishops.

2. And as to a General License, I will thank the King for it, yea, or any man
that has power to hinder me, that he will give me leave to Preach and Exercise
my Office: But I do not think that every man that does not hinder me when he
can, does give me power. And if a Bishop be so extraordinary good as not to
silence nor hinder a Minister from Preaching Christ, I do not think that this
man is an Usurper in Preaching the Gospel, for want of a License or second
Power: Nor yet in exercising the rest of his Office, where he and the People do
consent. These things seem plain to us, and they that (whether by Learning, or
the Love of Riches and Honor and Domination) are made wiser than we, may
suffer such Fools gladly, while themselves are ( in re vel spe) Rich,
Honorable and wise. 3. And what is Ordination but a General Investiture in the
power of performing the Ministerial Office? And why may not the General Power
or License be given at once as at twice? I think [ Take thou Authority to
Preach the Word of God, and Administer the Holy Sacraments, and the Discipline
of the Church, when thou art thereto lawfully called, (that is, have
opportunity and fit Objects) is a General License: And a Man may presently
Exercise this Office on Consenters: Unless the sense be [ Take thee power when
it shall be given thee.]

3. But if it be a Particular License that is here meant by the grant of second
power, I confess that there is somewhat considerable in it, and that in old
time the Bishop and his Clergy living together, and meeting in the same Church,
the Presbyters (like our Parish Curates now) were in all the Worship of the
day, and in their privater Ministry to the People to be ruled by the Bishop,
and to Modifie and Circumstantiate all as he directed them: And so may it be
again. But sure a Minister is not to travel an hundred miles to the Bishop, to
know whether he shall visit this sick man, or give the Sacrament to the other,
and to know what Chapter he shall read, and such like? If it be not a General
License that is meant, it must needs suppose the Bishops presence.

9. And seeing the Bishops may License a Presbyter to use the Keys, the opening
of this will help our understandings about the nature of the Bishops Office.
There is no act of Jurisdiction which they do not Ordinarily commit to others.
The sentence of Excommunication and Absolution is ordinarily decreed by a
Lay-Chancellor. (And Spalatensis says, that Episcopal Jurisdiction may be done
by a Lay Delegate.) The same sentence is Pronounced in Court by a Layman, or a
mere Presbyter. The same sentence is published in the Church by a Presbyter or
Deacon. And a Prince may give a License to exercise the Ministry to which we
were Ordained.

I enquire then, 1. Whether the granting of this Episcopal Power, be a making
that Man a Bishop that it is granted to? If so, a Bishop, a Presbyter, and a
Chancellor are all of one Office, when thus empowered. If not so, then a
Layman, or one of another Office, may have power to do the Work of the Bishops
Office. And what is the Office (tell me if you can) beside Authority and
Obligation to do the Work? A Layman and Presbyter may by the Bishop be
Authorized and Obliged to do the Work of a Bishop, and this ordinarily as an
Office: (For so they do,) Ergo, a Chancellor and a Presbyter may be made really
a Bishop, and yet in their esteem remain a Layman and a Presbyter still. And
is not that a Lay Office which a Layman may be Commissioned to do? If a
Layman were but Commissioned to do the Work of a Presbyter (to Teach a Church
ordinarily, to Administer the Sacraments, and to Excommunicate and Absolve in
foro internae poenitentialis, either it would make the Man a Presbyter, or it
would be a Nullity. And if it be not so with the Bishops Office, what is the
Reason? Is it not because it is not of Divine Specification and Institution,
but Humane, and therefore mutable, or such as Men may parcel out, and commit to
Laymen by pieces as they please? So much to Dr. Hammond's Appropriation of the
Power of the Keys in that Treatise.

As to his Annotations, I shall have occasion to recite them hereafter, The
Annotations.
among those that give up the Diocesan Cause (as opposed by us) and therefore
shall here pass them by.

His Dissertations against Blondel, have a Premonition about Ordination, which
though most confident, I shall manifest, when I come to the point of
Ordination, to be most weak; and indeed have done it before his death in my
Disput. of Ordin.

His first Preliminary Dissertation of Antichrist, of the Mystery of Iniquity
and of Diotrephes, I will not be so needlessly tedious as to meddle with any
further then to say that I will believe Dr. Hammond here, and in his Annot. on
2 These. 2. when I am fallen into so deep a sleep, as to dream, 1. That the
famous Coming of Christ, and our gathering together to him, (which is a great
Article of the Christian Faith) is but Titus his Destruction of Jerusalem; and
that the reward promised to all that love his appearing, is meant to all that
love the said Destruction of Jerusalem; 2. And that this Destruction was not to
be called nigh, or at hand, which fell out so few Years after. 3. And that the
Gentiles of remote Countries were so shaken in mind and moved about a Question
of a few Years distance of the Destruction of the Jews, more than about
Christ's coming to the Common Judgment. 4. And that the Gnostics were indeed
such terrible Persecutors of the Church, (who were dispersed Subjects) when
their Doctrine was but that they might dissemble to escape Persecution
themselves; and greater Persecutions were near? and not the Gnostics, nor
Jews, but Nero beheaded Paul; and the Jews themselves were banished Rome? 5.
And that Simon Magus was indeed so famous a Fellow, as to be taken for the
supreme God, when Church Writers speak so uncertainly of his conflicts with
Peter as of a doubtful story, and the evidence is so obscure, and the Roman
Histories say so little of him? He might as well have thought the Apostle would
have made all that ado about James Naylor, if he had been then alive. 6. And
that there were not many other Heretics as well as the Gnostics that troubled
the Churches, if Epiphanius knew how to name them and describe them rightly, or
Irenaeus before him, or John in Rev. 2. and 3. before them. 7. And that Simon
Magus and his Heresy was a Mystery of Iniquity not revealed when Paul wrote
the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. 8. And that many had not then followed
him and fallen away to Heresy. 9. Or that by the Apostasy that must first
come, is meant the Apostles separation from the Jews, and Moses's Law; As if he
had said, we will first separate, and that shall bring persecution on you, but
till we do that, it is withheld. 10. Or that the said separation was not done
by degrees, some before this, and some after. 11. Or that the difference
between the Jews persecution of the Christians, before the Apostles Apostasy,
and after it, was indeed so great as to be the Crisis of the Antichrists
Revelation. 12. And that poor Simon should be the Man that sits in the
Temple of God, and opposed and exalted himself above all that is called God,
when as the Scripture never once names him after his deprecation of the
Apostles curse or threatening; though Nicolaitanes are named, and Alexander,
Hymenaeus and Philetus named, and other Adversaries, and all the terrible
things foretold, which are here supposed to be done by Simon, and his Doctrine?
What, were all the Sacred Writers afraid to name him when they recited all the
Evils that he must do, and are supposed to make it a great part of all the
Epistles, and the History in Acts 15. and when he had been so sharply rebuked
and humbled before, Act. 8. 13. That the (...), he that withholds, till he
be taken out of the way, is not meant of any person, power or state, but the
aforesaid separation of the Apostles. 14. That verse 8. that the breath of
Christ's own mouth, signifies St. Peter's words that cast down Simon when he
fell and hurt him; and that the brightness of his coming, or the appearing of
his own presence, is nothing but the foresaid Destruction of Jerusalem. 15. And
so many of the Gnostics and Heretics, that troubled all the Churches of Asia
and other Countries, were got together into Jerusalem, as that they might be
said to be consumed and destroyed there, who so long after troubled the
Churches. 16. And when I can believe that the Revelation is made up of such a
sense, and that most or much of it, was fulfilled before it was revealed and
written, and all the rest fulfilled long ago (about Constantine's days) except
one Parenthesis, or a few Verses in the 20th Chapter. And that the Resurrection
and Thousand Years reign of the Martyrs, is that 1000 Years from Constantine's
beginning, in which the Bishops had Wealth and Honor, and sat on Thrones, and
judged the People in Courts, as our Lay-Chancellors now do; and that this
Glory, Wealth, and Grandeur of Prelates, is the Churches Resurrection, Glory
and Felicity: And that these happy thousand Years continued 700 Years after the
rising of Mahomet; and included those 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th Ages, which
Erasmus and all learned men (even Bellarmine himself) so dolefully bewail. And
that when Boys, and Whores, and Sorcerers, and Murderers, and Heretics, and
Schismatics ruled the Church, they were happy that had a part in this first
Resurrection to all this Glory, yea, that these are Holy too, Rev. 20. 6. And
that the second death shall have no power on them; that is while they are
drowning the true Churches of Christ in the Floods of all abomination, and
bringing in all corruption, and laying the grounds of all division, subduing
Kings, and murdering Christians by thousands, till the Year 1300. Blessed and
holy and happy are they, because though they persecute the Godly, they are free
from being persecuted themselves, which is the second death: Yea, that the
Church was freed from persecution in the Ages when the poor Waldenses, and
Albigenses were murdered in greater numbers than ever the Heathens murdered the
Christians heretofore. When I can believe abundance of such things as these, I
will believe Dr. Hammond's first Dissertation.

His second Dissertation which is to vindicate the Epistles of Ignatius, I
little regard, as not concerning me. I leave it to Dr. Pierson (who they say is
about it) to answer Dallaeus his numerous Arguments against him (with
Dionysius.) For my part, I wish Dr. Pierson may prevail; For there is no
Witness among all the Ancients whom I more trust to (at least ad hominem) as a
plain undoubted destroyer of our Prelacy, than Ignatius, who is the confidence
of the Prelatical Champions. I am possessed with admiration as much at their
glorying in Ignatius, as the Patron of Diocesans, who is so much against them,
as I am at their glorying in Rich. Hooker as a Defender of Monarchy and the
Prelates Loyalty: Of Ignatiu^ I shall say more anon.

His third D^^^ert. about Scripture passages more concerns us.

Cap. 1. which tells us of Christ's Episcopacy, concerns not our Cause.

Cap. 2. Whether the (...), the Regeneration, be the New Church State, and the
Apostles Episcopal Thrones be there meant, as settled in several Provinces
(which cannot be proved ever to have been) is little to our business. Nor yet
whether he will prove that it is not Prelacy but Secular Coactive power and
g^andure that is denied to the Apostles, and that it was those that grudged at
the Precedence desired for James and John, which Christ intended to reprehend,
because it was not an injurious Secular power, but a labor that was to be in
the Prelates of the Church. It suffices me that so much is here confessed. And
it cannot be denied: For that Precedence and Power which Christ allows in the
Rulers of the Nations, is it which he denies to his Disciples: But it is not
Tyranny, proud Domination and Oppression, but just Secular Government, which he
allows in the Rulers of the Nations: Ergo, it is this and not the former
which he denies to his Disciples.

And let all the Prelates here remember, that the Q^estion, Whether they be
Above their Brethren by Dr. H's Confession, is, Whether they may take more care
and pains for Men's Salvation? When one of us poor Ministers were not able night
and day to Catechize, instruct and oversee a Congregation of two or three
thousand Souls, without much help or many sad unavoidable Omissions, the
Q^estion shall be, whether the Bishop may not undertake to Teach and oversee
many hundreds or a thousand Parishes, and Catechize, Pray with, and Exhort a
thousand times more than any Parish Minister does or is able to do; And to do
all this without ever coming into those Parishes, or ever seeing the Faces, or
hearing the names of one of a multitude of the People; or ever speaking one
word to them, but summoning them by Apparitors to a Lay-Chancellors Court, to
be Excommunicated first, and after imprisoned while they live, if they do not
what the Chancellor bids them. O what is man's understanding! when a Carnal
interest has there clothed it self with a Sacred name.

Cap. 3. He tells us of the Power of the Keys committed to the Apostles, and
by them to the Bishops, as their Successors: But whether all the Bishops
Ordained by them, and living with them, (and some dying before them it is like)
were their Successors, and whether all true Pastors were not such Bishops as
had the Power of the Keys; and whether by those Keys be meant the Government of
the Flocks, or also of the Governors themselves, and of what extent the
Churches under each Bishop was, and to what end and use, are the things in
Question, which he here says nothing to.

Cap. 4. He proves by strong affirmation, that the Apostles were by Christ's
last Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. to be the Bishops of their several assigned
certain Provinces. But confidence goes not for proof with us. He tells us of
the name of Episcopacy, Acts 1. 29. We never questioned, whether the Apostles
had the Oversight of the Church; but we hold, 1. That the World was the first
Object of their Office, from whence they were to gather Churches. 2. That the
Place, Course, or Circuit of their Travels and Ministry, was not of any Divine
Institution, but left to their prudent choice, by the Common Rules of Nature
(doing all things in Order, and to Edifying) and sometime directed in their
motions by the present inspiration of the Holy Ghost. 3. That more than one
Apostle was often in the same Cities and Countries, none claiming it as his
peculiar Province, nor denying the right of others to be there. And where one
was this Year, another was the next. 4. That when an Apostle planted a Church
in any City, and settled Bishops over the People, they themselves were called
by many of the Ancients, the first Bishops of those Cities; in which sense, one
Man had many Bishoprics. 5. That the Apostles were Itinerant unfixed Bishops,
and not fixed Bishops, such as they themselves confined to any one limited
Church or Province. Nor can it be proved out of all Antiquity, that any one of
all the Apostles, was confined to any one limited Province, much less what that
Province was; but only that their Ability, Opportunity, Time and Prudence
limited every Man, and directed him as the End required. 6. And that if the
Apostles had fixed themselves in particular limited Provinces, they had
disobeyed their Commission, which was, to go Preach the Gospel to all the
World. And no Man did ever yet so dote, as to pretend that they divided the
whole World into twelve Provinces, and there fixed themselves: And such twelve
Provinces as they had been capable of overseeing, would have been but a little
of the World: And it was but a little part, comparatively, that they Preached
the Gospel to: Most Kingdoms of the World they never saw: And those which they
came into, were so great and many, that they Preached but to a few of the
People. Yet this was not their culpable Omission, because they were limited by
Natural Impotency, and so by Impossibilities of doing more: But had it been by
a Voluntary settling themselves in twelve Provinces to the neglect of all the
rest, the Case had been otherwise. But whilst they did their best for the whole
World themselves, and Ordained others to do the rest, they performed their
Office.

There needs no more to be said as to those Ancients that name the Apostles
Bishops: Nor is their Episcopacy, if proved, any thing to our Case, as shall be
manifested.

Cap. 5. He thought he had proved that Power in the Church is given by the
Apostles to the Bishops only. Whereas (with Spalatensis, and most Christians)
we hold it given to Christ's Ministers, as such, and therefore to them all,
though in an Eminency the Apostles only had it. And, 1. Whereas he denies the
Power of the 70, because they were not Apostles, but Disciples: We Answer, 1.
That Evangelists and other Ministers that were not Apostles, had the Power of
the Keys. 2. That to deny that the 70 were at least Temporary Apostles limited
to the Jews, and had the power of Preaching and working Miracles, would be to
deny the letter of the Text. And the Apostles themselves could not Govern
Churches, till they were gathered.

2. And yet if neither they, nor John Baptist, in Baptizing, did exercise any
power of the Keys (which he can never prove) it is nothing to our Case.

3. When will he prove that the Evangelists and the Itinerant Assistants of the
Apostles, had not the power of the Keys? When themselves commonly say, that the
higher Orders contain the powers of the lower? And are the Bishops higher than
the Evangelists?

4. Nay, when will he prove, that ever any Presbyter was Ordained by the
Apostles, or by any others as they appointed, without the power of the Keys? It
would weary one that loves not confusion and lost lalabour, to read long
Discourses of the Power of the Keys or Government, which distinguish not the
Government of the Laity or Flocks, from the Government of the Ministers
themselves? and that abuse the Church by feigning an Office of Presbyters that
are not Presbyters, and proving that Church-Governors are not Church-Governors?
For what is the Office of the Presbyter or Pastor essentially, but a Stated
Power and obligation to Teach and Govern the People, and Worship as their mouth
and guide?

Cap. 6. He seems, by denying the Evangelists the power of the Keys, and of
Church-teaching, and making them mere Preachers to the Insidels, to favor the
Independants Opinion, who think the Laymen sent forth are to do that work. But,
1. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Christ makes such Officers as must Preach and Baptize and
gather Churches among the Infidels before they govern them, to be them that he
will be with to the end of the World. And the same men had the Power of
teaching the Churches when they were gathered, as is there expressed. 2. Call
them by what name you will, such Itenirants were usual in the Apostles days,
as Silas, Apollo, and many more. 3. It was not the twelve Apostles only that
Converted the World, but such other Ministers, that were called thus to labor
by them, or by the Spirit immediately. Joseph of Arimathea is said by many to
have preached here, and in other Countries. 4. What man will dream that when
these went abroad the World to convert men, they were the fixed Bishops of
particular Churches first, which they thus forsook? 5. Who will believe that
Joseph, Silas, Apollo, Luke, Mark, Nathaniel, Philip, or any other, when they
had converted any City, or Country, had no power after to teach them as a
Church, or give them the Lords Supper, no nor to Baptize them first, nor to
ordain them Bishops, and settle them in order, but must either have an Apostle
or a City Bishop to come thither after them to do it? Such Fancies are obtruded
on the Church, because the one Ministerial or Priestly Office is first
dismembered, and then new Officers feigned to be made up of the several Limbs.

Cap. 7. As he robbed the Evangelists of the Power of the Keys, he would now rob
all the mere Presbyters of it; and all (without show of Scripture proof) from
such words of Canons or Ancients as say the Presbyters shall do nothing without
the Bishops. 1. As if the Presbyters were no Rulers of the Flocks, because the
Bishops are Rulers of the Presbyters? As if a Judge or a Justice were no
Governor, because he is under the King? 2. O Cruel Bishops that will undertake
to do that for the Souls of many hundred Parishes, which many hundred Ministers
are too little for, that the Souls of men and their own together may be damned
by the Omission of it! If the power of the Keys be appointed for men's
Salvation, they perfidiously betray them that thrust out the many hundreds that
should do it, pretending that it belongs to one man among the many hundred
that cannot do it. But of the Bishops great undertaking, I must say more anon.

Cap. 8. Of the Chorepiscopi there is little that concerns us, saving that he
comes near to grant us all that we desire, while that. 15 he says that
Learned men believe that in the Church of one Region, of old there was but one
Altar, so that lgnatius rightly conjoyneth (...) and (...): And all
Schismatics were said to set up Altar against Altar. As Cypr. de Unit. Eccle.
Ep. 40. 72, 73] This is the sum of all that we plead for. And. 29. he
mentions the Chorepiscopis as immitating the 70, when yet he had denied the
70, to have the power of the Keys, which he supposes the Chorepiscopi to have
under the Bishops. Of Clemens words in due place.

Cap. 9. About the sense of a Canon variously read.

And Cap. 10. Whether Eutychius Alexandrinus erred in one thing; and therefore
were not to be believed in another, are little pertinent to our business.

In his 4th. Dissert. the Cap. 1. is but Proem, but Cap. 2. he tells us that
the Apostles as Bishops Governed the Churches which they had planted, without
the mediation of a College of Presbyters (all ways) and he brings not a word
to prove it, but 1 Cor. 3. 6. You have not many Fathers in Christ, I have
begotten you by the Gospel, c. 4. 15, 16. I have planted, and c. 9. 19, 21. I
will come to you, will ye that I come with the Rod? and c. 5 3, 4. I as absent
in Body but present in Spirit have judged -- This is all. And will not the
impartial Reader wonder at humane frailty, how easily men believe what they
would have to be true, and what, an evident Nothing will go for undeniable
proof. Let the Reader Note, 1. That the question is not whether an Apostle
after that he had planted a Church remain still an Apostle to them as well as
others, and have the Apostolical eminency of Power, which is greater than any
mere Bishop had. 2. But first, Whether the Apostles had any fixed Provinces, or
Cities undertaken as their special charge, in which no other Apostle had
Apostolical Power? And 2. Whether there were not fixed Bishops settled by them
in all the Churches which they planted? 3. And whether it was not so in the
Church of Corinth' in particular? Yea, whether they had not more Bishops or
Presbyters than one? For by [ Unius] which here he applies to Paul, he means
Unicus, Paul only, or else he abuses his Reader and himself. And 1. He that
will follow Paul in his Travels, will find that he went the same way that some
other Apostles went, viz. John and Peter, and therefore that they must have the
same Diocesses, or have their Diocesses notably intermixed: John was in Asia as
well as Paul, and no man can prove that he was the Second Bishop of Ephesus, or
Asia, as Paul's successor only when he was dead. Nor will the Romans be willing
to grant that Peter was Bishop of no more at Rome but the Jews only (as this
Dr. elsewhere intimates) lest that prove not that the Gentile Church of Rome
was founded by Peter, but by Paul alone. 2. What proof has he that besides
Peter and John, there were not many other Apostles per vices in the same Cities
where Paul had been? And that when they did come thither, they had not
Apostolical Power there? 3. Does not the Text expressly say that Paul and
Barnabas long traveled together? And does it any where intimate that Paul was
the Governor of Barnabas, or the sole Bishop of the Churches planted by them
both together? Sure the people that would have worshipped Barnabas, as Jupiter,
and Paul but as Mercury, did see no Sign of such a Prelacy in Paul. And the
Apostles seem so to have ordered the matter, by going by Couples (as Christ
sometimes sent two and two before him,) as if they had done it purposely to
prevent these Monarchical conceits. Peter and John were together at the healing
of the Criple, and the successful preaching that followed thereupon. Sometime
Paul and Barnabas are together; sometime Paul and Silas, and Barnabas and Mark:
Paul and Sosthenes are the inscribed Names who send the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, and Paul and Timothy the second. And in the Text alleged, it is
said, One says I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollo; and c. 1. 12. Every
one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas. -- And Paul
baptized none of them save Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus. By
which it appears that Peter was among them as well as Paul; and if Peter had
been only the Bishop of the Jews here also, Apollos would not have been brought
in as a third in a way of equality: And the Controversy would have been
otherwise decided by Paul, by telling the Jews that Peter was their sole
Bishop, and the Gentiles that Paul was theirs, and all of them, that Apollos
was but their Subject. But he goes quite another way to work, preferring none,
nor dividing Dioceses, but levelling Ministers, as being but the helpers of
their Faith. And though they had Apostolical preeminence above Apollos, yet
Peter and Paul are not said to have a proper Episcopacy over him.

And now to his Arguments. 1. Paul planted; Paul only was their Father. What
then? Ergo, Paul only was their Bishop. I deny the Consequence, and may long
wait for a syllable of proof. Contrarily, Paul only was not their Apostle:
Ergo, Paul only was not their Bishop. For every Apostle you say has Episcopal
Power included in the Apostolical: and none of them ceased to have Apostolical
Power wherever they came, (though they were many together, as at Jerusalem)
Ergo, None of them ceased to have Episcopal Power. The conceit of Conversion
and Paternity entituling to sole Episcopacy, I shall confute by it self anon.

2. But Paul judged the incestuous person, and speaks of coming with the rod.
And what follows? Ergo, None but Paul might do the same in that Diocese. I
deny the Consequence. Any other Apostle might do the same. Where is your Proof?
And if all this were granted, it is nothing against the Cause that we maintain.

And next let us inquire, whether this Church had no Bishops or Presbyters but
Paul? As here is not a word of proof on their side, so I prove the contrary:

1. Because the Apostles ordained Elders or Bishops in every Church and City,
Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. Therefore the Church of Corinth had such.

2. If they had not Presbyters or Bishops, they could hold no ordinary
Christian Church Assemblies, for all Gods public Worship; e. g. They could not
communicate in the Lords Supper; for Laymen may not be the Ministers of it,
nor the ordinary Guides and Teachers of a Worshipping Church. But they did hold
such ordinary Assemblies, communicating in the Lords Supper. And to say, that
they had only Pastors that were itinerant in transitu as they came one after
another that way, is to speak without book, and against it; and to make them
differ from all other Churches, without proof.

3. 1 Cor. 14. does plainly end that Controversy, with 1 Cor. 11. when they
had so many Prophets, and Teachers, and gifted Persons in their Assemblies,
that Paul is put to restrain and regulate their Public Exercises, directing
them to speak but one or two, and the rest to judge: and this rather by the way
of edifying plainness, than by Tongues, etc. And c. 11. they had enough to be the
ordinary Ministers of the Sacraments. And cb. 5. they had Instructions for
Church Discipline, both as to the incestuous man, and for all the scandalous
for the time to come, and are chidden for not using it before. And who but the
Separatists do hold, that the power of the Keys for the exercise of this
Discipline is in the Peoples hands? Therefore most certainly they had a Clergy.
And if all this go not for proof against a bare Affirmation of the contrary, we
can prove nothing.

4. And 1 Cor. 4. 15. I scarce think that Paul would have had occasion to say [
Though you have ten thousand instructers] if they had not had qualified Persons
enough to afford them one or two for Presbyters.

Cap. 2. proving no more of any one Apostles fixed Episcopacy, he comes to
their secondary Bishops or Apostles: And whereas we judge, that Apostles, and
Evangelists, and the Apostles Assistants were unfixed Ministers, appropriating
no Churches or Diocesses to themselves in point of Power, but planting,
settling, and confirming Churches in an itinerant way, and distributing their
Provinces only arbitrarily and changeably, and as the Spirit guided them at
the present time of their work; and that Bishops and Elders were such Pastors
as these Church-gatherers fixed in a stated relation to particular Churches; so
that an Apostle was a Bishop eminenter, but not formaliter; and that a Bishop,
as such, was no Apostle in the eminent sense, but was also an itinerant
Preacher limitedly, because while he oversaw his Flock he was also to endeavor
the conversion of others, as far as his opportunity allowed him: I say, this
being our judgment, this learned Doctor supposes Apostles, as such, to be
Bishops, and the fixed Bishops, as such, to be second Apostles. And I so avoid
contending about Names, even where it is of some importance to the Matter, that
I will not waste my time upon it till it be necessary. In 1. he tells us,
that these second Apostles were made partakers of the same Jurisdiction and
Name with the first, and either planted and ruled Churches, or ruled such as
others had planted. Answ. 1. We doubt not but the Apostles had indefinite
itinerant Assistants, and definite fixed Bishops placed by them as aforesaid:
But the indefinite and the definite must not be confounded. 2. And were not
Luke, Mark, Timothy, and other itinerant Evangelists, as such, of the Clergy,
and such Assistants or secondary Apostles? Exclude them, and you can prove none
but the fixed Bishops: But if they were, why did you before deny Evangelists,
Dissert. 3. cap. 6. the power of the Keys, and make them mere converting
Preachers, below Doctors and Pastors, and the same with Deacons? whereas Paul,
Ephesians. 4. 11. does place them before Pastors and Teachers. But avoiding the
Controversy de nomine, call them what you will, we believe that these
itinerant Assistants of the Apostles were of that One sacred Office commonly
called the Priesthood or Ministry, though not yet fixed; and that the assigning
them to particular Churches did not make them of a new Order, but only give
them a new object and opportunity to exercise the Power which they had before;
and that Philip and other Deacons were not Evangelists merely as Deacons (which
term denotes a fixed Office in one Church), but by a further Call: And that
you never did prove, that ever the Scripture knew one Presbyter that had not
the power of the Keys, as Bishops have; yea, you confess your self the
contrary. All therefore that follows in that Chapter, and your Book, of James
the Just, and Mark, and others having Episcopal power, is nothing against us:
The thing that we put you to prove is, that ever the Apostles ordained such an
Officer as a Presbyter that has not Episcopal Power and Obligation too, as to
his Flock; that is, the Power of governing that Church according to God's Word.

And I would learn, if I could, whether all the Apostles which staid long at
Jerusalem, while James is supposed to be their Bishop, were not Bishops also
with him? Whether they ceased to be Apostles to the People there? Or whether
they were Apostles, and not Bishops? And whether they lost any of their Power
by making James Bishop? And whether one Church then had not many Bishops at
once? And if they made James greater than themselves, Whether according to your
Premonition they did not give a Power or Honor which they had not (which you
think unanswerable in our Case)?

Cap. 4. come in the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1, 2, and 3. of which (though
the matter be little to our Cause) I have said enough before, why I prefer the
Exposition of Ticoniui, which Augustine seems to favor. And I find nothing
here to the contrary that needs a Reply.

Cap. 5. he would prove the Angels to be Archbishops; which if done, would not
touch our Cause, who meddle not with Archbishops, but only prove, that the
full Pastoral or Episcopal Office or power of the Keys as over the Flock,
should be found in every particular Church that has unum Altaere.

To prove Metropolitans (again) he tells us, how that in Provinces we find [
Churches] mentioned in the Plural number, and in Cities only [a Church]
singularly: not perceiving how hereby he overthrows his Cause, when he can
never prove that in Scripture many particular, Churches are called [ A Church]
Diocesane or Metropolitan, as united in one Bishop, as our Diooesane and
Metropolitan Churches now are. Nay indeed, though the Society be specified by
the Government, yet the Name sticks in their teeth here in England, and they
seldom use the Title of the Church of Canterbury and York] for the whole
Province; and they use to say the Diocese of Lincoln, London, Winchester,
Worcester, Coventry and Litchfield, etc. rather than [ the Church of Lincoln,
London, Coventry and Litchfield etc.] lest the Hearers would so hardly he
seduced from the proper sense of the word [ Church] as not to understand them.

His Proofs of the Civil or Jewish distinction of Metropolitans,. 4, 5, etc.
let them mind that think it pertinent: But 9. we have a great word, that [ It
may be proved by many examples, that after this Image the Apostles took care
every where to dispose of the Churches, and constituted a subordination and
dependence of the lesser on the more eminent Cities, in all their Plantations.]
Answ. This is to some purpose, if it be made good. The first Instance is Acts
14. 26. 16. 4. and 15. 2, 3, 22, 23, 30. Not a word else out of Scripture. And
what is here? Why, Paul and Barnabas are sent to Jerusalem from Antioch, to the
Apostles and Elders, about the Question, and were brought on their way by the
Church, and passed through Phenice and Samaria: Chosen men are sent to Antioch
with Paul and Barnabas, Judas and Silas, with Letters from the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren, even to the Brethren of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria,
and Cilicia: And when they came to Antioch they delivered the Letters; and Paul
and Timothy as they went through the Cities delivered them the Decrees to keep,
that were ordained by the Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem.] Does not
the Reader wonder where is the Proof? And wonder he may for me, unless this be
it: The Apostles and Elders were at Jerusalem when they wrote this Letter, and
thence sent it to Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: Ergo, They established the
Bishop of Jerusalem to be the Governor and Metropolitan of Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia. The Apostle Paul went from Antioch to other Cities, and delivered them
these Decrees: Ergo, Antioch is the governing Metropolis of those Cities. I
think the major Propositions are, [Every City from which Apostles send their
Letters to other Cities, and every City from which an Apostle carries such
Letters or Decrees to other Cities, is by those Apostles made the Governing
Metropolis of those other Cities.] What dull Heads are the Puritans, to
question such a Proposition as this! But it is not given to all Men to be wise:
And we ignorant Persons are left in doubt, Q. 1. Whether the Universal Headship
or Papacy of the Bishop of Jerusalem be not of Apostolical Institution? and
that more than by one Apostle, even by all of them that were then at Jerusalem?
Q. 2. Whether the Apostles did not this as they did other parts of
Church-settlement, by the Spirit of God? and so, whether it be not jure Divino?
yea, by a more eminent Authority than the Scriptures, which were written by
parts, by several single Men, some Apostles, and some Evangelists? when this is
said to be done by all together. Q. 3. Whether Christ's Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and sending the Apostles thence into all the World,
(and not into the Roman Empire only) do not incomparably more evidently make
Jerusalem the Universal Metropolis of the Earth, and so set it above Rome,
which is but the Metropolis of one Empire? Q. 4. Whether then an Universal Head
of the Church or Vicar of Christ be not jure Divino? and so a Jerusalem Papacy
be not essential to the true Church and Religion? Q. 5. Whether then all the
Emperors, Bishops, and Churches, that did set up Rome, Alexandria, Antioch,
and Constantinople above Jerusalem, were not Traitors against the Universal
Sovereign of the Church, and guilty of Usurpation and gross Schism? Q. 6. To
what parpose this Sovereignty was given to Jerusalem, which was never possessed
and exercised? Q. 7. Whether Peter's being at Rome could alter this
Church-Constitution? and one Apostle could undo what all together had done? Q.
8. Whether the Apostles carried this Metropolitical Prerogative with them from
place to place, wherever they came? And whether it did belong to the Men or
the Place? And whether to the Place whence they first set out, or to every
place where they came? or to the place where they dyed? Judge what is the proof
of any of these. Q. 9. When they were scattered; which of their Seats was the
Metropolitan to the rest? or were they all equal? Q. 10. If the Power followed
the Civil Power of the Metropolitan Rulers, whether Caesar did not more in
constituting the Church Order, and giving power comparatively to the
Metropolitanes, than Christ and his Apostles? Q. 11. Whether it was not in
Caesar's power to unmake all the Church Metropolitans and Bishops at his
pleasure, by dissolving the Privileges and Charters of Cities? Q. 12. If it
please any King, or be the Custom of any Kingdom (as it is in many parts of
America) that the Kingdom have no Cities or Metropolis, whether it must have
any Churches, Bishops, or Metropolitan? Q. 13. Whether when Paul wrote his
Letters from Corinth to Rome he thereby made the Bishop of Corinth the
Governor of the Bishop and Diocese of Rome? And whether little Cenchrea was
over them also, because Phoebe carried the Letter? And did his writing from
Philippi to Corinth subject Corinth to the Bishop of Philippi? And did his
writing from Rome to Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, the Colossians; and from
Athens to the Thessalonians, and from Laodicea and Rome to Timothy, and from
Nicopolis to Titus, and John's writing from Patmos to the Asian Metropolitanes
produce the same effect? Q. 14. If Paul's carrying the Letters from Antioch to
other Cities, proved Antioch the Governor of the rest? whether when he
returned from the other to Antioch again, he made not the other the Governors
of Antioch? I am ashamed to prosecute this Fiction any further. His following
Citations from the Fathers I think unworthy of an Answer, till it be proved, 1.
That these Fathers took the Metropolitan Order, as such, to be of Apostolical
Institution, and not in compliance with the Roman Government, by mere humane,
alterable policy. And, 2. That this Opinion rose as early as he pretends. 3.
And that these Ancients were not deceived, ^^t our English Bishops rather (
Bilson, Jewel, etc.) who took Patriarchs and Metropolitanes, as such, for
Creatures of Humane Original.

While Ignatius his being Bishop of [ a Church in Syria] shall prove him the
Bishop of all Syria; and [ the Church of God dwelling in Syria in Antiochia]
shall be equivalent with [ the Church in Antiochia governing all Syria] I shall
not undertake to hinder such men from proving any thing that they would have
believed.

His Cap. 6. of the promiscuous use of the Names of Bishop and Presbyter, and
Cap. 7. that prepares the stating of the Controversy, need no answer, but to
say, that we deny not but where a single Presbyter was, he had himself the
power of Governing that Church; but where there were many, though all had the
full Office severally, they were bound to use it in Concord. And whether one
amongst them shall have a precedence or guidance of the rest, we think (as Dr.
Stillingfleet has proved) to be a matter alterable by humane prudence,
according to the various condition of the Churches: And if any take both such
Bishops and Archbishops to be Jure Divine, with Dr. Hammond, it will be
somewhat to his Cause, but nothing to ours.

Cap. 8. he opens his conceit (which in time I shall show does yield us the
whole Cause) that every place of Scripture which mentions Bishops or
Presbyters, means Diocesan supereminent Bishops only. And first he proves it
of the Elders Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20. because the whole flock is meant of
all Asia: Fully proved, because Irenaeus said (as he thought) that the Bishops
were convocate from Ephesus and the nearest Cities. But, 1. Irenaeus says not
[ Bishops] only, but Bishops and Presbyters, conjoining them as two sorts, and
not [ Bishops or Presbyters] as the Doctor does. 2. The nearest Cities, and all
Asia, we take not for words of the same importance. 3. We take not your bare
word for the validity of the Consequence, that because the Bishops of several
Cities were there, therefore it is all Asia that is singularly called (...),
the whole Flock, and not each Bishops Flock respectively; q. d. Each of you
look to your several Flock. 4. We think if you calculate the time, Acts 20 and
21. and consider Paul's haste Acts 20. 16. that few impartial men will believe
that Paul's Messengers (that were wont to go on foot) did so quickly go all
over Asia, and so quickly get together all the Bishops of Asia to Miletum;
unless they all resided at Ephesus, as our English Bishops do at London, and
Governed their unknown people by a Lay-Chancellour. 5. And Irenaeus, ibid. p.
312. says [ Et omnia hujusmodi per solum Lucam cognovimus, we know all such
things by Luke alone, pretending no other Tradition. And if it be in Luke it is
yet to be thence proved. 6. But he pleads our Cause too strongly, by
supposing that each City then had a Bishop without any subject half Presbyter,
and so that no such Office was yet made.

Cap. 9. Of Timothy's Episcopacy concerns not our Cause. Though I hope that
neither he nor his Church were so bad as the Angel or Church in Rev. 2. is
described. And it is easier to answer the strength of Dr. Hammond, than for him
to answer the Evidence brought by Prin in his Vnbishoping Timothy and Titus, to
show the itinerant life and Ministry of Timothy, contrary to the life of a
fixed Bishop. And if non-residency have such Patrons, and Timothy have taught
men to leave their Churches year after year, and play the Pastor many hundred
Miles distant, it will make us dream that non-residence is a duty. And if all
these years Timothy's Metropolitan Church at Ephesus had no ordained Presbyter
(but Passengers that fell in) I blame them not, or wonder not at least, that
they lost their first love; for it is like they seldom had any Church Assemblies
to Communicate and Worship God together.

Cap. 10. Comes to the case of Philippi, Phil. 1. 1, 2. And, 1.. 3. he says,
It is manifest that Epaphroditus Bishop of Philippi was at Rome with Paul when
he wrote this Epistle (and he supposes that there were yet no Presbyters, but
Bishops.) And so when Paul wrote to all the Saints which are at Philippi, with
the Bishops and Deacons,] he meant [ to those that are not at Philippi where
there was no Bishop, but in other Cities of Macedonia that had every one a
Prelate without ever a Presbyter under him.] With some this expounding may go
for modest, if not true.

Two probable Arguments I object against his improbable Expositions of this
Text and that Acts 20. before mentioned: 1. Where did he ever read that all the
Province of Macedonia was called Philippi; and the Saints said to dwell at
Philippi that dwelt all over Macedonia? 2. Where did he ever read in Scripture
many Episcopal Churches under one Metropolitan, called One Church in the
singular Number, as in Acts 20. 28. or One Flock either? 3. Will any knowing
man deny that he contradicts not only Hierom and Theodoret, but the common
Exposition of the Fathers, by this his odd Opinion? And is it not gross
partiality for the same man that can so easily cast off the judgment of almost
all the Ancients at once, to lay so much of the whole stress of his Diocesan
and Metropolitan Cause upon the Fathers assertions, yea doubtful reports; and
to take it for so immodest a thing in others, to deny belief to them in such
uncertain matters?

But he sets Epiphanius his words against Aerius against them all* Even that
Epiphanius who ordained in the Bishop of Jerusalem's Diocese to his
displeasure, and that combined with that Theophilus Alexand. (of whom Socrates
writes such horrid and unchristian practices) to root out Chrysostom, and
raise a flame in the Church of Constantinople; who liker a mad man than a sober
Bishop, came from Cyprus not only into the City, but the Church where
Chrysostom used to officiate, to inflame his people, and declame against, and
censure their Bishop, to whom he was an inferior; and that parted with him in
a wrathful Prognostic, and dyed by the way home: And yet even this one man
says nothing to his advantage, but that the Apostles placed Bishops only with
Deacons in some Churches that had not fit men to make Presbyters of: which we
not only grant, but doubt whether ever they made any but Bishops, (though in
great Cities there were many of them.)

And. 8, 9, 10. when it seemed to serve his turn, he yet further gratifieth us,
by granting, yea maintaining that one Congregation had not two Bishops, yet [
nothing hinders but that in the same City there might sometimes be two
distinct Assemblies, converted by two Apostles, perhaps of distinct dialects
and rites, and these governed by distinct Bishops, with a divided or distinct
Clergy,] which is almost as much as we desire. If any more be necessary he
grants it us,. 11. where having feigned and not proved that the people of all
the Province of Macedonia were said by Paul to be at Philippi; he confesses
that then every City had a Bishop, and none of those that we now call
Presbyters. And it is more this Bastard sort of Presbyters Office that we deny
than the Bishops: And granting this he grants us all; even that then there was
no such half Officers, nor Bishops that had the rule of any Presbyters: which
he further proves,. 19, 20, 21. And by the way,. 16, 17. he gives us two more
Observations, 1. That the (...) gave precedence to some Churches. Where I would
learn whether the Holy Ghost still observed the order in converting men, to
begin at the highest Metropolis, and descend by order to the lowest, and so to
the Villages? Or whether our Doctor do not here contradict what he said before,
of the Apostles every where disposing of the Churches according to the Civil
Metropolitical Order? I doubt his memory here failed him.

2. Philippi and Thessalonica being both in Macedonia, and these Epistles being
each written to all the Province, we hence learn that the Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and that to the Philippians, were written to the same men.
Whether each Epistle, Rev. 2. and 3. to the seven Churches of Asia was written
to all Asia, and so all the faults charged on all that are charged on any one,
I leave to your arbitrary belief. For none of these are proved, whatever proof
is boasted of.

Cap. 11. he further gratifieth us in expounding 1 Timothy 3. in the same manner,
One Bishop with Deacons then serving for a whole Diocese, that is for one
Assembly, not having such a thing as a half Presbyter subject to any Bishop.

Cap. 12. he is as liberal in expounding Tit. 1. By Elders in every City, is
meant a single Bishop that had no half Presbyter under him, and whose Diocese
had but one Assembly. We are not so unreasonable as to quarrel with this
liberality.

Cap. 13. And about Heb. 13. we are as much gratified in the Exposition of the
word [(...)] of which more afterward. And Cap. 14, and 15. he says the same
of (...) and (...), Pastors and Teachers, that they both are meant of none but
Bishops. And that Presbyters now adays are permitted and tied to teach the
people, and instruct them from the Scriptures, this apparently arose hence,
that Bishops in ordaining Presbyters gave them that power, but not to be
exercised till licensed by the Bishops Letters.] Of this detestable Opinion
(worse than the Italians in the Council of Trent, that would have derived the
Episcopal Power from the Pope) I have said somewhat before, and intend more in
due place. The Bishops do only ministerially give them possession: Christ is
the only Instituter of the Office by himself (and his Spirit in his Apostles.)
Can the Bishops any more choose to deliver this possession by Ordination, than
to preach the Gospel? Could they have made Presbyters that had no power to
teach the people? Is the Bishops liberality the original of the Office? How
much then is Christ beholden to Bishops, that when a thousand Parishes are in
some one of their Diocesses, they will give leave to any Presbyter to teach any
of the people? and that when eighteen hundred of us were silenced in one day (
Aug. 24. 1662.) that all the rest were not served so too?

Cap. 16. he exercises the same naked affirming Authority of the words [
Ministers of the word] Luke 1. 2. and Stewards] all are but Bishops. And he
asks whether ever man heard of more Stewards than one in one house? or of
several bearers of one Key? And he foresaw that we would tell him that Gods
Catholic Church is one House of God, and that at least all the Apostles were
Stewards and Key-Bearers in that one Church; and that by his Doctrine none but
one of them should be Steward of Gods Mysteries, or have the Keys: And
therefore he says, that [ Though the Apostles are called Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. that is to be reckoned as pertaining to the many
divided Families, that is the many particular Churches, distinct parts of the
Universal Church, which the Apost^^s divided among themselves. Answ. Unless his
etiam here be a self-contradicting cheat, it will hence follow, 1. That the
Apostles are not Stewards of Gods Mysteries in gathering Churches, but only to
the Churches gathered. 2. That in Baptizing and giving the Holy Ghost, to such
as yet entered not into a Particular Church, they ex^ercised not any of their
said Stewardship or Power. 3. That they have no Power of the Keys at all, over
any that are not Members of a Particular Church, (such as the Eunuch, Act. 8.
And many Merchants, Ambassadors, Travelers, and many thousands that want
Pastors or opportunity, or hearts, yea and all Christians in the first Instant
as merely Baptized Persons seeing Baptism enters them only into the
Universal Church, and not into any particular as such) 4. And that till the
Apostles gathered particular Churches, and distributed them, they had no
Stewardship, nor use (at least) of the Keys. And what if it can never be
provedthat ever the Apostles distributed the universal Church into Apostolical
Provinces, but only pro re nata distributed themselves in the World, were they
never Stewards then nor Key-bearers? Verily if I believed such a distribution
of the World into twelve or more Provinces by them, I should question the power
that altered that Constitution, and set us up but four or five Patriarchs. And
were the same Apostles no Stewards or Key-bearers out of their (feigned)
several Provinces? If we must be cilenced unless we subscribe to the Dictates
of such self conceited Confident men, who shall ever Preach that is not born
under the same Planet with them? Cap. 17. he proceeds still to maintain our
Cause, that even in Justin Martyrs writings, and others of that Age, by the
(...) are meant the Bishops of the several Churches who had not one Presbyter
under them, but Deacons only, and therefore had but single Congregations; but
did themselves alone with the Deacon perform all the public Offices in the
Church. And that no equal Presbyter was placed with them, offends us no more
than that our Parish Ministers now are presented and instituted alone, yea and
have power to take Curates under them as their helpers.

Cap. 18. He proves truly that the Names Sacerdos and Sacerdotium are usually
by old Writers spoken of sole Bishops and Episcopacy. By which we are the more
confirmed in our Opinion, that he that is not Episcopus gregis a Bishop over
the Flock, is not Sacerdos, true Pastor, but has only a limb of the
Ministerial Office, being a thing of presumptuous Prelates institution.

Cap. 19. He surther strengthens us by maintaining that the word Presbyter,
in the places of the New Testament cited by him, does mean only a Bishop, that
is a Pastor of one only Congregation, that had no Presbyter under him, but
Deacons: and that no mention is made by the Apostles of other Presbyters, 6.
And he gratifieth us with Epiphanius his Reasons, 4. [ because as yet there was
not a multitude of Believers:] And that the Elders that Paul speaks to
Timothy of ordaining and rebuking, and those that were worthy of double honor,
were only Bishops that had no subject Presbyters. Whether they were set over
the Churches as Moses was over Israel, with a design that they should make
subordinate Officers under them, I shall enquire in due place.

Cap. 20. He goes over most of the other Texts in the New Testament that
mention Elders, showing that they mean such Bishops; and that even at
Jerusalem, the Elders Acts 15. were not our new half Priests, but the Bishops
of all the Churches of Judaea; and so of others here again repeated by him. But
it sticks with me, that these Bishops having no subject Presbyters, are found
so often in the Metropolitan City, and so often in travel, and so often many hundred
Miles from home, that I doubt it was but a few Churches in the world that kept
the Lords day, and assembled for public Worship, or had any Sacraments
frequently, but lived as the Atheists and impious contemners of
Church Communion now do; or else that with the Fanatics we must hold that
Laymen or Deacons did play the Priests in all Church Offices.

Cap. 21. He vindicateth that one remaining Text, Jam. 5. 14. which mentions
Presbyters visiting the sick, as meant only of Bishops, and not of mungrel
Priests: And so being secured that these were never found in the Scripture
times, and consequently no Bishop (except Archbishops) that had more
worshipping Churches than one, we must look who presumed to institute another
Office. And here, 3. he persuades us to be so civil to Ignatius, as thankfully
to acknowledge him the first Patron of our Office-dignity; intimating that
there is no earlier proof of the invention of this mungrel Office, than the
Epistles of Ignatius.

Cap. 22. He tells us that the word Presbyter is also taken for Bishops by
Polycarp, Papias, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Clemens Alexand. so that our cause
will be carried beyond Scripture times. But again finding so many Bishops with
Polycarp, I doubt he makes Bishops too unwearied Travelers, and too great
non-Residents, and Gods Public Worship too often interrupted by their absence.

Cap. 23, 24, 25, 26. He speaks of Deacons, the word and Office, which we
have now no business with, but to note that cap. 26. 8. he is again at
Epiphanius allowing a single Bishop without Presbyters, but not without
Deacons, because he cannot be a Bishop without Deacons, (which I believe not,
nor do our Prelates) but without subject Presbyters he may (better than with
them.) And 10. he excellently argues from the Epistle to Timothy, that seeing
Paul instructs him in all things belonging to the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.
15. and yet never mentions these Medioxumos Presbyteros, mungrel or middle
Priests, it is plain that the reason is because none such were instituted when
the Apostle wrote: To which I add, nor afterward by the Apostles, as far as can
be proved, and therefore never should have been.

Cap. 27. He speaks of the (...) and (...) Tit. 1. and 2. and 1 Timothy 5.
showing that these Women were in Orders: Of which I have no mind to contend, so
that by the Name it be not inferred that they are she-Bishops; and that they
argue not as a Preacher did since we were silenced (I can name the Man and
place) from St. John's Epistle [ to the Elect Lady] to prove that there were
Lord-Bishops in the Apostles days, viz. an Elect Lady supposes an Elect Lord:
But there are no Elect Lords, but Elect Lord-Bishops: Ergo --

We have not yet seen all Dr. Hammond's confutation of our Diocesan Prelacie.
In his fifth Dissertation we have more. Cap. 1. He speaks of Clemens Romans and
whereas we think that the confusion among Historians, came partly from the
little notice that came down from those times of such particulars, and partly
from the identity of the Office of Linus, Cletus, and Clemens; being all
Bishops at once of a great Church (the Half-Presbyters being not yet ordained)
he gratifyeth us by proving that not only at Rome, but also in Antioch,
Ephesus, Corinth, and Jerusalem, there were more Churches than one, with their
several Bishops: Even one of the Jews and one of the Gentiles (how the local
Diocese were then divided is hard to tell, and where it was that one Apostle
had Power of the Keys, and where not) I shall improve this Concession in due
place.

Cap. 2. Of Clements Epistle he first takes notice of the Inscription [ to the
Church of God, dwelling (or sojourning) at Corinth] The same Phrase as Philip.
^. 1, 2. And by this Church he proves (by confident affirming) that all the
Churches of Achaia are meant. And that the same is to be said of Paul's Epistle
to the Corinthians, he unresistibly proves, by saying that Quisquis eas vel
leviter degustaverit (tuo scilicet gustu) hoc omnino pronunciandum esse
nobiscum statuet. Nec igitur de hac Clementis ambigi poterit.] And so all that
Controversy is ended. But though (without Scripture proof) imagination might
handsomely feign, that the many Churches of Achaia are called singularly [ the
Church of Corinth,] as one, because of the Unity of the Metropolitan; yet, 1.
I would have heard somewhat like reason for, and some instances of the use of
such a speech, as this [(...)] The Church of God dwelling (or sojourning) at
Rome, to the Church of God dwelling (or sojourning) at Corinth. And why and
where, and by what good writers; all Achaia is called Corinth, or all
Macedonia, Philippi (or all the Cities about it) indeed as the County of
Worcester, the County of York, of Warwick, etc. are usual Titles, so may the
Church of York, Worcester, Warwick, be in the Diocesans sense. But whoever said
of all the County or Diocese [ To the County, Diocese, dwelling at York,
Worcester, Warwick?] As if all the Country and Towns belonging to that Circuit
were called Warwick. etc.

2. Does not his own proof evidently confute him. 2 Cor. 1. 1. To the Church of
God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all Achaia. Are the
last words Tautological? does [ with] signify no addition at all. If by [ the
Church which is at Corinth] be meant all the Churches and Christians in Achaia,
what sense is there in the addition of [ with all the Saints which are in
Achaia?] O what kind of proof will satisfy some Learned Men!

3. Was it all the Churches of Achaia that the incestuous person. 1 Cor. 5.
dwelt with? and that are chidden for suffering him in their Communion? and that
are directed when they meet together to cast him out, and not to eat with him?

4. Would it not be Calumny according to all rational Laws, to accuse all the
Churches of Achaia, of all those Crimes which the Church at Corinth is accused
of, without a better proof than this?

5. Was it all the Churches of Achaia, which 1 Cor. 14. are said to meet all in
one place, and to have so many Prophets and Interpreters in that one Assembly?
I am not at leisure to say more of this.

But who denies that the same Epistle which was directed first to the
Corinthians, was secondarily directed to the rest of Achia, and to be
Communicated to them. And yet not the Churches of Achaia be all said to be or
dwell at Corinth.

When 2 Cor. 11. 10. Paul speaks of [ the Regions of Achaia ((...)) he says
that shows that the matter belonged [ to the whole Church of Achaia.] But how
long have they all been challenged to name one Text of Scripture, that speaks
singularly of the Church of a Province or Country, consisting of many
particular Churches: Yet adds he [ In re manifesta non pluribus opus est.]

Cap. 3. He only mentions the occasion of Clements Epistle, where without any
Proof he extends the Sedition then raised by them, to the disturbance of the
Civil Government and Peace: And if he had proved as he endeavors that by
(...) is meant the Civil Rulers (which is utterly uncertain) yet the
commendation of their Obedience, formerly to the Civil Power, as part of the
Character of their orderliness and peaceableness, does not prove that Rebellion
against them was part of their following disorder.

Cap. 4. Is to tell us, 1. That Clemens puts Obedience to Rulers, and due
honoring of Presbyters as a Law of God (which is not to be doubted of.) 2.
That Bishops were sent by the Apostles, as the Apostles by Christ, but were
joined only with Deacons to attend them. Mark here Reader, that he does not
only acknowledge that de facto the Order of Mungrel or Half-Priests was not yet
Existent, but also that none such were sent by the Apostles, and so not
Instituted, and that Clemens himself takes notice of no such even in his
times. But how the Dr. will prove that no great Churches (and particularly this
of Corinth) had but one Bishop, you shall see with little satisfaction.) 3. He
notes that these Bishops thus sent were constituted every where, Ecclesias
nondum natas, sed ad partum ( bonis Dei ausp^cus) festinantes, brachiis atque
ulnis suis susceptum and administratum; to receive in their Arms and Arms the
Churches not yet born, but (by Gods Blessing) hastening to the Birth] whereas of
his own Head he had before said that the Bishops were sent by the Apostles
(when Clement says no such thing) but only that they were Constituted (
sending being the word used of Itenerant Preachers gathering and visiting
Churches, and Constituting with Ordaining the usual word of Bishops and
Presbyters, who as such are fixed to particular Churches;) so now he more
boldly forgeteth that Bishops were (yea every where) to receive Churches that
were yet no Churches: Where he contradicts both Scripture and common use of
the word Bishop, and abuses Clement. 1. Let any Man that can show us thatin
the New Testament the word Bishop is ever used of any Pastor that was not
related to a Church, and as signifying that Relation, and that Bishop and Flock
are yet as much Relatives as King and Kingdom. 2 Let him show that can, that
the word was used otherwise by Christians, for many a hundred years after
Christ. Though I grant that Ministers in general were (and may be) ordained
sine titulo, to Preach and gather Churches, and help others, yet never Bishops,
the word signifying an Over-seer of the Flock or Church to which he is related.
3. If it were certain that the futurity of believing mentioned by Clemens had
relation to the Constitution of Bishops, and not to the Apostles Preaching
only, yet Clemens says not that there were yet no Believers or no Churches
where they were constituted Bishops: Where there were but a few Believers, the
Apostles placed Bishops and Deacons over those few, who should receive others
into the same Society (till it was full and no further) who should after
believe. It is an abuse of Clemens to say, it was [ to Churches yet not born]
when he has no such word! As if it could not be for future Believers, unless
at present there were no Believers. And it is an abuse of him to seign him to
assert that the Apostles did every where as soon as they had once Converted one
Man, presently make that new Baptized Novice a Bishop before they Converted any
more, saving perhaps one or two to be his Deacons: Or that they used to make
Deacons (or Bishops either) to Churches future, that were yet no Churches: When
as the Scripture tells the contrary most expressly, that the Church at
Jerusalem, was before the Deacons, Act. 7. That they ordained Elders in every
Church, Act. 14. 23. and not in no Church, as he implies: And Tit. 1. 5. every
City is equivalent to every Church, for it was not in every Infidel City that
had no Christians: Which beyond all modest contradiction is proved by the Rules
given to Timothy and Titus for the Ordination of Bishops and Deacons: Who were
to be approved chosen persons, that had ruled their own Houses well, not
Novices, apt to teach, well reported of those without (which supposes some to
be within) Tim. 3. 14, 15. These things I write unto thee, that thou may
know how to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the
Living God, a Pillar and Basis of the truth.] The first that were converted did
not always prove the fittest to be Bishops; perhaps they might be Women or
weakly gui^ted: To feign that the Apostles did that every where, which none can
prove that ever they did once (to make a Bishop and Deacons of the two or three
first Novice-converts before there were any more Converted, and to make Bishops
and Deacons before there were any Christians to constitute Churches, merely for
future Churches,) this is not Clemens act, whoever else will own it.

4. Lastly he notes here that this was done by the Revelation of the Spirit,
whereby they examined and tried who was worthy of that Dignity. And, 1. What
use for examination who was worthy, where there was no other to stand in
Competition, and where the first Convert still was taken? Election is e multis.
And if he be compelled to grant that there were more Christians over whom the
Bishop was set, it is a Contradiction to say that a Bishop and his Flock,
though small, is no Church. 2. It is hard to believe that the multitude of
ignorant Lads, and wicked Men that are now set over Churches, are Constituted
by this Apostolical choice and Trial, by the Holy Ghost.

Cap. 5.. 5. He now acknowledges that where many were at first Converted, not
always the first but the fittest was chosen Bishop. And how prove you that he
and his Flock were no Church? The same he maintains,. 11. And after from the
choice usually made by suffrages and other reasons, well confuteth the former
conceit, when he took it to be Blondels; but sure he could not believe that
they were Ecclesiae nondum nat^, or future Believers that chose Bishops by
Suffrages? But having so fully in this Chapter confuted his former, as
Blondel's opinion, I doubt not but Blondel is in this as easily reconciled to
him as he to himself, and meant no more, but, 1. That the Apostles used (not to
make Bishops of the first Converts simply, but) to choose them out of the
ancient, grown, and proved Christians. 2. And that being so chosen (not he that
was first Baptized, but) he that was first ordained, had the presidence in the
Con^essus of their Presbyters: Which the Dr. might easily have seen, and spared
his insulting upon the contrary supposition.

But let it here again be noted, that. 9. he expressly and confidently asserteth
all that I now desire, viz. That Clemens does speak of that time of the
Churches beginning, in which there were not yet many Believers, and therefore
without doubt, neither Presbyters instituted. If he means [no Subject
Presbyters] or if he means [not many in a Church but one Bishop] I desire no
more: For then no Bishop had more Church Assemblies than one, nor any
half*Presbyters were ordained by the Apostles. For Clemens does not tell us
what the Apostles did in the beginning of their Preaching only, but gives us
this as an account of all their course, in settling Offices in the Churches
where they came.

Cap. 6. He confesses that Clemens mentions but two Orders, Bishops and
Deacons, (and we would have no more) and. 4. is over angry with Blundel for
gathering hence, that he did not do as those that from the Jewish Elders, or
Priests, or the 70 gather another order, what is there in this Collection that
deserves the sharp words of that.

Cap. 7. Whether Clemens well cited Isai. 60. 17. we need not debate. But if
yet any think that the Dr. has not fully granted us our Cause, let him take
these additions:. 7. He well gathers from Clemens that this form of
Government, founded in Bishops and Deacons (in each Church) being settled by Men
entrusted by Christ, is no less to be ascribed to Gods Command than if Christ
himself had constituted Bishops and Deacons in every City. (Let who dare then
approve of the alteration by the Introduction of another Order of Priests.)
And. 8. He notes also out of Clemens that the foresight of the contention that
would be about Episcopacy caused this establishment of Bishops and Deacons: No
doubt God foreknew both that the popular sort would oppose Government, and that
the Monarchical Prelates would depose all the Bishops of the same Church save
themselves, and the Arch-Prelates would depose all the Bishops of particular
Churches, and set up half Priests in their stead. And he does well not to pass
the following words in Clemens (though hard, yet plainly subverting the Doctors
opinion) that from this same foresight the Apostles constituted the foresaid
Bishops and Deacons (in every Church) (...), etc. ac descriptas deinceps
ministrorum officiorumque vices reliquerunt, ut in defunctorum locum alii viri
probati succedere, and illorum munia exequi possent, (as Pat. Junius
translateth it.) The word [(...)] can allow no such doubt as shall make this
much of the sense to be questionable, 1. That upon the foresight of the
Contentions about Episcopacy the Apostles made (by the Spirit) an established
Description of the Orders and Offices which should be in the Church, not only
in their times, but afterward. 2. And that the approved men that should
hereafter be ordained, should succeed in those same Orders which the Apostles
had established and described, even to the same Work or Office, ((...)) 3. That
the Apostles thus settled or described no mungrel or half Priests, but only
Bishops and Deacons, nor any Churches that had not each a Bishop and Deacon. 4.
Therefore no such half Priests should be brought in, but only such as the
Apostles instituted or described.

I can scarce speak my thoughts plainlier, than by the Doctors next words, 9. [
It is evident that by the immediate impulse of the Spirit of God Bishops were
constituted (Deacons only joined to them) in every Church, and so at Corinth,
and the rest of the Cities of Achaia: And that by the command of the same
Divine Prophecy or Revelation, successors were assigned to them after their
departure; (not a new order invented) Christ thus consulting and providing for
the Churches peace, etc.] And. 14. he well grants, 1. That the form of Church
Government was no where changed by the Apostles (and so no middle order
instituted by them.) 2. That through all their Age, and when they were
consummate in the middle, under their Disciples, the Government of every Church
was in the power of the Bishops and Deacons in common.

But whereas. 13, etc. he lays this as the ground of his Cause, 1. That it
was not the Church at Corinth alone, but of all Achaia that Clemens writes to
under this name. 2. And that there were not many Bishops in one Church, but one
to each of these particular Churches: I desire the Reader, 1. To try
impartially whether in all the Drs. Book there be one word of cogent Evidence
to prove what he says, yea or to make it credible or likely. 2. To consider
these Reasons following for the contrary.

1. As is said, whether Scripture custom of speech will allow us to call all
the Churches of a Region [ A Church] in the singular Number: Show one Text for
it if you can.

2. Whether any ancient Ecclesiastical use of speech will allow us to say that
the Churches of Achaia dwell at Corinth (as Clemens speaks, p. 1.)

3. Whether I have not proved from 1 Cor. 14. etc. that the Church of Corinth
had more Ministers, or Clergy men, or Pastors in it than one in Paul's time?
And therefore was not without so soon after.

4. Whether it be credible that when it was but one or two Persons ( p. 62.) by
whom or for whose cause the Pre^byters were ejected; that it is like either
this one or two were members of more particular Churches in Achaia than one or
two? Or that all the Churches of Achaia would so far own one or two mutineers
in a particular Church, as to cast out many of their Ministers for their sakes?

5. Yea when Clemens whole scope intimates that this one or two did this
because they aspired after Power or Preeminence themselves: Could they expect
themselves to be made the Rulers of more than one or two Churches?

6. And what was the cause of this one or two like to touch the Bishops of the
other Churches? And what Cognizance was all Achaia like to have of the cause of
one or two distant persons, so as for them to rise up against their own Bishops.

7. If it was not all nor many Pastors that were thus turned out (as Clemens
words import) why should all Achaia be called seditious, and blamed for it?

8. Does not the common Law of Charity and Justice forbid us to extend those
words of reproof to a whole Province, which cannot be proved to extend farther
than to a single Church, and principally touched but one or two.

9. I have before proved that Paul by [the Saints at Corinth] means but one
Church: Therefore it is like that Clemens does so too.

10. The Bishops and Deacons that Clemens speaks of, were set up (...), Cum
consensu totius Ecclesiae, or as the Dr. will needs have it [ applaudente aut
congratulante tota Ecclesia] indeed [ with the good liking, Pleasure, or
Approbation of the whole Church.] And shall we be persuaded that all the Cities
and Country of Achaia were that whole Church, which approved, or consented to
these particular Pastors that were put out? Or that had Cognizance of them or
acquaintance with them?

11. He expressly says, page 62. (...), That the Church of Corinth for the sake
of one or two, moved Sedition against the Presbyters.] And why does he never
say [ it was the Church of Achaia.]

12. p. 63. He supposes the Person Emulating to be [ a Believer of power in
explaining Doctrine, wise in judging of Speeches, etc. And would have the
concerned Person say ( p. 69.) If the Sedition be for me, and the Contention
and Schisms, I will remove, I will be gone wither you will, and will do what
the People pre-determine of* (or command,) only let the Flock of Christ with
the Presbyters set over them live in peace.] And is it like that the Flock that
this Person must say so to, was all Achaia?

13. And p. 73. He requires [ those that begun the Sedition, to be obediently
Subject to the Presbyters (and not to their Bishop only.) And is it like to be
the Bishops of other Churches through all Achaia, that this one or two is
required to Obey and be in Subjection to.

I have given my Reasons, to prove that these Presbyters were in the One Church
of Corinth: Compare his (if you can find them) to the contrary, and Judge
Impartially as you see cause.

Cap. 8. Has nothing that concerns us, but the recital of his grand*
Concession, lest we should think that in Clemens days, the great Bishop of
Corinth, or any in Achaia, had any more Church Assemblies than one to whom he
could do all the Pastoral Offices himself, he thus concludes,. 9. [ Indeed
mention is found only of Bishops (with Deacons) constituted in each City,
sometimes under the Title of Bishops, sometimes of Presbyters; there being no
token or foot-step at all appearing of such as we now call Presbyters, etc.] To
which I wholly agree; though not that there was but one Presbyter in Corinth.

Cap. 9. He is offended much with Blondel, for reproaching Hermas, and yet
using his Testimony: As if a Heretics, or an Infidels Testimony might not be
used in point of History: And,. 14. he again comes to his supposition of
Bishops without Subject Presbyters, as if it served his turn more than ours.

Cap. 10. About Pius words, has nothing that I find the cause concerned in.

Cap. 11. Is of little moment to us, both parties have little that is cogent,
but velitations about dubious words.

Cap. 12. Is but about the sense of the word applied to Ireneu^* which Dr. H.
takes here and by many after to mean a Bishop, and wonders that Blondel
pleads for a parity of order from a common Name. But it is not so much
without reason as he makes it: For if Bishops and Presbyters were in the first
times called by one Name; and the highest Person in the Church then was
ordinarily known by the name Presbyter, and the appropriating of [ Bishop] to
one sort* and Presbyter to another, came afterward in by such insensible
degrees, that no man can tell when it was, it sounds very probable, that it was
the true Episcopal Power, or the same Office and Order, that was first commonly
possessed by them to whom the name was Common.

And so much of Dr. Hammond's Dissertations, wherein I must desire the Reader
to note, 1. That I meddle not with other men's Causes, nor particularly with the
question: Whether one man in each Church, had of old, a guiding superiority
over the rest of the Presbyters? Nor yet, whether the Apostles had such
successors in the General care of many Churches, (such as Visiters, or
Archbishops) but only, 1. Whether every Presbyter were not Essentially a
Bishop, or Governor of the Flock, having the power of Keys, as they call it,
in foro interiore and exteriore, both for resolving Consciences and for
Church Order. 2. Whether every particular Church, which ordinarily communicated
together in the Lords Supper, and had unum Altar, had not one or more such
Bishops. 3. Whether it was not a sinful corrupting change* to bring in another
Species of Presbyters; and so to depose all the particular Churches and
Bishops, and set up a Dio^esane Bishop* in^^^is ordinis, with half Churches and
half-Priests, under him in their stead. 2. And note, That as it concerned me
not to speak to all that the Doctor has said, so I have carefully chosen out
all that I thought pertinent and of a seeming weight, as to the cause which I
manage, and have past by nothing in the whole Book, which I thought an
understanding Reader needs an answer to.

There is yet the same Authors Vindication of his Dissertations to be
considered: But I find nothing new in them to be answered by me, nor that I am
concerned for the Cause in hand any further than to give you these few
Observations.

1. That again, p. 5. he says, [ That by observing the paucity of Believers in
many Cities in the first Plantations, which made it unnecessary that there
should by the Apostles be ordained any more than a Bishop and Deacon (one, or
more) in each City, and that this was accordingly done by them at the first, is
approved by the most undeniable ancient Records.

2. That p. 7. he again well averreth that the Jewish and Gentile Congregations
occasioned several Churches and Bishops in the same Cities. And p. 14. 15. That
Timothy was placed by Paul, Bishop of the Gentiles at Ephesus, and S. John, and
another after him, Bishop of the Jews. Page 16. He thinks that Timothy was
Bishop of Ephesus (or Angel) when Rev. 2. was wrote. Page 17. From Epiphanius
he reckons above 50 years from the Revelation of John, Rev. 2. to the writing
of Ignatius's Epistles. By which we may Calculate the time when the Office of
half-Presbyters began to be invented, according to his own Computation. That
page 21. and passim, his supposition of the 24 Bishops of Judaea, sitting about
the Throne of James Bishop of Jerusalem, and his other supposition of their
being so ordinarily there. And of the Bishops of Provinces in other Nations,
being so frequently many score, if not hundred Miles off their people in the
Metropolitan Cities, when the people had no other Priest to Officiate, does
tend to an Atheistical conceit, that the Ordinary use of Sacred Assemblies and
Communion is no very needful thing, when in the best times by the best men, in
whole Countries at once, they were so much forborne.

Page 26. Again you have his full and plain Assertion, [ That there were not in
the space within compass of which all the Books of the new Testament were
written, any Presbyters, in our modern Notion of them, created in the Church,
though soon after certainly in Ignatius time, ( which was above 50 years after
the Rev.) they were].

Page 60. He supposes that whoever should settle Churches under a Heathen King
among Heathens, must accordinly make the Churches gathered subordinate to one
another, as the Cities in which they are gathered were (though Heathen)
subordinate to one another, of which more in due place.

Page 76, 77. He says that [ As Congregations, and Parishes are Synonimous in
their Style, so I yield that Believers in great Cities were not at first
divided into Parishes, while the number of Christians in a City was so small
that they might well assemble in the same place, and so needed no Partitions,
or Divisions. But what disadvantage is this to us, who affirm that one Bishop,
not a College of Presbyters, presided in that one Congregation, and that the
Believers in the Regions and Villages about did belong to the care of that
single Bishop, or City Church] A Bishop and his Deacon were sufficient at the
first (to sow) their Plantations -- [ For what is a Diocese but a Church in a
City with the Suburbs and Territories, or Region belonging to it? And this
certainly might be and remain under the Government of a single Bishop. Of any
Church so bounded there may be a Bishop, and that whole Church shall be his
Diocese, and so he a Diocesan Bishop, though as yet this Church be not
subdivided into more several Assemblies.] So that you see now what a Diocese
is. And that you may know that we contend not about Names, while they call the
Bishop of one Congreation, a Diocesane, we say nothing against him: A Diocesan
in our sense is such as we live under, that have made one Church of many
hundred or a thousand.

But Reader be not abused by words, when it is visible Countries that we talk
of. As every Market Town, or Corporation is (...) a City in the old sense, so
the Diocese of Lincoln. (which I live in) at this reckoning has three or
fourscore Diocesses in it, and the Diocese of Norwich about 50 Diocesses in it,
etc. That is such Cities with the interjacent Villages.

Page 78. He says [ When they add these Angels were Congregational, not
Diocesan, they were every of them Angels of a Church in a City, having
authority over the Regions adjacent and pertaining to that City, and so as
CHURCH and CONGREGATION ARE ALL ONE, AS IN ORDINARY USE IN ALL LANGUAGES THEY
ARE: Thus were Congregational and Diocesan also. What follows of the paucity of
Believers, in the greatest Cities, and their meeting in one place, is willingly
granted by us.

I must desire the Reader to remember all this, when we come to use it in due
place. And you may modestly smile to observe how by this and the foregoing
words, the Dr. forgetfully has cast out all the English Diocesans: While he
makes it needful that the Cities be Ecclesiastically subordinate as they are
Civilly, and makes it the very definition of a Diocesan Bishop, to be a Bishop
of a City with the Country or Suburbs belonging to it: But in England no lesser
Cities (ordinarily at least) nor Corporation-Towns are at all Subject to the
great Cities: Nor are any Considerable part of the Country Subject to them;
nor do the Liberties of Cities, or Corporations, reach far from the Walls, or
Towns. So that by this Rule the Bishop of London, York, Norwich, and Bristow
would have indeed large Cities with narrow liberties: But the rest would have
Diocesses little bigger than we could allow to conscionable Faithful Pastors.

But he yet adds more, p. 79. he will do more for our cause than the
Presbyterians themselves, who in their disputes against the Independents-say
that Jerusalem had more Christians belonging to the Church than could
conveniently meet in one place; But, says the Dr. [ This is contrary to the
Evidence of the Text, which says* expresty, v. 44. that all the Believers were
(...), meeting in one and the same place. The like may be said of the other
places, Act. 4. 4. and 5. 14. For certainly as yet though the number of
believers increased, yet they were not distributed into several Congregations.

Will you yet have more? p. 80, 81. When the London Ministers say that [ the
Believers of one City made but one Church in the Apostles days] he answers [
This observation I acknowledge to have perfect truth in it, and not to be
confutable in any part: And therefore instead of rejecting, I shall embrace it,
and from thence conclude that there is no manner of incongruity in assigning of
one Bishop to one Church, and so one Bishop in the Church of Jerusalem, because
it is a Church, not Churches, BEING FORECED TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WHERE THERE
WERE MORE CHURCHES, THERE WERE MORE BISHOPS.] I am almost in doubt by this
whether the Dr. were not against the English Prelacy, and he and I were not of
a mind, especially remembering that he said nothing against my disputations of
Church Government written against himself, when I lived near him. Observe
Reader, 1. That even now he confessed that a Church and Congregation is all
one. 2. And here he confesses, that where there were more Churches, there were
more Bishops; and his words [ Because it is a Church, not Churches] seem to
import that de jure he supposes it is no Church without a Bishop, and that
there should be no fewer Bishops than Churches. And then I ask, 1. Where and
when do all the Christians in this Diocese, of above an hundred miles long,
Congregate; who meet but in above a thousand several Temples, and never know
one of a thousand of the Diocese? 2. Does not this grant to the Brownists, that
the Parish Churches are no Churches, but only parts of the Diocesane Church?
3. And then if it be proved that the Diocesane Church*form, is but of humane
invention, what Church in England will they leave us, that is of divine
institution? This is the unhappiness of overdoing to undo all; and of aspiring
too high, to fall down into nothing.

And does he not speak much to the same purpose, p. 87. [ One City with the
Territories adjoining to it, being ruled by one single Bishop, was to be called
a singular Church: And therefore that which is said to be done in every Church,
Act. 14. 23. is said to be done in every City, Tit. 1. 5. The sum of which
observation is only this, that one City with the Territories adjoining to it,
never makes above one Church in the Scripture Style: (And yet he largely
proves the contrary, that there was one Church and Bishop of Jewish
Christians, and one of Gentiles) whereas a Province, or Country, or Nations
consists, of many Cities, and so of many Episcopal Sees or Churches.] The like
he has again p. 90. 53.

But whereas p. 88. ^e would Prove that a Province, or Nation, of many
Churches, may be called one Church, because the Churches in all the World are
so called in our Creed, and in the Scripture: I answer, That he can never prove
that many Churches are ever in Scripture called one, save only the Universal
Church, which is but one, being Headed by one Head, even Christ. The Universal
Church (as he said before of a Church compared to Persons) is One Collective
body, as a Political Society related to Christ or constituted of Christ and all
Christians: And a particular Church is one as constituted of the Ministerial
Pastors and People: But find any Text of Scripture that calls the Churches of
a Nation, or Province, one Church, in all the new Testament if you can.

In page 103. he gives Reasons for his singularity in interpreting so many
Texts of Scripture; and shows that as the Fathers differ from each other, (as
Tirinus shows) so we may also differ from them, (and I know not of any
Expositor that ever wrote that has more need of this Apology than Grotius and
he.) And I mislike not his Reasons. But then how unsavory is it for the same
person to expect that we should in reverence to one expository word in
Irenaeus, and another in Epiphanius, forsake the common sense of the Fathers
where they do agree? or that we must bow to every ancient Canon?

But I would not have him thought more singular than he is, lest when I have
answered him the Prelatists forsake him, and say that they are still
unanswered, therefore I crave the Readers special observation of his words, p.
104, 105. [ I might truly say that for those minute considerations and
conjectures wheren this Doctor diff^rs from some others who have written before
him as to the manner of interpreting some few Texts, he has the Suffrages of
many of the learned men of this Church at this day, and as far as he knows OF
ALL that embrace the same cause with him.] Of which I only say, that if he do
but minutely differ from others, and not at all from the most, I hope my
confutation of him will not be impertinent as to the rest. But if he lay the
very stress of his cause upon novel Expositions of almost every Text which
mentions Bishops, Presbyters, Pastors, and quite cross the way of almost all
(save Petavius) that ever went before him; then think whether that cause stand
on so firm ground, as some persuade, which needs such new foundations or ways
of support at this Age, in the judgment of such learned men as these.

Page 119, 120, 121. He proves that Diocesane Bishops are the only Elders of
the Church which James advises the sick to send for: supposing the City
Churches (even of Jerusalem to be yet no bigger than that one Bishop and a
Deacon (who yet was not this Visiter of the sick) might do all the Ministerial
work. Where I confess he quite outgoeth me in extenuating the Churches in S.
James's time. If the Church of Jerusalem had seven Deacons, I will not belive
him (pardon the incivility) that they had but one Presbyter. And (pardon me a
greater boldness in saying) if he had tried but as much as I have done what it
is to do all the Pastoral work for one Parish of 2 or 3000 Persons in public
and private, he could not possibly have been of this Opinion. Nor do I think it
likely, that when it is a singular Person that James bids send for the Elders
of the Church, but that it implies that the Church where he was had more
Elders than one. I confess that if it had been spoken either to Persons,
plurally, or of Churches plurally, the phrase might well have signified the
single Elders of the several Churches: But to say to each sick man singularly,
Let him send for the Elders of the Church singularly) in common use of speech
signifies that there were many Elders for that man to send for in the Church.
And whereas he asks whether a sick man must send for the College of
Presbyters? I answer, that a sick man may well send for the Presbyters or
Ministers, either one after another, as there is occasion, or more than one at
once if need require for his Resolution. If we say to a sick man in London, (
send for the Physicians of the City, and let them advise you, etc.) it
signifies that the City has more Physicians than one, and that he may advise
with one, or more at once, o^ per vices as he finds Cause: and no man would
speak so to him, if London had but one Physician, and Norwich another, and York
another, etc. And when, p. 121. he supposes the Objection, that they have a
mean opinion of visiting the sick, because they say, it is not the Bishops work
(which he well makes it to be) methinks this should suit with no English Ears,
who will quickly understand, that they speak de facto of our Bishops, to whom a
sick man may send an hundred, or fifty, or twenty Miles, to desire him to come
presently, and pray with him, if his disease be a Frenzy which depriveth him
of his Wits, and all about him be as mad: And the Bishop with us may be said to
visit the sick of his Diocese, as a man may be said to weed a Field that
plucketh up a weed or two where he goes; or to build a City, because he knocked
up a Na^l or two in his own House.

Page 120. It is observable which he says [ Indeed, if it were not (the
Bishops work to visit the sick) how could it be ^y the Bishop, when other parts
of his Office became his full Employment, committed to the Presbyter. For, 1. he
could not commit that to others, if he first had it not in himself: And, 2.
This was the only Reason of ordaining inferior Officers in the Church, that
part of the Bishops ta^k might be performed by them.

Ans. Either he believed that the Office of a Subject Presbyter (or Order as
they call it) was instituted by God, and settled in the Church as necessary by
his Spirit, and Law, or not: If he do, then Qu. 1. Whether the work of these
Presbyters, after the institution, be not the work of their own Office, and not
(in the individual acts) the Bishops? As Eve was a Rib of Adam materially, but
when she was a woman she was no part of Adam, nor her acts like his acts; and
so of all womankind thereafter. Qu. 2. Whether the Bishop any other way commit
the work or Office to him, than by calling him to an Office which God himself
had made or instituted, and Ministerially investing him in it as a Servant
(that has no land of his own) may be sent by his Master to invest another in
some Land which he has given him, by a Legal Solemn delivery of possession; or
as a Steward may send such Reapers into his Masters field as his Master did
before exactly describe to him? Christ being the only maker of the Office, and
punctual describer of it, and the Bishop, people, and Magistrates altogether,
doing no more but choose the Person described as fit, and deliver him
possession of the place.

But if he thought that the Bishop himself does make the Presbyters Office, by
parting his own, and so giving him as much as he thinks fit, I shall shame
this Opinion in due place.

Page 132. (and in his Dissert.) he would make us believe that ( Polycarp's
Epistle, and so) Clement's [ to the Church (...)] were to be interpreted
extensively as relating to (...), to the Church in the Parish, that is the
Diocese, of Corinth, or Province of Achaia: And so he disto^teth Phil. 1. ^.
and other places; but in all his Citations gives us not a word of proof, that
(...) signifies to dwell in the Circuit or extent of a Diocese, and not simply
to so^^uru or dwell. As if (...) were derived from (...), and as if the first
notion of (...) were a Diocese, or a City with its Territories: As Pat Young
says on Clement's Epist. p. 1. [ cum idem sit (...) quod (...) ^t videre est
statim in initio libri Ruth and alibi apud 70: which he further proves, yea
and by an old Inscription of an Altar brought from Delos, etc. see the place.
And we took it to be agreed on that (...) in its strict sense is but habito
tanquam peregrinus, advena sum; and in its usual larger sense, juxta habito,
accolo, sum pr^ximus, vicinus accola. And (...) and (...) but incolatus and
vicinia and habitatio propinqua; a place of cohabitation, or a neighborhood:
As we still take cohabitation to be a necessary qualification or dispositio
materiae of a Churchmember (of the same particular Church, contrary to the
Diocesan state, where the Members never see each other, nor hear of their
Names.) And though (...) in process of time (as Bishops enlarged their Diocese
or Church) came to signify a whole Country, or Circuit as large as a Diocese
did, yet no man can prove that it was so from the beginning of the Churches; or
signified any determined space of ground, beyond the habitation of the members
of one Worshipping Church or Congregation: Even as (...) is not to build in the
same Diocese, but nea^ or in the same Neighborhood; and (...) is not to set
ones dwelling in the same Diocese, but vicinity: That (...) also in its
strictest signification is but inquilinus a sojourner, and in its largest (...)
a cohabitant, but in bo^n signifies a Neighbor (and not strangers dwelling
out of the notice of each other through a Diocese) is so fully showed out of
many Authors by the Basil Lexicon (published by Henr. Petr. 1568) that I need
not add to it. And the Authors of that Lexicon suppose, that the third (the
Church) signification is primarily but from (...), ut accola, that [ Paraeci
huic dicuntur qui fanum aliquod accolnit (not that dwell near a thousand or
many hundred several Churches) unde and (...) curia and viciniae conventus (not
many hundred Conventions) accol^rum coitio and congregatio, hoc parochiam
dicunt absurd. Much more would they call the newer Notion of a Diocess-Parish
like ours, absurd. In Heb. 11. 9. and Luke 24. 18. Act 7. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 11. 1
Pet. 1. 17. Act. 13. 17. Act. 7. 29. Ephesians. 2. 19. (which are all the places in
the new Testament where these words are used that I know of) the Dr. himself in
his Annotations does not once pretend that the word is used in his Province
sense: And is not Clemens and Polycarp liker to use the word in the Scripture
sense, than in this aliene sense, that since came into the Church? We must
therefore take leave, till better proof of the contrary, to expound Clemens,
Polycarp, and Ignatius, merely by [ sojourning and cohabiting in such a
vicinity as Personal and Congregational Communion required.

But his only seeming proof is (again) because Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians, was to the Province of Achaia. To which again I answer, that
Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians was to be communicated to all Achaia (and
after to all the World;) but that makes not Corinth, and Achaia, nor [the
Church at Corinth,] and [the Churches of all Achaia] to be the same: Nay, Paul
expressly distinguishes them by the Conjunction, as aforesaid; else his words
were Tautological, if by [ To the Church of Cod, which is at Corinth, with all
the Saints which are in all Achaia] he had meant [ To the Church of God, which
is in all Achaia, with the Saints that are in all Achaia] And I had thought all
Achaia had been more than a Parish, even as the word (...) was used
Ecclesiastically in those times, in the opinion of the Diocesane Divines
themselves. And so much of Dr. Hammond, and all that have written for our
Prelacy.

The Opposers of Prelacy.
To name the Authors that write on the other side (or some of them) is enough,
Viz. 1. Beza, 2. Cartwright, 3. Jacob against Downame, 4. Didoclane alias
Ca'derwood's Altar Damascenum, 5. Learned Parker de Polit. Ecclesiast. (not so
florid as his Treat. of the Cross, but more nervous) 6. Holy and Learned Paul
Baine ( Perkin's Successor) his Diocesan's Trial, short and nervous, in
Syllogisms. 7. Salmasius in 2 Books ( Apparat. ad primat. P. and Walo.
Messalinus,) 8. Before him Gersom Bucer dissert. de Gubern. Ecclesiae, against
Downame, large and learned. 9. Jer. Buroughs, in 2 or 3 sheets,
Argumentatively. 10. Prins unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, 11. Dr. Bastwick's
Flagellum Pontificis and Episcoporum Latialium (oratorical) 12. And such are
Miltons. 13. Smectymnuus, that is, Steph. Marshal, Edw. Calamy, Tho. Young,
Mat. Newcomen, and Will. Spurstow: And a defense of it. 14. The Land. Ministers
Jus Divinum, Presb. and Minist. 15. The Isle of Wight Papers. 16. Dav. Blondel
(that wonder of the world, for Chronology and History.) A few leaves of whose
over-large Collections, Dr. Hammond has Answered, as you have heard, and given
his reason for going no further, because Blond. extends the Ministerial
Parity but to 140. But to us it is not so inconsiderable to see by what degres
the Prelacy rose, and to see it proved so copiously, that even in after Ages
the species extent and of Churches, and the Order or Species of Presbyters were
not altered, notwithstanding accidental alterations. And therefore I shall
undertake to bring proofenough of what I now plead for from times much lower
than 140, such as I think the impartal will rest satisfied in, though interest
and preconceived Idea's are seldom satisfied, or conqueredly a Confutation.

CHAP. VI. That it is not of Gods institution, nor is pleasing to him that
there be no Churches and Bishops but in Cities; or that a City with its
territories, or Country adjacent, be the bounds of each Church.
SOme late most esteemed defenders of Diocesanes, especially Dr. Hammond, lay
so great a stress upon the supposition, that the Apostles settled the Churches
in the Metropolitan and Diocesane order, and that they did partly in imitation
of the Jewish policy, and partly as a thing necessary by the nature of the
thing, that even in Heathen Kingdoms, when Churches are gathered in any
Cities, they must have a difference of Church power over each other as they
find the Cities to have a civil power (as you heard before from Dr. H.) that I
think it meet here briefly to prove, 1. That it was not of the Apostles purpose
to have Churches and Bishops placed only in Cities, and not in Villages. 2. Nor
that Church power should thus follow the civil; 3. Nor that a City with its
territories should be the measure of the habitation of each Churches members.
The licet in some cases I deny not, but the oportet is the question, yea and
the licet in other cases. The two first are proved together by these reasons,
following.

1. Christ himself our grand examplar did not only preach and convert
Christians in Cities, but in Country villages, where he held assemblies, and
preached and prayed, yea in mountains and in Ships: And though he planted no
particular Churches with fixed Bishops there, yet that was because he did so no
where. He performed all offices in the Country which he did in the Cities,
except that which was appropriated to Jerusalem by the Law and the institution
of his last supper, which could be done but in one place.

2. There is no Law of God (direct or indirect) which makes it a duty to
settle Churches and Bishops in Cities only, and forbids the settling them in
Country villages: This is most evident to him that will search the Scripture,
and but try the pretended proofs of the late Prelatists; for the vanity of
their pretensions will easily appear; They have not so fair a pretense in the
New Testament for asserting such a Law, as the Pop: has for his supermacy in [
Peter feed my sheep]. And where there is no Law, there is no obligation on us
unto duty, and no sin in omission.

If they say that [ the Apostles did plant Churches only in Cities
comprehending their territories] I answer, 1. They prove that they planted them
in Cities; but the silence of the Scriptures proves not the Negative, that
they planted none in Villages. 2. Nor have they a word of proof that each
Church contained all Christians in the Cities, with all the interjacent
Villages. 3. Much less that they must contain all such, when all the Countries
were converted, and the Christians were enough for many Churches. 4. Nor can they
ever prove that the Apostles planting Churches only in Cities, was intended as
a Law, to restrain men from planting them any where else; Any more than their
not converting the Villages or the generality of the Cities, will prove that
they must not be converted by any other: Or than that their setting up no
Christian Magistrates, or converting no Princes, will prove that there must be
no such thing. Whoever extended the obligation of Apostolical example to such
Negatives, as to do nothing which they did not? 5. The reason is most apparent
why they preached first in Cities, because there is no such fishing as in the
Sea; They had there the frequentest fullest audirories: And so they planted
their first Churches there, because they had most converts there. And it is
known that Judea (a barren mountainous Country of it self) had been so
harressed with Wars, that there was little safety and quiet expected in
Country Villages; and the Roman Empire had been free from the same plague by
such short intervals, that as many people as could, got into the Cities: (for
all that know by experience what War is, do know the misery of poor Country
people who are at every wicked Soldiers mercy.) It was therefore among poor
scattered laborers, a hard thing to get a considerable auditory: which makes
Mr. Eliots and his helpers work go on so heavily among the scattered Americans,
who have no Cities or great Towns, because they can rarely speak to any
considerable numbers. Now to gather from hence either that Villages must have
no Churches or no Bishops, is an impiety next to a concluding that they must
not be assembled, taught, or worship God.

3. The reasons are vain and null, which are pretended for such a modelling of
Churches to the form of the civil Government, and thus confining them to
Cities. For, 1. There is no need that one Bishop be the Governor of another at
all; 2. And therefore no need that the Bishop of a Metropolis govern the Bishop
of a lesser City, or he, the Bishop of a Village. 1. God has not given one
Bishop power over another, as mere Bishops. As Cyprian says, in his Carth.
Council, none of us are Bishops of Bishops, but Colleagues. Dr. Hammond himself
says, that the Bishops are the Apostles Successors, and the Apostles were
equal in power and Independent, Annot. in 1 Timothy 3. c. p 732. Jesus Christ
dispensing them (all the particular Churches of the whole world by himself and
administering them severally, not by any one Oeconomus, but by the several
Bishops as inferior heads of unity to the severalbodies so constituted by the
several Apostles in their plantations, each of them having (...) a several
distinct commission from Christ immediately, and subordinate to none but the
supreme donor or plenipotentiary.] Indeed if it be not Bishops, but Archbishops
or Bishops of Bishops which are the Apostles Successors, in order over the
Bishops as they are supposed to be over the Priests, then such an order of
Archbishops is of divine right; But not as Metropolitanes, or for the Cities
sake, but as general Officers to take care of many Churches, succeeding the
Apostles.

2. And that Apostolical succession is not the foundation of the Metropolitan
or City power is plain; 1. Because if the Bishop or Archbishop be the
immediate successors of the Apostles, there must be but just 13 or 14 in the
whole world, if they succeed them fully in the accidentals of their office: But
if not, than their residence in Cities, will not prove that they must succeed
them in that accident, any more than in the number. 2. Because (as is showed)
the Apostles tied not themselves to Cities only, and what they did in
preferring Cities was occasional (as is said before): 3. Nor is there the least
proof (beyond an ostentation of vain words and confidence) that ever the
Apostles settled Churches according to the civil form, and put the Bishops of
lesser Cities under the Metropolitans: No more than that among themselves that
Apostle was Ruler of the rest, who had the Metropolis for his Seat: The Papists
themselves not pretending that Peter was Ruler of the rest, because Rome was
his Seat, but that Rome must have the ruling Universal Bishop, because it was
the Seat of Peter. And if the Metropolis made not one Apostle Ruler of the
rest, why should it do so by their successors? And I never heard any attempt to
prove, that Matthew, Bartholomew, Lebbeus, James the Apostle, Thomas, Philip and
every one of the Apostles had a distinct independent Metropolis for his
Episcopal Seat. 4. Indeed its but vain words of them that pretend that the
Apostles fixed themselves in any Seat at all; but it is certain by their Office
and by History that they often removed from place to place, in order to call as
much of the world as they were capable, and were sometimes in Metropoles and
sometimes in other places: and though the ancients make them the first Bishops
of Churches, they do not say that they were Bishops of any particular Churches
only, exclusively to all others. But the same Apostle that Planted ten or
twenty Churches was the first Bishop of them all pro tempore, settling fixed
Bishops to succeed them. 5. And whoever dreamed that Mark who was no Apostle,
was the Ruler of other Apostles, (at least that came into his Province) because
Alexandria was the second Metropolis?

4. This pretended forming of the Churches as aforesaid; is contrary to the
Ends of Church institution and Communion: which are the public worshipping of
God, and personal Communion of Parochians or Cohabitants in that worship,
Sacraments and holy living, in mutual assistance. Whereas in a great part of
the world, Country Villages are so far from any Cities, that if they must
travel to them for this public Communion, they must spend all the Lords day in
travail, and yet miss their Ends, and come too late. Nor can Women, Children
and aged ones possibly do it at all. But if they are to have no such personal
Communion with the City Churches, but have it ordinarily among themselves, then
(whatever men may say that strive about the Name) they are not of that
particular City Church as such, but are of another Church at home, which must
have a Bishop^ because it is a Church.

5. Their Civil and City or Diocesan frame contradicts the plain institution
or Law of Christ and of his Spirit. For 1. Math. 28. 19. 20. it is the very
Commission of the Apostles and their successors (with whom Christ will be to
the end of the world) to Teach or Disciple all Nations, and then to Baptizc
them, and so gather them into the Church Universal, and then Teach them as
Disciples all his Laws, which includes Congregating them in particular
Churches where they must be so taught. Now as it is all Nations, even the whole
Countries and not the Cities only that must be Discipled or convicted and
Baptized, so it is the whole Nations, Villages and all of Baptized persons that
must thus be Congregated into particular Churches and taught. 2. To which add
Act. 14. 23. the positive exemplary and so obliging ordinary practice of the
Apostles, They ordained them Elders in every Church: so that 1. It is Gods will
that Villages have Churches. 2. And it is Gods will that every Church have a
Bishop (at least) therefore it is Gods will that every Village have a Bishop
which have a Church; or that some Villages have Bishops.

And though [ every City be mentioned Tit. 1. 5. that only shows that de
facto then and there, Village Churches were rare or none, but not de jure they
must not be gathered: nor does he say [ ordain Elders in Cities only]: much
less [give them Rule according to the City power.]

And as Ceuchrea had a Church, which was no City, so Act. 14. 23. will prove
that they should have a Bishop. For every Church is to have a Bishop. And
Ceuchrea was not a family-Church; and so the name not used equivocally: And
Bishop Downams assertion that it was a Church with a mean Presbyter under the
Bishop of Corinth, is a naked unproved saying that deserves no credit; and is
contradicted by Doctor Hammond, who says there was there no mere Presbyter in
being.

6. Had this form been settled as they Pretend (in Cities only and Diocesses)
there would have been uncertainty and contentions what places should have
Bishops and Churches, and what places should have none. For it is uncertain and
litigious, what place is to be taken for a City and what not. For (...)
sometimes signifies any great Town, and some times strictly Towns incorprate,
and sometimes more strictly eminent Corporations now called Cities with us here
in England. And how great would the difficulty have been to determine when a
Town was big enough to pass for a City, or when it had privileges enough for that
title. If it be said, that the account and name then and thus used was the
directory, they will then make Gods Church to depend for being upon a Name with
heathen people. If they will call Ceucbrea a City, it shall have a Church;
otherwise it shall have none. But there was no such controversy in those times.

7. According to their model Churches shall be mutable and dissolvible at the
will of the Magistrate, yea of every Heathen Magistrate: For if he will but
change the privileges and title of a Town and make it no City, it must have no
Church or Bishop: And if he will remove the privileges and title, the Church
and Bishop must remove: And if he will endow a big Village or Town with City
privileges and name, a Church and Bishop must be then made anew. But who can
believe that Christ thus modled his Churches in his institution?

8. Yea after their model, an infidel or Christian King a^iud agen^, that never
thinks on it or intends it, shall change the Churches, and destroy them. If
by war a City be turned into no City, or if the King for other reasons un-city
it, or if change of Government put it into another Princes power, that shall
for his convenience un city it, the Church in City and Country is at an end,
though there remain people enough to constitute a Church.

9. Yea a fire or an Earthquake by this Rule may end a Church, by Wood and
stone, though the Country still have never so many Christians: and when the
City is gone, the Church is gone. 10. Yea it will be in the power of every
king, even of Heathens, whether Christ shall have any Church or Bishop in his
kingdoms, or not. Because he can un-city or dispriviledge all the Cities in his
kingdom at his pleasure, and consequently unchurch all the Churches.

11. And by their way Christ has settled as various Church forms as there be
forms of Government in the world: For all Dominions are not divided into
Provinces, under Prisidents etc as the Roman Empire was: In many Countries, the
Metropolis has no superiority over the other City or the Country, and so that
will be of divine institution in one Country, which will be a sin in others.

12. Yea by this Rule many vast Countries must have no Bishops or Churches at
all, because they have no Cities (as is known among the Americans); and others
must have but one Church and Bishop in a whole Country of many hundred Miles.

13. And by their Rule all the Bishops of England are unbishoped, and their
Diocesan Churches are unchurched. For 1. Some of them (in Wales and Man) have
no Cities now called such. 2. Others of them have many Cities (not only
Coventry and Lichfield, Bath and Wells now called Cities, but) abundance of
Corporations really Cities. 3. And the Cities in England, Scotland and Ireland
have no Civil Government over all the Countries, Corporations, Villages of the
Diocefe at all: nor are they Seats of Presidents or Lieutenants that have such
Rule, so that our Dioceses are not modelled to the form of the Civil
Government. What subjection does Hartfordshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
etc. owe to the Town of Lincoln?

14. By their model it is not Bishops and Metropolitans alone that are of
divine right: For if the Church Government must be modelled to the Civil, the
Imperial Churches must have had Officers to answer all the Proconsuls and
Presects, the Lieutenants, the Vicars, the Consular Presidents, the Corr^ctors
etc. For who can prove that one sort or two oaly must by imitated and not
others.

15. They must by their rule, set up in England an inconsistent or self
destroying form. For in many if not most Counties our Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, and Sherifs, and most Justices dwell in Country manors and
Villages, and not in Cities. And so either Cities must not be the Seats of
Bishops and Churches, or else the Seat of Civil Government must not be the Seat
of the Ecclesiastical. If they say that Assizes and Sessions are kept in the
County Towns, I answer. 1. So Church assemblies called Synods or Councils may
be held in them, and yet not be the Bishops Seat. For they are not the Judges
or Justices Seat, because of Assizes, and quarterly Sessions. 2. The
observation is not universally true: Yea no Assizes or Sessions at all are
therefore held in any Town because it is the County Town, but because it is the
convenientest place for meeting; The choice of which is left to the Judges and
Justices; who sometimes choose the County-Town, and sometimes another, as they
please (As Bridgnorth in Shropshire, Aleshury (not Buckingham) ordinarily in
Buckinghamshire, and so of others. 3. And th^se County Towns are few of them
either Cities or Bishops Seats: As Buckingham, Hartford, Bedford, Cambridge,
Huntington, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, Sherwsbury, Ipswich, Colchester,
Lancaster, Flint, Denbigh, Montgomery, Merioneth, Radnor, Cardigan, Carnarvon,
Pembrook, Carmarthen, Breeknock, and diverse others.

16. This model of theirs is in most parts of the world or many, quite contrary
to the Interest of the Church: and therefore forbidden by God in Nature and
Scripture, by that rule, Let the end be preferred, and the means which best
serve it: Let all things be done to edification: For in most of the world the
Rulers are enemies to Christianity, and disposed to persecute the Pastors of
the Church, therefore they will least endure Ecclesiastical Courts and Bishops
in their Imperial Cities, and under their noses (as we say) Obj. The Romans did
endure it. Ans. For all the ten persecutions, the Romans gave ordinarily more
liberty of Religion than most of the world does at this day. Bishops and
Pastors, are glad to keep out of the way of Infidel and Heathen Rulers. (And I
think verily our most Zealous English Prelates would be loath, (if they had
their language) to go set up a Church and Bishops seat at Madrid, Vienna,
Jngolsted, yea at Florence, Milan, Ravenna, Venice, Lisbone, Warsaw, etc. And
if they must needs be in those Countries, they would rather chose a more
private and less offensive seat.

17. I think that few Churches or Bishops in the world, except the Italian (if
they) are of the opinion now opposed by me. Quemad modum hodi^ ab aliqu^t
secul^s Antioch in a sides Patr. no^ est in ea u^be un^^ nomen habet, sed in
Meredin ad ripa^n Ch^bar, in finibus Mesopotainae Jos. Scaliger Animad. in
Eusebius. page 211.
The Greek Church is not: For though for honor sake they retain the name of the
ancient Seats, yet they ordinarily dwell in Country Villages. And so does the
Patriarck of Antioch himself often, or at least Antioch is now no City, of
which he has the name. And Socrates, and after him other Historians tell us,
that of old this practice varied as a thing indifferent, in several Countries
according to their several customs, which had no Law of God for them, and
therefore were not accounted necessary.

18. Our English Bishops have been for the most part of another mind till Dr.
Hammond and others turned this way of late: Not only Je^el, Bilson, and many
others have asserted that Patriarks, Metropolitans and Primates, and such like
are of human right, and mutable, but few if any were found heretofore to
contradict them. And at this day many Bishops ordinarily dwell in their Country
houses, (As the Bishop of Lincoln did at Bugden, the Bishop of Coventree and
Lichfield, (formerly) at Eccleshall Castle; the Bishop of Chester (now) at
Wigan, and so of others). And I think that is the Bishops Seat where usually
his dwelling is, and not where a Lay-Chancellor keeps a Court, or where a Dean
and Chapter dwell who are no Bishops.

19. There have (as Dr. Hammond has well proved) been of old several Churches
in one City; one of Jews and one of Gentiles, with their several Bishops and
Clergy. Therefore one City with its territories is not jure Divino the measure
or boundaries of one only Church.

20. If the Church Government must be modelled to the Civil, then in every
Monarchy or Empire there must be one Universal Pastor to rule all the rest as
there is one King: And in every Aristocracy, there must be a Synod of Prelates
in Church Supremacy; and in every Democracy -- who or what -- But then the
Papacy will be proved not only lawful, but of Divine institution, as the Head
or Church Sovereign of the Roman Empire (though not of all the world) (at Rome
first and at Constantinople after) And indeed I know no word of reason that can
be given to draw an impartial man of Judgment to doubt, but that Metropolitans,
Primates, Patriarcks, and the Pope as Head of the Churches in the Empire, stood
all on the same ground, and had the same Original; as all Fathers Counsels and
History show, which truly proves that (as an Universal Papacy is a
Treasonable Usurpation, so) an Imperial Papacy (that is, through the Roman
Empire) is but a human Creature, and Metropolitans, Patriarcks, etc. are the
like; and they that will feign the one to be of Gods institution or necessary,
must say that the other is so to.

But after all this, one consequence puts the world in hope that Diocesans may
come in time to be reformed: For seeling Kings may make and unmake Cities, and
consequently Bishop-pricks at their pleasure, whenever it shall please his
Majesty, or any other wise and Holy Prince, to declare every Corporation and
Market Town to be a City, we must needs have a Bishop in every one of them
(according to the principles of the Prelates themselves. And then the Diocese
will not be so great, but a diligent Pastor may possibly sometimes, see the
greater number of his flock.

Obj. But they that do say that the Apo^les took this course do not say that it
is so obligatory but that in cases of necessity we may do otherwise.

Ans. 1. They allege the very Law of nature for it, that it must be so even in
Heathen Empires ex natura rei, as Dr. Hammond before cited. 2. All mere
positves give places to natural duties, caeteris paribus: in cases of true
necessity we may break the rest of the Lords day, we may omit the Lords Supper,
we may stay from the Church assemblies, we may forbear to preach or pray or
meditate or read. So that the exception only of necessity will but equal this
Diocesan model, to other possitive ordinances, which are indeed Divine.

Obj. What if we prove but the lawfulness of it, though not the Duty?

Ans. If you prove it not of Divine institution, I have proved it to be sinful,
and shall do much more, by all the evils which attend it. And so much for these
City Diocese and Metropolitans and modelling the Church Government to the state.

CHAP. VII. The Definition and reasons of a Diocesan Church considered, and
overthrown.
I Have already showed, that we dispute not about aerie notions, nor
Nonexistence, but about such Dioceses as we see and have; and that by a
Diocese we Non-conformists mean only a large circuit of ground with its
inhabitants containing many particular Parishes: And by a Diocesan Church, we
mean all the Christians within that circuit, who have but one Bishop over them,
though they be of many Parish Churches, yea few Presbyterians take the word so
narrow as this. For (I think too) many of them do with Rutherford distinguish
between a worshipping Church and a Governed Church (and sadling the horse for
Prelacy to mount on) do affirm that many (about twelve usualy) of these
worshipping Churches (like our Parishes) may make but one Governed or
Presbyterial Church: But a Diocese in England contains many hundred, and some
above a thousand Parishes (as is said.)

But the Diocesans ( Hammond and Downam) define not a Diocese (as we see it) as
containing many Churches or holy assemblies; but only as being the Church of
one City with its territories. Now the question is, what it is that is the
specifying difference by which a Diocesan Church is distinguished from others,
and constituted. 1. Not that it is in a City: For an Independent Church, or a
Presbyterian Church may be in a City: When there is but one Church there, or
many Independent ones, these are no other than those allow, whom you take for
your chief adversaries.

2. Is it then the circuit of ground that is the boundary of these Churches,
either this ground is inhabited, or not; if not, then earth and trees make
their Churches. If inhabited, it is by Infidels, or by Christians, or both. If
by Infidels they are no members of any Christian Church, and therefore not of a
Diocesan Church. Unless they will profess to have Churhes of Infidels:

If they be Christians, either they are no more, nor more distant than as that
they may (at least the main body of them) come on the Lords days to the City
Church into one assembly, or else they are enough to make more or many Church
assemblies. If the former, than what differ they from a Parish Church, or an
Independent Church, which is planted in a City? When each of them are but one
congregation, where is the difference but in the arbitrary Name?

But if the City and territories have Christians enough for many Churches, then
either they are formed into many or not. If they are, they should (by their own
confession) have many Bishops: If not, either Church Societies are Gods
ordinance or not. If not, the City should have none: If they are, where has
God exempted the Country from the privilege or duty any more than the City?

But if they should say that a Diocesan Church is one Church in a City and its
territories consisting of Christians enough to make many, of whom the most part
take up with oratories for Churches, this would suite our Notion of a Diocesan
Church, but not theirs. For they say that it is not necessary that a Diocesan
Church have more than one Congregation.

Therefore it must needs follow that their Diocesan Church must differ from our
Parish or Congregational Churches only in potentia and not in actu, or else
earth or Infidels must be the differencing matter. Unless they will say that
the Order of Prelacy in it makes the difference, which is the office of a
Pastor who is actually Governor but of one congregation, but is in potentia to
be the Governor of more when he can convert them, and then is the Governor of
them all in that territory when they are converted. But if one congregation or
many make not the difference, a mere possibility in the Infidels of becoming
Christians cannot make the difference, because the Subjects of that possibility
are no members of the Church at all. Therefore the difference must be only in
the office of the Bishop. And if so, then an Independent Church that has a
Bishop is a Diocesan Church; And so an Independent and a Diocesan Church may be
all one. And then if a Bishop were but settled in a Parish Church in the City or
Country, it would make it a Diocesan Church. And then when we have proved that
the Country should have Churches, and not mere Oratories, and that every Church
should have a Bishop, and so that a Bishop is not to be appropriated to a City
and its territories, we have done all. And that society which should have all
Gods Church ordinances, should have a Pastor necessary for the exercising of
them all. But every true Parish Church, should have all Gods ordinances
(belonging to a single Church) therefore they should have a Pastor (at least)
to exercise them. And, a Pastor authorized to exercise all particular Church
ordinances of Christ's is a true Bishop. But every true particular Church should
have such a Pastor. Therefore they should have a Bishop. By the Church
ordinances I mean 1. Teaching. 2. Ministerial Worship, in Prayer, Praise and
Sacraments. 3. Discipline secret and public in that Church. And let them
remember that they that instead of proof, do but crudely affirm, that Cities
only may be Bishops Seats, do but beg the question.

But because he that puts us hardest to it ( Downame) does lay so much on these
two differences of a Diocesan Church from a Parochial. 1. That a Diocese
contains the City and territories, though at first it have but one
Congregation. 2. That converting the rest of the City and territories, gives
the Bishop a right to Govern them all: I will further distinctly consider of
both these.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Infidel Territories or Citizens do make part of a
Diocesane Church.
1. WE distinguish between a Diocese and a Diocesane Church. 1. The word
Diocese first was of civil signification, and so we have nothing to do with it.
2. It may signify a Country of Infidels whom a Minister of Christ endeavors
to convert: And so it is no Church of it self, nor no part of a Church, if a
Church be in it: (as is past all question.) And so we deny not but that, 1.
Every Minister should convert as many Infidels as he can. 2. That he that is
resident on the place as Pastor of a Cohabiting Church has better opportunity
than a stranger usually to convert the neighbor infidels; And therefore has
more obligation to endeavor it; because men must divide and order their work
as their opportunities do invite and guide them. 3. But yet that God set no man
his Ministerial Charge by the measure of ground: And therefore that if such a
City-Bishop have a smaller number of Infidels in his territories, than will
take up his time and labor (besides the care of his Church) he ought not to
confine his labor to them, nor neglect other territories that need his help,
but may, must and should go further in his endeavors, as Augustine and other
later Bishops among the Saxons, notwithstanding the neighborhood of the
Britains; and as Wilfred alias Boniface among the Germans, etc. And if any
other Minister come among the Infidels in the Territories of a City that has a
Church, while they have need of such help, the Bishop were a beast if he should
forbid him on pretense that it is his Diocese where another has nothing to do.
But as unoccupied Countries belong to any occupant, so an Infidel Country
belongs to any preacher that has opportunity to convert them. And if a
Diocesane prohibit such preaching, he is to be neglected or reprehended, but
not obeyed. Yet I deny not, but prudence may direct preachers (as it would do
occupants in the aforesaid case) to distribute their labors so as one may not
hinder but help another: But that is not a Law of propriety otherwise than as
mutual consent obliges. And it is, but the determination of circumstances, and
that not about any part of a Church, and therefore nothing to the constitution
of a Church.

And as is showed, as Christ sent his Disciples out by two and two, so the
Apostles often went two together, or an Apostle and an Evangelist, which showed
that no one claimed the Diocese. But still, were it otherwise, Infidels are not
of the Church.

CHAP. IX. Whether converting a Diocese give right to the Converter to be their
Bishop or Governor.
1: WE deny not, but that Converts owe a peculiar love and respect to those as
their fathers in Christ which did convert them; which Paul claims of the
Corinthians. 2. And we deny not but caeteris paribus, that man being as fit a
man as others, and his abode being nearer, and his Church being not full, but
capable of them, this advantage should incline his converts, to choose him
rather than another for their Pastor,

But yet converting them as such gives him not a right to govern them as their
Pastor, nor necessitateth them to choose him: As I prove.

1. Because a Lay man (as Frumentius and Edesius and Origin, etc.) may convert
men, who are not Pastors to them or any.

2. Because Conversion and Baptism as such is but men's admission into the
Universal Church (as in the Eunuchs case, Act. 8. is manifest) and not into any
particular Church: It uniteth them to Christ, but not to any particular Pastor:
For they Baptize not into their own name.

3. Because when two or three go together, as Paul and Barnabas, Silas,
Timothy, Luke, etc. it is to be supposed that one converteth not all, but one
some and another some; and therefore if converting gave right there must be
many Bishops and Churches in a place.

4. Because when a Church is settled, a strange preacher that comes after, yea
one that has a charge elsewhere, may convert many neighbors, that were not
Converted, and yet it will not follow that he must come, and set up another
Church there for that, nor that they must remove their dwelling to follow him.

5. Because a man may (and abundance of excellent preachers have Yet I confess
that he that converteth many caeteris paribus is fittest to be chosen for their
Pastor: on which account Greg. Nazianz. was chosen at Constantinople, for the
Success of his Ministry against Arianism: And in my Church History, I have told
you of a Council that decreed, that if a Bishop neglected to turn any of his
City from heresy, he that converted them should have them for his flock: which
shows that there might on just cause be then more Bishops and Churches than
one in a City; and that they were not necessarily measured by the compass of
ground, but Churches might be mixed among each other as to habitation, on such
occasions.
done it) convert many souls in many Countries where they go at great distances
from each other: But he cannot be the Bishop of so many people or Churches so
far dispersed.

6. Because it would make it uncertain who it is that has any where the
Episcopal power. For Conversion is, 1. a secret work known only to the person
converted. 2. And it is an obscure and usually a gradual work, not done at
once, but by such degrees, that the convert seldom knows himself who it was
that converted him: Though he may know that one man's ministry so far convinced
him, and another so far, and so on; It will be hard to say just when it came to
a conversion. And if you say it is he that persuaded him to be baptized, that
may be a lay man, or long after his Conversion. Princes in some Countries force
or persuade thousands to be baptized. If you say, that it is he that Baptized
him, than Paul should be Pastor but to few of the Corinthians, who thanked God
that he baptized none of them but Stephanus household, Gaius and Crispus; as
being not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

7. Because else many persons should be necessitated to choose a bad or very
weak man, if not a heretic for their Bishop, when they may have far better and
ablermen. For it has been known that a bad Minister, and a heretical Minister,
much more a very weak Minister has converted men. But God does not allow such
converts therefore to cast their Souls under the danger and disadvantage of
such a ones Ministry, or oversights when much fitter may be had.

8. Because both nature and Scripture example direct men to another course;
that is, 1. To be members of the Church where they are cohabitants, if there be
a worthy Pastor; 2. And to get the best they can. For cohabitation or proximity
or vicinity is necessary to Church ends, both to public and private communion
and mutual help. But the Minister that converth them may dwell far off that.

Therefore indeed the Reasons why all in a City and vicinity were wont to be of
the same Church (if there were room) was not because that Minister converted
them, but because they were fit for such Communion by cohabitation.

9. And were it otherwise the Bishop and his Presbyters preaching to the same
people, the Presbyter might convert more and become joint Bishop.

10. And certainly it would unbishop all the English Bishops almost that I am
acquainted with, who nether converted their Dioceses from Infidelity, nor
baptized them, nor convert many that ever we hearof from a wicked life, to
serious holiness: which the Presbyters have done by very many, and so must
there be made the Bishops (if they would.)

CHAP. X. That a particular Church of the first or lowest order, must consist
of Neighbor Christians associated for Personal Communion in local presence, in
holy worship and conversation; and not of strangres so remote, as have only an
Internal Heart-Communion, or an External Communion by the mediation of others.
LEt it be here noted (that none dally with the Name [Church] as an equivocal,
that, 1. I speak of no mere Community of Christians, nor of any accidental
assembly, which have no Pastors, or no intent of sacred ends; Call them what
you will: But of a proper Christian society constituted of the Pars gubernans
and the Pars gubernata; the Pastor and Flock. 2. That I speak not of a Family
Church, which consists of the Master and the Family. 3. Nor yet of the
Universal Political Church, as visible or as mystical: which consists of
Christ the head, and all visible or sincere believers. 4. Nor of any Christian
Churches confined by Agreement for Concord of Churches, being many. 5. Nor of
any such Churches accidentaly united in one kingdom, under one king or Civil
Governor, whether Christian or Infidel. 6. Nor of many Churches headed by
humane appointment with one Metropolitan, Primate or Patriack, being a Pastor
thus exalted by men above the rest. 7. Nor yet of many Churches under one
Archbishop or general Apostolical Visitor or Pastor, claiming this general
oversight by Divine right (whether rightly or wrongfully I now take no notice)
8. But the Church which I treat of is, only the political society of Christians
of the first rank (and so of a Bishop of the lowest rank, or a mere Bishop
that is no Archbishop). Not of an Oratory, or Chapel of ease, where part of a
true Church often meet; but of a true entire Church of the first magnitude or
rank.

And I take it for granted 1. That such Churches there should be, 2. and that
every true Church should have its Bishop, as Doctor Hummond and many others
grant, taking the Church in this political notion; or if that be not granted I
will prove it further anon.

And that these lowest true political or Organized Churches, must be Neighbors
united for Personal Communion, as aforesaid, I prove.

1. First from all the Scripture instances: The Churches at Jerusalem, Antioch,
Ephesus, Corinth etc. were all such as is fuller to be opened in the 2d. Part.

2. From the instances of all the Churches of the first and second age, of
which also more is after to be said.

3. From the duties of Church members, which are as follows.

1. To assemble together for Gods public service; Act. 4. Heb. 10. 25. 1. Cor.
14. etc. And how can they do this that are utterly out of reach, and never know
or see each other?

2. To have the same Pastors that are among them, and over them, and preach to
them the word of God, and go before them by the example of an holy life. 1
These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. 1 Timothy 3. 6, 7, etc. And how can they hear
the Pastors that never Preach to them, or be Guided by those that never see
them, or follow their example whom they never knew, or come for counsel to them
that are out of their reach and knowledge?

3. To send to their Pastors when they are sick, to pray with them, and advise
them: which they cannot do to them that are out of their reach. Jam. 5. 4. To
provoke one another to Love and to good works, and to consider one another
((...)) to that end: A word that signifies knowledge and more, even
Observation of that which we see or know. In which and v. 25. says Dr. Hammond
[ Let us weigh and consider all advantages we can have upon one another to
provoke and excite one another to Charity and all actions of piety, such as are
joining in the public service. And not suffer our selves to proceed so far
toward defections as to give over the public assemblies, (the forsaking of
which is not is not only deserting the public profession of Christ, but also
of the means of growth in grace) but stir up one another to the performance of
this] All which suppose propinquity, and and consist not with the distance of
incapable strangers. Heb. 3. 13. To exhort one another daily while it is called
to day, lest any be hardened by the dece^tfulness of sin. Which we cannot do by
men of another Country, with whom we have no converse.

All is plainly expressed, 1 These 5. 11. 12, 13. Wherefore comfort your selves
together, and edify one another even as also ye do. And we beseech you
brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish ^ou, and to esteem them very highly in love, for their work sake, and
to be at peace among your selves. But how can they comfort themselves together
that never came together, or see each other? There can no peace but Negative be
among them that are not among each other, and have no converse. They cannot
edify utter strangers. How can I know the Bishop of the Diocese who never saw
him, nor ever had opportunity to see him, tho I live about an hundred miles
nearer him (being at London) than some parts of his Diocese are? I know those
that Labor among us in this Parish, but the Bishop never labored among us,
nor was here that ever I heard of; nor do I know one in the Parish, that uses
not to Travail, that ever saw him, and few that by hea^say know his name.

Romans 15. 7. 14. Receive ye one another as Christ also received us, to the
Glory of God. 6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God -- -- of
which says Dr Hammond, [ That ye may join unanimously Jews and Gentiles into
one, and assembling together, worship and serve the Lord, wherefore in all
humility of condescension and kindness, embrace and succor one another, help
them up when they are fallen, instead of despising and driving them from your
communion v. 14. [ Able also to admonish one another so Col. 3. 16. Teaching
and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns -- But more of this in the 2d.
part.

5. Lastly it is their part to admonish a brother that offends, and if he
hear not, to take two or three witnesses, and if he hear not to tell the Church
Matthew. 18. 15. (of which see Dr. Hammonds Annot. and of the Keys). But all this
requires personal knowledge and propinquity.

Obj. It is not necessary to the being of Church members, that every one that
is a Church member know them: many in London know not their next Neighbors.

Ans. I Speak not. 1. Of the Act, but of the Power or Capacity and the Relation
with its end. 2. I speak not of every member, but of so great a part as
denominateth the Church.

1. As a Pastor who by sickness or other impediment preaches not of a long
time, may yet be a Pastor, because he has. 1. The Power. 2. And a Relation
whose end is the Instructing of the Flock. 3. And he intends the exercise as
soon as the impediment is removed (or if lazyness or any culpable neglect be
the cause, that alters not the nature of the office, but proves him faulty):
So a member that is. 1. Capable. 2. Related to the end, may be a member, though
neglect or impediments keep them from the exercise of much of that which they
otherwise may do. He that dwells in the Neighborhood may do all these Offices
to another, if he will when opportunity calls for it; and therefore may be so
obliged to it: But so cannot he that dwells out of reach. Citizens or members
of Corporations are in a capacity for officesbelonging to the society, though
some may neglect them, and others want opportunity to do them; but one out of
reach is incapable of the duty and therefore incapable of the Relation, which
is made up of obligation to that duty when there is cause. The Relation is
essentially a Power and obligation to the Duty: And the Dispositio materi^ is
necessary to the reception of the form. He therefore that is not in a capable
means, by cohabitation, is not materia disposita, and can neither have Power
nor obligation to the duties of a Church member toward the rest, and so cannot
have the Relative form, or be indeed a member. And therefore all that write
judiciously of the definition of a particular Church, do make Propinquity or
Cohabitation, to be the Dispositio materiae sine qua non; From which they are
called Parishioners. They are not a Church because a Parish; but they are
therefore the materia disposita as to this part of the capacity extrinsick
(Christianity being it that makes them intrinsecally fit materials).

2. And I deny not but some few members may be several ways incapable
naturally of the ordinary offices of members: Some by infancy, some by
distraction, some by sickness, some by the restraint of Parents Masters or
Husbands, and some by a retired disposition, etc. And some Churches may be so
sinfully overgreat, as that the number hinders many of the members from a
capacity of the ordinary duty of the relation; which is the case of some great
Parishes in London: But either this is the case of the greater part and main
body of the Society, or b^t of a few. If but of a few, it may prove it a
disordered Church, but it cannot prove it no Church; no more than a few
Heretics can denominate the Church Heretical, or a few mad, or leprous
persons, can denominate it mad or leprous, or than the family of Noah, David,
Christ, was denominated from a Cham, an Absalom, a Judas. But if it be the main
body (though in intrinsic qualifications, the Church may be denominated from
the better part sometimes and not from the greater, yet) in extrinsick
qualifications, it is now to be denominated a Church only from the Pastor and
that number who are capable of the relation (as being the two constitutive
parts) and all the rest are none of the Church: And if there be no such body
united to the Pastor for true Church ends, and capable of them, it is no Church.

Obj. But it is enough to make one Church, if they be all united in one Bishop
or Governor, though their distance make them incapable of knowing one another,
and doing what you have described.

Ans. It is enough indeed to make a Church of another species, such as I before
named, either the Catholic Church through out the world, or a Church composed
of many particular Churches (if it may be called a Church): Because their
Communion is not to be Local or present, nor to the ends of a particular
Church; but only intrinsical in Faith and Love, and extrinsical by Delegates or
Mediators. But this is not enough to the being of a Church of the first order
which now we speak of, which should have a Bishop of their own, and is not
composed of many united Churches. For else the Church of a Patriark or a
Primate, or an Archbishop or Metropolitan, should be a Church of the first
order, and have no Church or Bishop under it. For such a Church is united in
one Governor. (To say nothing of the Papal Church, which yet pretends not to
depose all Bishops.) Therefore the unity of the Governor will not suffice of
it self to make one Primary Church; though it may make one Compounded or
General Church containing many Churches and Bishops. 2. And the nature of the
thing tells us, that as the People, have their Duties and Privileges as well
as the Pastors, so the people must be united among themselves, by some common
Relation, containing Power of and Obligation to that duty, and capacity of that
privilege: Which is past all doubt among knowing men. Therefore an incapable
body cannot be made one Primary Church, by the unity of a Prelate. 3. But as we
distinguish of a Church single and compounded of many, particular and General,
Primary and Secondary, (all which terms I use to be clearly understood), so do
we also of Bishops or Pastors: which are particular Bishops of one Church, or
General Bishops of many Churches. Of the first sort we confess all that is said
positively, that is, that one such Bishop makes one Church. Because the very
nature of his office, as shall be after showed, does suppose a capable society.
It being his office in presence personally to conduct them; which a General
distant Bishop cannot do, so that indeed, one Present Pastor (or more) of a
flock by Christianity and Uicinity capable, and by consent united with him and
one another for presential Communion in public worship and holy conversation,
are the constitutive parts by which a Primary Church is essentiated and must be
defined.

Obj. But even the Presbyterians say that many worshipping congregations may
make up one Governed Church, though each congregation have ordinary Communion
in the Sacrament, etc. among themselves distinct from the rest; because they
may be all united in the Government of one Presbytery. And our ordinary
Parishes have Chapels in them, and yet are one Church.

Ans. 1. We must be excused from submitting now to the opinions of
Presbyterians or any other party, while we are giving an account of our own
judgment in the case.

2. The Presbyterians are not all of a mind in that point, whether each of
those Parishes be not a true political Church, and have not its own plenary
Pastor or Bishop, and such a Government as belongs to a particular Church,
though (as they all think) subordinate to a Presbytery of many Churches
conjunct (or as some call it) of one Church denominated so from the higher
Government.

3. And as to our Chapels ordinarily they are but places for the Assembling of
such as by age or foul weather or weakness cannot travail to the Parish
Churches, and they are for distance and number in those Parishes that have
them, no more or other, than may consist not only with the personal
acquaintance of the members of the Parish Church, but also with the frequent
Communion of them all, by turns in the same Parish Church, if they please to
travail to it, as they may. So that these Chapels of case, as they are
commonly called, are not inconsistent with all the fore-described ends and
duties of Church Members: And even the Independants do confess that age,
distance* persecution, etc. may allow one of their Churches to meet at once in
several houses or places, where several Pastors may pro tempore officiate: and
yet, this consists with all the forementioned ends of the relation.

4. And indeed disorders and confusions in Churches, must not be our measure,
to judge of their Nature and constitution by, though one in a Swoone may be
hardly discerned from a dead man, yet life is nevertheless essential to a man.
The Principalities in Germany may be so curtaled, and entangled, that it shall
be hard for Lawyers to judge whether the Princes be proper Soverains and
Monarchs or not. And yet what does constitute Monarchy and Soveraignity is
known. A Ship may be made so little, and a Barge so big, as that it may be hard
to distinguish them by name: and yet a Ship and Barge are diverse. If in one
great house, there be several men with their Wives Children and Servants, in
several rooms or parts, and ^ne have some superiority over the rest, they being
free journy-men or laborers under him, the degree of the Power of the chief
Master here may be in several cases so various, as that it shall be hard for
any man to say, whether this be one Family only or many. But must we therefore
remove all distinction of Families, or forsake the old and usual definition.
The same I say of Primary particular Churches. Stepney Parish, or Giles
Criplegate, or Martins in the fields may be so great, as to make a doubt of it,
whether they are single Churches; and so may some Lancashire Parishes, that
have very distant and large Chapelries. But shall the disease or extraordinary
case, or dicffiulty of such a Parish, make us change the old and true
definition of a Church?

And thus some Presbyterians have argued from the Multitude of Converts at
Jerusalem and Ephesus, that they could not be one particular Church, so as to
meet all in one place (which is the common and strongest objection against us).
But 1. undoubtedly there were many strangers there, that were ready to pass
away to other places. 2. And the Spirit knew that the Church was quickly by
persecution to be scattered. 3. And on a sudden there was not time to settle
them in exact order, as afterward they did in all the Churches. Acts. 14. 23.
But many Apostles being there they might transiently have diverse meetings at
once, 4. And the number and distance of them all was no greater then might
consist with the forementioned Church Ends and definition. They that meet one
day with one Apostle, might meet the next day with another, and might have
Personal Communion and Conversation. And 5. The text says that they did meet
all in one place: and as Doctor Hammond aforecited says, they deny the plain
text that do deny it: they were not distributed into diverse assembles; and the
[ All] that meet together, must mean the greater part of the Church members at
once. And I my self have Preached to a Congregation, supposed by understanding
persons in it, to be six thousand, and all to have heard: and as many more
might have heard the next day: and so twenty thousand might make a Church, when
vicinity makes them otherwise capable; and in Judaea we find that men speaking
to Armies, yea the Enemies Armies, show that far more could hear at once, then
can do with us (whether voices or air did make the difference I Know not) and
if the forenamed Parishes that have but one ordinary meeting place, have 30000
or 40000 or 50000 souls in them, we may conjecture at the case of Jerusalem
hereby; For though among those new Converts, there were not so many neglecters
of the Assemblies, yet the passing strangers might be many.

To make the case plain, I would but desire the dissenters to consider. 4.
Whether that Gods public worship be not a duty? Even the Communion of
Christians in Doctrine, Prayer and Sacrament?

2. Whether there must not be some present Pastors to officiate before the
Church in all these?

3. Whether this Congregation must not be Christians, and persons qualified for
Communion? and whether the Churches have not always (by the holy Spirits
appointment) differenced between Christians and Infidels, and between Heretical
or flagitious persons, and the orderly and obedient? and admitted the first
sort only to Communion?

4. Whether he that is present and delivers the Sacrament, should not know
what he does, and to whom he gives it, and should not in the administering make
a difference, and keep away the Infidels, Heriticks and openly flagitious, and
should not know the people whom he overseeth?

5. And whether he can do all or any of this, to a transient multitude, that as
the waters of a river are passing away, when he still sees strange faces only,
and those are his Auditors, and Commuicants, whom he never saw before, or
knows: how can he know whether they are Baptized Christians, or unbaptized,
Jews or other Infidels?

6. Therefore is not an ordinary Cohabitation, or vicinity, of necessity to a
fixed Church and Pastor, that he may know them, and they may know each other?
These things I suppose are past dispute.

7. And then I ask whether such a society as this be not a true Church? and
such as is described in scripture? and such as should ordinarily be continued
in the world? whether it be part of a more compounded general Church, and under
the general oversight of Apostolical Bishops, is none of my question now; but
whether this be not an ordinary political Church, of the first order?

8. And if so, whether every such Church by Acts. 14. 23, should not have such
Elders as are there mentioned, which Doctor Hammond maintains to be Bishops?
or should not have such Episcopos gregis overseers of this flock, as are
empowered to do all the foresaid works of their proper Office? of which next.

CHAP. XI. That a Bishop or Pastor of a particular Church of the first rank
aforedescribed, must Govern it statedly, as present by himself, and not as in
absence by another.
NOthing has more deceived men (next to Infidelity and Carnality) ^^^^
Chrysostom de s^cerdotio cap. 17 p. 57 Even about so small a part of a Bishops
or Pastors charge as the care of Virgins says. But if any one say that there
is no need of a Bishop to meddle with such things as these; Let him know that
upon him will fall all the cares of Virgins duty, and so all the accusation;
which shall be cast on Virgins: And therefore it is much better if he
administering the business himself he shall be void of those causes, which he
must sustain by others offenses; thus leaving that administration to live in
fear of giving account or being judged for the sins which others do commit.
Add also, that he that performs this office by himself, transacteth all with
great facility. But he that is necessitated to do it by the vicarious labor of
others, besides that it is a great business to him to persuade all men's minds
well to perform the work; certainly he himself has not so much remission of
his labor by abstaining from that office, as he must sustain business and
troubles from them that resist, and strive against his judgment and opinion.]
And if so great a Bishop as the Patriarks of Constantinople must not do so
small a part of his work per alios, alas, what a life do our Diocesans live.!
^n this controversy, than want of experience: Judging by a noise of words of
such matters as they never faithfuly tried. Had men well tried a few years what
it is to do the Office of a Pastor, they would easily know to whom it
belongs. But when either University students, or Nominal Pastors do stand by
and look on, or read and hear only of the name, of Church Power and Government,
and never did more themselves, than to preach and say the service of the
Church, or now and then visit a sick man, or dine or talk on the by with a
neighbor, or at most hear Chilren say their Catechism, it is no wonder if they
talk at random, and think that a man may be the only Bishop of many hundred
Churches, and Govern them per alios, or at twenty, or forty, or an hundred
miles distance, by mere visiting or meeting the Clergy, and dining with them
once in three Years.

I shall here therefore prove that the nature of the Primary Episcopacy (or
Particular, if the word Primary be cavilled at) is such, as cannot be done in
absence, nor per alios by substitutes, in any of its Proper parts, but only by
a present Bishop or Pastor himself.

And here first remember that I say [in any of its proper parts, as
distinguishing the proper works of the sacred Ministry, from those that are
common to other men, and those that are but Accidents or Circumstantial. As a
Bishop may plow his land, or build his house, or saddle his horse, by another,
so I doubt not but he may appoint another to toll the Bell to Church, to cover
the holy Table, to receive Collections, to read Proclamations, to keep the
Church doors, to repair the building, to bring relief to the Poor, to do that
about sacred things, which is common to Lay men with Ministers; even to read
the Psalm, to choose it, to set the tune, to publish Marriages, to name to the
people the times of meeting, to read the Scriptures, to be messengers to summon
accused offenders, to tell the Church, to summon witnesses, to hear witnesses
and confessions; All these he may appoint a servant or another to do, because
they are but accidental to his Office, and no part of his proper work; but that
his proper work must be done by himself, and that as present ordinarily with
the people whom he Governs, the enumerations of the particular will evince.

1. The work of such a Bishop is Public in the sacred Assemblies.

2. Or out of the Assemblies by way of applicatioon to particular Persons and
cases.

1. In the Assemblies, 1. It is the Bishops office to be the chief Teacher of
the Church; to preach, instruct, exhort and comfort them usually himself; And
when he does it not himself to appoint another, and judge of his performance.
(I shall reserve the proof to the 2d. part, where all this is to be reviewed to
a further use.) And this is the work of one that is present.

2. He is to be the mouth or Intercessor of the people, as a Priest under
Christ the Great high Priest and Intercessor: To pray in the Assembly, to be
their mouth in the common confession of sins: To praise God and give thanks
with and for them; to whom they are to join in consent with their Amen, (at
least.) And this is the work of a present Person.

3. He is to Baptize and admit persons into the visible Church; Or to try and
judge who is fit to be Baptized, and to admit them by some other Minister of
Christ; but he can neither Baptize, nor try and judge particularly who is to be
baptized (at least of the Adult) unless he be present and know the persons, and
hear his confession and receive his claim.

4. He is to Celebrate the Supper of the Lord, to consecrate the Bread and
Wine, to be the Messenger of Christ in his name to deliver them as his body and
blood, and the Seals of his Love, and of Remission of sins unto the people, and
so to commemorate his death till he come, and as his Steward to give his
houseshold meat in season; but this is all the work of a Present and not an
absent Person.

5. He is to be the judge of the claim and title of the persons that come to
the Churches Communion; to see that Infidels and incapable persons be not
there, which is not well done by one that is not ordinarily present, even in
the Administration to see to whom it is administered.

6. He is to be the chief public reprover, and admonisher of Scandalous
persons by name, who are so to be openly reproved and admonished in the Church,
which he cannot well do if he be not in the Church himself.

7. He is to be the chief public Excommunicator of the obstinately wicked, to
declare before all that such a person is incapable of communion with the
Church: which is not well done by one that is not there to do it; as shall anon
be further opened.

8. The same is to be said of public Absolution, when the Penitent is
publicly taken into the Church, or judged and declared to be ^^at Christ Mat.
18. in his ^^^l the Church, ^^an^th ^^ll the congregation, assembly or
multitude, and not only ^^ tell an absent Di^^^san Bishop (when ^er^aps ^ne
^^^^ ^^ 20, 4^, 6^ ^^les to tell him)* see Grotius himself in his A^^t* on the
Text and his ^^^^ort of sertullian and others. See also E^^^mus on the place.
And many others say the same, though some would have the Church to be only the
Bishop, or as others the Presbytery. Ru^herfords contrary reason is but a
fallacy, viz. [The same Church that must be heard must be told, but it is not
the Congregation but the Elders that must be heard. Ergo etc. Ans. The Church
consising of the Pastor and people must be told, and they have all ears that
without confuson can hear at once, but they cannot without confusion all speak
at once, therefore one must speak for all. For this argument would equally
prove that it is not any Presbytery or Court, or many Ministers that should be
told, if it be but one that is to speak to the ^inner: And it is not necessary
that the^ all speak to him. As the chief Judge speaks for all the Bench, and
the Prosecutor for all the Synod, and yet the Court or Synod may be complained
to; so is it hear: The sam^ man ^ay see with two eyes and hear with two ears,
and yet speak but with one tongue (yet this reason once deceived me.) Seeing
then that Christ, instituted thus much of discipline in each particular Church,
it is clear that by his i^stitution every particular Church (associated for
presential Communion) should have one or more ^^^tors authorized for so much
discipline which is that which we plead for.
Absolved.

9. And the blessing of the people in the name of the Lord, at the dismission
of the Assembly has of old been reserved to the Bishop as his part which is to
be done by one that is there present.

II. And as for those acts of Application to persons and cases which are to be
done out of the Assembly, 1. To be at hand for the people to repair to in their
greater doubts for resolution, and greatest difficulties for direction (as a
Physician among the sick) is not the least part of the true Bishops work. And
this requires his usual presence and some acquaintance usually with the
persons life: No man will expect that all such doubting people travail to a
strange Bishop many score miles distant, or out of their reach.

2. To hear the confessions and cases of burdened penitent souls and to direct
them in the true way to peace and comfort, is a special part of the Bishops
work besides his resolution of Doctrinal doubts which requires presence, and
acquaintance (usually) with the person.

3. It is part of the Bishops work to watch over the peoples conversation, and
to see that they live not in mortal sinsor scandalous courses; and to reprove
them that do, and draw them to repentance. And all this is a present persons
work.

4. It is the Bishops work to see that the families of the flock be ordered in
the fear of God, and that Parents and Masters do their duties, and indulge not
wickedness in their houses, which is also a present persons work.

5. It is the Bishops work to visit the sick and to pray with and for them,
which requires presence.

6. It is the Bishops work to stir up the people that are d^ll and backward to
their several duties, in public and in private, and to provoke them to love
and to good works which is the work especially of present and not of absent men.

7. And it is his duty to have a special care of the poor, and to see that they
be relieved; which he will never do well in absence and to the unknown.

8. And it is confessed to be the Bishops work to admonish the unruly, to
reprove and exhort ungodly persons, to convince gainsayers, to hear the accused
speak for themselves, to hear what accusers and witnesses say against them;
which requires presence, as shall be further shown anon.

Obj. Other men may examine witnesses and reprove offenders, therefore this may
be committed to another.

Ans. Other men may do it on another obligation, in another manner, to another
end: But to do it from the Pastoral obligation, in a Pastoral manner, to
Pastoral ends, is proper to the Pastors of the Church.

Obj. A Bishop may receive accusations by presentiments, or by information, and
may summon offenders, examine witnesses, and judge at a distance of persons
that are to him unknown.

Ans. He may do what he can that way, when necessity hinders him from doing
better, but not with any true satisfaction to God, the Church or Conscience to
discharge the office of a particular Church Bishop. In case of title to lands
or goods a civil Judicature may judge of persons that are unknown: Because the
title depends not on the moral qualities of the persons: And in criminal
cases where the question to be judged or resolved is, whether the person shall
live or die, or shall be fined, imprisoned, banished or not, the case may be
judged of unknown persons secundum allegata and probata: For outward
punishments must go upon outward proved crimes, and the Judges can possibly do
no more, because about twelve must judge a whole Kingdom. And yet even there
they greatly regard qua mente, with what mind and intent the deed was done, and
they greatly regard the moral qualifications of a Witness as to his
credibility, as far as they can find it out. But in Church cases, it is men's
consciences that are to be wrought upon. The first intention of the Pastor is
to bring the sinner to repentance; yea though he continued in penitent never so
long before, he is not to be* excommunicated till at the present also he show
impenitency. Therefore it is more necessary to be acquainted with the person,
and many an admonition or exhortation (ordinarily) should go before. And when
it comes to excommunication, the principal part of that Act is to acquaint the
Congregation that the impenitent person is unfit for Church communion, and to
charge and exhort them to avoid him And to do this it is necessary that the
Church be taught to abhor the sin, and to do it in abhorrence of the sin, and
therefore that they be convinced that the person is such a one indeed. For
seeing God commands them to Love all the faithful and to live with them in
the exercises of that Love in peace, if Godly men be unjustly excommunicated,
by a Diotrephes, who receives them not and excommunicateth such as do receive
them, the Church must not disobey God in obeying such a wicked excommunicater.
And though its true, that for order sake, they must often rest satisfied in the
Pastors judgment, when they have no reason to question it; Yet it is as true,
that it is a thing to be done before the Congregation, that they may not only
exercise a bare obedience to the Pastor in it, but also an abhorrence of the
sin, which they cannot do that have no satisfactory notice of the case; And
also that all suspicions of injustice and Church tyranny in their Pastors may
be avoided: And that the offender may be convinced before all, that he may be
ashamed: And seeing no man is to be excommunicated for any ordinary great sin,
without impenitency in it; so that the question is not then so much whether the
man have sinned, as whether he be Penitent, what man of any experience in these
matters can believe that a Bishops, or a Chancellors Court among strangers, and
also when he is in fear of being imprisoned and utterly undone if he be
excommunicated, is so fit to try a man's repentance, as the face of the
Congregation where he is known, and has no such motives to constrain him to
lie, and use hypocrisy. Nay in very truth such judicatures may as easily know
beforehand, that all the impenitent persons that almost ever come before them,
(who are not conscientious persons that take the sin for a duty) will say they
repent, and play the dissemblers as that a Child will cry for forgiveness to
escape a whipping.

Obj. But is it not so much the better? The Church must have hypocrites: we
cannot change the heart; that belongs to God: If we bring man to profess
repentance it is all that's our part to do.

Ans. Hypocrites that cannot be lawfully detected must be in the Church: But we
must not therefore make men hypocrites that they may be in it; and constrain
them to apparent lying, and then make lying to be the Church Title, and the
very constituting qualification of a visible Christian; else you may set men on
the rack till they say they repent, and then absolve them and pronounce them
the pardoned Sons of God; which will be a surer way than an imprisonment. And
in this practice this doctrine which I leave all Christians to judge of, is
included, [ Every Blasphemer, Heretic Adulterer, Drunkard, etc who had rather
say that he repents, than lie in a Gaol and be undone ought to be a
communicating member of the Church and to be declared pardoned by absolution.

Yea if there were no Penalty, the face of strangers is no fit trial of
repentance. If the sinner be obstinate, he will easilier stand it out before
strangers that know him not, than before the Congregation which is acquainted
with his guilt. But usually he will think, that it is no great shame to say, I
repent before a few strangers, who are never like to see him more, and
therefore this he will easily yield to, that would not yield to confession and
repentance before the Church that is acquainted with them: Experience proves
all this to be true: And I regard not their reasonings which are against common
experience.

Obj. But we see that many now will rather stand it out, and go to prison, than
they will profess repentance before a Bishop, or at a Chancellours Court.

Ans. But who be those? Not drunkards or fornicators or any wicked livers: But
men that more fear to sin against God, who can cast both soul and body into
Hell, than to lie in prison: perhaps it is such Ministers as now are silenced
for not saying, subscribing or swearing as they are bid: or it is some
Churchwardens who fear that they should be guilty of Persecution or Perjury
(which in their opinion are neither of them things indifferent) if they should
take the Oaths with the Articles that sometimes are offered them. Or perhaps it
is some one for not receiving the Sacrament, either when a troubled Conscience
makes them fear lest they should eat and drink damnation to themselves, or
from a Minister, or with a Church, which they think the Scripture commands
them to avoid: whether such be in the right or in the wrong, no wonder if they
refuse to repent, though they suffer, when they fear a greater suffering from
God.

Obj But the Minister of the place, though he excommunicates none, may seek to
bring the sinner to repentance, and may satisfy the Church of the justness of
the excommunication.

Ans. 1. In the nature of the thing, they go together, and are the work of the
same persons: And therefore Tertullian assures us, that in his time,
Discipline was exercised in the Church-meeting, when they had been worshipping
God. 2. Who is either so fit, or so obliged to satisfy the Church of the Act,
as he that does it, and has examined all the Cause? A parish Minister cannot
bring any unwilling person to come over to speak with him, (not that we would
have him have a forcing power: but he cannot do his own Ministerial part, which
is to refuse to be the Pastor of such a man as refuses to speak with him at
all, or to take him for his Pastor, nor to forbear himself to give him the
Sacrament): so that he that neither heard the examination of the Cause by the
Chancellor, nor perhaps can have any speech with the person, or at least with
the Accuser, or any of the Witnesses, is very unfit to justify another man's
act, and to satisfy the Church that it is well done; much less to exhort the
offender to repent, who to him perhaps (if he vouchsafe to speak to him) will
justify his own cause, when he cannot call witnesses to convince him. And (to
speak to that which is our common case) we have few persons excommunicated
(that ever I saw or knew of in forty years time) save only the Conscientious
persons beforementioned: And when the parish Minister often takes them for the
godliest persons in his Parish, and the Bishop or Chancellor excommunicates
them as Impenitent schismatics, how shall such a parish Minister justify
that, and satisfy the person or people of the justice of it, which he himself
lamenteth as a heinous sin, which tends to the dissipation of his flock.

But I come nearer to enquire into this officiating per alium by which an
absent Bishop is supposed to do his office in the several Parishes of his
Diocese.

1. That alius or Official is either a Layman, or a Clergyman. 2. If a
Clergyman, he is either one of the same Order with the Bishop or another. 3.
Either it is the mere accidentals of his sacred function, which he commits
to another, or the proper Acts of it. 4. Either it is pro hac vice in some case
of necessity, or it is as by an ordinary stated Official.

1. If it be a Layman and the work be but Accidental or Extrinsick to the
sacred function, I grant that he may do it: But for such works we need no
Bishop: For what a Layman may do when he bids him, he may do when the King or
his Magistrates bids him. This is not the thing in question. But if it be a
proper Pastoral Act, this Layman that does it, either receives from the Bishop
power and obligation to do it, or not. If not, he cannot do it as his Official:
If he do, then he is a Pastor or Bishop himself, and is Ordained, and so no
Layman: For I provoke any dissenter living to tell me wherein the sacred office
(or any other) lies, but in a Power (or Authority) and an Obligation to do the
proper works of that office, so that undeniably here is a contradiction.

And if any were of opinion that pro tempore in a case of necessity a Layman
might do any Ministerial sacred act, as Preach, Baptize, Consecrate the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, excommunicate, absolve, etc. 1. I answer,
if that were true, if would but prove that those Acts are not proper to the
sacred function in such a case of necessity as single Acts, but only as
ordinarily and statedly done by one separated to them. 2. And therefore this
would not at all concern our case, which is not about extroardinary Acts in
cases of necessity, but about an ordinary stated course, by Courts,
Chancellors, and Officials.

2. But if the Agent or Official were not a Lay Chancellor but a Clergyman, if
he be of the same Order with the Bishop, than I grant all, for it grants me
all; even that every Church should have an (ordinarily) present Bishop. But if
he be supposed to be but of an inferior Order, then I proceed as before; either
the Bishop gives him power and obligation to do the proper work of the Bishop
or not: If not, he is not hereby enabled to do it. If yea, then he has thereby
made him a Bishop: For to be a Bishop is nothing else than to have Authority
and Obligation to do the proper work of a Bishop. But if it be but an
Accidental or a common work, which another may do, it is not that in question,
nor do we need the Office of a Bishop for it.

Moreover either the Bishop pro hic and. nunc was himself obliged to do that
Act which he commits to another, or not he but the other was by office
obliged to do it. If he himself was obliged to do it he sinned in not doing it.
If he were not it was not truly his act or part of his office work: nor did he
do it by another, but that other did only his own work; for which not the
Bishop, but he shall have the reward.

Obj. But does not he that sends his servant to pay a debt, himself in
Lawsense pay it per alium? what another does as his Instrument, reputatively he
does himself.

Ans. I grant it; because it is none of the debtors proper work, nor is he at
all obliged to it, to bring the money and deliver it himself, but to cause it
to be delivered: Therefore in sending it, he does all that he is obliged to do,
and when another is his instrument, it is supposed that he is not obliged
himself to do that which his instrument does but only to cause the doing of it,
by himself or an Instrument, as he please: so that still this is nothing to the
case of a work that is proper to the Bishops Office.

Obj. But we therefore grant that it is not proper to the Bishops Office to
Judge, Excommunicate, or Absolve, but only to Rule the Action, by giving
another power to do it.

Ans. 1. If so, then nothing but Commissioning others, is the proper work of
the Episcopal order: and then any Presbyter may in foro interno vel externo
ordinarily exercise the whole power of the Keys upon the flocks, he may
Excommunicate and absolve publikly; as an act common to his Office with the
Bishops, if it Please the Bishop to give him Power, which he may do without
making him a Bishop. And if so, I enquire whether God be not the maker of the
Presbyters office, and not the Bishop? and whether God only (describing it)
give not all the power by way of Law, Charter or Institution, and the Bishop
give it not only by way of ministerial solemnization and investiture? and if
so, whether he that is duly called to the Pastoral office, which God only made
and discribed, wust not (in season) do the works of that office? whether men
commission him or not? or whether at least he any more need the Bishops
commission for Church Government, Excommunication and Absolution, than for
Preaching and Celebrating the Lords supper, seeing both are now thus confessed
acts common to the order of the Presbyter and the Bishop? I think all this is
past contradiction

And I ask then whether that all giving of power to another be proper to the
Bishops order? If yea, than a Minister cannot give his Clerk power to choose the
Psalm, or tune, etc. If not, then may not a Bishop if he please also give power
to the Presbyters to ordain, and to give other men power? For if it be his
proper work only to give power to others to do all the sacred acts of office,
he may give others power to ordain; and if so, then Ordination will be like
Preaching, Sacraments, and Discipline, which are none of them proper to the
Bishops order.

And is not Church discipline the exercise of the power of the keys? If then
the power of the keys may be exercised by the Presbyters, when ever the Bishops
please, it seems it is common to them, with him, as well as Sacraments, and
therefore belongs not to a Bishop as a Bishop, but as a Presbyter.

And if in my dispute of ordination Disput. of Church Gover. 2.
I have fully proved that the power of the Ministry is given by Christ so far
immediately, as that it passes not through the hands of Electors or Ordainers
to the receiver, but is given by the mere Instrumentality of the Law or
institution, and that the Electors and Ordainers do no more than determine of
the qualified person that receives it, and publicly invest him, or
ministerially solemnize his Possession, (as the Burgesses choose, and the
Steward or Recorder investeth the Major of a Corparation, whose power flows
immediately from the Charter granted by the King) then all this controversy is
at an end: and I doubt not but that is fully proved.

And if commanding another to do an office work be all that is proper to the
Bishop, I ask whether any thing there be proper to him? and so whether we must
have such an office? For may not the King command the Minister to do all the
work which belongs to his function? may he not appoint Magistrates, and make
Law to command it? may he not punish those that do it not? Is he not custos
utriusque tabulae? and must he not corect mal-administration in ministers, and
drive them to do their duty? No doubt he may.

Obj. But he does not ordain Ministers, though he command them to do their
duty when ordained.

Ans. 1. Our present question is not about Ordination, but commanding men to
Govern the Church by Discipline or fully to Rule by the Keys the people of a
particular Church. If this so far belong to the Presbyters office that he may
do it by the Bishops License, let him that can, tell me why he may not do it by
the Kings License? and then (as they were wont to say of old) excepta
ordinatione, nothing but ordination only is proper to the Bishops office.

And that this is not proper neither, 1. This objection it self does intimate,
seeing the Bishop may give another Power to ordain: (and then why may not the
King?) 2. Many of the Schoolmen, and the Papists themselves confess, that the
Pope (say some), or Prelates (say others) may empower an Abbot or Presbyter to
ordain, of which see that unanswerable book of Voetius de desperata causa
Papatus against Jansenius for Presbyters ordination. 3. And our Church of
England causes Presbyters to impose hands with the Bishops, and Bishop Downam
aforecited is angry with his answerer, for supposing that he pleaded for sole
power of ordination in the Bishop, when he spoke but for a chief power.

And if nothing but a chief power in ordaining be proper to a Bishop; why then
are the Churches so confounded, and beggered, and altered, by a contrary
practice? And why is a new office of Bishops set up in the world? whose work is
to hinder the Ministers of Christ from their officwork, under pretense of a
power of Licensing them to it? when God licenceth them to the work, when he
calls them to that office, which essenti? ally consists in a power and
Obligation to do it, when they have opportunity

Moreover my Lord Bacon in his considerations as has well manifested (if
impartial wise men could have bin heard) that the office of a Bishop is a
function consisting in the exercise of personal skill, or abilities: and
therefore must be done by him that has them, and not committed to another, as
the office of a Judge, or Lawyer, of a Physician, of a Tutor, etc. no man
chooses a Tutor or Physician merely to send another to him for his Tutor or
Physician, but ^^ do the work himself. It is not like the place of a King,
whose right depends not on his parts or skill, because he may Govern by
others that are able.

And Grotius (who one would think by their respect to him, should have been
regarded by them) truly says de Imperio sum. potest. Page 290 [ Nam illud [
Quod quis per alium facit, per se facere videtur] ad eas tantum pertinet
actiones quarum causa efficiens proxima a jure indefinita est] that is [ For
this saying. That whose a man does by another, he seems to do by himself,
belongs only to those actions, which nearest efficient cause is not defined
by the Law] But sure when God made the Pastoral office; he meant that the
persons called to it, should do the work and not only appoint other men to do
it.

And I would know whether the work of a Presbyter (as to consecrae and
celebrate the Sacrament etc) may be done per alium, by one that is no
Presbyter. If not (as all say not) then I ask, whether the Bishops work or the
Presbyters be the more sacred? If the Presbyters, then his Office is more
sacred: If the Bishops (or both alike) then that Bishops work, may no more be
done per alium then the Presbyters.

Moreover I know no Bishops but would willingly be more Respected and Honored
than the Presbyters, and if they desire, it should be only by way of fear, they
neither think or wish like Ministers of Christ, nor like sober men. But if by
way of love, who knows not what advantage the present Pastor has above the
absent, caeteris paribus, to get the peoples love? and Paul would have it to be
so, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. It is those that Labor among them and admonish them,
whom they must esteem highly in Love, not for their titles and dignities, but
for their work sake. And who knows not that he that Loves a man for
Preaching the word of salvation to him, is likelier to come to him, whose
doctrine daily edifieth him, and comfort him, than to him whom one of a
hundred of his Diocese never heard a Sermon or a good word from, in all their
lives! If it be for the work sake that they must or will be Loved, is not he
liker to be most Loved who is still with them, and prays and praises God
with them, and comfort, and confirms them, and resolves their doubts, and
quieteth their troubled Consciences, and visits them in sickness, and takes
care of the poor, and visits them from house to house, than he that once or
never came among them, and is unknnown? And if the people be Rebellious and
wicked, it is the present Pastor who shall be most hated and opposed (which if
it be for Christ is a good and comfortable thing, and has a special promise
Mat. 5, 10. 11, 12.) And that Pastor who is most beloved of the good people,
and most hated by the bad, is he that will do most good for men's salvation, and
will have most comfort in his Soul, and at last the greatest reward from God;
and that is caeteris paribus the present Pastor.

And it were worth the noting (if blind men would see) that this is our great
reason of the common calamities of the Churches: that when the best of the
people love their present faithful Pastors and the worst hate them most, and
love best the Absent Bishops that trouble them (as they do the dead Saints for
whom they keep holy ^^ajes) these wicked people fly to the Bishop and seek to
make the present Pastors suspected, or odious to him, as Schismatics, or such
as are against the Bishops mind and honor: and because these Villains Love the
absent Bishop better then the present Pastors, therefore the Bishop (that
knows them not but by hearsay) takes such for the honestest men in the
Parish, and so takes their words against the Ministers: and (to the utmost of
my experience I speak it) ordinarily, that Minister shall pass with the Bishop
for a Schismatic, a Puritan, a seditious Fellow, or a stark knave, let him be
more Learned than Hierom, more industrious than Augustine, more holy than
Macarius, or at least as suspected of these crimes, whom the flattering
malignant, will so represent to him: especially if he be a sensual Gentleman,
that cannot endure to have his lusts and licentiousnes reproved, or controlled
by a Minister of Christ. And when these lies and slanders have encouraged the
ungodly accusers by their success, while they engage the Bishop against the
present Pastors, and cause him to turn their troubler, hinderer or persecutor,
then is the Prelate and the Pastor become as enemies, whose interests are grown
inconsistent, and then they come to have their several Parties, and the
debauched take one side, and the sober and religious the other, and what
follows upon this, he is mad in this age who is ignorant after so great
experience.

But I shall add more of this subject in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XII. The just opening and understanding of the true nature of the
Pastoral office and Church Government, would end these controversies about
Episcopacy.
THe name of Church Government so far deceives undistinguishing gross
crinconsiderate wits, as that they take the controversy to be but whether we
shall have order or anarchie, Church Government or none. As if neither the
Magistrates Government of the Sword were any thing, nor yet the Pastors
Government by the word. But I would fain know of these men what more it is that
they would have, and what is the Church Government which they so much contend
for?

1. Is it an Universal Legislation? It is high and damnable Treason against
Christ for any mortal men to claim it. Universal Legislation is the
prerogative of the Universal King. There is no Universal King but Christ, who
else is Governor of all the world or all the Churches in the world? And Christ
has in nature and Scripture given the world already an Universal Law. If he
has done it well, take not on you to amend it. If you say he has done it ill,
either take not on you to be Christians, or else call your self the Christ,
that is Antichrist, if you will take Christ's place and take upon you to amend
his work. If you dream of an Universal Pope or General Council as having this
power, you will but make true Antichrists of them, and foolishly confound a
humane constitution with a Divine, and the Roman Empire with all the world. For
you are ignorant in Church History if you see not plainly that Popes,
Patriarks, and Primates stand all on the same foundation; And that both they
and Councils (falsely called, General,) were but Imperial, or confined to one
Princes Dominion, called or ruled usually by the Emperors, who had no power in
other Princes Territories: No Councils containing any considerable members, but
such as were in that one Empire, or formerly had been of it, and so kept the
custom which then they had received, except that the Romans placed one Bishop
on the borders of Scythia or Tartary, and one on the borders of Persia, in hope
that he might have influence further into the Countries, and rarely one or two
such might be at a Council called General, so that certainly there is no
Universal Lawgiver or Judge but Christ. This therefore is not the Church
Government of Bishops which men contend for.

2. What is it then, is it an Universal Exposition of the Scripture or of
Christ's Laws? why an exposition truly Universal is for Regulation as the Law it
self: And none ever had such power (even in civil Government) but the
Lawgivers themselves: Else the Expositor of the Laws should be King, and not
the maker, seeing it is his sense that the subject must be ruled by. But if it
be a particular decisive exposition which you mean, such as a Judge in
deciding particular controversies, I shall say more to that anon.

3. If it be any Coactive or Coercive power of Church Government that you
meant, by mulcts or Corporal penalties* no Bishops as such have any thing to do
with it; not only Bilson, but the generality of the Prelatists disclaim it,
and confess that it belongs only to the King and Magistrates and that they
receive it from the King, if ever they exercise any s^^h.

4. What is it then, is it to be the Kings Ecclesiastical Council, to prepare
such Canons as he shall enact? Of Canons I shall say more anon. But though
Pastors may be the fittest to Council Kings, yet that gives them no power, nor
does aptitude make an office, nor is the King tied to them, but may advise
whith whom he please. And experienced present Pastors, are usually fitter to
give advice in the matters of Religion, than they. And even Civil impartial
Noblemen have usually proved wiser, sob^rer and more peaceable and happy Church
Councillors, than the interessed partial Clergy.

I am not of Erastus mind, that all Church Government belongs to the
Magistrates. I have lately published my judgment of that matter in certain
Propositions to Ludov. Molinaeus. But I grant to him, and all sober impartial
Divines do grant, that all forceing Government by the Sword, belongs to
Magistrates (and Parents) only, and not to any Bishops as such.

It follows therefore that no Bishops power extends to any other effect,
but only to work on the Consciences of Volunteers, unless as the Magistrates or
Parents may constrain them by penalties to submit to it. Suppose therefore a
while that the Magistrates force were withdrawn from your discipline, and left
it to itself, you would then know better by experience wherein its strength
consisted: That man would then Rule the people most, who did most effectually
convince their reason, and prevail with Conscience: and further nothing would
be done, Are not our Bishops well aware of this -- Do they not themselves
confess how little their Government would signify above the Government of
present Presbyters, unless they could give clear convincing Reasons to the
people, which absent strangers are unlike to do? What do you think your
peculiar power would signify in one year above a Presbyrers, if the Magistrate
left all at liberty in their Church obedience to their Pastors, would not the
present Pastors carry almost all, with the best and soberest of the flocks?
Especially where Bishops make it their office to forbid the Pastors to do
theirs, and to keep them from Preaching the word of life? Their holding fast
the secular conjunct power, and using it so much does show what they trust to!
they say themselves, what would the Keys signify without the Sword? and the
Pishops Government prevail, where none are punished for despising it if the
Bishop excommunicate a faithful Preacher, neither he nor his flock will much
regardit, but go on in the service of the Lord. And perhaps some will
excommunicate the Bishop and be even with him. O! that the Magistrates would a
few Years try what the Keys can do in England of themselves, and valiant
quantum valere possunt. Not that I would wish him to leave off his own duty, to
punish sin; but let it not be mixed with Church Offices, so, as that all that
shall be imputed to the Bishops Keys, which is effected only by the Magistrates
Sword. I deny not but the Magistrate may moderately drive men to hear Gods
word, and to do the immediate duties of their places? But not to profess that
they are Christians when they are not, or that they consent to Church
Communion, when they do not: Nor to take those Privileges which belong not to
them: No man has right to Church Communion, who had rather be excommunicated
then repent of sin: Therefore if Gods word and an excommunication will not
bring him to profess Repentance, he should not be either Rackt or Imprisoned,
to force him to say he does repent, when it is certain that he does not indeed
repent, who will not profess it by easier means: Nor has that man right to
absolutiaon and Church Communion, who only prefereth it before a Goal. The
effects of the Church Keys are talked of but are indeed unknown, where secular
force does deterr men into lyeing professions of repentance and drive unwilling
persons in to the Communion of the Church: No unwilling person should have the
Seal of pardon put into his hands.

Obj. But we cannot say they are unwilling who consent, though moved by the
penalty of the Law and Sword.

Ans. Yes; he is to be called unwilling, who has not the willingness which
Christ makes necessary: He that is not willing to have Church Communion for it
self, and for Christ and his salvation, is not willing of it at all indeed, nor
in Gods account: For it is only freedom from a Prison that he is willing of,
and of Church Communion as a means to that, and not as a means to the end that
God appointed it: As he that consents to be Baptized only to heal the Kings
evil, or to save his life, is not to be Baptized nor taken for a Christian, nor
is it Baptism indeed, but touching only which he consents to; so is it in
this case.

Obj. But how know you but them in has righter ends together with these,
punishment brings many a man to reason and true repentance.

Ans. You suppose your selves that the word and Keys will not prevail with him
of themselves; and therefore it is that you desire force; your own Consciences
tell you that it is but to avoid punishment that you suppose him to profess
repentance: Otherwise when your threats have brought him to repentance, try
what is the cause by remitting the penalty on his body, and after freely
leaving him to himself.

Obj. But some are like Children that will hear reason when their stubbornness
is taken down: Therefore it may also have better motives for ought you know.

Ans. 1. Men that are dealt with in the matters of Salvation, are not to be
thus used as Fools and Children about common things; but as men that must live
and die as they choose. 2. And God has left us no such means to bring men into
a right Choice in things of this nature. Otherwise you might set Infidels on
the Rack till they consent to be Baptized, or send them to Prison, and then
say, how know you but this, as the Rod does Children, has brought them to
their wits. But the Church of Christ never took this course, nor never thus
understood his will. 3. The case is plain to men that will understand: When God
has made men's free consent the Condition of their Salvation and the Profession
of a free consent to be the Condition of Church Communion (and what wise man
would have lower that will not make the Church a swine stie)? It follows that
the Pastors must have the evidence of such a Profession of free and voluntary
consent, or else they must not receive such persons: Now such a one that has
been long tried by the word, and by the penalty of Excomunication it self, and
refuses to profess Repentance, but only professes it when no other means will
escape a Prison, does not give the Pastor an evidence in the Court of Reason
acceptable, to signify a voluntary Repentance or consent; and therefore what
ever possibly may be known to God, he is not to be taken into the Church: For
we must judge by evidence, and that is by such free profession of Repentance,
as Christ has taught us to expect: and therefore we can only Judge that person
to be one, that had rather say he repents than be imprisoned, but not as one
that indeed repents or desires Church Communion as such, and for true ends.

Obj. But if he be in the Church though without Repentance, he may there he
brought to Repentance afterward.

Ans. Possibilities are no Rule for us to go by in such cases, so you may say
if one be Baptized, before he profess to believe or repent, he may be brought
to it after by hearing in the Church: But this is but to make Laws for the
Church instead of Christ's, when we have cast out his Laws, and to confound the
world and the Church by our foolish adverse reason. He that is in the Church
notoriously against or without his will, stands there but as a testimony of the
Bishops perfidiousness: And he that will not come in by any reasoning or
entreating, without the violence of the Sword, is in all process of humane
Judgments to be esteemed unwilling: The ancient Churches would indeed importune
men to Baptism; but they never baptized any (at age) that did not entreat to be
baptized, and voluntarily make profession of faith and repentance. And Papists
and Protestants commonly affirm, that none should be constrained to be
baptized, or to make profession of Christianity. But the Papists come after and
tell us that vet when one is baptized, he may be compelled by force to all his
duty, and so may be constrained to stay in the Church, or to return if he
forsake it: Their Reasons are, 1. Because now he is obliged by his own consent.
2. Because he has put himself under the Government of the Church, and
therefore must be Governed by it. Ans. But 1. to consent to be a Christian
Ruled by Christ, and to consent to be constrained by force to continue this
consent, are two things. Prove the latter if you can to be included in our
Baptism? Contrarily as we freely and not forcedly consent, it is supposed that
we are accordingly to continue it as we began it. 2. And to put our selves
under the Government of the Church, is not to put our selves under the sword:
the Church punishment reaches no further then excomunication: and where a man
is fully excomunicated, he is cast out of the Church again: and when he is out
of it, he is not under its Government: Indeed he is under the Magistrates
Government: But if that will prove that he may be punished for not repenting
and returning to the Church when Excomunicate, it will prove too that he might
be punished before Baptism, for not repenting and being baptized. For though
there be some aggravations of his sin that Apostatizeth to it, yet that
differs the case but as to the degree. It is for the quality of the crime
itself, that the Magistrate is to punish (as Murder, Theft, Adultery, Blasphemy
etc.) Whether it be in the unbaptized, or baptized, or excomunicate: But it is
for Impenitency only in some crime that the Church does excommunicate. And if
the Magistrate must imprison or kill men properly for Impeni^encie, it must be
as it aggravateth the crime itself, and it may be as well the unbaptized as the
baptized, for he is the Governor of both: It is therefore a mere fiction of
Papists Church Tyrants, that there is such a difference between the unbaptized
and the excommunicate, as that the first must not have Church privileges till
they disire them, and the later may have them if they be but commpelled to keep
them, or return to them by the sword.

And so schismaticaly different are they from the Catholic Church for many
hundred years after Christ, as directly to contradict them. For all the Canons
as well as the History tell us, that all the ancient Churches when they had
excommunicated a sinner, would not receive him till he had penitently begged
readmission: Yea they used to cast down themselves on the earth (as even great
Theodostus did before Ambrose when but suspended), and to beg pardon and
readmission with tears: nay for great faults, this was not received till many
months or years continued penitence, showed their desires to be sincere; and
now Prelates must have a Blasphemer, or a common Drunkard, compelled by the
sword to say that he repents, that he may the next day have the honor and
privilege of a Christian: Communicant, whether he will or not. O
kind-natured-cruell-Church*

And when Gyri^ of Alexandria began to use the sword, and when the
Circumcellian Donatists tempted Augistine to change his opinion about using
force in matters of Religion; yea and when Ithacius and his partakers offended
Martin and Ambrose by stirring up Maximu^ against the Priscillianists, none of
all this was to force these Heretics by the sword, to Communicate in the
Church before they had showed a voluntary repentance, nor to make them Church
members against their wills, even that Ithacius whom Hooker himself
acknowledges so bad, was not so foolish* But only they would have forced them
from their own ways, and punished them as sedu^eis of the people, and as
disturbers of the Churches purity and peace. Though yet it is too evident, that
the pride and passion of the Prelates that were orthodox, did quickly and
sterely flame out to the constagration of the Churches, when they found that
the Christian Emperors were ready to serve their passions with the sword

It is then past denial, that all the power of Bishops or any Pastors is but
the ^^^^dgement of the word of God, upon the Conferences of men that believe
them and voluntarily receive that word: only with this advantage, that they do
not this as private men, but as Officers appointed so to manage this word. And
therefore he that disobeyeth the word of God truly delivered and applied by
them, commits a double sin; one as he disobeyeth Gods word as such, in the
matter in hand, and the other as he disobeyeth that particular word of God,
which commands him to hear and obey his Pastors. But if men will so sin, we
have nothing but that word of God, which they despise to cure them by.

For instance, 1. In our admonitions and reproofs, of the greatest sinners, we
can do no more but show them Gods Law, which they have broken, and which
threatens damnation to them, and to persuade them by Scripture arguments to
repent that they may escape.

2. In excommunication it self, we have nothing to do but to show them the same
word, and show them how God has threatened to punish them, and to show them and
the Church that word which commands us to have no Communion with them but to
avoid them, and according to that word to declare them (Impenitency openly
Characterizing them) to be persons unmeet for Christian Communion, and such as
(till they repent) are under the wrath of God, and must expect his dreadful
judgment; and to command the Church in Christ's name to withdraw from the
Impenitent person, and to have no Communion with him. And all this is but the
application of Gods word to his Conscience and the Churches. If his seared
Conscience deride it all, we can do no more. If he will forcibly intrude into
the Communion of the Church against their wills, it is like ones breaking into
my house; the Magistrate must restrain him as a violater of the peace as well
as of the Churches liberties: If the Magistrate will not, the Church most
remove from him. If they cannot, they must pronounce him morally absent, as a
forcible intruder and none of their Communion. If the Church will not obey the
Pastors sentence, he has no instrument but the same word to bring them to it.
Now all this being past denial, let us come more particularly to enquire in all
this, what part there is essential to a Bishops office as such.

1. Is it the making of Church Laws or Canons? About what? 1. Either these
Canons are but the Commanding of that which Gods Law made a duty before, or of
somewhat newly made a duty by themselves: 2. Either they are Laws or Commands
to the Laity only, or to the Presbyters, or to the particular Bishops, or all.

1. If they do but urge the performing of some duty already made such by God,
in Scripture or Nature, who ever doubted, but Presbyters may do that even to
teach and charge the people from God to obey his Laws.

And note that God daily makes new duties by the Law of nature, even
providentially altering the Nature of things; And so he makes this or that to
become Decent and Orderly and so a duty. And makes it my duty to speak this or
that word, to this or that person, or to do this or that particular good work.
Even by varying occasions, accidents and circumstances of things.

2. But if these Canons make new duties which God has not made, 1. If it be to
the Laity, the Presbyters may do the like; for they are Guides also of the
Laity, unless they are forbidden by a superior power: If it be only to the
Presbyters, that will not reach our present case, as shall be further showed
afterward. 3. If it be to the Bishops themselves, they cannot be Laws, but mere
agreements, because one Bishop is not the proper Governor of another; nor many
of one; nor the present in Council of the absent as such.

And here by the way it is worthy to be noted how much the Diocesanes
contradict themselves, in this claim of Government: They say that they are of a
distinct order and office from mere Presbyters, because they have power to
Govern them. And yet they make, 1. A Council of Bishops to have as high a
governing power over particular Bishops of the same order: 2. And an
Archbishop to be the Governor of Bishops; 3. And a Primate or Patriarch to be
the Governor of Archbishops; and yet not to be of a distinct Order, or
office, but only of a distinct degree in the accidentals of the same order. If
Government prove a distinct Order, or Office in one, it will do so in the
other. And why may not the Magistrate make all the same Canons who rules them
all?

But let us consider what these Canons may be. 1. The Bishops make Canons, how
often Synods or Councils shall be held, and when and where, and when they shall
be dissolved. But, 1. May not the King do the same? And can that be proper to
Bishops which the King may do? Yea which all Emperors have formerly used? 2.
And is not this Cannon made to rule Bishops themselves? who is it but Bishops
(or so much as them) that you think should be called unto Councils? And are the
Bishops in Council of another order than themselves out of Council? Need we an
office of Bishops to rule Bishops of the same office?

2. Canons are made about Temples, Buildings, Tithes, Glebes, Bells, Pulpits,
Seats Tables, Cups, Fonts, and other utensils. And 1. who doubts but the
Magistrate may do all this? yea that it belongs to him to regulate such
things as these? 2. And who knows not that even Bishops are under these
Canons also, who are of the same order? 3. And that Presbyters (even in
England) are members of these Synods, and so make Canons to rule the Bishops?
Ergo they are of a superior order to Bishops by your reasoning.

3. Canons are made for the regulating of Ministers attire, in the Church and
out, and for officiating garments, as surplices etc. And of these I say the
same as of the former. The King may do the same as Bishops may do, and Bishops
themselves are bound by them, and Presbyters make them, which three things
prove that it is not the proper work of Bishops as a distinct order from mere
Presbyters.

4. Canons are made for worship Ge^ures; in what gesture to pray, to receive
the Sacrament, to use the Creed, etc. And the same three answers serve to this
also, as to the case in hand.

5. Canons are made for Holidaies, public Fasts, and Thanksgivings, and
Lecture days. And the same three considerations fall in here.

6. Canons are made for the ordering officers, fees, and such like in Bishops
Courts. And here all the same three things fall in, 1. The King may do it, 2.
It is Bishops that are ruled, 3. Presbyters also make the Canons, therefore it
is not jure divino the proper work of a distinct Order.

7. Canons are made for the choice of what Translation of the Bible shall be
used in all the Churches, and what version or meetre of the singing Psalms.
And of this also the three former things hold true.

8. Canons are made to impose a Liturgy, in what words Ministers shall speak
to God and to the people. And, 1. This also the King may do and does, 2. And it
obliges Bishops. 3. And Presbyters make it.

9. Canons are made against Schismatics, new Discipline and constitutions,
non-subscribers, unlicensed Preachers, for the book of Articles, of ordination,
for Catechizing, Preaching, Marrying, Burying, Christing, and such like: In all
which each of the said three answers hold.

10. Canons are made to keep Parents from open covenanting to God for their
Children in Baptism, that they shall not be urged to be present, that
Godfathers do that office and not they; As also that none be baptized without
the transient Image of a Cross, and such like: whether this be well or ill
done, the three former answers all hold in this.

11. All the Canons that are for the restraint of sin, as neglect of Church
worship, profaning of it, and other abuses, have the same censure.

12. The circumstantiating Canons, how often Bishops shall confirm, and whom they
shall ordain, and how often, and how often the Common prayer be read, the Surplice
worn, the Sacraments administered, in what place, what Registers to be kept,
what order to be observed in reading the Scriptures and the Apocrypha, with
abundance the like, have all the foresaid answers to prove that they are no
proper work of a distinct order.

There remains therefore but the determination of present circumstances,
which are part of the Ministers proper work, or the Lecturer or Clerks at
least. As, 1. What text to Preach on to day. How to expound it, and apply it:
In what method to Preach: What words to use: How long to Preach: 2. In what
method, words and length to pray (where free Prayer is allowed) 3. What
particular Psalm to Sing, and in what tune; 4. On what particular days to
administer the Lords Supper, besides the great days (Easter, Whitsontide) etc.
At what hour to go to Church, and when to end, 5. What particular sick person
to visit, and when: And what sinner to reprove or admonish personally. And who
is to be taken for a true penitent and absolved in foro poenitentiali or
privately (as they distinguish, all these are either the personal work of him
that officiateth) (as chewing his meat of a man before he swallow it and degest
it; or as choosing his medicaments is to the Physician) and belongs to his
calling, which none should hinder him in (of which I make no question; And if
so, it is not the proper work of a Bishop. Or else it is fit that this liberty
be taken from him, and that other men choose for him every day his Text, his
Method, his words, his tune, his hour and the rest. And if so, when this also
shall be made a Canon, no doubt but the King and Parliament and Presbyters in
convocation, will all have a hand in it; and perhaps the Bishops be under the
Canon as well as others. Yet then we have not found out a Bishops proper work
unless it were when he is present in the same assemblies to govern the work in
all these circumstances, in which I do not contend against him.

II. If then it lie not in Legislation or Canon making, let us consider whether
it lie in judging or executing. And this must be chiefly about Excommunication
and Absolution, as it concerns the Laity. And here, 1. The business is not to
judge of the Law, but of the Person by the Law. It is not to judge in plain
cases, whether we must avoid an impenitent Fornicator, a Drunkard, a
Blasphemer, an Heretic, etc. For if the Bishops say nay, we must not believe
him or obey him. And for difficult instances, of the species of sins deserving,
it is partly the work of an expositor of Scripture, to determine of them, and
partly of the Canons and Laws of the land, where Magistrates and Presbyters are
efficient, and Bishops themselves obliged as well as Presbyters.

The business therefore is to judge whether this person be guilty of such That
unjust excommunications bind not, see the judgment of the most approved
casuists in Bapt. Fragoso de Regim Reipub. p. 1. l. 1. page 112. Col. 2. and
Gregor. Sayrus To. 2. l. 1. c. 17. number. 2. 5. 8. etc. And indeed they conclude
that out of the case of scandal, Magistrates Laws, unjust materially, that is,
to the Common hurt, or that are against common good, bind not in Conscience; ut
Id. Fragoso ib. p. 112. n. 234. 336. W^^ cites the consent of Silvest. Tabien.
Bald. Bartol. Hostiens. and Doctorum Communiter. So that Mr. John Humfrey is
not singular in his resolution of this Case, though I gave him many cautions
and limitations in the Letter, part of which he has printed in the end of his
book.
a Crime, and. 2. Whether he be impenitent therein. And that this is the work
of a Parochus, that is, a Cohabiting Pastor, who is upon the place, and knows
the parties, and not of a strange Bishop over a a thousand or many hundred
Churches, I have partly showed before, and partly shall show now, and partly
hereafter. At the present let the unexperienced consider of this which any
Novice that is upon the place may know.

1. A Bishop (especially armed with penal terror) or a Chancellour's Court, is
not like to know of one scandalous Impenitent person of a hundred, which the
present Pastor is like to know of. For experience tells us that few honest
men will accuse their neighbors, where they shall but get hatred, and foresee
no more probality of procuring the persons repentance by it: And that
Churchwardens do not and will not do it. Many men that fear perjury, refuse
the oath, lest they should break it, or sin in keeping it, as it binds them
to prosecute many men for Conscientious Nonconformity: And those that take the
Cath, before they fear an oath, will make no Conscience at all of breaking it.
So that a matter of notorious fact is past dispute. The land knows that not
one Swearer, Curser, Fornicator, Adulterer, Railer, Thief, Derider of Scripture
and Religion, etc. of a multitude, is ever accused at the Bishops Court.
Whereas the Present Pastor can scarce choose but know the greatest part of
these in his Parish, by dwelling among them, where he shall have frequent
notice of it. Say as long as you will that this is long of the Minister, or
Long of the Churchwardens, or of the Apparitor, we know that the thing is so.

2. And in Church judgments where a man's repentance is the cause in question,
he has the advantage an hundred fold that is present. For the tenor of his
life before, and after, will be of great signification in judging of this: A
man that never fell into such a sin before, and that quickly lamenteth it by
free confession (known to the Pastor) may easily be believed to be penitent.
But a man that has many years continued in a wicked life, and that after all
admonition and persuasions to repent, confessing one day and sinning the next,
and perhaps deriding the Pastor, and making a jest of his own confessions, is
not so quickly to be believed. And yet the strange Diocesans or Chancellor
shall not know the difference, nor hear any more at the best, than [I repent]
And whereas they say, if he sin again he is to be accused again] 1. They know
de facio, that this is seldom done, except against some Conscientious
Nonconformists. 2. And when neighbors see that the man whom they enraged
against them by an accusation, comes home again, by saying I Repent, and
paying his fees, and does but watch to execute his malice against the accusers,
they will meddle in such improfitable work no more.

3. And whereas the Chancellor or Diocesane must go upon the witnesses report.
1. The credit of the witnesses will be unknown to them; because it lies upon
the honesty of the persons, whom they know not but by other persons; nor those
other but by others; and they are forced to take all our slight reports, usualy
from some flatterers of themselves, almost the worst men in the Parish,
accounted by them the best and most credible, because they know not them
aright, nor the rest at all. 2. And how unsatisfactory a thing it is to a man's
Conscience, to Judge at random, or upon the uncertain credit of they scarce
know who, in a c^se of Excommunication or Absolution; whereas the present
Pastor may go on far more clear and satisfactory grounds.

4. Moreover the Conviction of a sinner before Excommunication or Absolution,
requires a great deal of time, and a great many words, and those chosen with
the greatest skill, and set home with the greatest Life, and Light, and Love,
that can be manifested by the speaker; Many a time I have tried it, and could
never satisfy my Conscience without more frequent, long and earnest
exhortation, and prayer with it, than ever I knew Chancellor or Bishop use to
forty delinquents set together. The present Pastor has opportunity to do
this: But the Chancellor or Diocesane has not. I never heard of any such means
used in their Courts that was of such a nature as true Pastoral exhortations
are, to melt a sinners heart into repentance. But of this before.

2. Another case of particular judgment is, what sinner in his sicknness before
death, is fit for Absolution. Here they cannot make the Bishop Judge, who is
many a mile off; nor can they tell how to deny it to be without the office of
the Parish Pastor, and therefore they allow him to be the Absolver; and yet,
lest he be the Judge, they bind him to Absolve all that require it, and do but
say they repent: which must needs be a pernicious deceiving course to
impenitent souls, when it is known that nothing is more ordinary with many in
sickness and in health, than to say I repent of some one gross disgraceful sin,
and live in others worse without any profession of repentance, and die so at
last. And must I absolve him from that sin which he repents of without the
rest? or from all because he repents of one? yea, commonly men have a
Confession which is like a Profession of their sin, and a Repentance which
declares it self to be Impenitence it self: some stoutly some stupidly saying
[I comfess I am a swearer and a drunkard, a whoremonger, but you Precisians are
as bad and worse, for you are but hypocrites: I repent of my sins daily, and
ask God mercy, though I commit them daily, and I doubt not of forgiveness, for
all are sinners] and if one of these say also on his sick bed, he repents,
without any signs of serious contrition or change of heart, we must Absolve
him: But yet though we are not free in this, it is no Diocesanes proper work,
and therefore requires not their office.

3. Another Judgment of individuals necessary is who is to be baptized, at
least of persons at age; in Infidel Countries, or such as ours, where many
thousand Anapabtists Children are unbaptized till they come to age? The
question is not what shall be the Law and Rule (whether Scripture or Canon) but
who shall judge whether the person be capable according to the rule. Doubtless
every one has not faith: The profession that entitleth to baptism must be, 1.
Of the whole essence of our part of the Covenant, faith, consent and future
obedience. 2. With tolerable understanding of what they say. 3. With seeming
seriousness. 4. With seeming Voluntariness and fixed resolution. Now how can a
Diocesan judge of this, that is not within many miles of the place, nor never
saw the person in his life? It has ever been confessed to be part of the
Baptizers work, though under the Government of Magistrates, and in the Church
the present Bishop is not denied a negative vote or a guiding judgment in the
affair.

4. The very fame throughout is to be said of judging what individual persons
in a Parish are grown up to a capacity of the Lords Supper; (whither it be done
in confirmation or at any other time) certainly they must renew their baptismal
Covenant, and moreover understand the sense of the Sacrament, etc. But shall
the Diocesan that never sees one of an hundred of his Diocese judge of every
one of these? I will stay no longer on such instances; I think we need no more.

III. If the cases of Testaments, Administrations, Licenses to marry, judgment
of cases of divorce, dispensations and such like be pretended as the proper
works of Bishops, I think I need not stay to confute them, while it is known
that so much as is not every Pastors work in it, belongs to the Magisirate,
and is done among us by his Commission, and that usually by Laymen.

IV. We have therefore the Government of the Ministers themselves to speak of
next, which consists, 1. In ordination, 2. Instituting and inducting, 3.
Licensing, 4. Suspending, ejecting, silencing and degrading.

1. And ordination being that great and notable work, which anciently was taken
to be all that was proper to the Bishop, by many of the Fathers, as well as
Hierome, this above all must be well considered. And 1. Let us consider of the
Reasons for it; and 2. Of the different cases.

1. The reasons given for appropriating ordination to Diocesans, or Bishops are
these, 1. Because no man can give that which he has not: 2. Because it is an
act of superiority: 3. Because none but Bishops ever did it in Scripture times,
or since without the Churches condemnation.

1. The first of these reasons Dr. Hammond Praemon. Dissert. is earnest in
urging. To which I say, 1. It is granted, that no man gives that which be has
not. But Presbyters have the office of Presbyters, therefore by your
supposition) they may give it.

Obj. But (says he.) Presbyters had never a power given by the ordainers to
ordain.

Ans. I deny it, and prove the contrary (whatever the ordainers mean) 1. Those
who in their ordination had an Office, Power or Keys of Christ's making,
containing the power of ordination, delivered to them Ministerially, had the
power of ordination delivered to them Ministerially: But all true Pastors or
Presbyters ordained in England had an Office, Power or K^y^s of Christ's making,
containing the power of ordination delivered to them Ministerially. Ergo they
had the power of ordination so delivered. Nothing needs proof but the Minor.
And, 1. That Christ and not the Bishops made the true Pastoral Office, or
Keys, is past doubt among sober Christians, 2. And that it was the ordainers
meaning to deliver them no new humane office, but that which Christ (by his
Spirit and Apostles at least) made, instituted and described, I will stand to
the ordainers own profession, 3. And if so, I think they will confess, that if
they did mistake, and think that the office contained not, what it contained
indeed, their mistake will not disable the ordained Minister; no more than the
Error of a Recorder or Steward, who thinks when he gives the Mayor his
Oath, that his office has lesser power than it has: But Gods making and not
man's meaning must determine of the power, 4. Therefore all the question is
whether God put the power of ordination into the Pastoral office. Of which now
I will say but this, that Dr. Hammond confesses that there was no Pastor
ordained in Scripture times that had not the power of ordination: And I shall
after prove, that no other should be introduced since by men.

2. And farther the Church of England appoints Ministers to impose hands with
the Diocesan in ordination: Therefore they take not ordination, but only a
Superiority in ordination to be proper to their office; As Bishop Downame and
other of them also openly hold and profess.

2. The, 2d. Reason, that ordination is an Act of Superiority. 1. Is granted;
because the person to be ordained is yet no Minister of Christ, and therefore
is Inferior to the Presbyters that ordain him, till he have received his
office. 2. But that afterward the ordainer must be of an higher order (as well
as greater antiquity in office) than him that is ordained by him, I deny: For
than Bishops could not ordain Bishops; nor Archbishops ordain Archbishops:
and who shall ordain the Patriarcks, or (if you be for him) the Pope? Have they
all superiors to do it?

3. The third Reason from History I shall confute in due place: only here
retorting it thus: In Scripture times no fixed Diocesan ever did ordain,
therefore none such should now ordain.

2. But next let us distinguish, 1. Between ordaining to the Ministry in the
Universal Church without affixing to a particular Charge, and the fixing of a
Pastor in that particular Church. And, 2. Between ordaining a Bishop or Plenary
Pastor, and a half Pastor called now a Presbyter.

1. As Baptism as such does join a man to no particular Church, but only to the
Universal, but yet they that have opportunity should secondarily by a faither
act of consent also join themselves to the particular Church where they live,
but if they live where they have no such opportunity, they must do it after as
soon as such opportunity comes: Even so ordination to the sacred Ministry as
such does fix a man to no particular Church, but make him a Minister of Christ
to the world for men's convertion, and to the Universal Church for Christians
edification, as he shall have any particular opportunity for exercise (which
the Church of England expresses by the words [ when thou shall be thereunto
Lawfully called] meaning a call ad exercitium, to the exercise of the office
received: But yet where there are not many unchurched Infidels to be converted,
but all profess Christianity, it is not fit such shall be ordained sine titulo,
as they speak, lest it occasion irregularity and poverty in the Clergy, but be
at once affixed to a particular Church, which fixed Ministers are in Scripture
usually called Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors, with relation to their
particular flock or Church, besides their primary relation to the World and to
the universal Church, from which the extraordinary Officers were called
Apostles and Evangelists, and the ordinary ones Ministers of Christ in general.
Though I deny not but even the unfixed may be called Bishops, Elders and
Pastors, as being virtually such, and in an Office which wants nothing but a
particular Call to that fixation and exercise.

Now 1. To call a Minister already made such to a particular Church, and so to
make a Bishop or Pastor or Presbyter of him, does not necesarily require a
Diocesan: For, 1. The people that are at liberty may do it, and ordinarily have
done (as Blondel has fully proved) And in our times if a free people only
choose a man already ordained, and take him for their Pastor, no man takes
this for a nullity, no not the Prelatists themselves. 2. And a Pastor
Magistrate or Prince may do it without a Bishop, as none deny. 3. And a
Minister may frequently on just occasion be removed from place to place, and
needs not a Bishop for every change, at least as to the being of his office.

2. And as to the first ordination of a Minister as such, if there must be a
Diocesan to do it, this is gathered either from the nature of the thing, or
from divine institution.

1. As to the nature of the thing, it shows no such necessity, but rather
contradicts it; for 1. As to Efficiency, if a Bishop or Archbishop or
Primate or Patriark may be made without the agency of any one of a higher
order, then so may a Presbyter. For the reason is the same.

2. And as to the object; 1. The first object of the sacred Ministry as such,
is the Infidel world, to whom they are to Preach the Gospel, and offer Christ
and Salvation, and beseech them in Christ's stead to be 2 Cor. 5. 19. Act. 26.
18. Mat. 28. 20.
reconciled to God, to call them from darkness to light, and the power of Satan
unto God. And to think that none but Apostles should do this, and that all the
world must be left to the Devil when the Apostles were dead, is an unchristian
thought: To those that must do this, Christ promised his presence to the end of
the world. Now. 1. The Infidel world is no more under the power of a Diocesan
than of a Presbyter: If it be, it is either. 1. As he is a Prelate. 2. Or as a
Diocesan. 1. Not as a Prelate in general. For if the world be the object of the
Ministers office, it can be no more of the Prelates as such. 2. Not as a
Diocesan: For the Infidel world, [ Egypt, Tartary, Japan, China, Persia, etc.]
is no part of any Bishops Diocese. 2. And as to the work of a Preacher to the
Infidels, it is the very fame whether it be done by a Bishop or a Presbyter:
There is nothing to do for them but preach and baptize, and neither of those is
a work proper to a Bishop.

If it be said that it is not because of the object or the work are proper to a
Bishop, but because the sending forth a man for that work is proper to him; I
answer, that when I have proved past contradiction that he fendeth a man to do
as high a work as he could there do himself, and to the very same, it shows
that ex natura rei there needs no higher order than the Ministers to send
him: No more than there needs a higher progenitor than a man to beget a man.

2. And as his office is related to the Church-Universal, all the same
argumentation will hold good. For the Church-Universal is the object of the
Ministers office as well as of the Prelates; and no more than his own Diocese
is the special charge of a Diocesan as such; and the work to which the Minister
is ordained in general to the whole Church can no otherwise be proved less than
the Prelates, unless by proving a Divine institution (which they will grant.)

2. And as for a Divine institution as to the ordaining power, I will say but
this much, (which may take with cordate men) till I come to speak more largely
of the point. 1. That Doctor Hammond (and as far as he knew, all that owned the
same cause with him) does grant that the Apostles (nor any other) in Scripture
times did not so much as institute the office of a Presbyter as distinct from a
Bishop, much less ever ordain any one to such an office: And that in all their
Instructions to Timothy and Titus about ordination of Bishops or elders and
Deacons, they have not a syllable about any ordination or qualification of such
subject Presbyters, but only about ordaining Bishops. Therefore if Bishops be
the successors of the Apostles in ordination, they cannot do more than they
did; nor ordain any other Presbyters than Bishops.

2. That if Bishops were the Institutors of Presbyters, as distinct from them
by a Power of parcelling out their office to others than Bishops, yet have
power to make more sorts of sacred Ministers, by subdivision of their power.
They may make one office only to Preach, and another only to baptize, and
another only to pray, and another only to administer the Lords Supper, and
another to Excommunicate, and why not another to ordain; and so ordination
shall not be proper to a Bishop. And so a Chancellor that has the parcel of
excommunicating and absolveing, is as true a Clergy man, and of as high
original as a Presbyter.

3. But that which Dr. Hammond betaketh himself to at last (in his Answer to
the London Ministers) is as miserable a shift as ever a poor cause was reduced
to (that had never stood if it had not been more beholden to the Sword than to
such foundations) he durst not say that the Presbyters office is not of Divine
institution: And yet it was not instituted in Scripture times: But it was
instituted in Saint John's time by him a lone after the writing of his Gospel
(which according to Jerome was about a year or two before he dyed) and the
Revelation (which according to Jrenaeus li. 5.) was about four or five years
before he dyed. And so all the Bishops power of ordaining subject Presbyters
depends, 1. On one Apostles Institution, 2. Not proved at all by Scripture,
3. But only by Church History, which has not a syllable of such a thing, as
that Saint John did institute the Presbyters office ^^^. And this is feigned to
be done by Saint John many years after Peter and Paul, are said to be Bishops
of Rome and James of Jerusalem, and Peter of Antioch, and Mark of Alexandria.
Yea about thirty two years after Mark was put to death according to Eusebius
Hierome says he dyed in the eighth year of Nero. aid. ^oi. Scaliger. Anim. in
Eusebius. Dorothaeun resutantem, page 195.
see then what proof the Doctor gives us that even at Rome and Alexandria all
that time, there was no Bishop over Presbyters, nor any that ever ordained a
Presbyter that was not a Bishop.

3. But suppose the Divine institution be proved of Bishops ordination of
subject Presbyters, let these three things more be noted.

1. That at least we have brought it to the Ancients measure, that excepta sola
ordinatione, except only ordination, here is no work for to make a Bishops
office of, but what a Presbyter may do.

2. That in this ordination they themselves acknowledge that the Presbyters may
join, even in imposing hands, which is the note of Superiority (the lesser
being blessed by the greater), and so Presbyters also (by Epiphanius's leave)
do generare patres: And Bishops have not the sole power of ordination, but the
chief.

3. And whether a chief power in investing men in the Ministerial office, do
make a distinct order or office de nomine, let them contend that please dear*
if this wereall, we were agreed: For my part, I had rather that Bishops had not
only a chief power as moderators, But even a Negative voice in ordination, yea
and in Removals and fixing of Ministers, than not: For in so weighty a business
two Locks and Keys to keep out bad men, are surer than one. And the poor
silenced Nonconformists have yielded to much more than this.

But yet there remains one part of the Diocesans work to be considered, viz,
The judging of Heresy and Schism, and the silencing, suspending and degrading
of Ministers that deserve it. The Question is, whether this be not proper to
the Prelates office.

And here no man can wish us to swallow the terms of the questions whole,
without distinguishing, as if they signified: but one thing.

1. As judging is, 1. Either private by discerning ones own duty, which
belongs to every private man. 2. Or public for the deciding of a
controversie^* and this as. 1. Civil, 2. Or properly* Ecclesiastical; so in
several manners and to several ends, Private men, Magistrates and Pastors may
judge of Heresy etc.

2. And as for suspending, silencing and degrading, either. 1. It signifies
some Correction by the Sword or force; and that undoubtedly belongs only to
the Magistrate, and to no private man, nor Clergy man at all, as such.

2. A Private man and much more a Congregation, may and must refuse a notorious
Intolerable Minister, whether Insufficient, Heretical or wicked and Malignant,
they must withdraw from him, and not take him for their guide, and Pastor, nor
trust their Souls upon his care and conduct. If Cyprian had never said [ Plebs
maximum habet potestatem, vel sacerdotes dignos eligendi, vel indignos
necesand^* the Law of nature says enough; as it does warrant a man to refuse
an unskilful or malicious murdering Physician. And Scripture requires every
man to take heed of false Teachers, and deceivers, and from such to turn away.

3. To silence a false Teacher by Argument, (by word or writeing) belongs to
every man that is called to contend earnestly for the faith, and to answer a
fool according to his folly.

4. To persuade him by Argument to give over Preaching, or to reform his
errors. 1. A private man may do it privately; 2. Any Minister of Christ may do
it both ex charitate and ex officio and authoritate, as a Minister of Christ in
his name. For as a Physician does medicate another Physician, not as another
man, but as a Physician, and a judge does judge the cause of another Judge, not
as a private man, but as a Judge; so a Minister of Christ does Preach to a
Minister, and persuade him, not as a private man but as a Minister, not as his
superior, but as a Messenger of Christ who is his Sovereign.

5. Yea, to Command such a man ex authoritate Nu^^ii vel Ministri, by
Ministerial authority in the name of Christ to forsake his Heresy and
wickedness, or to forbear the Sacred Ministry, belongs to Ministers of the
same office. For if a Minister Preach or speak to another Minister as a
Minister himself, and in Christ's name, then no doubt but he may command in
Christ's name; which is but by Ministerial office to publish the Commands of
Christ: No doubt but he may say to another Minister [I Counsel, yea Command you
in the name of Christ, by virtue of my office and his word, to forbear
Adultery, Theft, Blasphemy, Heresy, or else to forbear the Sacred Ministry]
Yea he may say thus (with due reverence) to a Bishop, so that for a silencing
by Reason or force, or by Ministerial authority and command as from Christ,
there is no need of the office of a Diocesan.

6. The question therefore is whether we must have a Bishop to silence men by
bare Authority without convincing effectual argument satisfying his Conscience?
or else by a distinct Superior Authority, more powerful than the Ministers?

And 1. Seeing the Diocesan as such has not the Sword, it is certain that he
silenceth no further than he prevails with the Conscience, either of the
Minister to be silent, or of the people not to hear him, or of the Magistrates
to silence him by force.

Now to do this, either he must prove to them from the word of God, by
argument, that each of these are thus far obliged by God; or else that God has
made him as Diocesan the Judge, and they are bound to do it, because he bids
them do it.

For the first, as is said, it belongs to every Minister, even with
office-authority to tell both Magistrates, Minister and people their duty, in
the name of Christ: Thus [God has commanded Adulterers, Heretics, etc. To
forsake their sins or forbear the Ministry, and commanded me to publish this
in his name, even to particular persons: But thou art an Adulterer, Heretic
etc. go etc. Or [God commands me to tell the people that it is their duty to
avoid a Heretic, and the Magistrate that it is his duty to silence him by
force: Therefore I require this of you in his name].

2. But if the Diocesan claim a Superior Nuntiative power, as one more to be
believed than the Minister, this is. 1. But to the doing of the same work which
a Minister may do. 2. And he must prove that Superior credibility. 3. But
Ministerial conviction is efficacious according to the evidence that is brought
to do the work. If the hearer believe not that the Major is Gods word (that an
Heretic e. g. must give over Preaching). Or if he deny the Minor [ but thou
art an Heretick] it is not a Bishops word that will convince him, but a
Minister that is better at proving it may do more.

Obj. but we will command him to be silent. Ans. And he will deride you and
command you to be silent again.

Obj. Then we will convince the Magistrate of his duty to silence him by force.
Ans. 1. That was not the way for 300 years after Christ: And what was
Episcopacy for till then? 2. What if the Magistrates believe you not, will you
convince him by Scripture or by your Authority over the Magistrate? It by
Scripture, a wiser Presbyter can do that better, or as well. If by authority,
of that anon.

Obj. But at least we will convince the people that it is their duty to forsake
that Preacher. Ans. Again I say, if you will do it by Scripture, a Minister can
do it as well. And thus many Ministers now do silence the Diocesans and
Conformists, that is, they persuade the people not to hear them, or own them.
But if by authority, it must come to this at last, that you are made by God the
Judges, and this must be believed.

And remember still you silence no further than you persuade the Conscience to
believe that God has given you this authority. And 1. I ask whether it be ever
likely that you will silence any Heretics, false Teacher, or Schismatic this
way by making him take you for one authorized by God to forbid him to Preach.
For it must be in one of these three cases or all that you have this power. 1.
Either to silence him as a Heretic that is no Heretic, or not proved such. 2.
Or to silence him as a Heretic that notoriously and provedly is a Heretic. 3.
Or to silence him as a Heretic in a doubtful case to others, but judged
Heresy etc. by you.

1. In the first case neither the injured person, nor any that know that you
injure him will or must obey you. Else a malignant Prelate might silence all
the holiest and worthiest Ministers of Christ, and it would be at such men's
mercy, whether Christ should have Churches, or the people should be Christians
or be saved. I am one of the 1800 that have been silenced by better authority
than the Prelates alone, and yet I think I am bound in Conscience to exercise
the Ministry which I received, whatever I suffer, to the utmost of my
opportunity. And if the Sword streightened my opportunity no more than my
Conscience of the Diocesans Prohibition, I should be but very little hindered.

2. In the 2d. case (of notorious Heresy) all good Christians are bound by God
to avoid such a man, though you never silenced him, yea though you licensed
him; yea though you commanded them to hear him: And so Magistrates are bound to
do their duty in restraining him. Can you deny this? Must the peoples Souls be
poisoned and damned, till the Bishop please to take away the poison and to save
them? must the Magistrate let Heretics alone till it please the Diocesan to
judge them?

2. And in this case, no sober Christian will deny, that a Presbyter ought to
call upon people and Magistrates to do their duty, as well as the Diocesans.
Yea, and to command men in Christ's name, to avoid a notorious or proved
heretic.

Obj. But a Presbyter cannot examine the case and so get proof. Ans. He may
examine it as far as Reason with Ministerial authority will persuade the guilty
or the witnesses to be examined. And his care of the Church and the peoples
Souls obliges him so to do. And a Prelate cannot bring men by sorce to
examination or witnessing.

3. But let his guilt be never so notorious to others, is it like that the
person himself will be silent through Conscience of obedience to a Prelate.

Consider. 1. that if he will not obey a Minister that shows him the word of
God, it is unlikely that he will obey a Prelate that says I have authority to
silence you.

2. A Heretic does not know that he is a Heretic, nor any erroneous person
know that it is an error which he believes: For it is a contradiction to err
in judgment, and to know it to be any error. And then 1. He knows that his
office is durante vita, and that he is bound not to cease it without cause. 2.
He knows that you have no power to silence Orthodox Preachers as Heretics,
but those that are Heretics indeed. 3. He takes himself for Orthodox and you
for the Heretic. 4. And all his followers are of his mind. How then will you
silence a Heretic without the Sword? If you convince him of his error you
shall not need to silence him; for he will leave his error rather than his
Ministry: But if you convince him not of his error, you will hardly convince
him, that because of that error, he must be silent; (nor convince his
followers that they must not hear him).

3. All the question therefore that remains, is whether in unknown doubtful
cases, you are the Judges of Heresy, Error, Schisin, and of men's unworthiness
to Preach. And here. 1. I need not tell you that by this way you can never
silence either the Arrians, or any that deny your authority. Of which sort you
know are most that you silence in this age and Nation. No, nora Donatist, a
Novatian, or any one that is for the office of Bishops, but takes you for no
Bishop as being unduely called: Of which sort were abundance of Christians
toward each others Bishops in former ages; and such are the Papists now
toward you. So that neither Papist nor Protestant that I ever knew silenced by
you, does forbear upon Conscience of this your pretended authority at all. And
what a silencing power is that which scarce any man would be ever silenced by?
You cannot choose but know this to be true.

2. And really, should Magistrates themselves be so servile to you as to
silence all Ministers by the Sword, whom a Prelate judges to be silent, while
he knows not whether it be deservedly or not; God forbid that Protestants,
like the Popes, sheald make Kings to be their Executioners, or hangmen. A mere
Executioner indeed is not bound to* know or examine, whether the sentence was
just or not (though in most cases to forbear if it be notoriously unjust) but
what a King or Magistrate does, he must do as a public Judge, and therefore
must hear the cause himself, and try whether he be really guilty or not, and
not only whether a Bishop judged him so. Else Magistrates will either be
involved in the bloody sin of persecution, as o^ft as a Prelate will but
command them; and so must be damned and help to damn others, when Prelates
please: Or else it is no sin for a Magistrate to silence all the holiest
Ministers of Christ, to the damnation of thousands of ignorant untaught Souls,
so be it the Prelates do but bid him, and he keep himself unacquainted with the
cause. And next they must obey the Counsel at Laterane sub. Inoc. 3. And
exterminate all subjects out of their Dominions (though it be all that are
there) and must burn Holy-Christians to ashes, because the Pope or Prelates bid
them.

3. I need not make also a particular application of this case to the people:
When they know nothing but wise and sound and holy in the Doctrine or life of
their Pastors, and God bids them know such as labor among them and are over
them in the Lord, and highly esteem them in Love for their work sake; they will
hardly be so debauched as to violate this command of God, as often as a Diocesan
will but say [ I know some Heresy or Crime by your Teacher which you do not,
and therefore he must Preach no more, and you must no more use his ministry.]
Were I one of these people, I would be bold to ask the Diocesan [Sir what is
the Heresy or Crime that he is guilty of? If he refuse to tell me I would
slight him as a Tyrant: General Counsels told the people of the Heresies for
which they did despose their Pastors. If he told me what it was, I would try it
by Gods word: If I were unable, I would seek help. If the Diocesan silenced my
Teacher, and ten neighbor Bishops wiser than he, did tell me that it was for
Truth and Duty, and that the Heresy was the Bishops, I would hear my Teacher,
and believe the other Bishops before him, (without taking them to be of a
higher order.)

The objections against this, and what is before said shall be answered in the
next Chapter. You see when it is but opened, how the Diocesans power vanishes
into the air.

CHAP. XIII. That there is no need of such as our Diocesans for the Unity or
the Government of the particular Ministers, nor for the silencing of the
unworthy.
IT stuck much in the minds of the Ancient Doctors and Christians that
Episcopacy was necessary to avoid Schism and discord among the Ministers and
the people; and that it was introduced for that reason. And I am so averse to
singularity in Religion, that I will not be he that shall gainsay it. A double,
yea a treble Episcopacy, though I cannot prove instituted of Christ, yet will I
not contradict, because one sort I cannot disprove, and the other two I take to
be but a prudential humane determination of the Circomstances of one and the
same sacred Ministerial office-worke. 1. That which I cannot disprove as to a
Divine Institution, is a General Ministry over many Churches (like the Scors
Visiters at their Reformation) who as Successors to the Apostles and
Evangelists in the durable parts of their office, were by a conjunction of
Scripture evidence and Divine authority of office, to persuade Pas^ors and
people to their several duties, and to have a chief hand in ordaining and
removing Ministers. 2. That which I will not contradict antiquity in, is a
Bishop in every particular Church, to be as the chief Presbyter, like the chief
Justice on the bench or one of the Quorum, as our Parish Ministers now are in
respect to all their Curates of the Chapels under them. 3. And I would not
deny but at all Ministerial Synods, one man may be Moderator, either pro
tempore, or for continuance, as there is cause. These two last are but
Prudential circumstances, as Doctor Stiling fleet has proved. And in all these
I like the Discipline of the Waldenses, B^^emian and Polonian Churches.

But no Government of the Presbyters, no concord, no keeping out of Heresy,
requires such as our Diocesans; 1. Who put down all the Bishops of the
particular Churches, under them, 2. And pretending Spiritual Power, Govern by
the force of the Magistrates Sword: 3. And obtrude themselves on the people and
Pastors, without their consent, and against their wills, being by multitudes
taken for the enemies of the Church. 4. And visibly before the world
introducing so many bad Ministers, and silencing so many faithful ones, as in
this age they have done.

Without them we have all these means of concord following. 1. We have a clear
description of the duty of Ministers and people in Gods word. 2. We have
Ministers to Preach up all these duties by Office. 3. The people are taught by
Scripture what Ministers to choose. 4. We find it natural to the people to
before Learned and godly Ministers, though many of them be bad themselves. And
though it be not so with them all, yet the sober part do usually persuade the
rest: So that in London and else where, those Parishes where the people choose,
had usually far worthier Pastors than the rest, especially than those in the
Bishops presentation. 5. The people are obliged by God to mark those Ministers
that cause division and contention and avoid them. 6. The Ministers are bound
to give notice to the people of false teachers and Schismatics, and to command
them to avoid them; And themselves to renounce Communion with them after the
first and second admonition. 7. These Ministers may have correspondence by
Synods, to keep up concord by agreement among themselves. So we have over all a
Christian King and Magistracy, who are the rightful Governors of the Clergy as
well as of all other subjects; and may constrain the negligent to their duty,
and restrain the Heretical, Schismatical and wicked from their sin. And may not
all this do much to keep up Concord?

2. What our Diocesans really effect in order to concord or order, they do it
by the Magistrates power, and not by the Keys; without the Magistrate they
would be so contemned a sort of men, that instead of silencing us by their
keys, one of us now silenced could do more to silence them, were that
according to our Judgment; I mean, it were easier to persuade ten people from
Hearing one of them (specially of late) than for them to persuade one from
hearing us, in many places. And what the Magistrate does, he can do by others
if he please, as well as now he does by them.

3. The Churches that have no Bishops have incomparably less Heresy, Schism,
Wickedness, and more concord then we have here. The Church of Scotland is an
eminent instance, which has known but little by experience what Schism or
Heresies are. And so are the Protestant Churches of France, of Geneva, of
Helvetia, and other places:

4. Were but the true Episcopacy forementioned restored, we should yet less
know any show of need for our Diocesane, Magistrate Ministers, and they would
suffice, to do what on earth may be expected.

Obj. Were not Bishops the means of the Churches concord in all ages?

Ans. True Bishops such as before described, did their parts, but when such as
our Diocesans sprang up, the Church was presently broken into pieces, and by
odious contentions and divisions became a sandal and scorn to unbelievers. To
read but the Acts of Counsels and the History of the Church, and there find the
horrid contentions of Prelates against each others, the parties which they
made, their running up and down the world, to Princes and Rulers, and Synods to
bear down one another, it will do as much to grieve and amaze the Soul of a
Sober Christan, almost as an History in the world that he can peruse.

Obj But they silenced Heretics and deposed them, and so kept Doctrine sound
and safe. Ans. Before they had the Sword of the Magistrate to second them, they
silenced none: For how could they do it? They only judged them to be cast out
of their Communion, and deposed, which they could no way execute but by
avoiding them, and persuading the people to disown them and avoid them: For
they neither did nor could hinder them from gathering Churches and Preaching to
their followers: And there the rejected ones did reject their Rejecters, and
excommunicate their excommunicaters, and in the eyes of their followers were
the better men, and only Orthodox: So that their silencing was but changeing
their Congregations. And so numerous were the sects that followed such
Teachers, that they sometimes seemed more than the Orthodox: Epiphanius found
enough in his time to fill a large Volume. And the Donatists alone were so
numerous in Africa as to pretend to be the Catholic Church, and by their
numbers and insolency deterred Augustine into a change of his opinion, and to
call for that help from the Princes Sword, which before he had denied. Never
had the Church in any place, so many Sects and Heresies, as since the times
that Prelacy grew up, and in those Countries, and where it wasmost exercised.
Andindeed the ignorance and pride of Prelates was not the least cause. For some
of them (and no small number) became the Authors of Heresies themselves, such
as Paulus, Samosatenus, the Ap^linarii, the great Patriarcks, Dioscorus,
Nestorious, Macedonius, and alas how great a number more and others of them did
by their dominering insolency rise up with so much pride and wrath against
those that humoured them not, especially if indeed they erred, as that they
forced some into Schisms, and by silenceing the dissenters, did but drive
them^^ ^t up for themselves in separated assemblies; And they so disaffected
the zealous people, as drove them away from the Orthodox Churches, to the Sects
and Heretics, as the English Prelates do at this day; so that multitudes of
the most strict and temperate Christians followed the Novations, the Donatists,
and much worser sects.

And when the Prelates grew up to a secular terror, and twisted with the Civil
power, and were backed by the Sword, 1. They made the more sober and mortified
Christians the more dislike them, as may appear by what Eusebius, Socrates, and
others write of them, and the Characters that are given of Cyril and
Theophilus, Alexander, and such others: And by Martins separation from Ithacius
and Idacius, and their Synods, and by the increase of the Priscilianists by
their pride and violence, mentioned by Sulp. Severus, and others. 2. And it was
not by the Keys indeed, but by the Sword which backed them, that they did all
that they did, be it good or evil, in silencings, and in keeping up their
order. 3. And they did but teach the Heretics to strengthen themselves by the
same means: So that the Priscilianists once got countenance from Gratians
Courtiers against the Bishops; And Ambrose was persecuted or endangered by
Valentinian, as Athanasius at last was by Constantine himself, and Chrysostom
deposed, and many others by such means: Yea till at last the Bishops found that
evil is more commonly befriended by corrupted nature than good; and that
Goodness is usually lowest where wealth and honors make men highest, and that
few Princes were the best of men, and therefore that if one befriended the
truth, many were like to be against it, and till the Arrians by the help of
Emperors, and Vandal and Gothish Kings, had almost turned all the Church into
Arrians, and had got the General Councels on their sides, and had cruelly
persecuted the Orthodox Bishops, and taught them what it was to trust to the
Sword, for the clensing, and concord of the Churches. And when the controversy
of Images came up, one Emperor was for them and another against them: By which
means and by the contending of the Eastern and Western Patriarcks and Prelates,
who should be the greatest, the Churches have been torn to pieces, and so
continue lamentably to this day (as in the History was before declared.)

And it was the Prelatical Tyranny of the Romanists, that since raised so many
parties against them, and then had no way to Cu^b them, but by pros^c^ting them
by the Sword and flames, as in the case of the Waldenses, Albigenses, and
Protestants appears: And as the Murders of many hundred thousands in
Piedmont, France, Germany, Ireland, England, etc, Besides their Inquisitions
show. Thus Solitudinem fecerunt, and unitatem and pacem ^^car^nt. When they
have hanged, burnt and slain the people and Priests, they have quieted and
silenced them, and when they have made a solitude and depopulation by killing
those that disser^d from them, they have brought all to concord, and been all
of a mind.

And let none be offended that I mention the Papists in describing Prelacy. For
I do it not to raise an Odium on them; but I refer it to the consideration of
sober men, 1. Whether as Herbarists give us the picture and description of
herbs, not in their spring, but in their full grown stalk, blossom and fruits,
and as he that will know the nature and difference of fruits, or animals, must
stay till they are come to their full growth and ripeness, and not take them
green and young; so he that will judge either of Schism or of Church-tyranny:
Lust do. 2. And whether the Quakers, Ranters* Familists and Munster monsters be
not Schismatics ripe and at full growth, and therefore a young Schismatic is
not ^o tell us what Schism is, but should himself see what he will be when he
is ripe. And so whether Popery be not the Diocesane Prelacy full grown and
ripe; and whether they should not therefore see what they would come to, if
that which witho^deth in the several Kingdoms were taken out of the way, as the
Pope has removed it in the Empire. If the Diocesans, Metropolitanes,
Patriarks, and Pope (as to his Primacy in the Empire) did not all stand on the
same humane foundation, then are they not the things that I am speaking of.

Obj. But the late and present Schisms in England show that it is the
adversaries of Prelacy that are the causes.

Ans. Very true, for Prelacy makes it self adversaries, and so makes some of
the Schismatics. There are two sort of Schismatick^; some Prelatists (as the
Papists, the Novatians, the Donatists, and most of the old Schismatics were);
and some Anti-prelatists. And there are two sorts of Anti prelatists: Some
Catholic being for the Primitive Episcopacy, and some Schismatics. And these
last the Prelates make, and then complain of them. It is their state, and
practice, hereafter described, that drives men to distaste them, and so
precipitateth the injudicious into the Contrary extreme. It is Prelacy that
makes almost all the Sects that be in England at this day: When they see how
the Spiritual Keys are secularly used by Laymen in their Courts, when they see
what Ministers and how many hundred of them are silenced, and what Fellows in
many places are set up in their stead, they think they can never fly far enough
from such Prelates: To tell the world, It is Schismatics that we silence, and
they are obedient and Orthodox persons that we set up, may signify something
in another land or age, but it does but increase the disaff^ction of those that
are upon the place, and know what kind of men the Prelates commend, and who
they discommend and silence. A very Child when he is eating his ^pple, will not
cast it away, because a Prelate says it is a Crab, nor when he tastes a Crab,
will he eat it, if a Prelate Swear it is a sweat apple. Though he that does
but look on them may possibly believe him.

I believe they that thought that Prelacy was the only cure of our Schisms, do
know by this time by experience, that by that time the Prelates had again ruled
but seven years, there were seven and seven against them for one that was so
before: And we that dwell among them, do take those that dislike their course
and ways, to be the Generality of the most Religious and sober people of the
land (always excepting the King and Parliament and those that must be still
excepted).

CHAP. XIV. The true Original of the warrantable Episcopacy in particular
Churches, was the notorious disparity of abilities in the Pastors: And the
original of that tyrannical Prelacy into which it did degenerate, was the
worldly Spirit in the Pastors and people, which with the world came by
prosperity into the Church. Quaere, Whether the thing cease not, where the
reason of it cease?
GOd does not carry on his work upon men's Souls, by names and empty titles; but
by such real demonstrating evidences of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, as are
apt to work on the Reason of man. And therefore he that would make his Apostles
the Foundations or chief Pillars and Instruments in and of his Churches, would
accordingly endow them with proportionable abilities, that in the Miracu'ous
demonstrations of Power, and the convincing demonstrations of Wisdom, and the
amiable holy demonstrations of goodness, they might as far excelothers as they
did in authority.

And nature it self teaceth us to difference men in our esteem and affection,
as they really differ in worth and loveliness. And this Law of Nature is the
Primary Law of God. And the holy Scriptures plainly second it, telling us often
of the diversity of Gods gifts in his Servants, which all make for concord, but
not for equality of esteem; and that there are greater and lesser in the
Kingdom of God, and that Gods gifts in all men must be honored, Math. 12. 1
Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. Heb. 5. 10. 11. 12. and 6. 1. 2. 3. 4.

And God that would have his various gifts variously esteemed, did in all ages
himself diversifie his Servants gifts. All were not Apostles, nor all Prophets,
nor all Evangelists: And after their days all the Ministers or Elders of the
Churches were not men of Learning, nor of so full acquaintance with the sacred
Doctrine, nor so grave, prudent, stayed, holy, charitable, or peaceable as some
were usually when miraculous gifts did cease, and very few Philosophers or men
of learning turned Christians. Any man may know that had not been told it by
Church History, that their Elders or Pastors were such as the better sort of
our unlearned Christians are; who can pray well, and worship God sincerely, and
read the Scripture, and in a plain familiar manner, can teach the Catechistical
points, and persuade to duty and reprove vice: But as for Sermons in a
methodical accurate way, as now used, and defending the truth, and opposing
Heresies, and stopping the mouths of gainsayers, they must needs be far below
the Learned. But yet here and there a Philosopher was converted; and of those
that had no such Learning (then called secular, and the Learning of the
Gentiles) some few were far better Learned than others in the sacred
Scriptures, and the customs and Learning of the Jews: And it was long before
the Christians had Schools and Academies of their own.

That this was so, appears. 1. In the reason of the thing. For no effect can
exceed the total cause. Therefore they that had not the inspirations
prophetical, or miraculous guists, nor Academies and Schools of secular
Learning, nor so much as Riches and leisure, but Poverty and persecution and
worldly trouble and labor, were not like to have more Learning than the holy
Scriptures taught them.

2. And this appears by the forecited Canons of Counsels, which forbad
Pastors, ever almost three hundred years after Christ, to read the Gentiles
books. By which the former custom of the Church may easily be perceived. And
also by abundance of reproaches which are cast upon some Heretics in the
Ancients writings, for being too much skilled in Logic and other of the
Gentiles Learning.

3. And it appears by the parity of writers of the second and third Centuries.

4. And also by the paucity of famous Divines that are mentioned in the
Histories of those times.

5. And above all by the plainness and simplicity of those that are described
and of their writings. I speak not in any contempt of them for this (perhaps we
value common learning now too highly) But only to tell you the true History of
those times. No doubt but many poor men among us, (diverse Weavers and some
Plowmen, of the Church which I was removed from; for instance) are able to
pray, and teach as well as most of those who are by Eusebius extolled as the
famous Bishops of the second and third age; and to write as Methodical, pious,
weighty tractates, as any that were then written by men that neither conversed
with the Apostles, nor had been bred up in Philosophy: That I say rot as
Clemens Romanus himself, or Ignatius, or Irenaeus, yea or Cyprians, Epistles
are. Yea, or as many of the ages following; even as holy Macarius, Epherm,
Cyrus, Synisius, (a Philosopher) Isidore. Pelusiota, and many more have written
since. If this be not believed, how many Laymen could I name who have written
more accurately and judiciously, and as far as the writings show, as piously as
any of these? And that not only Learned Laymen, but men that had neither many
Languages nor Philosophy. And if the books then written were very few, and of
those very few that were written by any but Bishops or Philosophers, and those
few so plain as we see they are, (the best of them far below the writings of
abundance of late Latin and English and French writers, that were but
Presbyters), you may easily judge of what parts the rest of the Presbyters of
those times were, that never wrote.

And from hence you may gather the reasons, 1. Why so few Volumes are left us
written in the two first ages. 2. And why the Churches had then so many
Presbyters. (Whatever Doctor Hammond say to the contrary without any proof.) It
was easy to find such Christians as aforedecribed, who might competently guide
the rest by Doctrine, worship, discipline and example: Though to find Learned
men was hard. 3. And you may see why so many Heretics boasted so much of their
higher knowledge, and Platonical etc. speculations, as accounting the Orthodox
to be ignorant men. 4. And you may see why so few were Champions for the truth.
5. And why there were so many parties and divisions, when the Elders were many
and less judicious. 6. And you may see how the opinion of Ecclesiastic mere
Ruling Elders came up; and how to expound Paul's, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Especially them
that labor in the Word and Doctrine. For it was but here and there a Learned
or special gifted Christian, that was able solemnly and ornately to Preach,
decide hard cases and controversies, confute Heretics, and guide the Churches
in difficult cases. And the rest did sit about the Bishop as his assistants,
and Preach and officiate at his direction, and oversee the people from man to
man; being of the same order and office with the Bishop, but not of the same
parts, and therefore not equal in the exercise.

7. And therefore lastly hence you may see, the reasons of the first fixed
particular Church Episcopacy: Those few that were Philosophers or eminently
qualified (being scarce enough to make one for every Church) did by their gifts
overtop the rest in the due esteem of all the people: who were bound to esteem
him wisest that was wisest, and to yield more to his judgment than to others
that knew less: And this inequality of gifts usually lasted as long as life;
and therefore so did the inequality of esteem and reverence. And both the
people and the inferior gifted Pastors, obeyed the Law of God in nature, and
readily gave honor to whom honor was due. And when one was dead finding
another still to excel the rest, they accordingly preferred him before the
rest, even as an excellent Physician would be by the patients, and by all the
younger and more ignorant Physicians, that are not carried away with pride. And
this did easily (as all things else) turn into formality under pretense of
order, and come to seem a kind of Office. But when difference required it, I
know not but that all this was well done, except that they foresaw not the
degenerate tyranny that would afterward hence arise.

This present experience opens to us to the day. What did set up Luther, and
Melancthon, and Illyricus, but their eminent parts? What else gave Zuinglius
and (...) the Presidencie at Zurich? What else did set up Calvin, and Beza at
Geneva? And Knox and Henderson in Scotland* And all our Parishes that have
Chapels and Curates show it here in England: Where one man for his worth is
thought meerest to have the Benifice and chief cure; but others may be chosen
by him and placed under him, and maintained by him (by the Bishops allowance)
as his curates.

And indeed it was so long before Academies made a sufficient store of men of
sufficiency for every Presbyters place, that for four or five hundred years,
there were few bred up to competent Learning, except either under Heathens, or
else in a Bishops house, or here and there as an Auditor of some one rare
Teacher* Clemens Alexandrinus, as a Disciple of Pantenus and Origene of
clemens, and some few others, came to Learning, as auditors in that Alexandrian
School: But few other places besides Alexandria had any such School of a long
time, in so much as Nazianzen, Basil, Greg. Nissen. Chrysostom, etc. were
taught at Athens, by Lybanius and such other Heathens; And Ambrose, Augustine,
and many others, were in a manner (...) self taught, so that it was not
possible then to have many Learned men ordinarily for one Church (or
congregation) And yet many Presbyters certainly they had. Which is the true
cause that one Learned man was made an Overseer and Guide to the rest, who were
his Curates or Assistants, gifted like our wiser sort of the Laity, but of the
same Office and order with him; And this Bishop was the usual Preacher, and the
other did learn of him to Preach, and grew up under him as Scholars; and he
that came to greatest abilities under him, was chosen for a Bishop to another
Church that wanted, but not without his own Bishops consent, which made the
debate in Councels so frequent, whether a Presbyter might remove to another
Church, or be chosen for a Bishop of another Church? And an African Council
gives it as a Reason why that Bishop that had able Presbyters, should not
refuse to let one go to be a Bishop elsewhere, because where there were many
fit to be Presbyters, there were but few men fit to be made Bishops, which
implies that they took it not then for a mere place of order, where one man of
equal parts was for Unity to rule the rest, but for a necessary difference of
exercising the same Office, because of the different abilities of the Officers:
Which was not only to keep an order by disparity of places, but to educate the
Presbyters to greater abilities, and to manage Gods work in each assembly more
skillfully and guide the Church more prudently, and defend the truth more
powerfully, than common unlearned Presbyters could do.

Now let it be for the present granted that for such reasons Episcopacy in each
Church was justly settled, and call it an order or a degree as you please; It
will be a difficult question, what shall be judged of those that have the same
place and Title, without the same Qualifications and precedencie of parts?
Because the Reason of his power fails. If one be chosen Bishop to keep out
Hetesie, and he prove a Heretic, and the Presbyters Orthodox, whatis his power
to that end? If one be chosen Bishop to keep out Schisin, and he prove a
Schisinatick or Sect-Master, and the rest concordant, what is his power? If one
be made Bishop to teach the people better than the Presbytres, and to teach the
Presbyters themselves, and to defend truth and Godliness, and he prove more
ignorant than the Presbyters, and Preach not to the thousandth or hundredth
part of his Diocese once in all his life, nor to any at all past once in many
weeks or months or years, and if he do but silence the Ministers that are abler
and far more pious than himself, what power has he as a Bishop to those ends?
Sure I am that dispositio mater^e is necessary as sine qua no^, ad receptionem
formae. If one be made a Schoolmaster, that cannot reach the Scholars half so
much as they know already, but has need to learn of them, and yet will
neither learn of them, nor suffer them to learn without him, I know not well
how far he is their Schoolmaster indeed. If one be made a Physician, that
knows not half so much as I do, I should be loath for Order sake to venture my
life upon his trust. Nor yet to venture my own life and others in a Ship that
had an ignorant Pilote, when the Mariners had more skill, but must not use it.
Orders and Office that are appointed for the work's sake, essentially suppose
ability for that work. And without the necessary qualifications, they are but
the Carcasses or images of the office (but of this before).

Therefore it is that the Christian flocks could never yet be cured, by all the
a^t or tyranny that could be used, of the esteem of real Wisdom and Godlines^,
and preferring it before an empty title, or a pompous show, and from setting
less by Ignorance and Impiety venerably named and arrayed, then by self
evidencing worth; nor from valuing a Shepherd that daily feeds them, from a
Wolf in Sheeps clothing, that has Fangs and bloody jaws, and fleeceth and
devoureth the flock (with the Shepherds.)

And hence we may say that God himself uses to give Bishops to the Church,
whether men will or not; while he gives them such as ( Jerome) Luther,
Melan^^horn, Bucer, Calvin, Zanchius, etc, Who had Episcopal ability, and
really did that which Bishops were first appointed for, while the Bishops would
have hindered them and sought their blood. They taught the people, they bred up
young Ministers, they kept out Heresies and Schisms, they guided the churches
by the light of Sacred truth, and by the power of Reason and Love: And who than
was the Bishop? who is the real Architect he that builds the house, or he
that has the title, and does nothing unless it be hindering the builders?

To this already said I add but two more intimations, which I desire the sober
impartial Reader to consider. 1. Writing is but a mode of Preaching: And of the
two it is worse to have inept Sermons in Public Assemblies (and so Gods work
and worship dishonored) than to have inept books in private. And no doubt,
the Pastors oversight extends to public and private. Now while the mere worth
of books without any Authority, commends them to the world, though sometimes
with some few, giddy Pamphlets are accepted, yet that is but for a fit; and
ordinarily the Booksellers sufficiently restrain all that are not of worth,
because they cannot sell them. But if a Bishop must impose on all the people
what books they must read, in many Kingdoms it will be for the Pope and Mass,
in others for Exorcism and Consubstantion, etc.

2. Is not order for the the thing ordered? Episcopacy is for the Churches
benefit by the Bishops eminent gifts and parts. But if the Bishop be of lower
parts, than the Pastors (and an Envious Malignant hinderer of their work),
Quere, Whether the order (being humane) cease not, ubi cessat subjecti
dispositio and relatio ad finem; when the end and the pesons capacity cease.

II. But how the world by the countenance of Emperors was invited to come int
the Church? How worldly wealth, power and honor did indue them? How
Bishoprics were made baits for the proud and tyrannical and Covetous? How
such then sought them and so the worldly Spirit had the rule, and altered
Episcopacy, I showed in the History before.

THE Second Part.
Having in the former Part laid down those Grounds on which the Applicatory
Part is to be built, and subverted the foundations of that Diocesane frame
which we judge unlawful, I shall now proceed to give you the Application, in
the particular Reasons of our judgment, from the Evils which we suppose this
frame to be guilty of.

CHAP. I. The clearing of the state of the Question.
THE occasion of our dispute, or rather Apology, is known in England. 1. Every
man that is ordained Deacon or Presbyter (or licensed a Schoolmaster) must
subscribe to the Books of Articles, Liturgy and Ordination, as Ex animo that
there is nothing in them contrary to the Word of God. And by the late Act of
Uniformity [ that he does assent and consent to all things contained in, and
prescribed by the said books as since altered (we think for the worse.)

2. In the year 1640 the Convocation formed, printed and imposed a new Oath in
these words (after others) [ Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the
Government of this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc.
as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand.]

3. After this the Parliament in the Wars imposed a Vow and Covenant on the
Ministers and People contrary to this called the Et caetrea Oath; which Vow
contained a clause to endeavor the ex^^rpation of this Prelacy. In the
Westminster Assembly before it passed, many Learned Divines declared that they
would not take it as against Prelacy unexplained, lest it should seem to be
against all Episcopacy, which was not their judgment, they being for the
primitive Episcopacy. To satisfy these men (that else had protested against
it, and the Assembly been divided, the Scots and some others being against all)
the additional Titles of Deans, Chapters, etc. were put in as a description of
the peculiar English frame of Prelacy which they all agreed against. Since His
Majesty's Restoration, there are many Acts made against the belief of an
obligation by this Vow. One is made for a change in Corporations, requiring a
Declaration by all in any place of Trust, [ that there is no obligation on me
or any other person from the said Oath, Vow or Covenant ] even absolutely no
obligation at all without exception of the clauses that are for the Protestant
Religion, for Repentance of our sins, against Popery, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, etc. The Act of Uniformity imposes it on all Ministers, etc. to
declare or subscribe that there is no obligation from that Vow on me or any
other person to endeavor at any time any alteration of Government in the
Church.] The Vestry Act imposes the like on all Vestry men; and so of others.

4. All Ministers swear to obey the Bishops in li^^tis and honestis, which is
called the Oath of Canonical Obedience.

5. And last of all an Act past at Oxford by which we are to be banished five
miles from all Cities and Corporations, and all places where we have preached,
and imprisoned six months in the Common Jail, if we come nearer any of them,
except on the Road, till we have taken an Oath [ that we will not at any time
endeavor an alteration of the Government of the Church,] (which plainly
imports as much objectively as the Et caetera Oath of 1640; Though not
endeavoring be somewhat less than not consenting.) And so black a Character is
put upon the Non-conformists, with a [ some of them) in the beginning of the
said Act, that all Reason, Religion and Humanity obliges us for the
satisfaction of our Rulers, for the vindication of our selves, and for the just
information of posterity, plainly and truly to lay open our Case, even those
reasons for which we forbear that Conformity; and by so doing, incurr all this,
besides the greater loss of our Ministerial Liberty, to labor for the saving
of the peoples souls, and the edifying of the Church of God.

What is said in the beginning may sufficiently inform the Reader, 1. That it
is not every man's Cause that is called a Nonconformist, no nor a
Presbyterian, or Independent that I here maintain. 2. That I am not writing a
Justification of the Covenant, 1. As to the Act of Imposing. 2. Or of taking
it. 3. Nor as to the obligation of it to any thing unlawful. Leaving such
matters as alien to my work, 3. And that I am not so rash as to assert that it
obliges any man, to endeavor (in his place and calling) any change of our
Church Government, no not of a Lay-Chancellor's use of the Keys, whatever I
think, Because it is made a matter of so grievous penalty by an Act. All that I
have to do is, to enquire whether the Diocesane Prelacy as now stated, be so
lawful that we may take all these Oaths and Subscriptions to it, and so
necessary that the King and Parliament have no power to change it, or make an
alteration if they please, and we endeavor it by obeying them if they should
command us.

And I go upon such Principles as Doctor Burges, Master Gataker, and many
others in the Assembly, that were ready to protest that they were not against
the Primitive Episcopacy, no nor a moderate one that did not in all things
reach it.

I will rather be guilty of Repetition than of leaving the rash or heedless
under a pretext for their mistake or calumny.

My own judgment is as follows. 1. That every particular Church, ( consisting
of as full a number as can associate for true personal Communion in Worship and
holy living) should be guided by as many Pastors or Elders (of the same Office)
as the number of souls, and the work requires.

2. That it is lawful, (if not usually laudable and fit) if these Presbyters
consent that one among them who is wiser and fitter than the rest, be statedly
their Guide, Director, or Moderator, in the matters of Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline in that Church, for order and concord, and for the peoples sakes and
their own: And especially that in Ordinations they do nothing without him.

3. That these particular Churches with their Bishop and Presbytery are
Independent, so far that no other Bishop or Church has a Divine Right to
Govern them, saving what is anon to be said of General Pastors or Visiiters,
and the power of each Minister in the Universal Church, as he is called.

4. That as to the Communion of several Churches among themselves, these
particular Churches are not Independent, but must hold Concord and
Correspondency by Letters, Messengers or Synods as there shall be cause.

5. That in these Synods it is lawful and orderly oftentimes to make some one
the Moderator or Guide of their debates. And that either pro tempore, or
quamdiu sit maxim idoneus, or durante vita, as true Prudence shall discern it
to be most conducible to the end.

6. That where the Churches Good and the calling of the Infidel World requires
it, there should be itinerant Ministers, like the old Evangelists, Silas,
Apollo, Timothy, Titus, etc. to preach the Gospel, and gather Churches, and
help their Pastors. And if such be not necessary in any place, yet the fixed
Pastors should when there is cause be itinerant, and help to convert the
Infidels and Heretics, and do both the general and particular work.

7. That the judgment of Antiquity moving me much, but more the Argument from
the necessity, [that the same form of Government be continued in its ordinary
parts, which Christ at first settled in the Apostles, and is not proved
repealed] do move me to incline to think that the Apostles must have such
Successors, as general Planters and Overseers of many Churches. And who should
(before all particular Bishops) have a chief hand in the ordaining of
particular Bishops and Pastors, and removing them as the Churches good
requires (As the Seniors have in the Bohemian Waldenses Government.) And
though I am yet in doubt my self, whether such general Ministers, or
Archbishops be jure divino, of Christ's institution, I do not deny it, or
contend against it: And though I would not assert or swear to their right, I
would obey them.

8. That all this Church Power is to be exercised only by Gods word, managed by
convincing Reason, Love and good Example, and that no Bishops or Archbishops
have any power of Corporal Coaction; Nor should give Church Communion to any
but Voluntary Consenters; nor should mix and corrupt the exercise of the Keys,
with unseasonable interpositions of the Sword even in the Magistrates own hand.

9. But yet that the King and Magistrates are the Rulers by the Sword over all
Pastors and their Flocks, to see that all men do their duties, and to regulate
them by Laws about holy things, subserviently to the Kingdom and Laws of
Christ, and in consistence with the preservation of the Office of the Ministry
and real liberties of the Flocks.

10. And therefore, though we think Churchmen usually very unfit for any
Magistratical Power, yet we shall obey as his Ministers any whomsoever the King
shall commit any part of his power about Church matters to; and promise them
due obedience as such.

And so you see what is not the Question now to be debated.

But the Question is [ Whether the present Church Government in England (as
distinct from the Kings and Magistrates part) be so good or lawful, that we
should swear or subscribe our approbation of it, our obedience to it, or that
we will never (in our place and calling) endeavor an alteration of it (no
though the King command us) and that every man in the three Kingdoms that vowed
to endeavor such alteration, is so clearly and utterly disobliged, as that all
strangers that never knew him may subscribe or declare that he is disobliged,
or not obliged to it by that Vow.

CHAP. II. The first Argument against the English Diocesans; That their form (
quantum in se) destroys the particular Church Form of God's Institution, and
sets up a Humane Form in its stead.
ARGUMENT I.
WE cannot subscribe or swear to that form of Church Government as good or
lawful, which in its nature excludes or destroys the very specifical nature
of the particular Churches which were instituted by the Holy Ghost, and settled
in the primitive times, and is it self a humane from set up in their stead.

But such we take the present Diocesane form to be: Ergo,

The Major will be denied by very few that we have now to do with. And those
few that will deny it, must do it on this supposition, 1. That the Holy Ghost
did institute that particular Church Form which is destroyed but pro tempore.
And Secondly, That he allowed men since to set up one or more of their own in
its stead. But the disproof of this supposition will fall in more fitly, when I
have showed what Church Form was first settled.

The Minor I thus prove.

The Species of a particular Church which the Holy Ghost did institute, was
[one Society of Christians united under one or more Bishops, for personal
Communion in public worship and holy living*]

The Diocesane English frame is (destructive of or) inconsistent with this
species of a particular Church.

Ergo, The Diocesane English frame is inconsistent with (or destructive of) the
Species of the Holy Ghosts institution.

In the Major, 1. By [Bishops] I mean, Sacred Ministers authorized by Divine
appointment, to be the stated Guides of the Church, by Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, under Christ the Teacher, Priest and Ruler of the Church. Whether
he have a superior Archbishop I determine not; Nor now whether he may ordain
Pastors for other Churches.

What I mean by [ Personal Communion] and whether it be consistent with diverse
Assemblies, I have fully showed before. I mean, that the said Churches were no
more numerous than our English Parishes, nor had more Assemblies; Or no more
than could have the same personal Communion, and that there were never any
Churches infimae^vel prime speciei, which consisted of many such stated
Assemblies.

I shall therefore now prove, 1. That the Churches of the Holy Ghosts
institution were no more numerous, or were such single Congregations. And that
they had each such Bishops and Pastors will be proved partly herewith, and
partly afterward.

2. And that such Churches do tota specie differ from the Diocesane Churches,
and from our present Parish Churches as they define them, and are inconsistent
with them. And the first I shall prove, 1. From the Holy Scriptures. 2. From
the Confessions of the Diocesanes. 3. From the testimony of Antiquity. All
proving fully that the ancient Episcopal Churches were but such single
Societies or Congregations as I have described, and such as our Diocesses of
many hundred Churches are different from, and inconsistent with.

CHAP. III. That the primitive Episcopal Churches of the Holy Ghosts
Institution, were but such Congregations as before described.
THese following particulars set together, I think will by the Impartial be
taken for full proof.

1. In all the New Testament, where ever there were more stated societies than
one, for public worship as before described, they are called [ Churches] in the
Plural Number, and never once [ a Church] in the Singular Number; except when
the Universal Church is mentioned which contains them all. This is visible in
Act. 9. 31. and 14. 41. and 16. 5. Romans 16. 4, and 16. 1 Cor. 7. 17. and 11.
16. and 14. 33, 34. (unless that mean the several meetings of the same Assembly
at several times) and 16. 1, 19. 2 Cor. 8. 1, 18, 19, 23, 24. and 11. 8, 28.
Gal. 1. 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4. Rev. 1. 4, 11, 20. and 2. 7, 11, 17,
29. and 3. 6, 13, 22, 23. and 22. 16.

If any say, how prove you that all these were but single Congregations, I
answer, 1. It is granted me by all that these plural terms [ Churches] included
many single Congregations. 2. I shall prove anon that the most of the
particular Churches named in Scripture were but such Congregations. 3. And no
man can give me any proof that a Society consisting of diverse such
Congregations is any where called [ a Church] singularly: And therefore we are
not to believe that the plural term means many such singulars, as are no
where singularly named.

2. Particular Churches are described so in Scripture as fully proves my
aforesaid limitation and description. As 1 Cor. 11. 16, 18, 20, 22. When ye
come together in the Church I hear that there be divisions among you. A Church
consisted of such as came together.

When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. And
it is the Assemblies that are called Churches, when he says [ We have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God.]

So 1 Cor. 14. 4. He that prophesies edifieth the Church] that is, the
Assembly that hears him, and not many hundred such Assemblies that are out of
hearing.

Verse. 5. Except he interpret that the Church may receive edifying.

Verse. 12. Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church.

Object. May not the whole Church be edified per parts? Ans. Yes, but it must
be per plures vel diversis vicibus. Not at once by the same man, if the far
greatest part of the Church be absent.

Obj. But is not the whole man edified (naturally or morally) by the
edification of a part? Answ. Yes, if it be a noble part: Because the whole man
being naturally One, by the unity of the soul or form, there is a natural
Communion and Communication from part to part: But one Corporation in a
Kingdom, may be edified or enriched without the wealth or edification of the
rest. And this Text plainly speaks of Immediate Edification of that Church
that hears, and this at once, and by one speaker.

So Verse. 19. In the Church I had rather speak one word with my understanding,
that I may teach others. Here the Church is plainly taken for the Assembly.

Verse. 23. If therefore the whole Church be come together in one place, and
speak with tongues,] what can be more expressly spoken to show that it is not
only a part of the Church, but the whole which comes together into one place.

So Verse. 24. If there be no Interpreter let him keep silence in the Church.]

So Verse. 34. For God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all
the Churches of the Saints.

So Verse. 14. Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is a shame for
women to speak in the Church.

So Act. 11. 26. A whole year they assembled themselves with the Church, and
taught much people.

Act. 14. 27. When they were come, and had gathered the Church together, they
rehearsed all that God had done by them.

Act. 15. 3. And they were brought on their way by the Church,] which must
signify such a number as might be called the Church, when part was but for the
whole, at least.

Act. 2. 1. They were all with one accord in one place; which it is like was all
the Church with the Apostles.

Verse. 44. 46. And all that believed were together, And they continuing daily
with one accord in the Temple, etc.

Act. 4. 31, 32. And the place was shaken where they were assembled together.
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul.

Act. 5. 12. And they were all with one accord in Solomon' s Porch, and of the
rest durst no man join himself to them.

If any here say that so many thousands could not be of one Assembly, I have
answered it before. 1. I have preached (as was supposed) to ten thousand at
once. 2. Some of our Parishes that have but one Church, are thirty thousand,
some forty thousand, some fifty thousand. 3. There were strangers at Jerusalem
from all parts. 4. The next Verse says [ There came also a multitude out of
the Cities round about unto Jerusalem.] 5. The multitude were not yet perfectly
embodied, and were quickly scattered.

Col. 4. 16. When this Epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in
the Church of the Laodiceans, etc. It is not [ to the Church] for then you
might have said that so it may be if the Church consisted of many Assemblies:
But it is [ in the Church] which intimates that the Church was but one
Assembly. And so that of Colosse answerably.

All these Texts and others such plainly tell us whether a Church there was one
Assembly or many hundred.

3. This is made yet much more evident, by the Scriptures description of a
Bishops work; even such as the Apostles then appointed over every Church. 1.
They were to be the ordinary public present teachers of all the Flock which
they did oversee. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Know them which labor among you and are
over you in the Lord, and esteem them highly in love for their work sake. Those
then that were over every Church, were present with the Church, and labored
among them (which they could not do in one of our Diocesses, saving as a man
may be said to labor among a Kingdom, or the World, because they labor in it.)

Heb. 13. 8, 17, 24. Remember them which have the rule over you, which have
spoken to you the word of God. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls as they that must give
account. So that a Church was no bigger than the Bishops could speak the word
of God to, and could watch for their souls. But I never saw the face of the
Bishop of the Diocese where I live, and know but very few men in his Diocese
that ever did see him.

2. And this care was to extend to the particular persons of the Flocks. Act.
20. 20, 28, 31. I taught you publicly, and from house to house. Take heed to
your selves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Bishops, to f^ed (or rule) the Church of God, etc. Remembor that by the space
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.

1 Pet. 1. 2. 3. The Elders which are among you I exhort who am also an Elder,
feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, etc. that is, says Doctor Hammond [ The Bishops of your several
Churches I exhort, take care of your several Churches, and govern them, not as
Secular Rulers by force, but as Pastors do their Sheep by calling and going
before them, that so they may follow of their own accord.] See also Doctor
Hammond's Annot. on Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. And says Doctor Jeremy
Tailor, of Repent. Praef. [ I am sure we cannot give account of souls of which
we have no notice.] (O terrible word to the undertakers of so many hundred
Churches, and so many thousand or ten thousand souls which they never knew!)

This made Ignatius (as after cited) say, that The Bishop must look after or
take account of each person as much as Servants and Maids.

Object. But there may be more in a Parish than a Minister can know. Answ. If a
Parish may be too large for a Bishops work, how little reason have they to make
a Church, and take the Pastoral Care of many hundred Parishes? 2. We must judge
by the ordinary common case. In a Parish a Minister may know every one, except
it be some few strangers or retired persons, or except it be a Parish or Church
of too great a swelling bigness: But in a Diocese of many hundred Churches, it
is not one of a hundred that the Bishop will ever know. 3. I know by experience
what may be done, whatever slothful persons say; I had a Parish of about three
of four thousand souls; (A Market Town with twenty Villages) and except three
or four Families that refused to come to me, (whom yet I knew by other means) I
knew not only the persons but the measures of all or almost all their
understandings, in the Town, and my assistants in the Villages knew the rest,
by personal conference, each family coming to us by turns. 4. And where a
Church is too large for one, there may be and must be assistant Ministers, and
that may be done by many, which cannot be done by one alone.

Object. So may a Bishop and his Presbyters in a Diocese. Answ. In a Diocese of
many Churches, the Presbyters only know the people, and do the Ministerial
Office for them, except in some one or few Churches where the Bishop dwells and
sometimes preaches: But in the same Church, all the Ministers preach to the
same persons ordinarily, ( per vices) and they all know them, and all watch
over them, though they assist each other in particular offices for them. There
is much difference between a Schoolmaster and his assistants in the same
School, and one Schoolmaster only with several Ushers in many hundred Schools.
As there is between a Master, Mistress, and Steward ruling the same Family, and
one Master with Stewards ruling many hundred Families; (of which more anon.)

3. Another part of the Bishops work in those times was to Baptize: For it was
part of the Apostles work, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. And how great a work that was, to
try the peoples due preparations, and to see that they did understandingly and
seriously what they did, I desire no other proof than the great care taken in
all the ancient Churches of this business, which brought up the Custom of
baptizing but twice a year.

Object. The Apostles baptized three thousand at once. Answ. The Jews were
supposed to be bred up in the knowledge of other parts of Religion, and wanted
only the knowledge of the true Messiah, and his Salvation, which might be
taught them in a shorter time than the Gentiles could be taught the whole
substance of Religion, that knew but little: Therefore as soon as the Jews were
convinced of the true Messiah and the righteousness of Faith, and consented to
the Covenant, they might be baptized. 2. The extraordinary effusions of the
Spirit in that time, did make a shorter preparation sufficient. At least
Baptizing must be an addition to the Bishops work.

4. As the Apostles laid hands on Believers to convey the Holy Ghost, so the
Prelatists think that the Bishops then Confirmed Believers with Imposition of
hands, says Doctor Hammond on Heb. 13. a. To teach, exhort, confirm and impose
hands, all which were the Bishops office in that place.] And O what a work it
is to know the persons of many hundred Parishes to be capable of Confirmation,
and so to confirm them (of which more afterward.)

5. I need not prove that the Bishops then were the Masters of the Assemblies,
and called them, appointing time and place, as the Rulers of the Synagogues
did: which shows that they were present with the Church Assemblies.

6. The Bishops administered the Lords Supper (as all confess) and therefore
must have some Pastoral notice of the fitness of all the Church to receive it:
which intimates sufficiently the extent of the Church.

7. They went before the Assemblies usually in performance of the public
worship: They prayed with them, and praised God: And Doctor Hammond thinks that
in all this in Scripture times, they had not so much as a Presbyter to assist
them.

8. They admonished the unruly and disorderly, and received Accusations, and
openly reproved and excommunicated the Impenitent. And O, how great a work is
it to deal with one Soul aright as must be done, before it comes to
Excommunication! Much more with all in a Parish. Much more in many hundred
Parishes.

9. It is confessed that it was the Bishops work to absolve the penitent
publicly. And then he must judge of their Repentance: and then he must try it:
And for how many thousand can a Bishop do this, with the rest?

10. The Bishop did dismiss the Congregation with a Benediction (as is
maintained by those that we dispute with) and therefore must be present in it.

11. They were to visit and pray with the sick, and all the sick to send for
them to that end, Jam. 4. 14. If any be sick among you let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him] says Doctor Hammond [
Because there is no evidence whereby these (inferior Presbyters) may appear to
have been brought into the Church so early, And because the visiting of the
sick is anciently mentioned as one branch of the office of Bishops; therefore
it may very reasonably be resolved, that the Bishops of the Church, one in each
particular Church, but many in the universal, are here meant.] Though I am far
from believing him that the sick person is bid to send but for one, when the
term is plural, or that he must send for many out of other Churches, I will
take his concession that this was the Bishops work.

12. Lastly, They were to take care of the poor, and of the Contributions and
Church stock, says Doctor Hammond on 1 Cor 12. 28. The supreme trust and
charge was reserved to the Apostles and Bishops of the Church. So in the 41st.
Canon of the Apostles, the Bishop must have the care of the moneys, so that by
his power all ^e dispensed to the poor by the Presbyters and Deacons; and we
command that ^e have in his power the Church Goods. So Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
That which is gathered is doeposited by the Prefect or Bishop, and he helps
or relieveth the Orphans and Widows, and becomes the Curator and Guardian of
all absolutely that be in want. So Ignatius to Polycarp, After the Lord thou
shall be the Curator of the Widows. And Polycarp himself speaking of the Elders
or Bishops, They visit and take care of all that are sick, not neglecting the
Widows, the Orphans and the Poor.] So far Doctor Hammond.

So that by this time it is easy to see how great the ancient Churches were;
yea, and how great they were to be continued; when all this is the Bishops
Office and Work. We are willing that they have Diocesses as big as they can do
this work in, even with a Consessus of assisting Presbyters. There is no one of
all these twelve alone that a Bishop. can do for a Diocese of many score or
hundred Churches. How much less all these set together? Nay, what one
considerable Parish would not find a Bishop with diverse assistants work enough
in all these kinds, if it be faithfully done?

As for the doing of it per se aut per alium, I have so far confuted it before,
as that I may be bold to tell them now, that they may also receive the reward
in se aut in alio: And if he that will not work should not eat, quaere whether
they should eat per alium.

I add, If all this as Doctor Hammond maintains was made by the Spirit in the
Apostles the Bishops work, if they may make new Church Officers to commit part
of their work to, there may be twelve sorts of Officers made by them for these
twelve parts of their work. And then we shall better understand them.

Whatever is the work of a Bishop as a Presbyter, every Presbyter may and must
do, according to his ability and opportunity: But whatever belongs to a
Bishop as a Bishop, cannot be done by another, either Layman or Presbyter.
Therefore let us have but Bishops enough to do it, or else confess that it is
no necessary work.

So great a trust as the Gospel and men's souls which Christ has committed to
Bishops, may not be cast upon others without his consent that did commit it to
them. But they can show no consent of Christ to make new Officers to do their
work by. Timothy was to commit the same to others which he had received, 2 Timothy
2. 2. The things thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. And who knows
not that if a Tutor commit his work statedly to another, he makes that other a
Tutor? And so if a Physician commit his work statedly to another, or a Pilot,
or the Master of a Family, he makes the other a Physician, a Pilot, a Master?
And so if a Bishop or Presbyter commit his work statedly to another, he makes
that other a Bishop or Presbyter. And then that Bishop or Presbyter so made is
himself obliged as well as empowred, and the work that he does is his own work,
and not his that delivered him his Commission. So that this doing these twelve
parts of a Bishops work per alium is a mere mockery, unless they speak unfitly,
and mean the making of all those to be Bishops as they are, or else by
perfidious usurpation casting their trust and work on others. For if they could
prove that God himself had instituted the Species of Sub-presbyters, it would
be to do their own work, and not another man's.

My next proof of the limitation of Churches in Scripture times is, that
Deacons and Bishops were distinct Officers appointed to the same Churches. The
Church which the Deacon was related to, was the very same, and of the same
extent, with the Church which the Bishop was related to; as is plain in all
Texts where they are described; Act. 6. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 7. etc. But it is most
clear that no Deacon then had the charge of many hundred Churches, or more than
one such as I have described: Therefore neither had the Bishop of that Church.

They that have now extended the Office of the Deacons further, and have
alienated them from their first works, of attending at the Sacred Tables, and
taking care of the Poor, cannot deny but that this was at least a great part of
their work in the Scripture times and some Ages after (at least when Jerome ad
Evagr. described the Offices of the Presbyters and Deacons.) And was any man
then made a Deacon to a Diocese? or to many hundred Churches? or to more than
one? Did he attend the Tables of many Churches each Lords day at the same time?
If you say that there were many Deacons, and some were in one Church and some
in another, it is true: that is, They were in several Assemblies, which were
every one a true Church, and they were often many in one Assembly: But there was
no one that was related to Many stated Church Assemblies; nor to a Church of a
lesser size or magnitude than the Bishop was.

5. And that there was no Church then without a Bishop (one or more) is evident
from Act. 14. 23. They ordained them Elders in every Church; compared with
other Texts that call them Bishops: And Doctor Hammond shows that these
Elders were Bishops. And indeed it was not a Church (in a proper political
sense) that had no Bishops formally or eminently. No more than there can be a
Kingdom without a King, a School without a Schoolmaster, or a family without a
Master.

Object. They are called Churches Act. 14. 23. before they had ordained Elders.

Answ. 1. It is not certain from the Text, for the name might be given from
their state in fieri or which they were now entering into. 2. If it were so, it
is certain that the appellation was equivocal, as it is usual to distinguish
the Kingdom from the King, the School from the Schoolmaster, the Family from
the Master, but not in the strict political sense of the words, for that
comprehends both. 3. The truth is, they were true political Churches before.
For they had temporary unfixed Bishops, even the Apostles and Evangelists, that
converted them, and officiated among them. Otherwise they could have held no
Sacred Assemblies for holy Communion and the Lords Supper, as having none to
administer it. The fixing of peculiar Bishops did not make them first Churches,
but made them settled Churches in such an order as God would establish.

6. Lastly, The settling of Churches with Bishops in every City, Tit. 1. 5. does
show of what magnitude the Churches were in the Scripture times. For, 1. It is
known that small Towns in Judea were called Cities. 2. And that Creete which
was called Hecatompolis, as having an hundred Cities, must needs then have
small ones, and near together. 3. And it is a confessed thing that the number
of Converts was not then so great, as to make City Churches so numerous near as
our Parishes are.

And if the consideration of all this together, will not convince any, that the
Churches that had Bishops in Scripture times, consisted not of many stated
Assemblies as before described, but of one only, and were not bigger than our
Parishes, let such enjoy their error still.

CHAP. IV. The same proved by the Concession of the most Learned Defenders of
Diocesane Prelacy.
THough the Scripture Evidence be most satisfactory in it self, yet in
controversy it much eases the mind that doubts, to find the Cause fully and
expressly granted, by those that most learnedly defend those consequents which
it overthrows: And if I do not bring plain Concessions here, I will not
deprecate the Readers indignation.

1. Among all Christians, the Papists are the highest Prelatists; And among 1.
Petavius.
all Papists the Jesuits; and among all the Jesuits Petavius, who has written
against Salmasius, etc. on this Subject. Petavius, Dissert. Ecclesiast. de
Episcop. dignit. and jurisd. p. 22. concludes his first Chapter in which he
had cited the chiefest of the Fathers; [ Hactenus igitur ex antiquorum
authoritate conficitur primis temporibus, Presbyterorum and Episcoporum non
tantum appellationes, sed etiam ordines, in easdem concurrisse personas, iidem
ut essent utrique.] i. e. Hitherto it is proved by the Authority of the
Ancients, that in the first times, not only the Names, but the Orders, of
Presbyters and Bishops did concur into the same persons, so that both were the
same men.] And if so, I shall show the consequents anon.

And page 23. He thus begins his third Chapter, as opening the only
necessary way to avoid the Scripture Arguments against Episcopacy, [ Si quis
amnia illa scripturae loca diligenter expendat, id necessario consequens ex
illis esse statuet, eos ipsos, qui ibi Presbyteri vocantur, plus aliquid quam
simplices fuisse presbyteros, cujusmodi hodieque sunt: nec dubitabit, quin
Episcopi fuerint iidem, non vocabulo tantum, sed re etiam and potestate.] i. e.
[ If any one will diligently weigh all those places of Scripture, he will
conclude that this is the necessary consequent of them, that those that are
there called Presbyters were somewhat more than simple Presbyters, and such as
now they are: and he will not doubt but the same men were Bishops, not only in
name, but in deed and in power.]

Page 24. [ Existimo Presbyteros vel omnes, vel eorum plerosque sic ordinatos
esse ut Episcopi pariter ac presbyteri gradum obtinerent.] I think that either
all or most of the Presbyters were so ordained, as that they obtained both the
degree of Bishop and of Presbyter.] Which he proceeds to show that he thinks
was done that there might be a store of Bishops prepared for all Countries.
Page 25. he thus far differs from Doctor Hammond, but not from the truth, as to
hold, that [ Plures in eadem Ecclesia velut Eph^sina Episcopi fuere.] [ There
were many Bishops in one Church, as in that of Ephesus.] Which he takes for a
particular Church, and not a Province; and says, that the simple manners of
the Church would then bear this, till Ambition had depraved men, and Charity
and Humility and the imitation of Christ waxed cold: then came that which
Hierome speaks of, that For a remedy of Schism one was chosen out of the
company of Presbyters, and set above the rest.

So Page 26. In eadem capita passim ambo conferebantur. And p. 27. Hoc si ita
est, quid aliud restat nisi ut penes eosdem (Nam plures una in Ecclesia fuisse
tales, iisdem ex locis argumentum ducitur) tam nomen illud duplex, quam
conveniens nomini potestas and authoritas utraque fuisse dicatur.] that is [ If
this be so, what else remains, but that both the double name, and the
agreeable double power and authority, be said to have been in the same persons
(for that there were many of them in one Church, may be proved from the same
places.)

And Page 95, 96, 97, 98, 99. he shows out of Justin Martyr, first, [ That
all things in the sacred Assemblies and Sacraments were done by the Bishop
alone; and that he was the Curator and Moderator both of the Sacraments to be
administered, and of teaching the people, and of the Churches money. The Bishop
consecrated the Sacraments, and by the Deacons administered them to the people.
He prays and preaches. He had the care of the Church-moneys, and kept them
with it; he relieved the Orphans, Widows, Sick, Prisoners, Travelers, etc. And
from Tertullian, that the Christians received not the Sacrament from the hands
of any but the Bishops. (Were there not then as many Bishops as
Church Assemblies?) And that they chiefly did baptize.

And p. 112. he cites the Can. 7. and. 8. Council. Gangrensis, which
anathematizeth those that without the Bishops consent durst give or receive the
Church Oblations, etc. And p. 141. out of Prosper de vita contempl. c. 20. that
a Bishop must excel in knowledge, that he may instruct those that live under
him. And p. 144, 145, 147. he cites Can. 3. Council. Arelat. 3. an. 813. [ That
every Bishop in his own Parish do perfectly and studiously teach the Presbyters
and all the people, and not neglect to instruct them.] And Council. Turonens. 3.
Can. 4. Let every Bishop diligently study by sacred preaching to inform the
flock committed to him, what they must do, and what they must avoid. And
Council. Rhemens. 2. Can. 14. That Bishops preach the Word of God to all. And
Council. Cabilonens. 3. Can. 1. [ That Bishops be diligent in reading, and
search the mysteries of Gods Word, that they may shine by the brightness of
Doctrine in the Church, and cease not to satiate the souls subject to them, by
nutriment of Gods Words.] And p. 147. That in the formula by which the Kings of
France committed Episcopacy to any, it is said, You shall study by daily
Sermons to edify, or polish, the people committed to you, according to
Canonical Institution.

And ibid. Can. 19. Council. Constant. in Trullo, [ The Church Presidents must
every day, but especially the Lords day, teach all the Clergy and people, the
things that belong to piety, gathering from the Scriptures the sentences and
judgments of verity.]

And p. 149. he cites Council. Lateran. sub Innoc. 3. c. 10. allowing Bishops
to take helpers in preaching when business or sickness hindered them. And p.
150, 152, 153. he mentions it as somewhat rare, that at Alexandria Presbyters
preached, and at Antioch Chrysostom, and at Hippo Augustine, while Flavianus
and Valerius were Bishops.

I do not cite all this now as to prove the sense of Antiquity, but the sense
of Petavius, who plainly intimates that the Churches were no larger of a long
time, than that a Bishop might preach to all the Clergy and People every Lords
day; and that in Scripture times all or near all the Presbyters were Bishops
(which is it that we contend for;) and consequently you may judge what the
Churches were.

And though it still look much farther than Scripture times, I will show you
what Petavius thought of the Magnitude of City-Churches, even near four hundred
years after Christ, in Epiphanius's days, in his Animadvers. on Epiphan. ad
Haer. 69. p. 276. [ Singularem tunc temporis Alexandriae morem hunc fuisse, vel
saltem paucis in Ecclesiis usurpatum, etc. i. e. That this was a singular
custom of Alexandria, or at least used in few Churches, you may hence
conjecture, because he so expressly mentions this custom as peculiar to the
Alexandrian Church: to wit, that in the same City there should be many Titles,
to each of which should be assigned a proper Presbyter, who should there
perform the Church Offices. But yet the same was formerly elsewhere instituted;
that is, at Rome: where the Presbyters did every one rule his own people, being
distributed by Titles (that is, settled Sub-Assemblies.) To them the Bishops on
the Lords days sent Leaven, or hallowed Bread in token of Communion.] See what
a shift they were at first put to, lest the several Assemblies should seem
several Churches. For it is not to be imagined that this was done to signify
that common Christian Communion which they had with all other Christian
Churches, but that nearest Communion which belongs to those that are embodied
under one Pastor, or the same Pastor in Common, that is, one particular Church
Even as if these diverse Altars or Tables were at a distance in the same Church,
and the Bishop would signify the Union of the several Companies in the same
Society, by sending some of the Bread which he had blessed to them all.

But Petavius proceeds [ Non dubito majoribus duntaxat in urbibus, etc. I
doubt not but that it was in the Greater Cities only that there were more (than
one) Titles within the bounds (or Liberties) when within the same Walls, they
would not be contained and meet together; and so had Presbyters put on the
several Churches. But in the smaller and less frequented Cities, there was one
only Church, into which they all did come together. Of which sort were the
Cities of Cyprus. And therefore Epiphanius notes the custom of Alexandria, as
a thing strange to his Countrymen and unusual. Hence was the original of
Parishes; which word was transferred from the Country Churches to the City
Churches. And adding the (...) with their Bishops or Curators settled in Rome by
Servius Tullius he says, Quibus Christianorum in agris Paroeciae quam
simillimae fuerunt; Nam and illic (...) etc. To which the Parishes of the
Christians in the Countries were most like: For there also were Bishops, or
rather (Chorepiscopi) rural Bishops placed of old: which some Latin
interpretations of the Canons call the Vicars of the Bishops, but others far
more rightly than they, the Country, or Village (Bishops) (of which more after.)

So that you see in Petavius opinion, even when Epiphanius wrote, the ordinary
Cities of the World had but one Assembly in each City and Suburbs; And only
some extraordinary Cities (of which only Alexandria could be named by
Epiphanius, and Rome also by Petavius, and no more by any other Author) had
diverse settled Titles under their several Presbyters: And even those Titles in
those two Cities were but Chapels, like our Parish Chapels, received
consecrated Bread from the Bishops Church, lest they should think that they
were a distinct body of themselves. Yea, and that the Villages that had
Assemblies had their proper Bishops. And so I dismiss Petavius with thanks, for
his free Concession.

2. My next Witness is Bishop Downame, the strongest that has written against
2. Bishop Downame
Parish Bishops for Diocesanes; who, lib. 1. cap. 1. (before recited) says, [
Indeed at the very first Conversion of Cities, the whole number of the people
converted, being somewhere not much greater than the number of Presbyters
placed among them, were able to make but a small Congregation.] And cap. 6.
page 104. [ At the first, and namely the time of the Apostle Paul, the most of
the Churches, so soon after their Conversion, did not each of them, exceed the
proportion of a populous Congregation.] Though this reach not so low as
Petavius Concession, it is as much as I need to the present business.

3. My third Witness shall be that learned moderate man, Mr. Joseph Mede, 3.
Master Mede.
who in his discourse of Churches, page 48, 49, 50. says, [ Nay more than
this, it should seem that in those first times before Diocesses were divided
into those lesser and subordinate Churches which we now call Parishes, and
Presbyters assigned to them, they had not only one Altar to a Church or
Dominicum, but one Altar to a Church, taking Church for the Company or
Corporation of the faithful united under one Bishop or Paster: and that was in
the City or place where the Bishop had his See and Residence. Like as the Jews
had but one Altar and Temple for the whole Nation, united under one High
Priest. And yet, as the Jews had their Synagogues, so perhaps might they have
more Oratories than one though their Altar were but one, there namely where the
Bishop was. Die solis, says Justin Martyr, omnium qui vel in oppidis vel ru^i
degunt in eundem locum Conventus fit. Namely as he there tells us to celebrate,
and participate the holy Eucharist. Why was this? but because they had not many
places to celebrate it in. And unless this were so, whence came it else that a
Schismatical Bishop was said, Constituere or collocare aliud altar? And that a
Bishop and an Altar are made correlatives? See St. Cyprian, Epist. 40, 72, 73.
de unit. Eccles. etc. So that Mr. Mede grants that every Church that had a
Bishop, had no more people than communicated at one Altar. To which purpose he
goes on further to Ignatius Testimony, of which anon.

4. Bishop Bilson's Testimony, Perp. Gov. cap. 13. page 256. See afterward. 4.
Bilson.


5. Grotius is large in his endeavors to prove, that not only every City had
5. Grotius.
a Bishop, but also every stated Assembly, of which there were diverse in one
and the same City, and that the Government was not suited to the Temple way,
but to the Synagogues; and as every Synagogue had its chief Ruler, of which
there were many in a City, so had every Church in a City its Bishop; and that
only the Church of Alexandria had the custom of having but one Bishop in the
whole City. Thus he de Imper. Sum. Pot. p. 355, 356, 357. And in his Annot. in
1 Timothy 5. 17. [ Sed notandum est una urbe, sicut plures Synagogas, ita and
plures fuisse Ecclesias, id est conventus Christianorum: and cuique Ecclesiae
fuisse suum praesidem, qui populum alloqueretur and Presbyteros ordinaret:
Alexandriae tantum eum fuisse morem, ut unus esset in tota urbe praeses qui ad
docendum Presbyteros Per urbem distribueret, docet nos Sozomenus, l. 1. c. 14.
and Epiphanius, etc.]

Thus Grotius thought that of old every stated Assembly had a Bishop that had
power of Ordination. I confess I interpret not Zozomen nor Epiphanius as
Grotius does, nor believe I that he can bring us frequent proof of two Churches
with Bishops in one City (much less many;) unless in Doctor Hammond's instance
before and after mentioned. But the rest I accept.

6. I may take it for a full Concession from Bishop Jeremy Tailor, which is 6.
Bishop Jeremy Tailor.
before cited, though in few words; Praef. Treat. of Repent. [ I am sure we
cannot give account of souls of which we have no notice.] And I am sure a full
Parish is as many as a more able and diligent man than ever I was, can take
such notice of as to do the Pastors Office to them.

7. But the last and greatest Champion for Diocesanes is Doctor Hammond: his 7.
Doctor Hammond.
Concessions are mentioned before; but now are purposely to be cited: But
remember still that we are yet speaking but of the matter of Fact.

In his Annot. in Act. 11. 30. he says, [ Although this Title of (...) Elders,
have been also extended to a second Order in the Church, and now is only in use
for them under the name of Presbyters, yet in the Scripture times it belonged
principally, if not alone to Bishops, there being no evidence that any of the
second order were then instituted; though soon after before the writing of
Ignatius Epistles there were such instituted in all Churches.

(Though so sudden a change be unlikely, I pass it by.) In his Dissert. p.
208, 209, 211. cap. 10. sect. 19, 20, 21. and 11. sect. 2. etc. he says, [
Prius non usquequaque verum esse quod pro concesso sumitur (in una civitate non
fuisse plures Episcopos.) Quamvis enim in una Ecclesia aut coetu plures simul
Episcopi nunquam fuerint, nihil tamen obstare, quin in eadem civitate duo
aliquando disterminati coetus fuerint, a duobus Apostolis ad fidem adducti,
etc. as I have before more largely cited him.

Yea, Dissert. Epist. Sect. 30, 31. he will have the question stated only of a
Bishop [in singulari Ecclesia] and [in singulari coetu.] The controversy is
not, Quibus demum nominibus cogniti fuerint Ecclesiarum rectores; sed an ad
unum in singulari Ecclesia, an ad plures potestas ista devenerit? Nos ad unum
singularem praefectum, quem ex famosiore Ecclesiae usu, Episcopum vulgo
dicimus, potestatem istam in singulari coetu ex Christi and Apostolorum
institutione, nunquam non pertinuisse affirmamus. So that it is a Bishop of one
Assembly or Church which Doctor Hammond will have the question stated about. 2.
And such a Church or Assembly as great Cities a while had diverse of, and so
diverse Bishops. 3. And this was after the Scripture times; for they had diverse
Bishops with a diverse Clergy. 4. But that in Scripture times, the Order of
Sub-Presbyters cannot be proved instituted. 5. And in his Annotations he
expounds all the Texts of the New Testament of Bishops that mention
Presbyters. 6. But in his Answer to the London Ministers, not daring yet to
hold that they were of Humane and not of Divine Institution, he holds that they
were instituted in the end of St. John's days after all the Scripture was
written (which was about two or three years before his death) and so were of
Divine Institution, though all the rest of the Apostles were dead.

Before I apply this I will subjoyn his words of more numerous Witnesses to our
opinion with himself, for he says.

8. Doctor Hammond of the rest, Vindication against London Minsters, page 8.
All the Divines in the same Cause.
104. [ And though I might truly say that for those more minute considerations
or conjectures, wherein this Doctor differs from some others, he has the
suffrages of many of the learned men of this Church at this day, and as far
as he knows of all that embrace the same Cause with him.]

I purposely pass by such Bishops as Cranmer, Jewel, etc. and such conformable
Divines as Doctor Whitaker, Fulke, etc. as being not high enough to be valued
by those that I have now to do with. As Jewel, Art. 4. p. 171. shows that
every Church must have one Bishop and but one, and out of Cyprian that the
Fraternitas universa was to choose him; Et ^piscopus delegatur plebe praesente
-- de universae fraternitatis suffragio, Episcopatus ei (Sabino) deferretur:
And mentions the Rescript of Honorius the Emperor to Boniface, that [ If two
Bishops through division and contention happen to be chosen, we will that
neither of them be allowed as Bishop; but that he only remain in the Apostolic
Seat, whom out of the number of the Clergy, Godly discretion, and the consent
of the whole Brotherhood, shall choose by a new Election.] How big yet was the
Church even then?

Now all this being asserted, 1. It is evident that they hold that in Scripture
times, no Church consisted of more than one ordinary stated worshipping
Assembly. 2. And that every such Assembly had a Bishop. For if there were no
Presbyters, there could be no Assembly but where a Bishop was present: for the
Lords days were then used for public Worship; and the people could not do that
without a Minister, for they had Communion in the Lords Supper every Lords day:
And therefore they must have a Bishop, or have no such Worship. And Doctor
Hammond departs from Petavius in holding that no Church had more Bishops than
one: So that de facto he grants all that I desire, 1. That the Churches were
but so many Assemblies having each a Bishop. 2. And that no Sub-Presbyters were
instituted in Scripture times. And by what right the change was made we shall
enquire anon.

CHAP. V. The same proved by the full Testimony of Antiquity.
THat the particular Churches, infimae speciei vel ordinis, (of which combined
Associated Churches were constituted) were no larger than is before described,
and had but Unum Altar, I shall prove Historically from Antiquity.

I. And Order requires that I begin with Clemens Romanus.

But let the Reader still remember that while I cite him and others often cited
heretofore by many, I do it not to the same end, as they who thence prove that
Bishops and Presbyters were then the same; but to prove the Churches to be but
such single Congregations as are fore-described, Ep. ad Cor. page 54, 55.
[(...)] i. e. Per regiones igitur and urbes verbum praedicantes, primitias
eorum spiritu probantes, Episcopos and Diaconos eorum qui credituri erant
constituerunt.] Here are these concurrent evidences to our purpose. 1. In that
he speaks only of Bishops and Deacons, and neither here nor elsewhere one
syllable of any other Presbyters but Bishops, it is apparent that in those
times there were no Subject-Presbyters distinct from Bishops in being: Nor
could Doctor Hammond any other way answer Blondel here, but by confessing and
maintaining this, and so expounding Clemens as speaking of Bishops only before
other Presbyters were in the Church. And if so, then there could be none but
Churches of single Assemblies then, or such as one man could officiate in:
because there was then no more to do it.

2. In that Cities and Countries are made the Seats of these Bishops: for
though some would make them to be mentioned only as the places where the
Apostles preached, the obvious plain sense of the words is connexive of
preaching and constituting Bishops: by preaching they made believers in Cities
and Countries, and over those believers they placed Bishops and Deacons; which
implies it to be in the same places. And whereas some would strain the word
[(...)] to signify Provinces, and not Country Villages, it must then, as
distinct from Cities, have meant [ many Cities] and so have stled Bishops and
Archbishops, intimating Subject-Presbyters under them: But here is no such
word or intimation: Yea, when the Countries are made first the Place of the
Apostles preaching (as they confess) let any impartial man judge whether this
be like to be the sense [ They preached in Provinces, that is, in the Cities of
Provinces, and in Cities.] And if there were Country Churches and Bishops
se^ied by the Apostle's, its easy to see that each particular Church-Assembly
had a Bishop, when even the City Churches themselves were no bigger than
Petavius and others mention.

3. Ad hominem, Though I believe that the [(...)] eorum qui credituri erant, be
intended only to signify the subsequence of believing to their preaching, yet
waving that, to them that suppose it to intend the subsequence of believing to
making Bishops, it must needs imply that the Churches then consisted but of
few, and were yet to be filled up: But whether one Bishop to have many Churches
is a question which must be otherwise and aliunde decided.

4. The magnitude of the Churches is plainly intimated, when he says p. 57.
[(...) etc. Constitutos itaque ab illis vel deinceps ab aliis viris celebribus
cum consensu universae Ecclesiae qui inculpate ovili Christi inservierunt,
etc.] If the Bishops were chosen by the Consent of all the Church, it was no
greater a Church than would and did meet to signify their consent; and not
such as our Diocesses now are.

5. Also the same is intimated by page 69. [ If it be for me that Contention,
Sedition and Schisms arise, I will depart, I will be gone whither you will, and
will do what shall by the people be appointed; only let the Sheepfold of
Christ live in peace with the Presbyters appointed over it. By which words it
is evident, that it was such a particular Ovile or Church, where the Will of
the people might be declared as a matter that bore much sway. But who can think
that this is spoken of many Congregations, where the peoples Will could not
easily be signified?

6. And it is farther manifest in that it was but for the sake of one or two
that the Church of Corinth moved this sedition against the Presbyters (called
also Bishops,) page 62. Now how many Congregations that Church consisted of,
where the interest of one or two was either so far concerned or so powerful, it
is easy to conjecture; set all these together, and judge impartially.

I add (though out of season) that it was none of the Apostles meaning that
those whom they made Bishops of such single Churches, without a subject Order
of Presbyters, should make such an Order of subject Presbyters, and make
themselves the Bishops of a Diocesane Church without any Bishops under them.
For page 57. he says, [ And our Apostles by our Lord Jesus Christ knew, that
contention would arise about the name of Episcopacy; and for this cause being
endued with perfect foreknowledge, they appointed them aforesaid, and left the
Courses (or Orders) of After-Ministers and Offices described, that other
approved men might succeed in the place of the deceased, and might execute
their Offices.] So that it was the same places and the same Offices which those
ordained by the Apostles had, in which others must succeed them, which
therefore were described by the Apostles, and not into others.

To confirm my Exposition of Clemens, note, that Grotius himself Epist. 182. ad
Bignon. gives this as a reason to prove this Epistle of Clemens to be genuine.
Quod nusquam meminit exortis illius Episcoporum authoritatis, quae Ecclesiae
consuctudine post Marci mortem Alexandriae, atque eo exemplo alibi introduci
coepit: sed plane, ut Paulus Apostolus ostendit, Ecclesias communi
Presbyterorum, qui iidem omnes and Episcopi, consilio fuisse gubernatas.] that
is, Because he no where makes mention of that excelling authority of Bishops
which began to be intrduoced at Alexandria by the custom of the Church, after
the death of Mark, and in other places by that example: But he plainly shows,
as the Apostle Paul does, that the Churches were governed by the Common Council
of Presbyters, who were also Bishops.]

Note also, as aforesaid, that Doctor Hammond in Dissert. grants as to matter
of fact, that Clemens speaks but of the Bishops of single Congregations, whom
he also calls Presbyters, there being no other in the Church of Corinth.

II. My next Witness is Pius Bishop of Rome, in Epist. Justo Episcopo; in
Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 3. page 15. mentioning only Bishops and Deacons: of which
Doctor Hammond making the same Concession, still grants that hitherto Bishops
had but single Churches. (Of this more anon.)

III. My next and greatest Witness is Ignatius, in whom (to my admiration) the
Diocesanes so much confide, as that quasi pro aris and focis they contend for
the authority of his Epistles. I am as loath to lose him as they are: therefore
I will not meddle in Blondel's controversy (against whom they say Doctor
Pierson is now writing.) In his Epistle to the Philadelphians he says, [(...)]
[ There is to every Church one Altar, and one Bishop, with the Presbytery and
the Deacons my fellow servants.] I am not able to devise apter words to express
my sense in. He says not this of some one Church, but of all; nor yet as of an
accident proper to those times of the Churches minority; but as of the Notes of
every Churches Individuation or Haecceity as they speak. The Unity of the
Church is characterised by One Altar, and One Bishop with the Presbytery and
Deacons. If [(...)] were out, it would not alter the sense, being plainly
implied. Bishop Downame's Exposition of (...) as if it signified Christ, is so
forced and contrary to the evidence of the Text, that his own party quite
forsake him in it, and he needs no confutation. For who ever before dreamed
that the Unity or Individuation of each particular Church, consisted in having
one Christ, who is the common Head of all Churches? One Christ to every Church
and one Bishop, would signify that every Church must have one several Christ,
as well as one several Bishop. Nor is (...) so used by the Ancients, except
when the Context shows that they speak by allusion of Christ. Master Mede's
plain and certain Exposition and Collection I gave you before; the same with
ours.

As for them that say that many Congregations might per vices come to one Altar
to communicate, I answer, 1. Let them make Churches as big as can thus
communicate and spare not; though there be necessary Chapels or Oratories
besides. 2. But remember that every Church used to worship God publicly and to
communicate, at least every Lords day; and that there was but One Altar to each
Church, and therefore but one Communicating Congregation. Doctor Stillingfleet
in his Schismatical Sermon is for my Exposition.

Object. It is meant of one Species of Altars, and not one Individual.

Answ. Then it is meant also of one Species of Bishops in each Church, and not
of one Individual.

Object. The practice of the Churches after shows that they took it not for a
sin, or Schism, to have several Altars in a Church.

Answ. I talk of nothing but matter of fact; it was the note of One Church when
those Epistles were written: whether the Author was mistaken de jure, or
whether after Ages grew wiser, or rather had fewer Bishops and more Altars for
the sake of Carnal Interest, I judge not.

The same Author Epist. ad Smyrn. says [ Ubi utique apparet Episcopus, ibi and
multitudo sit: quemadmodum utique ubi est Christus Jesus, illic Catholica
Ecclesia:] as Usher's Lat. Trans. or [(...)] omnis exercitus coelestis. And the
Context shows that this multitudo or plebs is the Church which the Bishop
overseeth. Therefore ubi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia fuit, and so every Church had a
present Bishop.

So in Epist. ad Magnes. he bids them [ All unitedly (or as one) run together
to one Temple of God, as to one Altar, to one Jesus Christ.] So that every
Church had one Temple and one Altar to which (as a note of their Union in
Christ) the whole Church must unanimously come.

So in Epist. ad Trull. he says [ Et Episcopus typum Dei Patris omnium gerit;
Presbyteri vero sunt consessus quidam, and conjunctus Apostolorum coetus; sine
his Ecclesia Electa non est: Nulla sine his Sanctorum Congregatio; nulla
Sanctorum Collectio. Et postea, Quid vero aliud Sacerdotium est (vel
Presbyterium) quam sacer coetus, Conciliarii and assessores Episcopi? Quid
Diaconi, etc.] So that it is hard more plainly to express a thing in words,
than this Author expresses, that not only de facto every stated worshipping
communicating Congregation had their Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, but that
de jure it ought to be so: And that there was no lawful Church Assembly for
Worship, without the Bishop and his Presbyters ordinarily; and one Altar and
one Bishop were the Notes of one Church.

And Epist. ad Polycarp. [ Saepe Congregationes fiant: ex nomine omnes quaere:
servos and ancillas ne despicias (ut Trans. Lat. Ush.) i. e. Keep often
Congregations: Enquire (or look after) all (or every one) by name: despise not
the Servants and the Maids.] And how many Congregations at once that Church
then had, or how great it was, when the Bishop himself was to look after every
one by name, even the Menservants and the Maids, I leave to their judgments
who are willing to understand the truth.

Since the writing of this (about thirteen years) I have seen Isaac Vossius his
Florentine Ignatius, Edit. 2. and also had some speech with Bishop Gunning,
confidently denying that by (...) is meant one material Altar or place of
Communicating: I will therefore review the Texts of Ignatius according to Isaac
Vossius, and answer this Bishops confident assertion.

1. Epist. ad Smyrn. p. 4. (...), etc. Omnes Episcopum sequimini ut Jesus
Christus Patrem; and Presbyterium ut Apostolos; Diaconos autem revereamini ut
Dei mandatum. Nullus sine Episcopo aliquid operetur eorum quae convenient in
Ecclesiam: Illa firma Gratiarum actio ((...)) reputetur, quae sub ipso est, vel
quam utique ipse concesserit: ubi utique apparet Episcopus, illic multitudo
sit: quemadmodum utique ubi est Jesus Christus illic Catholica Ecclesia: Non
licitum est sine Episcopo neque baptizare, neque agapen facere.

Here it is evident, 1. That by (...), the Multitude,] is meant the assembling
multitude, and not distant people many miles off.

2. That by (...) apparet, is meant the personal visible appearing presence of
the Bishop. And so that every Church-Assembly had a present Bishop ordinarily.

3. That by (...), is meant the Churches joyful laudatory Communion, of which
the Lords Supper was a chief part. And so that the Eucharist was usually
celebrated with and by the Bishop, and never but by his particular allowance to
the Presbyters; not only a general allowance to do it commonly as Parish
Priests do without him, but to do it in his Assembly either in case of his
absence, or need, or as assisting him.

4. That by (...) is meant the matters and persons of the particular Assembly:
And so that every such Assembly had a present Supervisor or Bishop.

5. That by (...), is meant a local going whither he goes, and an imitation of
him as present; and so that they had his visible presence.

6. That the prohibition of baptizing and holding their Love-feasting Meetings
without him, signified not only [ without his general license at a distance;]
but as no Servants must do great matters in the house without the Master, so it
implies here his ordinary presence and particular approbation of the single
persons fitness for Baptism, and his conduct of their Love Feasts, and his
allowance in case of necessary absence.

7. That the same Assemblies had a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons. For the same
multitude is to follow the same Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons: And how could
one Parish follow all the Presbyters of all other Parish Churches of a Diocese
whom they never knew? And it is certain that it was the same Church that the
Presbytery and Deacons here mentioned had: But Deacons were appropriated only
to single Churches, and the people of one Parish-Assembly, were not to follow
or obey the Deacons of all other distant Parish Churches.

8. And after he says, [ Saluto Deo dignum Episcopum, and Deo decens
Presbyterium, and conservos meos Diaconos and singillatim and communiter
omnes.] Which plainly signifies that it was the same City Church in Smyrna
that had a Bishop, Presbytery and Deacons: For the scattered Presbyters of many
distant Parishes cannot be meant by the Presbytery which is supposed present
with the Bishop and Deacons.

II. The next in the Florentine Copy is the Epistle to Polycarpe, where he
says to the Bishop, [Let not the Widows be neglected: Next after the Lord, be
thou the Curator of them: Let nothing be done without thy Sentence: and do thou
nothing without God: and what thou do let it be well stable: Let
Congregations be often made: seek all by name: despise not Servants and Maids:
speak to my Sisters to love the Lord, and be subject in flesh and spirit to
their Husbands, and to the men to love their Wives. And the Men that marry, and
the Women that are married, must make their union with the sentence of the
Bishop, etc.]

Here it is evident, 1. That it was a Church of which Widows were a part that
is here meant: But Widows then were special parts of particular
Parish-Churches, and not common to a Diocese of many such.

2. It was such a Church where the Bishop himself was to take care of all the
Widows, and see that they were not neglected: And that could not be done to a
Diocese of many score or hundred Parishes.

3. It was a Church where the Bishop as present could see to all that was done.

4. It was a Church that was often to assemble or be congregate: which a Diocese
never does: For it is frequent Congregations of the same persons that is here
commanded or desired.

5. It was a Church so assembled that the Bishop could by name take an account
who was absent by his own eye: Yea, even of the Servant-men and Maids.

6. And such as the Bishop could himself marry all that were married in it, or
at least be their particular Counselor therein: And exhort all Husbands and
Wives to their duties.

7. He after says, [I am of one soul with them that are subject to the Bishop,
Presbyters and Deacons.] Signifying that these three were the present Officers
of one and the same particular Church.

III. The next is the Epistle to the Ephesians; where, 1. Page 17. he wills
them to love their Bishop, and all of them to imitate him: which supposes that
they knew him (and so does not one in an hundred in most of our Diocesses, nor
ever see his face.)

2. Page 19. He tells them that [They agree in the Sentence of the Bishop, and
so does the worthy Presbytery agree with him, as the strings of a Harp; and
therefore in their consent and consounding love Jesus Christ is sung: and they
are all made a Chore, that being consonant in consent, receiving in unity
divine melody, they might with one voice sing by Jesus Christ to the Father
that he may hear them, and know by whom they do good.] Where it is most plainly
signified that it was a Church which sung to God by Christ in one Chore, in
unity of concenting voice, under one Bishop and his Presbytery and Deacons
present and conducting them.

3. After page 20. he praises them for being [ consonant in Unity with the
Bishop, For if any be not within the Altar, he is deprived of the ^read of God:
For if the prayer of one or two have so great force, how much more that which
is of the Bishop and all the Church? He therefore that comes not to the same,
is proud and condemns himself. And by how much you see the Bishop silent,
reverence him the more: for we must receive every one that the Lord of the
house sends, as him that sent him: you must therefore look upon the Bishop
manifest (or visibly present) as to the Lord. Onesimus praises your Divine
Order.]

Here it is plain that it was a Church where many, yea all the Church joined
presentially in prayer with the Bishop, which a thousand Parishes (nor two) do
not.

4. It was a Church where the Bishop was seen by all when he was silent; and so
reverenced for his silent presence.

5. It was a Church, which they that wilfully absented themselves from were
self-condemned: But a man can be but in one Parish at once.

6. It was a Church where they might all see (...), the Bishop manifest, that
is, Perspicuum, visible.

7. It was a Church where all that had the Sacred Bread were [ within the
Altar,] that is, the one Sacrarium, or place of communicating in the Eucharist.

8. And this was their (...), the Order of their Assembly.

After page 25. he says [Hasten therefore to assemble frequently, for the
Eucharist (or thanksgiving) of God, and for Glory: For when you often meet for
the same thing, the powers of Satan are destroyed, and his perdition loosed in
the concord of your faith.]

9. Here it is plain that it was a Church that used to meet together for the
Eucharist; manifesting therein the concord of the faith of all the Church.

And after page 29. he says, [Because they who according to Man, do all by
name meet commonly in Grace in one faith, and in Jesus Christ, in your obeying
the Bishop, and Presbytery, with an undivided mind, breaking one bread, etc.]

10. Here it is signified that the Bishop and Presbytery were all present as
Guides in one Assembly, which was that Church which they supervised.

11. And that it was such a Church that brake one Bread, professing one faith,
in presence, with undivided minds. So plainly does this Epistle decide our
controversy.

IV. The next Epistle is Ad Magnesios. In which he says, Canto Ecclesias in
quibus Unionem oro Carnis and Spiritus. Union of Flesh signifies local
Communion.

2. Page 31. he says, [I am dignified to see you by Dama your Bishop worthy of
God, and the worthy Presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, and my fellow Servant
Sotion the Deacon, whom I enjoy because he is subject to the Bishop and
Presbytery, etc.]

By which words it is plain that this Church which had a Bishop, Presbytery and
Deacon, was a Parochial Church that had presential Communion with them, and not
as our Diocesses.

3. Page 33. Having mentioned the Bishop he says, [Because in the aforesaid
persons I behold all the multitude, in faith and love I warn you, study to do
all in the concord of God, the Bishop presiding in the place of God, and the
Presbyters in the stead of the Consession of the Apostles, and the Deacons, etc.

Which shows that it was a Church where Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons sat
together in presence.

4. And after it is said, [Let there be nothing among you which may divide (or
separate) you; but be united to the Bishop and Presidents, etc. Which shows
the same present Presidency as aforesaid.

5. Page 33. He repeateth [without the Bishop and Presbyters do nothing] which
no reason can interpret of any Presbyters but the present.

So 6. Page 34. [Let nothing else seem reasonable proper to your selves; but
one Prayer for the same thing, one deprecation, one understanding, one hope in
love and undefiled joy.]

Which imports their present Communion in Prayer and Profession.

7. He adds, [All of you run (or meet) together into one Temple of God, as to
one Altar.] This needs only an impartial Reader, and it is plain.

8. And page 37. [With your worthily honored Bishop, and the worthily Complexe
Spiritual Crown of your Presbytery, and the Deacons, etc.] Where no Presbyters
are mentioned but the Bishops Presbytery which sat about him in the Church,
called the Complexe Corona.

9. He adds ut unio sit carnalis and spiritualis, that is, of present bodies
and of minds.

V. The next is the Epistle to the Philadelphians: where praising them for
their union with their Bishop as the strings of a Harp, he says, [Study
therefore to use one Eucharist (or Thanksgiving) that is, to join all together
in the Eucharistical Communion:) For there is one Flesh of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and one Cup (that is, which is there Sacramentally represented and
given) into Union of his Blood, one Altar, and one Bishop, with the Presbytery
and the Deacons my fellow Servants; that what you do, you may do according to
God.]

Here one Church is notified in its Unity by these marks.

1. That they all join in one Assembly for the Eucharist. Which signifies one
Body and Blood of Christ. 2. And that there be one Altar for this Communion. 3.
And one Bishop. 4. And one Presbytery with his Deacons with him.

But here Bishop Gunning says, It is not meant of one material Altar.

Answ. 1. It must be noted that (as Master Mede and others have observed) (...)
is used in Church Writers for the Chancel, Sacrarium, or place where the Altar
stood, as well as for the Altar it self: Into which place the Communicants only
were admitted; to which form our Chancels are made.

2. And to be intra Altar is usually meant of being one admitted to that
Eucharistical Communion. 3. And though as we give the Sacrament in private
houses to the sick, and have Chapels for the weak and distant, so might some
great Churches then, and yet have but one Chancel, Altar or place for the
Communion of the whole Church; 4. The express words, and the Context and sense
fully show that it is personal present Communion that is here spoken of, and
therefore in one place. 5. The common use of the word in other Writers, shows
it, (as being intra vel extra Altar, and setting up Altar contra Altar, that
is separated Assemblies for such Communion. (6. The most learned and famous
Expositors so expound it; such as Master Mede before cited, and Archbishop
Usher and others. 7. The Contradictors can feign no other probable sense. For,

1. If by the Altar they say is meant [One Christ,] 2. or one Species of
Altars, these are before confuted, and are palpably false. He that is in
another part of the World may come to an Altar of the same species, which is
nothing to the unity of a particular Church here spoken of. 3. If they say, It
is called one Altar because under one Bishop, this makes not many to be one,
no more than many Temples. And if tropically it were so meant, it would be but
a vain repetition, One Bishop being mentioned besides. And it is an Altar which
the Bishop with his Presbytery is supposed to be present at, which cannot be
All in a Diocese called One. Partiality can give no other probable sense.

Object. 1. One Church it is known had many Altars.

Answ. Not then; no nor long after except at Rome and Alexandria: and then they
were but as parts of Chapels, and not of Churches.

Object. 2. It is said also, There is one Body of Christ and one Cup, which
cannot be meant literally.

Answ. It is well called One agreeably to our present sense: For, 1. It is one
and the same Bread, though not one piece, which is there present, consecrated
and divided to them all; and one Cup or present quantity of Wine which is there
distributed among them. 2. And it is One body and blood or sacrificed Christ,
which is in every Church represented and offered by One Bishop at one Altar.
This does but confirm our Exposition. But what can be so plain as to convince
the prejudiced and unwilling?

2. Page 45. he wills [``the Church to send a Deacon to Antioch as other
neighbor Churches sent Bishops, and some Presbyters and Deacons.] And can any
man think that a Diocese met to choose a Deacon to go on a visit, or that it was
a Diocesane Bishop that was sent by a Diocese, yea that all these neighbor
Churches that sent them were so many Diocesses?

VI. The next is the Epistle ad Trallesios. Where he says of the Bishop that
came to him, [That he saw all the multitude in him;] that is, the Assembly. And
as before he bids them, [Do nothing without the Bishop, and be subject to the
Presbytery; and that as to the Counsel of God, and Conjunction of Apostles]
adding, [For without these the Church is not called:.] what can be plainer to
show that it was a Church that had a present Bishop and Council of Presbyters
conjunct, without whom the Church was not lawfully called together? So that
every Church had such.

2. And page 50. he says again, [Not inflated, but being inseparable from God,
Jesus Christ, and the Bishop and the Orders of the Apostles (that is, the
Confess of Presbyters) He that is within the Altar is clean; and he that is
without the Altar is not clean; that is, he that does any thing (in the Church)
without the Bishop, Presbytery and Deacon, is not clean in Conscience: which
plainly shows that every Church-Assembly had a guiding Bishop, Presbytery and
ministering Deacon.

3. Page 52. he says, [I salute you from Smyrna with the Churches of God,
which are present with me:] He had not then the presence of many Diocesses; nor
were Bishops alone used then to be called Churches: Therefore they were
Church Assemblies which he visited, and were with him, and about him.

4. Again he repeateth, [Be subject to the Bishop and Presbytery, and love one
another with an inseparable heart.] Which has the sense aforesaid.

VII. In the Epistle to the Romans, the words of the Church presiding in locho
chori Romanorum is much spoken of already by many.

The Epistles ascribed to him have much of the like kind; as Epist. ad
Tarsenses, page 80. Ad Antiochenos, page 86, 87, 88. The Epist. ad Heroum
Diaconum calls the Presbyters of Antioch Bishops who baptize, sacrifice and
impose hands.

So Epist. ad Philippenses, page 112.

If after all this evidence from Ignatius any will wrangle, let him wrangle:
what words can be plain enough for such? And what a blind or blinding practice
is it, which too many Writers for Prelacy have used? to pretend Ignatius to be
for them, who is so much and plain against them? And to toss about the name of
a Bishop and Presbytery, as if all that was said for a Parochial Bishop and
Presbytery (that is, in a Church associated for personal presential Communion)
were spoken for such a Diocesane Prelacy as puts down and destroys all
such Churches, Bishops and Presbyteries.

And what falsehood is it to persuade the World that we are against Episcopacy
because we would have every Church to have a Bishop, and would not have all the
Churches in England except Diocesane, to be unchurched and turned into Chapels
or Oratories? When yet we refuse not to submit to more general Overseers of
many Churches, to see that the Pastors do their duty, and counsel and exhort
them to it, whether appointed hereto by the Magistrate, or the consent and
choice of many Churches.

IV. Justin Martyr's Testimony is trite, but most plain, and not to be evaded.
(...) etc. Postea fratrum praeposito panis and poculum offertur -- Postquam
praepositus gratias egit totusque populus fausta omnia acclamavit; qui inter
nos Diaconi vocantur dant unicuique partem panis and calicis diluti, super quos
facta est gratiarum actio, atque etiam defer sinunt absentibus -- Die solis
urbanorum ac rusticanorum coetus fiunt, ubi Apostolorum prophetarumque literae
quoad fieri potest praeleguntur: Cessant^ Lectore Praepositus verba facit
adhortatoria -- Posthaec consurgunt omnes and preces off^rimus: quibus finitis
profertur panis, vinum and aqua: Tum praepofitus quantum potest preces offert,
and gratiarum actiones: Plebs vero Amen accin^t. Inde consecrata distribuuntur
singulis, and absentibus mittuntur per Diaconos: Ditiores si libeat pro sua
quisque voluntate conferunt: Collecta deponuntur apud praepositum: Is subvenit
pupillis, viduis, and propter morbum aliamve necessitatem egentibus, vinctis
quoque and peregrinis, and in summa curator fit omnium inopum. Thus Justin
Apolog. 2. Where he describes the Church State and Worship which we desire, as
plainly as we can speak our selves. Note here, 1. That whether the Countrymen
and Citizens had several Churches or met in one City Church, it shows that
they were but single Congregations. For every Church had a present Bishop: (For
Doctor Hammond maintains that by the Praepositus here is meant the Bishop,
and so do others of them.) 2. This Bishop performed the Offices of the day,
every Lord's day, praying, preaching and administering the Lord's Supper, etc.
3. All the Alms of the Church was committed to the Bishop at present, (and
therefore he had not many hundred or any other Churches under him where
Presbyters did all receive the Alms.) 4. He was the common Curator of all the
Poor, Orphans, Sick, etc. which could not be for more than one of our Parishes:
(And let the Bishops take as big a Church as they will do all this for, and
spare not.) 5. And the Deacons bringing the consecrated Bread and Wine to the
absent in token of Communion with the same Church and Bishop, shows that
there were not under him many other absent Congregations, that had no other
Bishop of their own: Nor did the Deacon carry it to such Congregations through
the Diocese. In a word, here is a full description of a Congregational Church
and Bishop.

Says Master Mede before cited, of these words, [As the Jews had their
Synagogues, so perhaps might they have more Oratories than one; though their
Altar were but one, there namely where the Bishop was. Die solis omnes, etc.
(here he cites these words,) Namely as he there tells us, to celebrate and
participate of the Holy Eucharist. Why was this? but because they had not many
places to celebrate in.]

V. Tertullian is as plain and full: Apol. c. 39. Corpus sumus de conscientia
religionis, and disciplinae unitate, and spei foedere: Coimus in Coetum, and
Congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus orantes --
Cogimur ad divinarum literarum commemorationem. -- Certe fidem sanctis vocibus
pascimus: spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus
inculcationibus densamus. Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and
censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei
conspectu; summumque futuri judicii praejudicium est, siquis ita deliquerit, ut
a Communicatione orationis and Conventus and omnis Sancti Commercii relegatur:
Praesident probati quique Seniores, etc.

And de Corona Milit. cap. 3. Eucharistiae Sacramentum, and in tempore victus,
and omnibus mandatum a domino, etiam antelucanis coetibus; nec de aliorum manu
quam praesidentium sumimus.

And further, [Aquam adituri itidem, sed and aliquando prius in Ecclesia sub
antistitis manu contestamur, nos renunciare Diabolo and pompae and angelis
ejus.]

In all these words (and many more such in Tertullian) it is evident, 1. That
then a Church was a Congregation met for holy Worship, and not many hundred
Congregations making one Church primae ordinis. 2. That this Church had
ordinarily a Bishop present (not present in one Congregation and many hundred
without.) 3. That the Bishop baptized, and took the Confessions of the
Baptized, and performed the ordinary Worship, and administered the Lords Supper.
(Doctor Hammond himself maintains that it is the Bishop that Tertullian
speaks of.) 4. That Discipline was exercised in those Church Assemblies, and
therefore the Bishop was present.

5. They took the Sacrament from none but the Bishops hand (save that the
Deacon distributed it as from him) which proves that the Bishop was present,
when ever the Sacrament was administered. 6. They had these Assemblies every
Lords day. All which set together plainly shows that then every Church had a
present Bishop, (ordinarily) and was no more than one Congregation, met for
such Communion as is described.

VI. And even in Cyprian's time the alteration was not great: Epist. 68.
Cyprian in the Separation of Feliciss. and sive Presbyters Epist. 44. (ed.
Goul) page 93. says, [Deus unus and Christus unus and una Ecclesia -- Aliud
Altar constitui, aut Sacerdotium novum sieri praeter unum Altar and unum
Sacerdotium non potest.
(Edit. Goulart.) p. 201. he says, [Propter quod plebs obsequens praeceptis
dominicis and Deum metuens, etc.] i. e. [For which cause the people that are
obedient to the Lords Commands and fear God, ought to separate themselves from
a sinful Prelate (or Bishop) and not to be present, at the Sacrifices of a
Sacrilegious Priest; seeing they have the greatest power either of choosing
worthy Priests, or of refusing the unworthy: which very thing we see coming
down by Divine Authority, that the Priest, the people being present, be chosen
(or appointed) before the eyes of all, and by the public judgment and
testimony be approved worthy and fit. And so going on to prove the Divine Right
hereof he adds, which was before done so diligently and cautelously, the
people being all called together, lest any unworthy person should creep into
the Ministry of the Altar, or the place of Priesthood. For that the Unworthy
are sometimes ordained, not according to the Will of God, but according to the
presumption of Man; and that these things are displeasing to God which come not
of legitimate and just Ordination, God himself does manifest by the Prophet
Osee, saying, They made themselves a King, but not by me: And therefore it is
diligently to be observed, and held of Divine Tradition and Apostolical
Observation, which with us also and almost all the Provinces is held, that for
the right celebrating of Ordinations, all the next Bishops of the same Province
do come together, to that people over whom the Bishop (or Prelate) is set, and
that the Bishop be appointed them, (or assigned) the people being present who
fullyest know the life of every one, and have thoroughly seen the act of every
ones Conversation: which also we saw done with you in the Ordination of Sabinus
our Colleague, that the Office of a Bishop was given (or delivered) him, and
hands imposed on him, in the place of Basilides, by the suffrage of the whole
Fraternity, and by the judgment of the Bishops that had met together and had
sent you Letters concerning him.

And before Sect. 4. Deus instruit, etc. God instructs and shows that the
Ordinations of Priests (that is, Bishops) ought not to be done but under the
Conscience (that is, present sight and consent) of the assisting people, that
the Laity being present, either the crimes of the bad may be detected, or the
merits of the good predicated, and that Ordination be just and legitimate,
which was examined by the suffrage and judgment of all. --

The Case is so plain in Cyprian that Pamelius himself is forced thus to
confess [Non negamus veterem Electionis Episcoporum ritum, quo plebe praesente,
immo and suffragiis plebis eligi solent. Nam in Africa illum observatum constat
ex electione Eradii successoris D. Augustini de quo extat Epistola ejus 120. In
Graecia aetate Chrysostomi ex lib. 3. de Sacerdot. In Hispaniis ex hoc Cypriani
loco, and Isidor. lib. de Officiis. In Galliis ex Epist. Celestini, p. 2.
Romae, exiis quae supra diximus Epist. ad Antoniam. Ubique etiam alibi ex
Epist. Leonis 87. Et perdurasse eam consuetudinem ad Gregor. 1. usque ex ejus
Epistolis; Immo ad tempora usqu^ Caroli and Ludovici Imperat. ex 1. lib.
Capitulorum eorundem satis constat; Verum
Plebi sola suffragia concessa, non electio quae per subscriptionem fieri
solet. -- Hoc enim potissimum tunc agebatur, ut invito plebi non daretur
Episcopus. --

From hence now the quantity of their Churches may easily be gathered. 1. The
people must be present. 2. And this must be All the people, the whole Laity of
the Church. 3. They give their testimony of the life of the ordained. 4. They
are supposed all to know his conversation. 5. This is the common custom of the
Churches, in Africa and all other Countries.

Now I leave it to the consideration of sober minds how many Churches, or
Congregations could do all this? Whether it was many hundred Churches that
never saw the person, nor one another, that were to meet in one Church or
place, to do all this? Or rather the Inhabitants of a Vicinity, using to
assemble for Communion, when even our Greater Parishes now are more than can
thus meet and do all this?

2. Note also that when Cyprian imposes it on the same people that choose their
Bishop, also to separate from one that is wicked, and not communicate with him
in the Sacrament, it is most evident to him that is willing to understand, that
this Bishop was to be the Teacher of all the people of that Church, and was to
administer the Sacrament to them in the Congregation, and they had ordinary
communion with him: For how else should they be called on to separate from him,
in the Sacrifice (as it is called.) Does he command a thousand or a hundred
distant Churches to separate from the Sacrifices of that Bishop, who never had
local Communion with him (unless perhaps once in their lives as with a
stranger.) The Impartial can hardly read these words, and not understand them.

Two Objections are here made. 1. Obj. All the People is put for all present,
which is a part.

Answ. By such interpretations let God or Man say what they will, it will
signify but what the Reader please. The Context and many concurrent
expressions show that (though business or sickness might hinder some
Individuals) it was the main body of the Congregation which is called Plebs
Universa, or else it will be nonsense.

2. Object. But if the same were the custom till the days of Charles and
Lodovick, then it could not be all the people, for then it is known that the
Dioceses were larger: Therefore it must be but all that belonged to the
Cathedral.

Answ. 1. Even till their days Christianity had not been received by the whole
Cities or Parishes, in the greatest part of the Empire; but (according to the
liberty then given when none were forced to be Christians) the Christians were
but few in many great Countries. It was long ere they were the greater number
of the Inhabitants in France and Flanders; longer in England; and longer in
Germany, and Hungary, and Poland; and longer in Sweden and Denmark, etc. 2.
That it was no Cathedral Society distinct from other Congregations under the
same Bishop in Cyprian's time, is most evident: There being no such distinction
intimated, but contrarily all the Bishops Church or Flock is spoken to: And how
should one part of the Church come to have a right to choose and refuse the
Bishop more than all the rest? And in all ordinary Dioceses it was so long
after: But it is true that at Rome, Alexandria and the greater Churches, where
the custom was continued, and yet the multitude of the people was so great that
they could not half meet in one place; those that were forwardest crowded
together, and often committed Riots and Murders (as at the Election of Damasus,
and others,) till by this, the custom was changed to avoid such tumults; and
those that would not be in the Crowd stayed at home: And the nearest Neighbors
commonly were they that met.

Object. But do not we see that a whole County can meet to choose Parliament Men?

Answ.1. No: It is only the Freeholders who are comparatively but a small part
of the County. 2. It is in a Field, or Streets, and not in a Church. 3. It is
commonly to judge of their Suffrages by comparing by the eye, the magnitude of
the distinct Companies when they separate, or else by taking their Votes Man by
Man in a long time, and not to do all in their hearing, and by their Counsel,
as in this Case. 4. I have been at great Assemblies for such Elections of
Parliament, in the Fields; and I never saw more together than have heard me
preach in one Assembly, nor half so many as some London Parishes do contain:
much less as a Diocese.

There is a great deal more in Cyprian to prove the thing in question, Epist.
3, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14, 26, 27, 28, 31, 33, 40. which would be tedious to the
Reader should I recite it. A primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine
consilio vestro and sine consensu plebis meae privata sententia gerere --
Prohibeantur offerre, acturi apud nos, and apud confessores ipsos, and apud
plebem universam causam suam.] Haec singulorum tractanda sit and limanda
before ratio, non tantum cum Collegis meis, sed and cum plebe ipsa universa.
-- Vix plebi persuadeo, immo extorqueo, ut tales patiantur admitti -- Secundum
vestra divina suffragia, Conjurati and scelerati de Ecclesia sponte se
pellerent. -- ] By these and many such passages it is evident that even the
famous Church of Carthage, under that famous Bishop was no greater than that
all Church Affairs might be treated of in the hearing of all the Laity, and
managed by their consent, and the Quality of each Presbyter and Communicant,
and their faults fell under the Cognizance of the whole Church; not as
Governors, but as interessed for their own welfare, as the words declare.

VII. And here I think I may seasonably cite the Constitutions called
Apostolical; which if not written by Clement, were certainly for the most part
of them very ancient, as being before Athanasius who mentions them. And the
Learned and Sober Albaspinaeus, Observe. Lib. 1. p. 38. says, [De
constitutionibus istis nemini dubium esse debet, quin probus iuxta and antiquus
liber sit; certoque affirmare possum trecentis primis eo ecclesiam Graecam,
tanquam rituali and Pontificali usam esse; Quique eas attente legerit, eadem de
illis quae de canonibus judicabit, additas, viz. decursu temporum primis novas,
quemadmodum and novae leges and constitutiones in regimine Ecclesiae, novis
occasionibus enatis, factae sunt.] that though they were not written by Clement
or the Apostles, yet they were that Summary of Apostolical or Christian
Discipline, which the Greek Churches much used for the first three hundred
years; and that Additions were made by degrees. But I cite them for nothing but
the History, wherein they are of great account to acquaint us with the state of
the Church in those times.

Lib. 2. cap. 18. It is said, that [Omnium Episcopus curam habeat, and eorum
qui non peccarunt, ut non peccent, and eorum qui in peccatis sunt, ut peccasse
poeniteat: ait enim Dominus, Videte ne contemnatis unum ex pusillis istis. Item
poenitentibus condonare oportet peccata. -- Quocirca curam omnium suscipe
tanquam rationem de pluribus redditurus: Ac sanos quidem conserva, lapsos vero
moan, and qui in jejunio premens, leva in remissione, and eum qui luxit recipe,
cuncta Ecclesia pro eo deprecante, etc.] And much more works he adds: Whereby
it appears that the Bishopric was no greater than that he could take a
personal care of every member, over the meanest, sound and unsound: And that it
was one Assembly where all did intercede for the restoring of the Penitent.

So cap. 20. opening the Bishop's duty to the Laity, he repeateth, Omnes
monens, omnes increpans, etc. And ibid. Medice ergo Ecclesiae Domini adhibe
medicinam cuique aegrotantium convenientem: Omnibus modis cura, sana, factos
sanos read Ecclesiae; pasce gregem, non per vim, neque imperiose, cum ludibrio
and despectu quasi dominatum teneas, sed tanquam bonus pastor in sinum ac
complexum agnos congrega and oves gravidas hortare.

And it concerns them to know well what they do, for cap. 2. Scitote quod qui
eum, qui injuriam non fecit, ejicit, aut qui se convertit non recipit, fratrem
suum occidit, and sanguinem ejus fudit, sicut Cain sanguinem fratris sui fudit;
cujus sanguis, qui ad Deum clamat, requiretur. -- Similiter eveniet ei qui ab
Episcopo suo sine iusta causa fuerit excommunicatus: Qui tanquam pestiferum
ejicit eum qui est extra culpam, is quidem saevior est interfectore. --
Violentior est ipso homicida qui corpus perimit, is qui innocentem ex ecclesia
ejicit.

Et cap. 25. Oportet ut qui in Ecclesia assidui sunt eos Ecclesia aelat (viz.
Pontificem, Sacerdotes, Levitas.) where the Assembly is the Church which
maintains the Bishop and Presbyters.

And cap. 26. It is the Bishop that to all the Church is, Minister Verbi,
scientiae custos, Mediator Dei and vestrum in iis quae ad eum colendum
pertinent (that is, officiateth in Church Worship:) hic est magister pietatis
ac religionis; hic est secundum Deum pater vester, qui vos per aquam and
Spiritum sanctum regeneravit, etc. Episcopus igitur vobis praesideat, ut
dignitate Dei cohonestatus, qua clerum sub potestate sua tenet, and toti populo
praeest, Diaconus vero assistat huic, etc. So that a Bishops Church was no
greater than that he could be the constant Teacher, Guide, Baptizer, etc. of
them all.

And cap. 27. All the Oblations were to be brought to the Bishop himself, by
themselves that offered, or by the Deacons. Immo primitias quoque and decimas
and quae sponte offeruntur; is enim probe novit afflictos and cuique tribuit,
ut congruit; ne quis eadem die aut eadem hebdom i would bis aut saepius accipiat,
alius vero nihil penitus. So that the reason why all the Offerings, Tithes and
Gifts in his whole Diocese were brought to the Bishop himself was, because he
was well acquainted with all the Poor of his Diocese, and was every day to
relieve them, and see that one did not receive twice the same day, or the same
Week, and another have none. How many hundred Churches think you had a Church
then in the Belly of it? and how large was such a Diocese?

And cap. 28. In their Love Feasts the Bishop was to have always his special
part of the Feast, even sent him if he were absent. Sure if his Diocese had six
hundred or a thousand Parishes and as many Feasts, and some of them as far off
as I am from the Cathedral Church (about fourscore Miles) it will cost more the
Carriage of the Bishop's Supper than it is worth, and it will be cold, and it
is well if it stink not by the way. And the Presbyters that were all to have a
double portion also of the Feast, are called tanquam Consiliarii Episcopi and
Ecclesiae Corona, sunt enim Consilium and Senatus Ecclesiae. So that it was but
one City Congregation yet that had Bishops and Presbyters and Deacons, etc.

And in cap. 30. and many Chapters there is mentioned often the Bishops doing
all without any help save the Deacons, which would make one think that de facto
Doctor Hammond was in the right, and that some of the Constitutions were
written when in most Churches there was no Presbyters with the Bishop but
Deacons only.

Cap. 32. If the Deacon knew any to be poor, he must tell the Bishop, and do
nothing without him. How large was this Diocese? cap. 34. This Bishop must be
loved as a Father, feared as a King, honored as a God, offering him our Fruits
and the works of our hands for his Blessing; giving him as God's Priest our
First Fruits, Tithes, First Fruits of Corn, Wine, Oil, Apples, Wool, and all
that God shall give us.] Was all this carried him from many hundred Parishes,
many score Miles?

And cap. 36. The Bishop's Church was no farther off than that all the Members
were to come to it in the morning before they went to any work, and at Evening
when they had done. How big was this Diocese?

Cap. 44. The Deacon is to be the Bishop's Eye, and Ear, and Mouth, and to help
him, that he may not be overwhelmed with his work: If he had a thousand subject
Presbyters, one Deacon's help only would not have been named.

Cap. 56. The Bishop is to see that this Deacon speak Peace to every one that
enters into the Church to worship. Which implies that he was present in the
Church.

Cap. 57. The description of a Church Order is, that the Bishop's Seat be in
the midst, and that the Presbyters sit on each side of him, and so for the
rest. And the Order of Officiating was, [that (the Deacons seeing all orderly
keep their Seats) the Reader first read the old Scriptures, and the Deacon or
Presbyters the Gospels; then that the Presbyters exhort the people, not all at
once, but one by one, and last of all the Bishop, etc.] These were then the
Churches; where every Altar had a Bishop.

So cap. 50. Cum doces Episcope, jube and moan populum frequent are quotidie
Ecclesiam mane and vespere, ut omnino abesse nolit, immo assidue conveniat,
neque Ullus subducendo se Ecclesiam mutilam faciat, and a corpore Christi unum
membrum decerpat: Neque enim de solis Sacerdotibus dictum est, sed potius
quisque Laicus, etc. So that a Bishop's Diocese or Church was so great, as that
no one Lay Member should be absent Morning or Evening.

Lib. 4. cap. The Bishop had the particular care of all the Pupils, Widows,
Laborers, Weak, Naked, Sick, Virgins, etc. And cap. 5. He is to know well who
they be that offer all the Oblations; and is to reject the Oblations of all the
Wicked: For cap. 7. Let the Poor have never so much ^eed, it is better perish by
Famine, than receive anything from the Enemies of God, which may be
contumelious to his Friends.]

Lib 8. cap. 4. The Ordering of a Bishop must be (de quo nulla est querela; and
qui sit a cuncto populo ex optimis quibusque electus, quo nominato and placente
populus in unum congregatus, una cum Presbyteris and Episcopis praesentibus,
die Dominico, consentiat. Qui vero inter reliquos princeps Episcopus,
percontetur Episcopos and populum, an ipse sit quem praeesse petunt? etc. So
that all the people of the Church came together to choose and consent to the
Bishop: no greater at that time was a Diocesane Church.

Cap. 12. His peractis dextram and laevam ejus ut discipuli Magistro assistant.
-- This is part of the Common Rubric (of the best and eldest Liturgy that I
know of recorded by Church History) for the celebrating the Sacrament. So that
it supposes a Bishop to be then present in all Churches that had an Altar and
Sacrament. The rest of the Liturgy, lib. 8. supposes still the same presence
of the Bishop. Cap. 35. Congregabis Episcope Ecclesiam ad vesperam, etc. It
would be too long to recite all the Bishops part in the ordinary Offices of the
Assembly. It is hence plain that in those Ages (unless it were very few;
perhaps only Rome and Alexandria) no Bishops had more stated Assemblies or
Churches that had Altars, or communicated, than one.

VIII. The Canons called the Apostles run just in the same strain with the
Constitutions: And though by some of them it is apparent that (at least) all of
them are not so old as many think, (As that which intimates that Rulers set up
Clergymen, etc.) yet they were elder than our Compound Diocesane Churches. For
Can. 5. It is said. [Omnium aliorum primitiae Episcopo and Presbyteris domum
mittuntur; non super altar: Manifestum est autem quod Episcopus and Presbyteri
inter Diaconos and reliquos Clericos eas dividunt.] By which and many such
passages it is evident that there was then but one Altar and one Bishop with
his Presbytery and Deacons in a Church, as in Ignatius's time: and that they
all lived on the same Altar, together with the rest of the Gifts of the Church,
Vid. and Can. 58.

The Can. 32. says, [Siquis Presbyter contemnens Episcopum suum, seorsim
collegerit and altar aliud erexerit, nihil habens quo reprehendat Episcopum in
causa pietatis, aut justitiae, deponatur, quasi principatus amator existens. --
Haec autem post unam and secundam and tertiam Episcopi obsecrationem fieri
conveniat.] The same is in the Can. 5. Council. Antioch. And to set up aliud
Altar, and Altar contra Altar is the Phrase used then by many Writers, and
Councils, to signify a dividing and separating from the Church, and setting up
an Antichurch; All which shows that then a Bishops Church had but one Altar.

IX. Dionysius (whoever or whenever he wrote) does so describe the Bishops work
as shows that he had but one Church and Presbytery to assist him. Cap. 4. de
Eccles. Hier. he tells us that [The Prefect did baptize those that were
converted,] and the Presbyters and Deacons did but assist him: And it is a very
long manner of baptizing which he there describes, and all the Church were
called together to it, and joined in it. And this was in times when the
Infidels were to be brought in, and converted, and baptized at Age, where
Examinations, Professions and Circumstances made it so long a work, as this
alone would have proved his Church to be no greater than aforesaid: much more
with the rest of the work which he describes.

X. But Councils give the surest testimonies to such matter of fact: Council.
Agath. Can. 4. Siquis etiam extra Parochias, and ubi legitimus est
ordinariusque conventus, Oratorium habere voluerit, reliquis festivitatibus ut
ibi missam audiat, propter fatigationem familiae, justa ordinatione
permittimus. Pascha vero, Natali Domini, Epiphania, Ascensione Domini,
Pentecoste, and natali Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and siqui maxim dies, in
festivitatibus habentur, non nisi in civitatibus, aut Parochiis audiant. This
being decreed so late, when Christians were increased in the Countries,
allows them, to avoid weariness in traveling with their Families too far, to
have Chapels or Oratories in the remote parts of the Country (but so that they
come all to the City or Parish Church on all the greatest Festivals.) Which
shows that then the Church was but one Assembly which all could join in to
hear the word.

And that each of these City and Parish Churches had a Bishop of their own, is
apparent in what follows, [Can. 30. Benedictionem super plebem in Ecclesia
fundere aut poenitentem in Ecclesia benedicere, Presbytero penitus non licebit;
that is, [It shall not at all be lawful for a Presbyter to pronounce the
Blessing on the people in the Church, or to bless a Penitent in the Church.]
Now these being (or one at least) performed in every Church Assembly, when a
Presbyter is forbidden to do them, it is implied that a Bishop was present to
do it himself: and so that every communicating Assembly had a Bishop.

And it is said, Can. 31. Missas die Dominico secularibus totas audire speciali
ordine praecipimus; ita ut ante benedictionem sacerdotis egredi populus non
praesumat, quod si fecerit, ab Episcopo public confundatur. So that there must
be a daily pronunciation of the Blessing each Lords day, and that not by the
Presbyters but the Bishop, who must rebuke them that go out before it; which
shows that each Church had a Bishop.

And after, [Qui solemnitatum, id est Paschae and natalis domini vel
Pentecostes festivitatibus, cum Episcopis interesse neglexerint, quum in
civitatibus communionis vel benedictionis accipiendae causa positos se nosse
debeant, triennio communione priventur Ecclesiae.] By which it appears that
in a City there were no more Christians or Church Members, than could
congregate with the Bishop on the Festivals for Communion; when all the
neglecters were to be deprived of the Communion for three years.

XI. The Council at Eliberis Baetic. An. 305. had nineteen Bishops, twenty six
Presbyters, and the Deacons, and omnis Plebs stood by: which intimates that
these twenty six Presbyters and the Deacons were the main body of the Clergy
under the nineteen Bishops; which was not two Presbyters to a Bishop: why else
should the Deacons and all the Laity be there, if not all the Presbyters? And
supposing that Plebs omnis here signify not strictly all the Laity, yet it
intimates that the Churches were no greater than that so great a part of their
Laity was there, as that Phrase might be well used of; which cannot be of our
Compound Diocese.

XII. Council. Gangrens. cap. 7. No one was to receive the Oblations of Fruits,
and the First Fruits, due to the Church, out of the Church. And cap. 8. None
was to receive them but the Bishop, or he whom the Bishop appointed. This
shows the quantity of the Diocese, and that every Church had one Altar and
one Bishop.

XIII. In a Roman Council sub Silvest. it is said, [Ab omni Ecclesia eligatur
consecrandus Episcopus, nullo de membris Ecclesiae intercedente, and omni
Ecclesia conveniente: and nulli Episcopo liceat sine cuncta Ecclesia a
novissimo gradu usque ad primum ordinare Neophytum Silvester Papa dixit, A
nobis incipientes moderamine lenitatis judicare, commonemus ut nulli Episcopo
liceat quemlibet gradum Clerici ordinare aut consecrare, nisi cum omni adunata
Ecclesia, si placet: and dixerunt Episcopi, placet. What can be more fully
said, [Let the Bishop to be ordained be chosen by all the Church, no one of the
Members of the Church being wanting, and all the Church meeting together. Let
it be lawful for no Bishop without the whole Church to ordain. -- Not to ordain
or consecrate any degree of Clergyman, but with the whole Church together in
one. And how great then were the Churches, when even at Rome and all about it,
The whole Church united, and every member could meet together at every
Ordination and Consecration? I scarce know how a testimony can be plainer.

XIV. The Council. Sardic. which first began to befriend the Grandeur of the
Roman Bishop, was it that first forbad Bishops to be ordained in small
Villages: yet note that even there it was not absolutely forbidden to all
Villages; but only to such Villages and small Cities where one Presbyter was
enough: But they allowed a Bishop to the Cities. [Quae Episcopos habuerunt, and
siqua tam populosa est Civitas vel Locus (mark Locus as distinct from Civitas)
qui mereatur habere Episcopum.] So that if there were but people enough for
more than one Presbyter, they allowed them a Bishop.

And Can. 14. It is decreed that, [As no Layman must be above three Weeks from
Church, so no Bishop from his own Church at another place.] Whereas if a Bishop
have many Churches, or many hundred, or a thousand, he could be but at one in a
Year, or two, or three, or more, if he did nothing but travel from parish to
Parish. Only in the next Canon, those that have Farms or Lands in the Country
are dispensed with for three Weeks to be absent from their own Churches, so
they go to another.

XV. In the Epistle of the 1. Council. Nic. ad Eccles. Egypt. (in Crab. page
262. T. 1.) Presbyters were to be made, [Solummodo sivideantur digni, and
populus eos elegerit, condecernente simul and designante maxim Alexandriae
Civitatis Episcopo.] Still the people that had the choice were no more than
could meet to choose.

And even in the Arabic Canons ascribed to this Council by some of late it is
said, Can. 72. Sic Episcopi and Sacerdotes si Civitates suas and Altaria
propter alia majora relinquerent, male facerent; which shows that each City
even then had but one Altar or Meeting for Sacramental Communion: though when
these were written, there were other Churches in Villages that had Altars.

And in Pisan. Can. 57. Archi-presbyter in absentia Episcopi honoretur tanquam
Episcopus, quia est loco ejus, and sit caput Sacerdotum qui sub potestate ejus
sunt in Ecclesia. The Bishop then was but such a Head of Priests in the same
Church, as an Arch-Presbyter might be in his absence.

And Cap. 9. The Vote of the whole Diocese without the Archbishop shall not
serve to choose a Bishop, though all gathered together.

XVI. The Council. Vasense granted leave for Presbyters to preach and Deacons to
read Homilies in Country Parishes, which shows both that Bishops were the
ordinary Preachers to their whole Flocks before, and that these Parishes were
yet but new, and perhaps but Chapels that yet had not Altars and the Lord's
Supper.

XVII. Binnius in Council. Ephesians. 1. To. 2. cap. 20. says, [Dalmatius told the
Emperor that there were six thousand Bishops under the Metropolitan sent to the
Council that were against Nestorius;] And there was a great number on the other
side with Johan. Antiochen. who cast out Cyril and Memnon. How great think you
were these Bishops Dioceses?

XVIII. Council. Carth. 3. cap. 39. and 40. (in Crab) some would have had many
(twelve) Bishops at each Bishop's Ordination; but Aurelius desired it might be
but three, because [Crebro and pene per diem Dominicum ordinationes habemus,]
they had Ordinations almost every Lord's day, and Tripoli had but five Bishops.
How big were these Dioceses where the Bishops could meet almost every Lord's
day for Ordinations; and five under Tripoly was an exceeding small number.

And cap. 40. If a Bishop were accused at his Ordination, the Cause was to be
tried, In eadem plebe cui ordinandus est; And surely it was not to be in many
hundred Congregations at once or per vices.

XIX. Council. Antioch. (before this) Can. 5. (page 321. in Crab) Siquis
Presbyter aut Diaconus Episcopum proprium contemnens, se ab Ecclesia
segregaverit and seorsum colligens Altar constituit (vel in secunda edit. and
privatim apud se collectis populis Altar erigere ausus fuerit, etc.) This
shows, 1. That the Presbyters then joined with the Bishop in the same Church.
2. And that then each Church had but one Altar, and to erect another Altar
elsewhere, was to set up another Church.

Can. 8. Presbyteri qui sunt in agris Canonicas Epistolas dare non possunt --
Chorepiscopi autem -- dare possunt -- This shows that then the Country
Villages had Chorepiscopos with Presbyters.

Can. 10 Qui in vicis vel possissionibus Chorepiscopi nominantur quamvis manus
impositionem Episcoporum perceperint, and ut Episcopi consecrati sint, tamen
Sanctae Synodo placuit, ut modum proprium recognoscant, ut gubernent sibi
subjectas Ecclesias earumque moderamine curaque contenti sint. This shows
that then the Churches in Villages had their Bishops, though under the City
Bishops.

Can. 16. A Bishop that put himself into a vacant Church without the consent of
a perfect Council, where must be the Metropolitan, must be cast out, etsi
cunctus populus quem diripuit eum habere delegerit: which shows that the
whole people were no more than could meet to choose him.

Can. 17, 18, 21. imply the same; Episcopus ab alia Parochia non migret ad
aliam, nec sponte sua insiliens, nec vi coactus a populo, nec ab Episcopis
necessitate compulsus: Maneat autem in Ecclesia quam primitus adeo sortitus
est. A Church and a Parish are here the same; and no greater than that the
people could be the compellers, which implies their concurrence, which could
not be in a Diocese of many hundred Churches; but in one only.

Can. 23. The Goods of the Church are faithfully to be kept: which also are to
be dispensed by the Judgment and Power of the Bishop, to whom is committed the
people, and the souls that are congregated in the Church: and it is manifest
what things belong to the Church, with the knowledge of the Presbyters and
Deacons that are about him, who cannot but know what are the Church Goods, etc.
Here 1. The Church contained only the souls that were congregated in it, and
not many Congregations. 2. All the Church Goods were known to the Presbyters
and Deacons, so that the Bishop did dispose of them while he lived, but could
alienate none at his death: which shows that it was but one Church or
Congregation, where the Bishop and Presbyters joined in the Ministry.

Cap. 25. has the same Evidence: The Bishop dispenses all the Goods and Lands
of the Church, to all that need, but must not appropriate them to his Kindred,
etc. but use them by the consent of his Presbyters and Deacons.

XX. Council. Carthag. 4. cap. 14. The Bishop's dwelling was to be near the
Church. (But if he had many Churches, they would have told which.) Can. 17. The
Bishop was to exercise the care of Government of Widows, Orphans, and Strangers
by his Arch-Presbyter and Archdeacon (which shows that they had not many
Churches; where each appropriate Presbyter and Deacons did it.)

Can. 22. The Peoples consent and testimony was necessary to every Clerk
ordained: (which shows how large the Churches or People were.)

Can. 35. The Bishop is ordered to sit above the Presbyters in the Church, and
in their Consess; but at home to know himself to be their Colleague: which
shows that they were all belonging to one Church, and not to many far from
each other.

XXI. Council. Laodic. Presbyters must not go into the Church (or Sacrarium as
the other Ed.) before the Bishop, nor sit in the Seats, but must go in with the
Bishop, or sit in lower Seats (till he comes.) Which shows that they were all
in one Church. And if there had been many Churches distant where there were no
Bishops but Presbyters only, it is like that Case would have been excepted, as
well as is the Case of the Bishop's [Sickness and Peregrination.] See Binnius
three Versions, To. 1. page 292. and Crab's two Vol. 1. page 310.

Can. 28. Forbidding the Agapae, or Church Feasts to be made in the Church,
implies that other Houses could contain the Church Members. And Can. 58.
Forbidding Oblationes fieri vel celebrari in domibus ab Episcopis vel
Presbyteris, does show that till they built Chapels there was but one
Congregation in a City, which was where the Bishop was.

XXII. Decretum Innocent. 1. P. Romans (in Crab, Vol. 1. page 453.) Dicit, De
consignandis infantibus manifestum est non ab alio, quam ab Episcopis fieri
licere: Nam Presbyteri licet sint Sacerdotes, Pontificatus tamen apicem non
habent, etc. And for how many one Bishop can do this with all his other work
also, you may judge.

XXIII. (To look back,) Council. Carthag. 2. Can 3. decrees, [Chrismatis
confectio, and puellarum consecratio a Presbyteris non fiant: Vel reconciliare
quenquam in publica missa, Presbytero non licere.] (Crab. page 424.) But this
being an ordinary public work, this supposes the Bishop still present in
every Church to do it, and to have a Church no more numerous than he could do
it for: whereas if Discipline were but moderately exercised according to the
ancient Canons, there could not be fewer than many hundreds in a day for the
Bishop either to excommunicate or absolve in this Diocese where I live, Leg.
Albaspin. Not. page 268. And the fourth Can. fortifieth this by this exception,
Si quisquam in periculo fuerit constitutus and se reconciliari divinis
altaribus petierit, si Episcopus absens fuerit, debet utique Presbyter
consulere Episcopum, and sic periclitantem cum praecepto reconciliare. Where
note that reconciliari altaribus is the Phrase for being reconciled to the
Churches: And that no Presbyter might do it but in case of the persons danger,
the Bishops absence, and with the Bishops Command: Which still shows that the
Bishop was usually present. And as Albaspineus notes, a Presbyter might not do
it for a dying Man, till he had consulted the Bishop, and told him all the
case, and had his Command: Which supposes him near (for the man may be dead
before our Ministers can ride to the Bishop and have his Commission) and
supposes the Church to be but small.

XXIV. To make short, and leave no place for doubting, I will join several
Canons which decree that [No Man shall be a Clerk to two Churches, nor an Abbot
to two Monasteries, nor a Bishop to two Cities or Churches.]

So Council. Oecumen. Nic. 2. Can. 15. (in Bin. page 394.) Clericus ab hoc
deinceps tempore, in duabus Ecclesiis non collocetur. Ab ipsa enim domini voce
audivimus, non posse quenquam duobus dominis servire.

And Council. Chalcedon. Can. 10. juxta Dionys. Non licet Clericum conscribi in
duabus simul Ecclesiis. And though then the Can. 17. shows that there were
Singularum Ecclesiarum Rusticae Parochiae vel possessiones, yet these were but
like our Chapels, and not called Churches, but only the Bishop's Church. And
if the Secular Power made any place a City, it was thereupon to follow the
Secular Order. So of Abbots, Council. Venet. Can. 8. (in Crab, page 948.) no one
was to have two Monasteries; Vid. Council. Agath. Can. 38.

And Photius and Balsamon Nomocan. Tit. 1. cap. 20. page 21. Ne in una
Provincia duo Metropolitani, aut in una Civitate duo Episcopi, aut in duabus
Civitatibus unus Clericus -- Neque in duabus Civitatibus quis potest esse
Episcopus.] Excepting only (even then) Episcopum Tomensem: Ille enim reliquarum
Ecclesiarum Scythiae curam gerit, (Because the Christians were few, and from
under the Roman Power.) [Et Leontopolis Isauriae sub Episcopo Isauropolis est]
He adds, [Porro 35 Constable. tit. 3. l. 1. Cod. c. 3. etc. ait, [Eum qui
quamcunque veterem aut recens conditam civitatem, proprii Episcopatus jure,
aliove privilegio private, tametsi Principis permissu id faciat, infamia notat,
mulctatque bonis constitutio; ac simul inceptum irritum facit.] So that no City
new or old might be deprived of its Privilege of having a Bishop. Now seeing
Corporations and Market Towns are in the old sense Cities, and seeing Parish
Churches such as ours are true Churches (as Communities) how many Cities, and
how many hundred Churches have many Bishops now? He adds, Can. 15. ^onc. 7.
and says [Si non permittitur cuiquam in duabus Ecclesiis Clericum fieri, multo
magis praesul duo Monasteria non moderabitur; Quemadmodum neque unum caput duo
corpora. Therefore by parity of reason much less should one Churchman or
Bishop be the head of many hundred or a thousand Bodies, without any
subordinate Head or Bishop under him. Why may not an Abbot as well rule a
thousand Monasteries, per alios non Abbates, as a Bishop a thousand Churches
per alios non Episcop^s?

More Testimonies of Councils added to the former Chap. 5.
UPon the Review, finding some considerable Evidences from Councils before
omitted, some shall be here added.

1. The Roman Clergy called a Council at Rome, Bin. page 158. etc. says, that
in the Interregnum they had the charge of the Universal Church: and Cyprian
wrote to them as the Governors of the Church of Rome, when they had been a year
or two without a Bishop. And their Actions were not null.

2. A Carthage Council with Cyprian condemn even a dead man called Victor,
Cypr. l. 1. ^p. 66.
because by his Will he left one Faustinus a Presbyter the Guardian of his
Sons, and so called him off his Sacred Work to mind Secular things. Did this
favor of Bishop's Secular Power, Magistracy or Domination?

3. How came the Carthage Councils to have so many hundreds in so narrow a room
or space of Land, but that every (...) Corporation or big Town had a Bishop?
Anno 308. at a Carthage Council the very Donatists had two hundred and seventy
Bishops. And at Arles two hundred Bishops heard the Donatists Cause.

4. The Laodicean Council decreed, Can. 46. that the Baptized should learn the
Creed, and on Friday repeat it to the Bishops or Presbyters:] which implies
that a Bishop was present with every Church.

And Cap. 57. It is ordained that thenceforth [Bishops should not be ordained
in small Villages and Hamlets, but Visiters should be appointed them: But such
(Bishops) as had heretofore been there ordained should do nothing without the
Conscience of the City Bishop.] Which implies, 1. That every big Town had a
Bishop. 2. And Villages before.

5. Epiphanius, Haer. 68. page 717. etc. says, That Peter separated from
Meletius in the same room, and as Meletius went to the Mines, he made new
Bishops, and gathered new Churches; so that in several Cities there were two
(Bishops and Churches:) Which implies that they were Congregations for
Personal Communion.

6. The Nicene Council, cap. 8. allows Rural Bishops then in use, (whom
Petavius proves to have been true Bishops.)

7. Greg. Nazianz. page 528. etc. shows how Churches were enlarged and
changed when the strife began between Mea and Tua, Antiqua and Nova, Nobilior
and Ignobilior, Multitudine Opulentior aut Tenuior.

8. After Lucifer Calaritanus ordained Paulinus, Antioch had long two Bishops,
half being his Flock, and half cleaving to Meletius.

9. Nazianzen had in the great City of Constantinople but one of the small
Churches. (the Arians having the greater) till Theodosius gave him the greater:
And those Hearers he was Bishop over.

10. A Council at Capua ordered that both the Bishops Flocks in Antioch (under
Evagrius and Flavian) should live together in Love and Peace.

11. Many Cities tolerated Novatian Bishops and Churches among them, and often
many other Dissenters. Which shows that but part of the City were one Church.

12. The Council at Carthage (called the last by Binius) decreed that
[Reconciliation of Penitents (as well as Chrisme and consecrating Virgins) is
to be done only by the Bishops, except in great necessity: (For how many
Parishes can a Bishop do all this and all the rest of his Office?) And when
Christians were multiplied they that desired a Bishop where was none before,
might have one. But else aliud Altar is again forbidden to be set up.

13. Another Carthage Council decrees, Can. 15. That the Bishop have but vile
or cheap Household Stuff and a poor Table and Diet, and seek Authority or
Dignity by his Faith and desert of Life. Can. 19. That he contend not for
transitory things though provoked. Can. 23. That he hear no Cause but in the
presence of his Presbyters: else it shall be void that is sentenced without
them, unless confirmed by their presence. (Note, this being a constant work
required a constant presence: and it is not a selected Chapter of Presbyters
that is named: And must those of many hundred Parishes dwell in the City, or
travel thither for daily Causes of Offenders? etc.) Can. 28, and 30. Bishops
unjust Sentence void: and Judgment against the absent.

14. A Council at Agathum, Can. 3. says, [If Bishops wrongfully excommunicate
one, any other Bishop shall receive him:] Which implies that the wronged
person lived within reach of a Neighbor Bishop's Parish: For it does not bind
him to remove his Dwelling: And leave to go daily twenty or forty Miles to
Church is a small kindness.

And I have already cited, Can. 63. If any Citizens on the great Solemnities,
Easter, the Lord's Nativity or Whitsuntide, shall neglect to meet where the
Bishops are (seeing they are set in the Cities for Benediction and Communion)
let them for three Years be deprived of the Communion of the Church.] So that
even when Churches were enlarged, yet you see how great a part of them met in
one place.

15. Diverse Canons give the Bishop a third or fourth part of all the Church
Profits; And if those Churches had been as big as our Dioceses, it would have
been too much of all Conscience.

16. A Synod at Carpentoracte decreed, that the Bishop of the City shall not
take all the Country Parish Maintenance to himself: Which implies as the
former, that his Country Parish was small.

17. A Council at Orleance, Anno 540. decree, Can. 3. about ordaining a Bishop,
that [Qui praeponendus est omnibus, ab omnibus eligatur.] The Dioceses yet were
not so large, but that All met to choose.

18. So Council. Byzazen. says, it must be [By the Election of all.]

19. Another at Orleance, Anno 545. says, [No Citizen must celebrate Easter
out of the City, because they must keep the principal Festivities in the
presence of the Bishop, where the holy Assembly must be kept. But if any have a
necessity to go abroad, let him ask leave of the Bishop.] Here is but one City
Assembly, and Individuals must be known to the Bishop, and ask his leave to go
abroad.

And Can. 5. says, [A Bishop must be ordained in his own Church which he is to
oversee.] Which implies that he had but one Church and Country Chapels.

20. Another Orleance Council has the like, deposing all Bishops that come not
in by common consent: And requiring them both in their Cities and Territories
to relieve the Poor from the Church-House.] Let us have such Dioceses as the
Bishop can do this for, and we consent.

21. A Synod at Paris, Can. 8. says, [Let no Man be ordained a Bishop against
the Will of the Citizens, nor any but whom the Election of the People and
Clerks shall seek with plenary Will: None shall be put in by the Command of the
Prince.] etc.

22. King Clodoveus called a Synod at Cabilone, which Can. 10. decrees, [That
all Ordination of Bishops be null that was otherwise made than by the Election
of the Comprovincials, the Clerks, and the Citizens.]

23. The Constable. Trul. Can. 38. shows how the unhappy changes were made,
decreeing, [That whatever alteration the Imperial Power shall make on any City,
the Ecclesiastical Order shall follow it.] And so if the King will make every
Market Town a City, it shall have a Bishop: And if he will make but one or two
cities in a Kingdom, there shall be but one or two Bishops: And if he will make
one City Regent to others, that Bishop shall be so. Thus Rome, Constantinople,
etc. came by their Superiority. But Hierome tells us the contrary; that the
Bishop of Tanais, or any small City (like our least Corporations) was of equal
Church-Dignity with Rome (or the greatest.)

24. The same Council, Can. 78. repeateth that, [All the Illuminate (that is,
Baptized) must learn the Creed, and every Friday say it to the Bishop and
Presbyters.] I hope they did not go every Friday such a Journey as Lincoln,
York, or Norwich Diocese, (no nor the least in England) would have put them to;
nor that the Bishop heard as many thousands every Friday, as some of ours by
that Canon should have heard.

25. Anno 693. at a Toletane Council, King Egica writes a Sermon for them, and
therein tells them, that [Every Parish that has twelve Families must have
their proper Governor (not a Curate that is no Governor.) But if it be less, it
must be part of another's Charge.]

26. Anno 756. Pipin called a Council in France, whose Can. 1. is, that [Every
City must have a Bishop.] And (as is beforesaid) every Corporate Town was a
City.

27. In the Epitome of the old Canons sent by Pope Adrian to Carolus Magnus,
published by Canisius, the eighth Antioch Canon is, [Country Presbyters may not
give Canonical Epistles, but the Chorepiscopi.] By which it appears that the
Chorepiscopi were Bishops, as Petavius proves (in Epiphan. Arrius.)

And Can. 14, 15. That [No Bishop be above three Weeks in another City, nor
above two Weeks from his own Church.] Which intimates that he had one single
Church.

And Can. 19. That when a place wants a Bishop, he that held them must not
proudly hold them to himself, and hinder them from one; else he must lose that
which he has.

28. The same Canons say (Can. 94.) If a Bishop, six Months after Admonition of
other Bishops, neglect to make Catholics of the people belonging to his Seat,
any other shall obtain them that shall deliver them from their Heresy.] So
that, 1. The Churches were not so big but that there might be diverse in one
Town. 2. And converting the People is a better Title, than Parish Bounds.

29. It is there also decreed, [That no Bishop ordain or judge in another's
Parish: else it shall be void:] And they forbid [Foreign Judgments, because it
is unmeet that he should be judged by Strangers, who ought to have Judges of
the same Province chosen by himself.] But our Diocesanes are Strangers to
almost all the People, and are not chosen by them. See the rest.

Also another is, that every Election of Bishops made by Magistrates be void:
yea, all that use the Secular Magistrate to get a Church must be deposed, and
separated, and all that join with him: Also if any exact Money; or for
affection of his own, drive any from the Ministry, or segregate any of his
Clergy, or shut the Temple.

30. A Council at Chalone under Carol. Magn. the Can. 15. condemns
Archdeacons that exercise Domination over Parish-Presbyters, and take Fees of
them: as matter of Tyranny, and not of Order and Rectitude. And Can. 13. says,
[It is reported of some Brethren (Bishops) that they force them whom they are
about to ordain to swear that they are worthy, and will not do contrary to the
Canons, and will be obedient to the Bishop that ordains them, and to the
Church in which they are ordained: Which Oath, because it is very dangerous we
all agree shall be forbidden.] By which it appears that, 1. The Dioceses were
not yet so large as to need such subordinate Governors as ours have: Nor 2.
Were Oaths of Canonical Obedience to the Bishop and Church yet thought lawful,
but forbidden as dangerous.

31. A Council at Aquisgrane, under Ludov. Pius, wrote an excellent Treatise
gathered out of the Fathers, to teach Bishops the true nature of their Office,
which has much to my present use, but too long to be recited.

32. Upon Ebbos Flight that deposed Lud. Pius, the Archbishopric of Rhemes
was void ten Years, and ruled by two Presbyters, Fulk and Hotho: who were not
then incapable of governing the Flock: but it is not like that they governed
Neighbor Bishops.

33. Canisius tells us of a Concilium Regiaticinum, and Can. 6. is, [That the
Arch-Presbyter examine every Master of a Family personally, and take account of
their Families and Lives, and receive their Confessions: And Can. 7. That a
Presbyter in the absence of the Bishop may reconcile a Penitent by his Command,
etc.] Which show that yet Dioceses were not at the largest.

34. A Council at Papia, Anno 855. order yet, [That the Clergy and People choose
the Bishops: and yet that the Laity on pretense of their electing power trample
not on the Arch-Presbyter, and that Great Men's Chapels empty not Churches.

35. Yea, Pope Nicholas, Tit. 8. c. 1. decrees that no Bishops be ordained but
by the Election or Consent of the Clergy and People.] When they became
incapable of the ancient Order, yet they kept up the words of the old Canons.

36. This is intimated in the old Canons repeated at a Roman Council, Anno 868.
[That if Bishops excommunicate any wrongfully, or for light Causes, and not
restore them, the Neighbor Bishops shall take such to their Communion till the
next Synod:] Which was the Bishop of the next Parish or Corporation, and not
one that dwelt in another County out of reach.

And Can. 72. Because the Bishops hindered by other business, cannot go to all
the Sick, the Presbyters (or any Christians) may anoint them. How big was the
Diocese when this Canon was first made? Who would give his business, rather
than Distance, and Numbers, and Impossibility, as the reason why the Bishop of
London, Lincoln, Norwich, etc. visit not all the Sick in their Dioceses?

37. Anno 869, till 879. was held a Council called General at Constantinople.
The Can. 8. is, [Whereas it is reported that not only the Heretical and
Usurpers, but some Orthodox Patriarchs also, for their own security have made
men subscribe, (that is, to be true to them) the Synod judges that it shall be
so no more; save only, that Men when they are made Bishops be required as usual
to declare the soundness of their Faith: He that violateth this Sanction, let
him be deprived of his Honor.]

But these later instances only show the Relicts of Primitive Purity and
Simplicity, more evidently proved in the three first Centuries.

38. And he that will read the ancient Records of the Customs of Burying, will
thence perceive the extent of Churches: Doctor Tillesly (after cited) affirms
(page 179. against Seldom) that The Right of Burial place did first belong to
the Cathedral Churches:] And Parish Churches began so lately (as now
understood, having no Bishops, and distinct from Cathedrals) that they could
not be there buried, before they were built and in Being; which says Seldom,
began in England seven hundred years after Christ; here one and there one, as a
Patron erected it: Seldom of Tithes, page 267. Yea, in seven hundred he finds
but one of Earl Puch in Beda; and in Anno 800. diverse appropriate to Crowland;
and so after. And it was the Character of a Parish Church to have Baptisterium
and Sepulturam, (page 262.) So that before a Bishop's Church however called,
had but one place that had Baptisterium and Sepulturam: Yea, long after that
Parishes, had very few Members in most places, so long was it ever the People
were brought to Christianity: And they were then, as our Bishops make them now,
not proper Churches, but Chapels of Ease. Seldom, (ibid. page 267.) tells you
that Ralph Nevil Bishop of Chichester and Chancellor of England requested of
the King that the Church of Saint Peter in Chichester might be pulled down, and
laid to another Parish, because it was poor, having but two Parishioners. Sure
it was never built for two Persons: But it is like many were Heathens: Or if not
so then, in the Years 700 and 800 they were so, (Though Master Thomas Jones
has well proved that the British Churches were far extended before Gregory
sent Austine, and that our Bishops and Religion are derived from them:) Even at
Tours in France in the days of Saint Martin, notwithstanding all his Miracles,
the Christians were not so many as the Heathens, at least till one public
Miracle toward his later time convinced some.

CHAP. VI. The same further confirmed by the Ancients.
I. EUsebius Demonstrat. Evangel. page 138. says, [When he considered the
Power of Christ's Word, how it persuaded innumerable Congregations of Men, and
by those Ignoble and Rustic Disciples of Jesus, (...) numerosissimae Ecclesiae
were constituted, not in certain unknown and obscure places, but erected in the
most famous Cities, (Rome, Alexandria and Antioch) through all Egypt and Lycia,
through Europe and Asia, (...) -- in Villages and Countries or Regions and all
sorts of Nations.] By this it appears that Villages had Churches then.

II. Though of later date, consider the History of Patrick's Plantation of
Churches in Ireland: who is said himself in his own time to have three hundred
sixty five Churches, and as many Bishops, and three thousand Presbyters; as
Ninius reports. Not only Thorndike takes notice of this, but a better
Author, Usher de Eccles. Brit. Primord. pa. 950. And Seldom in his Comment on
Eutychius Origines Alex. page 86. from Antoninus and Vincentius, thus
mentions it, [Certe tantum in orb terrarum tunc temporis Episcoporum segetem
mirari forsan desinet, quisquis crediderit, quod de B. Patricio Hibernensi
Antoninus and Vincentius tradunt; Eum scilicet solum Ecclesias fundasse 365.
totidemque Episcopos ordinasse, praeter Presbyterorum 3000. Qua de re consulas
plura apud praestantissimum virum Jacobum Usserium, etc.] So that here was to
every Church a Bishop and near ten Presbyters. (No Man will doubt but the
Bishops themselves were taken out of the better sort of the Laity, and the
Presbyters of the second sort; and all below many private Christians now among
us.) And were there three hundred sixty five Cities think you in Ireland? Yea,
or Corporations either? It Is easy to conjecture what Churches these were.

III. All History, Fathers, and Councils consent, that every City was to have a
Bishop and Presbytery to govern and teach the Christians of that City and the
Country people near it; which is but a Parish or Presbyterian Church. For the
word (...) signifies in the old common use, any big Town, yea little Towns
that were distinct from Country Farms and scattering Villages: so that all our
Corporations and Market Towns are Oppida and such Cities as (...) signified.
Therefore even by this Rule we should have a Bishop to every such Town.

1. Crete was called Hecatompolis, as having an hundred Cities, as Homer says
it had. And what kind of Cities were those? Which were to have an hundred
Churches and Bishops (in a small Island?)

2. Theocritus Idyl. 13. de laudibus Ptolem. verse. 82. says, that he had under
his Government thirty three thousand three hundred and thirty (...), Cities:
And if so, they must be as small as our Boroughs, if not some Villages:
certainly he had not above twice the number of Cities eminently so called that
Stephanus Byzantinus could find in the whole World, in his Book, (...).

3. He that will peruse and compare the Texts in the New Testament that Tit. 1.
5. Ordain Elders in every City.
use the word (...) (above sixscore times) and see Grotius on Luke 7. 11. etc.
shall soon see that the word is there used for such Towns as I am mentioning,
if not less.

IV. Sozomen, lib. 5. cap. 3. tells us, that Majuma which was Navale Gazae,
being as part of its Suburbs, or the adjoining part but twenty Stadia distant,
was, because it had many Christians, honored by Constantine with the name of a
City, and had a Bishop of their own. And Julian in malice took from them the
honor of being a City, but they kept their Bishop for all that. It had the
same Magistrate with Gaza, and the same Military Governors, and the same
Republic; but was diversified only by their Church State. For, says he, each
had their own Bishop, and their own Clergy, and the Altars belonging to each
Bishopric were distinct: And therefore afterward the Bishop of Gaza labored
to subject the Clergy of Majuma to himself, saying, that it was unmeet that one
City should have two Bishops: But a Council called for that purpose, did
confirm the Church-Right of Majuma.

V. Gregory Neocaesariensis called Thaumaturgus, was by force made Bishop of
that City, where all the Christians were but seventeen at his Ordination: such
was the Bishop's Church. And when he had preached and done Miracles there till
his Persecution, there is no mention of any Presbyter he had with him; but of
his Deacon Musonius that fled with him. (Though when he died he left but
seventeen unconverted.)

And when he had converted some at Comana, a small Town near him, A Village,
says Eusebius. l. 5. c. 16. Vid. Baron. an. 233. n. 10.
he did not set a Presbyter over it, and make it part of his own Diocese, but
appointed Alexander (the Collier) to be their Bishop; and that over a Church
who were no more than met and debated the Case of his Election and Reception.
See Greg. Nyssen. in Orat. in Greg. Thaumat. and Basil de Spirit. Sancto, cap.
19. and Breviar. Roman. die 15 November. and Menolog. Graec.

VI. Council. Nic. Oecum. 1. Can. 13. decrees that every one that before death
desires the Sacrament, was to have it from the Bishop: One Ed. in Crab says,
Generaliter omni cuilibet in exitu posito, and poscenti sibi Communionis
gratiam tribui, Episcopus probabiliter ex oblatione dare debebit. The other Ed.
says, [Et cura and probatio sit Episcopi.] We are content that the Diocese be
as great as the Bishop will perform this for, to examine all such dying men,
and give them the Sacrament, or send it them after his distinct Examination.

VII. Gregor. Nazianz. Epist. 22. page 786. To. 1. persuading the Church of
Caesarea to choose Basil for their Bishop, sends his Letters to the
Presbyters, the Monks, the Magistrates, and the whole Laity.] And though I
doubt not but by that time there were Country Congregations, by this the
magnitude of the City Church may be gathered, where the whole Laity could be
consulted, and could choose.

And Basil made this Gregory his chief friend Bishop of Sasimis, a small poor
dirty Town: And yet Gregory himself it seems had in some near Village a
Chorepiscopus with Presbyters and Deacons; as in Glycerius his Case appears,
Epist. Greg. 205. page 900, 901.

And Nazianzum where he played the Bishop under his Father (two Bishops at once,
one in Title, the other in Practice without Title) was but a small Town.

VIII. Basil an Archbishop was so much against enlarging Dioceses, and taking
in many Churches to one Bishop, that he takes the advantage of the difference
between him and Anthymius to make many Bishops more in his Diocese over small
places: yea, it seems some places were so small as that they never before had
any Pastors at all: as appears by Gregory Nazianzene, Epist. 28.

IX. Theodoret tells us, lib. 4. cap. 20. Hist. Eccles. that even in the great
Alexandria the Presbyters and Deacons were all but nineteen when Lucius came to
banish them to Heliopolis, a City of Phoenicia; which City had not one
Christian in it. By which it appears, that even then under Christian
Emperors, Christianity was not received by the multitude, when some Cities had
not a Christian.

X. Theodor. ib. l. 4. c. 16. says, that when Eulogius and Protogenes, the
Presbyters of Edessa, were banished to Antionone in Thebais, they found the
most of the people Heathens, and but few of the Church; yet had that little
number a Bishop of their own.

XI. Id. l. 4. c. 20. In Peter Bishop of Alexandria's Epistle (wherein he
shows such actions then done by the Soldiers in scorn of the Godly,
proclaiming Turpitude not to be named under the name of scornful Preaching, as
have been done by others lately among us) it is said of Lucius, [Qui parts lupi
nequitia and improbe factis agere impense studebat, quique Episcopatum, non
consensu Episcoporum O^thodoxorum in unum convenientium, non suffragiis vere
Clericorum, non postulatione Populi, ut sacri Ecclesiae Canones praescribunt.]
So that great Patriarch himself was chosen Postulatione Populi, as showing the
custom of all the Churches; which beginning when the people were but one
Congregation, continued as it could in some degree when they came like a
Presbyterian Church (for even then it was no otherwise) to have many
Congregations.

XII. Id. c* 22. says that [Valens found the Orthodox even in the great
Patriarchal City of Antioch, in possession but of one Church, which good
Jevinian the Emperor had given them; of which he dispossessed them. And when
they met afterward to worship God at a Hill near the City, Valens sent to
disturb them thence.] And Cap. 23. Flavianus and Diodorus Presbyters (Meletius
the Bishop being banished) led them to a River side, where they congregated,
till they were thence also driven by the Emperor. And Flavianus when he could
not preach, collected M^tter, Reasons and holy Sentences, (as Sermon-Notes) for
others to preach (in the Gy^nas^^^ Bellicum) where they resolved to meet
whatever came on it. Then Aphraates a Monk taught them, and when Valens told
him that Monks must pray in private, and not preach in public, Aphraates told
the Emperor that he had set the House of God our Father on fire, and troubled
the Church, and therefore he was called to its public help (to show how far
they obeyed a silencing Emperor.) By all which it appears that even then the
Orthodox Patriarchal Church of Antioch was but one Assembly which met in one
only place at once.

XIII. Id. l. 4. c. 29. When Teren^ius the Emperor's victorious General, (being
Orthodox) was bid by the Emperor to ask what he would of him as a Reward, he
asked but One Church for the Orthodox, and was denied it, which intimates
their numbers.

XIV. Dolicha where Eusebius made Maris Bishop, was parvum Oppidum, a little
Town (and infected with Arianism,) where an Arian Woman killed Eusebius with a
Tile when he went to ordain Maris Bishop. Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 4.

XV. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 16. tells us that Apollonius says of
Alexander a Montanist Bishop, that the Congregation whereof he was Pastor,
because he was a Thief, would not admit him.] By which it appears that his
Church was but one Congregation.

And l. 7. c. 29. The Synod of Antioch say of Dionysius Alexandr, that he wrote
not to the person of Paulus Samosatenus; but to the whole Congregation (that
is, his Church.) And they say [He licensed the Bishops and Ministers of the
adjoining Villages and Cities to preach to the People.] Which shows what
Dioceses and Churches then were.

XVI. Socrates, l. 1. c. 8. tells us that Spiridion was at the same time a
Bishop and a Shepherd.] And whether his Parish was one Church or many hundred
you may easily judge, when so holy a Man could spare time all the Week to keep
his sheep.

XVII. When Constans the Emperor affrighted Constantius to restore Athanasius,
Constantius craved of Athanasius that the Arrians in Alexandria might have one
Church to themselves: Athanasius told him, It was in his power to command and
execute; but craved also a request of him, which was that in all Cities there
might also be one Church granted for them that communicated not with the
Arrians: But the Eastern Arrian Bishops hearing that, put off the decision of
both the Requests.] By which a willing person may conjecture at the quantity of
the Episcopal Churches in those times.

XVIII. Even in Ambrose's days the great Church of Milan was no greater than
could meet in one Temple to choose a Bishop: And Ambrose was chosen by them.
Socrat. l. 4. c. 25.

And Baronius, in Vita Ambrosii ex Paulino, says, (page 9.) [Quod solitus erat
circa Baptizandos solus implere, quinque postea Episcopi tempore quo decessit
vix implerent.] What then was all the rest of his work? and how many Churches
could he thus oversee?

And the Arrians, for whom the Emperor made all that stir with Ambrose, were so
few in Milan, that when the Emperor would have had one Church for them, and
could not get it by fair means or force, Ambrose thus jesteth at the Empress
and the Arrian Goths; Quibus ut olim plaustrum seeds erat, it a nunc plaustrum
Ecclesia est; Quocunque foemina illa processerit, secum suos omnes coetus
vehit.] Her Coach is their Church; and which way soever she goes, she carries
all her Congregations with her.

Ambros. de Offic. To. 4. c. 1. shows that teaching his Church is the
Bishop's Office: And de initiandis, c. 2. p. 163. To. 4. he says to the
baptized person, [Vidisti illic (in Sacrario) Levitam, vidisti Sacerdotem,
vidisti summum Sacerdotem] In which he intimates that the Bishop (as the Chief
Priest) was present in the Church with his Presbyters at Baptizings. Which
shows that they had not a multitude of Churches without Bishops. And de
Sacram. l. 1. c. 1. how the Bishop himself must touch with Oil the Nostrils of
all that were baptized, with other Ceremonies after mentioned, shows that he
was usually present at every Baptism.

And de Sacram. l. 3. c. 1. he gives the reason why he did wash the Feet of
all that were baptized, and the Church of Rome did not, Vide ne forte propter
multitudinem declinarit.] [Perhaps they decline it because of the multitude.]
But all the Diocese of Milan (as a Bishopric, not as an Archbishopric) had
no such multitudes, but that besides all his other work, Ambrose could have
time to wash the feet of every one that was baptized.

And cap. 3. Ecclesiae contuitu and consideratione te ipse commenda -- The
Church was present then. And to show by his work what his Church was, he
celebrated the Sacrament daily: Accipe quotidie quod quotidie tibi prosit: sic
vive ut quotidie merearis accipere: Qui non meretur quotidie accipere, non
meretur post annum accipere.

And how he discharged all this you may perceive, de Dignit. Sacerdot. cap. 3.
Episcopus non aliud nisi Episcopalia opera designat, ut ex bono opere magis
quam professione noscatur, plus meritis esse Episcopum quam quod nomine
vocitetur. Quia sicut nihil esse diximus Episcopo excellentius, sic nihil est
miserabilius si de sancta vita Episcopus periclitetur; si Sacerdos in crimine
teneatur. (He thought not as too many now do, that the Name and Seat of Bishop
or Priest can do more to hallow Persecutions, Worldliness and other Crimes,
than the Crimes can do to unhallow the Bishop or Priest.)

And lib. 5. To. 4. page 180. having mentioned [The Husband of one Wife,] he
adds, [Si vero ad altiorem sensum conscendimus, inhibet, duas usurpare
Ecclesias.] A Bishop must no more have two Churches than a Husband have two
Wives. But some Bishops imitate Solomon's Lust rather than his Wisdom, and will
have above a thousand Churches, as Wives or Concubines.

Adding, Qui stipendiis tantum contentus Ecclesiae suae, penitus non ambiat
quae novit esse superflua. Covetousness has enlarged Dioceses.

And cap. 5. Cum dominatur populis, and anima servit Daemoni. When he Lords it
over the people, his own Soul is a Slave to the Devil.

And cap. 6. page 18. Nam quid aliud interpretatur Episcopus nisi
superinspector? Maxim cum solio editiore in Ecclesia resideat ut ita cunctos
respiciat, ut and cunctorum oculi in ipsum respiciant.] So that it is from the
oversight of one Congregation where he sits among and above the Presbyters,
that he is called a Bishop, and not from Churches which he overseeth indeed,
but sees not, and might well be said to be an Overseer in our vulgar sense, as
it signifies one that overlooketh or observes not, were he, as many now.

And of so small a place as Forum Cornelii, instead of committing it to a
subject Presbyter, he says, (Epist. 63. p. 111. ad Constant. Arausicorum
Episcopum) Commendo tibi fili Ecclesiam, quae est ad forum Cornelii, quo came de
proximo invisas frequentius, donec ei ordinetur Episcopus.

And page 117. Ad Eccles. Vercellens. post obitum Eusebii Epist. he writes to
them thus to choose another, Quanto magis ubi plena est in nomine domini
Congregatio; ubi Universorum Postulatio congruit, dubitare vos nequaquam
oportet, ibi dominum Jesum and voluntatis authorem, and petitionis arbitrum
fore, and ordinationis praesulem, vel largitorem gratiae.] So that this famous
Church was no greater than that all the people could meet and agree in the
Choice or Postulation of a Bishop.

So To. 4. de Poenitent. l. 5. c. 15. Tota Ecclesia suscipit onus peccatoris
cui compatiendum and fletu, and oratione and dolor est. By which it seems that
all the Church (that is, so great a part as might be called all) was used to be
present each meeting when Penitents lamented their sin.

And in To. 3. p. 183. in 1 Cor. 11. he says, that the Angels before whom the
Women in the Church must be veiled, are the Bishops as God's Vicars?] which
intimates that ordinarily every Church-Assembly was to have a Bishop present.

And ibid. Hoc notat qui sic in Ecclesiam conveniebant, ut munera sua
offerentes advenientibus Presbyteris, quia adhuc rectores Ecclesiis non omnibus
locis fuerant constituti, etc. And p. 161. in Romans 1. 2. Propterea Ecclesiae
scribit, quia adhuc singulis Ecclesiis Rectores non erant instituti. By which
you may conjecture what he thought of the magnitude of Churches then.

Tom. 3. p. 89. He so far acknowledges the People to have elected him, that he
calls them on that account his Parents, who in other respects were his
Children, (in Luke 18.) Vos mihi estis Parents, qui Sacerdotium tulistis: Vos
inquam Filii, vel Parents: Filii singuli, Universi Parents. (Like Hooker's
Singulis Major, Universis Minor.) Where you see, that the whole Church (and not
a thousandth part) did choose him Bishop.

And To. 3. p. 180. in 1 Cor. 14. Verum est, quia in Ecclesia (that is in every
Church) Unus est Episcopus (not in hundreds of Churches.) For he says, ibid.
in 1 Cor. 12. Et quia ab uno Deo Patre sunt omnia, singulos Episcopos singulis
Ecclesiis praeesse decrevit.] He decreed that there should be to every Church a
several Bishop.

When I cite all this of the state of that famous Church of Milan; where the
Emperor himself did often reside, and which presumed to differ in Customs from
Rome, I leave you to gather how it was before Christian Emperors, and in all
the ordinary Churches.

XIX. Augustine was chosen by the people, and brought to the Bishop to be
ordained. Vit. cap. 4. And cap. 5. Valerius the Bishop gave him power to preach
before him contrary to the use of the African Churches, but according to the
custom of the Eastern Churches.] Which shows that Augustine while Presbyter
(and so other Presbyters ordinarily) was in the same Congregation with the
Bishop, and not in another. And upon this other Churches took up the same
custom.

And cap. 21. it is said, [In Ordinandis Sacerdotibus and Clericis Consensum
majorem Christianorum, and consuetudinem Ecclesiae sequendam esse arbitrabatur:
-- And cap. 25. Cum ipso semper Clerici una etiam domo and mensa, sumptibusque
communibus alebantur, and vestiebantur. Yea, he ordered just how many Cups in a
day his Clergymen with him should drink; and if any swear an Oath he lost one
of his Cups. (Through God's Mercy sober Godly Ministers now need no such Law.)
By this it evidently appears that the Church which he and his Presbyters
ruled, was not many hundred, but one* Congregation, or City-Church: There being
no mention of any Country Presbyters that he had elsewhere, as far as I
remember.

And when Augustine was dying, the People with one consent, accepted of his
choice of Eradius to be his Successor; Epist. 110. page 195. To recite all that
is in Austin's Works intimating these Church-limits, would be tedious.

XX Epiphanius's Testimony I have before mentioned, as produced by Petavius,
that there were few Cities, if any besides Alexandria in those Countries that
had more than one Congregation; and particularly none of his own. And Doctor
Hammond trusts to him and Irenaeus to prove that the Apostles settled single
Bishops in single Congregations in many places without any Sub-Presbyters.

XXI. Socrates, l. 5. c. 21. says, [The Church of Antioch in Syria is situate
contrary to other Churches: for the Altar stands not to the East, but to the
West.] Which Speech implies that (besides Chapels if any) there was but one
Church that was notable in Antioch; while he calls it [The Church at
Antioch,] without distinction from any other there.

XXII. Socrates, l. 7. c. 3. tells us a notable story of Theodosius Bishop of
Synada, who went to Constantinople for Power to persecute Agapetus the
Macedonian Bishop in that City. But while he was absent Agapetus turned
Orthodox, and his Church and the Orthodox Church joined together, and made
Agapetus Bishop, and excluded Theodosius: who made his Complaint of it to
Atticus the Patriarch of Constantinople (a wise and peaceable Man) who desired
Theodosius to live quietly in private, because it was for the Churches good.]
(May such causes often have such decisions, and Lordly troublesome Prelates such
success.) By which story you may guess how many Congregations both Parties made
in Synada.

XXIII. Socrates, l. 7. c. 26. tells us that Sisinnius was chosen Bishop of
Constantinople by the Laity against the Clergy. And cap. 28. Sisinnius sent
Proclus to be Bishop of Cyzi^um; but the People chose Dalmatius and refused
him.] And this custom of the People's Choice, must needs rise at first from
hence, that the whole Church being but one Congregation was present: For what
Right can any one Church in a Diocese have to choose a Bishop for all the rest,
any more than the many hundred that are far off, and incapable to choose?

XXIV. Sozomen's Testimony (even so late) is very observable; lib. 7. cap. 15.
who mentioning the differences of the East and West about Easter, and inferring
that the Churches should not break Communion for such Customs, says, [Frivolum
enim and merito quidem judicarunt, consuetudinis gratia a se mutuo segregari
eos qui in praecipuis Religionis capitibus consentirent: Neque enim easdem
traditiones per omnia similes in omnibus Ecclesiis quamvis inter se
consentientes, reperire posses.] And he instanceth in this, [Etenim per
Scythiam cum sint Civitates multae, unum d^ntaxat hae omnes Episcopum habent (I
told you the reason of this Rarity before) Apud alias vero nationes reperias
ubi and Pagis Episcopi ordinantur: Sicut apud Arabes and Cyprios ego comperi.]
He speaks of his own knowledge: No wonder then if Epiphanius be to be
interpreted as Petavius does, when in Cyprus not only the Cities had but one
Church, but also the Villages had Bishops. To these he adds the Novatians and
the Phrygian Montanists. And let none think their instances inconsiderable. For
the Montanists were for high Prelacy, even for Patriarchs, as in Tertullian
appears. And the Novatians were for Bishops, and had many very Godly Bishops,
and were tolerated by the Emperors even in Constantinople, as good People and
Orthodox in the Faith: And Novatus was martyred in Valerian's Persecution, as
Socrates, l. 4. c. 23. says.

XXV. Even Clemens Roman. or whoever he was that wrote in his name, Epist. 3.
shows that Teaching the People is the Bishop's Office, and concludes (in
Crab, p. 45.) Audire (Episcopum) attentius oportet and ab ipso suscipere
doctrinam fidei; Monita autem vitae a Presbyteris inquire, a Diaconis vero
ordinem Disciplinae: By which Partition of Offices it is evident, that the
Bishop only and not the Presbyters then used to preach to the Church, and that
the Presbyters (though ejusdem ordinis, and not Lay Elders) used to instruct
the People personally, and give them Monita vitae: and that they were all in
one Church together, and not in several distant Churches.

XXVI. Paul himself tells us that Cenchrea had a Church, and the Scripture
says, They ordained Elders in every Church: And though Downame without any
proof obtrude upon us, that it was under the Bishop of Corinth, and had a
Presbyter of his to teach them; yet of what Authority soever (in other
respects) the Constitutions called Clements or the Apostles be, they are of
more than his in this; where lib. 7. cap. 46. in that old Liturgy, Lucius is
said to be Bishop of Cenchrea, ordained by the Apostles.

XXVII. Gennadius de viris illustr. l. 1. c. 10. says, that Asclepius was Vici
non grandis Episcopus, Bishop of a Village not great.

XXVIII. Says Cartwright, Four or five of the Towns which were Seats of the
Bishops of the Council. Carthag. which Cyprian mentions, are so inconsiderable
that they are not found in the Geographical Tables.

XXIX. And faith Altar Damascen. p. 294. Oppidum trium Tabernarum Velitris
vicinum was a Bishop's Seat for all the nearness and smallness of the Towns:
And Gregor. lib. 2. Epist. 35. laid the Relicts of the wasted Church to the
Bishopric of Veliterno.

Castrum Lumanum had a Bishop till Gregory joined it to Benevatus Bishop of
Micenas: (and so had many Castra ordinarily.)

Remigius did appoint a Bishop within his own Diocese when he found that the
number of persons needed it: Viz. apud Laudunum clavatum Castrum suae
Dioeceseos. Of Spiridion the Bishop of Trimithantis I spoke before.

XXX. Theoph. Alexand. Epist. Pasch. 3. in Bibl. Pat. To. 3. concludes thus,
[Pro defunctis Episcopis in locis singulorum constituti. In urbe Nichio pro
Theopempto Theodosius; In Terenuthide Aisinthius; In oppido Geras pro Eudaemone
Pirozus; In Achaeis pro Apolline Musaeus; In Athrivide pro Isidoro Athanasius;
In Cleopatride Offellus; In Oppido Lato, pro Timotheo Apelles. And the nearness
and smallness of some of these shows the Dioceses small.

The same Theoph. Alex. says, Epist. Canon. Can. 6. [De iis qui ordinandi sunt
haec erit forma, ut quicquid est Sacerdotalis ordinis consentiat and eligat,
and tunc Episcopus examinet, vel ei etiam assentiente Sacerdotali ordine in
media Ecclesia ordinet praesente populo, and Episcopo alloquente, an etiam
posset ei populus far testimonium: Ordinatio autem non fiat clanculum:
Ecclesia enim pacem habente decet praesentibus sanctis ordinationes fieri in
Ecclesia.] Undoubtedly, as Balsamon, notes by [Saints] is meant fideles, the
People. Here then you see that the Churches then were such where all the Clergy
were present with the Bishop, who ordained Ministers to a single Church where
all the people could be present to be consulted.

XXXI. In the Life of Fulgentius it is said, that Plebs ipsius loci ubi fuerat
Monasterium constitutum differ suam prorsus Electionem, donec inveniret B.
Fulgentium, cogitabat (where, the Bishops resolved to ordain, though the King
forbad it them.) And though the King persecuted them for it, it is added,
[Repleta jam fuerat Provincia Bizacena novis Sacerdotibus, and pene vix
paucarum plebium Cathedrae remanserant destitutae.] And the Phrase [plebium
Cathedrae] does signify a Bishop's Seat in one Congregation of People. One
Plebs was one Congregation; and had its proper Cathedram.

XXXII. Sozomen (after Socrates) mentioning the diversity of Church Customs (as
aforesaid) l. 7. c. 19. says, that at Alexandria the Archdeacon only reads
the Holy Scriptures, in other places only the Deacons, and in many Churches
only the Priests, and on solemn days the Bishops.] By which words it appears
that then every Church was supposed to have a Bishop, Priests and Deacons
present in their public Worship. For the Bishop on his solemn days could not
be reading in many Churches (much less many hundred) at once.

XXXIII. Histor. Tripartit. l. 1. c. 19. (out of Sozomen, l. 1. c. 14. Edit.
Lat. Basil. p. 1587.) tells us, how Arius seeks (as from the Bithynian
Synod) to Paulinus of Tire, Eusebius. Caesar. and Patroph. Scythopol. ut una cum
suis juberetur cum populo qui cum eo erat, solennia Sacramenta Ecclesiae
celebrare, -- Esse dicens consuetudinem in Alexandria (sicut etiam nunc) ut uno
existente super omnes Episcopo, Presbyteri scorsim Ecclesias obtinerent, and
populus in eis C^^^^ctas solemniter celebraret. -- ] [Tunc illi una cum aliis
Episcopis, etc.] By this (with what is said before out of Epiphanius) it is
undeniable that this (gathering of Assemblies by the Presbyters in the same
City, and administering the Sacrament to them besides the Church where the
Bishop was) was taken to be Alexandria's singularity, even as low as Sozomen's
time. And yet note that here is even at Alexandria no mention of many Churches
in the Countries at a distance, much less hundreds, thus gathered, but only of
some few in that great City. And if even in a great City, and in Epiphan. and
in Sozomen's days a Presbyter's Church was an Alexandrian Rarity, what need we
more Historical Evidence of the Case of the Churches in those times?

XXXIV. Ferrandus Diaconus, in Epist. de 5. Quaest. says to Fulgentius,
[Sanctos Presbyteros, Diaconos, beatamque Congregationem (which was his Church)
saluto.]

And that you may again see what Congregation or Church that was, In vita
Fulgentii, cap. 17. page 8. it is said, that the Plebs sought and chose him
(and that in despite of Foelix the ambitious Deacon, who sought the place, and
sought the life of Fulgentius.) Populus super suam Cathedram eum collocavit:
Celebrata sunt eodem die Divina solenniter Sacramenta, and de manibus Fulgentii
Communicans omnis populus laetus discessit.] And if in the noble City of Ruspe,
so late as the days of Fulgentius, the Bishop's Church Members were no more
than could choose him, set him on his seat, and all communicate that day at his
hands, it is easy by this to judge of most other Churches.

XXXV. Council. Parisiens. 1. (in Caranz. page 244. Can. 5.) says, [Nullus It
is the eighth Canon in Crab.
civibus invitis ordinetur Episcopus, nisi quem Populi and Clericorum Electio
plenissima quaesierit voluntate; Non principis imperio, neque per quamlibet
conditionem Metropolis voluntate Episcoporum Comprovincialium ingeratur. Quod
si per ordinationem Regiam honoris sui culmen pervadere aliquis nimia
temeritate praesumpserit, a Comprovincialibus loci ipsius Episcopis recipi
nullatenus mereatur, quem indebite assumptum agnoscunt. Siquis de
Comprovincialibus recipere eum contra indicta praesumpserit, sit a fratribus
omnibus segregatus, and ab ipsorum omnium Charitate remotus.] Here again you
see how late all the Church was to choose every Bishop; plenissima voluntate;
and consequently how great the Church was. And were this Canon obeyed, all the
people must separate from all the Bishops of England, as here all are commanded
to do from all those Bishops that do but receive one that is put in by the
King, and not by the free choice of all the Clergy and People of his Church.
Note that Crab (Vol. 2. page 144.) has it, [contra Metropolis voluntatem:] But
both that, and Caranza's Reading, who omitteth [contra] seem contrary to the
scope; and it is most likely that it should be read [Metropolis voluntate,
contra Episcoporum comprov.] scilicet voluntatem.

XXXVI. Leo 1. P. Romans Epist. 89. page (mihi) 160. damning Saint Hillary
Magisterially, yet says, [Expectarentur certe vota Civium, testimonia
populorum, quaereretur honoratorum arbitrium, Electio Clericorum, quae in
Sacerdotum solent ordinationibus, ab his qui norunt patrum regulas, custodiri,
ut Apostolicae authoritatis norma in omnibus servaretur, qua praecipitur ut
Sacerdos Ecclesiae praefuturus, non solum attestatione fidelium, etc. Et
postea, Teneatur subscriptio Clericorum, honoratorum testimonium, ordinis
consensus and Plebis: Qui praefuturus est omnibus, ab omnibus eligatur.] And
how great must that Diocese be, where all the Laity must choose and vote? etc.
It Is true that Epist. 87. c. 2. p. 158. he would not have little Congregations
to have a Bishop, to whom one Presbyter is enough; and no wonder at that time,
that this great Bishop of Rome, (the first that notably contended for their
undue Supremacy in the Empire) was of that mind; who also Epist. 88. says of
the Chorepiscopi, (Qui juxta Can. Neocaesar. sive secundum aliorum decreta
patrum iidem sunt qui and Presbyteri.) The falsehood of which being too plain,
Petavius in Epiphan. ad Haeres. 74. p. 278. judges that these words being in a
Parenthesis are irreptitious.) And ibid. Epist. 88. he says that by the Can.
all these things following are forbidden the Chorepisc. and Presbyter,
[Presbyterorum, Diaconorum, aut Virginum consecratio, sicut constitutio
Altaris, ac benedictio vel unctio: Siquidem nec erigere eis Altaria, nec
Ecclesias vel Altaria consecrare licet, nec per impositiones manuum fidelibus
baptizandis vel conversis ex haeresi Paracletum Spiritum Sanctum tradere, nec
Chrisma conficere, nec Chrismate Baptizatorum frontes signare, nec public
quidem in Missa quemquam poenitentem reconciliare, nec form^tas cuilibet
Epistolas mittere.] By which it appears how big that Man's Diocese must be,
who besides all his other work, must be present to sign every baptized person,
and reconcile every Penitent in every Congregation. And it is worth the noting
what kind of works they be that the Bishop's Office is maintained for.

XXXVII. From the great Church of Rome (at its first Tide time) let us look to
the great Church of Constantinople; even in the days of a better Bishop,
Chrysostom: Besides that they had long but one Temple, (of which anon)
Chrysostom says in 1 These. 5. 12. Orat. 10. (...) etc. Et primum debet
imperare and praeesse volentibus and lubentibus, qui ei gratiam habent quod
imperet, (p. 1472. and p. 1473.) Sacerdos in hoc suum contulit negotium: Nulla
est ei alia vita quam ut versetur in Ecclesia -- Qui Christum diligit,
cujusmodicunque sit Sacerdos eum diliget, quod per eum sit veneranda assecutus
Sacramenta; (And Doctor Hammond says, this Text speaks only of Bishops, 1
These. 5. 12.) Et ibid. [Pro te precatur, and dono quod per Baptismum datur tibi
inservit, visitat, hortatur and monet, and media nocte si vocaveris venit.] And
how many Parishes can a Bishop thus serve? And how many score miles will they
send and he go to visit the Sick at midnight?

And Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 14. p. 653. says, Conveniebant olim, omnes psallebant
communiter. Hoc nunc quoque facimus, (They had no separating Choristers) sed
tunc in omnibus erat una anima and cor unum: Nunc autem nec una quidem anima
illam concordiam videris and consensum; sed ubique magnum est Bellum. Pacem
nunc quoque precatur pro omnibus, is qui praeest Ecclesiae, ut qui in domum
ingreditur paternam, sed hujus pacis nomen quidem est frequens, res autem
nusquam. Tunc etiam domus erant Ecclesiae (though called Conventicles:) Nunc
autem Ecclesia est domus, vel potius quavis domo deterior. When Churches grew
to be Dioceses they grew worse than when they were in houses: But he that here
is said praeesse Ecclesiae is he also that pronounces Peace to them.

XXXVIII. Gregory Nyssen. speaking of the gathering of true Churches by
preaching, says (in Ecclesiast. Hom. 1. p. (mihi) 93.) [He is the true
Preacher, who gathers the dispersed into one Assembly, and brings those
together into one Congregation (or Convention) who by various Errors are
variously seduced.

XXXIX. He that reads impartially Beda's Ecclesiastical History shall find
that in England between six and seven hundred years after Christ they were but
single Churches that had Bishops: For indeed the famousest and holiest of them
in the Kingdom of Northumberland, were but Scots Presbyters, and such as were
sent by them without any Episcopal Ordination; (Aidan, Finan, etc.) And though
they did Apostolically preach in many places to convert the Heathen
Inhabitants, yet their Churches of Christians were small: yet presently the
Roman Grandeur and Ceremoniousness here prevailed, and so by degrees did their
Church-form. Yet says Cambden, Brit. ed. Frank. p. 100. When the Bishops at
Rome had assigned several particular Churches to several Presbyters, and had
divided Parishes to them, Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury about the Year
636. first begun to distribute England into Parishes, as is read in the
Canterbury History.] But it is plain in Beda, if he did then begin it, he went
but a little way with that division.

The same Cambden also tells us, that the Bishopric of York devoured seven
Bishoprics, and the Bishopric of Lincoln more, etc. Some Seats were but
removed, but many Bishoprics were dissolved and turned into one, which yet
were erected when Christians were fewer, says Isaackson Chronolog. There was
one at Wilton, the Sea at Ramesbury, one at Crediton, one at St. Patrick's at
Bodmin in Cornwall, and after at St. Germains, one at Selsey Island, one at
Dunwich, one at Helmham, and after at Thetford, one at Sidnacester or Lindis,
one at Osney, one at Hexham, etc. And at this day Landaff, St. Asaph's, Bangor,
St. David's are no Cities, where we have Bishops Seats, as notices of the old
way.

XL. Isidorus Peleusiota, lib. 1. Epist. 149. to Bishop Tribonianus distinctly
names the Bishop's Charge, and the calamity, if he be bad, that will befall
himself first, and then the whole Church: Himself for undertaking and not
performing, and the whole Church, (...) Quod hujusmodi viro Sacerdotium indigne
mandavit. The whole Church then was no bigger than to choose the Bishop and be
under his present inspection, as he intimates.

And Epist. 315. to Bishop Leontius; [If thou tookest on thee the care of the
Church, against thy Will, and art constrained by the Suffrages, and the
Contentions and Hands of the People, God will be thy helper. -- But if by Money
-- etc.

Lib. 3. Ep. 216. p. 342. He reckons up such and so much work as necessary
for a Bishop as no man living can do for above one ordinary Parish. And
frequently he describes the City and Congregation at Pelusium as the place
where the wicked Bishop and his wicked Priests together destroyed the interest
of true Religion.

XLI. I conclude this with the words of Eusebius with the Collection of
Papirius Massonus, a Writer of the Popes Lives. [Fabianus ab iis electus est ad
Episcopatum urbis: Ac forte evenit ut in locum ubi convenerant Columba, e
sublimi volans capiti ejus insideret, Id pro foelici signo accipientes magno
consensu and alacritate animorum ipsum elegerunt: Haec Eusebius, Hist. l. 6. Ex
quo loco collegimus Electionem Episcopi Romani, non ad paucos, sed ad omnes
olim pertinuisse. Pap. Masson. in vita Fabiani, fol. 18 col. 2.] And if all the
whole People of the great Church of Rome, were then no more than could meet in
one Room to choose their Bishop, what were the rest of the Churches in the
World? and how many Congregations did they contain?

CHAP. VII. More Proofs of the aforesaid Limits of Churches.
THe thing that we are proving is that every Bishop should have but one Church
(supposing him to be no Archbishop) and that this Church should be such and so
great only as that there may be personal Communion in public Worship and holy
Conversation between the Members: and not so great as that the Members have
only a Heart-Communion, and by Delegates or Synods of Officers.

As to our Historical Evidence of the matter of fact, it runs thus: 1. That in
the first state of the Churches, it cannot be proved that any one Church in all
the World consisted of more stated Communicating Assemblies than one, or of
more Christians than our Parishes. But though through Persecution they might be
forced (as an Independent Church now may do) to meet by parcels in several
Houses sometimes in a danger, yet their ordinary Meetings when they were free
was all together in one place: And Unum Altar was the note of their
Individuation, with Unus Episcopus, when Bishops grew in fashion in the eminent
sense.

2. That the first that broke this Order and had diverse Assemblies and Altars
under one Bishop were Alexandria and Rome, and no other Church can be proved to
have done so, for about three hundred Years after Christ or near; nor most
Churches till four hundred, yea five hundred Years after.

3. That when they departed from this Church temperament, they proceeded by
these degrees. 1. They set up some Oratories, or Chapels (as are in our
Parishes) which had only Prayers and Teachings without an Altar, Oblations or
Sacraments in the City, Suburbs or Country Villages near, the People coming for
Sacramental Communion to the Bishop's Church. 2. Afterward these Chapels were
turned into Communicating Churches: But so as that at first the Bishop's
Presbyters (who lived sometimes in the same House with him, and always near him
in the same City, and were his Colleagues) did preach and officiate to them
indifferently, that is, he whom the Bishop sent; and after that a particular
Presbyter was assigned to teach a particular Congregation; yet so, as that more
of the Bishop's Presbyters commonly had no such Congregations, but the most of
them still attended the Bishop in his Church, and sat with him on each hand in
a high raised Seat, and whilst he did usually preach and administer the
Sacrament, they did but attend him and do nothing, or but some by assisting
Acts: as Lay Elders do in the Presbyterian Churches; principally employed in
personal oversight, and in joining in Government with the Bishop. And those
same Presbyters who had Congregations, joined with the rest in their Weekly
Work, and made up the Consessus or College of Presbyters. 3. And next that (and
in some places at the same time) Communicating Congregations were gathered in
the Country Villages, so far off the City, as that it was found meet to leave a
Presbyter Resident among them; but under the Government of the City Bishop and
Presbytery, of whom he was one when he came among them. And all this while the
Churches were but like our greater Parishes which have diverse Chapels, where
there is liberty of Communicating. 4. After this when the Countries were more
converted, there were more Country Parish-Congregations set up; till they
attained the form of a Presbyterian Church, differing only in the Bishop; that
is, a certain number of the Neighbor Country Parishes in one Consistory (but
with a Bishop) did govern all these Parishes as one Church; that is, It was
many Worshipping Churches (as sis, eight, or ten, or twelve,) joining to make
up one governed Church. But at the same time many Pastors and People being
convinced of the Church-form which they had before been under, and of their own
necessity and privileges, did require the same Order among themselves as was in
City Churches, and so had their proper Bishops, who were called Chorepiscopi,
or Country Bishops. But these Country-Bishops living among the poorer and
smaller number of Christians, had not so many Presbyters to attend them as the
City-Bishops had: So that some Country Congregations had Bishops and some had
none. And the Churches being chiefly governed by the Synods, who met for
obliging Concord, to avoid Divisions, these Synods being made up of the
City-Bishops at first, they there carried it by Vote to make all the
Country-Bishops under them, and responsible to them: Which they the rather and
the easilier consented to, because many obscure and unworthy Fellows did
insinuate into the esteem of the Country-Christians, who had no Bishops near
them to advise them better; and so became the Corrupters of Doctrine, and the
Masters of Sects and Heresies.

By this time one part of the Country Churches had Bishops of their own, and
the other had none, but only Presbyters under the City-Bishops and Presbytery.
But yet it was but few Neighbour-Parishes, like our Market Towns and the
Villages between them that were thus under the City-Bishop. For every such Town
was then called a City in the larger sense as it signifies Oppidum, and most
such Towns had City-privileges too, which was no more than to be Corporations,
and not to have a Nominal Eminency, as now some small places have above greater
(as Bath rather than Plymouth, Ipswich, Shrewsbury, etc.)

Next to this, the Emperors being Christians, and desiring without force to
draw all the People from Heathenism to Christianity, they thought it the best
way to advance the Christians in worldly respects, which ever win on common
minds. And so they endued the Churches and Bishops with such Honors and Powers
heretofore described as were like to the Honor and Power of the Civil
Governors in their kind. And the Bishops being thus lifted up, did first
enlarge their own Dioceses as far as they could, and advance their Power; and
the World came unchanged into the Church, both in Cities and Villages, (where
the Christians were before so few, that many think the Heathens were called
Pagani in distinction from the Citizens, who were Christian.) And then the
Bishops put down the Chorepiscopi, as presuming too much to imitate their
Power: And next to that, lest every Corporation or Market Town having a Bishop,
their Dioceses should not be great enough, and ne vilesceret nomen Episcopi,
lest a Bishop's Name should not be honored enough, but become cheap by reason
of the number, and of the smallness of his Church, they first ordered that no
such small Cities or other places as had People enough for but one Presbyter,
should have a Bishop; and afterward by degrees put down many smaller Bishops
Churches, and joined them to their own: And so proceeded, by the advantage of
Civil Alterations on Cities Names and Privileges, to bring themselves to the
state that they are in, wherein one Bishop infimi ordinis (that is no
Archbishop) has many hundred or above a thousand Churches and multitudes of
Cities, called now but Corporations, Buroughs or Market Towns.

I have repeated so much of the History, lest the Reader forget what it is that
I am proving; and that he may note, that if I prove now that in later Ages they
kept but the Vestigia, or Relics of the former to prove how it was before
their times, and if I prove but a Church of Presbyterian Magnitude to have so
long continued, it suffices against that which we now call a Diocese: And that
we do not play with Names, nor by a Diocesane Church, mean the same thing with
a Parochial or Presbyterian; but we mean such as our Dioceses now are, where a
Bishop alone with a Lay-Chancellor's Court, or with some small help of an
Archdeacon, Surrogate, or Dean and Chapter, without all the Parish-Ministers
besides, does rule a multitude of distant Congregations, who have no proper
Bishop under him. And now I proceed.

I. The Chorepiscopi which were at first placed in Country Churches where were
many Christians, do show what extent the Churches were then of: That these were
really Bishops at first (whatever the aforesaid Parenthesis in Leo or Damasus
say) most Writers for Episcopacy, Papists and Protestants do now grant; and
therefore I may spare the labor of proving it: And whereas it is said that
they were but the Bishop's Deputies: I answer, even as Bishops are Vid.
Petavium, in Epip. haeres. 69. p. 276, 277, 278, etc. The chief Champion of
Prelacy strongly proves that the Chorepiscopi were true Bishops.
the Archbishops Deputies; that is, they were under them, but were really
Bishops themselves: For if a Bishop may depute one that is no Bishop to be his
Deputy, either a Presbyter also may depute one that is no Presbyter to
administer the Sacraments, or not. If yea, then Laymen shall come in and all
be levelled, (For a Deacon also may depute his Office.) If not, then either a
Bishop cannot do it, or else the Presbyter's Office is much holier than the
Bishop's.

And that these Chorepiscopi Country-Bishops were not such Rarities as to
invalidate my Proof, but very common, besides what is before said, is evident
by the Subscriptions of many Councils, where great store of Chorepiscopi are
found. And besides the names in our common Collections of the Councils, how it
was in the Egyptian and Neighbor Churches at least (if not how it was at Nice)
you may see in the Arabic Subscriptions published by Seldom in his Comment on
Eutych. Orig. Alex. page 93, 94, 95, etc. Number. 29, 31, 55, 64, 68, 119, 122,
128, 131, 179, 193, 215, 237, 241, 278. There are seventeen named. And the
Canons made to curb and suppress them, show that they were ordinary before; as,
Council. Laodic. Can. 57. But they should rather have increased them, that
Bishops might have multiplied as Churches or Christians increased, which was
decreed here in England in the cap. 9. of the Council at Hertford, per Theodor.
Cantuar. referente Beda, lib. 4. Hist. Eccles. cap. 5.

II. The very name Ecclesia which was first used before Parochi^ or Dioecesis,
and still continued to this day, does show what the form of a Church then was,
especially if you withal consider, that the name was communicated to the
Temples or sacred Meeting-Places, which are also ordinarily called Ecclesiae;
which no Man doubts was in a secondary sense, as derived from the People, who
were the Ecclesia in the primary sense. And so even in our Tongue, the word
Church is used for both to this day, as i^ is in many other Languages. Now it
is certain that a part, especially a small part, (a hundredth or a thousandth
part) of the Church is not the Church (unless equivocally.) Why then should the
Temple be so called from the Church, when no Church at all, but a Particle only
of a Church does meet there? (For that the word Church] in our Question is not
taken for any Community or Company of Christians, but for a governed Society
consisting of the governing and governed part, I have before showed.) But, 1. A
Church in its first and proper Notion being Coetus Evecatus, An Assembly, or
Convention or Congregation; (as distinguished from the Universal Church, which
is so called because it is called out of the World to Christ the Head, and with
him shall make one glorious Society,) how are those twenty or an hundred Miles
off, any more a part of the Assembly where I live, than those at the Antipodes
may be? If you fly to one Governor, I answer; 1. So the Pope claims a
Government at the Antipodes. 2. A Governor of many Assemblies may make them one
Society, as to Government, but not one Assembly.

2. And certainly when Temples were first named Churches, it was not because
those met there that were no Churches, but only Members of Churches: Nor is
this Parish Church called a Church because some meet here that belong to the
Church at Boston, Lincoln or Grantham; But to this day we cannot disuse our
selves from saying, the Church of Barnet, the Church of St. Albans, of
Hat^ield, etc. yea, in the same City, we denominate the several Temples still
several Churches.

Hesychius explaineth Ecclesia, by no other words than these three, (...),
which all signify the Meetings of the People, and not Men that never see each
other, only because one Man rules them.

Mr. Mede in his Exercitat. of Temples proves largely that the places of
Meeting are ordinarily by the Ancients called Churches, even in several
Centuries. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 1. says, in every City they built spacious and
ample Churches. And Theophil. Antiochen. Autol. says, [Sic Deus dedit mundo,
qui peccatorum tempestatibus and naufragiis jactatur, Synagogas, quas Ecclesias
sanctas nominamus, in quibus veritatis doctrina fervet, ad quas confugiunt
veritatis studiosi, quotquot salvari, Deique judicium and iram evitare volunt.]

So Tertullian, de Idololat. cap. 7. page 171. Tota die ad hanc partem zelus
fidei ingenuum Christianum ab Idolis in Ecclesiam venire, de adversaria
Officina in domum Dei venire, etc. The very Name there of a Church, and the
naming of a single Temple thence does signify our supposition.

III. To this I may add the Name and * Leg. Altar Dam. page 290. Says D.
Field, l. 5. c. 28. In Antiquity a Parish contained the Citizens, and all such
Borderers as dwelt near, and repaired to any chief Church or City: A Diocese
both then and now imports the Villages and Churches dispersed in diverse
places a^der the Regiment of one Bishop * Mark this t^^e use of the words,
against what Downame and others ^^etend.
Primitive Sense of (...). For it signifies a Vicinity, and Parochus Vicinus,
a Cohabitant or Neighbor, as well as inquilinus, and is used in all the
ancient Church-Writers as noting both a Sojourner (as Christians are in the
World) and a Neighbor, so constantly in this later sense, not excluding the
former. Else Men of several parts of the World might have been said to be
(...), because inquilini, had it not also and specially signified Vicinity. To
avoid tediousness of Citations, I refer the unsatisfied Reader but to Gers.
Bucer against Downam, and the Basil Lexicon of Henr. Pet. in the word (...).
And though the custom of calling a Church by the name (...) continued when the
Church was altered in magnitude to a large Diocese, yet that is so far from
proving that this was the first and old signification, as that the word rather
plainly leads us up to the thing and sense which first it signified. And
therefore to this day, Etymology teaches us more wit than in English to call a
Diocese a Parish, but only a Vicinity of Christians: And when the a Vicinity is
the English of the Word, why should Strangers that we shall never see or have
to do with, any more than those in the uttermost part of the Land, be called
our Parishioners or Neighbors?

IV. Another clear Evidence of the truth in question is the Paucity of Churches
(or consecrated Meeting-Places) for many hundred Years after Christ: both
before they were called Temples and after. Not that occasional Meeting-places
were few (Houses, Fields, etc.) but appropriated consecrated places called
Churches, where there were Altars, or ordinary Church Communion in the Lord's
Supper. (Or rather it is doubtful whether the name of Altars with the form were
introduced till two hundred Years after Christ, which makes some the more
question the Antiquity of Ignatius and Clem. Constable. and Can. Apost.) I yield to
Baronius (ad An. 57.) that the Christians had Churches, that is, places
consecrated for Church Assemblies, under those peaceable Emperors that went
before Dioclesian: For Eusebius (besides others) expressly tells us so:
Spaciosas and amplas construxerunt Ecclesias: But I desire the Reader to mark
his words. Lib. 8. cap. 1. [A man might then have seen the Bishops of all
Churches in great reverence and favor among all sorts of Men, and with all
Magistrates: Who can worthily describe those innumerable heaps and flocking
multitudes through all Cities and famous Assemblies frequenting the places
dedicated to Prayer? Because of which Circumstances, they not contented with
the old and ancient Buildings, which could not receive them, have through all
Cities builded them from the Foundation wide and ample Churches.] Here note, 1.
That here is no mention of any more Churches than one in each City: Cities and
Assemblies are numbered together. 2. That these Buildings are called Churches.
3. That these Churches were built greater than the old ones anew from the
Foundation, because the old ones were too narrow to contain the People: But not
superadded to the old ones. 4. That the Bishops are called The Bishops of all
Churches in relation to the same kind of Churches as are here described. So
that then a Bishop's Church met in one enlarged place.

Yet all these were no Temples; but such as the silenced Ministers have of late
built in some parts of London; for the Christians were in continual danger of
the demolishing of them: which fell out in Dioclesian's time. But till this
Calm which Eusebius here describes, for about two hundred and fifty Years
after Christ, the Christians often met in Vaults and secret places, where they
might be hid, and not in open Churches, unless now and then in a Calm between.

Platina in vit. Xisti, tells us, that even at Rome it self about the Year 120.
there were few found that durst profess the Name of Christ. And see what he
says, In Vita Clement. 1. and Anaclet. and Mantuan. lib. 1. fastor. de Clem.
Anacl. Evarist. Alex. Xist. Calist. Urban. etc. In whose times, Killing,
Banishing and Persecuting caused Scatterings, hidings, and as Pliny tells us
many Apostasies. See what Gers. Bucer says, page 221, 222, 223. of all the
Ages now in question about this matter: As Tertullian says, Apol. c. 3. adeo
in hominibus innocuis, nomen innocuum erat odio: Did the Rabble but see or hear
the Christians, they were raged against them, and cried to the Judges, Tollite
impios.

Says Polydor. Virgil. de invent. rer. l. 5. c. 6. Romae non reperio quod
sciam aliud antiquius templum aedificatum aut dicatum, vel ad usum Sacrorum
fuisse conversum, quam Thermas Novati in vico patricio, quas Pius Pontifex
Praxidis eximiae sanctitatis foeminae rogatu, divae Pudentianae ejus Sorori
consecravit; qui fuit annus circiter 150. But the name Templum here is not used
by Polydore as by the Ancients, for a large and comely Fabric. For, says
Tertullian, after that, Apol. c. 37. Christians leave Temples to the Heathens.
And says Pope Nicholas, in Epist de depositione Zachariae and Rodoaldi Episc.
(recited in his Life by Papir. Massonus, Fol. 132. Col. 2.) [Deinde propter
frigidiorem locum in Ecclesia Salvatoris, quae ab Authore vocatur
Constantiniana, and quae prima in toto terrarum orb constructa est.] You see
that by this Pope's own Testimony, there was no Church in the whole World built
before this one at Rome by Constantine. The meaning is, no large sumptuous
place called a Temple, but only commodious meaner Rooms or Buildings.

And the same Pap. Masson. in Vita Bonifacii, fol. 55. notes that Hierom even
in his time (so late) Basilicas Christianorum tres tantum commemorasse.

When upon the great increase of Christians, but one odd Idol Temple even in
Alexandria, was begged of the Emperor for the Christians, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap.
22. and diverse others tell us what tumult and stir it caused. And when Eusebius.
de Vita Constant. lib. 3. c. 49, 50. tells us of his building of Churches
except Constantinople, it is but one in a City, even the great Cities,
Nicomedia in Bythinia, and Antioch. And Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 12. says that
even in Constantinople (which he made so great and beautiful that it was no
whit inferior to Rome, and by a Law engraven on a Pillar, commanded that it be
called Second Rome,) he built from the Foundation (but) two Churches, Pacis and
Apostolorum.

I could find in my heart, were it not tedious, here to translate all Isidor.
Pelus^ota's Epist. 246. lib. 2. in which he opens the difference between
Templum and Ecclesia, and inveigheth against that Bishop as no Bishop, who
cried up the Temple as the Church, while he persecuted and vexed the Godly who
are the Church indeed; and against them that are for sumptuous Temples and
unholy scandalous Churches; and tells us he had rather have been in the times
when Temples were less adorned, and the Churches more adorned with Heavenly
Graces, than in those unhappy times when Temples were too much adorned, and
Churches naked and empty of Spiritual Graces.

So that when there was but one Temple in a City, (except two or three) and
when that was called the Church, because it contained the Church, it is evident
what the Churches then were.

V. The ancient Agapae show how great the Churches then were, when as all the
Church did feast together: and these continued in Tertullian's time, in some
places at least: And several Church-Canons mention them after that. And
Chrysostom. says (Homil. de Oportet haeres. esse p. (mihi) 20, 21. that in the
Primitive times, there was a custom that after Sermon and Sacrament, they all
feasted together in the Church, which he highly praises. (But it was not many
hundred Churches that feasted in one Room.) And after he says, [The Church is
like Noah's Ark, but Men come in Wolves, and go out Lambs, etc.] showing that
by the Church he meant the Assembly. And after, [All have the same Honor, and
the same Access, till all have communicated and partaked of the same Spiritual
Meat. The Priests standing expect them all, even the poorest Man of all.] (By
this he shows what Church he meant, and how I know the learned Albaspinaeus
labors to prove that the Agapae were not at the sacrament, and in that
place: But he thinks that they were meetings of the whole fraternity, and its
like no house was much greater than the Churchhouse, so that this makes no
difference.
great the Church was.) Et Sermon. 21. page 313. Redundat injuria in locum illum;
Ecclesiam enim totam contemnis: Propterea enim Ecclesia dicitur, quia
communiter omnes accipit. This does not only show what Church he means, but
fully confirms what I said before: that [The whole Church was in that place:
and that the place is therefore called the Church, because it commonly
receives all.] But note that this was not preached at Constantinople, but yet
at the great Patriarchal Church of Antioch.

And I may add as to the former Evidences, To. 5. Sermon. 52. page 705. when he
had showed that in the Church there must be no division, he expounds it by
[(...).] [Qui seipsum ab hoc conventu sejunxerit.] So that the Assembly was the
Church, and not a thousandth part of the Church only.

See more of the Churches feasting together in Baronius ad an. 57. page (ed.
Plant.) 543. to spare me more labor about this.

VI. Another Evidence of the Limits of the ancient Churches is (that which I
often mentioned in the particular Testimonies) that every where all the People
either chose, or expressly consented to their Bishops, and they were ordained
over them in their sight. And this no more could do than could meet in one
place; and one part of a Church has no more right to it than all the rest. The
Consequence is evident: And for them that say, that it was only the
Parishioners of the Cathedral Church that voted; I answer, Now Cathedrals have
no Parishes, and heretofore the Cathedral Parish was the whole Church. The
Testimonies fully prove that it was All the Church or People that were the
Bishop's Flock: And for some hundreds of Years there were no Parishes in his
Diocese but one, and therefore no such distinction. Pamelius's heap of
Testimonies, and many more, for the matter of fact I have already cited: And
however some talk now to justify the contrary course of our times, it is so
clear and full in Antiquity that the People chose their Bishops, at first
principally, and after secondarily after the Clergy, having a Negative Voice
with them, and their Consent and Testimony ever necessary, even for eight
hundred Years at least, that it would be a needless thing to cite any more
Testimonies of it to any versed in the Ancients. Papists and Protestants are
agreed de facto that so it was. See Cyprian, lib. 4. Epist. 2. of Cornelius;
lib. 1. Epist. 2. of Sabinus; and lib. 1. Epist. 4. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap.
29. tells us that Fabian by the People was chosen to succeed Anterus. And
Cyprian says it was Traditione Apostolica, vid. and Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 14.
and lib. 2. cap. 6. and lib. 7. cap. 35. and Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 24. and lib.
8. cap. 2. of Chrysostom; and lib. 6. cap. 13. vid. and Augustine. Epist. 110.
and Theodoret, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. in Epist. Council. Nicaeni ad Alexandr. The
Bloodshed at the Choice of Damasus was one of the first occasions of laying by
that custom at Rome. And yet though they met not so tumultuously, they must
consent. Leo's Testimony I gave you before with many more. Theodor. lib. 5.
cap. 9. of Nectarius shows that Bishops were then chosen, Plebe praesente and
universa fraternitate, as Cyprian speaks of Sabinus. So the Council. Parisien.
even an. 559. But for more plentiful proof of this see M. A. Spalatens. de Rep.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 22. n. 10. and lib 6. cap. 7. and lib. 3. cap. 3* n. 12.
etc. and Blondel de Jure plebis, more copiously, and de Epis. and Presbyt. and
Bilson perpet. Govern. cap. 15. and lib. of Christian Subjection often.

And it is to be noted that when the People's Confusion had made them seem
incapable any longer to choose: 1. This was long of the Prelates themselves, who
by that time had so far enlarged their Churches, that the People were neither
capable of doing their ancient Work and Duty, nor yet of being ruled by the
Clergy aright. 2. And when the People were restrained from the Choice by
Meetings and Vote, the Magistrates in their stead did undertake the Power. 3.
And when it fell out of the People's hands into Great Men's, the Proud and
Covetous who could best seek and make Friends did get the Bishoprics,
whereupon the Churches were presently changed, corrupted and undone. 4. And the
sense of this moved the few good Bishops that were left to make Canons against
this Power and Choice of Princes and great Men, decreeing that all Bishops
obtruded by them on the Churches should be as none, but be avoided, and all
avoided that did not avoid them. And the Roman and Patriarchal party cunningly
joined with these honest Reformers to get the Choice out of the Magistrate's
hands that they might get it into their own; and so Christ's Church was abused
among ambitious Usurpers. The Decrees against Magistrates Choice of Bishops you
may see, Can. Apost. 31. and Decret. 17. q. 7. c. siquis Episc. Sept. Synod. c.
3. Decret. 16. q. 7. Oct. Synod. c. 12. and Act. 1. etc. 22. Decret. 16. q. 7.
Nicol. 1. Epist. 10. and Epist. 64. with more which you may find cited by
Spalatens. lib. 6. cap. 7. page 675, 676, 677.

And it is to be noted that (though still the Clergy had a Negative or first
Choice, yet) when they procured Charles the Great (who was to rise by the Papal
help) to resign and renounce the Magistrates Election, he restored the Church
to its Ancient Liberties, as far as enlarged Dioceses and ambitious Clergymen
would permit it. His words are these, [Sacrorum Canonum non ignari ut in Dei
nomine Sancta Ecclesia suo liberius potiretur honor, assensum ordini
Ecclesiastico praebuimus, ut scilicet Episcopi per Electionem CLERI and POPULI
secundum statuta Canonum de PROPRIA DIOECESI, remota personarum and munerum
acceptione, ob vitae meritum and sapientiae donum, eligantur, ut exemplo and
verbis sibi subjectis usquequaque prodesse valiant.] Vid. Baron. To. 11. n. 26.
Decret. Did. 63. c Sacrorum. Where note that, 1. he includes the People of
the whole Diocese. 2. And does this as according to the sacred Canons. So that
for Men to dream that only the Parishioners of a Cathedral Church (which had no
proper Parish) or the Citizens only, were to choose, is to feign that which is
contrary to notorious Evidence of Law and Fact, as well as of the reason of the
thing. For where all are the Bishops Flock, and choose as his Flock, there all
the Flock must choose, and a parcel can claim no privilege above all the rest.

VII. The next Evidence is this: In the first Age, it is very fairly proved by
Doctor Hammond, that there were by the Apostles more Bishops and Churches than
one in many Cities themselves: And if one City had more than one Church and
Bishop, then much more many distant places, in Towns and Countries. That one
City had more than one he shows by the distinction of Jews and Gentiles
Churches: As Peter was appointed chiefly for the Jews, and Paul chiefly for the
Gentiles, so he shows it very probable, that at Rome, Antioch, and other
places they had several Churches. And thus he reconcileth the great differences
about Linus, Clemens and Cletus or Anacletus. And especially on this reason,
that they had not the same Language. And indeed when in great Cities there are
Christians of diverse Languages, it is necessary that they be of diverse
Congregations, unless you will have them Hear, as the Papists will have them
Pray, they know not what. And though some might say, that though they be of
diverse Assemblies, yet they might have only One Bishop to Rule them: I answer,
1. Dr. Hammond is more ingenuous, and acknowledges that the diversities of
congregations and languages inferred a diversity of Churches and Bishops with
their distinct Clergy. 2. And all Antiquity made Preaching or Teaching his
flock as essential to the Bishops office as Governing them (of which next:) But
he could not teach several Churches whose language he understood not.

VIII. Antiquity made the three parts of the Bishops office Teaching,
Worshipping, and Governing, to be of the same extent as to the subject society
under him. It was one and the same Church which he was ordinarily to Teach, to
guide in worship (prayers, praise, sacrament) and to Rule by discipline
(supposing still that we speak of a mere Bishop and not an Archbishop) I should
weary the Reader to cite numerous testimonies for so notorious a thing. But it
is known that the said Bishop neither is nor can be the Ordinary Teacher, and
Guide in worship to a Diocese of a multitude of Churches, but to one or few at
most. And he that peruseth ancient writers, shall find that the Bishop was not
only to be a ra^e or extraordinary Teacher of his whole flock, but the Ordinary
one: not only to send others, but to do it himself; till the enlargement of
Dioceses changed the custom.

IX. Another evidence is this: In the first two Centuries, Deacons and Bishops
were ever officers in the same Church: But Deacons were never then officers in
more Churches (or stated assemblies that had Sacramental Communion) than one:
therefore Bishops were not officers in more. No proof can be given of any
Deacons that had the care (in their places) of many Churches, Parishes, or
Societies of Christians. And when Dioceses were enlarged, it is notable that
the Presbyter that was the oculus Episcopi in the Diocese is called the
Archdeacon: Because originally he was but indeed a Deacon, the chief Deacon who
was with the Bishop in one and the same Church* It being then inauditum for a
Deacon to belong to many.

X. Another evidence is, The Great number of Bishops who out of a narrow space
of ground, did usually assemble in the ancient Synods. I told you before out of
Crab of Sylvesters number at Rome. Binius also has the like words [Sylvester
collegit in gremio sedis suae 284 Episcopos] and that 139 of them were ex urbe
Roma vel non long ab illa. A hundred thirty nine Bishops in Rome and not far
from it, had not such Dioceses as now.

Cyprian says, lib. 1. Ep. 3. that Privatus was condemned in Synodo
Lambesitana by 90 Bishops which was before Christianity was countenanced by
Emperors, and were under persecution, yea, long before Cyprian wrote that
Epistle.

For the examining of every ordinary cause of an accused Presbyter, sex
Episcopi ex vicinis locis, six Bishops from the neighbor places, (not from 40
or fourscore miles distance) were to hear and determine, and three Bishops for
the cause of every Deacon, Council. Afric. Can. 20. so that no doubt but their
Bishops were as near as our Market Towns at least, even when so few of the
people were Christians as that all that space afforded but one great
Congregation.

The sixth provincial Council at Carthage had 217 Bishops (whereas the General
Council at Trent had long but 40.)

A Council of Donatists (Heretics not so numerous sure as the Catholics) at
Carthage, mentioned by Augustine, Epist. 68. (about an. 308) had 270 Bishops.
And when there were so great a number of Heretic Bishops, how many were there
of the Catholics and Donatists and all other sects set together? This one
heresy had enough to become persecutours of the Catholics, (beating them with
clubs, putting out the peoples eyes by casting vinegar mixed with lime into
them, dragging them in the dirt) And yet they were the smaller number, and
complained of persecution; and some Circumcellions killed themselves to make
the Catholics odious as persecutors (Occisos auferunt luci, vivis auferunt
lucem -- Quod nobis faciunt sibi non imputant: and quod sibi faciunt nobis
imputantinquiunt, Clerici Hippon. ib. ad Januarium.) Certainly here were
Churches no bigger then, than our smaller Parishes.

And Augustine cont. Gaudentium says, there were innumerable Bishops in Africa
that were Orthodox. (And it was but a corner of Africa that were Christians,
and in the Roman Empire here meant.)

Victor Uticensis in persecut. Vandal. shows that in that part of Africa 660
Bishops fled; besides the great number murdered, imprisoned, and many
tolerated. The like may be said of Patricks Irish Bishops before mentioned, and
many others, who plainly were Parochial Bishops.

XI. Another evidence is, The way of Strangers communicating then by way of
Communicatory Letters, or Certificates from the Church whence they came, which
were to be showed to the Bishop of the Church where they desired to
communicate: But was it many hundred Churches that they must thus satisfy? or
must they travail to the Bishop with their Certificate, before they must
communicate in any one Church within 20. 30. 40. or 50. miles of him? Doubtless
an impartial Reader will think, that it was but a Bishop of the same
City-Church which he desired Communion with, to whom the Certificate was to be
shown. See what Albaspinaeus says of these Letters, ex Council. Laodic. c. 41.
Council. Antioch. c. 1. Council. Agath. can. 52. Council. Eliber. c. 58. in his
observat. p. 254, 255.

XII. Another evidence is the ancient phrase describing a Schism by Altar
aliud erigere, to set up another Altar, or to set up Altar against Altar. And
to separate from that Altar was to separate from that Church: which implies,
that there was but one Altar in a Church; and multiplying Altars was
multiplying Churches.

XIII. Another evidence was the late division of Parishes: The idle story of So
Sr. Hen. Spelman Council. p. 152. says, in Theodor. time about An 672. Parish
divisions here began. Seld. of Tithes proves that the division of Parishes in
England began but about 700 years after Christ. And Dr. Tillestly does not deny
the time, but thinks that though Patrons (as Seldom says) might probably
begin this, yet Bishops also had a hand in it.
Evaristus dividing Parishes at Rome, Gers. Bucer has fully confuted. It is
most certain that except at Alexandria and Rome, it was long before they were
divided. Sir Rog. Twisden Histor. Vindicat. c. 3. p. 9, 10. says that it was
under Theodore A. B. C. that Parochial Churches began (mark Began) to be
erected here in England, and the Bishop of Rome greatly reverenced in this
nation etc. out of a MS. in Trinity Hall Cambridge. And it was 668 as Beda
tells us before Theodore was Ordained Bishop. The evidence in history of the
Lateness of Parish divisions is past doubt.

And whereas the usual answer is, that there may be Dioceses without Parishes;
I answer, It is not the Name [Diocese] that is the thing in question, but the
Church State. While there was but one Altar, there was but one place of
ordinary Church Communion in the Lords Supper. And when there were more places
with Altars erected, they could not be, nor were long without their proper
affixed Presbyters (as Arius his Case shows and as is confessed) And when
that was done, they were Parishes in out sense: And till that was done, some
one Presbyter was sent from the Bishop as he pleased; and then all the Parishes
in the Diocese must needs be under one Presbytery as well as one Bishop. There
were no settled Congregations for ordinary Church Communion, besides the Bishops
Church-meeting, till Parishes were divided, if not by space of ground, yet by
the distinction of Temples and People, which is the thing intended. There could
be no such thing as a Diocesane Church in the sense that we oppose it in, that
is, One Church with a Bishop infimi ordinis (having none under him) made up of
a multitude of Communicating Churches with their Subpresbyters, yea such as are
no part of the Bishops Consessus or Presbytery for the Government of that
Church.]

XIV. The next evidence is, the ancient custom of All his Presbyters sitting in
one seat with the Bishop in a semicircle in loco eminentiore on each hand of
him and the Deacons standing under or below them: which is so ordained by
Councils (as Carth. 4. Can. 35. etc.) And the thing is commonly reported in the
ancients. And this being put usually as of his Presbyters in common, who were
his assistants and colleagues, and with whom he Governed the Churches, without
mentioning any excepted Presbyters belonging to distant Parishes, It is
apparent that the Bishop then had ordinarily but one assembly. The same I may
say of the many Canons, that show what the Presbyters are to do in the Church,
which imply his presence: But I have mentioned many of them before.

XV. Another evidence is, the custom of the Presbyters dwelling in the same
house with the Bishop (single) as in a College; which not only in Hippo, but
in very many other places was then used: and they dwelt near the Church, where
that was not used (As when they had wives, or the Bishop had his Episcopam as
the Council. Turon. 2. calls her, and allows it.)

Tolet himself, de Sacerdotio lib. 5. cap. 4. n. 15. page 722. confesses this
saying, [In Ecclesia Primitiva usque ad tempora Augustini and Hieron. Episcopum
and Clerum solitos vivere in communi: unde bona quae vel ex decimis, vel ex
fidelium devotione offerebantur, erant indivisa, and subdebantur distributioni
Episcopi, quae partim ipsi, partim Clero, partim fabricae, partim pauperibus
obveniebant. Postea vero quando quisque per se vixit, talia bona divisa sunt in
quatuor parts, prima Episcopo servata, secunda Clero, tertia fabricae, quarta
pauperibus.] And sure that Church then was no bigger than that College did
officiateto.

XVI. And that which these words of Tolet recite, is the next evidence, viz.
The way of maintenance in those times. 1. They lived on Oblations mostly: And
these oblations are ever mentioned as offered but upon One Altar. Of this see
an excellent Tract of Church Benefices, by Pad. Paul Sarpi, translated by Dr.
Denton confirming many things beforesaid.
2. These Oblations were all brought to the Bishops hands, and distributed by
him or his appointment. 3. The First Fruits, and Tithe that came next were also
in his hands. 4. And so were all the Gifts, and all the Praedia or Church
glebe. 5. All these are mentioned as given to One Church only, and not many. 6.
The distribution was as aforesaid, some fourfold, sometime threefold; of which
Spalatensis recites the decrees so fully, that I will not tire the reader with
reciting them. 7. And it was the Fabrica of One Church only that the Bishop was
to give the fourth part to maintain (And were many hundred fabrics more
forgotten?) 8. And it was a present Clergy, and not men settled along way off,
that he was to make distribution to. 9. And when he was to have the first
fourth part himself, who can think that this is meant that men must carry the
fourth part of the Hay, and Corn, and Wood, and Pigs, etc. from all the
Parishes through such Dioceses as ours, and the fourth part of all the Glebe
rents; This would make the Bishopric indeed seem to worldly minded men to be
worth the venturing of their souls for; And they must have so many score or
hundred barns full, as might tempt them to say, S^ul take thine ease, eat
drink* and be merry, etc. But the evidence speaks plainly.

XVII. Another evidence is this: That when first new Communicating Assemblies
were erected even in the same Cities with the Bishops, the sa^d Bishops did
devise this new trick of their own heads, to send to that Assembly some Bread
hallowed by themselves; And this was first to comfort (as they said) the
Presbyters and new Congregation, lest they should think themselves cut off from
their Bishops Church and Communion. 2. To hold their interest in the people by
this handle of their own making. Of these Eulogiae the Can. Council. Laodic. 14.
speaks, as Petavius and others think: Petav. in Epiphan. ad haeres. 69. page
276. says, [Romae, ubi per titulos distributi presbyteri suos quique populos
regebant: Ad eos Episcopi Dominicis diebus fermentum sive benedictum panem in
Communionis symbolum mittere consueverant.] And the passage which he cites out
of Innocent ad Decentium cap. 5. is very full, [De fermento vero quod die
Dominico per Titulos mittimus, superflue nos consulere voluisti: cum omnes
Ecclesiae nostrae intra civitatem sint constitutae: Quarum Presbyteri quia die
isto propter plebem sibi commissam nobiscum convenire non possunt, ideo
fermentum a nobis confectum per acolythos accipiunt, ut se a nostra communione,
maxima illa die non judicent separatos.] That Melchiades ordained this, Damasus
his pontifical book says; which was about An. 313. But Baronius ad An. 313.
largely opens all the business, and shows that this fermentum was hallowed
levened bread, which was not the Eucharist, but a devised sacrament (as
Innocent calls it) of Union and Communion: confirming this which I have said:
And ex Can. 14. Council. Laod. etc. he shows that it was used also in the
East: And to this notable passage of Innocent [Omnes ecclesiae nostrae infra
civitatem suntconstitutae] all the Popes Churches were within the city, he
says, (p. 97.) [Detitulis tantum intelligit, ad quos fermentum mitti soleret,
non quidem quod non essent in suburbiis aliae complures ecclesiae atque
sanctorum memoriae, sed nulla prorsus Titularis, in quam populus colligi
consueverit. Cujus rei causa ait se non mittere fermentum ad Presbyteros per
diversa coemeteria constitutos, quod illi plebem sibi subditam quam
colligerent, non haberent.]

Here you see, 1. That there were more Temples than Congregations, or Parishes,
being erected as Monuments in honor of the Martyrs. 2. That there were no
Congregations or Parishes, but within the City. 3. That this device of holy
bread came upon the division of Parishes; and therefore as one was new then, so
the other could not be old.

XVIII. Another evidence is the state of Cathedral Churches, which as many And
it is a considerable proof which Dr. Tillesley against Seldom says (p. 179
[The right of a B^^ial place did first belong to the Cathedral Church] and
herein the custom of our Kingdom and others was not different. And if the
Diocese was such as that all were to be buried at the Cathedral, it was not so
big as ^^^^ of our Parishes in London, which are fain to take other ground for
buryal; and their Church will not ho^^ the tenth part of the living as auditors.
Episcopal Antiquaries say, were first the sole Churches of the Bishops Charge
or Diocese; and that Parish Churches were since built one after another, as
Chapels be in Parishes, by those that could not come so far: And that the
present Government of the Cathedral by the Dean and Chapters, under the Bishop,
is the evident relict of the old Episcopal Government, and truly tells us
what it was: To pass by many others, I will now recite but the words of
Holingshead our Historian, a Clergyman, Chron. Vol. 1. p. 135. Col. 1. [Those
Churches are called Cathedral, because the Bishops dwell near them. At first
there was but ONE CHURCH in every JURISDICTION, whereinto no man entered to
pray, but with some oblation toward the maintenance of the Pastor -- And for
this occasion they were built very huge and great: for otherwise they were not
capable of such multitudes as came daily to them, to hear the word and receive
the sacraments: But as the number of Christians increased, so first
Monasteries, then finally Parish Churches were builded, in every jurisdiction*
from which I take our Deanery Churches to have their original, now called Mother
Churches, and their Incumbents Archpriests; And the rest being added since the
Conquest, either by the Lords of every Town, or zealous men loath to travail
far, and willing to have some ease, building them near hand unto these Deanery
Churches, all the Clergy in old time of the same Deanery were appointed to
repair at sundry seasons, there to receive wholesome ordinances, and to consult
of the necessary affairs of the whole jurisdiction, if necessity so required:
And some image thereof is yet to be seen in the North parts. But as the number
of Churches increased, so the repair of the faithful to the Cathedral, did
diminish, whereby they are now become, especially in their nether parts, rather
Markets and shops for merchandise, than solemn places of prayer, whereunto they
were first erected.] I need to say no more of this.

XIX. The next evidence is, That when Churches first became Diocesane (in the
sense opposed) they were fitted to the form of the Civil Government; And
Dioceses and Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs, came in at the same door: The very
name (...) was long unknown in a sacred sense, and was after borrowed from the
Civil divisions, when the Church was formed according to them. And as Altar
Damasc. p. 290. says, Vox (...) ut refertur ad Episcopum, ignota fuit Eusebio
and superioribus seculis: And the word Parish was also before used in our
narrower sense, for a vicinity of Christians. And as Grynaeus says in Eusebius.
p. 1. not. 3. Eusebius. promiscue usurpat haec duo vocabula (...)

And that a Diocesane as such (thus formed to the Roman Civil form) and a
Metropolitan and Patriarch, yea, and the Pope as the Prime Patriarch in the
Empire, are all of Humane institution, and all of the same original and right,
there are few Protestants that do deny. 1. The reason of the thing plainly
shows it. 2. Their beginning at once shows it. 3. And that they were never
any of them settled out of the Roman Empire, where that form obtained, except
that they settled here and there one on the verge of the Empire to have some
care of the neighbor countries, till after that the Roman name and power
invited small countries adjoining to them to imitation. And Bishop Bilson of
Chr. Subject. often tells us that Metropolitans and Patriarchs are of Humane
institution.

Godwin a Bishop, in the Lives of the English Bishops, de Convers. Brit. c. 3.
p. 30. says, Quis tam imperitus est ut non intelligat, post mortem Tiberii
fluxisse multos annos, ne dicam seculum unum aut alterum priusquam Cardinalis,
Patriarchae, aut Metropolitani nomen in Christianorum ecclesiis auditum est] He
might have added, Leg. plura apud Gers. Bucer page 231, 232, 233, 234, 235.
aut Diocesani, for they were built by the same hand on the same foundation. I
do not mean that an Apostolical General Ministry was so new, but a Diocesane of
many Churches, as Episcopus infimi gradus. Multitudes of Papists and
Protestants attest the novelties of these foresaid ranks. Two testimonies of
the Papists are so notable, as that I will not pass them by.

Cardinal Cusanus (that Learned Prelate, and proud enough) li. de Concord. l.
2. c. 13. says, [Omnes gradus Majoritatis and Minoritatis in ecclesia juris
positivi esse.] And therefore concluded that the Papacy is removeable from Rome.

Nay the very Canon Law it self, says, Decret. Par. 1. dis. 22. c. 1. c.
omnes, [Omnes sive Patriarchii cujuslibet apices, sive Metropole^n primatus,
aut Episcopatuum Cathedras, vel ecclesiarum cujuscunque ordinis dignitates,
instituit Romana ecclesia.] what need we more witness? It is from P. Nicolaus
his decretal. And though a man might suspect that he meant only of the personal
Institution of the particular Patriarchs, Metropolitans, etc. yet the context
shows the contrary, and that it is the species, office or place that he
speaks of; Because the opposite assertion is, that the Roman Churches dignity
was founded by God himself: And the next Cap. 2. is that, not the Apostles, but
the Lord himself gave the Roman Church its primacy.

XX. The next evidence is, That we rarely read of any Bishops preaching in any
Church but One, unless he was driven out of it by persecution, or unless it
were in another Bishops Church. If I should except only the great Patriarchal
Churches out of all the world, and that only as late as 400 or 500 years after
Christ, when Emperors had helped to increase the Churches, no impartial man
would take that for any debilitation of my proof. And yet I shall not easily
yield to that exception. In Antioch and Jerusalem I think it will hardly be
affirmed, that the Bishop used to preach to any Congregation but One: In Great
Constantinople (equalled to Rome) when find you Chrysostom any where but in
one Church, except when violence hindered him, and then the same Congregation
followed him? Indeed the Novatians had a Church there, and perhaps there was
some bye Congregation or two of Christians, who all communicated in the Bishops
Church, and therefore were but as Chapels. But go into all the rest of the
world, and the case will be plainer, (except Rome and Alexandria.) Even Basil
an Archbishop is not found a Teacher ordinarily any where but to his Church at
Caesarca; nor Gregory but at Nazianzum (when he went from Constantinople and
from Sasimis;) and so of the rest, no not Ambrose in the great city of Milan:
And let it move none that Milan and some other Cities had more Temples than
one, for as Baronius before cited tells us, there were then many Temples built
as Monuments in honor of the Martyrs, that were not Tituli, nor had any Parish
or Congregation belonging to them. When find you Augustine teaching in any
Church but one (in Hippo) as part of his charge? Of Epiphanius I need not
speak, seeing it is confessed that in Cyprus no City had two Churches in his
days, and that it was their custom to place Bishops in villages, (as Socrates,
Sozomen, and Nicephorus agree.) So that the matter of fact is certain: except
four or five Churches (if so many) in all the world 400 years after Christ, and
except but two or three hundred years after Christ, you will find no Bishop in
any Church but one, as part of his own Charge.

But the consequence inferred hence will be denied, because the other Parishes
might be taught by Subpresbyters without him. Answ. But I would ask, 1. Whether
all the rest of the Parishes were not the Bishops Charge? yea part of his
Church, yea equally with the other part? As to what Onuphrius and others say of
the stations, and the Bishops going from Church to Church, 1. It was scarce any
where but in Rome: 2. It was of later times: 3. It was only in the City: 4. It
was commonly the same auditors that followed him to several Churches.

And it is true that other Bishops went to the memorials of the Martyrs often, and
had as monuments more Churches than assemblies. And it is true that of later
times, certain Canons bind the Bishops to visit all their Parishes: And the
eldest oblige him to visit all the people: which shows that yet his Docese
was not great.

If he be the Bishop of the Church, and the office of a Bishop be to guide the
Church, in Worship, and by Discipline, then he is bound to do this to all the
Church: indeed if you make but a mere Presbyter of him, then as many may divide
the work between them, so each might know his proper part, (as things stood
when Parishes or Chapels were divided) But if a Bishop, as such, be the
uniting head as the King of a Kingdom, he must be equally related to the whole.

But if it were not equally, who can believe that there was so great a
difference in the parts of the same Church, as that one parcel of them only
should have right to their Bishops presence, teaching, worshipping, and
personal guidance, and ten, twenty, an hundred, a thousand other parcels have
no right at all? What! a Bishop of a whole Church, not at all obliged to Teach,
or Guide in personal worshipping, any part of that Church but one? Some great
change was made in Churches before men could arrive at such a conceit? Even now
among us, a Bishop takes himself (by the constraining Law of man, which is his
Rule) to visit his Diocese once in three years: (I do not mean one Church of
forty or an hundred in his Diocese, much less to preach himself usually in
those few Towns he comes to; but to call his Curate Priests together, and to
set one of them to preach his Visitation Sermon.) But where find you this done
by three Bishops in the world for 300 years after Christ, unless that
Archbishops visited the Bishops Churches under them? Now they say there have
been Bishops in England who have once in three years confirmed some children
abroad throughout their Diocese (I do not mean one of two hundred) but where
find you that then the Bishop went out of his City to do this?

2. My next question therefore is, Whether the Bishops of those times were not
at least as conscionable and careful and laborious in their offices, as any now
are, if not much more? What! not a Gregory, a Basil, a Chrysostom, an
Augustine, a Fulgentius, a Hillary, etc. What! not they that preached almost
daily? They that write so strictly of the labors of the Ministry? They that
lived so austerely, and favored not the flesh; that speak so tenderly of the
worth of souls? And would all these, think you, undertake to be Bishops of a
whole Church, and yet so leave the whole work upon others, as never to come
among them and teach them, and examine them, nor give them the Sacrament in all
the Parishes of the Diocese save one? This is not credible.

If you say that in Alexandria it was certainly so, that distinct congregations
were committed to the Presbyters, I answer, 1. Yet so as that they might any
part of them (as living in the same city) come and hear the Bishop when they
would: 2. They might communicate with him per vices if they would: 3. They were
all bound to do so at the great festivals of the year: 4. They were all
personally governed by the discipline of the Bishop and Presbyters conjunct in
Council: But of this next.

XXI. Another evidence is that the whole Plebs or people of the Bishops charge
(till Churches were settled under Presbyters far off in the countries) were
bound by the Canons to come to the Cathedral Church, and communicate with the
Bishop at Easter, Whitsuntide, and some other such festivals, even after they
were distinguished into several Auditories and Communicating Assemblies under
Presbyters; which I have before proved from the particular Canons: which
certainly proves that the Dioceses were no more than could assemble in one
place.

XXII. Another evidence is that Presbyters did but rarely preach in the two or
three first ages (except in Alexandria, or in some few Churches which had got
some extraordinary men; Chrysostom's preaching at Antioch, Augustin's at
Hippo, while they were but Presbyters, are noted as unusual things. And it is
said of Augustine (as forecited) that it being not usual in other Churches, for
the Presbyters to preach in the Bishops presence, the example of that Church
(by the humility of the honest Bishop who preferred his abler Presbyter before
himself) did lead many other Churches into the same practice. Spalatensis I may
add* also as anther evidence that in the beginning for a considerable time,
Confirmation was closely joined to Baptism, and therefore ordinarily none were
Baptized but by a confirmer, or in his presence: And the Bishops say, that only
Bishops did confirm: And if so, then let it be considered, to how large a
Diocese a Bishop could be present at every Baptism: Yea if Confirmation had
been at a greater distance, seeing all that were baptized were confirmed, it is
easy to know for how many one Bi^hop cannot do this. Did our Bishops use it
they would know. I do not think that in this city one person of 50 or 100 is
confirmed though the Bishop dwell among them. Perhaps in some Dioceses not one
of 1000 for we rarely hear of any at all.
and many others have given large proofs, that the Bishops and not the
Presbyters were the ordinary preachers in their Church. * Filesacus says, De
Episcop. authorit. cap. 15. Sect. 1. page 344. [Episcopos consuevisse ex ambone
verba facere, refert Council. Lateran. sub Martino, and Council. Trull. c. 33.
Permissum deinde Presbyteris, quanquam non passim, nec in quibuslibet
ecclesiis: Diaconis olim id concessum, sed raro -- and p. 351. ait, [Balsamon
juris Graeco-Romani li. 2. cap. 9. in Alexii Comneni Bullis; Populum docere
solis est datum Episcopis: and magnae eccl^siae Doctores Patriarchae jure
docent.] These were like our Canons as he shows at large; and this was in later
ages when a Bishop might teach per alium. -- And p. 351, 352. Council. Trull. c.
64. docet ex Greg. Nazianz. solis Episcopis convenire concionari and sanctas
scripturas interpretari; Presbyteris vero non nisi Episcoporum concessione. Of
the Bishops teaching see the numerous citations in Filesacus cap. 1.

And if any be stumbled at the name Presbyteri Parochiani usual in the Councils
and Fathers, as if they were Country Presbyters, who preached then in other
Churches? I have before cited a Canon which gave leave to Presbyters to preach
in the country villages, intimating it was rare heretofore. 2. Filesacus
says, ibid. p. 562, 563. [Sed ut quod res est libere eloquar, and illo aevo
and anteriore, cum Parochiae vox vulgo etiam pro Dioecesi usurpatur (that is
for all the Bishops Charge) credo Presbyteros Parochianos dictos fuisse, non
aliter ac siquis Dioecesanos pronunciaret, hoc est, In hac Parochia seu
Dioecesi ordinatos and titulatos.]

But surely whilst Presbyters rarely preached, there were either Churches that
had no preaching (which cannot be proved) or else few Assemblies that had not
Bishops.

Obj. But then you make Lay Elders of the Presbyters.

Ans. They were the abler sort of Christians ordained to the same Ministerial
or Sacerdotal Office as all true Ministers are: But few of them being Learned
men, and able to make long Sermons, were employed only as the Bishops
assistants, as elders are among the Presbyterians: who if they would but ordain
those Elders, and let them have power over the word and Sacraments, though only
to exercise it under the Bishops or chief Pastors guidance, when there was
cause, they would come nearest to the ancient use.

XXIII. And it seems to me an evidence that the Churches then were (usually)
but as narrow as I assert, that the Presbyters were to abide with the Bishop,
and attend him in his City Church. For if you suppose them able to Teach or
guide a flock themselves, (as some were such, as Augustine, Macarius, Ephrem
Syrus, Tertullian, etc.) it is scarce credible to me that the Bishop would
suffer such worthy persons to sit among his Auditors, when there were many
country congregations that needed their help. For that the Church was so
supplied with Preachers as that besides all these Presbyters in the Bishops
Church, there were enough for all the rest of the country Parishes as now, is
contrary to all the intimations of Church History. And therefore when we read
of so many Presbyters with the Bishop, before we read of many or scarce any
elsewhere, surely there were no people that needed them.

XXIV. And yet (though great Cities had many with the Bishop) I may add that
the In the subscr^ptions of Councils you shall find sometime a Bishop and one
Deacon, sometime a a Bishop and a Presbyter, as at Arles, id. Spelman. p. 42.
paucity of Presbyters under the generality of Bishops, shows that their
Dioceses then were but like Parish Churches with their Chapels: Or else
Aurelius and the other Bishops in the Carthage Council needed not have been in
doubt whether those Bishops that had but one or two Presbyters, should have one
taken from them to make a Bishop of, which was yet affirmatively decreed,
because there may be more found fit to make Presbyters of, where it is hard to
find any fit to be Bishops.

I will speak it in the words of the learned Bishop Bilsons Perpet. Govern. c.
13. p. 256. [In greater Churches they had great numbers of Presbyters: In
smaller they had often two, somewhere one, and sometimes none. And yet for all
this defect of Presbyters, the Bishops then did not refrain to impose hands
without them. The number of Presbyters in many places were two in a Church, as
Ambrose writes on 1 Timothy 3. sometimes but one. In the third Council Carthag.
when it was agreed that the Primate of that City might take the Presbyters of
every Diocese and Ordain them Bishops for such places as desired them, though
the Bishop under whom the Presbyter before lived were unwilling to spare him,
Posthumianus a Bishop demanded, [what if a Bishop have but one only Presbyter,
must that one be taken from him?] Aurelius the Bishop of Carthage answered, One
Bishop may Ordain many Presbyters, but a Presbyter fit for a Bishopric is not
easily found: wherefore if a man have but one only Presbyter, and fit for the
room of a Bishop, he ought to yield that one to be Ordained. Posthumianus
replied, Then if another Bishop have a number of Clerks, that others store
should relieve him. Aurelius answered, Surely as you helped another Church, so
he that has many Clerks not many Churches.
shall be driven to spare you one of them, to be ordained by you] A Diocese
such as is intimated here, we do not strive against.

XXIV. Another evidence is that when ever we read of persecution turning the
Christians out of their Churches, you ever find them gathered into one
Congregation, when they could have leisure and place to meet in, and usually a
Bishop with them; unless he were banished, imprisoned, or martyred, and then
some Presbyter supplied the place: or unless they were scattered into many
little parcels. And you find no talk of the persecution of multitudes of
Country Presbyters afar off, but of the Bishop with his City Presbyters and
Church. To which add that it was One Church still, which rejected, obtruded
Bishops, and refused to obey the Emperor who imposed them. All this is
manifest in Gregory Neocaesar. his flight with Musonius, and the state of his
Church: In the Case of Basil; and of Lucius the obtruded Bishop at Alexandria,
and in the Case of Antioch before described, and of Rome it self. It Is tedious
to cite numerous testimonies in a well known case. If Alexandria was in such a
case, or near it, I hope you will doubt of no other Churches. And that with
this you may see what Conventicles the Christians kept when the Emperors
forbad them, and how resolutely the Bishops preached when the Emperors
silenced them, I will recite the words of Baronius himself, and in him of
Dionysius Alexandr. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 10. etc. 17. and Cyprian ep. 5. etc.
in Baron. ad an. 57. p. 542. that those who cry out against Preaching and
Conventicles, when they are but strong enough to drive others out of the
Temples, may better understand themselves.

[Siquando, etc. If at any time so vehement a persecution did arise, that the
Christians by the Emperors edicts, were utterly excluded from the Churches and
assemblies, notwithstanding, little regarding such things, they forbore not to
come together in One, in holy assemblies, whithersoever there was opportunity.
This Dionys. Alexand. Bishop witnesses writing to Germanus when he mentions
the Edicts of Valerian forbidding the Assemblies. [But we by Gods assistance,
have not abstained from our accustomed Assemblies celebrated among our selves.
Yea, I my self did drive on certain brethren to keep the assemblies diligently,
as if I had converst among them.] And he writes the same also to Hierax when
he was banished [When we were persecuted by all and put to death we celebrated
the Feast with joyful minds; and any place appointed us for several sorts of
sufferings, (as the woods, the desert solitudes, the tossed ships, the common
Innes, the horrid prison) did seem fit to us in which we might keep our solemn
Assemblies with the greatest joy.] That they held their Assemblies and offered
sacrifice usually (when it was permitted them) in the prisons, Cyprian
witnesses: But the Acts of the holy Martyrs do fullier signify it; especially
those most faithful ones called Pro-Consular, which were taken by the public
Notaries. Certainly the Gravel-pits afforded them advantage for the celebrating
of their public Assemblies, in the time of persecution, especially at Rome,
where in the dug gravel there remain many subterraneous ample recesses:
Though when the persecution was vehement, they were thence also excluded; as
the letters P. Cornelii ad Lupic. Episc. Vien. testify, saying, [Christians
may not missas agere, keep their meetings for Church worship publicly, no not
in the vaults, (or pits) So much of the Churches and public assemblies of the
Christians etc. says Baronius.

Which Polyd. Virgil secondeth c. 6. yea the Bishops durst scarce be seen in
the streets so hot were the persecutions, as Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 31. Therefore,
as I before noted, they had yet no capacious Temples, as Illyricus well
gathers, Catalog. Testi. verit. p. 112. But they began to have days of peace
and liberty under Alexand. Severus, Gordian. Philip, Galienus, Flavius,
Claudius, Aurelianus, Probus, and then they did enlarge their too small rooms,
to that described by Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 1.

XXVI. Another evidence is, that Monasteries were built before Chapels and
Country Parish Churches, and far more numerous, so that we frequently read of
Monasteries under a Bishop with their Abbot, or Presbyter, when we read little
or nothing of Parish Churches in the Countries under him. And if these had been
as common, why are they not as much mentioned in the ancient records of the
Church? The Egyptian Monks, and those in Judaea, and those in Britain, in Beda,
and the life of Hierome, Fulgentius, and abundance such witness this.

XXVII. Another evidence is the Canons, that none but a Bishop must publicly
See Leo 1. Epist. 88. p. 158. So Lib. poenitential. Theodori Cantu. in Spelman.
p. 155.
reconcile a penitent, nor pronounce the blessing in the Church, etc. Of which
before in particular Canons.

XXVIII. Another evidence is that Presbyters or Bishops were not to remove from
the Places they were Ordained in: But those places of old were single Churches;
(usually in Cities with the suburbs that could come to the same Church, as Dr.
Field says.) Council. Arelat. 1. cited by Spelman, page 40. Council. Arelat. 1.
c. 21.
(because we had 3 British Bishops there) [In quibuscunque locis ordinati
fuerint Ministri, in ipsis locis perseverent] And ipse locus was not a circuit
of 40 or 50 or 100 miles long, but the Bishops Parish or Vicinity. Of the
Bishops not removing (without a Synod) many Councils speak.

XXIX. Another evidence is that the Canons which take down the Chorepiscopi and
turn them to periodeutae Visitors, or Itinerants, and which forbid the Conc.
L^od. c. 57.
making of Bishops in small Cities, or villages, 1. Were of late date, 2. And
were in aspiring times, and had a reason answerable, ne vilescat nomen
Episcopi; 3. And therefore intimate that it was otherwise before (as I have
before showed.)

XXX. A Separatist or Schismatic was then known by his withdrawing from his
proper Church; and so was an Apostate or deserter: And he that stayed away
certain days was to be excommunicate; And they that fall into sins and never
present themselves to the Church, to show their penitence, even when they fall
sick and desire Communion, shall not have it till they show fruits worthy of
repentance, faith Council. Arelat. 1. Can. 22. But 1. in our way, when the
Church that I am of is an hundred miles long and has above a thousand
Parishes, who can tell when a man is at the Church, and when he is not, unless
you make half a years work to examine the matter in a thousand Assemblies? 2.
And a man may wander, and never be in the same Assembly once in three years,
and yet be still in his own Church because the Docese is the Church: 3. Unless
the Bishops presence as well as remote relation be necessary; And then no man
comes to Church, but he that comes where the Bishop is, for ubi Episcopus ibi
Ecclesia: And the Parish Church is with them no Church, unless equivocally as a
Community. For as Learned Dr. Field says, (and they must all say) [None are to
be ordained, but to serve in some Church: and none have Churches but Bishops;
all other being but assistants to them in their Churches.] Lib. 5. c. 27. p.
139. Therefore they call the Parish Priests the Bishops Curates; and Dr. Field
makes the Bishops Church or Diocese and a particular Church all one. If then
one Parish priest of a thousand be an Arrian, Antinomian, Socinian, Papist,
Seeker, etc. he that separateth not from that one Priest and Parish meeting,
separateth not from his Bishops Church, nor any particular Church: For his
Church is a country, which while he is in, he is no Separatist, if he join
with any part of it.

XXXI. But my greatest evidence which I trust to above all the rest is, The
greatness of the Bishops work, which no mortal man can truly and faithfully
discharge and do for a Diocese in the opposed sense, nor for more than one of
our greater Parishes. I have recited some of the particulars before, and I
shall again have occasion to do it more at large: I now only name these parts.

1. To be the ordinary Baptizer, or still present with all that are Baptized,
(to anoint their nostrils, etc. as aforesaid.) 2. To be the Confirmer of all
the baptized in all the Diocese. 3. To be the ordinary preacher to his flock,
and to expound the Scriptures to them. 4. To be the only public reconciler or
absolver of all penitents. 5. To be the public Priest, to be the Guide of the
people in public worship, and to administer the Lords Supper. 6. To take
particular account and care of all the peoples souls, and admonish, teach, and
exhort them as there is special need. 7. To be the Excommunicator of the
impenitent (or ever one and the chief.) 8. To Ordain all Ministers and
Subministers. 9. To oversee and rule the Clergy. 10. To receive all Oblations,
Tithes, Gifts, and Glebes, and be the distributer of them. 11. To visit the
sick in all his flock. 12. To take a particular care of all the poor, the sick,
the strangers, the imprisoned, etc. as their Curator. 13. To keep almost daily,
but constantly weekly Assemblies for all the public offices. 14. To keep
Synods among his Colleagues, Bishops, and Presbyters. 15. To try and hear
Causes with the Bishops, and Synods, and with his Presbyters at home, about all
scandals, etc. that come before him, (of which one Town may find him work
enough, the convincing and gentle reproof and exhortation will take up so much
time.) 16. The looking after and convincing or confuting Heretics. 17. The
reconciling disagreeing neighbors. 18. The confecting of oil and holy bread,
etc. to furnish all his Presbyters with. 19. The Benediction of Marriages, and
Solemnizing of Funerals; with a multitude of other Ceremonies. 20. And besides
all this, the right government of his own house (And if he had Children, the
education of them) 21. The oversight of all the Schools and educating young men
for the Ministry (there being then no Universities to do it.) (That the
Schools were under his care, you may see proved in Filesacus) 22. The
Consecrating of devoted Virgins (to say nothing of Altars and other utensils)
23. The oversight of the Monasteries. 24. The writing of Canonical Epistles (as
they called them) to Great men, to other Churches, etc. 25. The granting of
Communicatory Letters. I have named all that come suddenly to my memory, but
it is like not all. And how many Parishes, how many hundred thousand souls can
one man do all this for, think you?

I will not tire you with citing out of Isidore, Gregory, Ambrose, Chrysostom.
etc. the strict Charges terribly laid on Bishops, but only now recite the
Preachers words whose Oration Eusebius gives us, at the dedication of a new
Church, Histor. Eccl. l. 10. c. 4. It is Paulinus Bishop of Tire. In which he
tells them that it is the work of Bishops [Intimae animarum vestrarum theoriae
videre and introspicere, ubi experientia and temporis prolixitate unumquemque
vestrum exact inquisivit, studioque and cura cunctos vos honestate and
doctrina quae secundum pietatem est, instruit.] It was then thought a Bishops
duty to be intimately acquainted with the minds of his flock, and exactly
enquire after every one of them, even menservants and maidservants by name,
says Ignatius, as cited before.

All this was then the Bishops work: Almost all this (except the Ceremonies)
Dr. Hammond proves industriously belonged to the Bishop. Let him faithfully do
it all, and let his Diocese then be as big as he please.

I might have added Council. Arelat. 1. c. 16. that people are to be absolved in
the same place where they were Excommunicated, which intimates it must be only
in the Bishops Church. And in Synod. Hybernic. Patricii (in Spelman p. 52.) All
that was more than necessary to a poor man that had a Collection was to be laid
on the Bishops Altar,] which implies that each Church had one Bishop and one
Altar. And c. 21. [and non in Ecclesiam ut ibi examinetur causa] And c. 25, 26,
27. no Clergyman but the Bishop to dispose c. 4, 5.
of Church offerings; and Clericus Episcopi in Plebe novus ingressor, baptizare
and offerre non licet, etc. with much more which intimates what Churches were
of old.

But so much shall suffice for proof of the Minor of the first Argument, that
our Diocesane Form, 1. takes down the Church Form of Gods Institution, and the
primitive Churches possession: 2. And sets up a humane form in its stead,
yea one only Church instead of a thousand or many hundred.

And therefore I add

CHAP. VIII. That the Diocesans cause the error of the Separatists, who avoid
our Churches as false in their Constitution; and would utterly disable us to
confute them.
WHen the Brownists say that our Churches are no true Churches, they do not
mean that they are not Societies of men's devising; but that they are not
Societies of Gods Instituting. And this they prove upon the principles of the
Diocesans thus: If your Churches be of Gods Institution (de specie) it is
either the Parish Churches, or the Diocesane Churches that are so: But neither
the Parish-Churches, nor the Diocesane: Ergo.

1. That the Parish Churches are not such, they prove because by the Diocesans
own confession, they are no Churches at all, except equivocally so called: It
is one of their own principles, (and we grant it) that Episcopus and Plebs
Constitute a Church, as a King and Subjects constitute a Kingdom, and as a
Schoolmaster and Scholars make a School: and as a Master and household make a
Family. And that ubi est Episcopus (as Cyprian says) ibi est Ecclesia; which
is nothing but Plebs pastori adunata. And that a people without a Bishop (truly
so called) are but a Church equivocally, as Scholars without a Master are a
School, or as a company of Christians in a ship or house accidentally met, and
praying together are a Church, etc. And as Dr. Field before cited, says, None
but a Bishop has a Church: all others are but his assistants, or as commonly
called his Curates. Therefore when a Prelatist pleads that our Parish
Churches are true Churches (either of Gods or man's institution) they do forsake
the principles of their party (as now maintained) or they contradict
themselves, or they play with equivocations and ambiguities.

II. And that a Diocesane Church, which is one composed of the carcases of
multitude of mortified Churches, is not jure divino, having said so much to
prove my self, I will not stay to tell you how easily the Separatists may prove
it. So that for my part as much as I have written and done against them, I
profess I am not able to confute them on the Diocesane grounds, but would be
one of them if I had no better.

Quest. How then must they be confuted?

Ans. Thus or not at all by me. A Presbyters office is not to be judged of by
the Bishops will or description, but by God's the institutor. As if the King
describe the Lord Mayors office in his Charter; If the Recorder or whoever
gives him his oath, and installeth him, shall misdescribe the office, and
limit it, and say falsely you have no power to do this or that; This will not at
all diminish his power, as long as it is the Charter that they profess to go
by. He shall have the power which the King gives, and not which the investing
Minister describes. If a Parson presented to a Benefice, shall be told by the
Bishop at his institution, the Tithes or Glebe are but half yours, this shall
not diminish his Title to the whole. So when God has described the Ministers
office, it shall be what God says it is, and not what the Ordainer says it
is. And God makes the Pastors of each particular body of fixed Communicants,
united as aforesaid, to be really a Bishop (or at least the chief of these
Pastors, or the sole Pastor:) And therefore the Church to be truly and
univocally a Church of Divine institution: Though it were never so much granted
that Archbishops were over them, as the Apostles were overthose Acts 14. 23.

And then when the Parish Churches are once proved true Churches, whether the
Diocesane be so or not, is nothing to our controversy with the Separatists.
But for my part I cannot confute the lawfulness of a Diocese as consisting of
many particular Churches with their Bishops, as I can a Diocese which has put
them all down.

CHAP. IX. The second Argument: from the Deposition of the primitive species of
Bishops, and the erecting of a humane inconsistent species in their stead: A
specific difference proved.
ARGUMENT II.
A Humane inconsistent species of Bishops erected instead of the
Divinelyinstituted species thereby deposed, is unlawful. But such is the
Diocesan species now opposed -- Ergo.

I have hitherto charged it with the changing of the Church Form: Now of the
form or species of Bishops. And here I need not add much to the former, because
they are coincident, and in proving the one I have already proved the other.

A Bishop of one Church united for Individuals Communion, and a Bishop of one
Church united only for Communion in specie actionum, are not the same. But
because I hear many say that Magis and Minus non variant speciem, And that a
Greater and a Lesser Diocese make neither the Church, nor Bishop to be of a
different species, I am here to prove the contrary.

And first let it be remembered in what predicament the things in question are,
a Church and a Bishop: That is, They are relations. Then let it be remembered
what goes to the essence and definition of a Relation, that is, The Relate,
the Correlate, the Subject, the Fundamentum (or as some speak the Ratio
fundandi also) and the Terminus. Now where these are not the same, or any of
these, then the Relation is not the same: because where an essential ingredient
is wanting, the essence is wanting.

Again it must be remembered that many Natural Relations are so founded in an
act past, that the Relation resulteth from it without depending on any thing
future. As God is Creator quia jam creavit, Pater est qui genuit. But there are
other Relations which are founded in mere Undertaking, Mandate authority, and
obligation to future actions: As he is a Tutor, a Schoolmaster, a Judge, a
Chancellor, a Pilot, a Bishop, a Husband, etc. who by mandate and undertaking
is authorized and obliged to such and such works, employed in the names. And in
these cases, there is nothing more specifieth the offices than the work of the
office, which is, its nearest End. And these nearest ends are ever essential to
such Relations; whether you will call them the T^rmini or End, or by what other
name, we contend not.

And therefore Aquinas and all, 1. 2. q. 18. art. 2. and others commonly agree,
that the Object and the End do specify humane acts.

But remote ends may be the same in Acts, (and so in Offices) of the same
species; It proving but a Generical agreement (which yet may be in specie
subalterna.) All humane Acts should have the same ultimate end, that is, The
pleasing of God in the resplendency of his Glory, and the felicity of man. Yet
this makes them not all of the same infimae speciei. All Government intends
the common good; and yet there are different species of Government. All Church
Government is for the good of the Church, and for the killing of sin, and the
promoting of faith and holiness: And yet there are different species of Church
Governors.

But besides the Object and End, (which all agree to) there are by Schoolmen
and Casuists, said to be circumstances, which may also specify Moral acts. The
Aqu. 1. 2. q. 18. art. 3. 5. and 10. and q. 72. art. 9. and Cajet. and Medin.
ib.
seven named by Cicero in Rhetor. are, Quis, Quid, Ubi, Quibus auxiliis, Cur,
Quomodo, Quando: And Aquinas and others tell us that these circumstances
communicate special Goodness or evil to actions. Vid. P. Soto in relect. 5. in
fine de bonit. and mal. act. Greg. de Valent. tom. 2. qu. 13. puncto 4. Jos.
Angles in Florib. 2. sent. d. 37. q. 3. a. 5. p. 2.

Greg Sayrus in Clav. Regia Lib. 2. Cap. 3. page 54. gives us these two notes
to know when circumstances specify actions.

1. Quando Circumstantia novam conformitatem, aut deformitatem actui tribuit;
ita ut peculiariter conveniat vel repugnet rectae rationi, novam speciem
constituit: Rat. Quia in hoc casu circumstantia transit in rationem objecti --
2. Quotiescunque circumstantia non respicit specialem ordinem rationis in bono
vel malo nisi praesupposita alia circumstantia a qua actus moralis habet
speciem boni vel mali quam solam intra eandem speciem auget, vel diminuit,
reddendo actum illum meliorem aut pejorem, toties circumstantia illa aggravans
vel diminuens, non autem speciem mutans, censenda est: ut quantitas v. g. magna
vel parva in furto.

Note also that though Relatio in forma relationis, non recipit magis and
minus; e. g. Titius non est magis Pater quam Sempronius; Yet quoad subjectum,
and aliquando quoad fundamentum and correlatum, it may recipere magis and
minus, so that magis vel minus shall change the species. This is in such cases,
wherein the alteration of Quantity alters the Capacity of the subject quoad
finem essentialem. For as in Physics, besides the Matter, the Dispositio
materiae (which Aristotle calls Privation) is necessary ad formam recipiendam
(which is commonly called A third Principle; but I would call it, the Conditio
necessaria of the Material Principle;) so in Relations there must be the
Dispositio necessaria subjecti, or else there can no relation result. E. g. to
the being of a house, some quantity is necessary to the End, that is,
habitation; And therefore it is no house, except equivocally which is no bigger
than an egg-shell: So to the being of a Ship, of a Church, etc. that which is
no bigger than a nutshel is no Ship or Church, though you call it so or
Consecrate it, etc. And on the other side, It is not a spoon, a dish, a ladle,
a pen, which is as big as a Church, a Ship, a House. Yea a Ship and a Boat do
differ in specie, though both have the same End, (safe passage over the waters
by portage) by the circumstantial differences of the End and Subject.

So also in Societies; the whole world, or a Kingdom is too big to be a Family:
And a Family is too little to be a Kingdom. Pagus, Vicus, Civitas, Regnum
differ principally in their Ends, and next in their Quantity of the subject
matter, because every quantity is not capable of the same Essential End.

These things being premised, for the use of such ignorant Lads only as know
them not, who may possibly study the controversy, I proceed to my proofs.

I. And I will begin (though it be weakest in it self) with an Argument ad
hominem; For with the men that I now deal with, I shall take that to be the
most effectual argument, which is fetched from their interest, and fitted to
their wills. I remember that once when an Army was resolved for Liberty of
Conscience, for all that professed the fundamentals of faith in God by Jesus
Christ, and the Parliament appointed some of us to draw up a Catalogue of
fundamentals, (which I thought was best done by giving them the Sacramental
Covenant, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue) a good man, (with others of
his mind) would needs have many more fundamentals, than I was for, and among
others, (That to allow our selves or others in known sin, is inconsistent with
salvation (or is damnable) I told him that I would not dispute against it, but
undertake to make him cast it by without dispute: And when they would not
believe me, but went on, I did all that I promised presently with telling them,
You know that the Parliament take Independency to be a sin; and they will say,
If we allow or tolerate them, they here pronounce the sentence of damnation on
us under their own hands] Dictum factum; we had no more of that fundamental.

I have greater confidence of prevailing with Diocesans by such an argument: In
taking the Covenant, in the Westminster Assembly, it would not pass till the
parenthesis describing the English species of Prelacy was inserted; because
many declared that they were not against all Episcopacy, but only the present
English species. Accordingly those that took the Covenant in that sense, take
not themselves bound to endeavor the extirpation of all Episcopacy but only of
that species: And they that would have conformed on the terms of the Kings
Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, went on this supposition that the
species of Prelacy was altered by it. Now I put these questions to the
Diocesans. Quest. 1. If a Usurper by power should take down all the Diocesans
(and their lands, Lordships, and Courts) and turn them into Parish Bishops, and
say, I alter not the species but the degree, would they believe him? Quest. 2.
If one that thinks himself obliged by the Vow or Covenant against this
species only, should think that he answers his obligation, if he procure no
other alteration than is made in the Kings forenamed Declaration, would they
tell him, You alter not the species unless you totally extirpate Episcopacy:
(supposing that he had power to do it.) Quest. 3. Seeing most that we speak
with who conform, and who take or plead for the Oxford Oath [Never to endeavor
any alteration of Church Government] do tell us that the meaning is only that
we will not endeavor to alter the present species, which is Episcopacy, and
not the appurtenances, as Chancellors, etc. I ask, If it should please the King
to take down all Diocesanes, and to set up only a Bishop in every Parish or
Independent Church, and say, I change not the species; or if I believed that
this were a Change of the English species of Church Government I would not do
it: what answer would they give to this? Quest. 4. If a Conformist or one that
has taken that Oath, shall say, I did subscribe and swear only not to
endeavor an alteration of the species, but not of the degree: Therefore I will
do all that I can to take down Diocesans, and to set up Congregational or
Parochial Bishops in their stead, will you tell this man that indeed by so
doing he endeavors not to change the species? Quest. 5. Seeing many of the
greatest opposers of Prelacy, do consent to a Congregational or Parochial
Bishop, will you grant that these are not at all your adversaries as to the
species of Church Government, but only as to the degree or extent of Dioceses?
These cases are practical: Therefore take heed how you resolve them, left you
do that which you are unwilling of. Quest. 6. And I may ask, Why is it that
many deny that it was a Parliament of Episcopal men, that raised the Army
against the King, only because in the Proposition sent to Nottingham they would
have had Episcopacy reduced to what is there intimated, and would have had
their power shortened? Come, come, deny not the plain truth, If magis and minus
non variant speciem, Parliament men, yea, and the Learnedest part of that Synod
who took down Bishops, were Episcopal men, yea, Prelatists as you are, for they
were but for a Gradual alteration at the beginning of their war, till they were
carried further by necessity and interest. Quest. 7. And I ask you also, why,
and with what front do you call us all Presbyterians, who offered Bishop Ushers
Model to the King and you in 1660. as the terms of Concord? Is it against your
Consciences merely to make us odious with you know whom? what can it be better,
if you grant that we are not only for Episcopacy in genere, but even for the
same species with your selves? Yea, those that are against Bishop Ushers Model,
and are only for Congregational or Parish Bishops, are it seems even for your
species: And are they not then Episcopal as well as you? So much ad hominem;
now ad rem.

II. Where the specifying Ends differ, there the Species of Relations differ.
But in the Churches and the Bishops in question the specifying Ends differ:
Ergo etc.

I will first manifest the truth of the Minor (for the Major is unquestionable)
of Churches, and next of Bishops.

1. The ends of a particular Church as described by us are these: 1. Communion
sensible and external; 2. And that local or presential; 3. And that personal by
all the body of the Church; 4. And that in the same Individual acts of Gods
public worship. 5. In watching over, or helping each other toward Heaven, by
provoking each other to love and to good works, and if a brother offend to tell
him of his fault; to comfort each other, and to live together in holiness, love
and peace. 6. To be related to the same Pastors, as those that are their
Ordinary Teachers, Governors and Guides in public worship, as laboring
amongst them and being ensamples to the flock. 7. To hold a distant Communion
with the neighbor associated concordant Churches, and particularly with those
nearest them of the first order of Composition; of which association this
particular Church is a part, for Communion of Churches as they are themselves a
Society for Communion of Individual Christians in a single Church.

2. Now the ends of our Diocesane Churches are not one of all these. For 1.
Their Communion is internal in Faith and Love; such as we have with the
Abassines. 2. It is distant only, and not presential at all: For as Diocesane
we never see each other it is like in our whole lives. 3. It is not personal (as
external and sensible) but only by the intervention of Delegates, Messengers,
Officers or Synods of such. 4. It is only in eadem specie of public worship
and sacred actions that we have Communion, but not in the same Individual
actions of worship: And so we may have Communion with the Antipodes, while we
believe the same Scriptures and Creed, and use the same Sacraments, etc. in
specie. 5. We have no converse with one another at all as Diocesane: (though as
Parochial we may)* we never meet together, pray together, hear together, exhort
or watch over or help each other: If a Brother trespass we tell him not of his
fault, etc. for we never know one of five hundred in the Diocese, no more than
men of another Country. 6. We hear not the same Teachers; we have not the same
Guides to resolve our doubts, and to instruct us as we need; We have not the
same Priests to join with in Gods public worship: But he that Teaches and
officiateth in one Church, has no power in another: Only we have the same
Bishop to call (not the people before him to teach and warn and comfort them,
but) the Parson and Churchwardens; or rather the same Lay-Chancellor and his
Court, and the same Canons (for silencing our Ministers, Excommunicating many
conscionable Nonconformists, etc.) which not only all the Diocese has, but all
the Land. Not one of many hundreds of the Diocese ever sees the Bishop in all
his life. 7. A Diocese is it self a compound of particular Churches associated
(Though mortified quantum in Diocesanis;) And therefore cannot be a
constitutive part of such a first order of Association, as a particular Church
may be or is. These are the differences in the Ends.

Now lay all these together, and try, whether the differences in so many parts
of the Ends of the Society, make not a Specific difference in Societies.
Whether [a company of Christians associated with the same present Pastors, for
presential personal Communion in Gods public worship, Sacraments, Teaching,
and Guidance, and for mutual assistance in holy converse and living, etc. and
cohabiting in a vicinity capable of this converse and Communion] be a Society
of the same species with [A company of Congregations associated (or rather
never associated) to hold a distant Communion in the same species of Belief,
Prayer, Sacraments, etc. under several appropriate Pastors, not living (ut
Parochiani*) in any such vicinity as may render them capable of any of the
foresaid present assistances or Communion: (unless in travail men accidentally
come together as, we may do with men of other lands.)] It is notorious that
these Essentiating Ends of the two sorts of Societies are distinct; and
therefore the Societies are essentially distinct.

Even as a City, Borough, or Corporation, are part of a Kingdom, and are
specifically distinct societies from the Kingdom. (For the Parts may have a
proper subordinate specification, which all set together may constitute one
more comprehensive species: As a Clock, and the several wheels and parts of
that Clock may differ in specie, though not as coordinate species) A Kingdom
may possibly be no bigger than a City: But yet the form of a Kingdom and of a
City do differ in the Ends of the Societies. So a Family in specie differs
from a City, which is compact of many Families: so a Troop differs in specie
from a Regiment, and a Regiment from an Army, a College from an University, a
bedchamber which is part of an house from an house, though yet it is possible
that a house may be but one room, and an University but one College, and an
Army but one Regiment, etc.

Now let us enquire whether de jure divino there ought to be such a Society as
I have described, associating for personal present Communion and assistance as
aforesaid. And this I have fully proved before Chap. 3. Acts 14. 23. They
ordained them Elders in every Church. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Know them that labor
among and are over you in the Lord, and highly esteem them in love for their
works sake: and be at peace among your selves. Heb. 13. 7. 17. Remember them
which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God. Act. 20.
28. Take heed to your selves and to all the flock, etc. v. 31. I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. 20. publicly and house by house. 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. The Elders that are among you, etc. feed the flock (not a
particle of the flock) Mat. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass against thee, tell
him his fault between thee and him; If he hear thee not, take two -- If he hear
not them, tell the Church -- If with Seldom, de Synedr. and the Erastians by
the Church were meant the Sanhedrim, it would tend to the confirmation of what
we plead for; considering how thin both Council (and Synagogues) were, and in
how small places. But against that sense, see Galaspies Aarons Rod, etc.

Heb. 10. 22. etc. Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, But
exhort one another -- 1 Cor. 11. When ye come together in the Church, 1 Cor.
14, etc. See the Text as forecited Chap. 3.

It is then manifest that Churches associated for such present Communion of
Christians, is of Gods appointment, which Thorndike in a set Treatise proves
to be the ground of Discipline.

2. Next I will show that the Bishops of such a particular Church and of a
compound Diocese are offices specifically different (a finibus.)

1. The Bishop of a particular Church is related to another Correlate,
specifically distinct from the said Diocesane: Therefore his office is
specifically distinct. The Antecedent is before proved, and the Consequence no
sober man will question.

2. And their works are specifically distinct.

1. The work of the one is, 1. To be the ordinary public Teacher of the
Church; 2. To Congregate the Church; 3. To be their Guide in present worship;
4. To give them the Lords Supper; 5. To watch over and guide them personally in
their conversation; and so of the rest forenamed.

2. The work of the other is, 1. To send Curates to be the ordinary Teacher,
and Guides, and Priests to the people; even to each Parish one. 2. To have a
Lay Chancellors Court to trouble them in a secular mode, and to judge men to
excommunication and absolution. 3. To visit some Towns in his Diocese* and
there to call together the Clergy and Churchwardens, once in three years, (or a
year if he please.) 4. To have an Archdeacon to keep some kind of Courts under
him in certain places, by himself or his official. 5. To grant Licenses to
Marry: 6. And to preach: 7. And to eat flesh in Lent. 8. To suspend or silence
Preachers. 9. To lay his hands on Children or others, for the Ceremony of
Confirmation; perhaps on the thousandth or five hundredth part of his Diocese,
(though dejure he should do it to every one) 10. To preach as often as he please
in his Cathedral, or where he will.

But as for the aforesaid work of a Bishop of a particular Church, he is not to
do it, nor any one part of it, that I know of. For whereas the true office of
such a Bishop is (as Dr. Hammond in his Annotat. well describes it) by a
Ministerial participation to subserve Christ to his whole flock in the
threefold work of a teacher, a Priest, and a Ruler, he does no one part of all.
1. Instead of Teaching his flock, he (if he be one of the extraordinary best)
does only publicly preach once or twice a week to the thousandth or five
hundredth or hundredth part of his flock: (But so do very few of them, but some
it may be once in a month or a year) And as to the personal care of their
Souls, he has not one Parish that he takes the care of, to teach them
personally. 2. He seldom does officiate in public Prayer, Praise, and
Sacrament to any part of his flock: And when he does, it is but to a particle
of the foresaid proportion: But when others do it, he says, He does it by
them. 3. He does not at all govern his flock with that which is the true
Pastoral Government; which is in person among them to guide them, and resolve
their doubts, and admit those to Communion that are fit, and refuse the unfit;
To admonish all the scandalous and unruly, as personally known to him, to watch
over them and confirm the weak, and refel seducers when they come among them.
But instead of this, he never sees them, (as to the main body of his flock)
nor knows them, but summoneth their Teachers and Churchwardens, (and such as
others that dwell among them, or his Apparitors will accuse to him) to come
before his Lay-Chancellours Court, as aforesaid, and in his Vi^itation to meet
him: so that here is none of the same work no nor Government it self, but
another kind of Government.

And here note, 1. That the foresaid three parts of the office (Teaching,
Worshipping, and Ruling) are all Essential to the office; so that if he wanted
but any One of them, he were not an Officer of the same species with those that
have them all, much more if he have but One, yea, not One of all.

2. That the flock or Church is not to be denominated from a small or
inconsiderable part of it, but from the main Body. Therefore he that is the
Teacher but of one Congregation of a thousand, or many hundreds, or scores, is
not to be therefore called, the Teacher of that Church or Flock, which
consists of so many Congregations: And so also for Worship and personal
conduct, He is not a Priest to that flock, etc. Much less when he undertaketh
not one Parish.

Obj. So you may say of one of the old City Churches, such as Alexandria where
the Bishop preached but to one Congregation; or of our Parishes that have
Chapels, where the Curate teaches in the Chapels; or wherever there are many
Presbyters to a Congregation: All do not preach, at least to all the people.

Ans. 1. I doubt not but Alexandria and all such places, should have had many
Churches and Bishops, as the Christians grew too many to be in and under one.

2. But yet when they had several Churches and Presbyters, the people were not
at all tied to their own Parishes, but might come to hear and join with the
Bishop as often as they pleased: which though they could not do all at once, they
might do by turns, some one day and some another: And so they did. So that
still they had personal Communion with him, though not every day. 3. And they
lived in Vicinity, where they were capable of Converse, and personal notice,
and private help from one another. 4. And the Presbyters all joined in personal
oversight or Government of the whole flock, and were each one capable of
personal admonition and exhortation to any member. 5. And those that attended
the Bishop and did not frequently officiate in the chief actions, yet were
present with the Church, and assisted him in officiating, and were ready to do
the rest when ever he appointed them or there was need: so that though quoad
exercitium they did not the chief parts of the work every day, or usually, yet,
1. it was all the three parts of the Pastoral office which they did, and
undertook to do, in season: 2. And that to the same Church in person by
themselves. So that though Churches that swell to a disordered bulk, are not in
that perfect order as more capable Societies may be; yet whilst their
Communion is personal, present, as aforesaid, the Church species is not altered
as in our Dioceses it is.

III. A diverse fundamentum vel ratio fundandi, proves a diversity of
Relations: But a true Parish Bishop and our Diocesanes have fundamenta that are
in specie diverse; And so have a particular Church and a Diocesane Church: Ergo,
a Parish Church and Bishop, and a Diocesane Church and Bishop are specie diverse.

The Major is undeniable. The Minor I prove by showing the diversity.

1. The Fundamentum of the Relation of a Particular Church, is either 1. Of the
Relation of the Church to God: 2. Or their relation as fellow members one to
another: 3. Or of their joint relation to their Pastors or Bishops: 4. Or of
their Bishops or Pastors relation to them. For certainly a Church is not only
compounded of various Materials, but its form is a compounded of these Four
Relations set together, and every one is Essential to it (And he that cannot
distinguish cannot understand.) Now everyone of all these compounding
Relations, is founded in a mutual consent.

1. The Relation of the Members, Pastors, and the whole Church to God is
founded in Gods consent and theirs: Gods is signified 1. By his Scripture
Institution and Command: 2. By his qualifying and disposing the persons: 3. By
his providential giving them opportunity: 4. And ad ordinem where it can be
had, by the Ordainers (as to the Pastors relation) who are Gods ministers to
invest them in the office, 5. And by his moving the hearts of the People to
consent (which belongs to the giving of opportunity.)

The Relation of all these to God, is secondarily founded in their own consent
(that it may be a Contract:) The Pastors express theirs, in their Ordination in
general, and in their Induction or fixing in that particular Church, to the
Ordainers, and to the people. The members express their consent, either plainly
in a Contract, or impliedly by actual convention and submission, and performing
of their duties.

2. The Relation of the members to each other, is founded in their said
Explicit or Implicit consent among themselves, joined to their foresaid
consent to God.

3. The Relation of the Members to their Pastors, is founded Remotely in the
said signification of Gods will, by his Word and Providence, and by the
Ordainers, (for they are but Ministers, and operate but by signifying Gods
will.) And nextly, by the mutual consent of the People and the Pastors.

4. The Relation of the Pastors to the flock is accordingly founded, 1.
Remotely in the said signification of Gods will by his Word, Gifts,
Disposition, Opportunity, and by the Ministry of the Ordainers: 2. And nextly
by the consent of Pastors and People. Thus is a particular Church-relation
founded, and all these parts are necessary thereunto.

But as for our Diocesane Churches, which have no particular Churches under
them, nor Bishops, but only Congregations with several Curates, being not
politically and properly Churches, (For I meddle not with such A. Bishops
Dioceses as consist of many true Churches with their proper Bishops*) let us
see from what foundation they result.

1. As to their Relation to God, he never expressed his Consent, nor owneth
them (that ever I could hear proved) And therefore the Fundamental Contract is
wanting. Those that go Dr. Stillingfleet's and Bishop Reynold's way, and say,
No Form of Government is of Gods appointment, do grant that the Diocesane form
is not: But that the Congregational form is, I have fully proved. Therefore
they have not the same Foundation.

2. And as to the Relation of the Members of a Diocese to one another, there is
no mutual consent truly nor seemingly signified by them: what ever some few may
do, who are not the Diocese, it is certain that the Diocese as such do neither
Explicitly nor Impliedly by word or deed express any such Church consent, but
rather the clean contrary. For 1. Their Dwelling in the Diocese is no more a
profession of consent, than the Christians dwelling in Constantinople shows
them to be Mahometans: For their Ancestors there lived, and they have no other
dwelling.

2. Their choosing a Parliament who consent is no proof of their consent. 1.
Because it is not past a sixth or tenth or twentieth part of the Members that
choose Parliament men. 2. Because they never intend to choose them for any such
use as to be the choosers of their Religion, or Church, and to dispose of their
Souls: But only to regulate Church matters according to Gods word, which when
they go against, they go beyond, and against the peoples consent. As in
choosing Parliament men, we do not trust them to choose husbands and wives and
Masters and servants for all the people: Nor can we commit that trust (for the
choice of our Religion or Church) to others statedly, which Gods Word and
Nature have bound us to use our selves. Or if such mischoose for us, they
disoblige us from accepting their choice. I am sure the Papists think not that
they choose Parliament men to choose a Church for them: Nor would the
Prelatists think so, if the Parliament should prove Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptists, or Papists.

3. The Diocese does not signify Consent to a Church relation, by the
Churchwardens or accused persons coming to the Chancellors or Bishops Courts.
For 1. It is but a small number comparatively that do so. 2. They are
compelled, and are well known to come full sorely against their wills: They are
undone if they refuse: And submission and patience, are not subjection nor
consent. 3. They most commonly profess to come to these Courts in obedience to
the King, and as they are empowered by him, and strengthened by his sword: And
not at all as Church-Pastors empowered by Christ: For who takes the Chancellor
to be such?

4. The appearance of the Clergy at the Bishops Visitation, and their
Conformity, is no proof of the peoples consent. For the Ministers are distinct
persons, and have a distinct interest, and are no way empowered to signify the
peoples consent.

5. Yea, they show their dissent, 1. By being so backward to be made
Churchwardens: 2. So backward to take their Oaths: 3. So backward to present:
4. So backward to appear at their Courts. 5. Doing it on a civil account as
obeying the Kings Officers. 6. So few of them ever coming to a Bishop to be
instructed, resolved, yea or for the ceremony of Confirmation.

So that the people can never be proved to consent to a Diocesane Church State.

And if they had, that is not the same as a consent to a Congregational or
Parish Church State.

3. The same I need not say over again as to the Diocesane Bishop, Chancellor
and Archdeacon: They consent to the Parish Ministers where they are tolerable,
by word or daily attendance in Gods worship: But I know England so well as that
I know that as they never choose their Bishops, or Chancellors, (but the King
chooses them, and a Dean and a few Prebends pro forma consent) so they are
never called to express their consent, nor do any considerable part of the
Diocese usually consent indeed; some never mind such matters: others say, the
King may put in whom he will; it is no act of theirs: others had rather have a
good one than a bad one, but had rather yet have none at all, especially of
late since so many hundred Ministers are silenced. And some would have Bishops
to silence the Ministers, and some are for them on a better account. But it is
no considerable part of the Diocese that signifies Consent. And as for the
formal demand to the standers by at the Consecration, whether any of them have
any thing against the Bishop, it is a ceremony fitter for a stage, than to come
here into an Argument.

4. And as for the Bishops and Chancellors relation to the People, when it
wants the word of God, and his consent, and the peoples consent, and has but
the Kings collation, the Deans and Chapters formal consent, and the Prelates
and Conformist Ministers consent, I may well conclude that here is not the same
Fundamentum as is of the Parochial and Pastors Church relation.

IV. And where there is not the same Relate and Correlate, there is not the
same Relation. But a Parochial Church and Pastor, and a Diocesane Church and
Pastor, are not the same Relate and Correlate. Ergo.

If they be, let them become Parochial Bishops and be still the same. But what
I have said of the difference of Ends and Foundations proves this; a
Combination of Christians into one Church primi ordinis for personal Communion,
is not the same with a Combination of Congregations for Communion mental or by
delegates only. And so of the Bishops of these several Churches.

V. If a Congregational Church or Pastor be of the same species with our
Diocesane Churches and Prelates, then a Church that extends through all the
Kingdom, yea to many Kingdoms, yea to the East and West Indies or Antipodes may
be of the same species also (and so its Pastor.) And so the Pope and his Church
may be of the same, (as to the magnitude) But the consequent is false: Ergo, so
is the antecedent.

The consequence in the Major is evident, because there is eadem ratio; For
their reason of denominating a Church One is because it has One Bishop; and by
their Principles there may be one Bishop to a Province, to a Kingdom, to an
Empire, to the World.

When all the subordinate Bishoprics were taken down to make up this Diocesane
Church of Lincoln which I live in, the Church was One, which before was many.
And if all the Bishops were taken down except the two Archbishops, the two
remaining Churches I confess would be of the same species with a Diocese. Yea,
if there were but One Church and Bishop in the Land. And why might not all
Europe on these terms make one particular Church? If you say, Because they are
not under one King, I answer, 1. That Is no reason: A King is a Civil extrinsick
Accidental head of a Church as a Church; and not a Constitutive Head: But a
Bishop is an Intrinsecal, Ecclesiastical Constitutive head, without whom it is
no Church (unless equivocally.) 2. Ten Kings may agree to give way to One
Bishop in all their Kingdoms (as they have done to the Papcy.) 3. The Roman
Empire was bigger than Europe: Why then might not that have been one only
Church of the same Species with a Diocese?

If they say that it is because one man is not capable of doing the work of a
Bishop for so many Countries. I Answer, Per se, he cannot do it for the
hundredth part of a Diocese: Per alios he may do it for all Europe: It is but
appointing some who shall appoint others, who shall appoint others, (and so to
the end of the chapter) to do it. There is but one Abuna in Abassia to Ordain,
(though numerous Bishops, who have not the Generative faculty; which Epiphanius
makes to be the difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, that the one
begets Fathers and the other but Sons: Their Country was converted by an
Eunuch.) It would be a notable dispute whether all the rest be true Bishops or
not (I think Yea; the Prelatists must think Nay.) And yet Brierwood says that
Abassia (after all its great diminutions) is as big as Italy, France, Spain,
and Germany. And does not the Pope govern per alios yet far more, and pretend
to govern the whole Christian World? while he sends one to Goa, another to
Mexico, (and Oviedo to Abassia, would they but have received him.)

Obj. But he has other Bishops under him, therefore he is not ejusdem speciei
as a Diocese. Answ. But the Abuna has no Ordainers under him. And the Bishop
has Chancellors, Deans, Archdeacons, Surrogates, Officials, and sometimes in
the days of old had Suffragans too, under him. (Quest. Was a Diocese then, One
Church, or two?) And what if a Patriarch or Pope put down all Bishops under
him, and exercise his power only by other sorts of officers? (They that can
demise, grant, let, what parts they please of their own office, may devise
enough.)

And seeing it would not alter the species, what if it should please the King
and Parliament to put down all the Bishops of England save One? I hope the
Bishops would not take that to be against the Canon of 1640. nor against the
Oxford Oath [of never endeavoring to Consent or Alter the Church Covernment]
(if it could have been past to be taken by the Parliament) Because the species
is not altered: And they tell us Nonconformists to draw us to Swear, that they
mean but the species. I make no doubt but at the rates of our present
Ordinations, One Bishop or Abuna with Chaplains enough, may Ordain Priests enough,
(and too many of all conscience) for all the Kings Dominions; and may silence
preachers enough, and may set up Chancellors, Surrogates, and Archdeacons enough
to do the present work. And it is pity that the land should be troubled with so
many when one would serve. I confess I would either have more or fewer had I my
wish.

And as for my Minor proposition, let him that thinks it wants proof, when
he has considered what is beforesaid, and how personal present Communion in
all Gods Church-worship, differs from the Communion of associated
Congregations by messengers, etc. think so still, if he be able so egregiously
to err.

But I must not so leave our Prelatists. I know that it is the common trick of
Sophisters, when they cannot make good an ill cause, to carry it into the dark,
or start a new controversy, and then they are safe. A Papist will wheel about
into the wilderness or thickets of Church history, and ask you what names you
can give of your Religion in all Ages, that one proposition of your Syllogism
may contain much of a Horse load or a Cart load of Books, and then I trow he
has done his work, if women be the judges. And others use to carry the
question a rebus ad verba: And so it is in the case in hand. But it is not the
name of a SPECIES that shall serve your turn. We know how hard it is in
Physics, to determine what it is that specifieth; and much more in Morals,
Politics and other Relatives. But Let the Logical notion of a species lie at
your mercy: It shall suffice us, that you may not make so great a change of the
Church-orders and Government of Gods institution, as to turn a thousand or
hundred Churches into one; and to deprive all Parishes or Churches Consociate
for presential Communion, of the privilege of having a Bishop of their own to
Teach, Worship, and Govern them presentially and per se. As if all the
Archbishops in the Ronan Empire had put down all the Bishops, and called
themselves the Bishops of the Churches. Of which more anon.

CHAP. X. Whether any form of Church Government be instituted by God as
necessary? or all left to humane prudence?
Obj. BUt Doctor Stillingfleet has invincibly proved that God has made no one
form of Church Government necessary, but left the choice to humane prudence.

Answ. I. If so, Why should we all swear to this one form, that we will never
endeavor to alter it? or (as the and caetera Oath) never consent to the
alteration of it, when we know not but the King may alter it, or command us to
endeavor it? Must there be such swearing to the perpetuating an alterable
unnecessary thing?

II. The word [Form] signifies either the essentials of Church policy, or the
Integrals, or accidents which Christ himself has settled: Or else it signifies
only some mutable accidents or modes, which God has left to humane prudence.
Of the first we deny man's power to change them. Of the later we grant it. Act.
2. 1. 42, 44, 46. Heb. 10. 22, etc and 13. 7, 17, 24. Act. 14. 23. and Act. 20.
1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 5. and 14. per tot.


1. It is undeniably of Divine institution that there be ordinary public
Assemblies for Gods solemn worship, and the peoples edification. 2. And that
Ministers of that office which Christ has instituted, be the officiating
Guides in these Assemblies. 3. And that Cohabiting Christians be the ordinary
stated bodies of these assemblies, and not live loosely to go every day as they
please from Church to Church, but ordinarily when they can, be settled members
of some one Church (To which cohabitation or vicinity, is one dispositio
materiae) 4. And that each of these Churches have their proper fixed Pastors,
and should not take up with unfixed various passing Ministers, unless in cases
of necessary unsetledness. 5. And that these settled Pastors should live among
the People, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. 5, etc. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 1
Cor. 11. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mat. 18. 15 Tit. 3. 10.
and watch over them personally, and know them, and be known of them in
doctrine and ensample, as to the main body of the flock. 6. That these
Relations and Communion be by mutual consent of the Pastors and the body of the
flock. 7. That these mutual Relations of Gods appointment and their own consent
do constitute them a spiritual society of Divine institution. 8. That this
Communion must be (as our Creed calls it) a Communion of Saints: that is, of
men professing Christianity and Holiness, and seeming such: And must extend to
a free Communication to each other, for the supply of corporal necessities; And
to a mutual assistance of each other in holy living. 9 That therefore there
must be some to discern and judge whether the persons that would enter this
Society and Communion, be Professed seeming Christians and Saints or not? And
whether they revolt by Heresy or wicked lives from their profession? And
whether they be impenitent in these revoltings? And therefore having
opportunity by presence or nearness to know them and the witnesses, must judge
of the credibility or reports or accusations? And must admonish the offenders,
and seek by all possible conviction and exhortation, with patience to draw them
to Repentance: And if no persuasion will prevail, to refuse to admit them to
the Communion of the Church, and to deliver them the Sacrament of Communion,
and to tell them openly of their sin and danger, and pronounce them liable to
Gods wrath till they do repent, and to charge the Church to avoid Communion
with them. 10. It is the particular Pastors of those Churches, to whose office
all this belongs. 11. If that Church have more Pastors than one, they must do
all this work in concord, and not divide nor thwart each other. So that as many
Physicians undertake one Patient, as each one singly of the same office, and
yet must do all by agreement, unless some one see that the rest would kill the
patient; so it is in this case. 12. All these particular Churches must in their
vicinities and capacities* live in Concord, and hold such a correspondency, and
Communion of Churches for mutual strength and edification, as tends to the
common good of all: The means of which are Messengers, Letters, and Synods as
there is occasion. All these twelve particulars I doubt not but so judicious
and worthy a man as Dr. Stillingfleet will easily concede. And indeed the sum
of them is granted in his book. And then whether you will call this a Form of
Government or not, how little care I for the mere name? 13. I may add this much
more, that All these Congregations are under the extrinsick Government of the
Magistrate, as Physicians are: And he only can rule them by the sword and force.

But then we will agree with Dr. Stillingfleet or any man, that God has left
all these things following without a particular determination to be determined
according to his General Laws. 1. Whether this Parochial or Congregational
Church shall always meet in one and the same place; or in case of persecution
or want of room, or by reason of the Age, Weakness, and distance of some
Members, may have several houses or Chapels of ease, where some parcels may
sometimes meet, who yet (at least per vices) may have personal present
Communion with the rest. 2. Whether a Church shall be great or small, that is,
of what number it shall consist, supposing that it be not so great or so small
as to be inconsistent with the end. 3. How many Pastors each Church shall have.
4. Whether among many One shall be a Chief, and upon supposition of his
preeminence in Parts, Grace, Age, and Experience, shall voluntarily be so far
submitted to by the rest, as may give him a Negative voice. 5. Whether such
officers of many Churches, shall consociate so as to join in Classes or Synods
stated for number, time and place. And whether their meetings shall be
constant, or occasional pro re nata. 6. Whether One in these meetings shall be
a stated Moderator, or only pro tempore, and shall have a Negative voice or
not, in the circumstantials of their Synodical work. 7. Whether certain
Agreements called Canons, shall be made voluntarily to bind up the several
Members of the Synods to one and the same way in undetermined circumstances of
their callings; or as an agreement and secondary obligation to their certain
duties. 8. Whether these Associations or Synods shall by their Delegates
constitute other provincial or larger associations for the same Ends: Who those
Delegates shall be. Whether one in those larger Synods also shall have such a
Negative as aforesaid. All these and such like we grant to be undetermined: And
if they will call only such Humane modes and circumstances by the name of Forms
of Government, we quarrel not de nomine, but de re do grant that such kind of
Forms or Formalities are not particularly determined of in Gods word.

9. And besides all these, whether successors of the Apostles in the ordinary
part of their work, as A. Bishops or General Ministers having the care of many
inferior Bishops and Churches, be not Lawful, yea, of Divine right, or whether
they be unlawful is a question which all Nonconformists are not agreed on among
themselves, so great is the difficulty of it. But for my own part, being
unsatisfied in it, I never presumed to meddle in any Ordinations, lest it
should belong to Apostolical A. Bishops only; and I resolved to submit herein
to the order of the Church wherever I should live.

III. But if you hold that Dr. Stillingfleet, Bishop Reynolds, and all those
Conformists who say that no Church Form is jure divino necessario, do extend
this (as expressly they do) to the Diocesane Form, Let it be observed, 1. That
we plead for no more than we have proved, (and they will confess I think) to be
jure divino. 2. And that we plead against swearing and subscribing to nothing
but what they themselves say is not of Gods institution. 3. That the proper
Prelatists affirm it to be of Divine Institution, or else they will renounce
it. 4. That the preface of the book of Ordination to which we must subscribe or
declare Assent and Consent, does make this Episcopacy to be a distinct Order
from Presbyters, as a thing certain by Gods word. This therefore I wonder how
they can subscribe to, who say no Form is jure divino: I am sure they persuade
us not to subscribe it, while they disprove it.

And I would have leave to debate the Case of the Church of England a little
with these Humanists, and to ask them, If no Church Form be of Gods making, 1.
Why may not the King and Parliament put it down as aforesaid? 2. But specially
who made the Form of the Church of England which we must swear to -- If another
Church, then that other was not of the same Form; otherwise that Form was made
before, which is a contradiction. If it was of another Form, I ask, what it
was? and who made the Form of that other Church which made this Church Form?
and so to the Original? If Bishops or Synods made it, still they were parts of
a Church, or of no Church. If of no Church, what Bishops were those, and by
what power did they make new Church Forms that were of none themselves? If an
Emperor or King first made them, either he was himself a member of a Church, or
of no Church. If of a Church, what form had that Church? And why should not
that first form stand? And who made that form? and so ad originem. If he was of
no Church, how came he by power to make Church forms, that was of none himself?
Nemo dat quod non habet. It Is no honor to Prelacy to be so made. And were they
Christians or no Christians that made the Diocesane Form? If Christians, were
they orderly Christians, or rebellious? If orderly, how happened it that they
were of no Church themselves, when the Apostles settled so much of Church Form
and Order, as I have before named? If rebellious, they were a dishonorable
original of Diocesanes.

And if the Church Form be not of Divine institution, then the Church it self
is not. For forma dat nomen and esse. And so the cause is given up to the
Brownists by these Learned moderate men, so far as that there is no Church in
England of Divine institution. Were it not that when in general they have said
that no Church Form of Government is so Divine, they again so far unsay it, as
to confess the Parith Churches or Congregations with their Pastors to be of
Divine institution and of continued necessity.

All that is to be said by and for them is this, That the Apostles were the
makers of the English or Diocesane Form, but not of that only, but of the
Presbyterian (and Independent) also; and so made no one necessary but left all
indifferent: Or that they made one of these Forms as mutable, allowing men to
change it.

Answ. But 1. I have proved what they made; Let them prove that they made any
other, of a different sort, not subordinate or supraordinate, if they can. 2.
And let them prove the mutability of that which they made, and their power to
change it, which they assert. Till one of these is proved, we are or should be
in possession of that which was certainly first made.

I am bold to conclude this argument with the speech of a bold but a wise and
holy man, Joh. Chrysostom de Sacerdotio lib. 3. page (mihi) 48. cap. 15. [And
when some (Bishops) have obtained that prefecture of a Province not belonging
to them, and others of one FAR GREATER THAN THEIR OWN proper STRENGTH CAN BEAR,
THEY CERTAINLY BRING TO PASS, THAT THE CHURCH OF GOD SEEMS NOTHING TO DIFFER
FROM AN EURIPUS (or a confused turbulent changeling thing) -- -- and page 49.
AND DO NOT THESE THINGS DESERVE GODS THUNDERBOLT A THOUSAND TIMES? ARE THEY NOT
WORTHY TO BE PUNISHED WITH THE FIRE OF HELL? NOT THAT hell WHICH THE HOLY
SCRIPTURES THREATEN TO US; BUT EVEN OF ONE THAT IS FAR MORE GRIEVOUS.] Forgive
the words, my Lords; They are not mine but Chrysostom's: or if you will not
forgive the citing of them, I will bear it as he did the like. Only I will
abate you in my prognostication, or sentence, that far sorer hell fire than the
Scripture threameth, supposing this will be sharp enough, even for the most
dispersing, silencing persecuting Prelate; and imputing those words to honest
Chrysostom's vehement Oratory. And I Will tell you what went next before these
words, [And they do not only take in the unworthy (into the Priesthood) but
they cast out the worthy: For as if they had agreed both ways to spoil the
Church of God, and the first cause were not enough to kindle the wrath of God,
they add the second, or worse, to the former. For I judge it equally pestilent
to drive out the Profitable, and to take in the unprofitable: which certainly
they do, that the flock of Christ may from no part either find consolation, or
be able to take breath] O what would this man have said had he lived now in
England!

CHAP. XI. Argument 3. From the destruction of the order of Presbyters of
Divine Institution, and the Invention of a new order of Sub-half-Presbyters in
their stead.
ARGUMENT III.
THe office of Presbyters instituted by the Holy Ghost contains an Obligation
and Authority to Guide by Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline the flocks
committed to their care: But the office of a Diocesane, being one only Bishop
over many score or hundred Congregations, is destructive of that office of
Presbyters, which contains an obligation and authority to Guide by Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, (or the exercise of the Church keys) the flocks
committed to their care. Therefore the office of such a Diocesane is
destructive of the office of Presbyters instituted by the Holy Ghost.

The Major is thus proved by the Enumeration of the Acts which contain the
general office, and by the proof of the General power extending to those Acts:
viz.

1. They that had the Authority and Obligation to exercise the Church keys in
the Scripture sense, had the authority and obligation to Guide their flocks by
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. But the Presbyters of the Holy Ghosts
institution had the authority and obligation to exercise the Church keys, in
the Scripture sense: Ergo they had authority and obligation to Guide their
flocks by Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline.

2. Again: The office which contained an Authority and Obligation to Teach,
Exhort, Rebuke, publicly and privately, to judge of persons baptizable and to
baptize them, to Pray, Praise God, and administer the Lords Supper to the
Church, and to judge of them that are to receive it, to watch over them
privately, and publicly to Excommunicate the obstinately impenitent, and
absolve the penitent, does contain authority and obligation to Guide that flock
by Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. But such is the Office of Presbyters as
instituted by the Holy Ghost. -- Ergo -- etc.

Here note 1. That I am not now meddling with the Questions, Whether such
Presbyters hold this power in subordination to any superior Bishops; nor
whether there lie any appeal from them to a higher power in the Church? 2. Nor
am I now questioning, Whether in Scripture sense Bishops and Presbyters are all
one in Name or thing.

3. But that which I maintain is, 1. That there is no proof in Scripture that
God ever instituted any order of Presbyters which had not the forementioned
power of the keys. 2. And that God did institute such an Order of Presbyters as
had that power, de nomine and de re. And 3. That the Diocesane Office
destroys such, and sets up others in their stead. What God instituted I
will prove 1. Out of the Scripture records, 2. Out of the History of the Church
which long retained them, in some degree.

CHAP. XII. That God instituted such Presbyters as had the foresaid power of
the Keys, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline; and no other, proved by the
Sacred Scriptures.
THat God instituted such Presbyters and no other, I shall prove by the
enumeration and perusal of all the Texts of Scripture which mention them, (viz.
as instituted in the New Testament, and now in force.)

Act. 14. 23. When they had Ordained them Elders in every Church -- Compared
with Tit. 1. 5. That thou should Ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee -- 7. For a Bishop must be blameless as the steward of God. And
his power is described v. 11, 13. Chapter 2. 1, 7, 15. and 3. 10. intimate it.
Compare this with 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 5, 6.

1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine: compared with 1
Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6. which show that preaching the Gospel was their work, as
well as Ruling the Churches under them, as 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Romans
12. 7, 8. intimate

Acts 20. 17, 28. He sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church --
Take heed to your selves and to all the flocks over the which the Holy Ghost
has made you overseers, (or Bishops) to feed (or rule) the Church of God which
he has purchased with his own blood. v. 31. Therefore watch etc. v. 35. So
laboring, ye ought to support the weak.

Acts 11. 30. They sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Soul.
Acts 15. 2. 6. 22, 23. To the Apostles and Elders -- And the Apostles and
Elders came together to consider -- -- Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church -- -- The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren send greeting --
See v. 25, 28.

Acts. 6. 4. The decrees which were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which
were at Jerusalem.

Acts 2^. 18. The day following Paul went in with us unto James, and all the
Elders were present --

1 ^im. 4. 14. Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery --

1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are among you ^exhort, who also am an Elder; --
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight (or Episcopacy)
thereof, not by constraint but willingly -- Neither as being Lords over Gods
heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall
appear --

2 John 1. The Elder to the Elect Lady --

Whether those Texts, 1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder. v. 19. Receive not an
accusation against an Elder] speak of an Elder by Office or by Age, is
uncertain; if it be by Office, the other Texts describe them.

Jam. 5. 14. Is any man sick? Let him call for the Elders of the Church. All
these Texts show that every Church had Elders by the institution of the Holy
Ghost: That they were the Teachers, Worshippers, Rulers, and were among the
people, present with their flock, personally doing their Offices, etc. And the
Scripture mentions no other that I can find.

And of this I have Dr. Hammonds full confession, Annotat. in Act. 11. and
dissert. before cited: with all those whom he mentions of his party and mind.
And as for them of the contrary opinion, they tell us that in Scripture times
the Names Presbyter and Bishop were common: And that the word [Bishops]
sometimes signified all the Presbyters (the Bishops as Presbyters and the
Subpresbyters) as in Phil. 1. 1, 2. And that the word [Presbyters] sometimes
signifies the Bishops only, and sometime both conjunctly: But they are none of
them able to give us any one instance with proof, of a Text which speaks of
Subject Presbyters? (I mean subject in Order or degree to Bishops of the single
Churches, and not subject to the Apostles and General officers.) And while we
prove that God appointed such entire Presbyters as are here described, and they
cannot prove against (Dr. Hammond or us) that any one text speaks of a lower
order or rank, I think we need no other Scripture evidence.

CHAP. XIII. The same confirmed by the Ancients.
AS for Humane testimony, the heap is so great brought in by Dav. Blondel, that
I have the less mind to say any more of it; But shall only (besides all that is
said before on the by) recite a few of those testimones which most convinced my
own understanding in the reading of them in the Authors themselves, leaving
others to take what they see best out of Blondels store.

I. I know that somewhat may be said against what I shall first cite, but I
think not of sufficient force. I begin with it, though not first in time,
because first in Authority. The 1. Council. Nicaen. in their Epistle to the
Church of Alexand. and all the Churches of Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, thus
decree concerning those that were Ordained by Meletius, (as Socrat. lib. 1. c.
6. translated by Grynaeus) Hi autem qui Dei gratia and vestris precibus adjuti
ad nullum schisma deflexisse comperti sunt, sed intra Catholicae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae fines ab erroris labe vacuos se continuerint,
authoritatem habeant tum Ministros ordinandi, tum eos qui clero digni fuerint
nominandi, tum denique omnia ex lege and instituto Ecclesiastico libere
exequendi] Now ordaining Ministers and nominating men for the Clergy, are acts
which, if any, show Presbyters to be Rulers in the Church.

Obj. 1. Perhaps it is Bishops ordained by Meletius that are here spoken of: or
Bishops with the Presbyters respectively.

Answ. There is no more in the Text but this, [They decreed further touching
such as were entered into holy Orders by his laying on of hands, that they,
after confirmation with more mystical laying on of hands should be admitted
into the fellowship of the Church, with this condition that they should enjoy
their dignity and degree of Ministry, yet that they be inferior to all the
Pastors throughout every province and Church -- Moreover that they have no
authority to elect the Ministers approved by their censures, no not so much as
to nominate them which are to execute the Ecclesiastical functions, nor to
intermeddle with any thing touching them that are within Alexanders
jurisdiction, without the consent of the Bishop of the Catholic Church.] And
then they add as before, that those that fell not into Schism (as they did) Yet
I doubt not that they were not to Consecrate Ministers alone without the Bishop.
shall have authority to Consecrate Ministers, and nominate such as shall be
thought worthy of the Clergy. Now that it is Presbyters and not Bishops that
are here spoken of appears 1. In that it is without any note of eminency said
to be [such as were entered into Holy Orders.] 2. In that it is such as so
entered by the Laying on of Meletius's hands: Wherereas a Bishop must be
ordained by the hands of three Bishops. And the Schism of one of the three,
would not have frustrated the Ordination, if the other two stood firm in the
Catholic Union. 3. Because it is the privilege of Presbyters that is denied
them: Though they be not degraded, they are to be below all other Pastors in
every Church: which cannot be, that they shall be Bishops below all Presbyters.
4. Because the consent of the Bishop of the Catholic Church (where they shall
come) is necessary to their officiating. But if it could have been proved that
Bishops had been here included, yet while Presbyters also are included, it will
not invalidate the testimony. But indeed here is no such proof. I confess that
Nicephorus (a less credible Author) seems to apply it to Bishops Ordained by
Meletius: But no such thing can be gathered out of Sozomen, either Tripart.
lib. 1. c. 18. where he describes Meletius and his party, or Tripart lib. 2.
c. 12. where he recites the same Epistle that Socrates does. But I would
pretend to no more certainty than is evident.

II. Pius Episcop. Roman. in Biblioth. Pat. Tom. 3. p. 15. Epist. Justo
Episcopo inquit, [Presbyteri and Diaconi non ut Majorem, sed ut Ministrum
Christi te observent -- salutat te senatus pa^per Christi apud Romam
constitutus: saluta omne Collegium fratrum qui tecum sunt in Domino -- And
epist. prima eidem Justo, he reckons Timotby and Mark with the Presbyters
educated by the Apostles. Now if they were of the Senate, the College, and the
same name Presbyters as Bishops had, we have no reason to think that they had
not the power of the keys.

III. Tertullian de poenit. to cast himself down at the feet of the Presbyters;
which implies that they had the power of the keys for Absolution: And those
whom he calls [Seniores] Apolog. managed the Discipline, and that not in a
Chancellors Court, but in the same Congregations where and when they Assembled
for public worship. If any will say that Bishops are here included, I will not
deny it; But if they will say that when he names the Seniors and Presbyters
without distinction, that he excludes all save the Bishop alone, I shall not
believe that Tertullian speaks so un-intelligibly. Unless they will follow
Dr. Hammond and believe (as I do not) that there was yet but One Presbyter, who
was the Bishop in a Church, or in most Churches: which de facto would be for us.

IV. The Testimonies of Clem. Roman. Ignat. Justin Martyr, may be gathered out
of the words forecited. Hierom's Testimony in this case is so plain and full,
and trite in every writing (Epist ad Evagr. and passim, making them the
Apostles Successors, and the same with the Bishops, except only in ordination)
that I will not trouble you with reciting it.

V. Cyprian neither would nor could govern his Church without the concurrence
Epist. 28. p. 64. Edit. Goulartii.
of the Presbyters: (before cited) De Gaia desiderastis ut de Philumeno and
Fortunato hypodiaconis and Favorino acolutho, rescribam: cui rei non potui me
solum judicem dare; cum multi adhuc de Clero absentes sint; nec locum suum vel
sero repetendum putaverint, and haec singulorum tractanda sit and limanda
before ratio; non tantum cum collegis meis, sed and cum plebe ipsa universa.
Epist. 36. (edit. Goulart.) He shows that it is the Clergies duty, to take
care of the widows, the sick, the poor, the strangers: (he the Bishop was then
absent.) So also Ep. 37. And Epist. 10. he reprehendeth the Presbyters for
reconciling and absolving the Lapsed overhastily and with neglect and contempt
of the Bishop; but not as if the work were not their office work to do: Nay he
gives us this full plain testimony, that even in this public Absolution in
foro exteriore, the true custom of the Church was for the Bishop and his
Presbyters together to impose hands on the penitent and so absolve them,
receive them, and give them the Sacrament. Page 30. says he, Nam cum in
minoribus peccatis The next Epis. 7. is worthy to be read of all that suffer
for the truth to keep them from pride, unruliness, and scandal. and so is the 8.
agant peccatores poenitentiam justo tempore, and secundum disciplinae ordinem,
ad exomologesin veniant, and per impositionem manus Episcopi and Cleri jus
Communionis accipiant; Nunc crudo tempore, persecutione adhuc perseverante,
nondum restituta Ecclesiae ipsius pace, ad Communicationem admittuntur, and
offertur nomen eorum, and nondum poenitentia acta, nondum exomologesi facta,
nondum manu e. s ab Episcopo and Clero imposita, Eucharistia illis datur.]

Epist. 5. p. 15. He writes to the Clergy in his absence to do the work of
Discipline, even their own part and his, and (as no man doubts but they did
the whole work in the public assembly when he was absent so long time, so
(that you may see what kind of Chapel meetings they had) it being the custom
for encouragement of sufferers, to go to the Confessors and visit them and
there celebrate the Sacrament,) he persuades them that the people may not go
crowding by great companies at once, lest it stir up envy, and they be denied
entrance (it is like they were in Prison) and lose all while they are insatiable
to get more: But that one Presbyter and one Deacon go one day, and another
another day by turns, because the Change of persons, and vicissitude of meeters
would break the envy: and all should be done in meekness and humility.

But the words I insist on are, [Peto vos pro fide and religione vestra,
fungamini illic and Vestris partibus and meis, ut nihil vel ad disciplinam vel
ad diligentiam desit.] And if the whole work of Discipline be such as is partly
their own part, and partly what they may do in the Bishops absence in his
stead, it is within the power of their function: For a Layman or a Deacon
cannot do all the Presbyters work in his absence.

And Epist. 6. p. 17. Having exhorted the sufferers or confessors not to grow
proud by it, and lamented that some after sufferings grew insolent and were a
shame to the Church, he adds (Nec a Diaconis aut Presbyteris regi posse,]
Showing that even the Government of the Confessors belonged to them both in
their places: And of himself he says to his Presbyters, Solus rescribere nihil
potui, quando a primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine consilio vestro,
and sive Consensu Plebis meae, privata sententia gerere -- sed cum venero -- in
Commune tractabimus -- As to them that say, This was only Cyprians arbitrary
condescension, I answer, 1. He says Non potui, And 2. he elsewhere speaks of
it as due, 3. It agrees with the Canons and customs of those times: 4.
Cyprian pleads so much for the Bishops prerogative, that we have little
reason to think him both so submissive and imprudent, as to bring up ill
customs, and teach the Ministers and people to expect that as their part which
belonged not to them, and so to corrupt the Church.

And in the Ep. 11. p. 32. again he says [Ante exomologesin gravissimi and
extremi delicti factam, ante manum ab Episcopo and Clero in poenitentem
impositam, offerre lapsis pacem and Eucharistiam dare, id est sanctum Domini
corpus profanare audeant --

The same he has again Ep. 12. p. 37. (with an examinabuntur singula
praesentibus and judicantibus vobis (that is, the people, to show how great the
Church was.)

Afterward Ep. 14. he directs the Presbyters to absolve those by Imposition
of hands themselves without him that are infirm and in danger, but that the
rest must be publicly reconciled in the Church praesente and stantium plebe.
To recite all of this nature in Cyprian, would be too long.

VI. I will add next a General Testimony viz. the constant custom of all
Churches, even Rome it self, where the Presbyters have Governed without a
Bishop in the intervals, when after one Bishops death another was not chosen.
As before the choice of Fabian's successor you may see by the Epistles of the
Roman Clergy to Cyprian. Marcion was expelled by the Roman Presbytes sede
vacant, Epiphan. Haeres. 42. And if they had the power over one another, more
over the flock.

And I need bring no particular proofs of this: For when Bishops have been See
Instances in Blondel.. 3. p. 183, 184.
banished, imprisoned, dead, and the seat vacant a year, yea, diverse years
together (as it has been at Rome) was the Church no Church all that time? Had
it no Government? Was there no power of the Keys? Was the Church laid common to
all? This instance is so full as nothing can be said against it, but that it
was in Case of Necessity. But that only proves that it is the Presbyters
office work, though out of a case of necessity they must do it with the Bishop,
and not without him. But a Layman may not do a Presbyters proper work on such
a pretense. However the Church by this practice has declared it is judgment in
the case.

VII. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 23. is [Ut Episcopus nullius causam audiat
absque praesentia Clericorum suorum; Alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi,
nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur. If it be said that here is no mention
of their Consent, but of their Presence only, I answer, It is a presence
necessary to the Confirmation of the Bishops sentence: and the presence of
Dissenters would rather infirm the sentence (more than their absence) than
confirm it. And the conjunct Canons show that it is Consent that is meant. For,

Can. 32. it is said [Irrita erit donatio Episcoporum, vel venditio, vel
commutatio rei Ecclesiasticae, absque conniventia and subscriptione Clericorum:
where such a Connivence is meant as is joined with subscription. And if
subscription of the Presbyters was necessary in these cases, no less than
Consent is meant in the other.

Which is yet more apparent by those following Canons, which forbid the Bishop
to Ordain without his Clergy, or to accuse any of them but by proof in a Synod,
or to suffer a Presbyter to stand while he sits. And the Canons that place
the Bishop in consessu Presbyterorum, and set him in the midst of them in the
same seat in the Church, and call him their Colleague: The Canons which make
the Presbyters Governors of the Rural Churches, and make the Deacons servants
to them, of which the number is too great to be now recited --

Even here Can. 22. it is said [Episcopus sine Concilio Clerioorum suorum
Clericos Note it is not consilio but concilio.
non ordinet: Ita ut Civium assensum and conniventiam and testimonium quaerat.]
And if not sine concilio * then not contra consilium. And if the consent of the
Laity be necessary, sure the Clergies is so too.

Can. 29. Episcopus si Clerico vel Laico crimen imposuerit, deducatur ad
probationem in Synodum. Can. 30. Caveant Judices Ecclesiae ne absente eo cujus
causa ventilatur sententiam proferant; quia irrita erit, imo and causam in
Synodo profacto dabunt. And if a Bishop must not so much as accuse but in a
Synod on proof, much lefs might he be judge alone.

Can. 33. appoints that Bishops or Presbyters shall be invited to preach, and
consecrate the Oblation, when they come into strange Churches] So for there was
no difference.

Can. 34. Ut Episcopus in quolibet loco sedens, stare Presbyterum non patiatur.

35. Ut Episcopus in Ecclesia and in consessu Presbyterorum sublimior sedeat.
Intra domum vero Collegam Presbyterorum se esse cognoscat.

Can. 36. Presbyteri qui per Dioeceses Ecclesias regunt, etc.

Can 37. Diaconus ita se Presbyteri, ut Episcopi ministrum esse cognoscat. vid.
and Can. 38, 39, 40.

Yea even in Ordination it is said, Can. 2. Presbyterquum Ordinatur, Episcopo
eum benedicente, and manum super ejus tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui
praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi, super Caput illius teneant. Et
Can. 3. Diaconus quum ordinatur solus Episcopus, qui eum benedicit, manus super
caput illius ponat: quia non ad Sacerdotium sed ad ministerium consecratur] So
that Priesthood was to be conferred by the hands of Priests, and the Bishop's
alone was not enough; But Deacons might be Ordained by a Bishop without
Presbyters.]

What need I tire the Reader with other Councils testimonies? when this, though
called Provincial having 214 Bishops, and among them Aurelius, Augustine, etc.
is no less valuable than any General Council in the volumes of the Councils.

VIII. In the Arabic Canons of the Council. Nic. 1. (which I cite not for their
justification, but as testifying the matter of fact in the times of which they
were written whenever it was) it is said, Can. 47. After one Bishop is forbid
to absolve him that another has Excommunicated [Eadem Lex erit de Sacerdote,
id est, Ut nullus Sacerdos solvat aut liget quem alius Sacerdos solverit aut
ligaverit, quamdiu ille qui solvit aut ligavit vixerit: Post mortem vero
successor ejus solvet quem mortuus ligavit: sed debet Episcopus praeesse huic
negotio -- Neque convenit ut Episcopus aut Archiepiscopus solvat aut liget eum,
qui digne a Sacerdote solutus aut ligatus fuit, quamdiu ille qui solvit aut
ligavit vixerit.] Here you see the Priest may bind and loose, and that in foro
Ecclesiastico: yea so fast that no Bishop or Archbishop may loose or bind
contrarily during his life. Then Presbyters had the Keys.

And Can 57. (according to other Canons cited before) they say, [The
Arch-Presbyter in the Bishops absence shall be honored as the Bishop, because
he is in his place; and let him be the Head of the Priests, who are under his
power in the Church, with all that the Archdeacon is over.] And if one
Presbyter may Rule the rest as a Bishop, the Government of the flock is not
above their Order or place. If it be said that he does it as the Bishops
Deputy, it is answered often enough before. Spiritual Power (or Pastoral) is
deputable to none but such as are of the same Order: which is not properly a
deputation.

IX. Presbyters had power to Baptize and to celebrate the Lords Supper,
Therefore they had power to judge who were Baptizable, and who were capable of
the Lords Supper: For 1. Else they would not do it as Christ's Ministers, but as
the executioners of another judgment. And if so, they may give both Sacraments
to Turks and Infidels if they be bid. And then indeed the Priest is not the
Baptizer or Consecrater Morally, but the Bishop does it by the Priest: All
which are false. And a Presbyter may preach and Baptize in any Infidel Kingdom,
where no Bishop has any Diocese, and this as an ordinary case (in Turkey,
Tartary, China, Japan, etc.) And what Bishop shall there tell him whom to
Baptize where there is no Bishop? And the power of Baptizing is the first and
greatest Key of the Church, even the Key of admission.

And they that do among us deny a Presbyter the power of judging whom to
Baptize and give the Lords Supper to, do not give it to the Bishop (who knows
not of the persons) But the Directive part they commit to a Convocation of
Bishops and Presbyters; and the Judicial partly to the Priest, and partly to a
Lay-Chancellor.

X. Epiphanius Haeres. 75. says, [The Apostles did not set all in full order
at once: And at first there was need of Presbyters and Deacons; by whom both
Ecclesiastical affairs may be administered: Therefore where no man was found
worthy of Episcopacy, in that place no Bishop was set] By which it appears
that he thought that for some time some Churches were Governed without Bishops:
And if so, it there belonged to the Presbyters office to govern.

Whereto we may add the opinion of many Episcopal men, who think that during
the Apostles times, they were the only Bishops in most Churches themselves. And
if so, Then in their long and frequent absence the Presbyters must be the
governors.

XI. That many Councils have had Presbyters, yea many of them is past doubt:
Look but in the Councils subscriptions and you will see it. A Synod of some
Bishops and more Presbyters and Deacons gathered at Rome, decreed the
Excommunication of Novatianus and his adherents, Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43.

Noetus was convented, judged, expelled by the Session of Presbyters, Epiphan.
Haeres. 47. c. 1.

See a great number of instances of Councils held by Bishops with their
Presbyters in Blondel, de Episc. sect. 3. p. 202. Yea one was held at Rome
praesidentibus cum Joanne 12 Presbyteris, An. 964. vid. Blond. p. 203, 206, 207.

Yea they had places and votes in General Councils: Not only ut aliorum
procuratores, as Victor and Vincentius in Nic. 1. but as the Pastors of their
Churches, and in their proper right. I need not urge Selden's Arabic Catalogue
in Eutych. Alex. where there were two persons for diverse particular places: or
Zonaras who says, There were Priests, Deacons and Monks; nor Athanasius a
Deacon's presence: Evenof late the Council of Basil is a sufficient proof.

XII. The foresaid Canons of Carthage which are so full, are inserted into the
body of the Canon Law, and in the Canons of Egbert Archbishop of York, as
Bishop Usher and others have observed.

XXIII. Hierom's [Communi Presbyterorum Concilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur,]
seconded by Chrysostom and other Fathers, is a trite, but evident testimony.

XIV. That Presbyters had the Power of Excommunications see fully proved by
Calderwood, Altar. Damasc. p. 273.

XV. Basil's, Anaphora Bibl. Pat. Tom. 6. p. 22. makes every Church to have
Archpresbyters, Presbyters, and Deacons, making the Bishop to be but the
Archpresbyter.

CHAP. XIV. The Confessions of the greatest and Learnedest Prelatists.
1. THe Church of England does publicly notify her judgment, that Church
Government, Discipline, and the power of the Keys is not a thing aliene from or
above the Order of the Presbyters, but belongs to their office. 1. In that
they allow Presbyters to be members of Convocations (and that as chosen by the
Presbyters.) And whereas it is said, that the Lower house of Convocation are
but Advisers to the Upper, I answer, All together have but an advising power to
the King and Parliament; But in that sort of power, the lower house has its
part, as experience shows.

2. There are many exempt Jurisdictions in England, (as the Kings Chapel, The
Deanery of Windsor, and Wolverhampton, Bridgenorth, (where six Parishes are
governed by a Court held by a Presbyter) and many more, which show that it is
consistent with the Presbyters office.

3. The Archdeacons who are no Bishops exercise some Government; And so do
their Officials under them. The Objection from Deputation is answered.

4. The Surrogates of the Bishops, whether Vicar General, Principal Official,
or Commissaries, are allowed a certain part of government.

5. They that give Lay-Chancellors the power of Judicial Excommunication and
Absolution, cannot think a Presbyter incapable of it.

6. A Presbyter proforma often passes the sentence of Excommunication and
Absolution in the Chancellors Court when he has judged it.

7. A Presbyter in the Church must publish that Excommunication and Absolution.

8. By allowing Presbyters to baptize, and to deliver the Lords Supper, and to
keep some back for that time, and to admit them again if they openly profess to
repent and amend their naughty lives, and to absolve the sick, they intimate
that the Power of the Keys belongs to them, though they contradict themselves
otherwise by denying it them.

9. And in Ordination the Presbyter is required to exercise discipline: And the
words of Act. 20. 28. were formerly used to them [Take heed to your selves and
to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers (or
Bishops) to feed (or Rule) the Church of God: Whence Bishop Usher gathers
that the Churches sense was that the Presbyters had a joint power with the
Bishop in Church Government. And though lately Anno 1662. this be altered, and
those words left out, yet it is not any such new change that can disprove this
to have been the meaning of them that made the book of Ordination, and that
used it.

II. Archbishop Cranmer with the rest of the Commissioners appointed by King
Edward the Sixth for the Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, decreed the
administering Discipline in every Parish by the Minister and certain Elders;
Laboring and intending by all means to bring in the ancient discipline. Vid.
Reform. Leg. Eccles. tit. de Divinis Officiis cap. 10. And our Liturgy wishes
this Godly Discipline restored, and substituteth the Curses till it can be
done. And the same Cranmer was the first of 46 who in the time of King Henry
the Eighth affirmed (in a book called The Bishops Book, to be seen in Fox's
Martyrology,) that the difference of Bishops was a device of the ancient
Fathers, and not mentioned in Scripture. And of the opinion of Cranmer with
others in this point, his own papers published by Dr. Stillingfleet Irenic. p.
390, 391, etc. are so full a proof, that no more is needful.

III. Dr. Richard Cosins in his Tables shows how Church Discipline is partly
exercised by Presbyters, and by the Kings Commission may be much more. And it
is not aliene to their office.

IV. Hooker Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. pleads against the Divine settlement of one
form of Government: And lib. 7. Sect. 7. p. 17, 18. he shows at large that
the Bishops with their Presbyters as a Consess governed the Churches: And that
in this respect, [It is most certain truth, that the Churches Cathedral and the
Bishops of them are as glasses wherein the face and very countenance of
Apostolical antiquity remains yet to be seen, notwithstanding the alterations
which tract of time and course of the world has brought. And much he has
elsewhere, which grants that the Presbyters are Church governors, though not
in equality with the Bishops.

V. Dr. Field, lib. 5. c. 27. showing how the Apostles first limiting and
fixing of Pastors to particular Churches, was a giving them Jurisdiction,
says, [this assigning to men having the power of order, the persons to whom
they were to minister holy things, and of whom they were to take the care, and
the subjecting of such persons to them, gave them the power of Jurisdiction
which they had not before.]

And [As another of my Rank cannot have that Jurisdiction within my Church as I
have, but if he will have any thing to do there, he must be inferior in degree
to me; so we read in the Revelation, of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
etc.] So that with him a Bishop is but one of the Presbyters, of the same Rank,
having the first charge of the Church, (as every Incumbent in respect to his
Curates) and so above his Curates in Degree.]

And [As the Presbyters may do nothing without the Bishop, so he may do nothing
in matters of greatest moment without their presence and advice. Conc. Carthag.
4. c. 23. -- It is therefore most false that Bellarmine says, that Presbyters
have no power of Jurisdiction -- For it is most clear and evident, that in all
Provincial Synods Presbyters did sit, give voices, and subscribe as well as
Bishops: -- And the Bishops that were present (in General Councils) bringing
the resolution and consent of the provincial Synods of those Churches from
whence they came, in which Synods Presbyters had their voices, they had a kind
of consent to the decrees of General Councils also: and nothing was passed in
them without their concurrence.

And Chap. 49. [The Papists think that this is the peculiar right of Bishops:
And c. 30. he shows instances of Council. Antisiodor. c. 7. Tarrac. c. 13.
Council. Tolet. 1. and ex Gregor. l. 4. ep. 88. Synod. Eliber. etc.
But they are clearly refuted by the universal practice of the whole Church,
from the beginning: For in all Provincial and National Synods, Presbyters did
ever give voice and subscribe in the very same sort that Bishops did; whether
they were assembled to make Canons of Discipline, to hear Causes, or to define
doubtful points of doctrine: And that they did not anciently sit and give
decisive voices in General Councils, the reason was, not because they have no
interest in such deliberations and resolutions, but because seeing all cannot
meet in Councils that have interest in such business, ^but some must be deputed
for and authorized by the rest, it was thought fit that the Bishops -- ] So
here are Bishops authorized by Presbyters as their Deputies in the greatest
affairs in General Councils.

He proceeds to prove this by instances, Council. Later. sub Innoc. 3. etc.

VI. Even Archbishop Whitgift maintains (as Doctor Stillingfleet has
collected, Iren. page 394.) that [No kind of Government is expressed in the
word, or can necessarily be concluded thence: -- No form of Church Government
is by the Scriptures commanded to the Church of God (or prescribed.)] And
Doctor Stillingfleet there cites King James, Dr. Low, Ep. Bridges, Cosins,
Sutliffe, Crakenthorp, Hales, Chillingworth, etc with Chemnitius and many
Lutherans and Calvinists.
many testimonies, to prove this the judgment of the Church of England: And if
so, it must be only men and not God, who make any difference between a
Presbyter and a Bishop in the point of Jurisdiction.

VII. Bishop Bilson Perpet. Govern. p. 16. c. 391. says, [The Synod of Antioch
which deposed Paulus Samosat. as Eusebius shows lib. 7. c. 38. and in Council
Eliber. about the time of the first Nicene Council sat Bishops and Presbyters,
even 36. In the second Council. Arelat. About the same time subscribed twelve
Presbyters besides Deacons. So in Council. Romans sub Hilario and Gregor. where 34
Presbyters subscribed after 22 Bishops. And in the first sub Symmach. where
after 72 Bishops subscribed 67 Presbyters: So in the third, fifth, and sixth,
under the same Symmachus, Felix had a council of 43 Bishops and 74 Presbyters.
The Council. Antisiod. c 7. says, Let all the Presbyters being called come to
the Synod in the City. By this judge how big the Diocese was.
]

Council. Tolet. 4. c. 3. says, Let the Bishops assembled go to the Church
together and sit according to the time of their Ordination: After all the
Bishops are entered and set, let the Presbyters be called, and the Bishops
sitting in a compass let the Presbyters sit behind them, and the Deacons stand
before them. Even in the General Council at Lateran sub Innoc. 3. were 482
Bishops, and 800 Abbots and Priors conventual, says Platina.] Thus Bilson and
more.

VIII. To the same purpose writes the Greatest Defender of Prelacy Bishop
Downam, Def. lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 11. page 43, 44. and the places before cited
out of him, professing that the Bishop has but a chief and not sole
jurisdiction.

IX. Bishop Ushers judgment is fully opened in his Model which we offered to
the King and Bishops in vain, and which he owned to me with his own mouth.

X. Because the citing of men's words is tedious, I add, that All those whom I
cited Christ. Concord. p. 57, etc. to show that they judge the Presbyters
Ordination may be lawful, and valid, do much more thereby infer that they are
not void of a Governing power over their own flocks. viz. 1. Dr. Field lib. 3.
c. 32. 2. Bishop Downam Def. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 108. 3. Bishop Jewel Def. of
Apol. Part 2. p. 131. 4. Saravia De diverse. Min. Grad. cap. p. 10, 11. 5.
Bishop Alley Poor man's Libr. Prelect. 3. and 6. p. 95, 96. 6. Bishop
Pilkington. 7. Bishop Bridges. 8. Bishop Bilson, Of Subject. p. 540, 541, 542,
233, 234, etc. 9. Alex. Nowel. 10. Grotius de imper. 11. Mr. Chisenhall. 12.
Lord Digby (then a Protestant.) 13. Bishop Davenant Determ. Q. 42. p. 191, 192.
14. Bishop Prideaux, cont. de Discipline. Eccles. p. 249. 15. Bishop Andrews.
16. Chillingworth. To which I add 17. Bishop Bramhall in his Answer to
Mileterius's Epistle to the King. 18. Dr. Steward's Answer to Fountains Letter.
19. Dr. Fern. 20. Mason at large. 21. Bishop Morton Apolog.

XI. Spalatensis is large to prove the power of the Keys to belong in common to
Presbyters as such. I cited the words before, Lib. 5. c. 9. n. 2. etc. 2. n.
48, etc.

XII. Even Gropperus the Papist pleads in the Council of Trent for the
restoring of Synods of Presbyters instead of Officials, (the thing so much
detested in England, as that all we undergo must rather be endured) yet says
Gropperus* [Restore the Synodals which are not subject to so great corruption,
removing those Officers by whom the world is so much scandalized, because it is
not possible that Germany should endure them.] The Spaniards and Dutch men
willingly heard this, but not the rest. Hist. p. 334. lib. 4.

XIII. The opinion of Paulus himself, the author of that History, is so fully
and excellently laid down, of the Original of the Bishops grandeur, and of the
manner of introducing the Ecclesiastical Courts by the occasion of
Pacifications, Arbitrations, and Constantines Edict, as that I entreat the
Reader to turn to and peruse p. 330, 331, 332, 333.

XIV. Filesacus (a Learned Papist) copiously proves from Councils that
Presbyters were called the Rectors of the Churches, page 560. And more than so,
that they were called Hierarchici and Prelates, and had place in Councils,
especially Provincial, p. 576, 577, 578. Page 574. he cites Council. Aquisgr.
saying, Presbyteri qui praesunt Ecclesiis, de omnibus hominibus qui ad eorum
Ecclesiam pertinent, per omnia curam gerant. Page 576. he proves they were
called Prelates abundantly. Page 577. Episcoporum instar suam habebant plebem
regendam.

XV. Mr. H. Thorndike is so large in defending the Presbyters Governing power,
and that as grounded on the power of Congregating, in his Form of Primit. Gov.
and Right of Church, etc. that it would be tedious to recite his words. Page
98. he says, [The power of the Keys belongs to the Presbyters and is
convertible with the power of celebrating the Eucharist, and that is the Reason
why it belongs to them (Nothing could be spoken plainer to our use.)

And p. 128. The power of the Keys, that is, The whole power of the Church,
whereof that power is the root and source, is common to Bishops and Presbyters.]

And Right of Chapter p. 126, 129, 130, 131. he says much more to confirm this by
testimonies and instances of antiquity.

XVI. The great Jo. Gerson is cited to your hand by the same Filesacus as
showing that Curates were Hierarchical, Quia eadem opera Hierarchica eis
incumbunt quae and Episcopis: And more out of Gerson, de Council. Evangel. and
de stat. Ecclesiastic. tit. de statu Curatorum consid. 1. and 4, etc.

XVII. I will end all in the fullest testimony for these times, His Majesty's
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, before the passing of which it
was examined by his Majesty and the Lord Chancellor, before Dukes, Lords,
Bishops, Doctors of their party, and many of us also that are now silenced, and
after all two great Bishops with Bishop Reynolds and Mr. Calamy appointed by
the King to join with two Lords to see that it were worded according to the
Kings expressed sense. And it says p. 11, etc. [Because the Dioceses,
especially some of them are thought to be of too large extent, we will appoint
such a number of Suffragan Bishops in every Diocese as shall be sufficient for
the due performance of their work But no one in all the land was appointed to
this day.
. 3. No Bishop shall Ordain or exercise any part of jurisdiction which
appertains to the censures of the Church without the advice and assistance of
the Presbyters: And no Chancellors, Commissaries or Officials as such, shall
exercise any act of Spiritual Jurisdiction, in these cases, viz.
Excommunication, Absolution, etc. -- [As to Excommunication our will and
pleasure is, that no Chancellor, Commissary, or Official Decree any Sentence of
Excommunication or Absolution -- Nor shall the Archdeacon exercise any
Jurisdiction without the advice and assistance of six Ministers of his
Archdeaconry, whereof three to be nominated by the Bishop, and three by the
election of the major part of the Presbyters within the Archdeaconry. 4. To the
end the Dean and Chapters may the better be fitted to afford counsel and
assistance to the Bishops both in Ordination and other offices mentioned
before, etc. -- Moreover an equal number to those of the Chapter of the most
learned, pious, and discreet Presbyters of the same Diocese annually chosen by
the major Vote of all the Presbyters of that Diocese present at the Election,
shall be always advising and assisting together with those of the Chapter in
all Ordinations and every part of Jurisdiction which appertains to the censure
of the Church, and at all other solemn and important actions in the exercise of
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction wherein any of the Ministry are concerned. --
And our Will is that the great work of Ordination be constantly and solemnly
performed by the Bishop and his aforesaid Presbytery -- 5. We will take care
that confirmation be rightly and solemnly performed by the information and with
the consent of the Minister of the place: Who shall admit none to the Lords
Supper till they have made a credible profession of their faith, and promised
obedience, etc. -- Besides the Suffragans and their Presbytery, every Rural
Dean -- together with three or four Ministers of that Deanery chosen by the
major part of all the Ministers within the same, shall meet once in every
month, to receive such complaints as shall be presented to them by the
Ministers and Churchwardens of the respective parishes, and also to compose
all such differences between party and party, as shall be referred to them by
way of Arbitration, and to convince offenders, and reform all such things as
they find amiss, by their Pastoral Reproofs and Admonitions, if they may be so
reformed. And such matters as they cannot by this Pastoral and persuasive way
compose and reform, are by them to be prepared for and presented to the Bishop;
At which meeting any other Ministers of the Deanery may if they please be
present and assist. Moreover the Rural Dean and his Assistants are in their
respective divisions to see that the children and younger sort be carefully
instructed by the respective Ministers, etc.] See the rest.

This was the judgment of his Majesty, etc. 1660. And on these terms we were
ready to have Conformed and United with the Prelatists so far as to go in the
peaceable performance of our Offices. But that very Parliament who gave his
Majesty thanks for this his Declaration, did lay it by, so that it was never
done, but other Laws established which we feel.

Obj. You do but obtrude on us your own opinions: For when you had drawn up
most of those words, his Majesty was fain to seem for the present to grant them
you, for the quieting of you.

Answ. 1. If we did offer such things, let the world judge what we sought by
them. 2. There is most of that about Rural Deanries put in (I suppose by the
Bishops consent who were to word it) after it went from us, and after the King
had done with it, on October 22. 1660. 3. Whoever motioned or desired it, by
this it appears that his Majesty and those that counseled him, did not then
think the work of Jurisdiction, Excommunication, Absolution, no nor Ordination,
to be aliene to or above the office of the Presbyter. And if that be no part of
his Pastoral work, they would not have appointed it him.

Yet finally let the Reader note, that though my proofs have reached as high as
the power of Canon-making, Jurisdiction, Court-excommunications and Ordination;
Yet it is no more than the power of Pastoral Guidance of our particular Parish
Churches, and not to be forced to administer all holy things (Sacraments,
Absolutions, etc.) contrary to our consciences, at other men's will who know not
our people, and not to those that we know to be utterly Ignorant, Infidels,
Scandalous, and Impenitent, that I am here pleading for.

I conclude therefore boldly after all this proof, that the Presbyters office
which was instituted by God, and used by the ancient Churches, contained an
obligation and Authority not only to Teach and Worship, but also the rest of
the Power of the Keys, to Rule the Churches committed to their care, (not by
the sword or force, but) by a pastoral persuasive power, judging who is to be
taken in and put out, and what persons are fit objects for the respective
exercises of their, own Ministerial acts: (which was the thing I was engaged to
make good.)

CHAP. XV. Whether this Government belonging to the office of Presbyters, be in
foro Ecclesiae and exteriore, or only in foro Conscientiae and interiore.
THe last shift that some Prelatists have, is to distinguish between the forum
internum Conscientiae, poenitentiale, and the forum externum Ecclesiasticum,
and to tell us that indeed Presbyters have the Power of the Keys in private or
in the first sense, but not in Public or in the second.

Answ. 1. Note that the question is not whether they have the sole power, or
the chief power, or with what limitations it is fit for them to exercise it,
nor what appeals there should be from them; But whether the power of the Keys
be part of their office.

2. That the question is not of the power of Governing the Church by the sword,
which belongs to the King, and is Extrinsick to the Pastoral office, and to
the being of the Church (As protecting the Church, punishing Churchoffenders
corporally, etc.) For this is proper to the Magistrate, and belongs neither
to Bishops nor Presbyters as such. We claim no part with the Prelates in any
such secular Government as their Courts use, except when they come to
Excommunication and Absolution: At least no coercive power at all.

3. All the question is of the power of the Keys of Admission, Conduct and
Exclusion; of judging who shall have Sacraments, and Church Communion with our
assemblies? that is, Who shall be pronounced fit or unfit for it, by our selves?

And that this belongs to Presbyters in foro publico Ecclesiae, I prove,

1. Because they are Public officers, or Pastors over that Church, and
therefore their power of the Keys is a public Church power, else they had none
of the Keys as Pastors of that Church at all: For the Keys are to Let in and
put out; They are the Church Keys: and he that has power only to speak
secretly to a single person, does not thereby take in to the Church or put any
out, nor Guide them publicly. A man that is a Minister (at least) may
convince, satisfy, comfort any man's conscience in secret, of what Church
soever he be, even as he is a member of the Universal Church. But he that is a
public Officer and Governor of the Church may publicly Govern the Church.
But a Presbyter is a public officer and Governor: Ergo.

2. The rest of his office may be publicly performed, Coram Ecclesia, and not
in secret only: He may Preach to the Church, Pray with the Church, Praise God
with them, Give them the Sacrament: Therefore by parity of Reason he may
publicly exercise discipline, unless any by-accident pro tempore forbid it.

3. Else he must be made a mere Instrument of another and not a rational free
Agent and Minister of Christ: Yea perhaps more like to an Ass who may carry
Bread and Wine to the Church, or like a Parrot that may say what he is bid,
than a man who has a discerning judgment what he is to do. I must publicly
baptize, and publicly preach and pray, and publicly give the Lords Body and
Blood: And if I must be no Judge my self to whom I must do this, then, 1.
Either I may and must do it to any one (without offending God) to whom the
Bishop bids me do it: And if so, I may Excommunicate the faithful and curse
Gods children, and absolve the most notoriously wicked, if the Bishop bid me.
And how come they to have more power than King Balak had over Balaam? or than a
Christian Emperor had over Chrysostom? He that says to the wicked, Thou art
righteous, Nations shall curse him, people shall abhor him, Prove. 24. 24. Woe to
them that call evil good and good evil! But what if the Bishop bid them? If I
may not preach lies or heresies if the Bishop bid me, then I may not lyingly
curse the faithful nor bless the wicked if he bid me. If I may not forbear
preaching the Gospel merely for the will of man, when God calls me to it,
much less may I speak slanders, yea and lie in the name of God, when men bid
me. The French Priest did wiselier than so, that being bid from the Pope to
Curse and Excommunicate the Emperor, said, I know not who it is that is in the
right, and who is in the wrong, but I do Excommunicate him that is in the wrong
whoever he be.

2. Or else, it will follow that I am bound to sin and damn my soul thereby,
whenever the Bishop will command me: which is a contradiction.

3. Or else it will follow that I am a beast, that am not to judge or know what
I do, and therefore my acts are neither sin nor duty.

4. If he have not the Keys to use publicly in foro Ecclesiae he has no power
of Excommunication and Restitution at all: For to Excommunicater is publicly
to notify to the Church, that this person is none of them, nor to be
communicated with, and to charge them to avoid his company.

5. The Bishops themselves put the Presbyters to proclaim or read the
Excommunication: and if this be any Ministerial or Pastoral act, certainly it
is in foro Ecclesiae.

6. Most of the Acts before named as their concessions, as to be in the
Convocation, etc. are acts in foro publico.

7. The full proofs before brought from Antiquity, of Presbyters sitting in
Councils, Judging, Excommunicating, etc. are of public, not private exercise
of the Keys.

8. They are the same Keys or Office power which Christ has committed to the
Pastors, even the Guidance of his Church, to feed his lambs: And ubi Lex non
distinguit non est distinguendum. Where does Christ or Scripture say, You shall
use the Keys of Church Power privately, but not in the Church, or publicly?

9. All this striving against Power in the Ministers of Christ, is but striving
against their duty, work, and the ends and benefits of it: He that has no
Power for public discipline, has no obligation to use it; and so he is to
neglect it: And this is it that the Devil would have, to keep a thousand or
many hundred Pastors in a Diocese from doing the public work of Discipline:
And as if he could confine Preaching to Diocesans only (And I verily believe
they are better of the two at Preaching, than at Discipline) he knows that it
is but few souls of many thousands that would be taught: Even so when he can
confine Church discipline to the Diocesanes, he knows how little of it will
be done. And who will use his wit, learning and zeal, to plead his cause, and
his parts and office thus to serve his designs and gratify him, who
considers what it is to be a Bishop, a Christian, or a man?

CHAP. XVI. That the English Diocesane Government does change this office of a
Presbyter of Gods institution into another ( quantum in se) of humane invention.
I Come now to prove the Minor proposition of my Argument; That the Diocesane
Government deposes the Office of Presbyters which God has instituted (as much
as in them lies) By which limitation I mean, that if we would judge of the
Power and Obligation of Presbyters, as the Prelatical constitution de facto
does describe it, and not as God describes it contrarily, we must take it for
another thing.

For the proof of this it must 1. be considered what is Essential to the
office, and 2. How somewhat Essential is taken from them.

I. And 1. we grant (as before) that no Action whatsoever, as performed at the
present, or for some excepted season, is Essential to the Pastoral office: A
man cease not to be a Preacher or Pastor, as soon as the Sermon is done and
he is out of the Church. When a man is asleep or in a journey, he ends not
his office: Nor yet when he is interrupted by business, sickness, or
persecution. Yea, if he were so sick, as to be sure never to exercise his
office more, he keeps the Title with respect to what he has already done.

2. Yet Exercise as Intended and as the Relative end or Terminus of the
Obligation and Authority, is Essential to the Office: For when it is a Relation
which we question, and that consists in Obligation and Authority, there is no
doubt but it is ad aliquid, and is specified by the Action or Exercise to which
men are Obliged and Authorized. (As a Judge, a Soldier, a Physician, are) And
it being a Calling which we speak of, and that durante vita and capacitate, it
must be such Action as is intended to be Ordinary, and Constant. He that
Consents not to do the work of a Minister, and that for more than a trial or
a present occasion, and is not Obliged and Authorized to that work, at least
statedly as his intended ordinary course of life, is no Minister of Christ:
which Paul well expresses by that phrase Romans 1. 1. Separated to the Gospel of
God.

3. As God in creating man made him in his own Image, so did Christ in making
Church Pastors: Therefore he says, As my Father sent me, so send I you: And he
that receives you receives me, and he that despises you despises me, and --
him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. And they are Ambassadors to beseech men in his
name and stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And Christ himself is
called the Angel of the Covenant, and the Apostle and high Priest of our
Profession, and the Great Prophet, and the Bishop of our Souls, and the good
Shepherd, and the great Shepherd or Pastor of the flock, and the Minister of
the Circumcision: And he was a Preacher of the same word of life as we are: And
he administered the same Sacrament of Communion as we do.

Now as the Office of Christ had these three Essential parts, viz. to be the
Teacher, the High Priest, and the Ruler of the Church; so has (not only the
Apostles, but) every true Pastor in his place (as is proved) this threefold
subserviency to Christ. 1. They will confess themselves, that He is no true
Pastor who has not Authority and Obligation (which set together are called a
Commission) to be a Teacher of the Church. For though some men may be so weak
as that they can Teach but by Reading, Catechizing, Conference, or very short
defective immethodical Sermons: And though where a Church has Many, the Ablest
may be the usual public Preachers, and the rest be but his assistants: Yet I
never found any proof of Elders that were not Teachers by office as well as
Rulers, and had not Commission to Teach the flock according to their abilities,
and might not Preach as the need of the Church required it, however the weaker
may give place to the abler in the exercise of his office. Because his office
is an Obligation and Authority to exercise his Gifts as they are, for the
Churches greatest edification.

2. And it will be confessed that he is no Minister or Pastor who is not
Commissioned by Christ to be the Churches Guide in public Worship, in Prayer,
praise, and Sacrament of Communion: However where there are many, all cannot
officiate at once.

3. Therefore all the doubt remains whether the power of the Keys for Church
Covernment, such as belongs to Pastors, be not as Essential as the rest; I
say the Commission, the Authority, and the Obligation, (though violence may
much hinder the exercise) And this I have proved before and must not stay to
repeat it. Only 1. God does not distinguish, when he gives them the Keys and
office. Therefore we must not distinguish. 2. The very signification of the
words [Keys, Pastor, Presbyter, Overseer, Steward, etc.] do not only import
this Guiding, Ruling power, but notably signify it, as most think more notably
than the Worshipping part of their office. 3. Dr. Hammond and all of his mind
confess that in Scripture these words are applied to no one person or office,
that had not the Governing as well as the Teaching and Worshipping power. 4.
The truth is, the Teaching, and Ruling, and Worshipping power, are inseparably
twisted together. Ruling is done (not by the sword here, but) in a Teaching way
by the Word: As a Physician may 1. read a Lecture of health to his Patients, 2.
and give every one particular directions for his own cure; and this last is
called Governing them: So when the same Pastor who Teaches all generally by
Sermons, does make his applications to men's persons and cases particularly, it
is Governing the Church: as when a man is impenitent, he does Excommunicate him
only by teaching him and the Church, that such persons as are so impenitent are
under the wrath of God, and incapable of Church Communion, and therefore
requiring the Church as from Christ, to avoid that person, and declaring him to
be under the wrath of God till he repent, and requiring him to forbear
Communion with the Church. And so in other acts of Government. And as in
Worshipping, the Pastor delivers the Sacrament of Communion, so it must
belong to him to Give it or Deny it. 5. And indeed the ancient Churches had
usually more Pastors than Assemblies, by which means every Presbyter could not
daily preach and officiate. But yet they were so constant Assistants in the
Government, as has occasioned so many to think that it was mere Ruling Elders
who joined with the Bishops in those times. And Paul himself saying 1 Timothy 5.
17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially they that
labor in the word and doctrine, does plainly imply that there were fewer who
were thus Laborers in the word and doctrine than that Ruled well. For indeed
the following practices of the Churches expounds this Text, when the Churches
having few Learned or able Speakers, he that could speak or preach best, did
preach ordinarily, and was made Chief or Bishop, and the rest helped him in
Government, and other offices, and taught the people more privately, and
preached seldomer when the Bishop bid them and there was need: (Being yet of
the same office.)

Obj. Why then may they not now be forbidden public Government in foro
Ecclesiae exteriore?

Answ. 1. Our question is not chiefly what part of the exercise of their proper
office may be restrained on just occasion; But what it is which truly belongs
to their office. 2. It is one thing to forbid it them pro tempore; and another
statedly (for this changes the Office.) 3. It is one thing to forbid a man
Preaching, Praying, or Exercise of Discipline in a Church where there are many,
and all cannot speak at once, and his restraint is for the better doing of the
work, and the avoiding of confusion: And another thing to forbid a single
Pastor of a Parish Church, with all his Curates, to do it, when there is no
other there, nor near the place, that knows the people, to do it; but it must
be undone. 4. And indeed the case of Discipline in this differs from
Preaching and officiating in Worship: Two men cannot do the later at once in
the same Congregation, without confusion and hinderance of Edification: But ten
men or twenty may consult and consent to the acts of Discipline. So that by
Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity it is clear, that if any one part were more
essential to the Presbyters office than the rest, it would be the Authority and
Obligation to Rule the flock by the word of God, and exercise the Church Keys
of Discipline.

II. Now that this power is here taken from them (notwithstanding all the
forecited Concessions or Confessions that it is due to them) I prove.

I. I might premise, that Ubi non est idem fundamentum, non est eadem relatio:
At, etc. There is not the same foundation, therefore not the same Relation. For
1. Here is not the same Election, no nor Consent. I opened this before. Though
all Antiquity gave the Church the Election of her own Pastors, yet we make not
that necessary to the being of the office, or relation to them: So there be but
Consent. But we take Consent of the Church to be necessary to any man's Pastoral
Relation to that Church (though not to the Ministry in general as unfixed.)
For seeing it is not possible to Exercise the office without the peoples
Consent, it cannot be assumed as over them without their Consent: Because that
which cannot be Exercised should not be undertaken to be exercised. But with
us, commonly, the Patron chooses, and the Bishop approves, instituteth, and
gives him induction, and so he is fully settled in title and possession in
their way, without any of the peoples knowledge or consent.

Obj. You choose Parliament men who make these laws, and your Ancestors
consented to Patrons power: Therefore you consent.

Answ. This seems a jest, but that the business and execution make it a
serious matter to us. 1. It cannot be proved that all the Churches or people
gave the Patrons that power. 2. We never intended to consent that Parliaments
should do what they list, and dispose of our Souls, or of that which is
necessary to the saving of our Souls. 3. Else you may as well say that we
consent to be Baptized and to receive the Sacraments, because the Parliament
whom we chose consents to it: And so we may baptize Infidels because their
great grandfathers consented that all their posterity should be Christians: And
you need no discipline to keep men from the Sacrament, if Noah consented that
all his posterity should fear God and serve him and so be saved. Many men are
jested out of their says and salvation, but none are thus jested into it. Sin
is a mockery, but so is not piety. 4. Our forefathers had no power to represent
us by such consenting. If they could oblige us to Duty by their Authority, they
cannot be our substitutes for the performance of duty, any more than for the
possession of the reward. 5. What God himself has laid upon the Person or
existent Church, they cannot commit to another if they would themselves,
because the obligation was personal, and they have not Gods consent for the
transmutation. We cannot serve God by proxy, nor be happy by proxy.

Obj. But how unfit are the common people to choose their Pastors: They are
ignorant, and partial, and tumultuous. Do the children beget their own father,
or the sheep choose their own shepherd?

Answ. 1. No: but wives choose their own husbands, and Patients choose their
own Physicians, and Clients their own Advocates, and servants their own
masters, etc. Similitudes run not on four feet. If all the Church of Christ
besides the Prelates and their Curates, be as brutish as sheep and as silly as
infants (in comparison of them) then they have talked reason in their
similitude. Else -- 2. Is it not notorious in England that no Congregations
have had more Learned and holy Pastors, than where the People have had their
choice? I desire London but to consider it (nay they know it by great
experience) what men has Aldermanbury had, Mr. Calamy, Dr. Stoughton, Dr.
Tailor, and so before? What men has Blackfryers had, Mr. Gibbons, Dr. Gouge,
and many formerly? So also Antholins, Lincoln's Inn, Greys-Inn, the Temple, etc.
But the truth is, that is an excellent person to us, who is an odious or
contemptible person to the high Prelatists. If he will preach as Heylin
writes, and make the people believe that Presbyterians are Rebels, and
Disciplinarians are seditious brainsick fellows, and strict living is
hypocrisy, and praying without book and much preaching is Fanaticism, and that
none are worthy to preach the Gospel who will not swear to be true to this
Prelatical interest: that drunkenness in a Conformable man is a tolerable
infirmity, and their ignorantest nonsense is fitter to save souls or Edify the
Church, than the labors of a Learned Holy Nonconformist; that Calvin was a
Rogue, and Cartwright, Amesius and all such as they, discontented factious
Schismatics, unworthy to preach or to be endured; This is a son of the Church,
and an excellent person with the men in question. But it is the man that
Learnedly and Judiciously opens the word of life, that closely and skilfully
and seriously applies it, that is an example of Holiness, Sobriety, Love,
Meekness, Humility, and Patience to the flock, who spares no labor or cost or
suffering for the saving of men's souls, who is for the wisdom which is first
pure and then peaceable, etc. This is the Pastor that is excellent in our eyes.
And of such I have often wondered that the common people should usually choose far
better than the Prelates do. But the truth is, Wisdom and Goodness have their
witnesses even in the consciences of natural men, which Faction, Pride, and
Fleshly interest does bribe or silence, and cannot endure.

3. But what is all this to us? We plead not now for the necessity of the
peoples Elections, but only for their consent: If the Patrons as now, or the
Clergy as formerly be the Nominators, or Electors, yet should the peoples
consent be acknowledged necessary in the second place.

4. For who is fitter to choose, or refuse, or consent at least, than he whose
everlasting interest lies at the stake? It is their own soul that must be
saved or damned? And in good sadness do these Diocesans love the souls of all
the people better than they love their own? Do you make them believe this, by
not seeing one of a thousand or many hundred of your flock once in all the time
of your lives? Does the silencing of so many Ministers show it? Christ will
have all men at age in Covenanting, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to be
Chusers or Refusers for themselves, because (as Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 1.
says,) they have free will, and it is themselves that must have the gain or
loss, that must be in heaven or hell for ever. What if a Prelate, a Parliament,
a Patron, or a forefather, choose Masspriests or Heretics for us, must we
accept the choice? Is this our bewaring of false prophets, and of the leaven of
the Pharisees, and our trying all things, and letting no man deceive us, etc.

5. But how unfit is this objection for a Prelates mouth or pen? Are you the
Church Governors? Is all this contention that you may have the Keys alone,
without the parish Ministers? And is this the fruit of all your Government,
that the common Church members are so mad, so bad, so untractable, that they
are not fit to be free Consenters to them that are to Teach and Guide them to
salvation? Who then is this Church Ruin and Abomination long of but your
selves, who have and only will have the Keys? Have you not fine Churches and
members, that are not fit to choose no nor consent to their own Guides? Why do
you not take care that the Churches by discipline may be better constituted? As
none should be Pastors who are not fit for the duty of Pastors, so none should
be members who are not fit for the duty of members. It Is excellent Government
inded to keep such in the Church as are unfit to be there, and then fetch an
argument from their unfitness for their neglect of their duty, and your
depriving them of their power? As if you should choose none but idiots (or most
such) to be Jury men, and then argue thence, that they are unfit for so great a
trust, and so the people must lose their liberties.

6. There are among the ignoranter sort of the people, usually diverse sober and
good men, and the rest use much to hearken to them.

Obj. But what if the people will not consent to any but a Heretic or
intolerable person?

Answ. 1. The former answers serve to this: You do fairly to keep such people
in the Church? But as the Foreigner wondered in Henry the Eighth's days, to see
at once some hanged for being Papists, and some burnt for being Protestants,
and cried out Dii boni quomodo gentes hic vivunt! So it is such another case to
see at once the same Prelates forcing the unwilling into the Church and to the
Sacrament, as if this would or could save them (if their Church be salvation)
in despite of them, even on pain of undoing, and perpetual imprisonment; And
yet Excommunicating and casting out those that are willing to stay in; As if
Consent were a mark of an aliene and a reprobate, and unwillingness the mark of
worthiness.

2. Such as you here describe are not fit to be members of a Church. If they
will not Consent to Church privileges and duties, they should be without the
doors. And you may force them to hear Teaching whether they are willing or not;
But you cannot make them Godly nor bring them to heaven, nor give them right to
Church Communion and Sacraments whether they will or not. So much of Election
and Consent.

2. Moreover the Ordination differs from that of Gods institution. For
Presbyters are now Ordained commonly neither by Archbishops, Bishops or
Presbyters of Christ's institution (in their way.)

1. The Bishops themselves profess that they Ordain not as Presbyters. For they
say such have no power of Ordination. 2. They are not Bishops of Christ's
institution as is before proved; but of another species, which half themselves
confess to be but humane. 3. They are not Archbishops, because they have no
Bishops under them. And so having not their power of Ordination as Officers of
Gods making, they have no power from him to Ordain.

Obj. By these two last differences you seem to give up the Cause to the
Separatists.

Answ. The Prelatists do so; but so do not we: 1. Because whether the Prelates
will or not, the people ex post facto do Consent to every worthy Pastor. 2.
Because we judge of Parish Ministers as God describes them, and therefore as
true Bishops: and consequently take the Prelates for a kind of Archbishops
whatever they call themselves. 3. And there is no honest Minister but has the
Consent of some neighbor Ministers and of the People: And though imposition of
hands be a laudable Ceremony, yet it is not that, but mutual Consent of
themselves and the Pastors and People in which their external call consists,
as is before said.

II. The different Correlates and Termini make different Relations. The
Churches which the ancient Presbyters were related to, were true entire
Churches, (however their work might be parcelled among the members.) But
according to the Prelates platform, each Presbyter has his charge over no
Church of Christ at all, but only over a hundredth, six hundredth or thousandth
part of a Church, having no more to do with all the rest than if they were of
another Diocese.

III. But I come to the point intended: That they take from the Presbyter his
essential Obligation and Authority appears,

1. In general, they commonly affirm, that the Governing power belongs not to
them; and that they are but the Bishops Curates: By which they mean not only
that the Bishops rule them: but they say that the Bishop does Teach all his
Diocese per alios, even by these his Curates. And accordingly they have lately
blotted out of their Litany [Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church] and
have substituted [Bishops, Priests, and Deacons] lest the Priests should be
supposed Pastors. But they altered not the Collect for all Bishops and Curates.
And they have put out of the Office for Ordination of Priests, Act. 20. 28. Now
what a Presbyter does in the person of the Bishop and as his instrument, that
he does not in the distinct person of a Presbyter: He that pays money or
delivers possession in his Masters name, does it not in his own. So that if
really they mean as they say, that quoad personam legalem quamvis non
naturalem, it be the Bishop that does Teach and Officiate per alios, then no
Presbyter is indeed endued with any power of Teaching, Officiating, or Ruling
in the person of a Presbyter, but only to be the Servant and Instrument of the
Diocesane.

2. No Presbyter has power to judge whom he shall Baptize, or whom to refuse;
but is to Baptize all without any exception that have Godfathers and
Godmothers, who will but say the words in the book. The Canon 78. is [No
Minister shall refuse or delay to Christen any Child according to the book of
Common prayer, that is brought to the Church to him upon Sundays or Holidays to
be Christened -- Else suspended three months from his Ministry. (Yea, that is
it that pays for all.) So Can. 79. he is bound to do in houses in case of
danger. Yet Can. 29. No Parent shall be urged to be PRESENT nor be admitted to
answer as Godfather for his own child. Now the Liturgy requires not any
Godfather to Adopt the Child, and take it for his own: Nor does it allow us to
refuse the Children of Turks, Jews, or Heathens; And if these Godfathers be
known Atheists, Turks, Jews or Heathens, or the filthiest Adulterers or wicked
persons, if they did ever in their lives receive the Sacrament, and will say as
the Book bids them, the Priest cannot refuse the Child. But if the godliest
Parent can get none to be such Godfathers or Godmothers, his Child must not be
Baptized. I told the Bishops my self that I had a notorious Infidel boasted
that he would bring his Child to be baptized, and say the words of the book,
and see who durst refuse it; And I was answered that if the Child had
Godfathers, there was no scruple but I should Baptize him: But, when I ask,
what if these Infidels (professedly such) be the Godfathers, and say
beforehand [I will say those words and refuse me if you dare] they have
nothing to say, that common reason should regard. Now he that is but sent to
Baptize those (even all whomsoever) that others bid him baptize, and has no
more discerning or judging power of the persons capacity, than a Layman has,
is in this no Presbyter, but a Prelates messenger or servant.

3. They have no power to instruct, admonish, or reprove in secret or public
or in their own houses, any one Ignorant Heretical Infidel, Atheistical or
scandalous wicked man, that will but refuse to speak with them or to hear them.
And yet he must give this person the Sacrament, at least till he prove that by
him which his refusal to speak to him makes impossible to be publicly proved.
If I have great reason by some private occasional speech or report to believe,
that many of the Parish know no more of Christ than Pagans do; or that they
among their own companions (who will not accuse them) profess Atheism,
Infidelity, or Heresy; or if after scandalous fames I would admonish them to
repent; If they refuse to speak with me, or suffer me not to come and speak to
them, I have no remedy; but must still continue them in the Communion of the
Church.

Obj. You would not have such men forced your self.

Answ. But I would not be forced then my self, to give him the Sacrament of
Communion as his Pastor, who refuses to speak with me or to hear me as his
Pastor; but would have power to refuse that Pastoral administration to him that
refuses the rest.

4. They have no power to judge of the fitness of any one for the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, in point of knowledge, faith, or Covenanting with God, nor
whether he understand what the Sacrament is, any more than an Infidel or idiot;
so be it the Bishop do but confirm him (in his childhood) or he will say that
he is ready to be confirmed. Indeed all are required to send their children to
be Catechized; But 1. few Ministers use it: 2. few persons in a parish come. 3.
If they refuse, we cannot prevent their further communicating. 4. It is but to
say over the words of that Catechism which they are called to; which experience
tells us children will do like Parrots, without understanding what they say:
And we must not ask them any other questions.

It is true also that they who are confirmed by the Bishop should bring a
Certificate from the Minister that they can say the Creed, Lords prayer,
Commandments, etc. But they may choose, and not one of many does it. I went my
self at thirteen years of age or fourteen, to the worthy Bishop Morton with the
rest of the School-boyes without any Certificate, and without any examination
he hastily said as he passed on three or four lines of a prayer over us, when I
knew not what he said: And after this, no Minister can refuse any one at age
the Sacrament. The Rubric says, They should openly own their Baptism, etc.
But few do it, and none can be refused for not doing it. And so the transition
from the number of Infant members into the number of the adult, is made without
the Ministers Consent (Though the Kings Declaration once yielded to the
contrary) And Communicants crowd upon him in utter ignorance, because they were
Baptized in Infancy: Nay few in a Parish (not one of many hundred of my
acquaintance) is ever confirmed by the Bishop at all, so much as ceremoniously,
or regard it.

5. They have no power to choose what Chapter they will read to the Church in
public (though a word before the Homilies lib. 2. seemed once to allow it
them) But every day in the year even weekdays and Holidays they are tied up to
the Chapters imposed on them, though Bell and the Dragon, Judith, Susanna,
Tobit, and other Apocryphal writings be appointed for Lessons, even about 106
Chapters of the Apocrypha in two months: And though any scandal or other
occasion in his Church would direct him, to choose some other subject for the
peoples good.

6. He has no power to choose what words to use in his public prayers to God:
no not to use any that are not written for him to read out of the book. And
though custom has so used Ministers to pray without book in the pulpit, yet
this is but connived at because it cannot easily be remedied: One of them wrote
a book against it, as answering that part of our Savoy Reply 1660: Dr. Heylin
has largely labored to prove that it is contrary to the Canon, which indeed
does seem express against it: And that is not all; However their Consciences
digest it, all the Conformists in England do subscribe as ex animo a covenant
or promise [that they will use the form in the said book prescribed in public
prayer and administration of the Sacraments, and no other.] Canon. 36. Mark, No
other: And the Bishops that endure this are forced to say, that these Pulpit
prayers are not the Churches prayers but our own: But yet they are [Publick
prayers] and therefore I doubt a breach of the Canon-Covenant.

7. A Presbyter as such has no power to preach the Gospel. The words of his
Ordination do but give him power to preach when he shall be lawfully called:
yea his Presentation, Institution, Induction and possession of a Pastoral
Charge, do not all make up this Lawful call, nor may he preach one Sermon after
all this, till he have a particular Licensing Instrument from the Bishop. So
that he preaches not merely as a Presbyter nor as a possessed Incumbent, but
as Licensed by the Bishop.

8. When he visits the sick, he has no Power left him to judge, Whether In
the new Rubric is added [If he humbly and heartily desire it] But if he will
but say so, the Priest must not judge.
the person be penitent and fit to be Absolved or not? But if the wickedest
liver will but say or swear that he repents of Swearing, of Adultery, of
Perjury, though such expressions or circumstances be such as plainly tell a
present Minister, that he has nothing like to a serious repentance, yet must
this Minister be forced even in Absolute words to Absolve him from all his
sins: When a Popish Confessor would require more. I do not in all this lay the
fault that this Minister has not power to keep away any of these persons, from
Baptism, Confirmation, the Lords Table, Absolution, etc. but only that he has
no Power to forbear his own action and application, and leave them to others
that are satisfied to do it: Nor not so much as to delay till he give a reason
of his doubt to his Lord Bishop.

9. When he buryeth the dead, he has no power to judge so far as to the
performing or restraining of his own act, whether the deceased person must
needs be declared and pronounced blessed. Three sorts of persons he must deny
Christian burial to. 1. Those that die unbaptized, (though they be the Children
of the holiest Parents) 2. Those that kill themselves (though they be the
faithfullest persons of godly and blameless lives, who do it in melancholy,
deliration, a phrenzy, fever, or distraction.) 3. All that are Excommunicate,
(though by a Lay Chancellor,) for not paying their fees, or though it be
because they durst not take the Sacrament from the hands of an ignorant,
ungodly, drunken Priest, to whose ministry neither they nor other of the
Parish did ever consent; or that it be the Learnedest Godly Divine that is
excommunicate for dissenting from the Prelatists.

But all others without any exception that are brought to Church, they must
bury with a public Declaration that they are saints, viz. [That God in mercy
has taken to himself the soul of this our dear brother] (And without Holiness
no man shall see God.) (So great difference in Holiness there is between the
Holy Church of Rome and ours, that they Canonize one Saint in an age by the
Pope, and we as many as are buried by the Priest.) Though it was the most
notorious Thief or Murderer, or the most notorious Atheist, or Infidel, or
Heretic, who either writes, or preaches or disputes that there is no God or
no life to come, or uses in his ordinary talk to mock at Christ as a deceiver,
and to scorn the Scriptures as nonsense and contradiction, or though it be a
Jew who professes enmity to Christ? Much more if it be a common blasphemer,
perjured person, adulterer, drunkard, a scorner at a godly life, etc. who never
professed repentance, but despised the Minister and his counsel to the last
breath, yet if he be brought to the Church for buryal, the Priest must
pronounce him saved in the aforesaid words, so be it he be not Excommunicate
(of which sort of late there are too great numbers risen up, in so much that
the sober Prelatists themselves cry out of the growth and peril of Atheism,
Infidelity, and most horrid filthiness, and profaneness.) The words of the
Canon are (Can 68.) [No Minister shall refuse or delay to bury any corpse that
is brought to the Church or Churchyard (convenient warning being given thereof
before) in such manner and form as is prescribed in the book of Common Prayer.
And if he shall refuse -- except the party deceased were denounced
Excommunicated Excommunicatione majori for some grievous and notorious crime,
(and no man able to testify of his repentance) he shall be suspended by the
Bishop of the Diocese from his Ministry by the space of three months] But the
New Rubric in the Liturgy says, [The office ensuing is not to be used for any
that die unbaptized, or Excommunicate, or have laid violent hands on
themselves.] The Office says, [Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of
his great mercy to take unto himself the Soul of our dear brother here
departed, etc.] And [We give thee hearty thanks that it has pleased thee to
deliver this our brother out of the miseries of this sinful world.]

And yet as self-contradicters and condemners, if any man do but say of one
that has been openly against the Prelates or Conformity, that he was a godly
honest man, (much more one that was against the King, and especially a
downright Traitor who so lived and died impenitently) they take it for a
heinous crime, (as in the latter case they well may do) And yet (except those
whose quarters they set up upon the gates, or deny Christian burial to by the
Magistrate,) the poor Priest must pronounce them all at the Grave to be the
Bishops dear brethren and saved as aforesaid.

10. They have no Power to give the Sacrament of Communion with Christ and his
Church, to any the most Learned holy Christian, who dare not receive the
Sacrament kneeling, (for fear of bread-worship in appearance, etc.) which
(though I think is unwarrantably scrupled, yet) has so much of Universality
and Antiquity as makes it ill beseeming those same men who cry up the Church
Councils, Customs, and Antiquity, to cast out of Communion those that conform
to all these, for so doing. For who knows not by Can. 20. of Council. Nic. 1.
and the consent of Antiquity, that they took it for a custom? and tradition
and Canon of the Universal Church, that none should at all adore God kneeling
on any Lords day in the year, nor on any weekday between Easter and Whitsunday.

11. They have no power to forbear denying the Sacrament of Communion to any
how faithful and holy soever, who is against the Diocesanes Confirmation, and
is unwilling that those whom he takes to be no true Bishops should use that
which he takes (as used by them) to be no true Ordinance of God, but a taking
of his name in vain; or if on any other account he be unwilling of it: For the
new Rubric is, [There shall none be admitted to the holy Communion, until such
time as he be Confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be Confirmed.] So that it
is not actual confirmation which they think necessary. But [a Desire of
Confirmation] by the imposition of the Diocesanes hands, is made a thing
necessary to Christian Church Communion.

12. As it is before said that he has no power to judge who shall be
Confirmed, and admitted into the Rank of Communicating members, so he has no
power at all effectually to keep away the grossest offenders, or to forbear his
own actual putting the Sacrament into their hands. For though the Canon seem to
favor his power, and the Rubric say somewhat the same way, yet it is to be
noted, 1. That whereas the Rubric allows him to advertise the scandalous not
to come to the Sacrament, yet it is only the contentious that have injured
others and are not reconciled, whom he is plainly enabled to refuse. 2. Among
those that he may advertise not to come, the grossly ignorant (who know not what
Christ or the Sacrament is) the Atheist, Infidel and Heretic are not numbered
at all; but [an open and notorious evil liver, or that has done wrong to his
neighbours] 3. And if he be never so wicked, yet unless also [The Congregation
be thereby offended] the Curate cannot hinder him, or so much as advertise him
not to come. And so if only a few Godly persons be offended, they are not the
Congregation; or if the Minor part be offended, they are not the Congregation:
And how shall the Minister know whether the Major part be offended: For he has
no power to ask them, much less to put it to the Vote: And the Major part will
never come to him nor be accusers? And if the Major part (which is no wonder)
be themselves so Ignorant, Heretical, or ungodly as not to be offended, but
rather to take the Sinners part, then the Curate must give them all the
Sacrament, and has no remedy. 4. And he that must not live in Taverns,
Alehouses, Play Houses, or other places of wickedness (specially if he live as
Chrysostom did, who never did so much as eat with any one in his own house)
may have most of his Communicants to be abominable and flagitious, before it
will be Notorious to him: for (as is said) He has no power to call any to
witness any thing, that are unwilling. And few will be willing to enrage their
neighbors, when they foreknow that it will do more hurt than good. 5. And if
he do refuse any one, he is bound to become an Informer, and to give an account
of the same to the Ordinary within fouteen days at the farthest.] Whenas, 1.
Perhaps he may dwell many score miles off; 2. And have his studies and all
other business on his hands: 3. And must then bring his proofs, when he is not
enabled to examine any witness nor take proof of that which to all others is
notorious. 4. It is a great doubt whether the Sinner have not his remedy at Law
against him to his undoing, if he lay not by all his other business to
prosecute the proof to the utmost. And if he do lay by the rest of his work
that while, the Bishop may undo him or suspend him. 5. By this means he shall
more exasperate the Sinners (by prosecuting them to such a Court as the
Prelates) and harden them against all profiting by his Ministry, than if by his
Pastoral office he had himself first lovingly convinced them, and suspended
them only till they repent. 6. When he has all done, if the sinner pay his
fees and say, He repents, the Chancellor is to Absolve him: And so the Curate
does only to his own vexation and the Sinners hurt, deny him the Sacrament but
once. And if the wrath or scorns of the Sinner show that he was far from true
Repentance, the Curate cannot deny him the Sacrament the next day, nor ever
after, till he not only again commit the same sin (Adultery, Perjury,
Drunkenness, etc.) but till it be again notorious, and he will be again at the
same trouble in the prosecution. 7. And there are few great Parishes in England
where there are no Swearers, Drunkards, Railers, Fighters, Fornicators,
Adulterers, and such like enough, to hold a Curate work through the whole year to
prosecute them, though he lay by almost all his other work: so that by this
way, if he keep such from the Sacrament, he must keep all away by ceasing his
Ministerial work. 8. The Curate cannot refuse him till he has called and
advertised him; whereas the person may refuse to come to him, at least by
pretending business and other excuses. All these things make this which seems
his most considerable power, to be in effect but next to none.

13. The Curate has no power when any person is obstinate and impenitent in
the most notorious scandal or heresy, or endeavors to pervert others, to
admonish him before all, that others may beware, nor to call him openly to
Repentance.

14. Nor has he any power to judge who shall be Excommunicated as impenitent,
be the crime never so heinous or notorious: no not so much as to concur in this
power with any Bishop, Chancellor or Presbyters; any more than any Layman
has. He can but Accuse them, and so may an Apparitor or Churchwarden: or Read
the Bishops or Chancellors Excommunication, as he does the Kings Proclamations,
or as the Clerk does other writings.

15. He has no power to absolve publicly any person Excommunicated, no more
than a Lay man; but as aforesaid to read the Absolution.

16. He has no power to forbear his own act of Reading an Excommunication
against the faithfullest and most religious persons in his Parish, whom it
shall please the Bishop or Chancellor to Excommunicate, (that is, usually, a
Nonconformist, or a Churchwarden who dare not swear to their large books of
Articles, to persecute the Nonconformists, etc. or one that appears not at
their Courts, or a poor man that does not pay their fees, etc.) The poor Curate
must read the Curse against them.

17. He has no power himself to forbear the open Reading of an Absolution of
the most impenitent wicked man, whom it shall please the Chancellor to absolve.
And how easily that is procured for any man, that is but Rich and Conformable,
is well known.

18. The Curate has no power so much as to Baptize the holiest believer or the
Child of such, as do but fear lest it be a Sin to use the Transient Image of
the Cross, as a humane symbol of Christianity, and an engaging dedicating sign,
that he [will not be ashamed to profess the faith of Christ crucified, and
manfully to fight under his banner against the Devil, the world and the flesh,
and to continue Christ's faithful servant and soldier to his life's end.] If the
person to be baptized were a Turk, or a Jew, who both hate Idolatry, and should
be so scandalized at this Transient Image and humane Symbol, as that they would
rather never be Christians or be Baptized, than receive it; yet must the poor
Priest let them go without Christianity, rather than Baptize them without this
Image of a Cross, unless he will be suspended from preaching Christ's Gospel to
the ignorant that they may be saved. But if he will bear that, he may do what
he will; that so poor souls may be the losers.

19. If the commonest whore or wicked woman come to be Churched, as they call
it, after childbearing, the Priest must use all the Office of thanksgiving,
without first expecting her repentance, as if she were the chastest person: And
must give her the Sacrament.

20. To conclude, no Priest as such (till Licensed) has power [to take upon
them to expound in his own Cure, or elsewhere (and therefore not to his family,
or any one of his ignorant neighbors) any Scripture, or matter, or Doctrine;
But shall only study to Read plainly and aptly, without glossing or adding the
Homilies, etc.] Are these Authorized Priests, that may not so much as tell a
Child the meaning of his Catechism, or any Article of the Faith? No though an
ignorant person ask him? The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the
Law should be enquired of at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts. But an English Priest may not expound any Matter, Scripture, or Doctrine
but barely Read, till the Bishop License him.

Obj. If they be not able, it will do more harm than good.

Answ. Will the righteous God be always mocked? and suffer men to make
merchandice of Souls, and to vilify them and set them at cheaper rates than
they would do a goose, a pig, or a dog? Is this a fit answer for those that are
their Ordainers? under whose examination and hands all men enter into the
Ministry? Will they say that they can get no better? What, not when they have
made so many Canonical Engines to keep out better? What, not when such as
Cartwright, Hildersham, Amesius, Parker, Dod, Ball, etc. are cast out as
unworthy? When so many hundred were silenced in Queen Elizabeth and King
James's days; and Eighteen Hundred of us now? When the Bishops have got so many
Laws to hinder us from Preaching in public and private, and to banish us five
miles from all Cities, Corporations, and places where we have preached? When
none but their sworn Curates, Subscribers, Declarers, etc. may preach, yet can
they get no better? Will they keep up a Ministry whom they will themselves so
ignominiously stigmatize, as to tell the world, that none of them all, as
Presbyters, may be endured to expound any Scripture, Doctrine, or Matter, but
barely to Read? Yea as if they would dissuade them from all Learning of
Humanity or Divinity as needless or hurtful things, they say [he shall only
study to Read plainly and aptly.] So that he that studieth for any more than to
Read, does break the Canons of the Prelatical Church.

Also a Priest as such has no power to judge what Garments he shall wear, nor
of what color at home or abroad.

He has no power to judge in what house he may instruct or pray with any of
his flock: nor when so much as with his Church in public, or with any sick or
afflicted neighbor in private, to Fast and Pray: But they are all straightly
forbidden to preach or administer the Sacraments, (except to the sick) in
private houses: To preach or officiate in any room save a Consecrated Chapel,
even in a Noblemans house; To keep public or private fasts; To give the
Sacrament to any that are not of their own Parish, at least if they go from
their own Priest, because he never studied more than to Read: They have not
power to admit any other, how Learned and Holy soever, to preach in their
Churches, as Presbyters, without License. All these show their Priestly power.

Obj. But a Surrogate may Excommunicate.

Answ. 1. That is but ludicrous pro forma. 2. Or else it is but their
self-condemnations while they allow one Presbyter of a thousand, to do that
which all the rest are forbidden. The same I say of Archdeacons, and peculiar
Ordinaries.

Object. They make Canons in Convocations, and choose Convocation Priests.

Answ. 1. It is but two Priests of many hundred that are in a Convocation: And
what is that to all the rest. 2. Choosing is not a Governing act. Where the
people choose Kings and Parliament men, it proves not that they have any
Government themselves. The Laity ever formerly chose their Bishops, and yet
were no Bishops nor Church Rulers. 3. It is in the Bishops power to frustrate
their choice. For when they have chosen four, he may put by two of them. In
this great Convocation which has new molded our Liturgy, which has formed
the Engines that have done what is done, the great and famous City of London
had not one chosen Clerk in the Convocation. (No wonder then if they Conform
not, as not being bound by their own Consent) For when they chose Mr. Calamy
and my self, the Bishop refused us both (which I am so far from mentioning in
discontent, that I take it to have been a greater Mercy than I can well
express) 4. I take not Canon-making to be any considerable part of the Pastoral
Office. If two of many hundred, have power to please the Plural Number of
Prelates, Deans, and other Dignitaries (whom they cannot over-vote) by serving
them against the Church and their Brethren, does that prove that Presbyters as
such have the Governing power of their flocks?

I am not striving for a power of Ruling one another, much less of
Excommunicating Kings and Magistrates, nor a power of making Laws, or Ruling
Neighbor Churches: But only a power of Guiding their own flocks, and judging
of their own actions. Yea, and that not as Ungoverned or without Appeals: But
as Ruled by Magistrates, consociated for Concord with other Pastors, and Ruling
Volunteers. And if Archbishops also Rule them by Gods Laws, we shall submit.

CHAP. XVII. That the great change of Government hitherto described (the making
of new species of Churches, a new Episcopacy, and a new sort of
half-sub-presbyters, with the Deposition of the old,) was sinfully done, and
not according to the intent of the Apostles.
THere are two pretenses (and no more that I know of) made to justify all this
foredescribed change. The first is by Dr. Hammond when he was hard put to it at
last, in answer to the London Ministers, which is, That Subpresbyters were
Ordained in Saint John's time, and therefore by him. The second is ordinary,
that though de facto the Apostles settled but single Pastors (without
Sub-presbyters at least) over single Churches or Assemblies, yet this was not
done with an Obligatory purpose, for the so fixing of it; But only de facto,
pro tempore, as a State of immaturity, with a purpose and intent, that it
should grow up to the change of this at maturity.

I. To the first Pretense I answer. 1. What probability is there that one
Apostle when all the rest were dead should make so great a change in their
Church Orders? Either it was part of the Apostolical Commission and work to
settle Church Offices and orders for Government, or not. (as to the species, if
Christ had not before done it; or to settle it by revealing what Christ did
command them; either from Christ's mouth, or the Spirits inspiration, to ^^tle
the Catholic Church, as Moses did the Jewish.) If it were none of their
Commissioned Office work, then it was none of John's: And then it is done so as
may be yet undone. But if it were John's work it was Theirs; And if theirs, why
did they not perform it? Even while they had that promise, Matthew. 15. 20, 21.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, etc. And, If two of you
agree of a thing, etc. If you say that there was no need till they were all
dead, I answer, It is a Fiction. The greatest numerous Church at Jerusalem, had
more need of more than One to officiate among them, (and so had Ephesus,
Antioch, Coritnb, etc.) than most Churches else had in St. John's days. And
were all the Apostles so negligent and forgetful?

2. What proof is there that St. John did make this change? It is either by
Scripture that it is proved, or by History. 1. Not by Scripture: For 1. No
Scripture mentions S. John's doing it. 2. Dr. Hammond and his followers
confess that it was not done (as can be proved) in Scripture times. And
Chronologers suppose that there was but a year or two, between his death, and
the end of Scripture times, that is, the writing of his Apocalypse. And is it
probable that he began so great a Change the last year of his life?

2. And History makes no mention of it at all. (For I am ashamed to answer
their nonconcluding reason, from St. John's bringing a young prodigal to a
Presbyter to be educated, or his Ordaining Presbyters, when it is no more than
is said of the other Apostles.) Let them give us, if they can, any Satisfactory
proof, that S. John alone, a year or two ere he died, made this new species of
Presbyters and Churches, that we may believe it to be of God. But blind
presumptions we dare not trust.

3. None of the Ancient Churches, Councils or Doctors (that ever I could find)
did ever hold that Subpresbyters were instituted by St. John alone, and these
changes made by him: How then shall we think that men of yesterday can tell us
without them, and better than they, and contrary to them, the history of those
times?

4. By as good a course as this, what humane corruption may not be defended,
and Scripture supposed insufficient to notify Gods Church-institutions to us?
When there is nothing said in Scripture for them, the Papists or others may say
that S. John made this or that Change when all the rest were dead: But why must
we believe them?

5. And the Church has rejected this plea already long ago. When Papias
pleaded that he had the Millenary Doctrine from St. John himself, and when the
Eastern Churches pretended his Authority for their time of Easters observation;
here was incomparably a fairer show of St. John's Authority than is produced by
Dr. H. in the present case: And yet both were overruled by the Consent of the
Churches.

II. And that it cannot be proved to be the Apostles intentions that their
establishment herein should be but temporary, and left to the will of man to
change, I have largely proved in my Disput. 1. of Church Government long ago. I
now only say,

1. That which the Apostles did in execution of a Commission of Christ, for
which he promised and gave them his infallible Spirit, was the work of Christ
himself and the Spirit, and not to be changed but by an Authority equal to that
which did it. But such was the settling of the species of Churches and Elders.
Ergo -- etc. The Commission is before recited from Scripture, and so is the
promise and gift of the Spirit to perform it.

2. Where there is full proof of a Divine Institution by the Apostles, and no
proof of a purpose that men should afterward change it, or that this
institution should be but for a time, and then cease; there that Institution is
to be supposed to stand in force, and the repeal, cessation, or allowed
mutation to befeigned. But there is full proof of a Divine institution by the
Apostles that Preesbyters with the power of Government were placed over single
Churches (and no other says Dr. H.) And there is no proof brought us at all,
of either Repeal, Cessation, or Allowance for mutation -- Ergo etc. -- They
confess de facto all that we desire, viz. 1. That there was then none but
single Churches or Congregations under one Bishop. 2. That there were no
Subpresbyters. Let them now prove the Allowance of a Change.

3. That supposition is not to be granted which leaves nothing sure in the
Christian Churches and Religion: But such is the supposition of a change of the
Apostles Orders in these points. Ergo.

If the after times may change these Orders, who can prove that they may not
change all things else of supernatural institution? As the Lords day, Baptism,
the Lords Supper, the Bible, the Ministry yet remaining, etc. And if so,
nothing is sure,

Object. Christ himself instituted these, and therefore they may not be changed.

Answ. 1. It was not Christ himself that wrote the Scripture, but his servants
by his Spirit. 2. Christ himself did that mediately which his Apostles did by
his Mandate and Spirit. Matthew. 28. 20. The Spirit was given them to bring all
things to their remembrance which he had spoken to them. And to cause them to
Teach the Churches all things which Christ had commanded them. And as Christ
made the Sin against the Holy Ghost to be greater than that which was but
directly against his humanity, and as he promised his Disciples that by that
Spirit they should do greater works than his, so that which his Spirit in them
did establish, was of no less authority, than if Christ had personally
established it.

4. By this rule the Prelates themselves may be yet taken down by as good
authority as the Apostles other settlement was changed: For if it was done by
Humane Authority, there is yet as great Humane power to make that further
change: Wherever they place it, in Kings, Bishops, or Councils, they may yet
put down Bishops, by as good authority as they put down what the Apostles set
up; and may set up more new orders still, by as good authority as they set up
these half-presbyters: And so the Church shall change as the Moon.

5. That which is accounted a reproach to all Governors is not without proof
to be imputed to God, and his inspired Apostles. But to make often and sudden
changes of Government, is accounted a reproach to all Governors: Ergo --

For it is supposed that they wanted either foresight and wisdom to know what
was to be done, or Power to maintain it. To make Laws and se^ up Churches,
Officers, and Orders, this year, and to take them down, and set up new ones a
few years after, seems levity and mutability in man: And therefore must not
without cause and proof be ascribed to God. And the rather because that Moses
Laws had stood so long, and the taking down of them was a scandal very hardly
born: And if the Apostles that did it, should set up by the Spirit others in
their stead, to continue but till they died, this would be more strange and
increase the offense.

6. There was no sufficient change of the Reason of the thing, Therefore there
was no sufficient reason to change the thing it self (if Prelates had had
Authority to do it.) If you say, That in Scripture times there were not worthy
men enough, to make Subpresbyters and Bishops both of: I answer, It is
notoriously false, by what Scripture speaks, 1. Of the large pourings out of
the Spirit in those times: 2. Of the many Prophets, Teachers, Interpreters, and
other inspired speakers which were then in one Congregation, Act. 13. 1, 2. And
1 Cor. 14. Insomuch that at Corinth Paul was put to limit them in the number of
speakers, and the exercise of their gifts. 2. And it is known by history and the
great paucity of Writers in the next age, that when those miraculous gifts
abated, there was a greater paucity of fit Teachers, proportionably to the
number of Churches, than before. 3. And who can prove that if there had been
more men, the Apostles would have made a new Order of Presbyters, and not only
more of the same Order?

2. Obj. But the Churches grew greater after than before?

Answ. 1. Where was there three Churches in the whole world for 300 years so
numerous as the Church at Jerusalem is said to have been in Scripture? 2. If
the Churches were more numerous, why might they not have been distributed into
more particular Churches? 3. Or how prove you that Presbyters should not rather
have been increased in the number of the same Order, than a new Order invented?
4. This contradicts the former objection: For if that Churches were so small
and few before, it is like there might have been the more gifted persons spared
to have made two Orders in a Church. 5. And what if in Constantine's days the
Churches grew yet greater, than they did in the second, or third age compared
to the Apostles? will it follow that still more new Orders may be devised, as
Subpriests were?

7. There are worser reasons of the change too visible: And therefore it is not
to be imputed to a secret unproved mental intention of the Apostles. In Christ's
own time, even the Apostles themselves strove, who should be the greatest.
False Apostles afterward troubled Paul by striving for a superiority of
reputation. Diotrephes loved to have the preeminence. Sect-masters rose up in
the Apostles days: Acts 20. 30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Some caused Divisions and
Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which they had learned, Romans 16. 17. In Clem.
Romans time the Church of Corinth was contending about Episcopacy and
superiority, even Laymen aspiring to the chair. Peter seems to foresee what
Pastors would do, when he forewarneth them not to Lord it over Gods heritage, 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. Victor quickly practiced the contrary when he Excommunicated
the Asian Bishops. See Grotius his complaint of the early and ancient pride,
contention, and tyranny of the Bishops, De Imper. sum. Pot. p. 360, 361.
Novatian with Novatus quickly showed this spirit (if they be not wronged) at
Rome and Carthage; and so did Felicissimus and his partners against Cyprian.
What stirrs were there for many ages between the Cecilians and the Donatists?
What horrid work was there at the Council. Ephesians. 1. And Council Chalcedon. and
Council. Ephesians. 2. between the contending Bishops on each side? The reading of the
Acts would make a Christians face to blush. What strife between Anthymius and
Basil for a larger Diocese? What work against Nazianzen to cast him out of
Constantinople? What sad exclamations makes he against Synods, and against
these Names and Titles of preeminence and higher seats, wishing the Church had
never known them? And yet he was angry with his friend Basil for placing him in
so small a Bishopric as Sosunis. What abundance of Epistles does Isidore
Pelusiota write to Eusebius the Bishop and Sosimus and the other wicked
Priests, detecting and reproving their malignity, drunkenness, and horrid
wickedness? And how sharply does he lament that a faithful Ministry is
degenerate into carnal formal Tyranny, and that the Bishops adorned the Temples
under the name of the Church, while they maligned and persecuted the Godly who
are the Church indeed? How lamentable a description does Sulpit. Severus give
of the whole Synods of Bishops that followed Ithacius and Idacius? And in
particular of Ithacius himself, as a fellow that made no conscience of what he
said: And what did Martin think of them who avoided all their Communions to the
death, and would never come to any of their Synods? Especially because by
stirring up the Magistrate against the Priscillianists, they had taught the
vulgar fury to abuse and reproach any man that did but read, and pray, and
fast, and live strictly, as if he were to be suspected of Priscillianism (which
Hooker himself complains of, Pref.) And Ambrose also did avoid them. What
bloody work did Cyril and his party make at Alexandria? What a man was
Theophilus after him? What work made he against Chrysostom? What a Character
does Socrates give of him? What insolence and furious zeal did Epiphanius show
in the same cause, in thrusting himself into the Church of Chrysostom to stir
up his hearers to forsake him? Hierom had a finger in the same cause: His
quarrels with Johan Hierosol. with Ruffinus, his abusive bitterness against
Vigilantius, etc. are well known. The multitudes of Canons for preserving the
grandeur of Patriarchs, and Metropolitanes, and Prelates, on one side, and for
keeping small Cities without Bishops, ne vilescat nomen Episcopi, and for
restraining Pride, self-exaltation, enlargement of Diocese, encroachment on
each other, on the other side, do all show the diseases that needed such a
Cure, or that had such a vent. In a word the Bishops never ceased contending,
partly for their several opinions and errors; and partly for preeminence and
rule, till they had brought it to that pass as we see it at this day, between
Rome and Constantinople, and the most of the Christian world. From all which it
is most apparent that Pride and Contention were cured but in part in the
Pastors of the Churches: And that the remaining part was so strong and
operative, as makes it too credible that there were ill causes enough for
enlarging of Dioceses and getting many Churches into one man's power, and
setting up a new Order of half-subpresbyters; And that the event of such a
change is no proof that it was the Intent of the Apostles, that this change
should be made when they were dead; no more than you can prove that all this
turbulent pride and strife was intended by them.

If any say, that it is not probable that so soon after the Apostles all the
Churches would conspire in such an error: I answer, If all these things before
mentioned were not done, or if matter of known fact may be denied as
improbable, then that objection has some sense. To which I add,

8. I have proved that this change was not made at once, but by slow degrees:
No nor made so soon as is pretended, nor so universally, but in long time,
except at Alexandria and Rome; It was long before the Churches knew it.

9. And I think none will deny but other things were taken up as the Traditions
of the Apostles, and all the Churches customs, which yet are now rejected as
no such thing. To say no more of Easter and the Millennium, there were five
ceremonies which were accounted the Churches universal customs, and
traditions, and none was to omit, viz. not kneeling in adoration on the Lords
days, Adoring toward the East, the White Garment, the Milk and Honey and the
Chrism to the Baptized: But were these such? Socrates, Sozomen, and Nicephorus
tell us great Reasons to believe that (whatever some say) the time of Easter,
the Fast of Lent, and many other observances, and among others the largeness or
smallness of Dioceses, were no Laws of God or the Apostles, but usages
voluntarily and diversely taken up, in several places, in which no Christians
should condemn each other, but allow a liberty of dissent and difference,
without breach of Charity or peace.

10. Moreover it is a clear proof that the Apostles intended no such change, in
that they left no Rule, Instructions or Directions for it, nor for the calling
of the new sort of Presbyters, nor for their performance of their places. They
left full directions for the Ordination and Regulation of Bishops, called
Pesbyters, and for Deacons, not leaving out so much as Deaconesses; And would
they have wholly omitted all instructions for the new order of Presbyters, and
Prelates, etc. if they had intended them?

11. To put all out of controversy, God has told us that his settled orders
are for continuance. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Such Offices as Christ has given to
the Church, are for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the
Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, etc. If God do
give some to lay the foundation, and some to build thereon, yet he leaves not
men to make new Officers besides all these, to do his appointed work. Timothy
had charge to propagate the same Doctrine, and the same Church orders, even to
the coming of Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. 2 Timothy 2. 2. and 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 5.
Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25. But of this I desire the Reader to see full proofs in my
2. sheet for the Ministry.

12. Lastly, the holy Scripture is a perfect standing Rule for all things
necessary to Salvation, and Divine Faith and duty, and to Church worship and
Communion. If not, what is? And where shall we find it? And what stop shall we
make of our additions, if there be no Law or Rule to govern the universal
Church? And who are they that have power to Rule the Church universal? See my
Key for Catholics, against the claim of Pope and General Councils. But if it
be, then the adding and altering is presumption, except in circumstantials
which God has left to man's determination: And then why must we swear never to
alter unnecessary circumstances, were they such?

CHAP. XVIII. The fourth Argument, From the Impossibility of their performance
of the Episcopal Office, in a Diocesane Church; And the certain exclusion and
destruction of true particular Church Government, while one man only will
undertake a work too great for many hundreds.
ALI that I have said hitherto is far short of this one Argument, from the
notorious unquestionable mischiefs which the opposed frame of Prelacy does
infer; not probably, but certainly; not only where Bishops are bad, but with
the best; not in some Churches, but in all.

ARGUMENT IV.
That Form of Prelacy is not lawful and to be sworn to, which makes the
Episcopal Office impossible to be performed, and certainly destroys and
nullifieth true particular Church Government wherever it obtains. But such is
the opposed frame.

None will deny the Major but the Erastians, who think that the Magistrate only
is the Church Governor (which as to forcing Government is true) And they that
so think, must needs be against Bishops otherwise than as they are Preachers or
Magistrates. Therefore I may let them pass.

The Minor I am to prove by parts.

It must be remembered, that I have showed how great the Dioceses are, and that
no work proper to the Office of a Bishop can be done by a Layman, or any but a
Bishop. And have prevented the pretense of doing it per alios. And now I must
show more fully than in the former breviate, what the work of a Bishop is; And
then you shall see whether it be not impossible. And lest you think I precisely
feign more work than God has put upon them, I will take it out of Scripture
and Dr. Hammonds Annotations.

I. The Teaching of the Flock. II. The Priestly worshipping of God with them.
III. The Government of them by Discipline, are the three parts of the Bishops
Office, as has been proved.

I. The Teaching of the Flock is, 1. Public Teaching them in their Sacred
Assemblies, by expounding and applying the word of God. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feed
the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, etc. says
Dr. Hammond, [The Bishops of your several Churches, I exhort -- take care of
your several Churches and govern them, etc.]

Heb. 13. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you
the word of God. Dr. H. [Set before your eyes the Bishops and Governors that
have been in your Church and preached the Gospel to you -- ] Acts 20. 7. Upon
the first day of the week when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul
preached to them -- ] Matthew. 24. 45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise
servant whom his Lord has made ruler over his household to give them meat in
due season.]

1 These. 5. 12. We beseech you brethren to know them that labor among you and
are over you in the Lord and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sake.] D. H. [Pay (your Bishops) as great a respect as is
possible for the pains they have taken among you.]

1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine.] D. H. [Let the Bishops
that have discharged that function well, receive for their Reward twice as much
as others have, especially those that preach the Gospel to whom it was news,
and also continue to instruct congregations of Christians in settled Churches.]
1 Timothy 3. 2. A Bishop must be -- apt to teach.] D. H. [One that is able and
ready to communicate to others the knowledge that himself has.]

2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom, preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine.] See Dr. H. Annot.

And can one Bishop be the public Teacher of a thousand, a hundred, or many
Churches: Can he feed them, and give them their meat in due season? where one
of a thousand never heard his voice nor saw his face? Is the flock with them or
among them? Can you say to his Diocese, I beseech you know the Bishop that
labors among you and admonishes you, and esteem him highly in love for his
works sake? Will they not say you mock them, and that they cannot know him whom
they never saw; nor love him for his work and admonition among them, that never
was among them, that never workt with them, that never admonisht them; but only
that one of many hundred saw him, and heard a Visitation Sermon in one City or
market Town once in three years, or a year at most. Must many hundred
Congregations that never heard him, give him double honor that preaches
sometime to one Congregation a hundred or twenty miles from them, and this as
their Instructing Elder? Judge of the possibility of this.

2. The Bishops are also bound to private helps, instruction, counsel, and to
watch over all the flock, and every particular member of them; as a Father must
look to every Child, and a shepherd to every sheep, and a Physician to every
Patient.

Acts 20. 20, 28, 31. I taught you publicly and from house to house -- Take
heed therefore to your selves and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood -- Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three
years, I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears] D. H.
[Instructing both in the Synagogues, and in private Schools, and in your
several houses whither I also came -- Wherefore ye that are Bishops or
Governors of the several Churches, -- look to your selves and the Churches
committed to your trust, to rule and order all the faithful Christians under
you.]

Col. 1. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.] Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls as those that must give account.] D. H. [Obey those that are set
to Rule over your several Churches, the Bishops, whose whole care is spent
among you, as being to give an account of your proficiency in the Gospel.]

I before cited Ignatius telling the Bishop that he must enquire after every
one by name, even servants and maids. And Dr. Jer. Tailor who says, No man can
be accountable for them that he knows not (or cannot know.)

Now is it possible for a Bishop to do this: To instruct, oversee, counsel, one
of many hundreds of the flock? who know him no more than one in another
kingdom? Is this pastoral teaching of particular Souls, to have an Apparitor
call one of a thousand when he Conformeth not, or offends, to a Chancellors
Court; How little know they what the work of a Pastor is that think so?

3. Bishops must teach the flock by their own visible example; By holy speaking
and holy living before their flocks. Heb. 13. 7. [Remember them which have the
rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow,
considering the end of their conversations.] D. H. [Set before your eyes the
Bishops -- observe their manner of living.] If it were the Pope at Rome, we
might cast a conjecture by the report of that great liar fame, Because it is a
place that we hear often from in the Curranto's and Gazets: But no Ga^et
tells us of the life of our Bishop. And how shall those observe their manner
of living, who know not whether they be alive or dead, till a Minister is to be
silenced, or a new Bishop does succeed the old? You may as well bid us observe
how they live in the West Indies.

1 Pet. 1. 5. 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage (or having dominion
over your charges) but being ensamples to the Flock.] D. H. [Walking
Christianly and exemplarily before them.] What! before them that never saw or
heard them? Before men of another Country, that may swear and not repent with
Peter, We know not the man? What! be examples to them that are out of the
notice of their words and lives? But if really you think that fame is
sufficient, 1. It must be of persons and things not too far off. 2. It must be
in a Golden age or another world, where good men are not hated and calumniated,
and where bad men if Great are not extolled, and where false reports be not
easily believed and reported; where a vile person is contemned, and those that
fear the Lord are honored; Where the faithfullest Pastors are not the object
of Great men's jealousy, of bad men's malice, of dissenters and contentious men's
backbitings and reproach, and are not made the drunkards song, nor the scorn and
offscouring of all things, and where he that reproves or departs from evil,
does not make himself a prey; or at least where malignity, worldliness, and
lying are not the predominant humors of the Age. When you have secured us of a
true fame, we will make the example of a stranger of another land or Diocese,
(as soon as one of this Diocese as strange to us) the exemplar of our lives.

4. Another part of the Bishops work is to preach to those without that are
uncalled, as he has opportunity: To labor in the word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.
17. says Dr. H. To preach the Gospel to whom it was news: which made Dr.
Downam and other Prelatists say That the City and Territories are their Diocese
even when few of them are converted, that they may first convert them and then
govern them; and Dr. H. to Note out of Clem. Romans that they are made Bishops
over the Infidels that should after believe. And doubtless they must do their
best to call the unbelieving and impenitent to Christ.

And how much of this will a Bishop have time to do, that has the work of a
Diocese of Christians on his hands?

5. It is the work of a Bishop to Baptize, or at least to judge of those that
are to be Baptized, Matthew. 28. 19. Go and disciple me all nations baptizing
them. And Dr. H. thinks that no Presbyter, but Bishops baptized in Scripture
time, because there were then no other existent. And it is too evident in
Antiquity (by what I before cited) that no child or aged person was usually
baptized without a Bishop (when Bishops came up,) at least they used to anoint
their nostrils, etc. with holy oil. And doubtless they that Baptized or
admitted to baptism, did examine them of their faith, and resolutions, before
they took them into the Covenant and Vow of God. And how many hundreds in a
year can the Bishop do this for, besides all his other work?

6. It is by the English Canons and Rubric the Bishops duty to confirm all
that were baptized: many think it is meant in Heb. 6. 1, 2. Our Bishops take it
for a proper part of their work. And they that must confirm them according to
our Liturgy, must know their understanding, and receive their profession of
their faith, and standing to their Baptismal Covenant, which requires some
time and labor with each one, for him that will not make a mockery of it. Look
into the Bills of London, which tell you how many are born every week; and
thence conjecture how many hundreds in a year the Bishop has in that Diocese
to Confirm, and consequently in other Dioceses proportionably? Or if that will
not inform you, try over England where you come, how many are (though but
cursorily as a hasty ceremony) confirmedat all? Whether it be one of many
hundreds? And set this to the rest of the Bishops work.

7. It is the Bishops work to defend the truth against gainsayers, to confute
and stop the mouths of Heretics and contradicters, and confirm the troubled
and wavering minded in the faith: not by fire and sword, nor by a quick
prohibition of others to preach; but by sober conferences, and weight of
evidence, and by Epistles as Paul did, when they are not at hand, yea even to
other Churches: and as one that is gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in
meekness instructing them that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And shall
the Bishop do this for many hundred Churches? While he is defending the poor
flock against Papists, Quakers, Arrians, Socinians, Infidels (alas how numerous
are the deceivers!) at Newark, or Gainsborough, or Boston, what shall they all
do between that and Barnet, or the remotest part of Buckinghamshire?

II. The second part of the Bishops office is to be the peoples Priestly guides
in Gods worship: principally in the public Assemblies, and often in private, viz.

1. To confess the peoples sins and their own: To be their own and the Churches
mouth in prayer, thanksgiving and the praises of the Lord. And in how many
hundred Congregations at once will they do this?

2. To consecrate and distribute the Sacrament of Communion; and consequently
to discern who are fit for it. And in how many Churches at once will he do this?

3. To bless the Congregation at the end of every meeting. All these I have
before proved that the ancient Bishops did; and Dr. Hammond says, No other in
Scripture times; And what Ubiquitary shall do this.

4. And in private it is the Bishop that must visit the sick, that must be sent
for by them all, and must pray with them. As Dr. H. at large proves, Annot. in
Jam. 5. I have told you before how well and for how many he is able to do this,
in one of our Dioceses. If that serve not turn, I pray you if you are
foreigners, ask English men what number it is of sick men in a Diocese that are
visited and prayed with by the Bishop? Compare them with the Bills of Mortality
in London, and judge proportionably of the rest, whether he visit one of many
thousands of such as die, to say nothing of all the sick that do recover.

5. And it is the Bishops work to receive all the offerings, first fruits,
tithes, and other maintenance of the Church, as the Canons before cited say.
And see Dr. H. on Act. 2. c. and Act. 4. 33, 34, 35, etc.

6. It was the Bishops work to take care of all the Poor, Orphans, Widows,
Strangers, as the Canons cited show; And Dr. H. on 1 Cor. 12. 28. c. says [The
supreme trust and charge was reserved to the Apostles and Bishops of the
Church.] So in Can. 41. Apost. A Bishop must have the care of the moneys, so
that by his power all be dispensed to the poor, etc. where he cites Just.
Mart. and Polycarp. for a particular care. I have before told you that if the
poor of every parish be not relieved till the Bishop take notice of them, few
of the poor in England would be any more for Bishops, than for famine,
nakedness, and death.

III. But the principal thing which I reckon impossible, and is, and must be
destroyed by Diocesanes, is the Government of all the particular Churches, (or
Parishes) in the Dio^^se.

Where note, 1. That I speak not of the Magistrates Government, 2. No^ of that
General Inspection by which an Archbishop or General Pastor overseeth the
inferior Bishops with their flocks, as a general Officer does the Regiments
and Troops in his Army, which have Colonels and Captains of their own. But I
speak of the particular Church Government of the Bishops of single Churches,
like that of Captains over their own troops, or rather Schoolmasters in their
several Schools.

And I the rather mention this because Bishops making it more proper to
themselves, than Teaching or Worship, must hold, (were they consistent with
themselves) that they can less delegate it to others.

The exercise of the Keys are 1. For entrance by Baptism. 2. By confirmation
(rightly understood, as in a peculiar Treatise I have opened it) 3. By Reproof,
Consolation, Excommunication, and Absolution of particular persons, which I am
now to speak of.

Where distinctly note I. What the work is Materially, II. In what manner it
must be done, III. On how great a number of persons.

I. 1. To receive accusations and informations of all the great and perilous
heresies, crimes, and scandals in the Diocese.

2. To judge of the credibility of the witnesses (hardly done by a stranger)
and of the validity of their proofs. For Councils themselves have petitioned
the Emperors, that ungodly persons might not be witnesses, who make so small a
matter of other sins, as that they may be supposed to make but little of false
witnessing. Else an Atheist or Infidel or man of no conscience (as he never
need to miss of Church preferment, for want of conforming to men's wills, so) he
may be master of the ^ame, liberty, and lives of all honest men, at his
pleasure, and govern them that govern Church and State. Therefore Bishops
themselves must difference between witnesses: And to say, I know an honest man
that knows an honest man that says they are honest men, is a poor
satisfaction in comparison of personal knowledge. Much less to trust the whole
trial to another.

3. He must hear the accused person speak for himself. For there is no judging
till both are heard.

4. He must rebuke false accusers, and justify the innocent, and vindicate
their good name.

5. He must by convincing arguments and melting affections, labor to bring the
sinner to Repentance.

6. He must desire the Church to be witnesses of his faithful admonitions, and
to avoid the like crimes and impenitence themselves, and to pray God to give
Repentance to the offender.

7. He must publicly declare the impenitent excommunicate, and bind him over
to answer it at the bar of God, and set Gods terrors before his Conscience.

8. He must try and judge of the Truth of the Repentance of those that say they
do repent (where all the ancient rigorous Penances came in.) And not trust
every incredible saying, I Repent.

9. He must receive those publicly into the Church that truly repent, or
credibly profess to do so; and must comfort him with the declaration of the
pardon of his sin.

10. He must persuade the Church to receive him into their affections and
Christian Communion, and to esteem and use him as a Brother again.

II. And as to the Manner, all this must be done, 1. with great Prudence and
discretion; else the Church may soon be set on fire, (as by a confession of a
Deacons adulteries at Constantinople, etc.) 2. It must be done with
deliberation and throughest acquaintance and information of the truth: else
rash and hasty judgments, and believing knaves will disgrace the Bishop, and
injure the just, and gratify the wicked, and breed uncurable breaches between
so unjust a Bishop and the flock. 3. It must be done with the greatest
seriousness, reverence, and gravity; As knowing that the honor of God and
Religion and the Church lies on it, and the comfort or recovery of the souls
of men, and the preservation of the rest.

It is not a Chancellors check, nor saying, do you repent, and will you pay
your fees, that dispatcheth such a work as this. It requires much skill, and
time and patience. Poor sinners must not be taken in a passion; nor is it
imperious frowns that melt men into true Repentance: The opening of the nature
of the sin, and the aggravation, not reproachfully but convincingly; the
awakening of a secure hardened sinner, with the terrors of the Lord; the
drawing him home by the opening of the motives of Love and mercy; do all
require greater skill, and holiness, and love to Souls, than most Bishops have
that ever I was acquainted with; much more than a Lay Chancellor has, who is
the man that does the work, that never pretended to be a Divine.

I must profess for my own part, that when I did this with others for one
Parish, it called for more skill, and holy affections, and consequently more
convinced me of my weakness, by far, than public preaching to the people. The
heart of an honest judge will be turned within him, before he pass the sentence
of death on an offender. And before we pass the sentence of Excommunication,
our bowels must yearn over poor souls, and all means be tried to recover them.

And here it is not the clearest witness of the crime that will serve turn: For
men are not to be excommunicated for any ordinary crime, unless it have
impenitency and obstinacy added to it. And therefore the work of the Bishop is
(not like a secular Court to judge only of the fact and fault, but) to judge of
men's repentance or Impenitence. And that is a thing that cannot be done by a
few Lordly awful words.

You will say, Because of all this we judge that ordinary Priests are not to be
trusted with so great a work, but a few wise and Reverend Prelates.

Ans. 1. I never yet knew the best Bishop that was to be compared for ability
in this work to many a Parish Minister that I have known: Nor did I ever know
One Bishop tolerably fit for it, who had not for a considerable time been a
laborious Parish Minister. Those that come from the Universities to be
Noblemens and Bishops Chaplains, and so get the Tithes of two or three rich
Benefices, and then are made Prebends, Deans, and Masters of Colleges; and
then he made Bishops, may read, and talk of all this work; but know no more
what it is indeed than I know how to build an house.

2. An experienced Minister that lives upon the place and knows all the
persons and witnesses, has incomparable advantage above a strange Prelate.

3. One that is their familiar and ordinary Teacher, whom they neither contemn,
nor fear with a carnal awe, for fear of punishment, may discern whether
Repentance be credibly serious; which he that aweth them by greatness and
terror shall never know: For almost all the veriest beasts will there profess
Repentance, though they come home with redoubled malice against the persons
that would have reformed them: Only a man that believes he is in the right
will incur the Bishops wrath for not confessing that he is in the wrong.

4. But yet our Caution is far greater than the Bishops; For because this
requires so much skill and faithfulness, we would have no one Man trusted with
it (except in a case of necessity, when a Church can have no more) For in the
multitude of Counselors is safety: We would have every Church have a Consessus
of Presbyters (and if one be a Bishop we contend not against it) And we would
have it done in the presence of the Seniors of the flock, who know the persons;
that so if one should want skill or trustiness, he might be helped by others, or
hindered from doing wrong. And if all this will not do, we would have the next
Synod of neighbor Pastors to have a final audience of the case.

And now let any thing except utterly blinding Pride and Partiality be judge;
WHETHER A CONSESSVS OF MINISTERS IN THE PRESENCE OF THE SENIORS OF THE FLOCK,
WHO ALL KNOW THE PERSONS, be not liker to JUDGE RIGHTLY IN ONE PARISH, where
also a neighbor Synod may review the case, than ONE STRANGE PRELATE or
CHANCELLOR FOR A DIOCESE OF MANY CHURCHES, WHERE HE KNOWS NOT THE PERSONS:

Especially when this Chancellor and all the Proctors and Officers of the
Courts do live (in wealth) upon the Trade, and therefore must manage it as a
trade: When in the way that we desire, no Presbyter, nor Synod, should have one
farthing for all his pains, but his comfort in obeying God, and end cavouring
the Churches good and men's salvation.

Alas Lord, How long shall Christ's enemies be the Pastors of his flocks? and
the seed of the serpent be the great instruments that must break the serpents
head, and the lovers of sin be they that must be the suppressers of it, and
those employed to teach men knowledge, who themselves will not know, and to
preach up holiness who cannot endure it? To willing minds these things are
plain.

Church Discipline has its effect on the Consciences of men, and these things
take as they come with spiritual life, light and love. We see in our Preaching,
how much all work is lost, which is done proudly, unskilfully and marred in the
manner. And true Pastoral discipline must work just as Preaching must do, it
being but a more particular application of the same word, to persons and
carses. Athanasius Patriarcha Constantinop* in his fifth Epistle for the
residence of Bishops (Bibl. Patr. T. 3. p. 159.) says of constant preaching
[Haec nocte dieque debent singuli Pastores gregibus suis inculcare, quae tam
necessaria sunt, quam est respirare animanti: Necessarium inquam omnia judicia
and testimonia Dei denunciare; ita ut ab hoc est prosperitas and opulentia, And
in his three last Epistles he counsels the Emperor to force those Bishops to
Preaching and Vigilance, that will not do it without force.

And indeed, unjust Excommunications most hurt the Excommunicators. Read
Nicon's Epistle ad Euch* de injusta Excommunicatione, proving that an unjust
Excommunication binds not another, but falls on the Excommunicators head.

But the sad truth is, that it is usual with the Prelates to confess the vanity
of their own Spiritual power, and to call it a leaden sword, which would but be
despised, if it were not backed with the Magistrates sword, which is the very
thing they trust to.

But of this anon.

III. And lastly, let it be considered objectively what work it is that every
Bishop has to do: and then you shall see whether it be possible.

1. As to the number of Sins in specie. 2. As to the number of Sinners.

1. Such sins as are in other Countries, and as are condemned in Scripture are
among us also. 1. As to Intellectual evils, we have ignorant persons who
neither know what Christ or Christianity is, or what a Sacrament is, or what
are the Essentials of Faith. We have Atheists that think there is no God, or
say so at least; we have more Infidels, that deride Christ and Christianity: we
have impious persons who make a mock of Godliness: we have Quakers and
Familists, and Seekers, who either deny the Scripture to be Gods word, or true,
or say Scripture, Church and Ministry are lost, or turn Scripture into an
Allegory, or that prefer the light within every man, Heathens and all, as
sufficient without it; and Enthusiasts and true Fanatics who trust to inward
Revelations and impulses instead of Gods word. We have Papists, we have
Antinomians, Libertines, and more Sects which the Bishops themselves can name
you, and overcharge.

2. And for more voluntary sins, we have almost all the breaches of all the
commandments: We have open enemies of preaching, praying, sacraments, family
duties, catechizing, the Lords days holy observation: Common scorners of those
that fear to sin, and diligently seek God. We have (if the Bishops could know
them) malignant persecutors, that would force Gods servants to most odious
sins, that hinder Christ's Ministers from doing the work to which they are
devoted, and from preaching to sinners the Gospel of Christ, and calling them
to Repent and live. We have idolaters, false worshippers, blasphemers, perjured
persons, common profane swearers, and cursers, and liars; and we have children
despisers and dishonourers of their parents, and servants of their masters; and
subjects of Princes and Rulers, (and whether of Bishops and Pastors, let the
Bishops judge:) Profane families; husband and wife living in open enmity or
wrath: we have murderers, fighters, railers, such as maliciously seek the ruin
of others, great and small oppressors, thieves, defrauders, adulterers and
fornicators, filthy speakers, gluttons, drunkards, such as waste their lives in
gaming, plays, and idleness, false-witnesses, Simoniacal, bribe-takers,
subverters of justice, to say nothing of the notorious effects of gross
uncharitableness, covetousness, and pride. These and more than these are here.

2. And for the number of sinners; 1. Conjecture by the number of persons: 2.
And then by the commonness of the sins.

1. I have before often told you that some Dioceses have many hundred Parishes,
some above a thousand; and in the lesser sort of these Parishes, commonly there
are in some 50, in most 100 or 200 families; and in the greater and Market
Towns, there are in some of the lesser about 1000 souls, in the middle sort
about 2000 or 3000 or 4000; and in the bigger about 5000 or 6000, and some few
10000: And in the greatest Parishes of all in London, some 20000, some 40000,
some 50000, and it is said in some many thousands more.

2. And for the sins, 1. The Bishops themselves say, that Atheism, Infidelity,
and derision of Scripture and Religion abounds among such as I will not name:
2. They say themselves that Rebels, and Quakers, and Seekers, and Enthusiasts,
etc. are so many as that they know not what to do with them. 3. They say
themselves that Papists so increase, as that they give out their hopes to
swallow up all. 4. One sort which they call Schismatics, as being against
their interest, they really exercise their power against: and find that this
one sort are more than they know what to do with. 5. The number that
malignantly labor to make all seriousness and diligence in seeking God, to
become a scorned hated thing, and make it to seem mere self-conceitedness and
hypocrisy, and to keep people from obeying God, is so great, as we cannot
reckon them. 6. The number of the grossly ignorant is lamentably great. 7.
Common swearers and cursers are usually met with in our ordinary converse. 8.
How common drunkenness is, let lamenting Parents, grieved wives, and beggered
families tell you. 9. Whether fornication and adultery (rarely heard of till of
late, comparatively) be now grown common, if not in fashion, I leave the
Prelates themselves to judge. 10. To pass by all the rest, Whether serious
credible Repentance (though not expressed by the ancient severe penances) be
now a common thing, for these or many other sins, I am content that any English
man be judge, that ever labored to bring men to Repentance, and knows what
Repentance is.

And now by this conjecture 1. How many thousands (I say not the Bishop who
puts it off, but) the Lay-chancellor has to stand at his bar at once, if
discipline were tolerably exercised. 2. How many years, the accusers and
offenders were like to wait before a cause could be heard. 3. Or how
spiritually, powerfully, meltingly this Layman (that never preached) is like
to draw all these thousands to Repentance. 4. What the Sinner and the Church
shall do till the year come that they can be heard. 5. Whether it be possible
for any such thing as true Pastoral conviction, exhortation, discipline, to be
ever exercised on them at all, whilst that new sins, even heinous ones are
still committed; and the Bishop or Chancellor or Surrogate, that had a
thousand, or ten thousand sinners at once to speak to, when he could deal but
with six or seven in a day (if he did nothing else,) shall before he can
examine their cases have thousands more (of their and others) to examine.

So that nothing of this nature can be more notorious, than that our
controversy with the Bishops is but such as these: Whether the Lord Mayor
alone shall not only oversee all the Families in the City, but be the Only
Governor of them, so that Husbands, Parents, and Masters, shall only teach and
exhort their families, but the Lord Mayor alone shall rule them, as to their
daily works, their speeches and their lives.

Or whether the City and the whole Diocese shall have but one Schoolmaster, who
shall be the sole governor of all the Schools in all those hundred parishes,
20, or 40, or 100 miles distant, and the Schools shall have under him only
Curate Ushers, who shall only teach the boys as far as they are willing to
learn, and for all their untractableness, disobedience, absence, and faults,
shall present their names to a Chancellors Court, set up by the sole ruling
Schoolmaster.

Or whether all the Colleges in the University shall have no Governor but the
Vicechancellor, and the rest be but Tutors to the Volunteers.

Or whether all the Patients in a Diocese shall have but one Physician, to
govern the Patient by prescripts, and under him only Apothecaries to carry
about his medicines and directions? Indeed if it were the Physicians work to
play the Soldier, and cut all their throats, it might be done in a short time.
But healing requires more ado. And if it were the Bishops or Chancellors work
to do no more, than to read an accusation, and say, Do you Repent, and (as some
do, because they must be thrice admonished,) to say at once, I admonish you, I
admonish you, I admonish you, I excommunicate you; or to do as the Pope does,
Interdict whole Kingdoms at once, (as Herod killed all the children in hope
that he should meet with Christ among them,) then a few hands might do the
work. But whether it be possible to exercise the discipline of Christ, in their
Diocesan way on one of a thousand, let the impartial judge: As also whether
that Church be fitlier said to be governed or ungoverned where one of a
thousand is governed indeed, whenas it is the body of the people, and not one
of a thousand, that is called the Church.

CHAP. XIX. The same Impossibilty proved by Experience.
THey say Experience is the teacher of fools: But O how well were it for the
Churches of Christ, if their Reverend Bishops (who think themselves only meet
to govern them) had but learnt by it, these 1300 years, at least. The
Experience which I offer you is,

1. That of the ancient Churches: what work the enlargement of their Diocesses,
and growing great by the greatness of their charge made quickly by the
destruction of true discipline, abundance of forecited testimonies show. To
which what sad complaints might I add out of Socrates Chrysostom. Isidore
Pelusiata and many others: which made Gregory Nazianz. Orat. 1. Say so much of
the difficulty of a Bishops work, and to depose himself when contentious men
were ready to depose him, and to wish so earnestly that there had never been
greatness and Priority and difference of Seats as Upper and Lower among the
Pastors of the Churches being tired with their contentions pride and envy, even
of* the Orthodox themselves: who instead of doing the work, contended for power
and preeminence.

I cited some of Chrysostomes sayings before, de sacerdot. l 3 c. 16. 17. where
he shows the greatness of a Bishops work, and p. 57. So p. 58. Nisi quotidie
Episcopus omnium domos circumierit, in hac part vel eas superans, quibus
nullum aliud studium est quam in foro versandi deambulandique, hinc omnino
offensiones infinitae emergent: Neque enim ij soli qui aegrotant, sed and qui
sani sunt, invisi se volunt: Id quod non religionis ac pietatis, sed honoris
dignitatisque potius nomine plurimi sibi vendicant. Ac si quem forte contigerit
ex ditioribus potentioribusque Christianis, ecclesiae usu lucroque communi ita
urgenti, ab Episcope frequentius invisi, hic protinus Episcopus palpatoris
atque adulatoris notam sibi inurit. Chrysostom speaks like a man that knew
by experience what a Pastors work is: And if our Bishops must go to every
house, how many years pilgrimage would it be to go but once through all their
Dioceses?

Bernard, says Epist. 82. Cum praesideant urbibus valde populosis, and coetus,
ut itadicam, patrias, propriae Diocaeses ambitu circumcludant, occasion
inventa ^^ quacunque veteri privilegio, satagunt ut vicinas sibi subdant
civitates, quatenus duae quibus vix due Praesules sufficiebant, sub uno
redigantur antistite. And the doleful lapse of discipline hereupon all History
witnesses.

Which made Erasmus say, Eccles. lib. 1. Quantum negoti^ credimus esse, cum
praeter vicos and pa^os* viginti frequentes and amplae civitates (such as our
big Market Towns) uni parent antistiti -- Et multorum praesulum ditio tam late
patet, ut siquam maxim forent expediti omnibus mundanis negotiis* non possent
tamen in omnibus oppidis Concionari; quum body una civitas quamplures requirit
Ecclesiastes: How much less will one perform all the rest of the Bishops work?

Says Musculus Loc. Commun. de Minist. p. mihi 438. [Quare viderint Episcopi,
etc. [Let Bishops look to it, who when they cannot (or do not) rightly Minister
to one Church, extend their power, not to some few Churches, but to whole
Provinces. Let them read Chrysostom on Tit 1. Per civitates, in every City,
etc. These things made Luther say advers. falso nominatum ordinem Episcop. To.
2. p. 310. Perinde habet, etc. It is with these wicked ungodly Bishops all one
as if the Devil himself, should mitred and ringed sit in the chair and himself
rule the people.

And Bishop Hooker in 8 precep. says, Et certe si jam vigeret antiquus ille
ergae populum amor, If they had the ancient Love to the people, they would
themselves confess that there is more work in one City, than the best men can
easily do. They know well enough that the Primitive Church had no such Bishops
till the time of Silvester the first. (I cite this ex Altar. Damascen having
not the Book at hand.

Filesacus tells us, ex Council. Triburiensi c. 26. Relata est coram sancta
Synodo quaeremonia plebium, eo quod sint quidam Episcopi nolentes ad
predicandum, vel ad confirmandum suas per annum paraecias circuire, de Orig.
Paraec. p. 537. What would they have done if they had been in our times.

See Isidore Pelus. Ep. 246. l. 2. p 236. teaching Bishop Eusebius* (and
Theodosius) what a Church is, who had so far lost the true Episcopacy, as to
take walls for men, and to abuse and scorn the true Church or godly people
while the Walls were adorned, as if Christ had come from Heaven more for [Walls
than Souls] etc. of which before.

In a word, nothing is more evident than that true Discipline was shut out at
the times and in the degrees as Diocesses were enlarged; and that in A^rick and
other places where the Churches or Diocesses were more small and numerous,
discipline was best preserved.

II. The second sort of experience is, that of almost all the Reformed
Churches, who have found the Pastoral work and Discipline particularly to be so
great, as that less than all the Parish Ministers concurring could not perform
it. 1. Those Churches which with Calvin set up Presbytery, exclude no Pastor
from the Governing part; but took in Elders of the people to help them, because
experience had told them that all the Ministers were too few: what then would
one Bishop and Chancellor or Vicar have been able to do?

2. The Lutherans who set up superintendants, commonly so set them over the
Pastors as not to take away the true Pastoral power of governing their
particular flocks, as finding by experience, that the old way of Prelacy would
not do it: And usually they join Magistrates with them, as they also in the
Palatinate did. And it is such an oderate supriority which is exercised in
Hungary, Transylvania, and in Poland till the Papists rooted them out thence.

3. The Helvetian Divines exercise a certain measure of power in keeping the
unfit from the Sacrament; but not what they judge to be the Churches duty,
because the Magistrate never would consent: That the Pastors are for it, as
needful to the right ordering of the Churches you may see in Polani: Syntag. at
large, and in most of their Divines of Basil, Bern, Zurich, etc. I will now
only cite the honest hearty words of Musculus above 100 years ago, because he
was a man most clear and candid, and that did mancipate his judgment neither to
Luther, Calvin, nor any party as such; but took liberty to differ from them all
(as in the points of Redemption, perseverance, etc.) At Bern in his Loci
Commun. ed. 1567. p. 421: He proves Bishops, and Presbyters and Doctors, and
Pastors to be all one. And p. 422. that in the Apostolic Primitive Church they
governed the Church in common, being subject to no head or president. But after
the Apostles days as Hierome says to avoid schism, but as he thinks more
out of a desire of Majority; one got the name and presidency of a Bishop: But,
says he [whether this counsel did profit the Church or not, by which such
Bishops were introduced, as Hierome says by custom rather than by truth, of
divine disposition, to be above the Presbyters, it has been better manifested
to after ages, than when this custom was first brought in: which we must thank
for all the insolency, wealth and tyranny, of the Principal and Equestral
Bishops, yea for the corruption of all the Churches, which if Hierome had seen,
undoubtedly he would have known that it was the devise, not of the Spirit of
God, to take away schisms as was pretended, but of Satan himself to lay waste
and destroy the ancient Ministers for feeding the Lords flock: whereby it might
come to pass that the Church might have not true Pastors, Doctors, Presbyters
and Bishops but under the masks of those names, idle-bellies, and magnisick
Princes, who will not only not themselves feed the people of God with sound
Apostolic Doctrine, but also take care by most wicked violence, that it be
done by no one else. By this devise of Satan it is brought to pass, that
instead of Bishops, the Churches have potent Lords and Princes, for the most
chosen out of the order of Nobles and great men, who being upheld by their own
and their kindreds power, may domineer over the flock of God as they list.

And p. 423. The office appointed to the Bishops that came after the Apostles
times was to preach to the people, to adminster the sacred things, to prescribe
repentance, to take the care of the clergy and the people both in City and
Country, to ordain, to visit, to take care that the goods of the Church be
rightly kept and dispensed, and to take the patronage of Church Matters with
Princes. And if the Bishops had but staid here, it had been better with the
Church: Or if the Prelates and Pastors of our times would return to these
Canonical Rules, there might be hope that the Eccleasiastical State and order
might possibly be reformed; and the controversies of these times might be ended
by the word of God -- Hence it is plain that the office of true Presbyters and
Bishops in the Church of Christ is, to feed the Lords flock with sound
Doctrine, and to be truly Pastors and Teachers. But now the false Bishops
pretend a Pastoral Cure, when going to the Assembly-Offices they are, as they
take it, Episcopally clothed. They put on a white stole, longer than ordinary;
with a girdle (not such as John Baptist wore, etc., -- The maskd Pastor thus
dressed does not feed the flock of God, but performs the Church service in
such a gesture, Ceremony and dralect, that all the matters of the Church may be
nothing else than certain vain and pompous shows -- so that if one of the
Apostles were there, he would never so much as dream that this were the
Episcopal feeding of the Lords flock. Thus the Bishop doing once or twice a
year does Suffciently perform his Office, what ever he do the rest of the
time. The ordination of Ministers and other things accounted Ecclesiastical, he
commits partly to his suffiragane, and partly to his Vicar, or Chancellor.
The office of Teaching he commits to some Doctor or Monk, so sworn, as that
he shall not dare to speak a word ( or hiss) besides what is prescribed him
in the forms of Laws.

Thus far I confess he speaks of the Popish Bishops: But who would believe he
meant not ours that had seen them? And how little do they differ? Well you
shall next hear him speak of Protestant Bishops.

Page 425 [Let us now come to other Ministers, Pastors and Bishops, diverse from
these, who do nothing in the Church of Christ but Preach and teach: They have
certain days of the week on which they Preach: And that is well: They Preach
only out of the holy Scriptures: And that well too. But this is not well, that
very many of them speak formally and coldly, and not from These are not our
Bishops.
the heart; so that what Seneca somewhere says, agrees to them; Animum non
faciunt, quia animum non habent. They make not men hearty ( or serious) because
they are not so themselves: And that of the Roman Orator, thou would never
talk thus, if thou speak from the heart: Nor do they accommodate the word of
God to the Hearers, by pertinent and profitable distribution, but they think
they have well performed their office, if they have any how spoken out the
hour. In the mean time, they observe not the peoples minds and lives, much
less do they reform them: Nor do they take care how the people grow in the
knowledge of God, the faith of Christ and in true Godliness: They apply not
themselves to the study of the Scriptures, nor persuade the people to read them
in their houses; they neither take care of the poor and strangers nor visit the
sick, as little caring how and with what faith they depart: And thus they
discharge their Ministry neither faithfully, prudently nor profitably. It is
indeed of great moment that they bring not strange Doctrine into the Church;
but teach the Scripture Do^^rine; and that they use not superstitious rites,
but are not content with simple administration of the Sacraments, according to
the custom of the Primitive Church. But in this they are to be blamed, that
they do things right and profitable, not from the hearts, but slightly, as on
the by, and what is accordingly to be else done by a faithful Minister they
wholly neglect. While they thus Minister, they do not indeed bring Error and
superstitions into the Churches, as in the foregoing ages was done. But in the
mean time, inclining to the other extreme, they take the course which by
degrees will bring the people into that indifferency in Religions which is the
most pestilent, and to drink in Epicurism the waster and extniguisher of all
religion. Wherefore I beseech them in the Lord, that they fully perform and
discharge their Ministry, and not thus by the halves] Thus far he describes
our ordinary better sort of the Clergy, but not our Bishops.

And Pa. 431. [They that labor more to keep up the authority of Bishops, than
to save the people, when they cannot convince the Ministers, called by the
Magistrate, of error, do raise a question about their calling, (being
themselves neither lawfully chosen nor called) saying, what Suffragane ordained
you minister? what Bishop called you to the office? As the Priests by Christ.
They questioned not his work, which they could find no fault with, but his
power -- so these, where they cannot by Gods word defend their own errors and
abuses, nor disprove our true doctrine, they fly to the Episcopal power and
authority, as if they did passess any such umblamable and lawful power, when
they neither discharge the office, nor have the power of true Bishops;
wherefore let no true sincere Minister of Christ, regard the barking of these
men, but as content with the testimony of his Conscience, and his calling to
teach by the Lawful Magistrate, go on in the Lords work with alacrity of
spirit.]

Here he adds the manner of their calling at Bern, by the election of the
Pastors and confirmation of the Magistrates, and reception of the people, that
you may know what he means by the Magistrates Call.

And p. 436. having told us, that Christianity falls where the election and
Pastoral care of the Ministry falls, he adds. [But now they that endeavor
to put out the light of truth, boast much of the power of Bishops,
Archbishops, Metropolitanes, Patriarcks, and the Roman Pope; where if you urge
them to it, they are not able to prove by any truth of divine institution, that
so much as this first ministerial power (of Ministering in the Church) is in
those Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitanes, Patriarcks or Pope, that is, in
these Church Lords ( Satrapes). Let them prove that these are true Ministers of
Christ. I strive not about Episcopacy ( simply) in it self, whether it be to be
numbered with Christ's true Ministers: But the controversy is whether such
Bishops as our age too patiently tolerateth are to be numbered with Christ's true
Ministers; It is greatly to be feared, lest in the day of judgment they will
hear that dreadful word from God, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know
you not.]

I have added more of Musculus then directly concerns the point now in hand,
because I would take him all together. And because the Helvetians are not
accounted Presbyterians. I add Bullinger, Decad. 5. Sermon. 3. p. (mihi) 377.
378. and Sermon. 4. p. 383. Where he shows that Diocesan Bishops have not the
sole power of ordination, that Presbyters and Bishops were the same and had the
same work, and the horrid abuses, that came into the Church by the degenerating
of Episcopacy: And Decad. 5. Sermon, 10. p. 491. that in latter Ages, Prelates
and Bishops, snatching by tyranny that power of excommunication, to themselves
which before was used by the Pastors in Synods in common, and sacrilegiously
using it against the first institution, had tarned a wholesome medicine into
deadly poison, and made it abaminable to good and bad. But I may not recite all.

Wagundus was no Presbyterian, being superintendent of Magdeburgh first, and
after of Wismaria, and after of Jene, and after Bishop Pomeraniensis; nor yet
Math. Iudex. yet go they the same way as may be seen, Sytagm, p. 1049. de
excom. p. 1114. de Eccles. p. 1135. de Minist. Should I cite all that is said
by those that never were called Presbyterians, about the degeneration of
Episcopacy, the largeness of their charge, the ruin of discipline by their
tyranny, ambition and grasping wealth, and titles, when they neither will nor
can perform the work, I mean by Luther, Melancton Illyricus, Chytraeus,
Tzegedine, Bucer, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Gryneus, Aretius, Gualther, Pet.
Martyr, Paraeus, Chenmitius, Pelargus, etc. I should but overweary the Readers
patience. I only add that if the Churches of France, Belgia, Geneva and the
rest of the Presbyterians, and the Churches of Transylvania, Hungary, and
formerly, Poland (that were Orthodox) and Bobemia, Brandenburgh, Saxony, the
Palatinate, etc. that set up another sort of Episcopacy, had found, that the
old or English species would have done the Ministerial works it is not credible
that they would all have rejected it.

III. The third part of that experience which I allege is the Bishops own.

1. This is signified by their confessions before named,

Ar. Bishop Ushers reasons for the ancient use of Episcopacy with their
Presbyters who shall be acknowledged true Church Governors over their flocks,
is fetched from the need of so many to the work. And Mr. Stanley Gower late of
Dorchester was wont to profess (being long intimate with him) that he professed
to him that he took a Bishop to be but primus Presbyterorum, of the same order,
and every Presbyter a Governor of the flock: And when he asked him, why then
he would be a Primate as he was, he told him that he took it not for any part
of his office as instituted by Christ but for a Collateral Dignity which the
King was pleased to bestow on him, for the more advantageous discharge of his
Spiritual Office.

What Bishop Jewels opinion was to the like purpose is plain enough in his
works.

Bishop Reignolds (that now is) professed to me his opinion to be the same,
when he took the Bishopric, and when he saw Dr. Stillingfliets book, that no
form of Church Government is prescribed in Scripture, professed that it was
always his opinion; And joined with us in our proposals for Bishop Ushers Model.

Dr Stillingfleet in his Irenicon has said so much against the Jus Divinum of
our Prelacy as can never be answered.

I have talked with many of the Bishops and Episcopal Conformists my self of
these matters, and I do not remember that ever I spoke to one accounted a
Learned man, that did not confess when driven to it, that the Greatness of the
Diocesses, and the Chancellors Government by the Church Keys, were causes of
so great a lapse of discipline, as is to be groaned under: And can show us no
probability, it possibility of restoring it, while it so stands. And yet they
would have us subscribe and swear never to endeavor any alteration of the
Church Government: not excepting in our place and calling, by petition, or
otherwise, no though the King commanded us.

Bishop Hall in his Mod. Offer does confess the faultiness, and desires
reformation: and in his excellent Peacemaker, would take up even with a
presidencie durante vita, as sufficient to reconcile us.

Dr. Hammond himself often complains of the lapse of discipline, and the
clergies and peoples vices thereupon.

The Liturgy wishes the godly Discipline restored, but does it not, as if in
our case it could not be done.

Abundance of their Writers lament the scandals of clergy and people which have
abounded, of which I shall say somewhat more anon.

2. And this is yet plainlier confessed by the Actual omission of discipline:
We need not to dispute whether that can or be ever like to be done, by our
Prelacy, which is no where done, and never was done, no not by any one man of
them, not excepting the very best; so that if they had not come near the
Erastian opinion in their hearts, and thought this use of the Keys to consist
but in bare Teaching, or the rest to be of no great need, it had not been
possible that they should have quieted their Consciences. Or at least, if they
did not do it, by saying, I cannot help it; It is not long of me: As Bishop
Goodman lays it on the King in the case of Chancellours, and most lay it on
the Churchwardens and Ministers for presenting no more: But all must confess
that little is done besides the troubling of Nonconformists. It is not one of a
thousand in a Diocese, I am confident, that ever is brought under the
exercise of Church discipline that ought to be; Nor one of many thousand that
should be so according to the ancient Canons of the Churches. If I should give
no other instance, than the ordinary neglect of all Gods public worship
(Preaching, Prayer and Sacraments) in public, Churches or any other Religious
Assemblies, I do not think but ten thousand persons in this Diocese, and
twenty thousand, if not forty, in London Diocese are guilty, that were never
questioned by the Church.

I may therefore argue thus: That which never was done by any one Bishop in
England, being the confessed work of their office is naturally or Morally
Impossible to be done (or if it have a possibility it is as bad as none, when
it never was once reduced into act) But the true exercise of Church discipline
on all or the hundredth or many hundredth person that it is due to; was never
done by one Bishop in England, that can by any credible History be proved
(since the deformation or reformation) Ergo.

The strength of the Major is plain. 1. From the Bishops own mouths who use to
praise themselves as the Wisest, Learn dst and best of the Clergy, and
therefore fitter to be trusted with the Government of the Church than all or
any of the Presbyters (though but under then) And they would take it heynously
if we question their wisdom conscience or honesty, and if they are all or most
so good, sure it is long of the state and constitution of their places, and not
long of their persons, that their very proper work is made but a shadow and a
dream.

2. But though this be but ad homines, yet really we have had very worthy and
excellent persons to be Bishops; what a man was Jewel? Archbishop Grindal had
Godliness enough and resolution too to make him odi^s, and favored Lectures
and Preaching, etc. Enough to bring him down, if Cambden, Godwin or Fuller, are
to be believed: but never could do this work of discipline, upon one of
hundreds or thousands under him. We had an excellent Arch-Bishop-Abbot
afterward, good enough to be reproached by Heylin, and to suffer what I need
not mention, but never able to do this work. What Learned, Judicious worthy
men, were his Brother Robert Abbot and after him Davenant, Bishops of
Salisbury? And how good a man was peaceable Bishop Hall, so Usher in Ireland,
Moron and many more? But no such thing was done by any of them? what should I
say now of Bishop Reignolds, and Bishop Wilkins, Men Learned and extraordinary
honest in these times: But let any man enquire whether any such thing as the
discipline in question is exercised on the thousandth Criminal in their
Diocese? Indeed we have heard in Bishop Reignolds Diocese of a great number
censured for Nonconformity: And it is his praise that it was not his doing; but
his Chancellours (though heretofore Judge Advocate in Fairefaxes or Cromwells
Army.) And to say now that it is long of Churchwardens, Chancellours, etc. Is
but to say that the Church is corrupted, the Episcopal discipline almost quite
cast out, and all the remedy is to say, It is long of somebody: Like the
Physician whose Praise was, that his patients dyed according to the rules of
art; or the nurse whose praise was, that though most of the Children perished,
it was long of themselves or somebody else.

IV. But the fullest experience, which so far satisfies me that all the books
in the world cannot change me in this, is my own, and the rest of my Brethren
in the Ministry. I have lived now (through Gods wonderful mercy) threescore
years wanting less than four Now ne^r* sixty five I have ^ately heard two
excommunicated for teaching School and being married without License, and a
thi^d no cause named.
In all this time, whilst the Bishops ruled, I never heard one man or woman
called openly to repentance for any sin; nor one ever publicly confess or
lament any sin? Nor one that was excommunicate in any Country where I came,
except the Nonconformists: Nor did I hear of any but one man to my remembrance,
who did formal penance for Fornication, I doubt not but there have been more:
But the number may be conjectu^ed by this. I lived under a great number of
drunken and ignorant Curates that never preached, and Schoolmasters, my self,
and many more were round about us, that were never troubled with discipline, or
cast out. I never lived where drunkards and swearers were not common; but never
one of them underwent the Churches discipline: But those that met to fast and
pray, and went to hear a Sermon two miles off, when they had none at home. But
yet this is the last of my conviction.

When I undertook a Pastoral charge my self; I kept with me two Ministers to
assist me (at one Parish Church and a small Chapel): I had three Godly
Justices of Peace in the Parish, who to countenance our discipline kept their
monthly meeting at the same time and place. I had four ancient Godly men that
performed the office of Deacons: I had above twenty of the Seniors of the
Laity, who without pretense of any office, met with us to be witnesses that we
did the Church and sinners no wrong* and to awe the offenders by their
presence: These met once a month together, we had almost all the worthy
Ministers of the Country agreeing and associated to do the like in their
several Parishes as far as they were able; that unity might the more convince
offenders: We had in the same Town the next day after our monthly Town-meeting,
an Assembly of a dozen or twenty such Ministers, to edify each other, and that
those might be tried by them and before them, whether we could persuade them to
repentance, who could not be prevailed with by ourselves: And, which was our
ease incomparably beyond all this, the times nor our judgment allowing us to
use discipline upon none but such as consented to our office and relation to
them, we told them that we had all agreed only to exercise so much of
discipline as Episcopal, Presbyterians and Independants had no controversy
about (some of the Episcopal joining with us) and that we would exercise it in
all our flocks, but we could be Pastors to none against their wills; whereupon
of about 3000 persons, 1800 or more of which were at age to be Communicants,
all refused to do any more than hear me preach, (for fear of discipline) except
about 600 or a few more. These 500 were the most understanding Religious part
of the Parish, all the grossly ignorant, and the Common swearers, and all the
Drunkards and scandalous persons were among the refusers, except about five or
six young men that had got such a Love to tippling that they could not leave it.
These hid their sin a while: But could not long: Yet the trouble and work that
these five or six men made us, sometimes by Drunkenness, sometimes by fighting,
sometimes by slandering their Neighbors, or such like was more than it is easy
for an unexperienced person to believe. So hard was it to bring them to a
Confession of their sins or to ask those Forgiveness whom they grossly wronged,
that when we endeavored with all our skill to convince them, and used both
gentle exhortation, and also opened to them the terrors of the Lord, when we
prayed before them that God would give them repentance, when their own Parents
and relations joined with us, all would not make them confess their sin, but we
were forced to cast them out of our Communion (for the most part of them). And
among all the rest there were some that sometimes would need admonitions, and
reconciliations with one another, which found us some work. But if we had but
been troubled with all the other (1000 or 1200 as was supposed) of the Parish,
and so with all the Swearers, railers, Common Drunkards, some Infidels, etc.
What work should we have had? So much as I dare confidently say that (without
being half so strict and troublesome as the Ancient Canons were) all we could
not possibly have done more in the work of discipline, than Govern that one
Parish. Nor could we have done so much, but with such omissions as nothing but
disability would have quieted our Consciences under.

And that you may know that I give you not my single experience, the rest of
the honest Ministers of the County. 1. Sometimes durst not associate with us,
because the scandalous persons of their Parishes were so many and so masterly
and fierce, as that they were not able (they thought) to exercise any
discipline among them. 2. Some that did join with us were fain to do as the
Independants, and gather out some of the best to be their flock as to Communion
in the Sacrament, and let the rest live quietly as bare hearers, because the
offenders were so many that they durst not exercise discipline on them. 3. Some
did even give the Sacrament to all promiscuously how scandalous soever, to
avoid the difficulties of exercising discipline. 4. And all over the land they
were feign to take the same course with these sorts aforesaid, yea and more,
too many quite forbear the Sacrament, because they could not keep away the
scandalous. 5. And too many took up the way of Separation, and gathered
Churches out of these Churches, according to their several opinions, because
the Parishes were so bad, that they thought them incapable of discipline.
Though yet the truth is. 1. Many such made them worse than they were. 2. And
took the course that was easiest to them, by avoiding the most difficult part
of their work; 3. And they were led to it by over valuing Expressive parts in
some of the people, and unvaluing the good desires of some that wanted such
Expressions.

And if we that found discipline too hard a work for us to exercise in our
several Parishes, should have dreamed that one of us, was sufficient to have
exercised it on a thousand or many hundred such Parishes (by our selves and
Chancellors) O what Monsters of ignorance, should we have been.

CHAP. XX. Objections against Parish Discipline answered.
Obj. 1. YOu make this discipline seem more needful than it is. A Church may be
a true Church without it. The Helvetians use very little of it at all.

Ans. 1. The Helvetian Divines write for it, though with lenity and they are
for denying the Sacrament to the Impenitently wicked, which is not nothing; and
they are for Pastoral admonition of the persons that are scandalous. And the
rest the Magistrates hinder them from, and partly undertake themselves. And
verily I take it to be much more iningenuous to let the Magistrate do what he
can, and to pretend to no more discipline, than to talk for it, and never use
it.

2. A Man may be a true man though he have the Palsy, Dropsy, Gout or Stone,
or be dismembered. And are these therefore indifferent things?

3. Whether discipline be needful judge after these Reasons. 1. Otherwise
Bishops are not needful to exercise it, nor any other Pastors, but bare
Preachers. Why should Lordships* wealth and honors, be allowed Bishops for
that which is not needful? 2. If it be needful to be exercised on Ministers,
why not on the People also? And if not on Ministers, why have there so great
numbers been silenced, suspended, and troubled? Sure somebody thinks, that
our silencing is needful. 3. If it be not needful, why did the universal Church
use it, and that so strictly from the beginning? And why do they that say this,
pretend a reverence to the Ancient Churches, to the Councils, the Canons, and
the Bishops of those times, who went ten times further in their Severities than
we do. 4. It is needful by Precept and Divine Canon as may be seen, Lev. 19.
17. Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. Tit. 1. 13. and 2. 15. and 3. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 5. 15. and 5. 19, 20, 21 22, 24. 2 Timothy 3. 5. and 4. 2. 2 These. 3* 6,
14. 5. It is needful to the honor of God, our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, that he may be declared Holy in the Holiness of his Church, and not
by our allowed wickedness be represented as an unholy friend to sin. 6. It is
needful to the Churches honor, that it be not as a very stie and sink of
wickedness as the Infidel World. 7. It is needful to the Churches beauty,
safety, and felicity, that God may delight in it, and not forsake it, as he
has done most of the East, nor make them miserable by his judgments. 8. It is
needful to the Honor of Holiness it self, which will be vilified if we
difference not the precious from the vile. 9. It is needful to the Conviction
and Conversion of Mahometans, and other Infidels and Heathens, who now are kept
in their Infidelity, by seeing that Christians as are bad or worse than
themselves; and would be more drawn to Christ, if the holy Lives of Christians,
and holy State of Churches did invite them. 10. It is needful to the
comfortable Communion of Saints, as it is professed by us in our Creed. 11. It
is needful to prevent the infection of the Church, and the increase of sin;
seeing a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and he that touches pitch
will be defiled by it. 12. It is needful to encourage and strengthen the
Faithful, when they see by this praejudicium futuri judicii, as Tertullian
calls it, the difference that God himself will make*. 13. It is an Essential
part of the Pastoral Office to have the Power of Discipline: And what is the
Power for but the Work? yea Power and Obligation are essential to his Office.
14. It is needful to the Holy Administration of Sacraments, and other parts of
Divine Worship, that Holy things be not given to Dogs. 15. It is needful to
convince the ordinary careless sinners among us, that seeing a difference put
between the good and bad, they may not think that preaching is but idle talk
and falsehood, and that they are as safe as others. 16. It is needful to keep
the better people from offending God by their familiarity and communion with
the notoriously wicked. 17. It is needful to break the Serpents head, that in
Christ's Church the Devils works may be renounced and cast out, and sin be
publicly made a shame, as the Devil out of the Church endeavors to do by
Truth and Holiness. 18. It is needful to the ease and peace of Magistrates,
that they may not he overwhelmed with the cares, troubles, dangers, that come
by multitudes of Wicked Men; but the Pastors labors with the voluntary may
prevent much of the Magistrates trouble with the involuntary. 19. It is needful
to the safety of Commonwealths and Kingdoms, that they be not poisoned by
wickedness, and so exposed to the judgment of God. 20. And lastly, it is
needful to the scandalous Sinners themselves, that they may not be suffered to
die and perish in their sin, but have all possible means used to bring them to
repentance, that they may be saved. Consider whether all these Reasons prove
not Discipline to be needful.

Object. II. But till Constantines time there was no Christian Magistrate,
which made it then needful: But since the case is not the same.

Answ. 1. Down then with Bishops now, if their work be needless. But why then
were they set so much higher, and had so much more power since the days of
Constantine then before? 2. Are you wiser than all the Councils (Nice, Ephesians.
Chalced. Constance, etc.) which have ever since made Canons for Discipline? 3.
Again, try whether none of the foregoing reasons, be still in force. 4. Read
Galaspies Aarons Rod, which fully proves the continued need of discipline.

Object. III. But discipline is not to be use^ on all that deserve it, but only
one now and then, one to be a terror to the rest: You are for too much
strictness, rigidness and severity.

Ans. 1. I am not for half the rigidness and severity of the Ancient Bishops
and Churches, who made the penitents wait at the Church doors, and cast down
themselves with cries and tears to beg absolution and readmission, and in many
cases to wait thus many years together, and in some, till their death bed. I
am for accepting the first credible profession of Repentance: I am for gentle
exhorting them and praying for them long before we cast them out. I am not for
troubling any for small faults: Nor for bringing any man's secret sins to light,
or making them more public than he makes them himself; I am not for imposing
such penances as the Papists do. And is a strictness short of theirs
intolerable to you, that pretend to be more holy than they? Yea more, I am not
for the use of discipline at all, where it is notorious to true reason that its
like to do more harm than good. And is all this too much strictness? But I am
not for keeping it out, and then making such pretenses, nor for causing the
inconveniences, and then pleading them against the duty.

2. The Scripture and Canons do not bid you reprove or suspend or reject one
blasphemer, or drunkard of many; but all that are such: And do you say that God
and Councils dissembled, and bid us do that which they would not have us do?

3. To censure one of a hundred or a thousand, yea, or twenty offenders, will
be no terror or warning to the rest; who will look to escape that which falls
on so few.

4. When one of so many only is censured, the Church will be still under most
of the forementioned danger and defilement; and this much will not reach the
End.

5. Partiality is an odious Character of injustice, and should not be found in
civil judges; much less in the Churches of Christ. And it will but harden and
enrage those persons whom you deal with, when you enable them to say, you
censure me, and let many others alone, in the same sin. Is this your Church
justice, or rather malice to me?

Obj. IV. You confess your self that it is so hard to use discipline in one
Parish, that most Ministers did neglect it when the Bishops were out: And why
blame you the Bishops then for neglecting it?

Ans. 1. We were to deal with the Parishes in that defiled and unruly state as
the Bishops left them: And all great works must have time to be done in. And at
last the reformation prospered apace, till they pulled it down. 2. We were to
make use of such Ministers as the Bishops left us, and of young men who were
newly come from the Universities. And men cannot get wisdom interest,
experience and resolution in a day. 3. The remaining respects which the people
had to the Prelates and their way was a hinderance to us that desired, to
meddle herein with none but consenters. 4. A great number of Sectaries, raised
by the distastes of the Prelates ways, did also hinder us. 5. Yet it was than
possible and feasible to Ministers that were wise and willing to do so much as
might very much attain the ends of discipline, though not so much as they
desired. 6. But is this an Objection fit for the Prelatists to make? or does it
not increase their condemnation? what would you say to a Physician, a Pilot, a
Schoolmaster, that should say, It is not an hundred Physicians, that can do
what should be done for all the Patients in this City; nor an hundred Pilots
that can well govern all the Navy; nor an hundred School masters that can well
Govern all the Schools in the Diocese: Therefore I will get them all turned out
and* I will be the only Physician (with my Apothecaries) the only Pilot (with
my S^am^n) the only Schoolmaster (with my Monitors and Ushers) my self; for the
work can be but left undone? Such rule the Churches must have while God for our
sins will suffer it.

The doing it per alios is often enough answered before.

Obj. V. Many Parish Ministers are young and raw and unfit to govern. Ans. 1.
They are unfit who make this Objection, who bring and keep such in, and cast so
many hundred out that are better (however ignorant malice slander them) 2. This
also may be said against their preaching, much more: For, 3. They may Rule with
others, when they cannot preach by others. 4. There may be appeals to the next
Synod (or Prelate if you will have it so).

Obj. VI. You would have a Priest to be a Pope in his Parish. Ans. I can call
this Objection no better than gross Impudency: For, 1. Its a Contradiction: A
Pope is a Head of the Universal Church: And so it is saying, that we make every
Minister a Head of the Universal Church to his Parish. 2. We desire more
Presbyters than One in a Church. 3. We desire Appeals to the next Synod: and is
that to be a Pope? 4. Is not one Minister as able to Rule a Parish, without the
help of assistants and Synods, as one Prelate to Rule many hundred Parishes,
who likely is a worse man than the Minister? Impudent pride will perhaps say no.

CHAP. XXI. The Magistrates Sword is neither the strength of Church discipline,
nor will serve instead of it, nor should be too much used to second and enforce
it.
THese three assertions I will prove distinctly. 1. The Magistrates Sword is
not the chief strength of true Church discipline.

I add this, because this is the Prelatists last Objection, that its true that
the Keys are but brutum fulmen and a leaden sword without the Magistrates: For
almost all men will despise it: Who will come to our Courts if they may choose?
Who will regard our Excommunications? Do not the people now despise them? what
then would they do if they had their wills? when we have excommunicated the
Schismatics, They will Excommunicate us again.

The greatest Prelatists who write to me and speak with me, use these very
words themselves. To which I answer.

1. If we prove that Christ has instituted discipline, and that for such noble
ends as aforementioned, it is little less than blasphemy thus to reproach it:
As if Christ had no more Power, Wisdom or Goodness, than to ordain so vain and
unprofitable a means, to such high and necessary ends.

2. The objection does but express a carnal mind, which regards only carnal
things, and thinks as basely of all others, as if nothing moved them but the
interest of the flesh; And as if Gods favor or displeasure, and the authority
of his word and Ministers were of no force or regard even with the Church of
Christ.

3. The objection inviteth Kings to put down all Bishops, except Preachers and
Magistrates; For why should they put the people to so great charge and trouble,
especially when they love the Prelates so little as to keep them up to wield a
Leaden Sword, and to brandish a brutum fulmen, and to make a noise to no more
purpose; yea to rob the Magistrate of the honor of his proper work, and to
make the deluded people believe that those things are done by a brutum fulmen
which really are done by the Civil power.

4. This objection bitterly reproacheth all the ancient Churches and Bishops,
and all General and provincical Councils, and all the Cannons and ancient
discipline of the Churches; As if they had troubled the world to no pupose and
all their discipline had been vain.

5. The objection is notoriously confuted, in that the Discipline was more
powerful and had better effect, before Constantius time than afterward, and
was much more strictly exercised against sin. And that which so long did more
without the Sword, than afterward by it, does not receive its efficacy from the
Sword.

6. A naturarei there is as much of Divine Authority, as much of the power of
his Precepts Prohibitions, Promises, and threatenings, as much of Heavenly
inducement, as much of the terrors of Hell, as much of internal goodness of
holiness, and evil of sins, as much of Soul interest in what the Minister
propounds for men's conviction, as there is, when it is backed with the
Magistrates Sword. And if all these have no force, Christianity must be a
dream, and able to do no good in the world; which better beseems Julian,
Celsu^ or Porphyry, Symmachus, or Eunapius, to say, than a Bishop.

7. By this objection the Prelatists openly confess that their Churches consist
of men so carnal as are not moved by Divine authority without the Sword: And
consequently what Pastors they have been to the Churches, and how they have
governed them; and what they allow us to expect from their discipline for the
time to come.

8. By this Objection they condemn themselves and justify the Nonconformists:
For why should we Swear that we will never endeavor any alteration of so
brutish an Office, as if the King and Parliament could not take down such an
useless thing? And why should so many hundred Ministers be forbidden to Preach
Christ, for not assenting, consenting and Swearing to such a vain and brutish
power?

9. By this they give up their cause to the Presbyterians, and Independents;
Confessing that their discipline is uneffectual; when as we that plead for
another frame, desire not the Magistrates Sword to interpose, and desire to use
discipline on none but Volunteers. And either the discipline which we desire
has some efficacy, or none. If none, what need they fear it, or hinder it, or
silence so many hundred Ministers, and write and strive, and all to keep men
from using such a brutum fulmen which can do no harm. But if they confess that
our discipline has efficacy, and theirs has none, what do they but directly
call us to seek the alteration which we are required to abjure?

10. Lastly by this objection they show themselves too ignorant of the nature
of Church, and discipline, and Sacrament and Ministry: Or else they would
better know how far Volunteers are proper objects of Church discipline, and
have the right to the privileges and Communion of the Church.

II. The Magistrates Sword will not serve instead of Church discipline.

1. Else Christ would not have instituted another office for it.

2. Else it might serve also instead of Ministry, Preaching and Sacraments.

3. The nature of it tends not directly to convince men of Errors to lead
them into truth, to move them by heavenly motions, and to bring them to true
repentance and godlyness. But this will be fuller proved under the next; and is
confessed by all save the Erastians.

III. The Magistrates Sword should not be used too forwardly or too much to
second or enforce Church discipline; much less to be its life and strength, and
inseparably twisted with it. I mean,

1. No unbeliever should be forced to say he is a Believer, and to profess the
Christian faith.

2. None upon such profession should be forced to be Baptized.

3. None that has no right to Church Communion in the Sacrament should be
forced to receive it.

4. None that Apostatizeth from Christ should be forced falsely to profess that
he is still a Christian.

5. None that are at age should be forced to stay in the Church by local
presence or relation as a member of it, who is not willing, and the practice of
the Papists who force no Heathens to be Christians, but afterward force
Christians by fire and Sword, and burn them that were Heretics, Schismatics,
or Apostates is self contradicting and self condemning; God having left man as
much unto his own choice for continuing as for Entering into the Church: And as
for Obedience to Rulers, Infidels may owe it to Christian Kings, as well as
Christians: And none but Magistrates can use the Sword to punish either.

6. No Magistrate should punish a Man's body, merely because he is
Excommunicate, and so punished already. Nor should he be made a mere
executioner to the Bishop without hearing, trying and judging the Cause
himself, in order to his own execution.

7. No Magistrate should force an Impenitent sinner to lie and say he does
repent, that thereby he may be admitted to the Church Communion and Sacrament,
but it is the force of Gods word that must try his Repentance.

But yet I acknowledge. 1. That Magistrates and Parents and Masters may force
their Subjects to use those means which tend to make them Christians, as to
hear Preaching, Conference or disputations, or to read convincing books: But
with these two Cautions. 1. That it be but when it is like or hopeful to do
more good than harm. 2. That it be by wise and moderate means of constreint,
and not hang or burn them to convert them.

2. Accordingly Magistrates, Parents, and Masters, may use the like force with
their Subjects who are Christians, to cause them to use the foresaid means (of
hearing and Reading and conference) for the cureing of their dangerous errors
or sinful lives.

3. And I doubt not but Magistrates may punish men Corporally for their crime
according to the nature of them, and even for the same that the Church has
excommunicated them. If one be excommunicated for Treason, Murder, Theft,
Swearing, Profaning the Lords day, and holy things etc. it follows not that
the Magistrate may not also meddle with him.

4. And we doubt not but Magistrates may Restrain false Teachers from seducing
others, and drawing them from God to sin.

5. And the Magistrate may and ought to encourage Ministers in the use of the
Church Keys, and to preserve them from the violence of wicked men.

7. And they may make a difference in their favors and rewards, between
Christians obedient to God and their Pastors, and Infidels, excommunicate, in
penitent ones, and Apostates, by denying honors and preferments and rewards to
the worse, which he gives to the better sort of men.

But yet as to the Cases before denied, especially the forcing men by fire,
sword, and imprisonment to say, they believe and repent, and to take the
Sacrament and other Church privileges, and making this the strength of Church
discipline, I have all this against it.

1. No force should be used to the hindering and destruction of Christ's
ordinance of discipline and his Church Laws. But such it would be in the case
in hand. For Christ's fundamental Covenant is, that the true willing penitent
and believer shall be a member of his Church, or those only that credibly
profess to be so (at age) He that will may freely drink of the water of life.
Nemo invitus fit Christianus: so that to say, that any man has right to the
mystical Church privileges, but Consenters, or any man has right to the
visible Church privileges, but credible Professors of consent, is to
contradict the very condition of the Covenant of life, which is the sum of all
the Gospel. Its true, you may compel some men to duty, but you cannot compel
them to be happy.

But to force them by perpetual Imprisonment, confiscation and the sword, to
say that they are Christians, or repent, consent or are willing, and so to give
them absolution and Church Communion, is to make Christ's ordinance of none
effect. For true discipline is to make them penitent and willing, and then to
use them as such: But, 1, It is not credible that that person is truly penitent
and willing to be a Christian, or have Church Communion, who will not be
persuaded to consent by all that can be said by the Pastors from the word of
God, but yet on the rack or to prevent undoing will say* I consent. This is
contrary to the nature of true Repentance. 2. Or if it did not make this forced
consent utterly incredible, yet it utterly crosses the ends of Church
discipline, which is to discern the voluntary penitent; which force so
obscureth that no man can tell whether the person be credibly penitent or not.
If I left a Legacy to so many that are Lovers of the Church, and its Communion,
and my Executors should get the Magistrate to hang, or Imprison or undo certain
men that are accused as Enemies of the Church, unless they will say, we Love
the Church, I think my Will would be ill performed, if those men had my Legacy,
that were forced to say so.

2. No man should be forced to his own sin and destruction. But he that is
forced to take the Sacrament when he is unwilling and had rather be without it,
in likelihood is forced to his sin and destruction: For even the Liturgy
tells the unworthy that they eat and drink damnation to themselves, and that
the Devil may enter into them as he did into Judas: And who is unworthy if the
unwilling are not?

3. Force is not fitted to cause love and willingness; therefore men should not
be forced to take a Gift, which Love and willingness is the condition of; men
use not to say, Love me or I will hang thee or imprison thee. This seems to
make a new way of Preaching which Christ never made.

4. Christ's terms are self-denial, Cross-bearing and forsaking all and
following him for the hopes of heaven: But this seems a new and contrary
Gospel, as if Christ had said; He that will be my disciple rather than be
imprisoned or die, shall be saved or received.] Christ says: He that forsakes
not all that he has cannot be my disciple, Luke 14. 33. This way, says [He
that will come to the Church Communion rather than forsake all shall be my
disciple]. Christ says [He that loves any thing, even his life more than me,
cannot be my disciple.] This way says, [He that loves life, credit, wealth,
liberty so well as that he will rather receive the Sacrament than lose it,
shall be my disciple] Christ says, except ye repent ye shall all perish.] This
forces a Minister to absolve a wicked man, as if he should not perish, if he
will but rather say [I repent] than lose his liberty and estate. God says [He
that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him]. This way says
[Do but Love the world so well as to say and do any thing to keep it, and then
Pastor and people shall number thee with the Lovers of the Father.] God says;
The carnal mind is enmity to God and is not subject to his Law nor can be.]
This way says [If thy carnal mind make thee say or do any thing to save thy
liberty or money, thou art an obedient Son of the Church and of God.] And is
not this to set up a new Gospel, Gal. 1. 7. 8.

5. And this way compels men to lie and play the Hypocrites. when we may
discern it is so. Mr. Capel of Tempt: would persuade us that a lie thus
differs from most other sins, that it is so evil in it self, as that it
cannot in the very act be lawful. When a man against all persuasion, says or
shows you, that he does not believe in Christ, or does not repent, to say to
that man, [Say thou believe, or Repentest, or thou shall be confiscate and
lie in jaile] is plainly to say [Lie or suffer] I deny not but that in some
cases a man may be examined when it is foreknown that he will lie. But its one
thing to force him to examination and answer, and another to force him to that
particular answer.

6. It is a compelling men to pretend to that which we cannot compel them to,
that is, to have a Right to so great a benefit as Absolution and Church
Communion. Force gives no man Right to the Benefit, and their force should not
compel him falsely to pretend a Right.

7. It confounds the Church and the world: Whilst every man is made a member
of the Church that had but rather tell a lie and take bread and wine, than be
undone, what wicked man on earth will not do the same (unless he be so
Conscientious that mistake and Conscience hinders him) Is there any Infidel,
Heathen, Atheist, Murderer, Traitor, or Sensualist, in the world that will not
do it? What should hinder him that believes there is no God, to do thus rather
than be undone? Is it so hard a word to say in a Chancellours Court [I repent]
and deride and curse them when he is gone out; or is a bit of Bread and a Sup
of Wine so hard for a Glutton or Drunkard to get down, as that any of them
would rather lie in jaile. 1. So that by this course the Church and the Infidel
world are made equal, and no man can prove that any Mabometan Congregation is
not as good, as to the persons, as such a Christian Congregation: For what
Mabometan would not say and do this rather then be undone? unless he be a
Conscientious one, who is not so bad as those Christians that have no
Conscience. 2. And by this means no conjecture can be made of the real members
of the Church. Thousands may be driven in at the doors, but we have no means to
perceive whither any of them indeed be Christians.

8. And hereby the Church and the Christian Religion are greatly dishonored,
while this odious stigma is made the mark of a visible member, [One that had
rather say he is a Christian and repents, than lie in a jaile]! Is this a
laudable description?

9. And hereby Mabometans, Jews and Heathens are hardened in their Infidelity
and reproach of Christ, while Christians are such as these.

10. It puts every conscientious Minister into a snare, and troubles his
Conscience^, or turns him out, when he must put the Sacrament into the very
hand of every man that had rather take it than be imprisoned; and must read the
Absolution of every one that had rather say, [I repent] than be undone.

11. It hinders the comfort of the faithful in Church Communion to know that
this is the measure and Character of these with whom they must hold that
Communion, which is called the Communion of Saints.

12. It destroys Church unity and Love. For every visible member of the
Church being a seeming Saint, should be loved with the special Love which
belongs to Saints, by us who are not Searchers of the heart. But who that is
not out of his wits can by any obedience to the Church, be brought to Love all
those as seeming Saints, who will choose a Sacrament before a jaile? He that
cannot believe them such, cannot Love them as such.

13. It will strengthen them that Separate from us as no Church, and make it
not so easy to prove that we have any Church, as else it would be; when they
should argue [Where there is no credible Profession of Faith and repentance
there is no true Church: But etc. Ergo. The Major is undeniable. As they that
to^^e the Covenant unwillingly now maintain that therefore it binds them not.
The Minor indeed is not true, because many do Voluntarily profess, and show
their Voluntariness other ways. But no thanks to them that teach the accusers
thus to argue [When the Laws of Profession are Profess or lie in jayle, there
is no credible (Voluntary) Profession: But etc. The Major they prove, Non esse
and non apparere here are equipollent: But under such a law no voluntariness
and Credibility is apparent: Ergo -- And I know but this answer to the Minor,
it is apparent otherwise, though not by that forced profession, because
multitudes daily show that they approve of what they do.

14. Force tends rather to hinder men's Repentance and Love to the Church: For
Fear breadeth Hatred; or at least Hurt does. Kindness breeds Love. God
wins our Love by mercy: And we are so to win the Love of others. Give a man
but a box on the ear or slander or wrong him, and try whether it will make him
Love you; to say, Love Christ and the Christian or I will undo thee and lay
thee in jaile, is the way to make him hate them.

15. And the Office of the Pastors is such as that truth and Goodness are the
wares which they expose to sinners choice, and Light and Love are the effects
which Spirits Word and Ministry are appointed to produce. And by Light and Love
they must be wrought. Therefore no Minister ^oth his work, or does any good to
some, if by Light and Love and holy Life, he help not the people to the same.
And therefore the adjunction of Jayles and confiscations, is so contrary to his
Office and design as obscureth or destroys it. (Though Enemies may be
restrained, and peace kept by force.)

16. True discipline cannot be exercised this way, not only as its lost in the
confusion of powers (as a little wine in Wormwood juice) but because the Number
and quality of the Church members will make it impossible. Enemies and
rebellious carnal minds are not subject nor can be to the Laws of Christ; you
may affright them to a Sacrament, but one of them will make a Minister such
work, who will but call them to credible repentance for their crimes, and will
renew those crimes so often till he be excommunicated, and will so hate those
that excommunicate, as will tell you what can be done, when all such are forced
unwillingly into the Church. Of this I have spoke at large in my Book of
Confirmation.

17. It tends greatly to harden the sinners in the Church in their
impenitence, to their damnation: when they shall see, that let one swear and
curse and be drunk every day in the week, if he will but say, I repent, rather
than lie in Jayl, he shall be absolved by the Chancellor in the Bishops came,
and have a sealed pardon delivered him in the Sacrament, by the Minister who
knows his wicked life. How easy a way to Heaven (which leads to Hell) do
such good-natured (cruel) Churches make men?

Obj. The Minister is to refuse the scandalous.

Ans. Not when he is absolved by the Chancellor.

Obj. But if he sin again, he may refuse him again.

Ans. How far that is true, I showed before. But not when he is absolved again.
And he may be absolved toties quoties, if he had, but rather say, I repent]
than lie in Jayle.

18. Let but the ancient Canons be perused, and how contrary to them will this
course appear? The ancient Churches would admit none to absolution and
communion after diverse greater crimes, till they had waited (as is aforesaid)
in begging and tears, and that for so long a term and with such penitential
expressions, as satisfied the Church of the truth of their repentance. It would
be tedious to recite the Canons. How great a part of Cyprians Epistles to the
Churches of Carthage and Rome, are on this subject? reprehending the Confessors
and Presbyters for taking lapsed persons into Church Communion before they had
fulfilled their penitential course? And what a reproach do they cast upon all
these Bishops, Churches and discipline, who say, That sinners must be taken
into Communion, if they will prefer it before a Jayle Though they love a
Wherehouse, an Alehouse, a Playhouse, a Gaming house, yea, a Swine-Stie
better than the Church, yet if they do not love a Jayle with beggary better,
they shall be received.

19. Even when Christian Emperors had advanced Prelates, and given them
(though not the sword yet) the aid of it in the Magistrates hand to second
them, they never used it to force any to the Communion of the Church, but only
to defend them, and to repress their adversaries. Yea when Prelates themselves
began to use the sword, or to desire the Magistrates to serve them by it, it
was not at all to force men to say: They Repent and so to be absolved and
communicate; But only to keep heretics from their own assemblings, and from
publishing their own doctrines or maintaining them, or from being Pastors of
the Churches. And yet now men will force them to be Absolved and communicate.

And how great mischiefs did even so much use of the sword in matters of
Religion as was the punishment of Heretics then being (though they were not
forced into the Church.) Socrates brandeth Cyril of Alexandriae, The ophilus
^^^ Sisters s^n and successor.
for the first Prelate that used the sword: and what work did he make with it?
He invaded a kind of secular Magistracy. He set himself against the Governor
Orestes, and under his shadow those bloody murders were committed on the
Jews; who also ^illed many of the Christians. The Monks of Mount Nystra rose
to the number of 500, and assaulted the civil Governor and wounded him; and
Amonius who did it was put to death by Orestes: and Cyril made a Martyr of him;
till being ashamed of it, he suffered his memorial to be abolished. And when
Hypatia a most excellent woman of the Heathens, was famous for her public
teaching of Philosophy, Peter, one of Cyrils Readers became the head of a party
of that Church, who watched the woman, and dragged her out of a Coach into a
Church, stripped her of her clothes, and tore her flesh with sharp shells, till
they killed her, and then tore her members in pieces, and carried them to a
place called Cynaron and burned them, for which we read of no punishment
executed, Socrat. lib. 7. c. 13. 14, 15. And it was this S. Cyril who deprived
the Novatians of their Churches, and took away all the Secret treasure of them,
and spoiled the Bishop Theopompus of all his fortunes, Socrat. l. 7. c 7.

What his Nephew and Successor Theophilus was and did, you have heard before
and shall hear more anon.

What the ancient Christians thought of using the sword against Heretics
(though they compelled them not to the Church and Sacrament) any man that
reads their Writings may see, viz. Tertullian, Arnobius, La^tantius and
abundance more. And the case of S. Martin toward Ithacius and Idacius, I have
often enough repeated: Only I cannot but note the impudency of Bellarmine, who de
Scriptor. Eccles. de Idacio (falsely making Idacius to be the same with
Ithacius, when he was but one of his associates) does tell us that Idacius fell
under the reprehension and punishment of the Bishops (in eo reprehensus and
punitus ab Episcopis fuit, quod Priscillianum apud seculares accusaverit and
occidi curaverit] whereas Sulpitius Severus, tells us, that all the Bishops
of the Synod joined with them, and one S. Martyn and one French Bishop more
disowned and refused them, and Martin would have no Communion with them to the
death (save that once at the Emperors persuasion he Communicated with them to
save a prisoners life, which was given him on that condition, and yet was
chastised by an Angel even for that.) And Ambrose at Milan also disowned them
(as you may read in his life), and when the deed was done, the Christians spoke
ill of Ithacius and Idacius for taking that new and bloody way, which before
the Churches commonly disowned, but they pretended that they did not cause this
execution.

And the same Sulpitius tells you, that when this new way of seeking to the
Emperor, was first set on foot by Ithacius and his Synodists, the
Priscillianists quickly got the handle of the sword; and by a Courtier got even
Gratian to be on their side against the Bishops.

And yet that was not all the mischief, but when Maximus had killed Gratian, it
was this pleasing of these bloody Orthodox Prelates which he trusted to as his
means to possess the Empire, and so punished the Priscillianists to please
them, and serve himself of them (of which more anon.)

But you may see here that Bellarmine himself seems to disown Bishops seeking
to Magistrates to punish Heretics; As if he had forgotten their bloody
Inquisition and Massacres. And Baronius invit. Ambros. would persuade us that
Ambrose (who was of Martins mind) did not disown the punishment of heretics by
the sword, but he would not have Churchmen seek it. As if it were not evident
enough that it was the thing it self that he and Martin were against, and that
Martin was reproached by the Prelates as a f^^tor of Heretics, for traveling
to Maximus Court and importuning him to save them. And as if the Inquisitors
did not seek to the Magistrate, and more, even Judge, and execute the sword
themselves.

Its true that Augustine was at last for the use of the sword against the
Donatists. But its as true. 1. That he wrote much before against it. 2. That it
was so much against the Churches former judgment and practice that he was fain
to write his Apology and reasons. 3. And that the Donatists, Circumcellians
used frequent and cruel violence against the Christians that were Orthodox (or
Cec^llians) and caught their Presbyter in the streets of Carthage, dragged him
in the dirt, and abused him cruelty two Church days before they let him go,
with many such outrages: Yea, the Catholics could not go safely in the streets
for them; And among other devises, they mixed Lime and Vinegar together, and
cast it in men's eyes as they passed in the streets, to put out their eyes: And
they were so mad that they wounded and killed themselves to bring odium on the
Catholics: And they were so numerous, that they called themselves the whole
Catholic Church. 4. And Austin did never desire the Magistrate to force them
to the Sacrament, but to defend the Church, and repress their insolences. 5.
And yet the whole Clergy joined first in a representation of all this to the
Donatists Bishop Januarius as being an old experienced peaceable man, and to
desire him to remedy it, before they would fly for aid to the Magistrate (all
this you may see in their Epist. to him inter Augustini Epistolas.

And what work did the Arrians make with the Orthodox, when they had got the
Emperors sword to serve them. Nay indeed it was the Arrians who did first set
this work on foot (after the Jews and Heathens) They so depopulated the
Churches by it in the da^es of Constantius and Valens, that they seemed all to
be turned Arrians, and the Orthodox party seemed to be almost conquered if not
extinct. And their Sergius the Monk that instructed Mahomet, set him by this
way of the sword on that extirpation of Christianity, which has so dolefully
prevailed in the Eastern Empire: And so great was the swords success against
the faith of the Trinity, that Philostorgius of Old, and out of him Sandius of
late, would make us believe that almost all the ancient Bishops indeed were
Arrians.

But the saddest instance of the mischief of too much serving Churchmen by the
sword, is the case of the Papal faction: when Cyril had begun the trade at
Alexandria, says Socrates, [Episcopus Romanus non aliter atque Alexandrinus
quasi extra sacerdotis fines egressus, ad secularem principatum erat jam ante
delapsus] (it seems Rome had the primacy in a Sanguinary Prelacy;) And, says
he, Then Pope Celestine first took their Churches from the Novations, and
compelled their Bishop Ruricolae to keep their meetings privately in houses:
And though the Bishops commended them as Orthodox, yet they spoiled them of
their fortunes, Socrat. l. 7. c. 11. so impatient are armed Prelates of any
that are not of their mind and way, how honest otherwise soever they
acknowledge them.

But, alas, since then what streams of blood have been shed to ^ack the Roman
discipline? How many hundred thousand of the Waldenses and Albigenses did they
murder? How many thousands in Belgia, France, Germany, Poland, Ireland, etc.
And when at first they precariously got the Magistrates to serve them
voluntarily with the sword, at last they would constrain them to it, as their
duty; and such a duty as they must perform on pain of losing their dominions:
For the Pope having first excommunicated them, next may give away their
dominions to others, as is fully expressed, Council. Lateran. sub. Innoc. 3.
Can. 3. and Council. Romans sub. Gregor. 7. And do I yet need to say more, what
mischief has come by overmuch backing Church discipline by the sword? If I do,
let this be the close, that God knows how many Great men and Commanders are
now in Hell, for the persecutions and murders, which Church men have thus drawn
them to.

2. Lastly, most certain this course (of forcing all men into the Church and to
the Sacrament by prison and sword) will keep up perpetual divisions in the
Churches. The more religious sort of people will still in all ages be flying
away from such Churches as from a Pesthouse, or infected place, or ruinous
house that is ready to fall. The unexperienced Prelates think that it is but
some few preachers that teach the people such strict opinions, and if those
were cut off all would be well: But their ignorance is the Churches plague and
their own. 1. There is somewhat in Scripture that persuades them that God
hates all the workers of iniquity; and that holiness and unholiness are as
Light and Darkness, and that he that names the name of Christ must depart from
iniquity, and that the impenitent and scandalous must be avoided and ashamed,
and heretics after a first and second admonition, and that he that bids them
Good speed is partaker of their evil deeds, and that a little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump, and therefore the wicked must be cast out, and must be to us
(if obstinate after admonition) as Heathens and Publicans; These are not the
words of phanaticks but of Christ. 2. There is something in the newborn soul
which is contrary to wickedness, and which inclines men to an enmity with the
Serpents seed as such, though a love to them as men that are yet capable of
grace and which disposes men to obey all the foresaid words of Christ. 3. And
there is in the people more than in the Pastors, some remnants of ignorance,
which makes them more liable to stretch these words of Christ too far, and by
mistake to run further from wicked men than God would have them. But when they
see the Wilderness called the Garden of God, and the wicked not only tolerated
in the Church, but forced into it by the Sword, and so the Church to contain
the world, and to be as vicious as Infidels; (what ever men should do,) I dare
confidently prophecy what they will do; All the Prelates in the world, no nor
all the godly that preach, will never prevent it, but every age will bring
forth new divisions, and the stricter sort will be still flying from such
Churches as these, to worship God in purer societies; And if you are angry with
the Scriptures, and with the Papists, keep them from their knowledge, you must
do so also by the Creed, Lords Prayer and ten Commandments, or else the very
Article of [the Communion of Saints] and the praying [Thy Name be hallowed, thy
Kingdom come, thy Will be done in earth as it is heaven] with the precepts of
Holiness and Righteousness, will have the same kind of operation.

Obj. But in the Church of Rome, there is unity and concord, and no Sects, and
therefore that shows us what the sword may do.

Ans. 1. But the Church of Rome is it self but a fraction, divided from the
rest of the Church. Do they not differ sufficiently from the Greeks, Armenians,
Abassines, etc. Did they not drive from them Germany, Belgia and the rest of
the Protestants? Yea, even by their cruelty, so far was cruelty from preventing
it? The Anabaptists, and many other Sects may be at one among themselves, and
yet not at one with any others.

2. Are you willing of a concord in your Churches upon the same terms as the
Church of Rome has it? What, with the same ignorance and ungodliness; Locking
up the Scriptures, in Latin Prayers and Masses, and a Catholic Tyrant or
Usurper, and all this procured by the blood of so many hundred thousands, and
kept up by the same Love-killing means? would you indeed have such a concord?
Et cum solitudinem facitis, pacem vocabitis, as Tertullian speaks.

3. But indeed the Church of Rome has one other means for concord which you
want; and that is various houses and orders of Monasticks. Ignorance and
profaneness will serve for the concord of the worst; but there will be still
some who believe and forethink of a life to come, and therefore will be
religious; and for these when they cannot have communion with the wicked, this
politickly holy Church has provided this expedient: every one that will be
Religiouser than the rest, has a hive or society to fli^ to at their choice,
and may betake themselves to that which is most strict or most suited to their
own conceits. And if you would make Independent Churches to be like such
Monasteries, where the Religiouser sort may have Communion with one another,
you may do much to prevent a further breach.

Object. II. But the sword will prevail with the most: In the changes of ^
Religion in England and else where, the People have always changed with the he
King.

Answ. 1. Men may seemingly leave an ill way with the King: Because they are
wicked that walk in it, and therefore can say any thing. But men will not so
easily leave a good way when a King shall leave it; Because they that are in a
good way are often Good men, and true to God, and hold Truth and Goodness
faster than bad Men hold Error and Evil. 2. Indeed this is the way to have a
Church only of perfidious wicked Men, who will turn to any thing with their
tongues (because they will not turn to God with their hearts): And to have no
true Christian left among you: for such fear not them that can kill the body
only, in comparison of him that can damn the Soul, Luke 12. 4. 3. Do not
France, and all the Churches, and Our selves at this day fully show you the
falseness of this Objection.

CHAP. XXII. An Answer to the Objections. 1. No Bishops no King. 2. And of the
Rebellions and Seditions of those, that have been against Bishops.
I Come not for your own sake to meddle with such matters as these, but you put
a necessity on us, by making us odious by such pretenses. 1. To the first I
answer, 1. Were not all the very Heathen Emperors heretofore, and are not all
the Heathen Kings still, Kings, and as great as others, without Bishops? And
may not Christian Kings much more? 2. If the Presbyterians had said, no
Presbyters, no King, you would have taken it for treasonable; as if they had
threatened that the King shall not be King, unless they may have their way, and
shall not the King be King unless you may be Bishops? 3. What is in the nature
of the thing to warrant this assertion? Presbyterians own every text and
Article for Monarchy as the Prelatists do, even as ever any Christian Council
or Confession asserted, as far as we can learn. They plead no other divine
right for their offices, than our Prelates do. And (save what some of them have
held by the Magistrates own gift) they pretend to no power over any man's body
or purse. Many of them and the Independants, meddle no further than their own
Congregations. What is in all this against Kings? That an Aristocratical Church
Government may not live quietly under Monarchy, or a Monarchial Church
Government under Aristocracy, is an asserted fiction, without all proof.
Otherwise by the same reason you would persuade Venice, Holland and all such
Governments, that Prelacy may not be endured under them.

4. But what if it were all as true as it is false? What is it to those
Nonconformists that craved Bishop Ushers Episcopacy? The question is but
whether a humble Bishop in a Parish or Market Town, without any Lordship or
great revenews, or interest in the sword, may not live as safely and obediently
under Kings, as our Lord Bishops? Yea in very deed most of the Independent
Churches themselves have a kind of Episcopacy, whether they own the name or
not: For usually one single Pastor has as much as a Negative voice in the
management of all disciplinary affairs.

II. But the answer to the second will fuller answer this. 1. Do you not know
that where Prelacy is at the highest, there Kings and Emperors have been at
the lowest? Do you not know how the Papal Prelacy at the present usurpeth one
part of their Government: and is ready to take away the other when they can,
when ever Kings displease them? Can any thing be said to hide this by him that
reads, but the two forenamed Councils (Later. and Romans sub Gregor. 7.) Did
Prelacy preserve those Emperors of the East that suffered by it? Does it now
preserve the Emperor of Moscovy, where the Patriarks interest is pretended in
the rebellion? Did it preserve Frederick, and the two Henry's of Germany? or
Henry 3. and 4th. of France? Did it preserve the Kings of England, Will. 2.
Hen. 2. and 3. John, etc. from their wars and troubles? Did it preserve the
Kingdom of Navar to the right Lord? What should, I say, more of this after the
copious instances of H. Fowlis? and after that volume of W. Prin. of the
English Prelates Treasons? Read it and judge.

2. What people more peaceable and obedient to their superiors, for instance
than the Helvetian Ministers have been? who yet have no such thing as Bishops.

3. Dr. Pet. Moulin Junior, one of your selves in his answer to Philanax Angl.
has said enough to confute most of the Calumnies against the Reformed Churches
in this point.

4. Who knows not, that even in the ancient Churches, and that when
Episcopacy was thriving apace, yea and by and among the Bishops themselves, yea
some that were good men and are now Sainted, yet tumults, seditions,
rebellions, and contentions troubled the Churches, and the Emperors and
Magistrates, as frequently as of later times, which I mention not to abate the
honor of those better Christians, but 1. To show you, that all this was done
under Prelacy, and therefore it was not want of Prelacy, or aversness to it
that is to be taken for the cause. 2. That these distempers were found in the
best times, and among the purest Churches, and therefore are not to be now
thought strange, or taken for a mark of a bad religion.

I will not repeat what I said but even now of the horrid tumults and blood
shed at Alexandria, their cruel Murdering of Hypatia, and the insurrection and
sedition even of the Holy Monks, and Saint Cyrils Sainting of the executed
actor of violence on the Governor.

What work his Predecessor Saint Theophilus made against Saint Chrysostom, how
Epiphanius acted his part; how Saint Hierome was of their party; how even the
Orthodox Bishops in several Synods opposed and deposed those two excellent
Bishops of Constantinople Gregory Theol. and Chrysostom, has been said before.

Even at the Election of Chrysostom Theophilus went about by all means to
discredit him, and to prefer to the place one Isidore a Priest of his own
Church. And that you may know how Loyalty prevailed against the owning of
Tyrants when they got the better you shall further hear why Theophilus set so
much by this Isidore, because he undertook for him a perilous piece of service
(says Socrates li. 6. c. 2.) viz, [When the Emporour Theod^sius waged War with
Maximus the Tyrant, Theophilus sent Presents directed to the Emperor with two
Letters (one to Theodosius and one to Maximus) charging Isidorus to present him
that got the better with the gift and one of the Letters. Isidore being careful
of his business, went diligently about this feat, got him to Rome, and
hearkeneth after the Victory: But his fetch was not long ere it was found out;
for his Reader, that accompanied him stole away his Letters. Whereupon Isidore
being afraid to be taken with the manner, took his heels in all have to
Alexandria: This was it that made Theophilus labor so carnestly for Isidore:
But all that were of the Emperors Court preferred John to the Bishopprick: And
afterward when as many charged Theophilus with heinous crimes, and presented
to the Bishops (then present) libells and Articles against him, some for this
thing and some for that; Eutropius one of the Emporours Chamber having gotten
the Articles and Inditements, showed them to Theophilus, bad him choose whether
he would Create John Bishop, or stand at the Bar and answer to the Crimes that
were laid to his charge. Theophilus was so afraid with this that presently he
consented to the installing of John].

What would have been said of one of us now, if we had not only complied with a
victorious Tyrant, but also so jugled with presents and double Letters before
hand. I did my self disowne Oliver Cromwell openly to his death; and yet because
after twelve years possession of the Usurpers, I did but Dedicate two Books to
his Son Richard, whom I never saw nor heard from, only to encourage him to
befriend truth and unity against Papists and Sectaries, who then threatened
all, (and this when the Royalists themselves gave out that he was Really for
the restoration of the King) this is made the odious Crime in me, as a thing
deserving greatest Infamy.

Do I need to recite how great Leo himself and other Roman and Italian Bishops
owned the Barbarian Conquerours? No wonder than if they too early took
Theodoricus for their King set over them by God, who was a better man than the
rest, and had at last a better Tittle.

Says Socrates further li. 6. c. 7. [When the Commonwealth of the Roman
Empire, was tossed with these troublesome storms of Rebellion such as were
promoted to the reverend function of Priest hood were at distraction among
themselves, to the great slander of Christian Religion: Then was one set
against the other; the original of which pestilent Schism came from Egypt, and
the occasion was as follows. There was a question broached a little before,
whether God were a body, made after the likeness and form of man? Or whether
he were without body, and void of all Corporal shape. What should such
Religious men be now called, that had no more knowledge, so great error and so
great fury and tumultuating ^^^e^lion.
Hereof there arose sundry contertions and quarrels: While some affirmed this
and others that: Some of the rudest and unlearned sort of Religious men thought
that God was Corporeal, and of the form and figure of man: But the greater
part condemned them with their Heretical opinion, affirming that God had no
bodily substance or shape. Of which opinion was Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria; so that in the hearing of the whole Congregation he inveighed
bitterly against the Contrary -- The worshippers of Egypt understanding this,
left their Religious houses, came to Alexandria, flocked about Theophilus;
condemned him for a wicked person, and sought to bereave him of his Life.
Theophilus being made privy to their Conspiracy, was wonderful pensive, devised
how he might escape their hands and save his life. As soon as he came into their
presence he saluted them Courteously, and said thus to them: When I fasten mine
eyes on you, methinks I see the lively face of God. With these words the rash
heat of the unruly Monks was delayed, and they said, If that be true that thou
say, that the Countenance of God is no otherwise than ours, accurse then the
works of Oregen: For diverse of his books do impugn our opinion: But if thou
refuse to do this, assure thy self to receive at our hands the punishment due
to the impious and open Enemies of God: Nay, says Theoph. I will do that which
seems good in your eyes] Thus you see what the Monks were. But will you see
what Theophilus was.

It follows [The Religious, houses in Egypt were overseen of four worthy men,
Brethren, Dioscorus, Ammonius, Eusebius, and Eutburmus, Their great fame and
excellency made Theophilus force them out of their beloved solitude, and make
Dioscorus, a Bishop, and two other to live with himself -- At last, their
Consciences were pricked, perceiving that the Bishop was set upon heaping and
hoarding of money. Says Dr. Hanmer in his Margin, [This ^ish^p has more
fellows in the world].
and that all their labor tended to gathering, they would no longer dwell with
him but got them into the desert -- As soon as Theophilus understood that they
abhorred his manner of living, he was wonderfully incensed, and promised to
work them a displeasure -- and being prone to anger and revenge, bestirred
himself against them and endeavored by all means to work them mischief. And he
began to despite Dioscorus, the Bishop, for it grieved him to the gutts that
the Worshippers made so much of Dioscorus and reverenced him so highly (To
beshorter than Socrates) Theophilus not knowing else how to be revenged, set
the Monks against him and his Brethren, and accuses them of holding contrary
to the Scripture, that God had no body, hands, or feet, and so takes on him to
be of their opinion* till he had set them altogether by the cars: And the
ignoranter Monks being the greater number he took their side, and so they went
first to it by zealous reproaches, one part calling the other Originests, and
the other part calling them Anthropomorphites, and at last it came to a deadly
Battle. And, says Socrates, Theophilus perceiving, that his fetches framed
after his will went with great power toward the Mount Nitria, where there
religious houses stood, and aided the Monks against Dioscorus and his Brethren:
And the Religious men thus beset with great danger had much ado to save their
lives.] Socr. l. 6. c. 7.

Did ever Presbyterians commit such an unchristian and inhumane vilany as this,
by such false dissimulation and malice? And here we see how the quarrel began
against Origens Works, not for the passages that are truly culpable, but for
the sounder parts; and how it came to pass that Chrysostom was not so forward
to condemn them as his Condemners did require him to be.

Theodoret. lib. 4. Hist Eccl. c. 13. Tells us that when the Emperor Valens
his order was brought to Eusebius Samosatenus for his removal and banishment,
Eusebius tells the Officer, That if the People should know it, they would drown
him in the River (Euphrates) and therefore contrived to slip away by night.]
What would they say, if our Churches were such as this orthodox Episcopal
Church was?

Theodor. lib. 3. c. 13. The Virgins openly sung in reproach of Julian the
Emperor [Ratae illum consceleratum tyrannum contemnendum esse and omnium
irrisione ludendum] judging that wicked Tyrant to be contemned and made a
mocking stock by all. And yet he was a lawful Emperor and none of the
cruellest Persecutors.

Theodor. l. 3. c. 13. When the People of his Church had found out Eusebius
their banished Bishop, they earnestly persuaded him to return, contrary to the
Emperors Edict, and not to suffer his flock to be left to the Wolves (which
were the Bishops set over them by the Emperor). And is not this more than the
people are now condemned for, who only hear the Ministers privately?

Cap. 14. When the Emperors Arrian Bishop was set over them, not one of all the
People rich or poor, servant or labourer, husbandman or Artificer, man or
woman, young or old, would come as they used to the Church, nor come in sight
of the Bishop, nor speak with him: But though he lived very modestly, he came
to the Church (place) alone. They would not bathe with him nor bathe in the
same water, but throw it first into the Channel; when he left the City (this
was Eunomius). Do our hearers deal as harsshly as this?

Afterward when Lucius was set over them, the Children in the streets did burn
their ball, because his Asses feet had touched it.

Id. ib. c. 16. When the Bishop of Edessa was removed and another set over
them, the people frequented private meetings in the Suburbs. And when the
Emperor commanded his Prefect, Modestus, to take Soldiers and disturb them,
and drive them away, the women ran with their Children hoping to die with them.
And Eulogius the Presbyter asked, Was the Emperor made Priest when he was made
Emperor?

And how the Presbiters and People of Antioch continued their meeting whether
the Emperor would or not, though he disturbed them by Soldiers.

Theodor c. 17. Basils answer to the Prefect, when he offered him the Emperors
favor, was, that Children were to be so talked to, but Men bread up in divine
studies, would suffer any death rather than suffer one syllable of divine Truth
to be blemished. Quod autem ad Imperatoris amicitiam, etc. But as for the
Emperors friendship I much value it (says he) joined with godliness, but if it
want that, I say, it is pernicious. In one of us this answer would have been
enough to make us seem as bad as it made Basil esteemed good.

Id. 11. c. 19. When the forenamed Lucius was made Bishop of Alexandria, and
Peter their Bishop put out, the People would come to the Church place, though
he persecuted them as he had done the other, and omnes pariter ceperunt Lucium
convitiis lacer^re, they all began to tear Lucius with revilings, because he
persecuted the Monks of Egypt.

Id. l. c. 38. Audas a Bishop in Persia demolished their Temple (or Pyreum) by
violence: For which the Emperor of Persia killed him, and destroyed all the
Christian Churches.

Id. l. 4. c. 21. When Moses was desired by Queen Mavia to be her Bishop among
the Saracens, he would not let Lucius ordain him, because he had persecuted
good men, But said to him (Quis impius non tua causa conventus Ecclesiasticos
petulanter insectatus est? Quis e laudatorum virorum numero non part exulavit?
Quam immanitatem barbaram, malefici abs te in dies singulos admissa non
superarunt?) Do Nonconformists speak more harshly to our Bishops?

Theodoret himself frequently calls Julian a Tyrant. cap. 22. The Heathens
kept their Feasts openly; Telis autem Apostolicae doctrinae propugnatoribus,
tyrannus iste se hostem praebuit. And when he was dead, they openly rejoiced at
his death.

Id. cap. 30. l. 4. With what bold language does Izaak tell Valens of his
fighting against God, and casting out his Ministers, and Gods fighting against
him and what he would be sure to meet with at the end, if he kicked against the
pricks.

Lib. 5. c. 17. The Christian people of Thessalonica rose, and killed some of
Theodosius his Officers, which provoked him by his Soldiers to kill seven
thousand of them, for which Ambrose brought him to do open pennane.

To mention all the blood shed at Rome (as at Damascus election and else) and
Constantinople, and Alexandria would be tedious, even that which was shed on
the account of Bishops.

Lucius Calaritanus was a pious Bishop; but so hot for separation from those
that had been Arrians, that he is numbered for it with the Heretics, though an
orthodox Bishop.

The Novatians were Episcopal, and so were the Donatists, and yet how have they
been judged of for their Schism I need not tell: Apollinarius father and son,
Paulus Samosatenus, Nestorius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, Nicomed, Theodorus
Mopsuest, and how many more Bishops have been Arch-hereticks and the cause of
tumults and dissensions. The very reading over the acts of the General
Councils, especialy Ephesians. 1. and 2. and Calced. is tremendous. It was to be a
Bishop, that Maximus made so pestilent a stir at Constantinople and Alexandria
against Gregory Theolog. Yea they tell us themselves, that it was because he
could not be a Bishop that Aerius spoke against Bishops, so pestilent a thing
has the desire of such Bishoprics been.

Theodotus the Bishop would not so much as join in Prayer with Basil morning or
evening, because he had but communicated with Bishop Eustathius upon his fair
professions, Basil. Epist. 43. Admir: ad Terentium Commit.

The contention between such excellent persons as Eusebius Caesar while Bishop,
and Basil: while Presbyter, was very sad and scandalous.

The contention between Basil and Euthemius about the extent of their Diocese
was no less.

The People of Caesarea would have torn in pieces, Eusebius the President, the
Emperors own Uncle, for Basils sake, if he had not hindered them.

The Church of Neo-Caesarea wrangled with Basil for his Psalmodie, and even
avoided him as if he had been an Heretic, see Basils Epist. ad mer. 4. to
Julian, what language he there ufeth to the Emperor: Not that I judge him, but
wish you to judge equally of the actions of those times and ours. See Basil Ep.
82. Theodor. l. 5 c. 19.

The Antiochians for a Tax under Theodosius the great, did tumultuate and kill
the Magistrates, and destroyed the Statue of Placilla the good Empress.

In the West good Ambrose at Milan (was not silenced as we are, but) by an
Orthodox Emperor desired and commanded to deliver the Arrians possession but
of one Church: and he refused to do it, and to forsake that Church (or Temple)
or deliver the Vessels till they should be taken by force. Vit. Ambros. per
Baron. p. 6. whereas we all left our Churches at a word. Nay though he would
not resist the Emperor, he would rather die than deliver up the Church.

When he was celebrating Gods Worship he was fain to break off, to rescue an
Arrian Priest out of the hands of the Orthodox people, who had laid hold on
him: For which multitudes were laid in prison and Irons, and accused of
Sedition, and great Calamity followed to the Church, and this from Valentinian
an Orthodox Emperor.

Ambrose says when he refused to deliver up the Temple, E^qua sunt Divina
Imperatoriae potestati non esse subjecta (If Baronius say true); but mine I
shall yield to him]. But we hold that even Temples (as well as Bishops) though
dedicated to God, are under the Civil power of the Empour.

When Ambrose was desired but to quiet the people, he answered It is in my
power not to stir them up; but it is God that must quiet them] So great was his
interest in the people that the Emperor said he was a Tyrant, and that the
people would deliver himself bound to him, if Ambrose did but bid them. Yet had
Ambrose been the man that had gone on his Embassy to Maximus, and kept him
from coming into Italy in pursuit of Valentinian which made Ambrose say [Non
hoc Maximum dicere quod Tyranus go sum Valentiniani: qui se meae legationis
objectum queritur ad Italiam non potuisse pervenire.]

And because the late revolutions in England are made by some Prelates the
pretense for the silencing of the 1800 Ministers, of whom one of ten never
meddled with Wars, being fallen again on this case of Maximus, let it be noted
how like he was to Cromwell, saving that it was not the Sectaries, but the
Bishops that he studied to please and rise by. When Gratian the Emperor
befriended the Priscillianists, Maximus to please the Bishops persecuted them
to the death. When Valantinian by Justina the Empress means did persecute or
trouble Ambrose for refusing to deliver a Church to the Arrians, and also other
Orthodox Bishops as well as Ambrose, Maximus gave to Ambrose and the Bishops
the Honor of keeping him out of Italy, and letting Valentinian escape: Yea,
wrote his Letters to Valentinian for the Orthodox Bishops, telling him how
grievous a thing it is to persecute the Ministers of God, and when under his
father they went for faithful Ministers. Quae tanta mutatio, ut qui antea
sacerdotes, nunc sacrilegi judicantur! Iisdem certe praeceptis, Iisdem
Sacramentis dilatis; Eadem fide credunt, qua antea crediderunt. An put at
Venerabilis mihi serenitas tua conceptam semel in animis religionem quam Deus
ipse constituit posse evelli? And proceeds to show what disorders and
contentions must needs follow when there be a show of persecuting Christians
and Ministers] Upon this message of Maximus, Valentinian being afraid of him,
the persecution ceased; and Ambrose must be sent again on the Embassage to
Maximus to stop him: But when as the Bishops of France and Germany owned him,
and Ambrose would not communicate with those Bishops (no more than Martin)
says he, cum videret me abstinere ab Episcopis qui communicabant ei, vel qui
aliquos devios licet a side (that is the Prescillianists) ad necem petebant,
jussit me sine mora regredi. See here that Ambrose as well as Martin separated
from the Communion of the multitude of Bishops for owning Maximus, and for
seeking to the Magistrate to draw his sword against the Priscillianists, whom
Sulp. Severus calls Gnostics: When as many among us, have by words and
writing provoked Rulers to draw the sword against us that differ, in no one
point of doctrine from the Articles of the English Church.

And the said Maximus and the Bishops did so close that only one Hyginus a
Bishop is mentioned, and Theognostus besides Ambrose and Martin that rejected
Maximus, and refused Communion with the Synod and Bishops, and was banished
also for so doing. By which you may see, 1. That Bishops can comply with
usurpers that will be for them as much as Presbyters, 2. And that all is not
unwarrantable separation or schism, which Bishops call so, when these three
shall separate from so many.

And says Baron. in vita Ambros. Maximus ut Tyranni nomen vitaret, perinde
atque fidei Catholicae tuendae causa bellum illud suscepisset, in hereticos
pugnam convertit and Catholicos sacerdotes quibus valuit honoribus and officiis
est prosecutus, p. 24. Maximus raises that war for the Orthodox Bishops to
save them from the persecution of their lawful Prince, and sets himself to do
them all the honor he could, and to pull down the heretics.

And these were the Halcionian days which Ambrose himself declares and
magnifieth, even when Maximus had suppressed the Arrians [En tempus acceptabile!
quo non hiemalibus perfidiae caligantis pruinas annus riget, nec altis nivis,
etc. ibid. Reader was not that time more strange than ours? that Ambrose must
be so loyal as to save his Prince and Country from a usurper; and yet so pious
as to be persecuted by his Prince, and he and his brethren saved by that same
usurper* and openly give praise to God for the great felicity of the Church
which it received by that same usurper whom he so resisted? I^ it not pity that
things should be so strangely carried?

And that yet you may see more into this business, Paulinus in vit. Ambros. p.
40. tells us, that Maximus took just a name to himself as Cromwell the Protector
did. [Maximus Procuratorem se reipublicae nomine praefuisse confiteretur.] He
would rule as the Procurator of the Commonwealth.

Well! But this is not all the Usurpers that rose up in those days. Eugenius
soon becomes more terrible than he (who once was but a Schoolmaster). And how
does this loyal S. Ambrose carry it? when he had got of Theodosius a pardon for
all that took part with Maximus, even his Army except two or three, yea and
benefits too, yet did not this holy loyal man think it sinful to write thus to
the Tyrant Eugenius, [Epistol. l. 2. p. 103. Clementissimo Imperatori Eugenio,
Ambrosius Episcopus; Bishop Ambrose to the most Clement Emperor Eugenius. And
thus concludes, [In his vero in quibus vos rogari decet, etiam exhibere
sedulitatem potestati debitam* sicut and scriptum est, cui honorem, honorem,
cui tributum, tributum: Nam cum privato detulerim cord intimo, quomodo non
deferrem Imperatori?] i. e. But in these matters where it becomes us to
petition you, we must also give the diligence due to power: as it is written,
honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute: For when I honored you, when you
were a private man from the inwards of my heart, how should I not honor you an
Emperor?]

Reader do not only judge of my two Epistles to Rich. Cromwell by these
passages, but even of theirs that submitted to Oliver himself: and yet Judge of
the inferences that are raised by our accusers.

Should I but recite the words of submission of Bishops to usurpers, yea of
Gregory the Great and such of the highest note, it would be over tedious to the
Reader, who I doubt will think that I have been too long in this unpleasant
History already.

2. But this I must need add ad homines, 1. That it has been the Bishops
themselves that have been the grand cause of our Church divisions and
separations: what advantage they have given the separatists I showed before. I
am sure in the Congregation where I once was teacher, and the Country about,
nothing that ever came to pass has so inclined the people to avoid the
Prelates, as their own doing, especially the silencing and reproaching their
ancient teachers whom they knew longer and better than the Prelates did.

2. That it was a Parliament of Episcopals and Erastians, and not of
Presbyterians, who first took up Arms in England against the King.

3. That the General, and chief Officers of the Parliaments first Army were
scarce any of them at all Presbyterians, but Episcopal by profession, saving
some few Independants.

4. That the Lord Lieutenants of the several Counties, were almost all
Episcopal, save three Independents.

5. The Major Generals of the several By-armies in the Counties were almost all
Episcopal.

6. The Assembly of Divines at Westminster were all save eight or nine
Conformable.

7. Most of the Episcopal men of my acquaintance took the Covenant, that could
keep their places by it, or at their composition.

8. I knew few of them that took not the engagement it self, against King and
house of Lords, merely for liberty to travail about their business, when we
that ran a greater hazard by refusing, never took it; but many were cast out of
their Churches, and their government in the University Colleges for refusing
it. These and many more such unpleasant things, I have fully proved elsewhere,
being constrained by the false accusations of implacable men, to mention that
which I had far rather silence.

9. And what hand the Londoners, the Presbyterian Ministers, and Gentlemen, and
people had in bringing in the King was once known and acknowledged.

And General Monks Colonels and Captains were so many of them Presbyterians,
when they cast out the Anabaptists, from among them in Scotland and marched into
England and restored the King, that as I knew diverse of them to be such, so far
as I could learn from others, the chief strength of them were such or so
inclined.

10. And though many of the Parliament were supposed Presbyterians long after,
who were Episcopal at the raising of the Army, yet could not the late King
Charles I. be rejected and judged and put to death, till most of the Parliament
were violently secluded and imprisoned by the Army. And as soon as they were
but called together again, it was they (in Parliament and Council of State)
that opened the door for the Kings restitution.

But while the matters of the Church of Christ, and the decision of religious
controversies, and the liberty of Christ's Ministers to preach his Gospel, must
be laid upon state revolutions, and where Bishops that can neither accuse
Christ's Ministers of heresy, ignorance, negligence, covetuousness, pride, nor
scandalous immoralities, shall run to the old methods, and persuade Kings that
these men are not for their profit, that they are pestilent fellows and movers
of sedition among the people, that they prophecy not good of Kings but evil,
and that they would set up another King, one Jesus, and therefore are not
Caesar's friends, these malicious projects may silence Ministers, and prosper,
while our sins are to be punished, and the peoples, contempt of the Gospel and
their ingratitude are to be chastised. But the wicked servant that says, my
Lord delayeth his coming, and beats his fellow servants, and eats and
drinks with the drunken, will see that his Lord will come in a day, that he
looked not for him, and will cut him a sunder and give him his portion, with
hypocrites (for their dead Image of Religion will not save them) there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51.

CHAP. XXIII. Four dou^le charges I have now proved against the foredescribed
Diocesane f^rm of Government, the least of which alone is enough to prove it
utterly unlawful.
1. THat it overthrows the ancient Species of Churches, and sets up
another sort of Churches, in their place; and sets up one Church of that kind
instead of many hundreds.

2. That it overthrows the ancient office of a Presbyter, by taking away one
part of his work (viz. Government) which as much belongs to him as the rest:
And makes a new office of subject Presbyters, which Cod never made.

3. That it overthrows the ancient sort of fixed Episcopacy, (as distinct
from Itinerants and Archbishops); taking down a thousand or very many Bishops,
even the Bishops of particular Churches, and instead of them all setting up but
one over all those Churches; as if all Bishops were put down, and the
Archbishops only take all their charges and work upon them.

4. That it makes the Discipline or Government instituted by Christ, in the
very matter of it to become impossible and impracticable, and so excludes it,
under pretense that they are the only persons empowered for it; and they set up
a kind of secular Courts and Government in its stead; and so are practically
Erastians.

I shall conclude all with these Consectaries which follow what is already
proved.

Cons. 1. Such Diocesane principles greatly strengthen the Brownists cause, who
deny us to have any Church or Ministry of divine institution: as is before
showed. And as for them that say. [No form of Church Government is of divine
institution]. Ans. 1. It is well that they are forced to except both the
universal and the particular Churches, and expound this only of Associations of
Churches. 2. It is well that yet they confess that the office of Pastors is of
Divine institution; who are made Church Governors by Christ. 3. But it is
scant well that yet they subscribe to the book of Ordination, which asserteth
the Divine right of three distinct orders, if they do not believe it. 4. And
these also too much gratify the Brownist, who affirms that we have no
Churches of Divine institution, and thinks that it is no fault to separate,
but from a Church of humane invention.

Cons. 2. To say that no man High or Low is bound in his place and calling to
endeavor a Reformation of such a Church Government, and so to justify the
neglecters and opposers of all such Reformation is to draw upon a man's self the
guilt of so much pollution, and of the ruin of such a multitude of souls, as
should make that Conscience smart and tremble, which is not seared and past all
feeling.

Cons. 3. To swear or subscribe, or say and declare, that though millions
should swear to endeavor such a reformation, in their places and callings, by
lawful means, there is no obligation lies on any one of them from that Vow or
Oath: So to endeavor it, is -- The Lord have Mercy on that Land, City or Soul
that is guilty of it --

Cons. 4. All carnal interest and all carnal reason is on the Diocesanes side,
and all the lusts of the heart of man, and consequently all the Devil can do:
Therefore while carnal Christians make a Religion of their lusts and interest,
and pride, and covetousness, and idleness are more predominant, than the fear
of God and the love of souls, no wonder if the Diocesane cause prevail with
such.

Cons. 5. A truly sanctified heart knows the nature and worth of Grace, and
the nature and weight of the Pastoral Office, and is devoted to God and the
good of souls, and contemns the ease and pleasures of the flesh and the
riches and the honors of this World, and is the best argument in the World
against such Diocesane Prelacy; and must at least be weakened before it can
subscribe never to endeavor to amend it.

Cons. 6. No wonder if the most serious zealous practical sort of Christians
are ordinarily against such Diocesanes Prelacy, when it has the described
effects and that those among themselves.

Cons. 7. No wonder if the principal work of such Diocesanes, be to silence
faithful preachers and persecute zealous Christians, where they had espoused a
cause so contrary to the interest of Godliness that all these are
unreconcilable thereto: Speak not of any other Prelacy.

Cons. 8. Take but from such Prelacy the plumes which it has stolen from
Magistrates and Presbyters, and it will be a naked thing, and simply a name.

Cons. 9. If Magistrates were not the Prelates Executioners or seconded them
not by writs de excommunicato capiendo, etc. such Prelacy would give up as
dead, or aweary of it self.

Cons. 10. The ill Mixtures of force and secular power, corrupts Church
Discipline, and depriveth it of its proper nature, use and force, makes it
another thing, or undiscernable.

Cons. 11. Though in cases of necessity civil Rulers may trust Church men with
part of their power about religion, it is far better out of necessity that they
keep if wholly to themselves. And let them thunder their excommunications
without any power of the Sword.

Cons. 12. Such Bishops and Archbishops as overthrow not the Churches
officers, and discipline of Christ, must be submitted to by all peaceable men,
though we cannot prove them as such to be of Divine institution.

CHAP. XXIV. Some testimonies of Prelatists of the late state of the Church of
England, lest we be supposed partial in our description of it.
1. FOr the true understanding of the late state of the Church of England, the
Reader may find some light, in the Lord Falklands Parliament Speeches, and Sir
Edward Dearings, and in Heylins own History of the Sabbath, with Pocklingtons
Sunday no Sabbath, and the Bishop of Lincolnes book of the Holy Table name and
things, and Dr. Heylens answer to him; And the same Heylins History of
Archbishop Laud: and from Mr. Thornedicks four last books.

II. To what common scorn all serious Godliness was brought by the rabble
through the abuse of the name Puritan, used by the Prelatists to make odious
the Nonconformists, is after showed out of Bishop Downame, and Mr. Robert
Bolton, who is large and frequent in it.

III. Bishop Halls Confession of the corruptions in the Church Governors and
Government in his Modest offer and Peacemaker, and his disclaiming those that
deny it, I have cited elsewhere.

IV. Williams Archbishop of York, Morton Bishop of Durham with many other
Episcopal Divines of greatest name and worth, did assemble in Westminister and
collected a Catalogue of things needing reformation in Discipline and worship,
which are to be seen in print.

V. A Prelatical Divine in a Treat: called Englands faithful Reprover and
Monitor, thus speaks to his prelates and Pastor page 60, 61. etc. And now
with what depth of sorrow ought we to recount your past errors, partly through
neglect of duty, partly through abuse of power -- Ithacia^^
were the faithful in your trust? did ye diligently instruct the ignorant?
severely punish the disobedient? Endeavor to reclaim those that walked
disorderly and contrary to the Gospel -- That ye were violently bent against
Action and Schism, against singularity and Nonconformity, all confess; a few
excepted who thought nothing too much, yea nothing enough in this kind, how
opposite soever to Christian mildness, prudence and Conscience: But in the mean
time, by reason of your Connivence or Supineness in the Episcopal office,
Ignorance and Superstition every where misled the people, and caused them to
wander in darkness, not knowing whither they went. Profaness like a rank
pernicious weed overspread the field and Vineyard of the Lord -- And the
profane and vicious lives of those who stood up in defense of your Government
Most of the profane.
occasionally gave increase and added strength to the opposite factious party,
who alleged this as one main ground of their separation from the Church, that
those who adhered to it, were for the most part unworthy to have Communion with
any orderly well governed Congregation of believers, because of their loose and
scandalous manner of living, which because they could not redress, they did
pretend at least they were bound thus to shun and avoid as hateful to God and
to good men. Wherefore ye did not carefully separate between the precious and
the vile 1. Ye^ but th^^ did, by persecuting the ^est. 2^ They could not
because they were Diocesans, and would not because* too may of them hated the
best.
but consulting with flesh and blood what ye were to do in this case, thought
in humane Policy to break the power of one party, by strengthening the hands of
the other The de^oist.
or not binding and restraining them with the Cords of Ecclesiastical
discipline. Thus while you opposed Profaneness against Schism O good Bishops.
or did let that loose at this, or secretly favored and upheld it in hope to
suppress the later by the former, the one grew too strong by the violence of
opposition for your selves, and both for the Church in order to peace and
holiness. As for your labor in the work of the Ministry, how little it has
been for many years together, it is even a shame to mention, some of you wholly
exempting your selves, from this necessary burden of their calling, for ease
and pleasure: Others supposing it a task and employment too low and inferior
for them -- The rest for the most part, slightly or seldom bearing it with
their shoulders, and laying it aside presently, as that which concerned other
men, and not themselves any longer than they listed; And thus far had been
pardonable with men, had care been taken to see this work duly performed by
the Clergy -- But alas there were not wanting of you, who did not only wink at
the wilful neglect of their inferirour brethren in this point of Ministerial
duty: But did countenance and favor such as were most peccant therein, judging
them most averse from faction, who were least conscious Very true
Of Preaching to the peole, and fairest friends to the present Government, who
were loose enough, God knows, in their office and conversation. Whence it
came to pass that very many who were for you in the time of Trial, were
ignorant and dissolute men, Mark what they were sequestered for.
dishonorable to your party, and indeed to the Christian Religion, which they
did continually profane by their words and works: So unsuitable is humane
policy with Evangelical simplicity, and unsuccesful when it is used to support
the regiment thereof. And instead of sending forth meet Laborers into the
Lords harvest, fit Pastors into his flock, you sent those that were idle
Shephards, loving to slumber, given to sleep, altogether like your selves,
careless of the Lords Heritage, either unwilling if able or if willing unable,
or neither willing nor able, rightly to divide the word of truth, giving them
their portion in due season. As for those to whom God had given both ability
and will, to preach the word, ye permitted them not the free use and exercise
of their gifts; but forbade them to teach the people as often as they saw it
convenient or necessary for their Edification. And though you did at first
commend to them, the way of Catechizing the younger sort -- yet afterward, I
know not upon what grounds or for what reason, you so far limited and
restrained the Minister in this pious and profitable practice, that ye did in a
manner take away the key of knowledge, or make it useless for them, so that
they could not enter in thereby.

And page 69. [of this I am assured, that nothing was reformed afterward in
your ordinations, it being as free and indifferent for all who came, as ever --
p. 70. 71. 72. [The like excuse some frame for the gross corruptions of your
prerogative Courts, for commutations, unjust, partial and unreasonable Censures
of Excommunication, for unlawful (to say no more) suspension of the meaner sort
from ordinances of Jesus Christ, for non payment or rather disability of paying
pecuniary mulcts and fees imposed on them, and without Equity exacted of them,
by your profane and greedy officers. They pretend the power of the Chancellor
to be distinct and separate from that of the Bishop, in many points of
spiritual Jurisdiction, and so exempt from it and uncontrollable by it, however
proving illegal and exorbitant in the proceedings there of; -- And surely it
may seem strange to any considerate person, that ye who did so much strain your
authority for the introuducing of new Ceremonies into the Church of Christ
(savouring of superstition, and begetting jealousies in men's minds of Popish
innovations intended by you,) without prudence or Conscience, and used it so
rigorously for the enforcing of the old upon many ill affected to the
observation of them, absolutely requiring conformity to the Church Liturgy in
every point, of all men, (notwithstanding rebus sic stantibus and profligata
disciplina Mark.
some former thereof were not appliable to diverse persons) would not extend it
to the utmost measure for the rectifying those great abuses which had by
insensible degrees crept in, and corrupted the true Primitive discipline -- But
Court employments, State flattery, and sinful Complyances with great persons,
were the main lets, which hindered you from the due discharge of your office,
both in preaching the word, and exercising the Rod of Christ, according to his
mind and will, while ye thought in carnal reason, such means as these most
effectual for the acquiring and retaining of your greatness, and despised those
which the prudent simplicity of the Gospel did offer and commend unto you:
Wherefore it is no wonder if vice did reign there where flattery did abound,
and that in the chief Ministers and Messengers of truth, if injustice and
oppression did bear sway, -- If men were secure in their sins, where peace was
proclaimed -- where a profane Company heard nothing for the most part decried
in the Pulpit but Faction, from which perhaps, alone they were free. And what
could be expected from the common people, but blind ignorance, love of
pleasures more than God -- when ye their chief Leaders caused them to err, not
only through your negligence, but also by your example. -- And I would to God
some of you had not proved false and deceitful to your brethren whom ye
perverted from the way of truth and peace, by your own departing from it --
continuing fast friends to the world -- ye were carnal your selves and walked
as men, showing them the way to heaven with hearts and eyes fixed upon earth.
For who more immoderate in their care for the things of this life than you? Who
more eager in the pursuit of riches and honor, more tenacious in withholding
good from the owners thereof, than your selves? Who were more set upon the
usual course of enriching above measure, and raising your families on high? If
a dignity or office fell within the Compass of your Diocese, who was presently
judged of you more worthy to possess and manage it, than a Son or a Nephew, or
a Kin'man, or an Allie, though they were many times altogether incapable of the
honor and trust to which ye preferred them in the house of God, either they
wanted ability of parts requisite thereunto, or had not as yet attained to
maturity of years, being not much past their nonage, as we have known some of
them to be, or in all respects undeserving persons. And yet men of age, and
experience, eminent for learning, and piety, must stand unveiled before such as
these, to receive directions, and commands from them, to whom they were able
and fit to give the same: who through the just judgment of the Almighty, have
since been as much and more scorned -- than they do now scorn others, every way
their superior, but in place.]

Here he cites such like words also even from Bishop Andrews, Gonc. ad Cler.
with his prediction of the fall of their order, for their vicious lives.

So p. 6. [To this specious design, an open way seemed to be made by the great
profaness and vicious living of the opposite party, who while they were zealous
for conformity to the ordinances of men, and thought a main part of Christian
duty, to depend upon the observation of them, did allow themselves carnal
liberty inviolating the precepts and commandments of God. And this they did,
as from the inbred corruption, which is common to all men; so likewise from a
private spirit of opposition against the adversaries of their cause].

And p. 10 11. Speaking of advantages against the Bishops and their party*
says he [This perchance was not the meanest, that they might thus check and
shame the open profaneness, gross impiety, irreligion and sin of their professed
adversaries: The which (to speak truth) was so eminent often times and notorious
in many of them, as might startle a mere natural Conscience to hear or behold
it; and cause therein an abhorrence from their courses, (so opposite as well to
right reason, as sanctifying grace) much more in a mind enlightened, though
with the smallest ray of Evangelical truth. For what could be more strange or
hateful to men, in whom was any spark remaining of common grace or moral
virtue, and who were not wholly possessed with Atheism, and carried on with
fullest bent to libertinism, and ungodly practice, than to hear those that
professed themselves the followers of Christ, scoffing at the purest acts of
his worship, blaspheming or profaning his holy name, by causless Oaths,
fearful imprecations, direful execrations, and such like speeches, not to be
expressed again without horror and amazement. And not only so but glorying
likewise in this their abominable wickedness, and in other of like damnable
nature; in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, and strong drinks,
revellings; wherein they thought it strange that others ran not with them to
the same excess of riot, speaking evil of them. -- How much did this their
apparent and overdaring impudence in sin, commend and grace the seeming
Saint-like Leave i^ to God to judge of the secrets of ^he heart.
conversation of their adversaries, [of some of them, we cannot without
manifest breach of charity judge of them otherwise, than that they were simple
harmless well meaning men, who being offended (and not without cause) at the
corruption of the times, and scandalous lives of many in the sacred office of
the Ministry. -- ] And indeed their strict conformity in other respects to the
precepts of the Gospel, with their constancy in suffering for the defense of
their cause, did argue as much to moderate men and not possessed with
prejudicate hatred of their opinion and persons: For such as these could never
be induced to entertain a good conceit of them, no not in the least measure;
but judged their best actions to be counterfeit and false, and thought their
greatest suffering to proceed from pride and contumacy of spirit -- Now as it
comes to pass between those that extremely hate one another, that they
endeavor as much as in them lies, to be unlike each other in manner of life,
so it fared in this case. --

And p. 27. 28. (The slack hand of ecclesiastical discipline, was another cause
of the general ignorance and profaneness of these times* which reached no
further for the most part, to the inferior Clergy (how peccant soever
otherwise) than in disconformity to Episcopal orders, Provincial or Synodical
Constitutions touching external government: Neither did it call people to a due
account (if any) of their proficiency in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, or
censure them for non-proficiency therein, yea scarcely for gross and scandalous
crimes, if they were persons known to be well affected to the present
Government -- ]

And of the change since in 1653 when Bishops were down, he says, p. 29. [I
can speak it on my own knowledge, that a Town of good note in the Western parts
of the land, not far distant from the Sea, heretofore famed for all manner of
riot, and disorder, by this course of late years has been reduced to that
order and discipline, that it is a rare matter to see a man there at any time
distempered with wine and strong drink, or to hear a rash Oath proceed from any
man's mouth, no not when there is most frequent concourse of people thither from
all the neighboring parts.

Such changes through Gods mercy were not rare, till Prelacy returned. Reader,
I cite, the words of this author so tediously, because many would persuade
those that knew not those times, that none of this was true on either side; And
because the Author was a very high Prelatist, writing openly against their
adversaries, 1653.

VI. Dr. Gauden, after Bishop of Worcester, Hiera spist. page 287. says, [I
neither approve or excuse the personal faults of any particular Bishops, as to
the exercise of their power and authority; which ought not in weighty matters
to be managed without the presence, Council, and suffrages of the Presbyters,
such as are fit for that assistance. The want of this S. Ambrose, S. Hierome,
and all sober men * He makes our Prelates no sober men.
justly reprove, as unsafe for the Bishops and Presbyters and the whole Church.
For in multitude of Counselors is safety and honor. I am sure much good they
might all have done, as many of them did, whom these touchy times were not
worthy of -- ]

And p 262. 263. [They have taught me to esteem the ancient and Catholic
Government of Godly Bishops, as Moderators and Presidents among the Presbyters
in any Diocese or Precincts, in its just measure and constitution for power
paternal duty exercised, such as was in the persecuting, purest and primitive
times. -- ] Just such we offered them in Bishop Ushers Model. -- p. 263, [I
confess after the example of the best times and judgment of the most learned in
all Churches, I always wished such moderation on all sides, that a Primitive
Episcopacy (which imported the authority of one grave and worthy person, chosen
by the consent, and assisted by the presence Counsel and suffrages of many
Presbyters) might have been restored or preserved in this Church; And this not
out of any factious design, but for those weighty reasons which prevail with
me].

Add to this, what he says in Hookers life of the late Bishops, and remember
that this man was one of the Keenest Writers against the adversaries of the
Bishops in his time; And that though he was made a Bishop and great when the
King was restored, yet he was the only Bishop of them all that in our
conference at the Savoy, did desire and endeavor by such concessions to have
reconciled us altogether.

VII. I must not tire the Reader with more such long citations I next wish him
to see Mr. Alesburies Treatise of confession, p. 21. 24 28, 104, 105, 169.
Where he describes the ancient discipline, and shows from our own Prelates
that it is every particular member of the flock that the Pastor should
personally know and counsel; And see how far we are from this.

VIII But none of these speak of the times that we are now fallen into: It can
hardly be expected that any of their own party should yet dare to speak against
them: yet in private talk how common is it? But because it will be too tedious
to recite the words, I desire the Reason to peruse a Book called Icabod, or the
five groans of the Church, which in sharpness and high charges upon the
Prelates since their return, exceeds all that are before cited. And that you
may know that he is sufficiently Episcopal, one of his accusations of them is
for accepting so many into the Church now that were lately against conformity:
I know the man who is said to be the Author, and know him to be conformable to
this time, and in possession of a benefice in the Church.

IX. Let the Reader remember that the division between the Conformists and
Non-conformists began at Frankford in Queen Mary's days, and that Dr. Ri. Coxe
was the man than began this stir against the English Church there, by his
forcible obtruding the Common Prayer book on them, and that long led that
party; And let him read in Cassander his 20th. Epistle where he will find that
the said Dr. Coxe when he was made Bishop of Ely in Queen Elizabeth's time,
wrote to Cassander for directions about setting up Cruci^^xes or crosses in the
Churches; and Cassander instructs him in what shape the Cross is to be made:
And his Prec. Eccles. gave us some of our Collects.

X. Yea, when the Popish Prelacy is described, it is so like to ours that when
Dr. Bastwick and others wrote against the Italian Bishops, ours take it as
spoken of them. Hear Bishop Jewl, Sermon. on Mat. 9. 37. 38 [But the laborers
are few, I say, not there are but few Cardinals, few Bishops few Priests, that
should be preachers, few Archbishops, few Chancellors, few Deans, few
Prebendaries, few Vicars, few Parish priests, few Monks, few Friars; For the
number of these is almost infinite -- And p 198. And what shall I speak of
Bishops? Their cloven Mitre signifies perfect knowledge of the old and new
Testament; Their Crosiar staff signifies diligence in attending the flock of
Christ. Their purple boots and sandals signify that they should ever be booted
and ready to go abroad through thick and thin to teach the Gospel. -- But, alas
in what kind of things do they bear themselves as Bishops? These mystical
titles and shows are not enough to fetch in the Lords harvest: They are
garments more meet for Players than for good laborers -- whatsoever apparel
they have on unless they will fall to work Christ will not know them for
Laborers. -- Page 144. The Christians in old time, when they lived under
Tyrants, and were daily put to most shameful deaths, and were hated and
despised of all the world, yet never lacked Ministers to instruct them. It is
therefore most lamentable that Christians living under a Christian Prince, in
the peace and liberty of the Gospel should lack Learned Ministers to teach
them, and instruct them in the word of God: This is the greatest plague that
God does send on any people.

To which, I add on the by, that if any say, we would labor if the Bishops
would give us leave.] Though the charge against them thus intimated is grievous
(and it were better for that man that offends one of Christ's little ones,
much more that hinders multitudes from their duty in seeking men's salvation,
that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the depths
of the Sea) yet that this will not excuse men from the preaching of the Gospel
to the utmost of their power, see Bishop Bilson himself Asserting, viz. that
silenced Ministers should not therefore give over preaching, in his Christian
subject.

XI. Yea, read but Caesar's description of the Heathen Druides, and tell us,
whether their Character agree not better with the Prelacy which has prevailed
in the Churches these seven hundred years at least, than Christ's Character in
the Scripture, save only that it is Christianty which they profess. Caesar
Comment. lib. 6. p. 72 [In omni Gallia, etc. In all France there are two sorts
of men in some number and honor, (for the common people are accounted almost
but as servants, which of themselves dare do nothing, nor are used in any
consultations, most of then being pressed with debts, or the greatness of
tributes, or the injuries of the more powerful, do give themselves in servitude
to the nobles, who have all that power over them as Lords over their servants:
And of these two sorts, one are Druides, the other Knights. The former are
interested in Divine affairs, they procure public and private sacrifices;
they interpret Religions: To these flock abundance of young men for discipline;
and they are with them in great honor: For they determine of almost all
controversies private and public; And if any crime be committed, if murder be
done, if there be any controversies of inheritanc or bounds, these men
determine them, and do award rewards and punishments. If any private person or
the people stand not to their award ( or decree) they forbid them the
sacrifices. This is with them the most grievous punishment. Those that are thus
interdicted are accounted in the number of the ungodly and wicked: All men
depart from them, and fly from their presence and their speech, lest they get
any hurt by the contagion; nor is any Right (or Law) afforded them when they
seek it, nor any honor done them. And over all these Druides there is one in
chief, who has the highest authority among them. When he is dead, if any one
of the rest excel in worthiness, he succeeds: But if there be many equal, he
is chosen by the suff age of the Druides: And sometimes they contend for the
principality by Arms. At a certain time of the year in the borders of the
Carnuli ( Chartres) which is counted the middle of all France, they have a
Consess ( or Convocation) in a consecrated place; Hither come all that have
controversies from all parts, and obey their judgments and decrees. It is
thought that this Discipline was found in Britain, and there translated into
France. And now they that more diligently would know that business, for the
most part go thither to learn it. The Druides use not to go to the Wars, nor do
they pay tribute with the rest. They have freedom from warfare, and immunity
of all things: Being excited by so great rewards, many flock to this discipline
of their own accord, and many are sent by their parents and kindred. They are
reported to learn there abundance of Verses: Therefore some continue at
learning twenty years; And they think it not lawful to commit them to writeing;
for in other public matters and private accounts, for the most part they use
the Greek Letters. It seems to me that they do this for two causes: because
they would not have their discipline (or learning) made common ( or brought to
the Vulgar) nor those that learn it, neglect their memories by trusting to
writings; which befalls the most, who by the help of writings, remit both their
diligence in learning and their memory, This especially they persuade that
souls die not, but after death pass from some to others: And by this they think
that men are chiefly excited to virtue, neglecting the fear of death. Many
things also they dispute and deliver to youth about the Stars, and their
motion, of the magnitude of the world, and of the earth, of the nature of
things, of the force and power of the immortal Gods.] So far Caesar, which I
repeated as offering it to consideration, whether the foresaid Prelacy for
Grandeur be not liker to these Druides, than to christ's Ministers who must be
the servants of all? And yet whether they are not far more negligent in the
exercise of discipline? And whether this Discipline, which shameth sin; by thus
distinguishing the Godly and upright from the ungodly and wicked, be not of the
very light of nature, and round much in Britain before Christianity, and
therefore should not be hated and banished by Christian Bishops, who pretend
that their office is instituted for that very use and end.

CHAP. XXV. The Ordination lately exercised by the Presbyteries in England is
valid: Ergo Reordination unnecessary.
THat valid ordination is not to be repeated, is agreed on by Protestants and
Papists: It is one of the ancient Canons called the Apostles, Can. 67. [Siquis
Episcopus aut Presbyter aut Diaconus secundam ab aliquo ordinationem acceperit,
deponitor, tam ipse, quam qui ipsum ordinaverit.

Arg. 1. The way of Ordination which was valid in the Primitive Church is valid
now.

But the way of Ordination by mere Presbyters was valid in the Primitive*
Church: Ergo it is valid now.

The Major needs no proof, at least to the point in hand.

The Minor, I prove.

1. From Hieromes frequently cited words in his Epistle to Evagrius, where he
tells us, that the Presbyters of Alexandria from the days of Mark till
Heraclas and Dionysius made or ordained their own Bishops. Having showed that
Bishops and Presbyters were of one office, he adds. [Qwa autem postea unus
elecius est, qui caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factum est, ne
unusquisque ad se trabens Christi ecclesiam rumperet: Nam and Alexandria a
Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper
unum exse electum, in excelsori gradu collecatum Episcopum nominabant: Quomodo
si exercitus Imperater in faciat: aut Diaconieligunt exse quem industrium
noverint, and Archidiaconum vocent.] Where note, 1. That Hierome undertaking to
show how Bishops were made at* Alexandria, mentions no other making of them
but this by the Presbyters:

2. That [Presbyters made Bishops] is brought by Hierome as an Argument to
prove the Identity first, and nearness after of their power.

3. That he ascribes to the Presbyters the Election, the placing of him in a
higher degree and the naming of him a Bishop.

4. And that he distinguishes the Presbyters making of a Bishop thus
anciently, from that which followed Heraclas and Dionysius, which was by
episcopal ordination or consecration. Which observations are sufficient to
answer all their objections that will persuade men that Hierome speaks but of
Election.

2. This testimony is seconded by a more full one of Eutychius Patriark of
Alexandria, who out of the Records and Tradition of that Church, in his Arabic
Originalls thereof says as follows [according to Seldens Translation in his
Commentary page 29. 30. [Constituit item Mar^us ^^^^geli^ta duodecem
Presbyteros cum Hanania, qui nempe manerent cum Patriarcha, adeo ut cum vacaret
Pratriarch^tus eligerent unum e duodecim Presbyteris cujus capiti reliqui
undecim manus imponerent, eumque benedicerent, and Patriarcham ^um crearent:
and dein virum aliquem nisi quem eligerent, eumque Presbyterum, secum
constituerint loco ejus qui sic fac^us est Patriarcha, u^ i^a semper extarent
duodecim. Neque des^it Alexandriae institutum hoc de Presbyteris ut scilicet
Patriarchas crearentur Presbyteris duodecim, usque ad tempora Alexandri
Patriarchae Alexandrini, qui fuit ex numero illo 318. Is autem vetuit ne
deinceps Patriarcham Presbyteri crearent, and decrevit ut mortuo Patriarcha
convenir^nt Episcopi qui Patriarcham ordinarent. Decrevit item ut vacant
Patriarchatu, Eligerent sive ex quacunque regione, sive ex duodecim illis
Presbyteris, sive aliis, ut res ferebat, virum aliquem eximium, eumque
Patriarcham crearent* atque ita evanuit institutum illud antiquius, quo creari
solitus a Presbyteris Patriarcha, and successit in locum ejus decretum de
Patriarcha ab Episcopis creando.

Here you see in the most full expressions that the Presbyters Election,
imposition of hands and Benediction created their Bishop or Patriark; and also
chose and made or ordained another Presbyter in his room, and so ordained both
Presbyters and Bishops.

3. The Tradition or History of Scotland tells us that their Churches were
long governed by Presbyters without Bishops, and therefore had no ordination
but by Presbyters.

Hector Bo^thius Histor. Scot. li. 7. fol. 128. 6 [Ante Palladium populi
suffragiis ex Monac^is and Culdaeis Pontifices assumerentur.]

John Major de gestis Scotorum li. 2. cap. 2. Says [prioribus illis temporibus
per sacerdotes and monachos sine Episcopis Scoti in fide eruditi sunt.

Jahan. Fo^donus makes this the custom of the Primitive Church: Scotichr. li.
3. cap. 8. Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei Doctores ac
Sacramentorum Ministratores Presbyteros solummodo vel Monachos, ritum sequentes
Ecclesiae primitivae.

Which Bishop usher reciting (de primordiis Eccles. Brit. p 798. 799. 800.)
Says Quod postremum ab iis accep^ssevidetur qui dixerunt (ut Johan. Semeca in
glossa decreti Did. 93. cap. Legimu) quod in prima primitiva Ecclesia commune
erat officium Episcoporum and sacerdot^m, and nomina erant communia and
officium commune sed in secunda primitiva c^perunt distingui and nomina and
officia. So Balaeus Script. Brit. Cent. 14. cap. 6.

All which assure us that then only Presbyters could ordain where there were
no other, the same we may say of the Gothic Churches according to
Philostorgius Eclog. li. 2. c. 5. That were for seventy years after their
conversion without a Bishop Vlphilas being the first.

4. Columbanus was no Bishop but a Presbyter and Monk, nor his Successors that
yet Ruled even the Bishops, as Beda notes, Hist. li 3. c. 4. and 5. H^here
solet ipsa Insula Rectorem semper Abbatem Presbyterum, cujus jure and omnis
provincia, and ipsi etiam Episcopi, ordine inusitat^ debeant esse subjecti,
juxta exemplum primi Doctoris illius (Columbani) qui non Episcopus sed
Presbyter extitit and Monachus.]

And these Presbyters did not only ordain (as being the only Church
Governors) but they sent Preachers into England, and ordained Bishops for
England at King Oswalds request, as Beda at large relates Eccles. Hist. l. 3.
c. 3. 5. 17. 21. 24* 25. The Abbot and other Presbyters of the Island Hy, sent
Aydan [and ipsum esse dignum Episcopatu ipsum ad erudiendos incredulos and
indoctos mitti debere decernunt -- Sicque illum ordinantes ad praedicandum
miserunt etc. Successit vero ei in Episcopatu Finan, and ipse illo ab Hy
Scotorum insula ac monasterio destinatus. c. 17. and cap. 25. Aydano Episcopo
de hac vita sublato. Finan pro illo gradum Episcopatus a Scotis ordinatus and
missus acceperat etc. So cap ^4. etc. You will find that the English had a
Succession of Bishops by the Scottish Presbyters ordination: And there is no
mention in Beda of any dislike or scruple of the lawfulness of this course.

Segenius a Presbyter was Abbot of Hy (cap. 5.) when this was done And (cap.
4.) it appears that this was their ordinary custom, though in respect to the
Churches that were in the Empire, it be said to be, more inusitato, that
Presbyters did Govern Bishops: but none questioned the validity of their
ordinations. And the Council at Herudford, subjecteth Bishops in obedience to
their Abbots.

And the first reformers or Protestants here called Lollords and Wicklifists
held and practiced ordination by mere Presbyters, as Walsingham reports Hist.
Angl. An. 1^. 89. and so did Luther and the Protestants of other Nations, as
Pomeranus ordination in Denmark shows, and Chytraeus Saxon Chron lib. 14. 15.
16. 17.

5. Leo Mag. Epist. 92. cited by Gratian, being consulted a rustico Narbonensi,
de Presbytero vel Diacono qui se Episcopos mentiti sunt; and de his quos ipsi
clericos ordinar^nt, answered [Nulla ratio s^vit ut inter Episcopos habeantur
qui nec a clericis sunt electi, nec a plebibus expetiti, etc. -- yet thus
resolves of their ordination [Siqui autem Clerici ab ipsis Pseudo- Episcopis
in eis Ecclesus ordinati sunt, quae ad proprios Episcopos pertinebant, and
ordinatio eorum cum consensu and judicio presidentium facta est, potest ^ata
haberi* ita ut in ipsis Ecclesus perseverunt.] So that the mere consent of the
proper Bishops can make valid such Presbyters ordination.

6. F^licissimus was ordained Deacon by Novatus one of Cyprians Presbyters,
Schismatically, yet was not his ordination made Null by Cyprian; but he was
deposed for Mal-administration. See Blondel p. 312. 113.

7. Firmilian (in 75 Epist. apud Cyprian) Says [Necessario apud nos fit, ut
per singulos annos seniores and praepositi in unum conveniamus ad disponenda
quae curae nostrae commissa sunt, ut si quae graviora sunt, communi consilio
dirigantur This shows that communi consilio imports a consenting Governing
Power) etc. Omnis potestas and gratia in Ecclesus constituta, ubi praesident
majores natu qui and baptizandi, and manum impone^^^, and ordinandi possid^nt
Potestatem] If any say, It is only Bishops that Formilian speaks of; I answer,
1. He had a little before used the word (Seniores) (the same in sense with
Majores natu here) as distinct from (Praepositi) to signify either all Pastors
in general, or Presbyters in special. 2. When he speaks of (Majores natu) in
general, they that will limit it to Bishops, must prove it so limited; and not
barely affirm it. 3. The conjunct acts of the office disprove that: It was the
same men that had the power of baptizing.

8. The great Council of Nice (the most reverend Authority next to the holy
Scripture) decreed thus concerning the Presbyters ordained by Melitius at
Alexandria and in Egypt [Hi autem qui Dei gratia and nostris precibus adjuti,
ad nullum Schisma deflexisse comperti sint, sed se intra Catholicae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae fines ab erroris labe vacuos continuerint, authoritatem
habeant tum ministros ordinandi, tum eos que clero digni fuerint nominandi, tum
denique omnia ex lege and instituto Ecclesiastico libere exequendi.] If any say
that the meaning is that these Presbyters shall ordain and Govern with the
Bishops but not withoutthem, I am of his mind, that this must needs be the
meaning of these words; or else they could not be consonant with the Church
Canons: But this shows that ordination belongs to the Presbyters office,
and consequently that it is no nullity (though an irregulrity as to the Canons)
when it is done by them alone Socrat. lib. 5. 6. cap. 6.

9. It is the title of the twelfth Canon Council. An cyrani [Quod non oportet
Chorepiscopos ordinare nisi in agris and villulis] Now either these
Chorepiscopi were of the order of Bishops or not; If they were, then it further
appears how small the Churches were in the beginning that had Bishops, even
such as had but Vnum Altar, as Ignatius says; when even in the Country
Villages they had Bishops as well as in Cities; notwithstanding that the
Christians were but thinly scattered among the Heathens. But if they were not
Bishops, then it is apparent that Presbyters did then ordain without Bishops,
and their ordination was valid. And the Vafrities of the Prelates is
disingenious in this that when they are pleading for Diocesan Churches, as
containing many fixed Congregations, then they eagerly plead that the
Chorepiscopi were of the order of Presbyters: But when they plead against
Presbyters ordination, they would prove them Bishops. Read and Can. 10.
Concilii Antiocheni.

10. Even in the days of ignorance and Roman Usurpation, Bonifacius Mogunt.
alias Wilfred, Epist. 130 (Auct. Bib. Pat. To 2. p. 105.) tells Pope Zachary
(as his answer intimates) that in Gente Boiariorum there, was but one Bishop,
and that was one Vivilo, which the Pope had ordained, and that all the
Prebyters that were ordained among them, as far as could be sound were not
ordained by Bishops, though that ignorant usurping Pope requires, as it
seems, that they be reordained, (unless Benedictionem ordinationis should
signify only the blessing or confirmation of their former ordination, which is
not like) For he says [Quia indicasti perrexisse te ad gentem Boiariorum, and
in^enisse eos extra ordinem ecclesiasticum viventes, dum Episcopos non habebant
in Provincia nisi unum, nomine Vivilo, quem nos ante tempus ordinavimus,
Presbyteros vero quos ibidem reperisti, si incogniti fuerint viri illi a quibus
sunt ordinati, and dubium est eos Episcopos fuisse, an non, qui eos
ordinaverunt, si bonae actionis and catho^ici viri sunt ipsi Presbyteri and in
ministerio Christi omnemque legem sanctam ^docti, apti, ab Episcopo suo
benedictionem Presbyteratus suscipiant and cons^^r^ntur, and si^ ministerio
sacro fungantur.

11. Of old it was the Custom of the Church that Presbyters join with the
Bishops in Ordination. Council. Carth. c. 3. All the Presbyters present must
impose their hands on the head of the Presbyter to be ordained with the Bishop.
Which fully shows, that it is an act belonging to their Office, and therefore
not null when done by them alone, in certain cases: and that it was but for
order sake, that they were not to do it without a Bishop, who was then the
Ruler of the Presbyters in that and other Actions.

And its worth noting, That ib. Can. 4. The Bishop alone without any See
Stillingfleets Iren. p. 379. etc.
Presbyters was to lay hands on a Deacon (though not on a Presbyter) Because he
was ordained non ad sacerdotium sed ad ministerium, not to the Priesthood but
to a Ministry or service, which plainly intimates what Archbishop Usher said
to me, that Ad Ordinem pertinet ordinare (quamvis ad Gradum Episcopalem
ordinationes regere.) The Priesthood contains a power to ordain Priests; but
the Episcopal Jurisdiction as such suffices to ordain a Deacon: Or that the
Bishop ordains Presbyters, as he is a Presbyter (his Prelacy giving him the
government of the action) but he ordains Deacons as a Ruler only.

Arg. II. Ordination by Bishops such as were in Scripture time is valid (and
lawful). But the Ordinations in England now questioned, were performed by
Bishops, such as were in Scripture times, Ergo the late ordinations in England
(now questionedare valid and lawful.

The Major speaking de nomine and officio is granted by all. The Minor I prove
thus. 1. The Ordinations in England now questioned were (many or most)
performed by the chief particular Pastors of City Churches (together with their
Colleagues or fellow Presbyters) that had Presbyters under them. But the Chief
particular Pastors of City Churches having Presbyters under them, were such
Bishops as were in Scripture times: Ergo, the Ordinations in England now
questioned were performed by Bishops such as were in Scripture times.

I must first here explain what I mean by [a particular Pastor] as in an Army
or Navy a General Officer, that takes up the General care of all is distinct
from the inferior, particular Captains, that take a particular care of every
Soldier or person under their command; so in the Church in Scripture times
there were 1. General Officers, that took care of many Churches (viz. a general
care.) And 2. particular Bishops and Presbyters that were fixed in every City
or particular Church, that took a particular care of every Soul in that Church.
It is only these last that I speak of, that were Bishops infimi gradus; not
such as the Apostles and Evangelists; but such as are mentioned Acts 14. 23.
and Acts 20. 28. Tit. 1. 5. etc.

Now for the Major it is notoriously known, 1. That ordinarily some of our
Ordainers were City Pastors. 2. That they had Presbyters under them; viz. one
or more Curates, that administered there with them, or in Oratorics called
Chapels in the Parish.

(...) is Oppidum, and our Boroughs and Towns Corporate are such Cities as are
signified by that word: And there are few of these but have more Presbyters
than one, of whom one is the Chief, and the rest ruled by him. Besides, that
one was oft-times President of the Assembly chosen by the rest. For instance
(if I had ever meddled in Ordainings as I did not). 1. I was my self a Pastor of
a Church in a City or Burough. 2. I had two or three Presbyters with me, that
were ruled by me: so that I was statedly their Chief: I was statedly chosen by
the neighborhood associated Pastors to be their Moderatour (which was such a
power as made Bishops at Alexandria before the Nicene Council.)

Now that such were Bishops (such as were in Scripture-times) I prove 1. By the
Confession of the Opponents: Doctor Hammond and his followers maintain, that
there were no subject Presbyters instituted in Scripture times; and
consequently that a Bishop was but the single Pastor of a single ongregation,
having not so much as one Presbyter under him, but one or more Deacons (which
grants us more than now I plead for:) and that afterward when Believers were
increased, he assumed Presbyters in partem curae: So that our Bishops which I
plead for are of the stature of those after Scripture times in the Doctors
sense. Defacto this is granted.

2. The Bishops in Scripture times were ordained in every City and in every
Church, Tit. 1, 5. and Acts 13. 23. So are ours. They had the particular
Episcopacy oversight rule and teaching of all the Flock committed to them,
Acts 20. 28. (and if the Angel of the Church of Ephesus were one chief, he was
but one of these, and over these in the same Church and charge). And so have
our Parochial Pastors; these very words, Acts 20. 28. being read and applied
to them in their ordination. They had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
committed to them, and so have ours. If it be said, that these are but things
common to the Bishop with the Presbyter: 1. What then is proper to a Bishop? To
say [Ordination] is but to beg the question: And Ordination it self is not
proper in the sense of our own Church, that requires that Ordination be
performed as well by the laying on of the hands of the Presbyters, as of the
Bishop. 2. They use themselves to make the governing or superiority over many
Presbyters to be proper to a Bishop.

3. Those to whom the description of Bishops in Scripture belongs are truly
and properly Bishops. But the Description of Bishops in Scripture agrees (at
least) to the chief particular Pastors of City Churches, having Presbyters
under them; Ergo, such are truly and properly Bishops.

The Minor (which only needs proof) is proved by an induction of the several
Texts containing such descriptions, as Acts 20. and 13. 23. 1 Timothy 3. and 5.
17. Tit. 1. 5. etc. 1 These. 5. 12. Hebr. 13. 7. 17, 24. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. and
the rest.

4. If our Parochial Churches or at least our City Churches (those in each Town
Corporate and Borough) be true Churches, then the chief particular Pastors of
them are true Bishops, but they are true Churches; Ergo.

Still note, 1. That I speak of Churches as governed Societies in sensu
Politico; and not as a Company of private Christians.

2. That I speak only of particular Pastors, or Bishops infimi gradus, and not
of Archbishops, and General Pastors. And therefore it they say It is not the
Presbyters but the Diocesane, that is the chief Pastor of your Parish Church: I
answer, there is none above the Resident or incumbent Presbyters, that take the
particular charge and oversight: The Bishop takes but the general charge, as a
general Officer in an Army. If they do indeed take the particular Pastoral
charge of every Soul, which belongs to the Bishops infimi gradus, then woe to
that man that voluntary takes such a charge upon him, and has such a charge to
answer for before the Lord. If they say that the Presbyters have the particular
charge for teaching and Sacraments, but the Bishops for ruling. I answer, 1. It
is Government that we are speaking of, if they are Bishops infimi gradus, then
there are no Bishops or Governors under them. And if so, then it is they that
must perform and answer for Government of every particular Soul. And then woe
to them. 2. Governing and teaching are acts of the same Office by Christ's
institution, as appears in 1 Timothy 5: 17. Acts 20. 28. etc. And indeed they are
much the same thing: For Government in our Church sense is nothing but the
explication of Gods Word, and the application of it to particular Cases: And
this is Teaching. Let them that would divide, prove, that Christ has allowed a
division. If one man would be the general Schoolmaster of a whole Diocese, only
to oversee the particular Schoolmasters, and give them rules, we might bear
with them: But if he will say to all the particular Schoolmasters, you are but
to teach, and I only must govern all your Scholars, (when governing them is
necessarily the act of him that is upon the place, conjunct with teaching, this
man would need no words for the manifestation of the vanity of his ambition.
The same I may say of the Masters of every Science, whose government is such as
our Church Government is, not Imperial but Doctoral: yea of the Army or the
Navy where the government is most imperial.

Now for the Argument. 1. The consequence of the Major is undeniable: because
every such Society is essentially constituted of the Ruling and Ruled parts, as
every Commonwealth of the pars imperans and the pars subdita: So every
organized Church of the Pastor and the Flock.

2. And for the Minor, if they denied both our Parish Churches, and our City
Churches (that is those in Towns Corporate to be true Churches, they then
confess the shame, and open the ulcer and leprosic of their way of governing,
that to build up one Diocesane Church, (which is not of Christ's institution,
but destructive of his institution) they destroy and pull down five hundred or
a thousand Parish Churches, and many City Churches.

If they will also feign a specifique difference of Churches as they do of
Pastors, and say that Parish Churches are Ecclesiae dociae, but Diocesan
Churches are only Ecclesiae gubernatae of which the Parish Churches are but
parts: I answer, 1. The Scripture knows no such distinction of stated
Churches: All stated Churches for worship are to be governed Churches; and the
government is but guidance, and therefore to be by them that are their Guides.
2. I have before proved, that every worshipping Church, that had unum altar
was to have a Bishop or Government by Presbyters at least.

Arg. III. That Ordination which is much better than the ordination of the
Church of Rome, or of any Diocesane Bishops of the same sort with theirs is
valid.

The Ordination now questioned by some in England, is much better then the
Ordination of the Church of Rome, or of any Diocesane Bishops of the same sort
with theirs, Ergo the Ordination now questioned by some in England is valid.

The Major will not be denied by those which we plead with; because they hold
the Ordination of the Church of Rome to be valid, and their Priests not to be
re-ordained.

The Minor I prove.

If the Ordination, that has no Reason of its validity alleged, but that it
is not done by Diocesane Bishops, be much better than the Ordination of such as
derive their power from a mere Usurper of Headship over the universal Church,
whose succession has been often interrupted, and of such as profess themselves
Pastors of a false Church, (as having a Head and form of divine Institution),
and that ordain into that false Church, and cause the ordained to swear to be
obedient to the Pope, to swear to false Doctrine as Articles of Faith, and
ordain him to the Office of making a piece of Bread to be accounted no Bread,
but the Body of Christ, which being Bread still is to be worshipped as God by
himself and others (to pass by the rest) than the Ordination now questioned in
England is much better than the Ordination of the Church of Rome.

But the Antecedent is true: Ergo so is the consequent.

And for the other part of the Minor I further prove it: If the Office and
government of the Romish Bishops and of any Diocesanes of the same sort with
them, be destructive of that form of Episcopacy and Church Government which was
instituted by Christ, and used in the Primitive Church, then the Ordination now
questioned by some in England is much better than that which is done by such
Diocesanes.

But the Office and Covernment of the Romish Bishops and of any Diocesanes of
the same sort with them, is destructive of that form of Episcopacy and Church
Government, which was instituted by Christ and used in the Primitive Church.
Ergo The Ordination now questioned by some in England is much better, than that
which is done by such Diocesanes.

The Reason of the consequence is because the Ordination of Presbyters now in
question is not destructive of the Episcopacy and Government instituted by
Christ and used in the Primitive Church: Or if it were, that's the worst that
can be said of it. And therefore if other Ordination may be valid
notwithstanding that fault, so may it. N. B. 1. I here suppose the Reader to
understand, what that Ordination is now questioned in England: viz. Such as we
affirm to be by Bishops, not only as Presbyters, as such are called Bishops,
but as the chief Presbyters of particular Churches, especially City Churches,
having Curates under them, and also as the Presidents of Synods are called
Bishops:

2. Note that all I say hereafter about Diocesanes, is to be understood only of
those Bishops of a Diocese of many hundred or score Churches which are infimi
gradus, having no Bishops under them, who are only Priests, who are denied to
have any proper Church Government: And not at all of those Diocesane Bishops,
who are Archbishops having many Bishops under them, or under whom each Parish
Pastor is Episcopus Gregis having the true Church Government of his particular
Flock.

And thus because the Major is of great moment, I shall handle it the more
largely.

The Viciousnes of the Romish Ordinations appears thus.

1. In that they commonly profess to receive and hold the Ordainers office and
power from the Pope: The very office it self say the Italians being from him;
And the application and communication of it to the individual subject being
from him, say the Spaniards and French also. But the Pope as such has no power
to make Bishops at all: which I prove

1. Because the very office of a Pope as such is not of Christ, yea is against
Christ and his prerogative and Law, and abhorred by him; viz. [An universal
visible Vicar or Head of the Church on earth.]

2. Because on their own principles, the Pope can have no power, for want of
uninterrupted succession of true Ordination, nothing being more plain in Church
History scarce, than that such succession is long ago nulled by often
interruptions, as I have proved elsewhere, and as is by many Protestants proved.

3. Because the Work that they ordain their Priest to is Idolatry, even Bread
worship; besides Man worship, and Image worship.

4. Because all their Priests are (in the Trent Oath) sworn to this Idolatry,
and sworn to renounce all their Senses to that end, and to renounce the
Scripture sufficiency; and to own the Papal Treasonable usurpation, which all
are contrary to the Office of Christ's Ministers.

Yet are those, that ordained at Rome, received by our Prelates, when they turn
to us, without reordination, and their Orders are not taken by them to be null
(which I dispute not now). Much less are the late Protestant English
Ordinations null.

II. The Viciousness of such other Prelates Ordinations, is proved by all that
is said against their Calling it self before. And further. 1. Those Prelates,
that are chosen by Magistrates and not by other Bishops or the Presbyters of
their Diocese or People (what stale hypocritical pretext soever there may be of
the contrary) are by the Canons of the Universal Church no Prelates. But such
are those in question: Ergo --

The Major (to omit many other Canons) I prove from Council. Nic. 2. Can. 3. in
Bin* To. 2. p. ^93. [Omnem electionem, quae fit a Magistratibus, Episcopi vel
Presbyteri, vel Diaconi, irritam manner, ex Canone dicente, si quis Episcopus
secularibus Magistratibus usus, per eos Ecclesiam obtinuerit, deponatur and
segregetur, and emnes qui cum e^ communicant: Oportet enim eum qui est
promovendus ad Episcopatum ab Episcopis eligi, quemadmodum a sanctis Patribus
Niceae decretum est in Can. qui dicet [Episcopum oportet maxim quidem ab
omnibus, qui sunt in provincia constitui, etc.]

Argument IV. Orders conferred by such as are in orders, and have the Power of
Order equal with the highest Bishops, is valid. But the Orders lately conferred
in England and Scotland by those called Presbyters, were conferred by such as
were in Orders, and had the power of Order equal with the highest Bishop: Ergo
The Orders lately conferred in England and Scotland by those called Presbyters,
was valid.

As to the Major, I remember Arch-Bish. Usher told me himself that it was the
argument by which he endeavored to satisfy K. Charles I. 1. That Ordinis est
ordinare, a man that is in orders as to the sacred Priesthood, may caeteris
paribus confer Orders; it being like Generation or univocal causation. 2. That
Hierom tells us the Alexandrian Presbyters did more; for they made their
Bishops: And at this day among the Papists, men of inferior Order must with
them ordain, or consecrate, or make their Pope. And Bishops make Archbishops:
How much more may men of the same Order confer what they have, that is the
Power of the Priesthood or Presbyterate. As Abbots (who are no Bishops) have
frequently done.

2. And for the Minor Bishop Carleton has these words in his Treatise of
Jurisdiction page 7. The Power of Order by all Writers, that I could see, even
of the Church of Rome, is understood to be immediately from Christ, given to
all Bishops and Priests alike by their consecration; wherein the Pope has no
privilege above others Thus teaches Bonavent. in 4. sent. d. 17. q. 1. August.
Triumph. li: de potest. Eccles. qu. 1. a. 1. Joh. Gerson li. de pot. Eccles.
Consid. 1. Cardinal Cusau. li. de conced. Cathol. 2. cap. 13. Cardinal
Contarenus Tract. de Eccles. potest. Pontif. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pontif.
cap. 22.

In the Canons of Elfrick ad Wolfin Episc. in Spelman p. 576. l. 17 Having
showed that there are seven Orders (1. Ostiarius. 2. Lector. 3. Exorcista. 4.
Acolythus, 5. Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbyter) though the Bishop for
Unity sake have the privilege of Ordination and Inspection, yet he is there
declared to be but of one and the same (7th.) Order with the Presbyter. Haud
pluris interest inter Missalem Presbyterum and Episcopum, quam quod Episcopus
constitutus sit ad ordinationes conferendas, and ad visitandum, seu
inspiciendum, curandumque ea quae ad Deum pertinent, quod nimiae crederetur
multitudini, si omnis Presbyter hoc idem faceret. Ambo siquidem unum tenent
eundemque Ordinem, quamvis dignior sit illa part Episcopi. This being the
Doctrine of the Church of England even in the times of Popery, we have little
reason (with the Preface to the book of Ordination) to say that it is manifest
in Gods word that they are distinct orders. For as it is added Can. 18. Non est
alius ordo constitutus in Ecclesiasticis ministriis (humane and all taken in)
praeter memoratos septem istos etc.

Dion. Petavius Theolog. D^gmat. To. 4. par. 2. Tomi. 3. Append. c. 2. p. 677
[Alterum est, quod nunquam iterare illam (ordinationem) licet ut cum ab haeresi
ad Catholicam Ecclesiam revertuntur, qui vere ordinati, eis denu^ manus
impenitur. And what ordination is valid among the Papists, see in Johnsons
answer to my Questions.

FINIS.
POSTCRIPT
Promiscucus additions to the Chapter, 4. of part second out of Mr. Gilbert
Burnets bocke called, The Vindication of the Church of Scotland, etc.
Page 304. 305. Let me here send you to the Masters of Jewish Learning;
particularly to the eminently learned Dr. Lightfoot, who will inform you that
in every Synagogue there was one peculiarly charged with the worship, called
the Bishop of the Congregation, the Angel of the Church, or the Minister of the
Synagogue. And besides him there were three who had the Civil judicature, who
judged also about the receiving of proselites, the imposition of hands, etc.
And there were other three who gathered and distributed the alms. Now the
Christian Religion taking place as the Gospel was planted in Cities where it
was chiefly Preached, these forms and orders were retained, both names and
things.

Page 306. -- These Presbyters were as the Bishops Children, educated and
formed by him, being in all they did, directed by him and accountable to him,
and were as Probationers for the Bishopric, one of them being always chosen
to succeed in the seat, when vacant by the Bishops death. Now all these lived
together as in a little College, thus the Churches were planted and the Gospel
disseminated through the world. But at first every Bishop had but one Parish,
yet afterward when the numbers of the Christians increased, that they could
not conveniently meet in one place, and when through the violence of
persecution they durst not assemble in great multitudes, the Bishops divided
their charges in lesser Parishes The story of Eranistus dividing into Titulos
(much less proper Parishes) is confuted by the most knowing isistorians.
and gave assignments to the Presbyters of particular flocks, which was done
first in Rome, in the beginning of the 2d. Century -- And things continued thus
in a Parochial Government, till toward the end of the 2d. Century, the Bishop
being chiefly entrusted with the cure of Souls, a share whereof was also
committed to the Presbyters, who were subject to him, and particularly to be
ordained by him, nor could any ordination be without the Bishop; who in
ordaining was to carry along with him the concurrence of the Presbyters, as in
every other act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

Page 308. 309. Corruptions broke in upon Church Officers, especially after the
4th. Centurie, that the Empire became Christian: Which as it brought much
riches and splendour on Church employments, so it let in great Swarms of
corrupt men on the Christian Assemblies: And then the Election to Church
offices, which was formerly in the hands of the people, was taken from them, by
reason of the tumults, and disonders that were in these Elections, which some
time ended in blood, and occasioned much Faction and Schism: And An^bitus
became now such an universal sin among Churchmen, that etc.

Page 310. I do not allege a Bishop to be a distinct office from a Presbyter,
but a different degree in the same office, etc.

Page 320. As for the sole power of ordination and Jurisdiction, none among us
claim it, but willingly allow the Presbyters a concurence in both these.

Page 322. That whole frame of Metropolitans and Patriarks was taken from the
division of the Roman Empire, which made but one great National Church.

Page 331. I acknowledged Bishop and Presbyter to be one and the same office,
and so plead for no new office bearer in the Church -- The first branch of
their power is their authority to publish the Gospel, to manage the worship
and dispense the Sacraments: And this is all that is of Divine right in the
Ministry; in which Bishops and Presbyters are equal sharers, -- but besides
this the Church claims a power of Jurisdiction, of making rules for
discipline, and applying and executing the same; All which is indeed suitable
to the common laws of societies, and the general rules of Scripture, but has
no positive warrant from any Scripture precept: And all these Constitutions of
Churches into Synods, and the Canons of discipline, taking their rise from the
divisions of the world into the several provinces, and beginning in the 2d. and
beginning of the 3d. Century, do clearly show they can be derived from no
Divine original, and so were a to their particular form but of humane
constitution. Therefore as to the managment of this Jurisdiction, it is in the
Churches power to cast it into what mould she will -- But we ought to be much
more determined by the Laws of the land -- In things necessary to be done by
Divine precept, since no power on earth can Council the authority of a Divine
Law, the Churches restraints are not to be considered.

Page 335. I acknowledge that without Scripture warrant no new offices may be
instituted.

Page 337. I am not to annul these ordinations that pass by Presbyters, where
no Bishop can be had: And this lays no claim to a new office, but only to a
higher degree of inspection in the same office; whereby the exercise of some
acts of jurisdiction, are restrained to such a Method: And this may be done
either by the Churches free consent, or by the Kings authority.

Page 348. In Augustines time it appears from the journal of a conference he
had with the Donatists, that there were about 500 Bishoprics in a small tract
of ground.

Page 30. Observe the Bishops were to be ordained in the presence of the
people, where every one might propose his exceptions, yet the popular Elections
were not wholly taken away, and at least the peoples consent was asked.

Page 41. Voss^is, from all the manuscripts of Damasus his lives of the Popes,
shows that S. Peter ordained both Linus and Gletus, Bishops of Rome, and after
some enquiry into the matter he concludes, that at first there were three
Bishops in Rome at once, Linus, Cletus, and Aneneletus: in the next succession
he places Cletus, Anencltus, and Clemens.

Page 48. Among the Jews where ever there were an hundred and twenty of them
together, they did erect a Synagoguge

Page 49. At a conference which Augustine and the Bishops of that Province had
with the Donatists, there were of Bishops 286 present, and 120 absent, and 60
Sees vacant: And there were 279 of the Donatists Bishops.

Page 51. The Gothic Churches are said to be planted 70 years before Ulphilas
their first Bishop came to them (Page 50, He she weth the like of the Scots.)
By the streine of Ignatius Epistles, especially that to Smyrna, it would appear
that there was but one Church, at least but one place where there was one Altar
and Communion in each of these Parishes (which was the Bishops whole charge.]

Page 56. The enlarging of the Diocesses has wholly altered the figure of
Primitive Episcopacy)

That the Bishops were chosen by the people, and by the Clergy and people, and
at last not obtruded without the peoples consent, Father Paul Saript. de
Beneficiis often tells you, and I have fully proved by many Canons in my abstract
of Church History of Councils.

FINIS.

