A THIRD DEFENSE Of the CAUSE of PEACE, PROVING 1. The need of our Concord. 2.
The Impossibility of it, on the Terms of the present Impositions. Against the
Accusations and Storms of, VIZ. Mr. John Hinckley. A Nameless Impleader. A
Nameless Reflector, or Speculum, etc. Mr. John Cheney's Second Accusation. Mr.
Roger L'Strange, Justice, etc. The Dialogue between the Pope and a Fanatic. J.
Varney's Phanatic Prophecy.


By RICHARD BAXTER.

Psalm 120. 6. 7. My Soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for
peace, but when I speak they are for war.

Romans 3. 17. The way of peace they have not known.

London, Printed for Jacob Sampson, next to the Wonder Tavern in
Ludgate Street. 1681.

Readers,
IF this striving work be unpleasant to you, it must be much more so to me: It
is not the least advantage that Satan gets against the Church, that by other
men's sins he can occasion that to become our duty, which else would be a
sinful loss of time, and against the peace of our selves and others. A
multitude of heresies make it our duty, to read abundance of Books, and study
those languages, and trifling Arts, which else were needless: And the multitude
of Erroneous, malignant, and other adversaries, and the variety of their
assaults, makes many Defenses, Evidences, Witnesses, and Confutations
necessary, which else would signify that evil Contentiousness, which the
assaulters manifest. Though the servant of the Lord must not strive, yet must
we contend earnestly for the Faith, and must not forsake and betray truth and
innocence. And the necessitated Defender may do his duty, while the wilful
Aggressor does sinfully militate against Truth, Charity, and Peace. And as we
must love our Enemies, so we take our selves bound much more, to love our
tempted envyous brethren; and if they use us as Joseph, cast us into the Pit
and sell us as slaves, we will call them brethren still, and hope one day their
repentance will render them more lovely than they are. And though some Preach
Christ in Envy, Strife, and Contention, to add to our affliction, and not
sincerely, we rejoice and will rejoice that Christ is Preached: And though they
would drive us out from the inheritance of the Lord, 1 Samuel 26. 19. We will not
venture with David to curse them, but say as he in another pursuit, 2 Samuel 15.
25. 26. Carry back the Ark of God into the City: If I shall find favor in the
Eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his
Habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I,
let him do to me as seems good to him. In my endeavors for peace these
Thirty Four Years, as I have been put to publish many things which I had rather
might have been spared, so I have written to satisfy others, the Quantity of
many Volumes, which I cast away as unnecessary to the World. But some men that
I have dealt with, will not give me and the Reader such an indulgence.

Mr. Dodwell is one who shall have his answer by it self. Mr. Hinkley is
another, to whose last Letter I wrote an answer about Nine Years ago: But he
would not so bury his Talent, but has printed my former Letters with his
answer, and so called and constrained me to publish my last reply. Fame
reports that the Impleader is Mr. Long of Exeter, who heretofore wrote an
Accusing Book, of which I gave him a private Epistolary Animadversion. Who the
Reflector or the Author of the Speculum is I know not, the Subject calls me
to no particular Answer. He and Mr. Roger le strange, who argue in the same
Mood and Figure, make me little work: which concerns others, They mistook the
question, as if it had been, what the World should think of me. In which I
leave them to their Liberty without much contradiction.

But our question is First, whether the Concord of Protestants being supposed
necessary, the silencing, imprisoning, fining, and banishing from Corporations,
all Ministers that take Conformity to the present Impositions to be a sin, be
the way of Peace and Concord, either probable or possible to attain the end.
Mr. John Cheny, I judge a godly serious man: who being near me and familiar
with me, never told me a word of his exceptions, nor gave me the least touch of
a private Admonition for all the Atheism, Infidelity, Wickedness, Abomination,
destroying all Religion etc. Which he accuses me of in print: And his Book is
so dismal a piece of work, in its extraordinary privation of Common Reason,
Truth, Charity, Tenderness and Modesty, that I am constrained to think that the
honest man is diseasedly melancholy: And I have known some well meaning men in
that disease, that are so tenacious of all their own Conceptions, that they are
still fiercely confident that the grossest things that they hold and say are
right, and passionately reject all that is said against them. Whom he has
reported to be his Instigator, I shall not here proclaim. The Dialogue between
the Pope and a Phanatick, and Joh. Varney's Prophecy, I leave the Reader to
answer himself, as he finds cause. If any man think it a service to God to
accuse me and others, and justify our silencing and the imposed penalties, I
entreat him to remember the Ninth Commandment, and that God and his Church
need not Lies for their Service, but its he that is both the Father of them,
and a Liar from the beginning. That was a lying Spirit in the Mouth of all
Ahabs Prophets, (even of him that smote Mica^ah, for supposing the Spirit of
God departed from him,) and whose work on Earth against Christ and Souls, is
done by Deceit, and Wrath, and Hurtfulness; Imitating him will disgrace your
cause and you: And Light will not so easily be hid. Great is truth and will
finally prevail. And all the waves do but break themselves, who dash against
this impregnable rock. I call this Book, A Third Defense of the cause of Peace,
with respect to two former, One in answer to the Accusation of Mr. John Cheny,
the other in answer to Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, men whom I once thought more
unlikely than most other to become our Accusers.

All Mr. Gouge's WORKS.
POlitical and Military Observations of the Court and Camp of France during the
late Wars in Flanders, Germany, etc.

Sacramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their Affections
and Graces, when they draw nigh to God in that most awful solemn Ordinance of
the Lords Supper. By John Flavel Minister of Christ, in Devon. 12o. price 1 s.
6 d.

A peaceable resolution of Conscience touching our present Impositions, wherein
Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and settled upon their true Foundation in
Scripture, Reason, and Constitution of this Kingdom against all resistance of
the present Powers, and with compliance with the Laws so far as may be in order
to Union. With a Draught or Specimen of a Bill for Accommodation. Octavo, price
2 s.

The Narrative of Rob. Bolron of Shippon-hall, Gent. concerning the late horrid
Polish Plot and Conspiracy, for the Destruction of His Majesty and the
Protestant Religion: Wherein is contained,

1. His Informations upon Oath before His Majesty in Council, and before
several Justices of the Peace, of the said Design, and the means by which he
arrived at the knowledge thereof.

2. Some particular Applications made to himself to assist those designed in
the murdering of his Majesty; the persons by whom such Applications were made,
and the Reward promised.

3. The project of the Popish party to Erect a Nunnery at Dolebanck near Ripely
in Yorkshire, together with the Names of some Nuns, actually designed for that
Employment, and taking the Profession upon them: As also an Account of a
certain Estate of 90 l. per annum, given by Sir Thomas Gascoigne to the Nunnery
for ever. With other remarkable Passages relating to the horrid Piot. Together
with an Account of the Endeavors that were used by the Popish party to stifle
his Evidence.

The Narrative of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds in the County of York, Gent.
concerning the bloody Popish Conspiracy against the Life of his Sacred Majesty,
the Government, and the Protestant Religion:

Wherein is contained,

1. His knowledge of the said Design from the very first in the Year 1676; with
the Opportunity he had to be acquainted therewith, and the Reasons why he
concealed it so long: with the manner of his discovering the said wicked
Project to his Majesty, and his most honorable Privy Council.

2. How far Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, etc. are engaged in the
Design of Killing the King, and Fireing the City of London and York, for the
more speedy setting uppermost the Popish Religion in England.

3. An Account of the Assemblings of many Popish Priests and Jesuits at Father
Rishton's Chamber, at Sir Thomas Gascoigue's house at Barmebow; with their,
Consultations and Determinations: with other considerable matters relating to
the Plot. Together with an account of the Endeavors that were used to stifle
his Evidence, by making an Attempt upon his Life in Leicester Fields: price 6 d.

A Memento for the English Protestants, etc. with an Answer to that part of the
Compendium which reflects on the Bishop of Lincoln's late Book. Quarto: price
stitcht 6 d.

Naked Truth, the first part: Being the true state of the Primitive Church. By
an humble Moderator: price stitcht one shilling.

Causa Dei; Or an Apology for God: wherein the perpetuity of Insernal Torments
is evinced, and Divine Goodness and Justice (that notwithstanding) defended,
etc. By Richard Burthogge, M. D.

Tulli's elect Orations.

Gouge's Works, Octavo.

Horrid Popish Plot in a Pack of Cards

A second Pack, continuing a Representation of their Villainous Design, from
the publication of the first Pack to the last Sessions of Parliament, begun
October. 21. 1680.

AN ANSWER TO MR. HINCKLEY.
SIR,
I Have perused yours, (I think Impartially) and to tell you my Judgment of it,
I perceive, is like to offend you more. I find it is natural to men to desire
to be thought to be in the right, and to have said well, and done well, be it
never so ill. It is some Honor to Truth and Goodness, that the Names and
Reputation of them seem desirable to those that cannot endure the things; yea,
that the Things are never loathed or opposed formally as such, but for their
opposition to somewhat, that is more loved. And it is some help to the
depression of Falsehood and Sin, that it is ashamed of its own Name, and cannot
endure to see its own Face, which has ever inclined it to break the Glass;
though to its greater shame, when every piece will show that ugliness which was
showed but by the whole before. If nothing else had notified it to us, one
might have strongly suspected that you are of that Tribe, who take themselves
to be persecuted when they may not domineer, and when others may but Preach and
live without their Consent; by your excessive tenderness and impatience,
calling it Poison, Hornets, and abundance of such smarting angry Names, if a
man that is cast out of God's Vineyard as well as his Maintenance among many
hundreds more, do but plainly in a private Letter speak for himself, and show
the injustice of your Printed Accusations. O! that you were all but the
thousandth part as tender, (I will not say of your Brethrens sufferings) but of
the danger of many thousand perishing starved Souls? I shall only tell you this
much in general, that I now perceive you are used but for a Temptation to me,
to lose my time, by the neglect of better Work. And that you do so notoriously
bawk the Truth, and hide Untruth in a heap of Confident Rhetorical Flourishes;
that while you are of this temperament, I will not undertake to prove to you
that Two and Two are Four.

1. My Beginning was taken from your Ending; where you wrote [You will satisfy
your self, as little as you will do others] And what others Mind know you
better than your own? And sure that which satisfies not you, does you no good
as to its proper end, what ever it may do by accident some other way. Yet it
seems you forgot that you had written this, and that was warrant enough for all
your confident Impertinencies on that occasion. Sandy foundations, light and
darkness, Hornets Nests, rushing into the midst of the Pikes, waking Dragons,
the golden Fleece, etc. come all in upon this your oversight: And you seem to
think that you have acquit your self well.

2. You tell me of bringing the Controversy to an issue by dint of Scripture,
whether you sin in Conforming. Is this fairly done, to pretend that to be the
Controversy which I never undertook to meddle with? Could you possibly forget,
1. That You were the Plaintiff and Accuser in Print, not content that your
Brethren were forbidden to Preach Christ, and that many of them live in great
poverty and want? You wrote a Book of reproachful Oratory, with no strength of
Argument worthy an Answer, to make them seem the flagitious Causes of their own
silence and sufferings: Against which, they (that meddled not with you) had
nothing to do but to justify themselves. 2. That in this Book you vehemently
importune me, who never knew you, nor meddled with you, to give the World the
Reasons of my Nonconformity. 3. That hereupon the Question that I treated
about with you, was, How I may have leave to do it. And whether it be ingenious
thus publicly to urge me to that which you know I cannot do. This was all the
Controversy I had with you. I tell you again, I would go on my knees to any
Bishop in England, to procure but License for my self alone, (much more my
Brethren) to Write and Print the Reasons of our Nonconformity, after Nine
years Silence, Suffering, and Accusation; that the World and Posterity may but
once hear us speak for our selves: And I would be engaged to leave out all such
plain expressions as now offend you. But to begin such a Work, when I know I
cannot Print it; or to enter a Dispute with you in this rambling way, (whose
Books and Letters tell me that you will Syllogize in Aristophanes, or Lucian's
Moods and Figures; and whose Logic will take up no greater room among your
Oratorical Diversions, Evasions, Subterfuges, and Flosculi, than a spoonful of
Wine in a Gallon of Water, which will leave it Water still. I shall not easily
be drawn to this, having lost so much time upon you already, as I have done:
Therefore you here bring in your Serpents Head and Tail and Fable, upon a false
Supposition of the Subject of our Debates.

. 1. Here first, you would have your Book go for Innocent; no wonder:
Impenitence is no rarity, among those whose office is to Preach Repentance: And
therefore so many of them go without the Fruits of it, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. And he
that can write against Truth, can defend it by Untruth. 2. You untruly suppose
me to undertake the Confutation of your Book. But who has so little to do, as
to show particularly of each Page and Line of a Bundle of impotent Oratorian
Revilings, how little Logic or Truth is in them. 3. You untruly suppose me not
to have opened the faultiness of any Page of your Book: Let the Impartial
judge. 4. In all, you show the strange unacquaintedness with your Self, and
your Own, which you cannot endure to be told of. A Calumniating Volume of yours
is Innocent, and affords no matter for blame or repentance: But to be told
so, is to let fall such Drops on you as make you smart (you say) as if there
had been poison in them. If we that are forbidden to eat a Bit, or wear a Rag
of the Levites Portion, or come within Five Miles of any Corporation, or Preach
Christ to the most ignorant miserable Souls; do but think and say, it is hard
usage: We add to our guilt, and deserve yet worse, because we do not Toto
pectore telum recipere: Or as Camero, unbutton our Doublets, and cry, Feri
miser. But if we tell you of it, when you voluminously play with Reproaches
upon them, that you are utterly unable to prove guilty and confute; Oh, it
makes you smart like poison. Guilt is always tender, but most in the
Domineering Tribe. They are contemned and scorned, if we take not their strokes
for stroakings, and their calumnies for kindness: And to tell them that their
slanders are injuries, is to call them to veil their Bonnets to us, and we are
Popular Rabbis (for being against the Rabbis) if the people (that know them
and us, will not (because they cannot) believe all the falsehoods which such
report of us, who find no readier and surer steps for their Ascension to their
desired Heights.

. 2. First, Here you would be my T^^^r in Logic, to teach me that the Species
is no^ comprehended in the Genus. And that I transgr^ss the Laws of Discourse,
in supposing that what was spoken against the Non-conformists, as such, was
spoken against the Presbyterian Non-conformists. This is my enclosing and
limiting: As if I had offended by saying, that you say that against Man, which
you say against an Animal as such. And this Talk needs a Confutation? But was
not the Discipline calumniated, which I noted a sufficient explication of your
sense. 2. And here you condensate your Untruths: As first, That there were but
few who were not then tantum non Independants, which the Age you live in knows
to be false. 2. That I intimate, that they are all of a sudden become
Presbyterians, Because Presbyterians are a part of them: so part and whole are
not distinguishable by the Logic of the Gamaliels, whose Instruction I mist
of. When I have often Published, that (besides Scotland, Lancashire, and London)
I knew no great number of Ministers that received the Presbyterian Model: But
almost all those in the County where you live (Worcestershire) Declared, that
they agreed to join in the Practice of so much of Church Discipline, as the
Episcopal Presbyterians and Independents were all agreed in; and on those
grounds to unite for the promoting of the Peoples Instruction and Salvation,
without dividing for the Controverted parts, or laying a greater stress on
them, than there was cause for; yet here you have occasion to talk of the
transmutation of Elements, etc.

. 3. Here you want Conviction still! If so, I will not undertake to Convince
you of any thing in the World which you are unwilling to know. Offer the case
to an uninterested Stranger, and take his Judgment. Tell him this Truth
[Eighteen hundred Ministers are at once forbidden to Preach Christ according to
their Ordination Vow: And when upon that Dedication they had alienanated
themselves from all other ways of Employment and Livelihood, they and their
Families are cast upon Alms in a time of extraordinary poverty, except some of
them that had somewhat of their own: None of all these are put out for
Ignorance, Insufficiency, or any Crime or scandal at all; But for not
subscribing Assent and Consens to all things (without exception) in Three Books
written by men that profess that General Councils are fallible, even in matters
of Faith: And for not declaring, that no man (that vowed it) is obliged to
endeavor in his Place and Calling, any alteration of the present Church
Government (which some think the unsworn as much bound to endeavor, as to
Reform the worst Alehouse or Tavern in the Land: Especially whilst Laymen
Govern by the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution) And for not swearing and
unswearing, etc. as is known, with such like things. These Men thus ejected and
silenced, are forbidden, upon severe Penalties, Ecclesiastical and Corporal, to
speak any thing in depravation of the Government of the Church, the Liturgy or
Ceremonies, and under the penalty of total ruin in this World: To say that any
man is bound by the National Vow to endeavor any alteration as aforesaid. A
Law forbids Printers to Print any unlicensed Book, upon penalty of losing
all the Copies, Paper, and Print; besides, answering for all therein contained.
The Company in London is called together, and constrained (as holding their
Charter by Patent;) to make Laws also among themselves, That any man that
Printeth an unlicensed Book, or Leaf, shall lose his Freedom, and become
incapable of their Trade (and so be utterly undone.) A Conforming Minister (for
ends best known to himself) Writes a Book called a Persuasive to Conformity,
which contains not the twentieth part of the Argument commonly before used by
others; Saravia, Hammond, Downame, Bilson, Burges, Fulwood, etc.) which the
Non-conformists are supposed to have studied: But florid Oratorical, confident
Calumnies, most of the Book importing; an Ignoratio Elenchi: And in this Book
he vehemently urges one man particularly, that never saw him, nor meddled with
him; to publish to the World, An account of the Reasons of his Nonconformity.
This one man tells him, that no Licenser will license it: That he has not
Printed without License, before his importunity since the Act: That some few
Printers through poverty have ventured on a few Sheets, which they could
quickly slip out of the way. But now severity having increased their penalty,
he knows not of one man that will venture so far: That if they would, it will
do him no good, who has so much to say against Conformity, as a few sheets
will not contain; and he knows not of that man living that would Print: And,
that should he do it, he must look for such an Imprisonment as is likely to be
his death: And therefore he thinks that his Time and Life may be more
usefully employed; especially when Experience assures him, that such a Writing
would passionately displease the Prelates of the Church, and such as call for
it. And therefore that he did not ingenuously that clamoured thus for an
account, when he knew that all these Manacles were on our Hands: Yet will not
this man be convinced but his Clamor was reasonable and innocent, because in a
few Sheets that accidentally had an advantage to see the light, (being both for
the Kings and the Churches Government) he met with a few words which he thought
were not to be licensed. And if this were published without License, it was
most long of himself, since his foresaid urgency, no such thing being done
before, nor do I know how to procure the like again.

This is the true Case; And now let any sober Person, Christian, or Heathen,
judge between us, whether any thing could have hardened you into an impossibility
of Conviction, but the great aversness to Humiliation and Repentance, and
selfish inclination to be righteous in your own eyes? No wonder if no man be
justified as Legally innocent, when a bare Confession of a deliberate printed
sin, as visible as a beam in the eye (as Christ meant it) is so hardly obtained
with some men: And (because with what measure men meet, it shall be measured to
them again.) Wonder not if you meet with Auditors like your self: Suppose that
You whose Office is to Preach Men to Repentance, do hear the Perjured, the
Drunkards, Blasphemers, the F^rnicators say, This man is a Rayler, he drops
smarting poison upon us in his Sermons; When we hear him, we deal with a Woolf,
and put our hands into a Hornets nest; bitterness and reviling is his Dialect;
We are innocent, and all that he says does not convince us. What would you say
to such returns? But too many think that it is their work to preach Repentance,
and other men's to Repent. As for Magistrates forbidding faithful Ministers to
preach the Christian Faith, where there are not enough more to do the Work:
Cannot you be content with the Honor, Comfort, and Reward of approving it, and
suffer such to be without it, as refuse it. But when you say [Alas, Church
censures without the Magistrate are but brutum fulmen] I will presume to tell
you; 1. That you seem to me to come near to Blasphemy, to intimate that Christ
ordained so vain a Discipline: What? and yet be the Infallibe Teacher and King
of the Church. But if you think that He did not Institute it, tell us so
plainly, and pretend not more to an unalterable Divine Institution, which all
of us must swear never to endeavor an alteration of. Or if you think that
Christ did institute Church Discipline to be exercised, only when the Sword
will second it; say so, that we may know your mind. And then 2ly, Do you not
make the Apostles and the Primitive Church for above 300 years, to have abused
the World with this brutum fulmen. If you talk of the Apostles power of
seconding it by miraculous Penalties. I answer, 1. It cannot be proved that
they did so ordinarily, but only extraordinarily. 2. All Pastors and Churches
then had not that power, that yet were obliged to exercise Discipline. 3. The
Church for 300 years had not that power every where. 4. And Discipline was to
operate propria virtute, and not only by Miracles. So that you reproach the
Apostles, and all the ancient Churches. 3. Do you not reproach all the ancient
Councils and Canons of those times, as making such a stir in the World about a
brutum fulmen. 4. Do you not reproach Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors, who for a considerable time adjoined not the Sword at all to the
Churches Keys, except to remove some great Patriarch that had influence on the
State; and long after did only force them to a quiet submission to the
Discipline, without the addition of another Penalty, or constraining any to
say, they did repent. How long was it before the Church took a man to be meet
for her Communion in the Lords Supper, that had but rather say, that he
repented, than have all taken from him, and lie in Prison. 5. Do you not here
tell us what you trust to, even the Magistrates Sword alone: And do you not
disgrace your Cause and Function, in telling the World in plain English, that
without the Sword, Prelatical Discipline is but brutum fulmen? What then would
your Church be, should the King leave it only to an equal Toleration with all
other Parties. 6. And do you not highly honor us Non-conformists, that desire
no greater matters, than bare Leave to Exercise Christ's Discipline without the
Sword, on Volunteers; we would have no more. If any have formerly desired more,
we disown it. The Scots indeed had more, but when Cromwell left them but their
Liberty, their Discipline proved not brutum fulmen. And truly I see not how
those few among them that are against the Supremacy of the King, Circa sacra,
if there be any such, can expect any further protection or help by his Sword,
than a bare Toleration. Let us but Preach and use this brutum fulmen, and then
enjoy your Lordships, Honors, and all that is desired. And why are you so
greatly afraid of a brutum fulmen in our hands, when you confess it to be no
better in your own.

. 4. If you cannot see your Contradictions, repeating them will not open your
Eyes. As for Valentine and Orson, and Knights Errant, I give you the honor of
being better acquainted with them, than I am. 2. And next you teach us, that
according to your School, a Question may be false. Well! so let it be, you
shall there have the better also. I knew no more but that some kind of
Questioning might imply a Proposition which is false. But I will not strive
with you, if you are wiser. The Question was, [How many of these Ministers have
little more Learning than the English Books have taught them.] If this Question
be false, false let it be: I cannot make it true, I would I knew what [How
many] fignifieth.

And what could I do more to detect your falsehood, than Name you many that
dwell about you, Seven near you I named. And now (O the power of Innocence and
worth) all those for their Gravity, Sobriety, Learning and Peaceableness, you
have as much esteem for as I can have] And really I hope as bad as they, and
their adversaries judge each other, were they all better acquainted with each
other, the rest would constrain their afflicters themselves to such a praise
and approbation, an inconsiderable number only excepted.

But who else should I name in the County where you live, and near you, Mr.
Joseph Baker, Mr. Benjamin Baxster, Mr. George Hopkins, Mr. Waldern, etc. are
dead. Those living are Mr. Ambrose Sparrey, (your predecessor at Hampton) Mr.
Andrew Tristram, Mr. Kimberley, Mr. Osland, Mr. Badland of Worcester, Mr.
Sergeant, Dr. Richard Morton, Mr. Stephen Baxter, Mr. Richard Dowley, Mr.
Cowper, Mr. Paston, Mr. Read, I cannot remember all. Tell me how many and which
of those you mean. The Elder about you dead, were on our side, Mr. Arthur
Salway, Mr. John Hall, Mr. Thomas Hall, (your next Neighbor) Mr. Smith at
Dudley, Mr. Smith at Stoke, (a younger Man) and not far of Mr. Anthony Burgess,
Mr. Blake, etc. which of these mean you? And what if you can Name one unlearned
Man, in Forty or Fifty. If he be but a mere Nonconformist, and not of some such
Sect, with whom we have not much more affinity than with the Papists (who
conform not, and yet say they are nearer to you than to us) I doubt, that odd
unlearned Man, should he but conform, would be a great ornament to your present
Church. But what course can one better take to silence such Calumnies, and to
convince Posterity of such men's incredibility, than to Name the persons round
about? How many hundred worthy men in London, and a few Counties of my
acquaintance could I Name you. And you say, it is a usual Stratagem with us, to
possess particular persons with an opinion that you detract from them: It is
bad arguing Syllogizare ex particulari] Excellent Logic! He that condemns
the Non-conformists, and the ejected Ministers as mere illiterate, does not
condemn the Individuals, though it came in with an How many.] I never said,
that you condemn them all; but I asked you, as you did me, How many. And is this
like syllogizing ex particulari.] Do you intimate an Accusation against Many of
them; and when I name almost all of that County near you, will you absolve them
all?

2. Next you say [Those I intended have your suffrage] Because I said [I had
rather have a mere English Divine, than an Hebrew or a Syriac Sot. It seems you
are of another mind: A Sot will serve to preach Divinity, and seek men's
salvation, We feel the judgment of more than you; and this was enough to set
you upon blew Aprons, etc. How forgot you Tub-Preachers?

3. And you would fain steal some honor to your self from the Universities as
a Defender of them: O happy advantage! But who accused them? I said [I am grown
of late years to take it for no very great honor to our young Preachers, that
they are acquainted with the Universities.] And you put [It is] for [I take it]
and so I take it still. But late years signifies not [always] nor [our young
Preachers] all [Preachers. Does he that dishonors the University, deserve
honor for being at the University? What young ones you have I know not; but
our young ones that I speak of, do not yet go about to change my mind. Do you
think all those named (though he did not well) by the Gloucester Cobbler Ralph
Wallis, are an honor to the University, or it to them: I still take it for no
very great honor, (I said not none) for any ignorant, idle Lad, to have been
at the University: But sure I obtruded not this judgment on you or any other!
Yet here is place for Fanatics slighting Learning, and the Universities,
Corah's holy Congregation, eclipsing the two Luminaries, Agamemnon, the
Sodomites, and more such stuff. And shall it be the Controversy, whether you
or I have written more for Learning and Universities; and which of us did more
to save them from the Anabaptists and other Fanatics when they were
endangered? The visible Evidences shall decide the Case. You may be more
beholden to the Universities than I; but I have done more than wish their
prosperity as well as you. But Quidvis ex quovis is your way. There went about
Eleven or twelve out of Kederminster Parish and School to the University and
Ministry in my time, and many since: If you please enquire of the difference.

3. And when you tell me, that I deal no better with the Primitive Fathers; I
first ask you, how could you make shift to be ignorant how ill you use the
ancient Presbyters, yea and Bishops of the Church your self? were they not
mostly blew Aprons with you, and such as you disdain for want of Hebrew, etc.
Know you not that the Paucity of Learned Presbyters was the true Cause that the
few that were such, got the place, and honor, and power of Bishops above the
rest: And how few Philosophers turned Christians then? And how long it was
before the Christians had many considerable Schools, much less Universities?
And what men the common Presbyters were; yea, and the Bishops for the most
part? Alexandria by Pantaenus, Clemens and Origin kept up some competent
Learning; Basil, Nazianzen, Nissen, Chrysostom, were fain to go to such as
Libanius, and to Athens; except those forenamed, and Justin Martyr, and
Tertullian before them, and Hierom after: how few either Linguists or
Philosophers had we: And yet do not you account those holy and worthy men, blew
Aprons, such as Ignatius, Polycarpus, Irenaeus, yea and Cyprian, almost all the
Bishops of Rome, Graeg. Neocaesar. Antonius, Ab. Pachomius, Macarius; yea
Epiphanius himself, Ephrem Syrus, Isidore Pelesiota, Ambrose, Philastrius,
Theoph. Alexand, Ruffinus, Gaudentius, Maximus, etc. Besides Simeon Stillita,
and all the holy Famous Monks; yea Augustinus himself, the best rational Divine
had little enough of the Tongues. Their Writings easily prove all this, with
the Historical Descriptions of others concerning them.

I said [I think it so short a Work to read the few brief Writers of the three
first Centuries, as makes it more a dishonor to be ignorant of them, than any
great honor to be acquainted with them.] Instead of this you feign me to say
(It is no great honor to be acquainted with them.) But is this true? Is a
Positive and a Comparative Assertion all one?] But it seems you are not of my
mind: But take it for a greater honor for a Minister to know them, than a
dishonor to be ignorant of them: And who vilified them more then you or I? If
I say, that it is a greater dishonor to be ignorant of the Alphabet, of the
Grammar, of the Gospel, than honor to be acquainted with them, so as to know
what is in them; and you denied this, who vilified them most? Have you no
greater matters than these to exercise your censorious faculty on: You know in
how few months all the Writers of the three first Centuries may be read over. I
pray you here leave every one to his liberty of judging: Among you it shall be
a greater honor to know them, than a dishonor to be ignorant of them: Among
us it shall be a greater dishonor to be ignorant of them, than an honor to
know them. Could you endure any to differ from you, this Comprimize might
serve: But the next time falsify not my words. As for your intimation of some
that cannot read them, do you not believe your self, that its true of ten
Conformists for one Nonconformist: I remember but one Nonconformable Minister
in Worcester shire that was not of an University, and I conjecture that he can
read the Fathers: But by your speeches, what stranger would not take it to be
used by you for their ordinary Character, which you durst not charge on One by
name in all the County that is an Ordained Minister when I provoked you? Does
not this savor of Factious malignity? As to the prepostecus method of Reading
late Writers before the Fa^hers, which you talk of: 1. Papists and Protestants
in all Universities have most usually done so, as far as I can hear. 2. Some
take both together. 3. I suppose that if one Book be read this Month, and
another the next, it is not like to make any great alteration in knowledge
which goes first. 4. Methinks still you cross your own intention, and tell men
that those Non-conformists honor the Fathers more than you; for the most
judicious or necessary Authors should be read with greatest judgment, and
mature judgment is usually the greatest. If you would have Boys learn the
Fathers at School, as they do Tulli's Offices before their larger Catechisms,
they would be lost, as Tulli's Offices usually is: And that which they have
once read, though without judgment, they would think they need not read again.
5. Do you believe that Lads that never read any Method of Theology or
Catechism, could draw a good Catechism or Method out of the Fathers first:
suppose them to have begun at (lem. Romanus, and taken in Dionis. Areop. and
Ignatius, yea, and Martialis Apost. at a venture, true or false, and to have
ended at the Nicene Council, yea or any where short of Augustine: What a Method
think you would they draw up? Yea if they must go further and read all
Chrysostom, with his Enemy Epiphanius, and Augustine with his Hilary, Prosper.
and Fulgentius, how would the Lads reconcile their Doctrinal Disagreements, and
then draw one Method out of both Parties? 6. Do you not condemn the Church of
England, which did not send men first to the Fathers for a Method, but drew
them up Catechism first, and then a Book of Articles, or Confession, and
Nowell's Catechism is Authorized by them, and then an Apology, and a Book of
Homilies, etc. And commands not subscription to the Fathers, but to these:
And commanded no Commentary of the Fathers to be kept in the Churches, but
Erasmus's Paraphrase. 7. And in good sadness, can you that have read both,
believe that the Writings of the Fathers are as methodical, as accurate, as
sound, as full, as useful to form a true Body of Theology in the Mind, as the
later Writers are? Can you believe this? Is there any thing among them to these
uses, like Melancthon's Loci Communes, Tzegedines Tables, Calvin's Inst.
Polanus, Ludov. Crocius, Georgius, Sohnius, Amesius, Theses Salmuenses, Synops.
Theol. Leidensium, Camero, etc. Or if you had rather like Arminius, Episcopius,
Dr. Hammond, especially like Bishop Andrews, Dr. Field, Bishop Davenant, etc.
Are the best of their Practical Writings, even Macarius, Ephrem Syrus, etc.
Comparable to abundance used now: Whether such Non-conformists as Hildersham,
Perkins, Rogers, Buroughs, etc. or such Conformists, as Sibbes, Preston,
Gurnal, the Practice of Piety, Hammond, etc. Do you think that the surest and
readiest way for Youth to come to understand and believe the Doctrine of the
Trinity, of the Godhead of Christ and the Holy Ghost; of the Hypostatical
Union, of the twofold Nature and Will of Christ, etc. is to read first, all the
first Writers that say little or nothing of them, and those that say much amiss
of some of them; and then to read all the odious Wars at the Ephesine Council,
at the Councils of Arimin. Sermium, and many more. And to read all the
contentious Writings hereabout, of Cyril Alexand, Theodoret, Epiphanius, and
down to Damascene. Is not one Joshua Placaeus pro deitate Christi, worth all
that ever was then wrote? I confess above all their Subjects, the times engaged
them in the largest Defenses of the Christian Religion against the Heathens; In
which Eusebius. in Praeparat. and Demonstrate. Evang. and Augustine have done
well: But so far short of what is done of late by Grotius, du Plessis, Vander
Meulin, Camero, yea Savonarola, Vives, and many more; as that all laid
together, I am not for your Method. Take out but Justin, Tertullian, and
Cyprian, in the three first Centuries, and Basil Nazianz. Nyssen, Hierom, and
Chrysostom, and Augustine after, and I will not tell you what you will leave us.
If Origin must be taken in, let them first fight it out to decide it whether he
be a Hererick: For Halloix and our Conforming Originists tell us, that Theoph.
Alexand. and Epiphanius, ended not the Controversy by the banishment of
Chrisostom. 8. And if all the Naevi of the ancient Fathers, were in our modern
Divines, which not only Scultetus and other Protestants have gathered, but even
Baronius, Sixtus Senensis, Possevine, Bellarmine, etc. What would you call
them? What Heretics should we be? Was there ever so great Error charged on any
one of the 1800 Ministers for their silencing, as is visible in Dionys.
Constitut. and Can. Apostol. Irenaeus, Clem. Alex. Tatianus, Arnebius,
Lactantius, etc. But I forgot how much Dalaeus de usu Patr. has said more on
this Subject. If we had to do with Men that could let men live by them, that
obey them not, even in the method of their Studies, this much also might
compremise this difference. You shall set your Pupils first to read all the
Fathers, and make out of them such a Religion as they are able, or perhaps too
many: (But then you must not be their Collector as you teach them; For it is as
good to take a Method from a Book, as from your Mouth:) And We will teach Ours
first to understand the Catechism, Ursine, Polanus, Amesius, etc. with the
Scriptures, and to read the Fathers in order, when they have judgment to know
how to use them, and let the issue show which is the wiser way. But I pray you
while you read the Fathers to your Scholars, call them not blew Aprons, nor
Tub-Preachers, nor Fanatics, as out as you find them to have wanted the
Languages, or Academical Education, lest it hinder your success.

But I think all this quarrel with the Method of our Studies, is for the
Interest of Diocesan Prelacy; Therefore to save us any more trouble, we will
refer all that Controversy to your own Ignatius alone, (who determines, That
in every Church there is one Altar, and one Bishop, with his Presbyters and
Deacons) and with that we are content. In your Page 6, to keep your wont; 1.
You feign me to say, that which I tell you is objected to me by others. 2. You
falsely feign me to allow the Conformists to have some Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac,
and Arabic, my very mention of which words you out lay hold on, as an Honor
granted to your ^^^^: But it is all a false supposition, I never ap^roved hofe
words to the Conformists: I only told you, that (valuing Matter before Words) I
(...) the Church had men that speak sound Doctrine in an apt and serious
manner, for bringing Sinners to repentance in English, than such as can lace an
insipid, empty, senceless Discourse, with some shreds of Chaldee, Syriac, or
Arabic: and though I could wish that all the Ministers of Christ had all
Accomplishments fit even for the adorning of their ^acred Work; yet I had
rather hear a mere English Divine, than an Hebrew or a Syriac Sot.] You put me
to the troublesome repeating of my words, by your falsification. I did not
mention Conformists at all, nor had any thought of appropriating these Passages
to them any more than others: But only to tell you, that be he Conformist on
Nonconformist, if like Augustine, Ambrose, etc. he had sound Divinity without
the Languages now mentioned, I could better bear with him, than with one
(whoever) that had Words for Ostentation without Sense; and to free you from
all suspicion of Injury, I never heard one of the young Conformists which I
mention, make any ostentation or credible signification of his skill in any one
of those Tongues: Nor do I remember but exceeding few Conformists in England of
my acquaintance, that I will accuse or suspect of any such skill: But having a
Lad in my house not long ago come from School, who has some acquaintance in
all these Languages, and as many more, who I assure you is too young to be a
Conformable Preacher, or Divine, he being next me, suggested the Matter of my
Comparison, when you vilified I know not whom (some unnamed) Non-conformists,
for knowing little more than English Books can teach them. One Pressick a
Sadler in Leverpool has written That against some of your Sect in English,
which all their Languages will hardly enable them to Confute: And I hear but
few of you that in real knowledge, are much more Angelical than Aquinas, subtle
than Scotus, profound than Bradwardine, etc. when yet they and their
Scholastic Tribe were commonly very sorry Linguists. But its needful that I
entreat you, that you affirm me not to have called them all Non-conformist^,
because I name them in this Comparison.

As for the loads of Dirt that you say I cast, and your saying, that you see
(you should have said feel) that its difficult to forbear reproach toward them
from whom we differ.] I answer; 1. And I see that its no wonder if that Tribe
who think themselves persecuted, when they may not persecute and silence
others, do also think themselves reproached, when others are justly vindicated
from their reproach. 2. But its hard, that as Transubstantiation must be an
Article of some men's Faith; so we also must be obliged to believe, that all our
Senses and Experience are deceived: And that he that walks in the Frost is a
reproach for saying it is cold, because another affirms that the Summer is
colder, because of now and then a rainy day. Alas, are so many great
Chappelries, and many Parish Churches in several parts of the Land, utterly
without any Minister at all; Are so many others so supplied (yea so many
hundreds) as the Lovers of Souls do groan and weep for; and must we neither see
nor feel it? But, Sir, if we must not feel it to you, let us feel it to God,
that we may feelingly and not formally pray him to send forth more and better
Laborers into his Harvest. For my part, I seriously profess, that if the
Gospel be but better Preached, and the Souls of all the Parishes in the Three
Kingdoms better instructed for their Salvation, without us, than with us, I
will never more speak for a Liberty to Preach, much less desire a Farthing of
the Maintenance.

But, Sir, if you talk in Print as you do to me in private Letters, you might
make strangers of your Mind; But to the People of the present Age, that see,
that hear, that know the Persons, your words will be all vain: You may call
them the Children of Hell for not believing you, but men are so naturally
sensible, that your Anger will not change them near London, and in it I think
are the worthiest Conformists in the Land (proportionably) And yet how many
places not far off it, feel what I say. A worthy Learned, judicious, peaceable
Divine (bred up in one of the next Parishes to you awhile) Mr. John Warren, is
silenced at a great Town, Hatfield Broadoak in the Bishop of London's
Presentation: Thus he has long lived and done much good, yet since 1662 that
he was silenced, the Place has been void many years, because the Maintenance
is small; and there must be none at all, rather than such a one as He. But you
call this casting Dirt too: The starved Souls must not take on them to feel
their Case; And to be past feeling in such cases, is a state that men are prone
to of themselves; and need no Preachers to help them to be indifferent in.
Well! Souls must be starved, or not be humble. [How can we prefer others before
our selves] unless we will be content that those for whom Christ died be
neglected, and Ignorance set up to teach men knowledge, and the Ungodly to
teach them Godliness. But as in Natune, so in Grace there is a Principle that
will not suffer men by Words to be brought to take Famine for Food, nor saying
a dry Lesson, for teaching men the Way to Heaven: Blessed be God that has
possessed all renewed Christians with a new Nature, which differenceth the
Chaff from the Wheat, and words from real worth and substance. But you heard a
Preacher say, That he thanked God he never heard a Preacher, but he could get
something by him. Answer, And I also am of Mr. G. Herbert's mind, Church Porch,
p. 15. [If all want sense, God takes a Text and preaches Patience.] But for
all that, I will not by my Approbation contract the Guilt of such Preachers,
nor of those that set them up, and would have others silenced and calumniated,
and then plead Humility for the valuing of these. Every Text that is preached
on, is eaifying; and I hope by bare reading it we may be edified: And in
Muscovy where all Preaching is put down for fear of Treason, 1671. and yet now
by Treason they are just between Life and Death) they seem to have great
advantage in the using of your Argument, to tell them that would have
Preaching, that Humility should teach them to esteem the Readers labor above
their own. And truly Basil and Chrysostom's Sermons which they read, are better
than the Sermons in very many Churches in this Land, (which you that honor the
Fathers its like will not deny:) But cheat not your self so as to dream that we
are the Assailants, when we meddle not with you but by way of Comparison, when
urged to it in our own defense. But because Prejudice, and Factious passages,
yellow Jaundices, a Party, etc. are here accused, I could almost find in my
heart to send you a Copy of some of the Sermons that I have lately heard; But
you would but pretend that this were some rare unusual thing. O let the World
take heed what History they believe; I have as much ado to persuade you, that
many Churches are left in a case which calls for Tears, as I have to persuade
Bagshaw and others on the other extreme, that any of them have worthy or
tolerable men: When yet many hundred thousand Persons have Sense, Reason, and
Experience to decide the Case. But these ten years experience, and much more,
have taught me, not hastily to believe a Faction, though in a matter where the
common sense is Judge: for Faction is one of the greatest Liars in the world.

But you say [Just so did Martin Marprelate traduce the regular Clergies.
Answer, Just so, is just untruly spoken by you. As well may the Papists say to
the Lutherans, Just so did the Heriticks of old: Rather just so did Christ tell
some men, That they took away the Key of Knowledge, and would neither enter,
nor suffer others. And just so he told them, That if the blind lead the blind,
both will fall into the Ditch. One of the last Sermons I heard, was on
[Servants obey your Masters in all things:] and our own Servants being almost
wholly past by, it was applied to show, That we are Servants to the Bishops,
and must obey them in all things: As if subjection without servitude had not
been enough. One of the next before it, was to prove, That the Church may
appoint Holy Days, because Easter Day (which is the Lord's Day) is a Holy Day of
the Churches appointment: When most of the people had more need to have been
taught the Cathechistical Principles, and, what they did when they were
Baptized. I can name you the Man (and Place) that from the Title of John's
Epistle [To the elect Lady] proved undeniably that then there were Lord
Bishops, because an Elect Lady relates to an Elect Lord, and there are no
Elect Lords, but Elect Lord Bishops. And if such as you are pleased to approve
of the silencing of many hundreds, yea of such as Amesius, Cartwright,
Greenham, Hildersham, John Rogers, Egerton, Dod, Bradshaw, Rob. Parker, Paget,
Hering, etc. (O what men) and the setting up of such as These, or Readers in
their stead, all is salved by telling us, that we must think others better than
our selves, and that we may profit by all. And if God did work by all alike,
sense or nonsense, and made as much use of the Ignorant and Ungodly to procure
Knowledge and Godliness in the world, I would say as you. I believe with K.
James they have an ill Spirit, that recount Grievances to make themselves
popular; (I suppose Sir Edw. Sands named by you, was one he meant so ill do
your Allegations agree) But I will not therefore consent to their Guilt that
make grievances, and then declaim against such Popularity. They please not God
and are contrary to all men's forbidding us to Preach to the Gentiles that they
might be saved, for Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, was this Popular
declaiming against grievances? Deny your Children Food and Raiment, and then
call them such Popular declaimers.

Again you snatch at your former self-deceiving fiction, [did these Hebrew
Children and Ara bick Lads, come out of your School, they should have been
stroaked for Precious Youthes] Answer, How pleaseing to you is a selfmade
Cheat. Realy Sir, I know not one such Lad that is a Conformist, your urgency
may possibly provoke me to, send you if it please you, some of our homebred
Fruits, to tell you whence I fetched my comparison. 1. (when you well mourn for
your Alehouses Sots, and yet say, that all our 1800 are not free) your
Confession on one part is constrained, your Accusation on the other side I
think is a Calumny. 1. Because no one of all the Non-conformists was cast out
for Drunkenness, but many on the other side were cast out upon Accusation of
that sin, seconded by Oaths, (how just I must not presume to say) 2. I that
know the Non-conformists better than you, know not one Drunkard amongst them
all in England. 3. I Challenge you to Name one of all the Ministers I Named to
you, or any other in the County of Worcester where you live.

Next, (Page 7.) you pretend that I Change my judgment in valuing the Common
Prayer and Homilies,] Answer, all false still, no change at all. I ever valued
the Common Prayer and Homilies much before such Preaching as I described to
you. And realy I think that the Non conformists much more value the Homilies,
than the Conformists do.

Next, I am glad that you disclaim the proving it of any of our Non-conformists
in England, that he was silenced for Insufficiency. But was this impertinent to
one that intimated such Charges of unlearnedness as you did. But, you say it is
of another Nature (the reason of our silence) that we do not give security to
Authority: that we will Preach up no more Wars, Answer, I summon your
Conscience to justify you silencing of so many and such, in the necessity of so
many Thousand Souls, one moment after death, upon the Charge now given us on
these reasons, 1. I told you, and you could not deny it, that if you leave out
your Oath and Subscription to the Bishops and Chancellors, with the Vast
Assent, and Consent, few Non-conformists will refuse the renuncation mentioned
by you about Wars. Yet still have you that front to ^ay it upon this. The many
that took the Oxford Oath upon this, and the more that were ready to take it,
if Judge Keeling had not presently and openly declared it to be a renunciation
of the National Vow. 2. I again provoke you to prove that there is one
Non-conformable Minister of Ten or Twenty, that ever was proved, or can be, to
have meddled with the War against the King, 3. you read and cite my late
Writing, wherein I say (Page 51. Differ. of the Pow of Mag. and Past. I ascribe
all that power to Kings which is given them by any Text of Scripture or
acknowledged by any Council General, or Provincial, or by any Public
Authentic Confession of any Christian Church, either Protestant, Greek, or
Papist, that ever I yet saw.) And is all this Insufficient to a Liberty to
Preach Christ, to ignorant Souls, must Protestants, Greeks, and Papists, be all
silenced for want of Loyalty? I will subscribe to the utmost, that which any of
their Confessions give to Kings, 4. The Non-conformists, (as far as I am
acquainted with them, have still been ready in express terms to promise never
to meddle in any War against the King; Nay to promise to employ their interest,
and labor to prvent it. I^ this would serve they should not be silenced, Are
such as Hooker and Bilson thought worthy of Honor, and are these Principles of
ours so much less security against War, as to leave us on that account
incapable to Preach. Let but reason and humility be judge of your Accusation
and Cause. And here to shame your self, yet more Marchiaement Need-hams Book,
is instanced in. A Man that is no Minister but a Physician: who in those days
Wrote against us Non-conformists, and against my self by Name, when the
generality of the now silenced Non-conformists, and (excluding the Sectaries)
stood, out refusing for the most part the engagement whom the Royalists of my
vicinity took it. This Man that Wrote against me, and since the Kings return,
has welcomed him in florid Poems: is instanced in to tell Men what the
Nonconformists are, and why they are silenced. Truly Sir I conjecture you are a
Stranger to them, (as abundance of the Prelatists are) though you lived in
England, and have dwelt somewhere where you knew but some Giddy Sectaries, and
judge by them of those you knew not. And here (Page 8.) I am glad that you deny
not, that the worst among us are received, if they do but conform, which
shows for what crime we are kept out. And for your exclamation against us
that come not in, you would be impatient if I should but describe your dealing,
What if you lived under in such a power of Usurpers as would say [if all the
Ministers in Germany Holland etc. will under their hands, or delibrately
profess, that no one in the Kingdom is bound by the Oath of Supremacy or
Allegiance, and promise that he will never endeavor the reformation of any
Corruption in Religion, but will Assent and Consent to every Word in the
Interim, and will use Exorcism, etc. they shall have leave to Preach else they
shall all be silenced and deprived of all Ministerial Liberty and maintenance.]
And the^ Cassander should have told them, that they shu^ out themselves if they
come not in. I say not that our Case is the same with this. I know it is not
But Cassander dealt more Heartily than you do Is there any thing that could be
imposed, that would make you a Nonconformist? If there be, might non any Man
talk to you at such rates, even tie your Legs, and entreat you to go: or
blindfold you, and say, read who struck you.

. 6. What need you more to the present Case, when you say that there is never a
Cherubim to hinder them, than this, that though it be no sin in your Opinion,
it is a heinous sin in theirs.? And will your Opinion prove it, where we search
as diligently as you do to know the truth: If we be not as good as you, you may
allow us to love our selves as well. Tell me what time of any Usurpation had
such impositions, which the main Body of the present Conformists then in being,
did not conform or submit to, or which they refused to the Cost of all their
Church maintenance (for the liberty of Preaching, too many of them could easily
forego it) I know that many were turned out by others, that would gladly have
conformed, if that would but have been accepted. I knew not three Men in the
three Counties about me, that would not then have conformed, if that would have
kept them in their livings. If there were more unknown to me there or
elsewhere, I would but have asked those men, whether it was a sin that was
imposed on them: And if so, whether it would have prevailed with them if one
had done as you, and told them that they kept out themselves, and that no
Cherubin stood in the way, and how hainously they sinned in forsaking their
Calling. It seems by your Complaint of the Tryers (men that I had nothing to do
with) that either you did Conform then (or would have done, if they had not
refused you:) They say you did Conform. I am sure that most of my Acquaintance
that were sequestered, would have Conformed to have kept their Livings: But if
we be of another mind now, when Declarations, Subscriptions, Oaths, and
Practices are imposed on us; which -- what would you have us to do? Our
manifold Interests obliges us to judge them lawful if we could: We lose as
much by not Conforming, as most of you get by Conforming. Must we judge all
lawful, because our Guides do so? How far will that hold? Will it hold in
Italy, or in France, or in Denmark; or formerly in Scotland if you had lived
there? He that must take all for good, which another calls so, must know who
it is, that is so far to be trusted on; especially of those that renounce
Infallibility.

2. The Irony was palpable enough to have prevented your Fancy, that I give up
the Cause, scil by confessing the Crime that we sought to save Souls, and that
we did eat bread. A little will encourage you sometimes to great Conclusions.

. 7. P. 9. Here you have many things to say, to prove that men that came into
Sequestrations, either sought not, or procured the good of Souls: But O! first
remember, that if that were true, yet all those (or near all) were turned out
of their Sequestrations before the silencing Bartholomew Day, 1662. 2. Do you
think that it had been as consistent with the good of Souls, that they had for
sixteen years been all untaught, and left without any Ministers, or Public
Worship, rather than any should have succeeded the ejected. 3. If our Preaching
did no good to Souls, why should you think that yours does any? If you preach
the same Gospel, why should you think so well of your own works above other
men's? And if yours also do no good, why do men pay their Tithes, and trouble
themselves to hear such as do but trouble the World. 4. Do you not Conspire
with the Quakers that falsely cried out that our Ministry did not profit men;
and with the Levellers, that would have taken down the Ministry as
unprofitable. 5. But O! what an attempt you make to prove how little History is
credible, to teach men to say, How know we that Hegisyppus, that Eusebius, that
Socrates, that Epiphanius say true, when such men as should be the Preachers of
Truth, can say what they do of common or notorious matters of Fact; yea and
confidently stand to it, to the face of that Age which knows that they speak
falsely. 1. Who are more competent Judges, whether men received any good by
Christ's Gospel which we preached you or they. Do you know the Hearts and Lives
of many hundred thousands better than they do themselves: I know many are
deceived with selfflattery, but are you that are a stranger to their hearts and
them, the fittest Judges. Do you better know what Faith, Hope and Love what
Repentance and Obedience the Gospel has produced. To instance among strangers,
is the way of darkness or evasion; I may speak boldliest where I know best. Ask
the People of Kederminster, whether in that time they received any good by the
Gospel: Know you not, that when some such did but preach to them at the rates
you now talk, it so alienated their minds from Prelacy and Conformity, who
before were not so averse thereto, as that they have put it past my power to
reconcile them so far to them as I am reconciled my self; and were not my
interest very great in them, and their Preacher very honest, I should not get
them to come to Church: Such good the Spirit of Envy and Faction does in the
World, while it pretends to heal the hurt that others do. 2. Let the effects
that are visible be judge; if places that abounded with Rioting, Drunkenness,
Ignorance, and Ungodliness, do now search the Scriptures and meditate with
delight in the Law of God, and constantly worship him, and their Families call
upon his Name, if they live soberly, righteously, and godly, forsaking the
former lusts of their ignorance, and seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and live in charity and peace; will it prove that these People
are never the better, because Faction causes a stranger to tell them so. But
you say [They were not the Souls of every Soil, such as did inhabit poor
Villages, but such as dwell in fattest Parsonages, or else in great Towns,
where these men who were most for the good of Souls, might act their parts,
etc.] Answer. Farwell the credit of all History, if there be no truer
Historians: (But how shall Posterity know who they are?) Is there an
Englishman that can be ignorant that the endeavor then was that no Church
might be unsupplied. There is no talking a far off, was not Mr. Cowper at
Moseley Chapel near you, Mr. Rock at Rowley, Mr. Tristram at Clents, Mr.
Walderne at Broom, Mr. Baldwin at Chadsley, Mr. Sergeant at Stone, Mr. Baldwin
at Wolverley, my Assistant at Mitton Chapel, Mr. Lovel at Alveley, etc. Does
not all the Country about you know, that this which you say is false: And are
you then to be believed in difficult moral Cases of Duty or Sin, who deny
public fact which all the Country about you knows. Go into any one of these
Churches, and tell them that these men were never their Preachers, and try
whether you can convert them to believe you. 2. But that the great Towns (which
commonly had least Maintenance) should be first provided for: That Tribe of Men
should not deny, who hold that none but Cities of old had Churches and Bishops,
nor should have Bishops to this day. Nor should they teach Enemies to say,
These Bishops settled themselves only in the great Cities to act their parts
with most popularity. Is that the reason of your remove to Hampton. 3. But what
were the parts they had to act? Their work it self is the best evidence of
that. Let the two Printed Agreements of the Worcestershire Ministers, one for
Discipline, and one for Catechizing and personal instruction, with my Reformed
Pastor, be a standing Witness to Posterity, what the Countries Ministers work
was, against all factious Calumny: We lived not idle; not one of a multitude
had an hundred pounds a year Maintenance, that I could know of. In my great
place (of Sequestration) mine was less, when I was elsewhere often offered above
Three hundred pounds; we preached twice or thrice a week, and rarely meddled
with any Controversies, except against the Quakers, and Anabaptists, when they
came to trouble the Churches: We spent half two clays a week in Conference with
each Family, to Catechize them, and help them to understand the Catechism, and
to prepare them for another World. Besides all our Labor of Discipline; to
bring the Scandalous to Repentance, and all the other Offices of our places. In
the last Leaf of my [Uiversal Concord] the practice of the Church where I lived
is recited. This was the Part we acted for our selves. 2. But you add [What
good was done to Souls by these Intruders, late Posterity will find, etc.
Answer, 1. I think that the present Age that has the Experience may better
know than Posterity, unless they have truer Historians than you. 2. Many
thousand Souls already in Heaven, and many thousand more yet on Earth, that
were brought to the true knowledge of God and themselves, by the Labors of
such Ministers, will be their Witness what good they did. But the Stranger
meddleth not with their Joys. 3. If you impute to them either the Errors or
Work of Sectaries, whom they were the principal means of suppressing, and whom
they did much more against than you: Or yet the Works of the Rebellious
Soldiers, that pulled down Powers, and set up themselves; you will but show
your malignity and unrighteousness: If you do not, your Accusation signifies
nothing. If you mean that the People will not be brought to like silencing of
Prelates better than such Preachers; and this is the breach which the
skilfullest of you cannot heal, I am of your mind: And the Names of Intrusion
and Schism will not serve to change their Minds. As for Intrusion, I knew very
few such in those days that ever came to a place before they were sought to and
entreated; And I know very few now that are not Seekers. 3. Your next, against
Preaching down Authority and Plundering other men's Livings to save Souls,
shows more what you are, than what they did: When you know that I have
provoked you to name one of ten or twenty that ever preached down Authority, or
meddled with Arms; Most coming out of the Universities after the Wars, and many
never meddling with them (though several Conformists did.) And sure the Party
is not to be judged or denominated by a tenth or twentieth part. I named many
men to you in the former Paper, and in this: Enquire how few of all those ever
meddled with Arms. 2. And those few that did, almost all did it before they
came into Sequestrations, and many never did so after; and thought it had been
Authority which they had stood for: And as he that erreth in Medicine upon the
judgment of a College of Physicians, so he that erreth in Law upon the
judgment of a Parliament, is more pardonable than some other men, and may again
be capable of Preaching the Gospel, or else such should not now be readmitted.
3. And, if eating the Bread of Preachers be it you call plundring other men's
livings, their Error if it were one, had these excuses, that they thought that
the Tithes had been first devoted to God, and that he was the first proprietor,
and that they were determinately devoted to him for this use, to maintain a
lawful Minister there to officiate: and they thought that when the then Ruling
Parliament had cast out some under the Notion of Insufficient and Scandalous,
it was lawful nevertheless for others to keep up a Church, and teaching, and
Worship of God, and therefore to Eat the Dedicated Bread. And as for the
turning out of any for the Kings Cause, that were not utterly Insufficient or
Drunkards, or such like, we Printed our judgment against it; and many would not
succeed such men, which gave advantage to some that were Sectarians to succeed
them? And what got the People by that scruple? As for the fifth part, you know
it was ordinarily paid, (and now nothing) and, Mr. Lea's Book made no
alteration. Your talk of meddling with Temporals, in ordine ad spiritualia, is a
mere impertinency. But if you ask Bishops, and Chancellors, whether it be
lawful to meddle with spiritual things, in ordine ad temporalia, (yea and
Priests too) it will be a seasonable question, (if set home.) I am glad to read
that they did but threaten to silence you. By which I perceived you were not
then so scrupulous as to lose all, to escape Conformity to those times. And I
also was threatened to be silenced as well as you: and virtually sequestered by
an Ordor against such as would not keep their Fasts, and Thanksgivings, and
that spoke against their Authority (which I openly did) and that would not take
the Engagement: and yet I was never silenced by them, (but only as to one
Assize Sermon,) that work being fitter for Men, whose proper Office it is, and
that jure divino. And my life was frequently threatened by the Soldiers, as
well as yours. But I must [tell you truly, should I reassume my Chair, would I
continue in this Courteous Mood.] Ans. You have proved already, that a Question
may be false, may you not as easily prove that it may be Malignant, 1. What is
my Chair? Had I any but the Pulpit, or Reading place, at Kederminster, 2. Why
do you question my Courtesy, when I both Printed my desires and reasons,
against hindering any worthy Men from Preaching the Gospel, upon pretense of the
Cause of the King or Prelacy heretofore, and when I have in Three or Four Books
this very Year, maintained the same Impartiality and Principles. Yea most of
all my Writings and Preaching for 25 Years have been much against Faction: and
for the Union, Concord, and Concurrence of all Ministers and Christians, who
are agreed but in Christianity it self, and the Essentials of Church Communion,
in carrying on Gods Work with mutual forbearance. And when I never had a hand
in putting any such men out, and have kept many of your Party in: What room
after this for such a Question? Next you carp at me, for telling you (in
reputation of your Calumnies by a Comparison) what Ministers were in my time,
and in the Places where I lived: You [marvel at my Praecox ingenium, that could
judge before I was ten years old, Who were ignorant, Who learned Preachers: You
fear it is still the greatest part of some men's Devotion to censure the Parts
and Gifts of the Preacher.] Answer, O what relief are poor Souls like to have
from such uncompassionate Shepherds! I conjecture you believe me not, I will do
what I can to cure you. But remember, I open not my Fathers Nakedness, while I
speak nothing but what Congregations saw and heard; and that to you alone now
in secret, and that upon your urgency. I was not bred in Wales nor Ireland, but
first in Shropshire. At six and seven years old my first Master was a Reader,
never at University, and Preached once a Month: I name him not, because he was
as^ied to me, and mended. My next Master Mr. Heyward was a Layman, publicly
read the Common Prayer, but never Preached, but proved after an honest Layman,
though no Scholar. My next Master, Mr. Cope, Read and never Preached. My next
Master, Mr. Yale, B. D. Preached once a Month, and drank himself, Wife and
Children, to be stark Beggars. These at Rowton: And still note that we had no
other. I then came to live at Eaton Constantine; the Vicar of the Parish, Mr.
Richard Wolley, never Preached: The Parson of the Town, Sir William Rogers,
above fourscore, had two Livings, and never Preached in his life, as was said:
When his Eyesight failed him, he said Common Prayer by Memory; and John Colly
a Day-labourer, one year, and Thomas Gaynam a Tailor, another year read the
Scriptures, but none Preached. Having two Places, when he was absent, his
Curate was first, his Son Francis Rogers, rarely if ever Preached; a famous
Stage Player: (One of his Sports was on the open Stage, to let his Pudenda
nudata per restem laceratam quasi neglecta se ostentare ad risum populi
movendum. His next Curate, my Master John Rogers (his Grandchild) was
unlearned and never Preached. His next Curate, Richard Bathoe, was a Lawyers
Clerk, broken by drinking, who was wont, to our smart, to let us know when he
was drunk; and never Preached there but once, which was in my hearing when he
was drunk, as I told you: If he be not lately dead, he is yet a Minister very
near you at Patshill. In the same Village another Neighbors Son turned Priest,
Mr. Thomas Rock, who being detected to be vicious, and have forged Orders,
fled: So much for our Parish (Leighton.) The next Eastward, Bildwas, had a
Minister that never Preached; nor could I learn that ever they had before a
Preacher since the Reformation. The next to that was Madeley, whose Minister
preached not, and was as famous for Debauchery, as the Madmen of Madeley for
Folly. On the other side us, the next Church Cressage had no Preaching. The
next Kenley, had Mr. Bennet a Reading Curate, that Preached not. Mr. Bent at
Harley; my Kinsman Mr. Wood, B. D. at Cund, seldom: And the same I may say of
too many other Places round about us. At Kederminster Mr. Dance Preached (as
some called it) once a Quarter, or Half-year: Mr. Turner at Mitton, sometime
(when sober) once a day, of whom I told you, that I knew by Examination, his
intolerable Ignorance of the Creed. At Dowles our foresaid Sir William Rogers
was Parson. In the two Chapels in the Rock Parish (which I confess had small
Maintenance) one Reading Curate made Ropes for his living, and another cut
Faggots. I will add no more; and this is only private to your self: to excuse
my self and the poor people, who you think [place our Devotion in judging of
the Ministers Parts.] Alas, poor Souls! Into such hands are you fallen: The
Lord be more merciful to you, than such Pastors; who if for Bread, they give
you a Stone, will reproach you as Censurers of your Teachers, if you find
fault: And when the first Work needful to save Sinners, is to awaken them to a
care of their own Souls, and a love to Teaching; some men are angry with them,
if they will care whether they are taught or untaught. Of all Merchandise, I
love not making Merchandise of Souls. But I pray you dream not, that I take all
the old Ministry for such as these? I know there are many excellent men: But I
think the present Non-conformists as fit for the Sacred Office as these; (Is
that presumption?)

. 10. p. 10. I thank you for your transitions and purposed brevity: To requite
you; 1. Your first Paragraph does but say in effect, 1. That you untruly
suppose me to meddle with the Controversy, which I do but wish for leave to
meddle with. 2. And that you think many things good, which I think to be stark
naught. But because you call me so often to Dispute the main Controversy, I tell
you once, that it is disingeniously done, still in Print and Writing to call
for more, as if we had never done any thing in it, while our Printed Books lie
by you unanswered. Answer my Fifth Dispute of Church Government, 1. In the
Point of Prelacy, 2. Of Reordination, 3. Of Impositions; and then call out for
more when you have done: Or if you have more time, Answer Gersom-Bucer, de
Gubernat. Eccles. Baine's, Diocesanes Trial, Robert Parker de Polit. Eccles.
and Blondel de Episcopis, where Dr. Hammond left at the entrance. One quarter
of the Reasons of our Nonconformity, is contained in these Books; and some are
in Ames his fresh Suit, and Nicols and Bradshaw; but the most are upon a new
account, which our Fathers were not put upon.

2. I am ashamed to Read a Preacher, a Writer, an Accuser of the afflicted, to
talk of the dreadful subject of Oaths so poorly as you do. Though I tell you,
I will not dispute this Point with you without a License from Authority, I will
say, 1. That when you say [Take an unlawful Oath in what sense you please, and
will there be much need of absolution.] You should not so confusedly have Named
an Unlawful Oath. Remember that you have proved against me, that a Question
may be false. And that an Indefinite in renecessaria, or thus unlimitedly
delivered, goes for an Universal: an Oath is unlawful, 1. Quoad actum
imponendi, 2. Quoad actum jurandi, 3. Quoad materiam juratam. If the Materia
Jurata be Lawful, do you think that the unlawfulness of the other two, do
leave no need of an Absolution? 1. What if a Thief force me to swear Allegiance
to the King, or to swear to do some Duty, does it not add a Second bond? Or
what if I vowed without the Command of any power? 2. What if I sinned in making
a Vow, or Oath, by taking it from a Usurper* or without just Cause, or
unreasonably, or to an ill end, etc. If the Matter be good, does it not then
bind me. And de materia, what if one Article or many be bad and another good,
does the Neighborhood of the bad, disoblige me from the good. If so, it is but
inserting some bad Clauses, and men may be bound by no Oaths or Vows, as in the
former Case. It is but swearing sinfully, to an ill end, etc. and never be
obliged. But if this be your Divinity about Oaths and Perjury, you have no
cause to censure them so deeply that swear not as quick and deep as you. Your
next Question is, Must the sense of an Oath be measured by him that receives
it, or from the Authority and Intention of those that im^ose it. Answer, Still
worse and worse: what Confusion is here? Who knows whether by ^easuring the
sense, you mean as to the taking of the ^ath, or as to the Obligation of it
when taken. Your Must seems to speak of both. But 1. He that takes an Oath
from one in lawful Authority, ^r from an Equal, is bound to take it in the
sense ^f the Imposer or Requirer, whom we would sa^isfie. 2. He that takes an
Oath from a Thief ^r Murderer, some Casuists say, (Is bound not ^o lie to hide
his sense, but) may take it in a sense ^ifferent from the Imposers, when the
plain words ^ill bear it without a Lie. As if a Thief or Tray^r should force
the King to swear that he will do ^his or that, which has an equivocal Name;
If ^he Traytor's sense be not according to the Com^oner use, or defaniosiore
analega^o, but the King's, they think that the King is not bound to wear in his
sense, though yet he may be bound ^o swear, to save his life. 3. But our Case
is only ^e obligatione juramenti praestandi: If a man that ^as bound to take
the Oath in a Usurpers sense, shall either mistake the Usurpers sense, or shall
^ke it in another sense, as supposing that he is not ^ound to the Usurpers; I
say, that this man if ^e make this A VOW to God, and not only an ^ath to Man,
is bound to keep it in the sense he ^ok it in, if it were materially lawful. If
I Vow to ^ive so much to a Minister of Christ, and he that ^rced me to it meant
a Mass Priest, and I mistook ^im, and meant a true Minister; I am bound by ^y
Vow to give it him. If your confused Question suppose the contrary, then a
man's Vows to God are all null, if he that forced him to it were of another
sense. A mere Oath to confirm a Contract to a man, is to be interpreted by the
Contract, being but an Obligation to perform it; yea, and may be remitted by
the man that will remit his Right. But in a Vow, God and Man are the Parties;
and God's sense imposing, and Man's sense intending in the Vow, are each
obliging: So that if ten men use the same words in Vowing, in ten several
senses, they are ten several Vows, and all oblige if materially lawful. And
therefore when you say, that the Vow was commanded by Usurpers, and when I know
not the sense of one that vowed, let him that will say of Millions, that they
are not bound, no not when they vow against Schism, and Profaneness. But you
cite here a Non conformist against me, Amesius Case Consc. to you, p. 216. to
me p. 203. But 1. He speaks not at all of our Questions, In what sense an
Oath binds when taken, but only in what sense it ought to be taken. 2. He
speaks not of a Vow, but of a mere Oath. 3. He speaks only of the Case of
Equivocation; but he that swears in sensu famosiore, to a Thief whose mind he
is not bound to follow, does not equivocate. 4. He himself says in the next
Case that the words of an Oath must be taken, Eo sensu quem audientes
concepturos judicamus, id est, regulariter eo sensu quem habent in Communi
hominum usu. But the Audientes and the Imposers may be different; and a man may
think sometimes that the Imposers sense may be contrary to the usum communem,
and his own agreeable to it. But this impertinent Question is nothing to us:
Suppose that the Powers were bound to take it in the Imposers sense, but did
not; the Question is, whether it bind them not in their own sense: (And in some
possible Cases in both, and to both.)

You add [You mention some good things in the Covenant; as the Declaration
against Popery, Schism, and Profaneness: But you pass by the second Article,
etc. Ans. So I perceive you would have me Conform that I may Preach: And what
should I Preach against but Sin? And will you not give me leave to suppose,
that Perjury is one of the greatest of all sins; and that he that is knowingly
for Perjury, is against humane society, and not capable of Trust or Credit, and
is against the safety of the King; which depends much on the Conscience of
the Oath of Allegiance in his Subjects; and that he that would but say, I would
declare my self for Perjury, that I may preach against all other sins, ^^ --.
These things being premised, I ask you, Are you in good sadness? What! after
such a confident Persuasive to Conformity? Will you tell your Hearers, If you
Vow to God Repentance, Obedience, or any Good; this Vow binds none of you
all, if there were but some Evil joined with it.] And so, if a Jesuit would
take the Oath of Allegiance or Supremacy, yea or the Vow of Baptism be taken at
our Christening, if either Ignorance or Knavery do but join some bad things
with it; nothing of all the rest is obligatory. What Cheater then will not
foist in some bad thing into his Vows, that he may be disobliged from all the
rest? If you dare preach such Doctrine, and dare die in the Aprobation of it,
and dare persuade others to do the like, as their Duty to God; your Book's
Title, shall make me view S. Paul's warning, (...). Would you have me
deliberately undertake to justify all men from the lawful or good parts of a
Vow, that I may have leave to preach against sin.

You add [And the Power imposing the whole.] Answ. Still all alike; What? will
you tell your Hearers, that no Oath or Vow binds them, which powerless man
imposed: The want of power in the Imposers, proves indeed that no Power of
theirs obliged you to take it. But what if you had taken it to save your life
from a Thief, or within your Closet-walls voluntarily, without the command of
any Power, does it not oblige to lawful matters? Bishop Sanderson would have
taught you otherwise to resolve that Case. This is a hard way to Conformity.

You add, [What was good in it we were obliged to by a former Covenant.] Answ.
And what then? Is that another Doctrine, that Conformists must preach, That [no
Vow or Oath obliges you to any good that you were obliged to before.] Oh
dreadful! The Jesuits Morals would abhor such a Doctrine: If there may be new
Vows to the same thing, there may be new or additional Obligations to the same
thing; else all the following Vows are no Vows. What if the Oath of Allegiance
be thrice taken? Does it oblige only the first time? Then if a man be at
Baptism obliged to Christianity, no after Vows at the Lords Supper, or other
time, are obligatory. Sir, be not angry with me for telling you, that
Non-conformists have somewhat in them, that will not permit them to take these
for indifferent things: And that the diminution of your glory and men's
temptation to separation from you, has too much occasion and color from your
selves.

You add, [The worst of Heretics maintain some Truths.] Answ. And quid inde?
Suppose, so the Covenant has some good? Our question is not, whether we are
bound to the bad, but to the good: And will you say, that I must receive no
truth which a Heretic holds; or am bound by it to no good, which is
contained in a Vow that has evil with it.

. 12, 13, 14. Will any thing convince you of an Error or Sin, if the visibility
of my words and yours, and my reminding you of your visible misreport will not
do it? but still when you see your words and mine, and hear of your mistake;
you will yet go on, yea and falsely add, that [In one breath I say I did, and I
did not retract them.] This practice, and your foregoing Doctrine well agree:
When I had asked you [Whether it be all one to say I had expunged all that you
accuse me of (or charge me with) and that I expunged all that you pervert] (or
falsely took occasion from for a visible slander.) This is no stop to you, nor
worthy of any Answer; but you go on: Yea when you tell me the Page you meant,
and see that there is no such thing there as you mentioned; yet all this (nor
my many Writings against that same Opinion) are nothing at all to stop your
Calumny. I am not justifying what I expunged; but if it were faulty, must it
needs contain a Doctrine which it never mentioned, which I openly wrote
against. This dealing is enough to tell me, to what purpose a Disputation of
Conformity with you would prove, when Sense it self will not convince you: And
all your justification is, you [give the sense, though not the words.] Utterly
false; there are no words there (how bad soever) of any such sense. The words
speak mostly De fine belli, and not of the Justifying power, which is ever
supposed besides a good end. I never thought that War might be made against
Authority, for Religion sake, what ever I might then think of the Subjectum in
quo of that Authority, though not as Hooker did.

. Still Confusion and Untruth twisted: I deny not that I led many (if you will
call Convincing Reason, Leading) into an Association: was that in the Question
before? I rejoice and glory in it, and thank God for it, as much as almost any
passage of my life! I told you before, (and two Printed Agreements told the
World) what our Associations were for. One was to exercise so much Discipline,
as all the three Parties were agreed in, contradicting none of them in our
Agreement. The other for Catechizing and Instructing every Family at stated
Days, every Week in course. And what is this to men's present coming to your
Churches which you talk of. If they Conform no more than I, I am not ashamed to
be esteemed a Promoter of their Judgment. If they Conform less than I, that
they never had that from me, my Five Disputes of Church Government, then
written, are a visible Witness against your rash and heedless Calumny.

. 16. Be not offended with me, for judging some Conformists honest: And I could
wish that you would consider of it, before you teach your People, that [there
are no honest Sinners.] For that is all one as to say, that the World has never
had one honest man, but Christ, and Adam and Eve a while. Though a man be not
honest quatenus vel in quantum a sinner: (nor I think quatenus a Conformist)
yet I hope still that there are some honest men in the World; yea such as have
sinned avowedly and deliberately (when they knew it not to be sin, as most
Sects that contradict each other do) yea and some that sin against knowledge
too (as many do in their vain thoughts and words.) But where is it that I said,
that these honest Conformists sin avowedly, delaberately, and against
knowledge? Make Conscience of Truth. It Is like that I might sometime say, What
it would be in me if I should do it: But is that to say, that it is so in
others, whose knowledge I am a stranger-to; or that it borders on the sin
against the Holy Ghost. As for your Invective against these honest Conformists;
I ask you, 1. May not a man be an honest Conformist, that takes Conformity for
a thing lawful merely in case of Deprivation, as Mr. Sprint did, though he had
rather be excused? If not, few learned godly Divines of my youthful
acquaintance were honest men: For all such as pleaded then with me for it, went
upon those terms. May not those be honest Conformists that heartily and openly
wish for abatements, as the Bishop of Chester does, and Bishop Gawden openly
upon my demand of his Judgment, often did. May not those be honest Conformists
who go on Bishop Reynolds and Dr. Stillingsteet's grounds, That no form of
Church Government is of Divine Institution: Or those that had rather all the
Ceremonies were out of the Church, than so many Preachers. If they are, you do
ill to censure them as dishonest; If they are not, I shall never be induced to
Conform: for it would be to give away my honesty, if I do it on those aforesaid
Principles. Thus I perceive that it is not Conformity that would satisfy you
if we yielded to it, unless we also did it on your Principles. But if neither
the Bishops and Clergy of England in Abbot's days were any of them honest,
saving the few described by Heylin that went higher; or if all the
Latitudinarians (that had rather the Ceremonies were forborne) and all the
unwilling Conformists in England (that would not do it but to keep their
Ministry) be dishonest men, I am not yet ready to fall in with that other sort
of men that charge so many of their own Society with dishonesty, and that
account so few honest, who are accounted honest by the rest of Mankind, and
appropriate honesty to those, that others can hardliest discern it in.

. 17. And will you so grossly dispute down Nonconformity? To distinguish
between [meddling with the War] and entering into the Army] to you is [a Fly, ad
populum phalerae ficulnea evasio, a little poor Criticism.] So that it seems
you dare affirm or deny that of the one, which you do of the other. Durst you
swear that none of the Lords, or Commons, or Citizens meddled with the War, but
those that entered into the Army? And can you insist on such passages thus
against your sight, when your Error is detected? I pray you if ever you be a
Confessor, resolve not other men's Cases of Conscience at this rate, as you do
your own.

. 18. It is an unhappiness in you, that so hardly write that which is not
error, and yet so hardly acknowledge any crrour in your Writing. The Aphorisms
recited by the Bishop were mentioned by way of Accusation: You excepted none,
but spoke generally of those collected by him; What can I do more for trial
than to name Particulars? And where should I begin but with the first? But it is
many more that I can name, which would extort from you the same Answer:
Particularly that which Bagshaw (seeing there) was tempted to transcribe among
his falsehoods, as if I had said all that of Oliver, which I said of his Son,
which others also have falsely said of me.

. 19. It is a troublesome thing to dispute on terms not explained or understood:
I thought all this while that Presbyterian and Episcopal had been terms whose
sense we had agreed of, but I was mistaken; for now you let me know, that an
Archbishop (who strove hard for such Preferment) who drew the rest of the
Bishops into that high Protestation, for which some were imprisoned, who
forsook the Parliament and went to the Kings Party; as soon as he saw that they
would bring low the Bishops, who for self-safety turned to the Parliament, when
he saw all was almost gone on the other side; and this but in Wales to recover
his own house: this man with you was a Presbycerian Archbishop; I may
understand shortly what a Presbyterian signifies of late in England! As many
Episcopal Non-conformists are silenced, and go now under the Name of
Presbyterians: So take heed of straining the word too high, lest Archbishops
and Bishops at last be put down as Presbyterians too. If he be a Presbyterin
who is an Archbishop, and would continue an Archbishop, because he foresaw that
the Bishops would pull down themselves, and the Puritans would prevail. In this
sense I should not have denied but that they were Presbyterians that first
raised that War in England against the King: But your proof is out of
Rushworth, p. 224. viz. No other than those two famous men, Sir John Lamb, and
Dr. Sibthorpe importuned the Bishop to prosecute the Puritans; the Bishop said,
He knew of none, and asked what manner of people they be? It Is answered by Sir
John Lamb in Dr. Sibthorp's presence, That they seem to the World to be such as
would not Swear, Whore, nor Drink, but yet would Lie, Cheat, and Deceive. That
they would frequently hear two Sermons a day, and repeat the same too, and
afterward Pray, and sometimes fast all day long. Then the Bishop asked,
Whether those places where those Puritans were; did lend Money freely (to the
King) upon the Loan. To which Sir John Lamb and Dr. Sybthorp replied, That they
did generally resolve to lend freely. Then said the Bishop No man of descretion
can say, that that place is a place of Puritans: For my part I am not satisfied
to give way to Proceedings against them. At which Dr. Sibthorp said, He was
troubled to see that the Church was no better regarded. Very good; A
Presbyterian then is a Bishop that is not satisfied to persecute such Puritans
as those. Add but what is said by many old Conformists, how the word Puritan
was used with the utmost Malice by Papists and Drunkards, and ungodly persons,
against those who were firm Protestants, and would not Drink, and Whore as they
did; as Dr. Robert Abhot, Regius Professor in Oxford, and Bishop of Salisbury,
and Bishop Downam, (one that I verily thought had been no Presbyterian) in his
Spittle Sermon, called Abraham's Trial, Mr. Rob. Bolton frequently, (who thinks
there was never poor persecuted word used with such bitter malice by the mouth
of the Serpents Seed, as that word Puritan was at that day of good people.) I
say take in all this, and let Posterity judge of an English Presbyterian by it,
that he is one that will not persecute and undo such Puritans: We had diverse
such Presbyterian Bishops, Usher, Bedle, Downam, Davenant, Hall, etc. And
before them Grindal, Abbots, and the most of our Bishops for Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. Again, I confess that it was some such Presbyterians as these that
raised the Parliaments Army in England.

The two next Sections evincing your Error and Calumny you pass by.

. 22. Is of no further use to us; only about Dr. Jo. Reignolds, you are a most
deceived and deceiving Historian. 1. You do not know, etc. But you might have
known that there is extant in Print his Letters to Sir Francis Knowles against
Prelacy, for a mere Moderatorship or Presidency. 2. You say, [Did he not live
and die in full Conformity with the Church of England.] Answ. A known falsehood,
if a Question may be false: What matter of Fact shall ever come to Posterity by
such hands without falsification? if Cartwright and Reignolds, the leading
Non-conformists of England were Conformists; Sir, I, and hundreds more have
offered long to Conform as far to the utmost, as either of these did. And yet
we are unworthy to Preach the the Gospel of Christ for want of Conformity; (It
may be, left it prove them to be Presbyterians that will not prosecute us:)
Learn better whether ever Dr. Reignolds did subscribe to the Liturgy and
Ceremonies; whether ever he took the Oath of Canonical Obedience, or was not
against the present Prelacy? Whether he was for the Cross in Baptism, etc. But
you verily think that were he now alive, he would be as hard a Mawl of the
Schismatics, and Non-conformists, etc. Answ. 1. Of the Schismatics no doubt,
for he wrote against both Prelacy and Separation. 2. Wonderful! What cannot you
verily believe, which you are but willing should be true? That an Archbishop is
a Presbyterian, and that the Leading Nonconformist would be a Mawl of the
Non-conformists: when 1. Twice as much is now required of Conformists as was
then. 2. And Dr. Reignolds was not a man to do what he did without such Reason
as would have made him constant. And to requite you with as strong Confidence,
Sir, I do not rashly but soberly and deliberately profess, that were they all
alive at this day (the old Religious Conformable Divines themselves) such as
Dr. Io. White, Dr. Willet, Dr. Challoner, Dr. Field, Mr. Whateley, Mr. Crooks,
Mr. Robert Bolton, Dr. Preston, Dr. Sibbes, Dr. Stoughton, Dr. Tailor, with a
thousand more, and a thousand; yea these that wrote for the old Conformity, Mr.
Sprint, Mr. Paybody, Dr. Jo. Burges, Forbes: yea the old Bishops themselves,
Jewel, Sands, Grindall, Abbot, Miles Smith, etc. I do firmly believe without
hesitation, that the generality of them would have been resolved
Non-conformists at this time, not changing their judgment, but because of the
great Change of Conformity: For I know that Cornelius Burges, the Learned
Gataker, Dr. Robert Harris, and almost all the late Westminster Assembly, were
formerly such kind of Conformists as these were: And I know the same
Non-conformists now (though not many) would have yielded to the old Conformity.
Yea more, I am persuaded that were Rogers, Bradford, Sanders, etc. Yea Bishop
Hooper, Bishop Farrar, and Bishop Latimer alive now, they would all choose
rather to burn at a Stake again, than to do what is required of us. Say not
that I reproach the Laws, for I only speak of the matter of Fact; whether they
or the present Bishops were the wiser, I meddle not. Yea more, yet I much
doubt, whether all the Bishops of England now would Conform themselves as
Ministers do, if they were put to it? For I suppose you to know, that they are
not put to the Declarations and Subscriptions, as the Ministers were, nor to
their Oaths: But in this I am not confident, but only doubt. But of such old
Conformists as Bolton, Whateley, etc. I make no doubt at all. 3. But your Proof
is, That he received Absolution according to the Church of England. Answer, Is
this proving? So would I do: yea, I do receive the Lords Supper according to
the Liturgy. Am I therefore a Conformist? Does it follow that he would swear,
subscribe, declare, use the Image of the Cross as a symbol of Christianity,
etc.

. 23. Your intimated Calumny about Popery, it is well you let fall, though you
confess it not.

. 24. We come now to the greatest of our Differences, which you call my (...),
about a notorious matter of Fact, Whether they were Presbyterians or Episcopal
and ^rastians, that first raised the Armies in England against the King: When
in the very Age that it was done, such a thing can be so confiuently denied,
what Credit is there in some men's History?

I thought all these set together, had been proof enough. 1. That former
Episcopal Parliaments began the Business, and left it where those found it. 2.
Heylin himself shows fully, that the difference was long working between the
two sorts of Episcopal men, about Arminianism, favoring Papists, Innovations,
and Propriety. 3. That such as Jewel, Bilson, and Hooker, gives us the
Principles on which they did proceed: And Sir Edward Sands that has written
for high Conformity, and was Hooker's Pupil and bosom Friend, was one of the
Chief for the People interest in th^se Parliaments. 4. That H^ylin and
Rushworth and Fuller acquaint us, That Abbot was laid by for refusing to
license Sibthorp's Book; and how the rest did prosecute Mainwaring. 5. That we
knew our selves abundance of the Parliament Men, who were all of their
Judgment; Viz. [That Moderate Episcopacy was the best Government, and that the
Bishops that followed Lawd did by Innovation seek to destroy both Religion and
the Subjects Liberty (as they thought) and that it was necessary to bring down
the Bishop's Power in Temporals, and to get better men that would be confined
more to Spiritual Government, and use it better: But that no Episcopacy was so
necessary, as that the State should be hazarded to support it.] This was the
Judgment of almost all them that I could hear or know of 6. That even to this
day 1671. there are yet about threescore of them alive, besides Lords, from
whom the matter may be known. 7. That understanding conscionable Members of the
House yet living, openly profess that Presbytery was fearce known among them,
and that there was but one known Presbyterian then in that House, which was Mr.
Tate of Northamptonshire, an honest man. 8. That when they had raised their
Army, in their Propositions sent to the King at Nottingham, they offer the
moderating of Episcopacy, and not Presbytery. 9 That the Earl of Fssex General,
the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse, the Earl of Peterborough, Sir John
Merick, Dolbiere, the Earl of Stamford, the Earl of Huntington, the (now) Earl
of Denbigh, the Lord S. John, the Lord Roberts, the Lord Mandevile (late Earl
of Manchester) the (now) Lord Hollis, Colonel Essex, Col. Goodwins; Colonel
Grantham, Sir Henry Cholmley; and so through the rest of the Colonels, were no
Presbyterians; (though the Lord Say, Lord Brook, and the Lord Wharton were not
Episcopal.) 10. That except these three last named, all the Parliament's
Lord-Lieutenants through England that ever I could hear of, were men accounted
Episcopal and Conformable; and these three were not accounted Presbyterians,
but honest godly Independents or neither 11. That their Major Generals in the
several Parts of the Land were commonly Episcopal and Conformable men; yea the
Earl of Stamford, Sir William Waller, Mr. G. Brown, Mr. G. Massey, Mr.
Lawghorn, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Mr. G. Pointz, Mr. G. Morgan, Sir Thomas
Middleton, Mr. G. Mitton, Sir John Gell, etc. 12. That the Synod at Westminster
at first were all Conformists, except about nine or ten, (As Doctor Hammond
tells them in his Answer to the London Ministers.) 13. That the Scots
themselves (as may be seen in a late Answer to the Bishop of Dumblanes
Accommodation) do profess, That as England never was Presbyterian, so they
never supposed that they should immediately be such, but only put into the
Covenant the general words of [Reforming according to the word of God, and the
Example of the best Reformed Churches] That they might engage them further to
enquire what is the Reformation which is most agreeable hereunto; that so in
time they might attain it: So that when the said Bishop (now Archbishop of
Glasgoe (being known to me) cites my own words, and other men's, to prove that
the Assembly or Parliament never intended the Renunciation of Episcopacy, but
of the English exorbitant Prelacy, the Scots Presbyterians deny it not, but
answer as aforesaid. 14. That it is a commonly known thing, that the Covenant
came in, not only after the Wars were begun, but when the Parliament was
brought so low as to seek to the Scots for aid. And that Presbytery was little
known in England, till the Scots brought in the knowledge of it. 15. And it was
a notorious thing that the Parliament yielded to Presbytery and to exclude
Episcopacy at last, not because they thought that a moderate Episcopacy was not
lawful and best, but because they had no way to hold up their Wars, (without
which they thought they had no way to uphold themselves) but by the help of the
Scots and such as were against Episcopacy. And because they had seen the
Prelacy fly so high, and now to be so strong against them that they had no hope
of moderating it, but feared it would bear down all. Insomuch that Mr. Thomas
Coleman gave the Covenant to the Lords with this open profession, That it
signified not the Renunciation of Episcopacy. 16. And it is a notorious thing,
that before the Parliament 1640, there were not so many Non-conformable
Ministers in England, (Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists altogether)
as there were Counties in the Kingdom. And 17. It is known that few of those
few had any hand in raising or promoting the War: Mr. Dod in Northamptonshire,
Mr. Ball in Staffordshire, Mr. Langley in Cheshire, poor Mr. Barnet of
Uppington, in Shropshire, Mr. Oliver Thomas, and Mr. Wrath in Wales (that
quickly died, as almost all the rest did) Mr. Augier in Lancashire, Mr. Slater,
Mr. Root, and a few more in all England. And 18. It is known, that when
necessity had drawn them to please the Scots, and take the Covenant, the
Parliament would never be drawn (though they made Ordinances for it) to appoint
any to settle Presbytery in the Counties in execution of their Ordinances. But
purposely delayed, and never did it, except in London, Lancashire,
Warwickshire, and a few more places. 19. And it is known, that the Ministers of
England themselves were but few of them indeed Presbyterians, and therefore
were the backwarder to set up that Discipline: And therefore our Worcestershire
Agreement (to concur in all that the three Parties are agreed in) did the more
easily and generally take; and that the People themselves were so generally
against Presbytery (except some of the stricter sort) that they never would
submit to it: And so de facto, it was never indeed set up, save in the few
places forenamed. 20. Lastly, It is visible, that the Reasons of the
Parliament's War published in their Remonstrances and Declarations, do suppose
their Consent to Episcopacy, and mention nothing of a change: And that the
Lawyers of the House (as Judge Brown, Seldom, Glin, etc.) were generally
Episcopal Erastians, that thought Episcopacy lawful, as being from the
Sovereign Power, which they thought might appoint Church Government as he
please: (As Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenic. pleads; and as the Kings late Acts in
Scotland intimate so far, as to determine that all the external Government
belongs to the King: And I will not believe, though you should swear it, that
the King is a Presbyterian. I did think that these Twenty Evidences set
together, would have proved to any sober man, that on both sides it was
Episcopal men, and Episcopal Erastians that raised the first War in England.

But all this Evidence notwithstanding, this is to you the strangest Paradox in
Historical Transactions that ever saw the light: A serious Confutation of it
would have showed you to be in a delirium, etc. Answ. You have hit on the best
Confutation of it in those words that the Cause was capable of: For now
ignorant strangers and Posterity may possibly think, that a man would not so
confidently deny a notorious thing, without some ground. But what are those
grounds (for it is almost all one, as to dispute whether the English War was
between Protestants, or between Englishmen.) Why 1. you say, That [the Spirit
of Presbytery and Nonconformity was stirring in those Parliaments, though not
known by those Names.] Answ. Nay, then there is no dealing with you in History.
We judge of men's Hearts by their Professions and direct practice, and take him
for conformable, that says he is so, and actually conformeth. But you see
deeper into the Spirit: So you may say that it was the Spirit of Socinianism
that workt in the Arminians, as others say, it was the Spirit of Popery that
workt in A. Bishop Laud and his Party; and others say, that it is the Spirit of
Democracy that works in popular Princes, and the Spirit of Rebellion that
workt in Hooker, and the Spirit of Independency that works in the
Presbyterians, and the Spirit of Anabaptism that works in the Independents;
and so Bagshaw and his Brethren say, it is the Spirit of Conformity that
works in us. And so whatever Error a man runs not as far from, as frightened,
or furious Adversaries do, he must be said to have the Spirit of that Error. As
if a Pythagorean should tell you that you have the Spirit of Ajax, Thraso, or
of some Brute. Sir, we plain people have hitherto taken a Presbyterian to be
one that holds [That the Church is and ought to be governed by Sessions,
Classes, and Synods, the lesser subordinate to the greater, to which there
lies an Appeal, and these composed of Pastors in parity and ruling Elders
conjunct, and that not for mere Concord, but direct Regiment.] These are
Presbyterians in the sense of Beza and Saravia, Downam, and Gors. Bucer,
Bilson, Hooker, and all that have written on it: Whom though I differ from, I
take to be commonly the most sober, religious, strict, and understanding sort
of Christians, (together with the New England moderate Independents) that I
know, who make up a party in the world. And I take my self to be under a
rational disparagement to differ from them so far as I do, though for truth
(...) will bear that disparagement. But now forsooth, we have ^^^^ professing
Episcopacy and Conformity in Parliements, that have the Spirit of Presbytery:
And it was Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Presbyt^^ians that began the War. Just
as among the Pa^^sts, the poor Jansenists, yea the persecuting ^^^^, are said
to have the Spirit of the Ca^vinist^, Ergo, they are Calvinists, deny it who
dare.

2. You prove it fully, by saving, Did you never hear that when these
Parliaments we^e in their full Cry against the Duke of Buckinghum; they
secretly moved him to make Dr. Breston Archbishop, and then all Complaints
should be hushed] Answ. What still untruths? 1. Produce your credible proof if
you are able. 2. Could a Parliament which does all things by the major Vote
transact such a Business secretly. Could it have been proved, would not the
Duke of Buckingham have alleged it against his Adversaries? 3. Would Heylin
himself have silenced such a thing, and emplyed the contrary if it had been
true.

4. Would Mr. Thomas Ball that Florid full Historian, in the Life of his Tutor
Dr. Preston, have omitted it, when he advanced his Reputation as high in
outward respects as possible.

5. But what if all this had been true? Oportuit fuisse memorem? Truth shameth
the cunningest and most confident Adversaries, Doctor Preston was conformable.
And is it a proof that the Parliament had the Spirit of Presbytery, if they
would have had a Conformist made Archbishop. Thus we have still your first
description of Presbyterians, viz. Such Conformists as would be Archbishops,
and such Parliaments as would have Archbishops. We call Archbishops, Bishops,
and so Episcopal; and you call them Presbyterians: And are we not there like to
agree well of the Thing, that are not agreed of the Name.

6. But he that knows that Abbot was then Archbishop of C. will hardly
believe you, that the Parliament would have had Dr. Preston put in, (though it
be nothing to the purpose.)

What you say of the Infection from Geneva, has this sense: [Geneva infected
the English Fugitives with Presbyterianism; Ergo the Parliament 1642, were
Presbyterians.] We deny the Consequence. For, 1. They infected not all England.
2. Nor those individual persons. 3. They that were infected were
non-conformable Ministers, who were after silenced or trodden down by the
Bishops, and had not any Votes in Parliaments.

Next when I tell you, That Parliament, Militia, Army, Major Generals, etc.
were no Presbyterians: You answer me, That you meddle not with Laymen. Answ.
And what need we more, were not the Parliament Laymen? And was it not the
Parliament that raised the Militia and the Armies, and that gave Commissions to
Major Generals etc. And was it not the Laymen that were the Commanders and
Soldiers that fought against the Armies of the King. And yet all this was an
Historical Paradox to you. But you say, The dissenting Brethren were most
guilty in blowing the Trumpet. Answ. 1. Suppose that were true; all that you
can say were but this, That one Episcopal Party raised a War against the King,
and the other Party, because some Non-conformists blew the Trumpet, or
persuaded them. But if Episcopal men are so unstable and simple to be drawn
into such a War by a few Non-conformists, why do you not acknowledge it? But
you question whether there were ^hen so few Presbyterians in England, because a
thousand subscribed a Petition in King Jame 's time. Answ. This is to write
History by conjecture against notorious matter of fact. I named you the men; I
can name you those in the Assembly of Divines, Mr. Nie, Mr. Goodwin, Mr.
Simpson, Mr. Bridge, Mr. Boroughs, Mr. Philips, Mr. Greenhill, and Mr. Caryl
(after) all Independents, and Mr. Ash a Presbyterian. Name me many more English
Non-conformists if you can: And name me as many more in the Land then I have
named, if you can! But a thousand subscribed the Petition. Bancroft, and your
other such Conformists tell you, that it was not so, and that most of them
Conformed then or soon after: You can believe such men when it serves your
turn. The truth is, many Conformed, and the rest were dead and gone. Do you
think there were many Non-conformists alive in 1642, who subscribed that
Petition when King James came in. If Mr. Dod were, I suppose not many more. But
did they not increase and multiply? Answ. Excellent History! Did not we live in
the Country with them? Should we not have known them? Name them as I do. They
were all consumed to the number that I mention, except some that went into New
England; And of these named, diverse came back out of Holland. Death and
Conformity had almost made an end of them, when they wonderfully revived from
among your selves: Know you not, that this is the grand hope of your present
Generation from old Experience, that Non conformity will be but res unius
aetatis. (But Reason, Conscience, Scripture, Duty, and Sin will for all that be
still the same.)

As to your doubt, whether England infected not Scotland? Heylin in his Life of
Land will tell you plainly. They might at last encourage them, but it was not
for Presbytery, but for that which they called Propriety, Liberty, and Safety
from Popery. These were the frights of the Episcopal great men of those times:
But as for any Ministers to infect Scotland hence with Presbytery, when it
there prevailed, and here were next to none at all, it is a ridiculous fancy.
But now you pretend to speak sense, and tell me, That one of the Propositions
sent to the King after Edgehill, was to abolish Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
Ans. Unhappy still! 1. But how long since after Edgehill Fight? Was it not
long after, at the Treaty of Uxbridge that you mean? And was that before the
raising of the Army? 2. Was not the Proposals at Nottingham sent by the Earl of
Essex, a little before the raising of the Army? A surer Proof against you that
then they were not for Presbytery, but restrained Episcopacy. 3. Even at
Uxbridge Treaty, many thought that another frame of Moderate Episcopacy would
not be well set up, till the present Frame was taken down. 4. And even then
they said nothing that I know of for Presbytery. 5. But the truth is, they saw
by that time, that they could not stand but by the help of those that were
against the Bishops, the Scots, the Independents, and the unwilling Conformists
that desired a Deliverance. But this proves not that the Parliament was
Presbyterians then, much less that they were so before the Wars: But you that
meddle not with Laymen, remember that Laymen sent those Propasitions.

You next tell me of Alderman Pennington, and the Apprentices. Answ. 1. Few of
those Apprentices knew what Presbytery was, but were exasperated against
Episcopacy for the sake of the present Bishops; as the common people be now
within these nine years, thinking that it is they that silence their Teachers,
and cause all our Divisions. But alas little knew they what Church Government
to desire. But most that were in judgment against Episcopacy, were Independents
and Separatists then. And how inconsiderable a number in London were those
Apprentices. 2. And our Question is not, what Party of Lads, or Apprentices, or
Women did clamor against Bishops,? But what Party it was that raised the War?
Did these Lads give the Earl of Essex his Commission? But you find none that
said any thing against their Petition, but the Lord Digby. Answ. And has not
he forsaken you also? 1. Where did you seek to find it? Not in the Parliament
Journal sure, else you might have found more. 2. The truth is, the Episcopal
Parliament themselves perceiving what Party they must trust to, opposed not
those Petitions, because the Petitioners might serve their turns, and I doubt
were too well contented with them. But as no man must say, that the King had
the Spirit of Popery, because he was willing that the Papists should help him:
So no man can prove that the Episcopal Parliament had the Spirit of Presbytery,
or were against Episcopacy it self, because they were willing to be helped by
all sorts, who on a sudden were fallen out with Bishops. The truth is, the
suspending and silencing of Ministers, and the cropping the Ears, and
stigmatizing Prin with Burton and Bastwick, had suddenly raised in the London
Apprentices and others, a great distate of the Bishops, though they knew little
of any Controversies about Church Government at all. When you say, that
[Episcopacy (or rather Bishops Lands) was the Palladium, etc.] 1. Episcopacy
was not so till after the Army was raised: It was so, no doubt, in the private
designs of some particular men, Apprentices and Women, in the City and Kingdom;
that is, all that were against it desired it should fall: And many that were
Episcopal desired that it should rather fall, than the Abuses of it continue by
such men as they thought would else ruin Church and State, thinking that there
was no other way to save them: (so far did different apprehensions about
Propriety, Liberty, Popery, and Arminianism, carry men from one another, who
were all for Episcopacy.) But forget not 1. That it is the major Vote of the
Parliament, and not a few secret designers within or without doors, that is the
Parliament. 2. That it was the Parliament that raised the Militia and Armies.
3. That this Parliament was not at that time against Episcopacy; (Therefore
your talk of the Isle of Wight so long after, is liker a Jest than serious.
Besides that you seem ignorant of, the Parliament resolved to accept of the
Kings Concessions, (as Prins long Printed Speech will show you) and therefore
immediately before they should have voted that closure were pulled out by
Cromwell, (who had secret intelligence what they were going to do.) 2. And your
oblivion caused you by your Parenthesis to contradict what you have hitherto
said your self: For if it were Bishops Lands rather than Bishops that they
would have down, it implies that they were not Presbyterians, nor against
Episcopacy. Would you make an Englishman of this age believe, that none of
your own Church have an appetite to Bishops Lands? Try them, and they will
confute you more effectually than I can. Do you think that of the Multitude
that now drink and ^rant, and roar, and whore, and rob, there are none whose
Consciences could be content that Bishops fell, that they might have their
Lands? you will say perhaps, these are not truly for Episcopacy. Ridiculous!
Must we write Histories out of men's secret thoughts and hearts, and call men
only what they are conscientiously and in sincerity? Who knows another man's
sincerity but God? Come into London, or go among these Gallants, and tell them
that they are not Sons of the Church if you dare. Hearken whether they talk not
more for Bishops, than for any other Sect? Whether they do not curse and damn
the Presbyterians and Fanatics, and their Conventicles, and deride their
Preaching and praying, and say as bad of them as you can wish them? Though I
know that too great abundance since our silencing are fallen off from you to
Infidelity or Atheism, and to make a Jest of the Sacred Scriptures; and the
Papists say, that very many thousands are turned to them: yet I speak of those
that still call themselves Protestants of the Church of England. Really if you
will take none to be of your Church that would sell the Bishops Lands, or none
that are not conscientiously for you; I doubt your Church yet will prove
invisible, and as little as some of the housed Sects. And if that will serve
your turn, I pray deal equally, and let the Sectaries also have leave to say of
any of their Party that killed the King, or were guilty of Treason, he was not
truly one of us. The War was first called Bellum Episcopale by the
Parliament Men, because they thought or said that Land and his Adherents were
the Causes of it, by seeking to reduce the Scots to their will, and to set up
Altars and other Innovations in England. But not because the Parliament at that
time renounced Episcopacy it self.

As to the particular Members of the Armies, I confess I did know them better
than you; I speak not of Fairfax or Cromwell's Army, but of Essex's: And its
well that you have so much modesty, as not to deny that they were Episcopal or
no Presbyterians. But you venture to say of those yet living, [That they were
so whilst they assisted in the support of the late Cause, I have not so far
renounced my Reason and Experience as to fall in with your account. And if we
persevere in this new Doctrine, we shall be as distant as the two Poles.] Answ.
Now you are at your Strength, your Confidence, and Resolution to believe (or
say you believe) as you do, is all the life of your Cause. It is now taken for
no dishonor to the greatest Lords, to say, that they are for Episcopacy. There
are yet living the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Denbeigh, the Earl of Stamford,
the Lord Gray of Warke, the Lord Hollis, the Lord Asthey, the Lord Roberts, the
Earl of Anglesey (though he be no Soldier) Major General Morgan, Mr. G.
Massey, Sir John Gell, and many more. Enquire of themselves, or any that know
them, whether they were ever Presbyterians, or against a moderate Episcopacy.
Sir William Waller was most called a Presbyterian (in your sense) who died
lately, and has told me (being my very dear Friend) his own Judgment and the
Parliament's, as I now tell it you. I have in the heat of the Wars heard Sir
Thomas Middleton, Major General Mitton, and many others thus give their
Judgment: Yea, these were for the Liturgy and full Conformity; and some of them
for Dr. Hammond's highest strain of Episcopacy. But its sufficient to your
Cause, that though the men who are yet living, are the best Witnesses of their
own minds, yet you are resolved not to believe either them or me. But let me
remember you of one wide-mou^hed Witness more, which will almost swallow up
your credit: When Cromwell and his Army, and their secret Adherents in the
Parliament, cast out the eleven Members of Parliament first, and Conquered the
City, and pulled down all the Committees, and disbanded all the other Forces of
England, (Massey's Army, and all the Garrison and County Forces:) Yea before
that, when they laid by Essex and his old Officers and Army, and abundance of
the Parliament Men that had Command in Garrisons, Armies, etc. by the
self-denying Vote (as it was called.) All this was done upon Insinuations, that
they were not men to be trusted, being even then at the heart for the most part
Episcopal. And if yet you are incredulous, and as distant as the other Pole, I
will now but entreat you to fetch one Argument from the North, to draw you from
your North Pole distance; and tell your self whether Major General Monk (and
Morgan) and his Army which brought in the King, and set up the Bishops again,
was Episcopal or Presbyterian? And yet their long abode in Scotland made that
Army accounted to be more Presbyterian than any Army that was in England. But
as King Charles says in his Letter to Mr. Henderson, No man can so hardly
understand as he that would not know. That the War is so odious now as that
neither side will own it, is no wonder, when they have learned by so much
Experience: I would it had been so from the beginning.

. 28. I must allow you to ease your Fancy with the name of [Singularities,
strange Imaginations, the body of a dead man, etc.] for want of bettet stuff.
But its more strange to me, that the Contention between Arminian and Calvinian,
Prelates and Prelatists, should be talked of as so incredible; when your Goliath,
Peter Heylin has made it so much of the substance of his History of the Life
of A. B. Laud. In what you say more of Williams, you still confute your self:
For what say you, but that selfish carnal Motives did make an A. B. fight
against the King. But was he therefore no Prelatist, and yet an Archprelate; or
was he therefore a Presbyterian A. B. I again advise you not to cast all out of
your Church that are ruled by selfishness and worldly interest, least you leave
so few as will take away the glory of your Magnitude, and leave the Sectaries
to vie with you for the majority. And I will entreat you but to mark throughout
the foresaid History of A. B. Laud, how grossly and uglily your foresaid
Champion describes Laud and the chief of his Party, as if Preferment and
Rising were there very scope, and the contriving and seeking it by all Friends
and means, were their very Trade of life and business in this world: So that to
a truly heavenly mortified Christian, it must needs seem as loathsome a
Character, as Christ gives the rich man, Luke 16. 12. if not much more: For he
writes Pride, Ambition, worldliness, seeking to be greatest; as it were the
very Inscription of the Picture which he draws: (As his own Letters in the
Caball say the same of Williams.) And will you make that to be a mark of
No-prelate, which your Champion makes their notorious Character. Read him
impartially, and judge.

As for Arrius, I had no acquaintance with him, nor have I any business with
him: But if all my foresaid twenty Evidences fail me, and I cannot know what a
Parliament was? what a Synod was? what an Army was? when I was acquainted
familiarly with so many of them all? How should I know whether or no that
Epiphanius spoke truly of the secret heart of Arrius who so openly, falsely, and
furiously abused and persecuted his Superior Chrysostom. You shall believe
what you will, and I will believe what I can. But few men have ventured to cast
such a slur upon S. Hierom as you do, saying, That [Jerom himself was not a jot
the better for it, even for missing of a Bishopric:] Medina himself has not
done him so much wrong. What Bishopric was it that he sought and missed of,
and when? Though he joined with Chrysostom's Adversaries, I find not that he
sought his Place or any other Bishops, though he sowrly overtop Augustine in
confidence of arguing; I find not that he sought to be above him in place. It Is
well that you are not out of hope of Preferment your self, lest you should turn
Presbyterian: for (pardon on my smarting sharpness of speech to you (as you
account it) while I tell you that) I take you not for a better man than S.
Jerome; and therefore think that want of Preferment would do more with you, than
it did with him. But this is the ordinary judgment of Worldlings, who measure
other men by themselves. When I am dead, and cannot answer for my self, I doubt
not but the same will be said of me, though you were now forced to recede from
that Censure. But above all Impudencies, I must magnify theirs that charge
this on the Presbyterians as such, whose denominating opinion lies in
resisting all Honors, Preferments, Precedencies, great riches, etc. in the
Ministry, save what mere Worth or Age procures; and yet they are said to be
discontent because they cannot be Bishops, when their Doctrine is against them.
The Dog that is busy about his Carrion, snarleth at every one that passes by,
as jealous that he would bereave him of his Feast.

. 29. 31. When the Question is, As whether the Parliament of England be
Englishmen, or Frenchmen? I will take your return of [round, square, and
forked Atomes] for a very moving Answer, considering the Cause and Person. But
when I allege your perversest Champion Heylin only ad hominem, I will not
believe that your Allegation of his Lies against Presbyterians is any more
argumentum ad hominem to us, than if you alleged the authority of Manesseh Ben
Israel, till you have proved, (for what cannot you do that you have a mind to
do) that Pet. Heylin (as well as the Archbishop of York) was a Presbyterian. I
thank you for your silence to. 32.

. 33. When our Question was of the Causers of the late War, and we came to
recite the Principles of the Leaders of the Prelatical party, what should I do
more than name the men and their Books. When the Bishop silenced me, and forbid
me to Preach in his Diocese, he commended for my Cure the reading of Bilson and
Hooker, and named no others. I now recited the words of Bilson and Hooker, the
first as asserting the Principles of the Parliament; the second as going quite
beyond them on the Principles of them that pulled down the Parliament, I cited
page and words at large. To all this I have nothing but that you will cover
your Fathers nakedness, and not own all that they say: But does not this yield
that this was their doctrine? What need you disown or cover it, if it were not
so? Yet nothing will make some men confess. But still Mr. Hooker you admire,
and so did Camden, Usher, Morton, Hales, Gawden, King James, King Charles.] I
dare not join my self to so great Names as one of his Admirers, lest I seem too
much to value my self. I will come far behind them, supposing that a long
tedious Discourse in him has as much substance, as one might put into a
Syllogism of six Lines. I said, but that [it was theirs and such Prelatist's
Principles that led me into what I did and wrote.] His Principles might do it,
and not he, as they were managed by other men. But these are Niceties to men
that heed not what they read or say. What is written Line 1. p. 24.. 10. you
seem to defend: and 1. you say [What is this more, than some that writ for the
Kings Cause in the late Wars professed?] Answ. And will you defend or own all
that then was confessed by them? Have you read the Kings Answer to the 19
Propositions? Do you know that the Parliaments Adherents drew up a Catechism
out of that Answer, as pretending to justify all their Cause by it? Know you
not that in Fountains Letter answered by Dr. Steward; and in Sir Francis
Nethersole's Writings for the King, and many others, those things are supposed
or asserted, which I would not counsel you now to assert. Your Instance is,
[That as to making of Laws, our Kings have not challenged a Power without
Parliaments.] Answer, God be thanked, but that is none of our Question: But what
you will not know, you cannot understand. Seeing you seem to justify Hooker
here, who says, That Laws they are not, which public Approbation has not
made so: (Which I believe of those Countries where such public Senates have
part in the Legislation.) By this you must say, that in the Turks Dominions, or
any the like, there are no Laws. But if you say, that the Original Grant of the
Legislative Power to one is equivalent to an Approbation of his Laws: I
maintain that Hooker's Principle is false, [That by the natural Law whereto God
has made all subject, the natural power of making Laws to command whole
public Societies of men belongs, so properly to the same entire Societies,
that for any Prince or Potentate of what kindsoever upon earth, to exercise the
same himself, and not either by express Commission immediately and personally
received from God, or else by Authority derived at first from their Consent,
upon whose persons they impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny. How
hard a task then do you put Kings upon to excuse themselves from Tyranny, when
ever such Prelatists will accuse them of it. For 1. I hope you will not put
them to prove [That they have their Power by an express Commission immediately
and personally from God] (as Saul and David had) Shall we obey none but those
that fanatically can pretend to a Revelation, or immediate personal Commission
from Heaven. And 2. prove if you can, that the People have Regal power to use
or to give. I grant that originally their Consent may be necessary to the
designation of the Person or Family that shall receive it from God: But it is
God that gives the power, though the people choose the Person or Family; no
man gives that which he has not: The People have not legal or governing
Power, Ergo, they cannot give it. The Wife chooses her Husband, but Gods
Institution gives him his power. If that it be certain (as Doctor Hammond has
proved against John Goodwin) that the Peoples consent does give no power, but
only let in the person that shall receive it from God, and not from them; how
dare you thus conclude all Kings on earth to be but Tyrants, as Hooker plainly
does: For no King on Earth has [an immediate personal Commission from Heaven]
And no King (that I know of) can receive power from the People that never had
it to give: Ergo, you make all Kings to be no Kings but Tyrants; but falsely.
Will you defend this because Hooker wrote it? Were not these the Levellers and
Democratists Principles, higher than the old Parliament owned? Must a Clergy of
such Principles put men upon banishing the Non-conformists five Miles from a
Corporation, as men of seditious Principles. -- Terras astraea reliquit. You
tell me, I take what is for my purpose, and leave out the rest. Ans. Semper
idem. Do I may many Sentence? Do I pervert any? Is the rest contradictory to
this? What in the great Hooker? No, not at all. I suppose the rest. Unrighteous
man! If you require me to write out all his Book, when ever I transcribe a
part? I own that which you transcribe? What would you have more. But next you
say, that I have found other Doctrine in Hookers other Books. Answ. A silly
pretense, of which anon. You ask [Was you led aside by Hooker, etc. yet you
quote passages out of the 8th Book, that came out since. Ans. A man that would
turn us to Conformity, must be able himself to heed what he reads; 1. I said,
not that Hooker, but such Principles led me. 2. I never said, that I was led by
every word that I now cite, but that these words contain the Principles which
missed me (that is, so far and so long as I followed those Principles.) Do you
not see that your heedlesness tempted you to this Error; and yet your [Ex post
liminio] and [first building the Roof] seemed sense to you, or you would have
them seem such at least to me.

But it is well that you disown these three Book of Hookers also. But 1. is not
this forecited in the first, the very sum of all that you are afraid of 2. Will
you so give away the sixth and seventh which say far more for Episcopacy than
all the rest 3. Will you thus reproach all Bishop Gauden's triumphant
Vindication and Dedication to the King? 4. Did he not tell you that the Copy
was interlined with Hookers own hand, as approving it? What would you have
more? 5. I again tell you, I can bring you proof of a Concordant Copy, (the
Scribes Errates excepted). 6. Mr. Walton could not deny it. 7. Dr. Bernard
cited by you confirms it. For to say, that a Sentence or two were left, does
intimate that the Book was his; and leaving out, is not putting in: And I cited
nothing that was left out, nor any thing in it that is maimed for want of it.
8. Any man may see that the 8th Book was imperfect, and that is proved by the
matter, manner, and end: But it was nevertheless Hooker's, and concordant in
style and matter with the first. And have you now vindicated the Doctrine of
the chief Prelatists any better than by disowning them? And do you take it as
incredible, that many Episcopal men in Parliament should think as Bilson and
Hooker thought, and as the great Speakers, Sir Dudley Digs, Cook, Philips,
Eliot, and many such in former Parliaments did seem to think.

. 35. Did you write against their Discipline with such ugly Insinuations of
Treason, before you knew what their Discipline was, and then think you are
excused by saying, It must not be touched. 2. Did you not know till now, that
the Nonconformists are not in all things of one mind? They never pretended to
it: How many men are so, whose Faith is their own? Are you after so many years
to learn, that some that Conform not are Episcopal, some Presbyterians, some
Independents, and some as we of Worcestershire (and I think most of England)
addicted to no Party; but thinking that each of the three (and the Erastians
too) have somewhat in which they excel the rest, and somewhat in which they
err more than the rest. This is our judgment: And will not old printed
Writings make you know it, before you first write against it, and then wonder
at it, and make a stir about that which you know not, when i'ts told you. You
next think that by proving that they fly their Habitation, and refuse the
Oath, you sufficiciently prove -- that the Chorus sticks at renouncing War
against the King. Because it is a serious business; I must profess that you
here so cross the common Principles of Reason, Humanity, or Christianity, that
you do not at all tempt me to Conform: When you know (if you are reasonable)
that if they should take all the Oath except the last Clause, they are
nevertheless to be confined from Corporations? When you know (if you are
reasonable) that a man may judge the first part, or one part lawful, that
thinks otherwise of the last, and so that he must remove his Habitation! To
conclude, yet that the flying of their Habitations, and not taking the Oath is
a proof that they are against the whole, or against that Clause that renounceth
Arms against the King; and to take this for a Demonstration, as going is, that
there is motion; I tell you again, this reasoning beseems not a Divine, or a
man. Does it not imply, that you will take an Oath your self, if you judge but
one part of it lawful? And yet before, that Vo^doth bind no man to the lawful
parts which you said had in it some parts unlawful. Thus Errors agree amongst
themselves.

You open your self yet more; you say, [This makes me nauseate your Principles
as much as the former, viz. Not swearing, not to endeavor an alteration in the
Government of the Church.] Answ. And indeed, do you loath as much the altering
of your Church Government as the Kings, and yet be loyal? Is it as loathsome to
turn Diocesance into the old Episcopacy, or to set up Bishop Usher's Model,
which we offered, yea or to take down Lay Chancellor's power of the Keys, as to
take down Kings. Yet this tempts me not unto Conformity. Yet do you not stick
to say next [Yes, by Petition, as becomes Subjects (viz.) we may endeavor
alteration.] Answ. What a saying and unsaying is this? And what a jumble of
swearing and unswearing would you have us make? Will men awake believe that
Petitioning is no Endeavoring? Will you preach this Doctrine to your Flock?
You may lawfully swear that you will not any time endeavor an alteration of
the Scripture, of the Ministry, of the Universities, of Religion, of Monarchy,
and yet may endeavor it by Petitioning, that Oath notwithstanding.] May a man
swear universally, and mean particularly. May he swear that he will not at any
time murder his Child, and mean [except by famishing him.] May he swear that he
will never endeavor to defame you, or take away your Life or Lands, and yet
may Petition the King or Parliament to take them away? swear with you at these
rates that will for me. But by this it appears that quoad sensum you are of
the Nonconformists mind, though not as to the method of swearing: For if they
could but stretch their Consciences to put your sense upon that Clause of the
Oath, they would take it: And yet do you nauseate their Principles and
Discipline, because they cannot interpret it as you, who would take it were it
so interpreted? See then by how small a matter (even the mere exposition of the
words.) Satan can tempt some men to nauseate the Discipline and Principles of
others that fear an Oath. But you think [in our Places and Callings] is, that
Ministers must preach them down, and Soldiers fight them down. Ans. 1. But is
not Petitioning confessed by you to be agreeable to the Place and Calling of a
Subject, and therefore allowable. And so you build up what you would pull down.
2. Either it belongs to the place and calling of a Minister to preach for
Church Reformation in the said Alteration, or not. If it be, dare you oppose
it? If it be not, this Clause restrains it. 3. If the King (who can give
Soldiers Authority) should commission Soldiers to pull down Lay Chancellors,
or alter Prelacy, and make a Bishop in every Market Town or Parish, would you
teach the Soldiers to disobey and any to resist him? What! and yet in the Oath
swear that it is not lawful to resist any Commissioned by him? But a Soldier
that is not authorized to do it, does it not in his place and calling. Your
talk of changing Discipline with Rebellion by instances from practices, is but
a proceeding in bold Calumniation, when you say nothing to the Vindications
which Dr. Pet. Moulin Bishop Bilson, King James, and others have given it. And
to name no Instance but that of Prague, is so bad, that I will not name its
quality. Do you know what Discipline they were of at Prague? I suppose you know
that the Bohemian Waldenses were Episcopal, as Commenius and Lascitius
Treatises will show you under the name of Seniors and Conseniors. And the
Palatine Discipline was mostly Erastian by Magistrates, even long before
Erastus pleaded for it against Beza, even as was and is the Discipline of the
Helvetians. And has the Image of both Churches, or some such Papist put this
into your head, to nauseate Magistrates, Church Government, for the sake of
them of Prague, that raised a Tumult against the Magistrate (on what cause I
leave to just Historians.) When you ask me what I think of those disciplinarian
Principles. I answer, I think who ever used them they are false, and I think
him a shameless Calumniator that will charge them on us that Conform not,
without one syllable or show of proof: Do you mean [Bancroft and Heylin charge
them on some called Disciplinarians in the last age. Ergo, I may charge them on
the present Non-conformists; yea on the whole Chorus, yea on their Discipline
that desired Bishop Usher's Episcopacy.] Let it be so, that you may be your
self: As to what you say against the Genevian Principles, as against
Government, etc. I answer, 1. Why did you not name some one of those
Principles, and try by what Consequence it infers all the Villainies which
you name. Do not the Papists say the same of the Protestants. 2. And next, why
did you not prove that we hold those rebellious Genevian Principles? Were it
Christian dealing in me, if I should say, [Because Prins History of Prelates
Treasons proves that multitudes of Prelates have been Traitors therefore our
present Prelates are such too.] But we see what Instruments the Prince of
Malice and Calumny uses. You tell me that you shall the less believe
Confessions, because the Parliaments Declarations so differed from their
practice. Ans. 1. But will you falsely accuse the part that is good for the part
that is evil? Most Christians live not according to the Christian Profession:
Is the Christian Profession therefore bad, and the cause of all their
Villainies? Will you judge fidem ex homine? Will you charge all that upon a man's
Religion objectively considered, which you find amiss in his life. 2. Do you
not know that our Question now is not what the men are, but what their
Principles and Discipline, and that it is not the Professio profitens, but the
Professio professa which is to be disputed of. And by what means shall any
Church or Party under Heaven defend their Religion against such a Censurer and
Disputant as you are? They will say that they have the true Religion; you will
say, no, for you are not true to your Religion: They will say, that their
Articles are true; you will say, no, they are false, because you live not
according to them, (which implies that they are true and good, or else what
fault were it to contradict them in practice.) The Protestant will say, Our
Religion is sound and agreeable to Gods Word: you teach the Papists to answer,
no, it is false, for there are vicious Livers among you. And I pray you, what
number of Sinners must go to prove a Religion, Creed, or Articles false? Must
it be all, or the major part, or will any one serve? Must the Kingdom try by
the Pole, or Vote whether the Vicious or the Virtuous are the greater number
among them, before they can prove their Religion true? Does the Act go to the
Essence of the Object? 3. But if it must needs be so, I pray dispute no more
against the Non-conformists, or dispute against them better by your Lives, than
you have done? Will you teach them to argue the XXXIX Articles, the Liturgy,
and Book of Ordination are not true, or to be subscribed, because the
Conformists live thus or thus. You know Foreigners and Posterity know not which
of the Histories of this Age are true or false: Suppose that they should read
Mr. White's Centuries of Drunkards, etc. ejected from the Ministry, and the
Records of the Country Committees, saying, So many and so many were upon Oath
proved scandalous Drunkards, etc. And Ralph Wallis naming so many Drunkards and
scandalous Conformists now. Would you have them question the Principles and
Discipline of the Church of England, till they can prove these Histories false.
I profess to you resolvedly, that if I must needs judge that Church or Party to
have the soundest Principles and Discipline, who have the best lives; I should
far and very far prefer the Presbyterians, Independents, and much more the
Conciliators, before the Prelatists, and yet not extenuate any of their Faults.
But all this is nothing to you that go another way to work. [Why tell you of
men's Professions, when you see their contrary Practice?] When as it is not the
Practice only, but the Profession that is the Principles and Discipline that
you accused: And so when their Principles are in question, why do we talk to
you of their Principles? And how silly a shift is all this covered with?
Because the Parliament promised to make the King the most glorious King, if he
would return to them, etc. But 1. Is a Promise and Disciplinarian Principles of
the same nature, when we question their truth. The Promise is not true, unless
it agree with the Mind of the Promiser, of which God is the Judge till
Performance show it. But Principles may be true, though he that profess them be
never so false. 2. And I pray remember, that the Parliament were pulled to
pieces, and conquered by Soldiers (even for resolving to close with the King)
before the King could be cut off. But as for the first War, I have told you the
Authors of it.

To your next; [If we must call none Episcopal men that are not faithful to
their Principles] Then I know not indeed whom I may call such: If Parties must
be notified by their Fidelity, we should have agreed thus to sense the Word
before we had disputed, for other men speak not thus. Did you think I cited
Moulin against Philanax to prove that our Principles are better than the
Papists. Have you read him all, and understand him no better? I cited him as
fully proving historically that the Places now charged with Presbyterianism and
Rebellion, Geneva, Holland, etc. had changed this Government before, or on
other accounts; Flanders and Brabant joined with Holland in the change, the
main Body being Papists, who after fell off when the Prince of Orange mentioned
Liberty of Religion. And for Geneva, page 27. he faith, [My business being to
vindicate the Reformation from the charge of Rebellion, I must take from the
Reformers of Geneva that Aspersion, that they expelled their Bishop, and that
they altered the Constitution of that State, and both these ascribed to Calvin:
It is a Tradition received in England, as a current and undoubted Truth: (A
fair Credit to the Prelatists Honesty and historical Veracity!) And upon that
ground many fine and judicious Inferences are built. But it is like the Story
of the Phoenix, and the singing of Swans, never the truer. What credit can be
given to Histories of things bapned in the Indies 2000 years ago? if in things
done so lately, and so near us, gross Mistakes go for uncontrolable Truths.
(You know with whom.) I say, it is utterly false that Calvin was one of the
Planters of the reformed Religion at Geneva. False also that he or the
Reformers at Geneva turned their Bishop out of doors. And false also that the
Bishop went away upon the quarrel of Religion. The Bishop was fled eight Months
before the Reformation, seeing his Conspiracy discovered to oppress the
Liberties of the City by the help of the Duke of Savoy, for which his Secretary
was hanged after he was gone; the said Bishop being hated before, for the Rape
of a Virgin, and many Adulteries with Citizens Wives. And it is most to be
noted, That they who after his flight reformed the Civil Government were strong
Papists, and mainly opposed the reformation of Religion.

I shall recite no more out of this Episcopal Doctor, Prebend of Canterbury,
but desire you again to read page 23, 24. What changed Luther's mind to own the
Protestants Arms against the Emperor. And page 32, 33. What King James says
to vindicate the French Protestants; [I never knew yet that the French
Protestants took Arms against their King, etc.] And that Cap. 3. page 64, to
73. He cites the Confessions of all the Churches, the Augustane, the French,
the Belgic, the Helvetian, the Bohemian, the Saxonian, the Swevian, the
English, as consenting for Obedience to their Sovereigns. But all this is
nothing to you that can say nothing of worth against it: Neither the
Vindication of their Principles or Practice. But (unrighteous Judge) I am with
you (partial and unequal.) 1. Because I told you, that you should not have set
down the bare Names of T. C. and Travers, as a Charge, without citing what they
say. And is not that true? Is that an unequal expectation? And what if I had
added, That had you proved them guilty, it had not concerned any of us, or our
Discipline or Principles, till you had proved that we had owned the same? And
is that unequal? O Justice! 2. Because I said, [I will no further believe
Bancroft or Sir Th. Aston, then they prove what they say.] No, nor you neither.
Must I believe Adversaries accusing Parties without proof, and such Adversaries
too! Why must I believe them more than Heylin, or more than Doctor Moulin
aforecited believed the English Tradition against Geneva? Is this the equality
of your way?

. 37. It Is tedious disputing with a man that cannot or will not understand what
is said, no not the Question, no not the Subject of it. You cite my words out
of the Saints Rest, that say not any thing to the Question. The Question is
not, What were the final Motives of the War? But, what was the Controversy of
the warranting Cause and Foundation, that must decide the Case, whether it was
lawful or unlawful. The Bonum publicum, and the Gospel and Religion, and men's
Salvations, are the great moving ends and Reasons of a lawful War. But it is
not these Ends that will serve to prove a War lawful? Could that be the Cause
or Controversy which they were both agreed in? Did not the King profess to be
for Religion, Liberty, etc. as well as they. See yet his Shrewsbury Half-crowns
(if Coin be any evidence with you) private men may not raise War for Religion;
but the King may. The Finis and the Fundamentum are not the same. I there talked
but of the Finis and Motives, I now speak of the Fundamentum and Controversy,
which is well known to be, whether the King or Parliament then had the power of
the Militia, rebus sic stantibus; and whether the Parliament had true Authority
to raise an Army against the Army Commissioned by the King for that Defense,
and executing the Law upon Delinquents, which they then pretended to. Now I say
still, I know no Theological Controversy herein: I know no Scripture but
Policy and Law, and Contract, that will tell us, whether the King of Spain, or
the States, be the rightful Governors of the Low Countries? Or, whether the
King of France be absolute? If you can out of Scripture prove that all
Republics must have the same Form and Degree of Government, or how Forms and
Degrees must be varied in each Land. I resist you not, but only confess my
weakness, that so high a performance is beyond my power. Had you understood the
Question, you might have spared your Citation of my words.

. 41. You come again to our swearing Conformity; and you say, [That it must
reasonably be understood of a tumultuous and armed endeavor.] Answ. 1. And it
is publicly known that we are ready to swear against a tumultuous and armed
endeavor (unless by the King's Command.) If you would not endeavor it, even
with Arms, if the King commanded you, accuse us not of Disloyalty for being
more Loyal than you. If you would, we are of the same judgment as to the thing:
And so (while the thousands of ignorant Souls are untaught) men of the same
judgment (on our part openly professed out) must some be Teachers, and some
silenced, some preferred, and some in Prison, and banished from Corporations,
etc. even while they hold the same thing. And why? Because one part of them
dare take an Oath in a more stretching sense than the others dare: And that, 1.
Because they are taught (not only by Amesius where you cite him) but by all
conscientious judicious Casuists, That an Oath is to be taken strictly and not
stretchingly, in the common sense of the words, unless the Lawgivers will
otherwise explain themselves. 2. And the words are universal [Not endeavor at
any time] without the least limitation or exception of any sort of endeavor.
(I should have broke that Oath by this writing to you had I taken it.) Et non
est distinguendum aut limitandum fine lege. 3. The Lawmakers are to be
supposed wise, considerate men, especially the Bishops, and able to distinguish
between an universal and a particular or limited enunciation, and to express
their minds in congruous words. 4. The Lawmakers knew before and since that we
would take the Oath, if (Endeavoring) had been limited as you do; and yet they
never would limit it by one syllable. 5. The Reasons used for that Clause, and
our acquaintance with the Bishops and other Authors of it, leave our
Consciences persuaded, that their meaning was against all Endeavors, and not
tumultuous, military, or illegal only; as in the Et caetera Oath 1640. It was
that [I will not consent] which is less than [Endeavouring.] And we are not
ignorant what relation this Oath has to that: And we take it to be a sin to
deceive our Rulers, by taking an Oath in that sense which we believe was not by
them intended, and seeming to them to swear what we do not mean. 6. When twenty
London Ministers took the Oath, because Doctor Bates told them, that the Lord
Keeper promised him at the giving it, to put in the words [Endeavour by any
seditious or unlawful means] (or to that sense) the said limiting words were
not only left out, but when old Mr. Sam. Clark said, My Lord, we mean only
unlawful endeavor: Judge Keeling asked, Will you take the Oath as it is
offered you, and refused to add any such Explication; and told them when they
had done, they had renounced the Covenant. 7. The Justices tell us when they
offer us the Oath, That we must take it according to the plain sense of the
words. 8. The Parliament in the Act for regulating Corporations, in the
Declaration there imposed, and the Oath, does fully satisfy us what is their
sense about this matter. 9. It is not true (as far as any London Ministers can
know) that ever the Judges declared their sense as you say for that limitation:
That is, that ever they did by any Consultation and Concord give any judgment
in the Case, whatever any single Judge (as the Lord Keeper) might say
privately, or any one alone, when another may say the contrary. 10. If they
had, it is a known thing, whatever their judgment may do to make Cases in the
Common Law, yet as to Statute Law, only the Lawmakers are the
Law-Interpreters, as to any Interpretation which shall be as the Law it self, a
Rule universally to the Subjects: And that Judges and Justices (who here are
made the Judges) do only interpret the Law, for the decision of particular
Controversies that come before them. And if all the Judges and Justices in
England should meet and agree of this Statute, it would only show how they
resolve in particular judgments to expound it, and not what is the true
obliging sense to the Subjects Conscience: Otherwise the Judges would be equal
to, if not above the King and Parliament. For he has more power who
determines what sense and soul the Laws shall have, than they that only make
the words and body, which others may put what sense they please on. Nor can all
the Judges make it lawful to take up Arms against the King, if they so
expounded any Law: They have a deciding Expositors judgment as to the Case
before them, but not the regulating universal expounding power at all. 11. We
think that Divines that preach against sin, above al^ men must not stretch
their Consciences in so dangerous a point as public swearing. 12. And we think
that if men be once taught to equivocate, and play fast and loose with the
sacred Bond of Oaths, Conscience is quite debauched, no sufficient Bar is left
to keep out any the greatest sins; Preachers and People become incredible;
humane society is endeavored to be dissolved, and the King's Life (secured
much by his Subjects Fidelity and Conscience of an Oath) is exposed to the
wicked wills of men. We charge no others with all this, but we will avoid it
our selves though it cost us yet more. You may swear [not to endeavour] and
mean particularly [not by Tumult or Arms, but by some other endeavor;] but so
cannot we. Therefore do you enjoy your Liberty, Maintenance, and Honor, and we
will be without them; and to morrow, at death, we shall be as free and as high
as you.

But fie, Sirs, why will you talk of [straining Oaths, and turning plain Oaths
into Snares, ana^ allowing no Interpreters?] Are your ways here equal too? 1.
What is the plain sense, but an universal sense of an universal enunciation? If
by [All] or [None] I understand All or None, and you understand not All but
Some, who is the Strainer of the Oath? And I pray you tell me, if once any
endeavor shall be excepted, who shall determine how much it must be. The first
part of the Oath says [Not on any pretense whatever:] That is, we must not
take up Arms against any Commissioned by the King. What if a bold limited
Expositor will here come in, and say, [Except King John deliver up the Kingdom
to the Pope; Or except the King's Commissions through the Officers fault should
be contradictory] Or such Exceptions as Will. Barclay and Grotius make? Should
not this man rather be the Equivocator and Strainer of the Oath, than he that
thinks so plain a Phrase, as [not any pretense whatsoever] is exclusive of
any pretense whatsoever? Never trust the man that fears not an Oath. 2. But
why talk you of none being Interpreters? we cannot give the Power to whom we
please: The Lawmakers think it best as it is, and will not interpret as you
do, when they can, and know all the Reasons that you can give them. The
Justices are made our Judges: I told you that the Justices when they sent me to
the Gaol, refused to Expound it, and told me I must take it according to the
proper sense of the words. Yet do you go on, as if none of all this had been
said to you.

As to what you say of Obligation by the Covenant, and leaving a gap, etc. I
answer, Melancholy men by fearing bring the thing feared on themselves: It was
the Et caetera Oath 1640, that forced me (who else had lived quietly in my
ignorance) to read and study many Authors, to know the truth before I swore,
who turned me (not against Episcopacy) but against the Italian and Diocesan
frame. The Covenant is not the thing that they are in danger of, but their own
Diseases; we firmly believe that the Covenant binds us to nothing but what we
were bound to if we had never taken it, as being not a primary Bond to make new
Duty, but a secondary to bind us to that only which is antecedently a duty; and
that no Vow or Covenant binds us from obeying the King in any thing
indifferent, much less a duty before. These are our Principles, however you
nauseate them. But without respect to any Vow or Covenant, we hold that we are
all bound (not to any Treason, Rebellion, or any illegal means; but) in our
true Place and Calling to endeavor that those things may be reformed in the
Discipline, which my first Dispute of Church Government has proved to be evil
(After which so long unanswered, you need not so loudly have called for my
Reasons:) And if this be it that makes you think my Retraction not sincere,
think what you please, I never retracted any of this.

. 44. First, They that exercise the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution in
the ordinary open Judicatures of the Land, are Church Governors: But Lay
Chancellors exercise the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution, in the
ordinary open Judicatures of the Land; Ergo, Lay-Chancellors are
Church Governors. 2. Who doubts but the Et caetera included them. If it
included None, it was superfluous: If Any, how exclude you them. And is it not
said, [As it stands, and ought to stand.] But were it but Deans and
Archdeaeons, I would not swear, that if the King commanded me by Writing or
Petition to endeavor some alteration, I will resist or disobey him; you may do
as you will. 3. It were too long now to tell you, how far I take my Conscience
obliged to a Lay-Chancellor, and how far not. 4. But what is next? That [no
Learned men so much as maintain in the Schools, the Lay-Chancellors Church
Government.] And yet have we hot and feverish heads, if we will not swear to
that which no man will maintain. Well! let it go for our Crime or Folly while
such men judge. 5. Add p. 20. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom; a
good understanding have all they that do them. -- Fools make a mock of sin. --
See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. To fear an Oath is a
mark of the fear of God; and I am sure to play with Oaths is a mark of the
contrary. God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. All
things by temptation may go for lawful to him, to whom Perjury, deliberate
studied Perjury seems lawful, yea and a duty. And avoiding the name, is no
avoiding of the thing. He that will commit Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. and
then prove it to be no Murder, etc. does not thereby escape the guilt: And he
that is not willing to know Sin to be sin that he may leave it, is wilful and
wicked, as well as he that will not leave it, when he knows it. We do search
the Scripture to know what is Perjury as well as we can; And we are the less
likely to be partial, when our judgment loses us the favor of so many, and
our Maintenance, and Liberty, and in Prisons, hazardeth our Lives, besides our
Ministry, the most of all. Few men will take this way for the flesh; yet this
is no proof that our Cause is good: But let the Evidence show, whether in
fearing Perjury we fear [a Serpent under every Leaf, or a Gorgons head in every
Bush, and bring this Woe upon our selves] or not: If we do, it is not for
worldy ends, nor is it by a superstitious fear of things indifferent. If so
many in Queen Mary's days were burnt for denying the Real Presence, etc. Shall
I not fear Perjury?

. 44. Next p. 20. you come to the Liturgies Confession, that our Discipline is
imperfect, and think that should satisfy me. Ans. So it does satisfy me, not
to assent and consent to all things contained in and prescribed by the Book of
Ordination and the Liturgy, and not to forswear all lawful endeavors of a
Reformation; it seeming unmeet for me (whatever others do) to give so plenary
assent and consent thus to swear, to that which in the same Book is confessed
imperfect: I can live in Communion with a Church that has imperfections, and
keep its peace, but not assent, consent, or swear to its Imperfections. 2. An
you give me no reason yet, why a Confession the imperfection of Discipline
should satisfy u^ that all things in the Church Government, or all
Church Government is both lawful and necessary, and unalterable: For if it be
alterable by King and Parliament, I will ^^^^ swear never to endeavor an
alteration, though they command me: Nor will I believe you if you say that this
Case (of their command) is excepted, while the terms are universal without
exception; Remembering that the long Parliament long before the Wars, when the
Lord Falkland, Lord Digby, and the rest joined with them, did exagitate the Et
caetera Oath, for the word [Not consent] as establishing Prelacy as an
unalterable thing; whereas they knew not but the King and Parliament might be
brought to see cause for some alteration. And this Parliament has not restored
that Oath (and Canons,)

Ib.. 44. My Consutation of your horned Reasoning, and of the common [peralium]
I perceive offends you, as triumphant. It is natural for men that see plain
truth, to be guilty of calling it truth: In this if we cannot be pardoned, we
must be patient. Truth it self is our reward and satisfaction. The force of my
Reply you indeed leave entire and untoucht; For when you say, that you break my
Chain at the first Link, you do but repeat what I replied to, and put me but to
say over again what I said. You say that Lay-Chancellors excommunicate neither
as Laymen, or as Clergymen formally, or by any proper Causality, but from the
Surrogates.] Answ. And were you willing here to be understood? Either they do
Excommunicate by proper Causality, (without causality no Act is done) or they
do not. If you mean that indeed they do not, why would you not say so, and deal
plainly? If you mean they Excommunicate but ^^^^ by Causality, why would you
not say so (which ^^most absurd.) If they do it, they do it formally as some
persons, and in some capacity, and by some power or right whatever it is. That
they do Excommunicate and Absolve decretively, as the stated public Judges, is
notorious to the Land. That the Person in which they do it, is formally Lay or
Clergy, I thought had been past doubt, and the enumeration had been sufficient.
But you do dare tertium, find out a third Mumber: He is formally neither Lay
nor Clergy, but does it from the Surrogates; See you not how you change the
Question, [In what person he does it] into [from whom he does it] or make that
[from] to signify a third Species, which you could not or would not name: And
when I say, that if he do it from the Surrogate, yet he does it either as a
Layman or a Clergyman; you answer me as neither [but from the Surrogate.] You
might have said as well, As neither, but from the King. But who ever it is
from, tell us of what Species that man is in acting, who is neither formally a
Layman, nor a Clergyman; whereas in our present sense, as a Clergyman
signifies,, One in the Priesthood or Deaconship, dedicated to the Sacred
Church-Offices: I easily prove that in the World there is no third sort;
because the terms signify Opposita contradicentia, and contradictio est omnium
oppositionum maxima, prima and reliquarum mensura. For to be a Layman, is to
be one that is not devoted and separated as aforesaid. And Devotus and non
devotus, separatus ad sacra and non separatus, vel persona sacrata and non
sacrata, are contradicentia. And if you allow me not to swear or conform till
you prove that some men are neither Lay nor Clergy, you will be no succesful
Pithanalogist with me. But I desired to know who this Surrogate is that you
mean, and you will not tell me: If you mean any one that is absent and no
Member of the Court. 1. The Chancellor has his power from no such man as is
notorious. 2. You might better say, that he had it from the Bishop: But still I
should ask in what person he acted, and whether as a Lay or a Clergyman. But
if you mean the Priest present who pronounces the sentence, I never heard that
he was called the Surrogate till now: But call him how you will; 1. It is
notorious that he gives not the Chancellor his power at all. 2. And as
notorious that he has not, nor exercises the power himself: But to judge any
man to Excommunication or Absolution, is the Chancellors part; and the present
Priest is but like the Parish Priest, who reads or speaks (as a Crier) what
the Chancellor judges and orders: And whether such Priest be any Member of
the Court, or constantly used, I leave to your Enquiry; but certainly he is no
Judge at all, nor does any thing but pronounce as he is bid. And still my
Arguing is unanswered: For had this Presbyter the power, it would be either as
a Presbyter, or as a Bishop. Not as a Presbyter, say the Prelatists; for then
it will set Presbyters too high, or rather take hundreds from that which
belongs to their Office, whilst one in the same Office exercises the Keys
upon all their people and themselves that are his equals: Et par in parem non
habet potestatem. Not as Bishops, for they are not such really, and the
Episcopacy cannot be delegated, as I proved. You said (which I am glad of) That
it may be you could wish that Excommunication were reduced into a more
Scriptural, Apostolical, and Primitive Channel as much as my self. But you
never look that the Church below should be without spot or wrinkle.] Answ. You
speak here so well, that it half reconcileth us: If so, then the main
difference left is, (not whether we shall live peaceably in such a Church, or
promise to do so; for that I have often done, yea and did subscribe to the
Archbishop that now is, (when he gave me a License to Preach, and I could have
had it without subscribing a word) that I would not Preach against the
Doctrine, Liturgy, or Ceremonies of the Church: But) whether I may deliberately
give my hand and profession that I assent and consent to such a frame, and may
swear that I will not any time endeavor an alteration of that Government,
which runs not in the Scriptural, Apostolic, Primitive Channel, nor of its
acknowledged spots and wrinkles: That is, To promise or swear that I will not
obey God, nor seek the Reformation of any such thing in his Church, which is
acknowledged amiss, no not in my place and calling, and by any lawful means.
Whereas in my Baptism I vowed my self and service to Christ as the Savior of
his Body; and in my Ordination I vowed my self to him as a Minister; and I
daily pray for the hallowing of his Name, the coming of his Kingdom, the doing
of his Will on Earth even as it is done in Heaven: And therefore will not by
swearing to the contrary, renounce my Baptism, Ministry, or Prayers. (Pardon
the description of the Sin as it would be to me: I do not say, that it is such
in you, or another that sees not what I see.) Good Meanings and Latitudes, and
stretching Expositions, will not make this pass with me among things
indifferent. And (for your own sake, not mine, who stand or fall to a higher
Tribunal:) I entreat you to judge of us in this as of men that are dying daily,
and near a World where Preferments and Wealth, and humane Favor signify
nothing; and who are so unwilling to neglect our undertaken Office for men's
Souls, that we offer our Superiors to take it joyfully as a Favor to be any
way punished for this supposed Sin (of not lying nor being perjured) so it may
not hinder us from Preaching the Gospel of Salvation; Even to be punished as
deeply as common Swearers, Drunkards, or Adulterers are; to rid Channels, to
Dig or Plow, or to be burnt in the hand as Felons are, or our Ears bored or
cropped as Rogues or perjured Persons are, so we may but Preach Christ, or see
the Kingdoms so supplied, as that our Labors may be truly needless to men's
Salvation. I would take all this thankfully on my Knees: much more be denied
the Levites Bread, or Ministerial Maintenance. But these are too high Favors
for such as we to hope for in such a time, and from such Persons, as Experience
proves; except that the Clemency of the King vouchsafes us some convenience,
against the will of such of the Clergy as you: Nothing but either Debauching
our Consciences, and stretching them so wide, as that any thing will afterward
go down; or else deserting the Preaching of Christ for men's Salvation, will
serve with some men that I have talked with: (For it is not my Superiors now
that I am speaking of;) I did all that I was able unfeignedly, to have brought
all men once to Union with the Church, upon any other terms than these, when
the thing was feasible as to the most: But -- was an Enemy, and one that
deserved shame and ruin for it. But I am gone back: To return. --

I am glad also that you say, That the Surrogates have the power of the Keys;
and indeed so most Schoolmen say, and so Spalatensis has notably and often
proved: But what it will infer against Bishops, denying them to all the
Presbyters in a whole Diocese, save one or two, or few: I will not repeat.

You say, I did not well to overlook what you said about Chancellour's Skill in
the Civil Law, etc.] Answ. I did not overlook it, but past it by as an
Impertinency, supposing we had been agreed: 1. That the holy Scriptures are the
Universal Rule of Church Discipline as to the Essentials, and the Laws of the
Land, and Canonical Agreements, the subservient Rules about Circumstances, and
Adjuncts, and for the execution of the former. 2. And that Ability in
Scriptures (much less in the Roman Laws) does give no man authority to the
exercise of the Spiritual Keys without a Call, being but his remote Capacity.
3. And that he that is called hereunto is called to be a Clergyman, to whom
the Keys are proper. I pray you, Sir, deny none of this: (Let Begging this once
go instead of Arguing. 4. And he may be fit to Advise and Assist a Bishop that
is himself no Clergy man; but Advising and judicial Decreeing are several
things. 5. And I am weary with saying, that we submit to Chancellors as
Magistrates, doing that which belongs to Magistrates, according to the sense
of the Oath of Supremacy. But what is all this to our Case in hand?] You add,
[Tell me, Sir, may not a man be said to do that virtually, which he does not
immediately.] Answ. Yes, a man may pay a Debt by his Servant, or Deputy; but
not Baptize or Administer the Lords Supper, or Discipline by another, because
Christ has annexed the Office to the Person, and the Office is an Obligation
and Authority to do the work.

You add, [The King does neither Preach, nor Administer Sacraments, yet has a
Supremacy of Power in all things belonging to the Church.] Answ. Now I cannot
follow you so far, as to believe that the King does virtually Administer the
Sacraments per alios: At least I durst not swear it. If you think it is but a
Gorgons head that affrighteth me; hear and judge: 1. Christ gave the Keys
immediately to Ministers, and not to Kings, and distinguished their Offices. 2.
Queen Elizabeth' K. James, and the Convocation have publicly disclaimed such a
sense of the Oath of Supremacy, and taken it for the Papists slanders, and
disclaimed such a Power of the Keys in the King, and so has our present King
(wisely) in my hearing. 3. Some Scots are well charged with an injurious
refusal of the Oath of Supremacy, on the account of such a false Exposition;
which is the Papists Case. 4. Almost all the Papists and Protestants in the
World that ever I heard or read, are agreed, that the King has not the said
Power of the Spiritual Keys and Sacraments. 5. And specially the most learned
and zealous Defenders of Monarchy and Prelacy: Bilson of Chest. Obed. and Perp.
Gov. and Andrews in Tortura Torti, have most plainly and vehemently renounced
it, and showed their malice or ignorance, that impute such an Arrogation to our
Kings: So also Carlton of Jurisdic. Jewel, Whitaker, and who not. 6. What a
King may do virtually by another, I think (unless Inconveniences hinder the
exercise) he has power to do himself. But I think the King may not Administer
Sacraments or Spiritual Discipline himself: Which of our Kings did it? Or who
since Uzziah offered Sacrifice among the Jews. 7. Our Kings never yet pretended
so much as to Ordain; that is, to Invest another in that Power Ministerially in
the Name of Christ. But as to the Supremacy, it is true, that the King is the
Supreme over Physicians, Philosophers, etc. but not the Supreme Physician or
Philosopher: He exercises Coercive Government by the Sword over Bishops who
use Spiritual Government by the Keys and Word; but has not Authority to use
this same sort of oversight himself (unless a Clergyman were King, as some are
Magistrates.) As to the Proxies of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament, when you
have as well proved that Christ has allowed them to Preach, Administer
Sacraments, and exercise the Keys by Proxies, I will yield all that Cause: But
they will be loath to go to Heaven by Proxy.

Page 21. As to Jebosaphats Mission, and his Nobles Teaching; I answer, 1.
Teaching is not so proper to a Pastor or Clergyman, as the Keys and
Sacraments: Parents have their Office or Power of teaching, and Schoolmasters
and Lay Catechists have theirs, and Magistrates have theirs: Judges on the
Bench do usually teach the People, even religious Duties; so did Constantine,
and so may any King. But there is a different teaching whith is proper to the
Clergy; which is [by teaching to gather Churches, and guide them, and edify
them as Pastors, devoted or separated to this as their proper Office.] As there
is a difference between the Office of a Physician and a Woman's healing a cut
finger, or giving a Cordial to one that faints. But this proper Teaching
(which God did not leave in common to others) no Prince can use, no Bishop can
do by Proxy; Nor can he delegate to a Layman the power of the Keys and
Sacraments. 2. And the King may no doubt command Pastors to do their Duty as
well as Physicians to do theirs. I take none of this to be quarrelling, but
plain truth: Your telling us that Chancellors may direct and advise the
Surrogates, may signify something in another Land, but not with us: If we had
never seen their Courts, nor read Travers, Of the difference between Christ's
Discipline and theirs; yet Cousin's Tables are in our Libraries.

You add, [We are all but the Bishops Curates in the exercise of it.] Answ. 1.
I ventured to deny that to Bag shaw who made it the Reason of Separation: And I
will yet deny it of some others, though not of you. If we are all but the
Bishops Curates; the Italian Bishops of Trent were not so absurd as they were
made in making the Bishops the Popes Curates. How easy should I be, were I a
Curate, could I believe that I have no more to answer for, than the Bishop
imposed on me, and that he must answer for all the rest. I suppose that the
Office of the Presbyters or Ministers of Christ is immediately Instituted and
described in the Scriptures, and that the Bishop does but Invest them in it,
and that their work is their own, as properly as the Bishop's is his own, and
that his Precminence, makes not him the Communicator of the Power to them as
from himself, nor them to be his Curates. 2. And while I think that I can prove
this very easily, censure us not too deeply for not swearing to the Bishops, if
the sense of it be, to make us his Curates. Not that I think my self too good
to be a Servant to the Bishop's Coach man, but that I dare not subvert Christ's
established Church Orders.

As for your [Engine, and Wonders, and Babel, and Lucifer, and trembling] I
have not learning enough to answer them. As to your talk of Absolute
Autocratical, etc. they are but Oratorical Flowers, that speak against none of
our particular Doctrines, but are the rant of your Magisterial style. And your
talk of Excommunicating Kings, may pass as part of your equal ways, to one that
has written so often against Excommunicating Kings, (when yet Bishop Andrews and
other Prelates maintain the Refusing them the Communion; and you know in what
Case Chrysostom rather offered to lose Hand and Life, even then to give the
Sacrament to the Greatest that was unworthy. Prove that ever any of the present
Non-conformists, who were called to present the judgment or desires of the
rest, did ever say more than Andrews and Bilson, or so much. But the Lord Digby
is your Author. Answ. 1. Were we and our present Controversy, (for the most of
us) in being, and at age when the Lord Digby spoke that? Is not Conformity now
another thing? Do all or half the Non-conformists profess themselves
Presbyterians? Are Presbyterians all for Excommunicating Kings? And do not some
that are for it, confine it only to such Pastors as Kings themselves shall
commit their Souls to, and give leave to exercise that Power? Are we, I say, we
now living, and silenced, answerable for all that any Presbyterian holds, any
more than you are for what Hooker holds? Some Scots-men refuse the Oath of
Supremacy. Are we guilty of that Mistake, who Take it, and Write for it? Or did
we spring out of their Loins, and must be silenced for such Original sin,
derived from them that were no kin to us? 2. But where did the Lord Digby say
it? You cite no Book or Speech of his; but cite Rushworth, p. 218. Where is no
syllable of any such matter, nor any where else that I can yet find. 3. Suppose
he had; Did he not say in his Letter to Sir Ken. Digby Printed, That the
Primitive Church Government will be found pecking toward Presbytery: He was
then Episcopal, he is now a Papist. Is not his Authority then ad hominem, while
he was one of your own, more valued against you than against them that were not
of his Party or way, and is this good arguing? [Whatever the Lord Digby,
Bancroft, Heylin, (and if you will Bellarmine) charge the Presbyterians with
1640, or I know not when or where, all that are the Non-conformists, Episcopal,
Presbyterians, Independents, and Catholic Moderators are guilty of in 1671.
But the Lord Digby sometimes said, that the Presbyterians would Excommunicate
Kings: Ergo, the present Nonconformists, even Episcopal and all, are guilty of
that Opinion, even they that write against it.] But all your ways are just and
equal: But I pray you, why was no Article about Excommunicating Kings offered
us as a Test? or why was there never any such difference between us and the
Prelatists pretended? Try us whether we will not subscribe in this to, as much
as the Prelatists ever did agree on, or ordinarily hold, and lay our Liberty
upon it, and spare not. But I remember you nibled before at my words in Differ.
of Magist. and Pastors power, These. 60. p. 38. as if I had said, That [unless
perhaps in some rare Case, Kings may not be Excommunicated.] A Calumny, when I
annexed those words of exception only to the Excommunicating of Parents. But
your ways are still equal! And I gave even Moral Reasons against
Excommunicating Kings and Parents. But when you in swearing will put (who knows
how many) Exceptions to express Universals, must I after all this be at your
mercy, unless I will say, that [In no rare case a Pastor may Excommunicate his
own Parents.] What if the rare Case were 1. That he were but one in a
Presbytery subject to a Bishop, and his Parents were as open Apostates as
Julian, and the Bishop and the rest of the Presbytery required him to concur in
their Excommunication? 2. What if the King command a Bishop to Excommunicate a
Magistrate or Parent for Treason? Must he needs be disobeyed. 3. What if God
should send an Angel or Prophet with a particular Message so to do? I am sure
that Case is rare enough, and I durst not disobey. But its hard pleasing some
men.

. 45. Semper idem? 1. But will you give it under your hand as a Lesson to your
Flock, That a Minister may not gainsay another for slandering Christians, who
in any thing differ from him that does gainsay him; nor may defend the
Innocence of a Presbyterian, unless he be one himself? And that all men are
bound to stand to the Opinions of all Christians in all other points, whom they
seek to vindicate against public slanders. What a pack of Doctrines do the
Reasonings of these your Writings imply if they were but set together. If I
write almost twenty years ago, and still against Lay Elders, a Conformist may
equally charge that upon me which I write against, if I do but plead against
slandering those that hold what I dissent from. Yea [he knows not where to
have us] so little do our Writings signify our minds in these men's account.
The first Epist. to Kederm. in the first Book that ever I wrote, disclaims
them: But that is nothing to you. And I must be taken for the Achilles of the
Party, and accountable for their Opinions; if I do but say to a Printing
Conformist, [Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.] May I
not say so to you for a Heathen or a Papist. Dr. Heylin tells us in the Life of
Archbishop Laud, That the Kings Printers were censured sorely for Printing the
Seventh Commandment [Thou shall commit Adultery.] But I never yet met with the
Ninth Commandment so transmuted, to give you any excuse: If you think it lawful
to say any thing how unjust soever against a man that is not for your
Discipline (which you as much wish amended your self) I am of another mind.
When Lamprid. tells us, that Alex Severus borrowed his Motto of the Christians,
Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. He never said that therefore he was a Christian.
I had got no Lawyer to plead for me at the Bar, if they had known that they
were accountable for all my Opinions. I am sure the Lord Chief Justice when he
acquit me, thought fit to declare his different judgment from mine in point of
Preaching privately: Yet here your terms of Logic are, [Into how many shapes
-- and Hecatetriformis -- Fish, flesh, Mermaid, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent; yet none of these when you please an (...), sometimes in the
water, sometimes out; I wish you were hot or cold.] All this set together would
make a Syllogism of a new Mood and Figure. But 1. For ought I know most of the
Nonconformists are such are your bungling description intimates: And whatever
men hold, take it as it is, and feign them not to hold what they do not. Do not
you in Print proclaim men to be flesh or fish, hot or cold, that are not so?
But lay our Error where it lies (even as I must not take your Chancellors for
Clergymen or Laymen.) 2. And did not all my tedious writings convince you
before now? that I therefore take that for an honor which you take for my
disgrace; because I take that for plain and certain truth, which you reproach,:
You could not (except a Catholic Christian) have trulier called me, than an
Episcopal Presbyterian-Independent. I have often enough told the World, that I am
very confident that each of the three Parties have some Truths and some Errors
appropriate to themselves, or which the rest have not. I never found in
Scripture any Obligation that I must needs be of a Faction, in a time when
Faction has bred Wars, troubled Kingdoms, silenced Preachers by the hundreds,
etc. and when I have seen and felt the Effects, and not been always innocent of
the Cause: Nor yet that I must either refuse all the good, or receive all the
bad, and feed on the excrements of any Faction whatsoever; I am for no such
heats or cold; I am no such fish or flesh: I will neither persecute as Paul
did, nor separate as Peter did, Gal. 2. nor comply as Barnabas did, nor reject
the Brethren as Diotrephes did, nor condemn others as the Weak did, nor despise
them as the strong did, Romans 14. 1, 2, etc. But be such an (...), as he that
became a Jew, a Greek, all things to all men that he might win some. When I
offended the Bishops in Conference, I openly told them, I had ever taken
kneeling at the Sacrament to be lawful, but I never took it to be lawful to
cast honest Christians out of the Communion of the Church of Christ, that dare
not do it. Did this prove me to be neither fish nor flesh? Is no man of your
Religion that is not for Excommunication, or Prisons, Swords or Flames, for
every Child of God that cries or wrangleth with the Breast. Again I will say,
were they Priscillianists, I am more for Martin's Spirit than the Ithacian
Bishops. And, Sir, that factious fury and uncharitableness keeps up but a
present violent kind of honor; the Instance now once again named may tell you,
that when all the Bishops thereabouts in their Synods did but seek to the
Magistrate to use the Sword against such gross Heretics as the
Priscillianists, who as Severus says that knew them, were Gnostics, and but
one poor ragged unlearned godly Bishop Martin, (with one other only in all
France) did dissent from them, reprove them, and separate for it from their
Synods and Communion (Godly people accidentally falling under the Vulgars
reproach for the Heretics sake, as lately by the word Puritans here) yet this
one poor Bishop that renounced all their Communions for it, is Canonized a
Saint, while Hooker himself justly reproacheth Ignatius. And it made me marvail
to read in Bellarmine de Scriptor. Ecles. page 100. this great Lie that
Ithacius (whom he falsely makes the same with Idacius, who was one of the same
Synod, and Author of the Chron. in Jos. Scaliger de emend temp.) In eo
reprehensus and punitus ab Episcopis fuit, quod Priscillianum apud seculares
judices accusaverit and occidi cur averit.] Whenas 1. The Bishops never
punished him for it. 2. The Synod of Bishops joined with him. 3. Martin was
despised as an unlearned Hypocrite, and Favourer of the Heretics that did
renounce their way and Communion. 4. Ithacius and Idacius because of the common
Odium, would have pretended that they put not on the Magistrate hereunto: And
that Bellarmine one of the Tribe that is for burning Heretics, should yet
leave this blot on Idacius, and seek by untruths to excuse the rest of the
Bishops of it; whence is it, but that the Memory of the just shall be blessed,
and the Name of the wicked (the cruel especially) shall rot. I digress only to
tell you, that the honor of violence will end in shame, and he be odious to
Posterity, who may be set up as high as Gardener or Bonner, to serve the turn
in some present Execution: And I had rather be lukewarm, than have a
destroying or slandering heat.

To what you say of Beza and Seldom, I answer, 1. Did I or the present
Nonconformists ever subscribe to Beza or Geneva. 2. Is it not palpably against
your self, that cry down Lay Elders, (though many with Ministers have power but
in one Presbytery or Synod) when our Lay Chancellor has the power over
hundreds of Ministers and Churches. You that cry up or keep up Laymens Church
Discipline, may worse speak against Laymens Church Discipline, than we that
are against it in all whomsoever. 3. But Beza and Geneva do not take them for
Lay Elders, nor the Scots neither, but for Church Elders, and part of the
Clergy of Divine Institution; none of which is pretended for Lay Chancellors.
And is that no difference? For Seldom as I know what he says against the
Diocesan Church, Bishops in Eutychius Alexandr. So I know what he says against
all of us for Erastianism de Synedriis, better than by any Citations out of
Heylin. And I know he was one of the Long Parliament that raised the War, whom
even now you had possessed with the Spirit of Presbytery: And you may judge of
many of the rest by Seldom. And must you or I be Erastians because Seldom (and
other Lawyers in the Parliament) were so.

. 46. The Quibble in this Section is Content without an Answer.

. 47. I judged but of your Words, and judge you of my Motives for refusing a
Bishopric no worse than I give you cause. I answer you, it intimated no
Ingratitude to His Majesty, nor did I ever repent: And that I did it not to
keep up a Party or Interest in them, the Lord Chancellor had Evidence; and my
voluntary endeavors against all Faction, and casting away my Reputation with
all such, declares; when I could as easily have kept it, as you with yours,
and had no outward interest to move me to renounce it. I say this, because you
seem suspectingly to talk of my Motives.

. 48. Our Question is, Whether a Church of One Altar (as they spoke of old)
Associated for personal Communion, and a Church of never so many Altars or
Congregations Associated for other ends, and not for personal Communion be
ejusdem speciei? And so, whether the word Church here signifies but one
Species? You hold the Affirmative of both, and I the Negative. My reason is, 1.
Because it being a Relative which is in question, [The ends of the Society
specifically differing, make the Societies specifically to differ, (the
Terminus being essential to the Relation.) But here are different sorts of
ends: Ergo, here are different sorts of Relations. I use the word (ends) to
signify the nearest end which specifieth, and not the remote. And to avoid the
ambiguity of the word [Terminus] which (as Finis cujus and finis cui are
distinguished, so) they use variously, sometimes for the Correlate, and
sometimes for the nearest end; and so I now use it. As a Master to teach a
Grammar School, and a Master to rule a Family, or to guide a Ship, are
Relations specifically distinct a fine: And so is a Magistrate, and a Pastor,
and a Physician, etc. This is clear. And for the Minor, That these Churches in
question have different nearest ends is evident: For the end of a particular
Church is personal ^ummunion in God's public Worship and holy living, to their
mutual assistance. But the ends of Churches that never know each other, but
live an 100 or 1000 Miles asunder. (They say some of our Islands and
Plantations are parts of some English Diocesan Church) can be no such thing,
but only a distant communion in the same Faith, Love and Obedience. The end of
a single Church is the personal Communion of Christians in that one Society.
The end of an Association of many Churches, is the Communion of those many
Churches in distant mental Concord, or by Delegates or Synods sometimes in ^ase
of need. And who ever thought that a particular Church, a Patriarchal Church,
and a Pabal or the Universal Church, were ejusdem spe^i^i. when they agree only
in remote ends, and differ in the Terminus vel finis proximus. As a Kingdom and
a Corporation differ Ex differentia ^inium; because though both are Societies
for Ci^il Communion and Government, and so agree ^n genere, yet the end of one
is Kingdom government and Communion; and the end of the other is ^ut
Corporation-government and Communion. 2. Where there are different sorts of
Relates and cor^elates, there are different sorts of Relations: But ^^ a
particular Church, and a Patriarchal, Dioce^n, or other Combination of many
Churches, ^here are different sorts of Relates and correlates: Ergo, there are
different sorts of Relations. The thing supposed in the major is undeniable,
that ^^e Relate and correlate enter the definition; ^^erefore the major is
undeniable. The minor ^pposeth a Church to be Constituted of the ^ars dirigens
vel regens, and the pars subdita, as relate and correlate, which is undeniable.
And ^en it is proved per parts. 1. The Pastor of a ^^gle Church, and a
Patriarch, Pope, or Dioce^n of a multitude of combined Churches, are not the
same Relate, for they have not the same Relation: (I suppose the Relation of a
Church to be thus Constitute of the two Complicate Relations, as well the
Church subjectively of the two Relates.) For, 1. The different Work. 2. And the
different Correlate, prove these Pastors to be two sorts of Relation (however
agreeing in^genere.) 1. It is not the same sort of Works personally to guide a
present people in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline (under Christ as Prophet,
Priest, King, all essential to the Office) as to send others as his Curates to
do this: (For the King may send others,) or to exercise some degree of
Discipline himself over many Churches, where he is none of their Teacher, not
Mouth, nor Guide in Worship, Prayer, Praise Sacraments, etc. Nor is it the same
work to be an unusual Teacher (as one may be in another Church or School) and
to be the stated ordinary Teacher and Worshipper of that Churrh which is the
end of the particular Pastors Office. 2. And the Correlate proves the
difference: For it i^ not the same Relation to be a Ruler of a Family and of a
Kingdom; and so here: which bring me to the proof of the Minor by the second
part And that the Correlates are various is evident, no only from the
magnitude, but the end also there included: For the subject of Political Society
(Civitatis vel Ecclesiae) is a Community, not an multitude of men: Because that
which Aristat^calleth Privatio, and is better called Disposu^materiae, is
necessary as a kind of Principle to the reception of the Form. (As in Physics,
so quianalogum in Relations:) And therefore it must b^ a Community. Now
Communities themselves are first specified by their various ends: As a Company
of men combined for Merchandise, and a Company combined for Literature, or for
Soldiery, etc. are not the same: So a Company combined for Personal Communion
and helps in holy Worship and living, are not the same with those combined for
other ends as aforesaid. Therefore neither the Pastors nor Peoples Relation,
and consequently the Churches, is not of the same sort. 3. Where there are
distinct Fundamenta vel rations fundandi, there are distinct Relations: But
here are distinct fundamenta, etc. The fundamentum is, 1. Principal, which is
Institution (Divine or Humane.) 2. Subordinate, which is Consent: Viz. 1. Of a
Minister to gather Churches, Consensus duplex Dei and Ministri. 2. Of a
Minister to guide Churches gathered, Consensus triplex and plerumque
quadruplex; viz. 1. Dei. 2. Ordinati. 3. Populi. 4. Plerumque Ordinantis. If
any of these vary, the Fundamentum relations does so far vary; were it not
tedious I would show, you how much difference there is in all these. But it is
the first Reason, that being most edent, I most insist on.

Now your Reason to the contrary (for your Affirmative) is, that Gradus non
variat speciem. To which my Answer being, that Quando variat aut finem
proximum, seu terminum, vel fundamentum, vel relatum correlatum, variat
relationis speciem. But frequently Gradus materiae, variat finem proximum
fundamentum, etc. Ergo, and speciem. The Major needs no proof; the Minor I
cleared by the instance of a Ship, a Church, a Spoon, etc. where magnitude or
parvity can make this difference. You tell me Relatives do not suscipere magis
and minus. Answ. The clean contrary is an usual Maxim with Logicians: But that
is so plain that it needs no dispute; viz. Quoad subjectum (and fundamentum
aliquando) and materiam correlati; It may be found in diverse degrees, but not
in degrees of matter incapable of the End and Form: But the forma Relativa does
not so vary; one is not magis vel minus haec relatio, than another. But if you
will extend this to the Matter of the Subject, which is our Case, you do but
(though mistakingly) give away your Cause: For then every new Member makes a
new Church in specie, (when you say) [This is only in respect of quantity;] You
know that Aristotle says, That Quantity non suscipit magis and minus, and so
his Interpreters say, speaking strictly and not laxly: Therefore it is this you
must mean as I do, while you would say something that we may seem to differ. I
told you, that different quantities in the subject may change the relations,
which I think never man denied that understood what a Relation was. And you
feign me to say simply [That Magis and minus variant speciem in relatives:]
That you may have occasion to say as I said, under pretense of contradicting
the same thing. But to my Instances, you say, That it is enough for your
purpose that there is not a specific difference between a little Spoon or
Diocese, and a great one.] Answ. Say you so; our Question is, Whether different
Degrees in the subject may vary the species of Relations? Either you deny it,
or you do not: If you do, common Experience and Reason will shame your denial.
I instanced in a Spoon, a Church, a Troop, Regiment, Army, a Ship, etc.
Wheresoever the finis proximus (as in all Offices and Societies) is essential
to the Relation, there no man of Logical acquaintance can make a doubt of it,
but that certain Quantities or Degrees in the Subject may be so over great or
over small, as to be incapable of that End, and consequently of the Relation. I
will not censure you to be so ignorant as to doubt of it; and if I do not, you
force me to judge you so heedless or partial as to say something toward the
hiding of that truth which you do not doubt of: I say, that Degrees in the
Subject or Correlate vary not the Species, but when they vary the specifying
end: some Relations are founded only in Actions past; as Pater and filius in
Generation, Creator and creaturae in Creation: And there the end following is
not essential. But it is otherwise with those Relations which consist in an
Authority, Obligation, undertaking of a future work, (as a Teacher, Physician,
etc.) where the Work as undertaken is the essential end. And you had here no
better a shift then to dissemble in silence the other Instances; and to tell
me, that [a great Spoon and a little one differ not specie:] But does that
prove, that it may be in specie a Spoon, if if be as big as a Ship, or in
specie a Ship, if it be no bigger than a Spoon: Since you perceive your own
deceit, which is by transferring the Question, are ad nomen, and then by
choosing Instances de nomine, where the Name is never used generically, but
only for one species. The name of a Spoon is never taken for a Ship, and
contra: And therefore to say, that a little Spoon and a greater differ not
speeie, is but to say, that the same species is the same, as being found in a
capable degree of subject. But a Society, a Church, yea a Diocese, are names
(generical or analogous) which may be and are applied to various Species. The
universal Church headed by Christ, is no more of the same species with a
particular Church, than a Kingdom, and a Corporation in that Kingdom are. I use
not words to hide things, but to render them intelligible. A thousand Schools
combined under a general Schoolmaster, or an hundred Colleges making up one
Academy, are not of the same species with one School, and one College, though
in the great remote end they both agree. But you fly to that poor shift of
bidding me take heed of absurd and ridiculous Suppositions, not argumentative,
etc.] As if you had showed any absurdity in these Suppositions: Or as if plain
undeniable Instances had no place in Arguments or Answers, but were ridiculous
Suppositions; and he that would say, that a Kingdom is greater than a Family,
and the King than a Master or Major, used a ridiculous Supposition. Just thus
the poor Nonconformists are persuaded by your Pithonalogy, to subscribe, swear,
etc. But I seem (you say) to assert this my self, by saying, there is a small
difference between Bishop Usher's Model and the present.] Answ. It Is tedious
disputing with one that must have still another Writing to help him to
understand that which he will first confute, yea and seems not willing to
understand. It is a fallacy, A dicte secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: I
only asked you, What Farthing does it take from their Estates? What Title from
their Honor, Power, Negative voice: (even their Lordships and Parliament
places.) But is this the Question? We then labored to satisfy the unsatisfied
Ministers, that not only Bishop Usher's Reduction, but even the King's
Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, had changed the very species of
Prelacy without any of those Abatements. If you would know, it is by one word
[Consent] restoring the inferior Pastors and Churches, though not to their
Integrals, yet to their Essentials. And we were so inclinable to Conformity,
that on that supposition we had Conformed, had but that Declaration stood:
(though some of the Sects are of another mind, whom you Arguments would
confirm:) For we judge, that a Bishop of one only Church consisting of five
hundred or a thousand Chapels or Congregations that are strictly no Churches
(as having no Bishops) does specifically differ from a Bishop of a thousand
Churches, which have every one their proper Bishop, and so he is truly an
Archbishop or General Bishop. But I am not to trouble you with this.

And now how impertinent was it, to bid me [Rub up my Philosophy about Maximum
quod sic and minimum quod non.] Know you not, that the common use of those
Writers are to intimate the same thing that I am saying against you; That there
is a subjective maximum and minimum, which only are capable of the relative
form? But I am next turned to Vossius de invoc. sanct. of which he has there
disputed, and one Histor. These. and I am not told which (of them) but the words
are in the first These. 49. to prove that the Saint in Heaven and those on Earth
make one Society: [Quare cum nihil obstat quo minus unius civitatis cives
dicamur, nec causae quicquam erit, quo minus aeque civilis honos dicatur, qui
civibus coelestibus exhibetur, quam qui civibus terrenis: Nam grad^ quidem
honores isti differunt, sed uterque tamen est (...).] And was it possible that
you should think that this made for you? Because the world or Universe of
Rationals are one Body or Society, and so civil honor is the same thing as
such in genere to them in Heaven as to them on Earth: does it follow that in
this universal Society there are no Kingdoms, Cities, or Families specifically
different? Nor no different species of the civil honor, what not to Kings,
Parents, Masters? What a thing is factions Interest? Vossius only proves
Generical Identity of civil honor, and the specifical difference of it from
the honor of Religious Adoration. The Church universal is one; and the love
and honor which we owe to the Saints in Heaven and Earth is Generically of the
same kind. But do you believe therefore that there are no subordinate Species
of Churches and Honor on Earth? What not the Honor due to the King, the
Bishop, the Chancellor, the Parish Curates, the Deacons, and the Beggars. Yet
all this with you are Premises sufficient to conclude. [And then it may be you
may give leave to -- Magis and minus non variant speciem, to be a Maxim still]
See what Evidence it is that must persuade us to Nonconformity. Are they not
worthy to be silenced and branded as you have done, that can resist such Light?
But you come to the quick, and say, [Is there no Communion but personal? Answ.
Yes, else they could not be two ends to make two Societies. You add, [Many of
the Kings Subjects never saw his face, yet they have many Hands and Eyes in
respect of their subordinate Officers, so have Diocesans in their Curates.]
Answ. Very true! And that proves that a Kingdom is one Society, and a whole
Diocese also one: Ignoras Elenchum. But does that prove that there are no
subordinate Societies in these? Which though subordinate in point of Power, yet
specifically differ. Is there no such thing as Personal Communion in presence,
because there is such a thing as distant Communion of another sort? For all
that your terms of Hands and Eyes would hide it, I scarce think you are
ignorant, that under the King there are Heads as well as Hands and Eyes: Heads
of Families, Schools, Colleges, Universities, Corporations, Cities, who are
constitutive parts of real Societies, which are not of the same species with a
Kingdom, though in it. And if Archbishops be of God's appointment, so it should
be with Archbishops and Bishops, and every Church should have a Bishop. But if
you will not have it so, but we must only have a Bishop and Curates, and a
Diocesan Church and Chapels, you betray our Cause to the Brownists, who easily
prove [No Bishop or Pastor, no Church in sensu politico:] And so when you have
granted them that we have no true Parish Churches, there are few of them whose
Wit is so weak as not to disprove the pretended right of such Diocesan Churches
as consist of the Carcasses of many hundred mortified Parish Churches.

. 50. My Answer I must not repeat, take it how you will: you here come to the
very Controversy, I will not begin it with you, because I cannot prosecute it:
I have so much to say on it, as at these rates may engage you and me in dispute
for many years, if we lived so long: which I find no reason allowing me to
undertake. Get me leave to Write and Publish it, and I will write you a just
Volume of it, since it is published: till then I again tell you, I have said
enough (though too negligently) in my Dispute of Church Government; (though one
has nibled at the Forms of some Arguments in it:) If you would have more,
answer Gers. Bucer, Parker, and Baine, Ames's fresh Suit, to name no other.

. 50. I showed the invalidity, 1. Of your [Licitis and honestis.] 2. And of
former Obedience, sub poena anathematis, as nothing to our case in hand; and do
you deny what I said, and disprove it. 2. I tell you, that so far as Bishops or
Chancellors are the Kings Officers to Govern the Church circa sacra by the
Sword, we will swear and perform Obedience to them under the King, in licitis
and honestis. But I told you, they that take them for the Usurpers of Spiritual
power, will easily prove it to be lawful to swear Obedience to Usurpers in
licitis and honestis; will you deny that. 3. And I told you that it is another
Oath that is imposed on us to take. But did you well to say, You produced the
words of Ignatius, to prove the antiquity of swearing to Bishops, who says not
a syllable of any such thing? And untruly say, I took no notice of it, when I
told you that Ignatius mentioned not Oaths, but only actual Obedience. This is
no notice with you: But do you not know how late it was before swearing
Obedience to Bishops came into the Church, and by what sort of men, and to what
end and effect.

. 52. Your talk of Cartwright confirms me of the vanity of the Hypocrites
reward, the praise of men; there being nothing so false which may not by some
men be said of them with boldest confidence. If Cochleus or his like, do but
say, That Luther learned of the Devil; that Calvin was a stigmatized Sodomite,
etc. all their Followers can ever after say, It is in Print. So Mr. S. P. (some
body) Printed this you say. And Heylin says, He promised. What? just the same,
or to the same sense, as I told you, I voluntarily subscribed, when I might (by
the Kings Declaration) have chosen, merely because I would have them know our
minds and peaceable resolutions. I told you why he that can promise to live
peaceably, etc. cannot subscribe and swear the Approbation of all in that
Liturgy, Government, etc. which he lives peaceably under. But this is nothing
to you; if Cartwright Conformed, first, Prove it by credible History. 2. Why
then could the great Earl of Leicester procure no more liberty for him, than an
Hospital in Warwick, and no Church. 3. I have lived in Coventry, and been often
in Warwick, and know by all credible testimony of Neighbors, that it is false,
and no such thing as his Conformity was there dreamed of, any further than I
Conform. 4. Why did he never declare it to the World, nor retract his Writings.
5. Your Heylin's own words intimate the contrary; (though I must tell you, I
owe as little belief to that Book of his, as most Histories written by sober
Protestants.) But you say much more, [Dr. Burges, p. 377. observed, That
Cartwright opposed the Ceremonies as Inconveniences, but not as unlawful, and
therefore persuaded men to Conform rather than leave their Flocks.] Answ. 1.
But the Ceremonies are but part, and the lesser part of Conformity. 2. Else had
all Conformity been here included, he was still a Conformist: And how could you
then say, That at last he wrangled himself into Conformity, if he was such at
first? 3. But if you cite him truly, be judge your self, whether Hoylin said
true; and what will be your case if you will report all that you find such men
report. 1. Dr. Burges's own words are but these, page 423. [The consideration
of this necessity moved Mr. Cartwright to advise the wearing of the Surplice;
and Mr. Beza to resolve for the use of these Ceremonies, rather than the Flocks
of Christ should be forsaken for these.] And he cites Cart. Repl. 2. So that
here is not a word of Cartwright's Concession in any thing but the Surplice,
(kneeling he was for.) The Answer of Amesius to his Father-in-law Burges, is in
these words; (Fresh suit, p. 21, 22.) [Whereas he adds, that Beza and Mr.
Cartwright determined with them in case of the Surplice. I answer, 1. They did
not so for the Cross. 2. They did not so for subscription to either. 3. They
did not so but by way of toleration, requiring also that men speak against the
imposing of the Surplice. 4. Beza was not thoroughly acquainted with the state
of our Church. Mr. Cartwright, as I have been certainly informed by his own
Son, recalled that Passage of his Book, and desired that his revoking of it
might be made known.] Then follows the Attestation of another to that report.
Do you see now how credibly S. P. Heylin and you report Cartwright to have
wrangled himself at last into Conformity: Be warned, and take up false reports
no more.

. 53. I thank you for shortning my trouble.

. 54. [Waspish, and faltering, and raging, after a tedious journey.] Are your
Logicks above my skill to answer? But adrem, 1. It is a wonder to me that an
Englishman should be in doubt who they be that drive men from the Parish
Churches? Enquire who drove away the People of Kederminster? Did I? I Preached,
I Printed long before. That should the Liturgy be restored, it were no
sufficient cause, etc, When I was silenced and might not Preach in public, the
last Sermon that ever I preached to some at my Farwell in a private House, was
in conclusion to persuade all to keep to the public Churches, where the
Ministers are not notoriously Insufficient as to the very Essentials, or
notorious Hercticks, or Malignant Opposers (not of differing Parties, but) of
the certain Practice of Godliness it self. But when I had done my best then,
and since by other means, the Reading Vicar, and one Sermon of the Bishops, and
one of the Deans, and many of a Lecturers after, and they saw so many hundred
Ministers silenced, it possessed them with so great a prejudice, that till a
good Minister came among them, it was past my power to reconcile them to the
Church; nor is it done so fully as before I could easily have done.

2. As to your second Questien, When I told you how hardly the People would be
driven t^ Communion in your way: You answered, Ha^ they not been distracted,
distorted, poisoned by other Tutors. -- But since they have been taught, like
Wolves not to value the Scepter, -- like Mastiff-dogs they will worry me to
pieces. Those that are lately perverted any way, are most heady and ^ierce. The
Revolters are profound to make slaughter: And after the Scribes and Pharisees
compassed Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, when he was made, he was twofold
more the Child of Hell than themselves:] These are your words: And I thought I
had used them very gently, when I only say, [Whether all such Dissenters are
such Children of Hell as you describe.] (I might have added, such Wolves, Dogs,
etc.) I shall leave to a more wise and righteous Judge, what is in these words!
Be impartial one hour before you die, and compare them with your own, and think
how he that will say at last, [Inasmuch as you did it not to one of the least
of these my Brethren, etc.] will take all these Revilings of faithful Souls.
But how heedlesly do you read? I said, [All such Dissenters as you described,
and were talked of.] And you say, [all Dissenters.] There is no end at this rate
of calling you again to read what you write against. I excuse no man's faults:
But I will not be one of those Nurses that will cast the Children out of the
house when ever they cry or wrangle, till I find it pleases our Father, and
till I know where to have better enough in their rooms: Nor will I call them
Wolves and Dogs, that for fear of sinning against God dare not do as I do, and
too precisely wrangle with me when I urge them to it: And if their narrow
throats cannot swallow so big Morsels as the Nurse can, but will cry and strive
when it is crammed down by force, I will not cut their Throats to widen the
passage; nor stretch Conscience, till like a crakt Bladder it will hold
nothing: Nor with Ithacius, get the worst on my side as my Flock, and bring
the strictest under suspicion and reproach, because they are angry with me. And
what now your Calumniare fortiter signifies, Review.

. 55. The matter of this I have answered. The Flowers of [Flood-gates Torrents,
Dragons Scum, Raca, etc. I leave unanswered, because you would have brevity:
But if you would have brevity, you should not make work for prolixity, unless
you bespeak me to forbear answering you. But I know not how better to spare
your trouble and my own, than to tell you, that I expect or desire no answer
from you to all this that I have written; And if you do send me one, I will not
promise you a Reply. I like the Work as little as you do: And for the matter
and manner of my Writings, I do (as one that daily expects, (and long have
done) a speedy passage into a more holy, wise, righteous, and peaceable World)
Protest to you, that as I have not been for forty years at least the most
negligent Searcher after Truth, nor the coldest Desirer of it; but have I think
Impartially labored to know it, without adhering to any Sect, (at least these
25 years;) so I do defend nothing which I am persuaded is the Truth; nor oppose
any other men's ways, but what I think my Fidelity to God, his Church, and Truth
obliges me to oppose. If you be in the right and I in the wrong, it is because
you have a more blessed understanding, and not because I have been less
studious, or desirous to know the truth than you. And I confess my Temper and
Style is sharp; and Verba rebus aptanda, is a Motto that Quoad dispositionem
was born with me, and makes me often forbear that pleasing style, which should
be fitted to the persons, though unsuitable to the thing. But I write in have,
and suit all my Answers just to the matter before me, not considering
sufficiently how men can bear it. I justify none of this; and I unfeignedly
desire you to pardon all Passages, which you shall truly find to transgress the
Rules of Christian lenity: For if I be angry I would not sin; but I am not
conscious of wrath or disaffection when I speak most eagerly. But I must needs
tell you that had this writing been for the view of the World, I would have
forborne most of that freedom which in plainess I have used to you, but being
only for your self I remembered L^v. 19. 17. which I need not recite: being
confident that you have much wronged your brethren by the Book which you have
written. Which I impute (with all the rest of our divisions, violences and
calamities) to wa^^ of acquaintance and familiarity with each other; each party
conversing familiarly only with those of their own mind, and judging falsely of
their nearest Neighbors as of real strangers, by thereports of factious men.
For I do not remember that I ever yet had real acquaintance with any man in my
Life, that I did not live in Love and Peace with. But all my reproaches,
accusations, and sufferings, have come from men that know me not (unless by a
few public interviews.) And I do faithfully endeavor to defend behind their
backs, the just Honor and Reputation of the Bishops and Conformists, as well
as of the Nonconformists, being not for factious Calumny against either. Nor am
so sharp in my censures, as your moderate Erasmus was against such Bishops as
he then of London, that would have persecuted Dr. Colet, (the Bishop being a
learned Scotist,) who, as Mr. Thomas Smith translateth him in the Life of Dr.
Colet, says, [of which sort of men I have known some that I WOULD NOT CALL
KNAVES, but I never knew one, whom I COULD CALL a CHRISTIAN. There be some that
judge just thus of the (not unwilling Conformists, but) the eager promoters and
defenders of it among the Clergy, (that are not our superiors.) But so do not
I, but reprove their censoriousness; though I must needs confess, while I fear
being of a party, I fear not being one that differs from ungodly formal
Hypocrites, and that I find very great difference in point of serious piety
between parties. And if in my Youth I did incline more to one party than
another, it was only on the supposition that they were more spiritual,
practical, and devoted to God, (on which account I hope I shall still value
them) though even then Schism was, and now much more is, a thing which I
abhor; but take not those to be the least promoters of it, who most accuse
their brethren of it, being just of Hales's mind in that treat of Schism. And
for former complyances, etc. (you were acquainted at Co^sold, Sir Robert Pyes,
Mr. Twisse's, etc.) consider whether of us it is that needs no Retractation:
A word to the wise is enough. Having some information of your former life, I
may very easily say, that as great a noise as you now make for Conformity, and
against the late Usurpers, I did much more against them than you did in my
Ministry; and my danger from them was not a denial of a richer living (which I
never sought) but for open opposing their usurpation, engagementdaies of
thanksgiving for unjust victories, etc. I add this but to mind you that some
men by reproaching others, do doubly reproach themselves, and that
consciousness of their proper case should make men speak as they would hear.

(...), etc. look diligently into the Scriptures which are the true Oracles of
the Holy Ghost: learn that in them is contained nothing unjust, or fained, or
counterfeit. For you shall not find that the just were rejected by holy men.
The just suffered persecution, but from the ungodly. They were cast into
prison, but by the Profane; they were stoned, but by the unrighteous and
transgressors of the Laws: They were extinct, but by the wicked and such as
were pricked with unjust envy against them. Clemens. Roman. ad Corinth.

Reader, remember that this was written only for Mr. Hinkleys sight, if he had
so pleased.

FINIS.
RICHARD BAXTERS second Account to Mr. John Cheney of his Judgment, accused by
him of Atheism, subverting all Religion, Christianity, the Gospel, the Church,
all Government, Introducing Popery, etc. Especially for asserting, 1. That
Christ has Instituted one Universal Church, of which he only is the Head; and
particular Churches as parts of it, of which the Pastors are Subordinate Heads
or Governors, and so formally differenced. 2. That neither of them is
Constituted without some signification of consent: which he never before heard
one Christian deny.
CHAP. I. PREFATORY.
1. COntending though Defensive, and made necessary by Accusers, is an
unpleasant work: As I would choose a Prison before a Defensive War, were it for
no greater interest than my own; so I would choose to be in Print proclaimed an
Heretic, Schismatic, Atheist, or any thing, rather than be at the unpleasing
labor of a Confutation of all Accusers, were it not for a higher interest than
mine: For though we must contend for the Faith, yet the servant of the Lord
must not needlessly strive, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And experience tells us, the good
seldom answers the bad effects.

2. And there are few that call me to a public Account, that I answer less
willingly than Mr. Cheney: because his Accusations are such gross Mistakes,
that I cannot Answer them in the gentlest manner, according to truth, without
opening that which will bring him lower in the Readers esteem than I desire;
and I much fear, will be to himself a temptation which he will hardly overcome,
as I see by this his 2d Book. Had he that was my familiar Neighbor thought
meet to have spoken with me, before his Publications, I am past doubt that I
could have convinced him of multitudes of Untruths and Errors, so as to have
prevented such a publication of them; for in private he would easilier have
born the detection of them, than in the hearing of the World, (which he has
chosen.) But whereas some cast away his Book, as a fardel of Dotage and
shameless Lies, I must remember such, that I am confident he wrote no falsehoods
with a purpose knowingly to deceive; and therefore they are not strictly Lies,
but as rash untruths are such in a larger sense, which ignorant men assert for
want of due trial. It is a great error to overvalue such poor frail ignorant
men as we all are: Mr. Chapter and I have both over-valued one another; and this
error now we have both escaped, but not laid by our Christian love. And as God
will not take Men's Diseases for their Sins, his bodily temper is to me a great
excuse of his strong confident mistakes.

3. The very Introductory Preface of his Books disowning Cruelty and
uncharitable dividing Impositions, enableth me to forgive him the multitude of
rash untruths and slanders: and instead of a Mentiris, I shall put but a
Putares or Non-putares.

I have just such a task in dealing with Mr. Chapter as with one that is hard of
hearing: when I speak to such a one, that hears but one half, and mis-heareth
the rest, he answers me as he heard: and when I tell him his mistake, his
last reply is [I thought you had said thus and thus:] but if I should dispute a
whole day with such a man, I should be sharply censured if I printed the
Dispute, and told the World how many hundred times the man mis-heard, and so
mistook me. And I fear neither he himself, nor the Reader that valueth his
time, would thank me for such exercise of my Arithmetic with Mr. Cheney.

4. For his Preface I thank him: It tells me, that all our Accusers do it not
in mere Malignity: and that he has a few steps further to tumble, before he
come to the bottom of the hill. His Book consists partly of a handsome
considerable discourse for Prelacie, and other Church-Offices of Humane
Invention; and partly of a new and singular Doctrine about Church-Forms; and
partly in a critical discharge of his fancy, and unpacking his preparations
against the Independent Covenant, and Church-Form; and partly in detecting my
many Atheistical, Infidel, Impious Errors, by which he supposes I am
deceiving the world; and partly n a multitude of falsehoods of me (and others)
in matter of fact; and partly (I hope an ignorant) plea for the Pope. To open
all these fully, would tire the Reader and me.

CHAP. II. What the Doctrine is which he accuses of Atheism, Impiety, etc.
1. THE Reader that has well perused my Writings knows it: but I cannot
expect that all should do so that read his Book. The abstract is this.

I. That Jesus Christ is Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

II. That the Mosaical Law, as such, never bound other Kingdoms, and is ceased,
with their Commonwealth, and is abrogated by Christ, and that he as King of the
Church, has established a sufficient Law for all that is universally necessary
for Doctrine, Worship, and Church Order or Government: and was faithful in all
his house as Moses, and Commissioned his Apostles to Disciple Nations,
Baptizing them and teaching them what Christ himself had commanded them, Matthew.
28. 19.

III. That he settled the Ministry and Church-Form before he made any Magistrate
Christian, and that no Magistrate has power to change them.

IV. That what his Apostles did by his Commission and Spirit, he did by them.

V. That Church-Forms being so Instituted and Constituted, he has not left
them so much to the will of Man, as he has done the Forms of Civil Government.

VI. That Christ has One Universal Church, of which he is the only Head and
Lawgiver, and no Vicar personal or collective, as one Political person or
power: of which professed believers and consenters in Baptism are the visible
Members, and sincere Believers and Consenters the Spiritual saved Members.

VII. That the World and Church are not all one; nor Heathens and Infidels the
same with Christians, nor any parts of the Church properly called.

VIII. That Christ's Ministers first work to which they were Commissioned, was
not on the Church or any Member of it, but the Infidel world to gather them
into a Church; and the first Baptized person was not Baptized into a
preexistent Church; but the Church existing, Baptism enters men into it.

IX. That the first Baptizer was no Pastor of such an existent Church, but an
Organical Minister to gather a Christian Church.

X. That though at Baptism one may enter into the Universal and a particular
Church, yet Baptism qua talis enters us only into the Universal, being our
Christening or Covenant-uniting to the body of Christ.

XI. That a Pastor in the Scripture and usual sense, is a Relate to Oves the
Sheep or Flock, and not to Infidels: And a Ministry to Infidels, and an
Episcopacy or Pastorship of the flock, are different notions: but if any will
use the terms otherwise, we contend not de nomine, though you call him a Pastor
of Infidels, or what else you can devise.

XII. To explain my self, when I mention a Bishop or Pastor, I mean the Bishop
or Pastor of a Church: and I take not Heathens for the Church.

XIII. I believe that in this Universal Church are thousands of particular
Churches, and this by Christ's Institution.

XIV. I believe that there is no particular Church or Christian on earth, who
is not (respectively as Visible or Mystical) a part of the Universal Church.

XV. As every worshipping Assembly is a Church in a larger sense, so a Church
in a political sense is essentially constituted of the Pastor and People, or
the Sacerdotal guiding and the guided parts: and of such a Church it is that I
am speaking.

XVI. As such meeting in transitu are an Extemporate transient Church, so fixed
Cohabitants ought to be a Church accordingly fixed, related to each others as
such for longer than the present meeting.

XVII. Every such Political fixed Church, should consist of a Pastor (at least)
accordingly fixed, to a cohabiting people, and as their Pastor more specially
related by obligation and authority to them, than to strangers or neighbor
Churches. He is not bound to do that for all, as he is for them, nor may go
into other Pastors Churches with equal power, nor officiate where he please.

XVIII. If there be no Church but the Universal, than there is neither
Parochial, Diocesan, or National, nor are Assemblies Churches. Nor is our King
the Royal Governor of any Church: for of the Universal he is not.

XIX. Christian Princes must do their best to settle faithful Pastors in all
Churches, that is, according to the Laws of Christ, but not against them. But
as they must do their best that all their Subjects may have good Phycisians,
Schoolmasters, Wives, or Husbands, Servants, Diet, Clothing, etc. but yet are
not trusted by office to choose all these for every one, and impose them on
Dissenters, because the same God that made Kingly power, did first make
personal and paternal power, which Kings cannot dissolve: so every man is so
nearly concerned for his own Salvation, more than for Wife, Servant, Diet,
Phycisian, etc. that though he must thankfully accept of all the Rulers lawful
help, he is still the most obliged chooser. Nor is it any part of the office of
a King, to choose and impose on every Subject a Guide or Pastor, to whom only
he shall trust the Pastoral conduct of his Soul, any more than a Physician or a
Tutor for him.

XX. Parish-bounds are not of Primitive or Divine Institution: but cohabitation
or propinquity is a needful qualification of settled Members, gratia finis: And
Parish-bounds are a useful humane determination, according to the general
Rules, Do all to edification and in order.

XXI. No one is a Churchmember merely because he dwells in the Parish; for
unbaptized Infidels, Heathens, Atheists, may dwell there.

XXII. Nor is a stranger a Churchmember for coming into the Assembly; for
such, as aforesaid, or Jews, Mahometans, may come in.

XXIII. A Pastor owes more care and duty to his flock, than to the rest of the
world (as a Physician to his Hospital.) Therefore he must know who they are,
better than by knowing that they dwell in the Parish; nor may he Baptize them,
or give them the Lords Supper, only because he sees them in the Assembly or in
the Parish: else Jews and Heathens must have it.

XXIV. Nor is he to give it to every one that demands it: for so may Jews and
Heathens, that take it in scorn, or for by-ends.

XXV. Yet a Christian having a valid Certificate that he is such, has right to
transient Communion with any Church of Christ where he comes: but for order,
the ancient Churches used not to receive them without some Certificates from
the Churches that they came from, lest Heretics and Excommunicates, unknown
persons, should be every where received.

XXVI. No man can be an (adult) Christian without signified consent: nor a
stated member of any particular Church, without such consent: no, nor a lawful
transient Communicant without consent. For so great benefits none but
consenters have right to, nor can such relations be otherwise contracted.

XXVII. Consent not signified nor known, is none to the Church.

XXVIII. A man may be obliged to consent that does not: but that makes no man a
Christian or member of the Universal Church; else Millions of Infidels and
Heathens are Christians; And so it makes no one a member of a particular
Church, that he is obliged to be one: nor am I a Pastor over any men as a
Church, because they are obliged to take me for their Pastor, no more than that
is a Husband, Wife, Servant, who is obliged to be so, and will not. To say that
I am a Pastor to Heathens as a Church, is a contradiction: or that I am their
Pastor as my special Christian flock, and particular Church Members that
consent not.

XXIX. But the same man that lives among such, may be to consenting Christians
a Pastor; and to Refusers, Infidels, or Heathens, a Teacher. The Church ever
distinguished the Audientes and Catechumene Candidates, from the Fideles, who
were the Members of the Church.

XXX. No Pastor or people should impose any Covenant on any adult to be
Christened, but consent to be Christians signified by Baptism; nor on any in
order to transient Communion among strangers, but just notice of their
Christianity and understanding consent to that Communion: nor on any in order
to their being the stated Members of this or that flock and particular Church,
but due notice of their Christianity, and of their understanding consent to
what is essential to such members; that is, to the relation as essentiated by
the correlate and ends.

XXXI. No one should be obliged by covenant to continue one year or Month in
the station of that particular relation: because they know not when Gods
providence may oblige them to remove or change it.

XXXII. Though the Peoples consent be necessary to their relation, their
Election of the Pastor (which signifies the first determination who shall be
the man) is not absolutely necessary, though of old so thought. An
after-Consent may serve ad esse relationis.

XXXIII. Much less is it necessary that the people choose who shall be ordained
a Minister unfixed, and only of the Universal Church.

XXXIV. 1. Mutual consent of the duly qualified Ordained and Ordainer,
determines who shall be a Minister in the Church Universal; as consent of the
College and the Candidate do who shall be the Licensed Physician. 2. The
Peoples consent and the Ministers instituted, determine who shall be the Pastor
of this particular Flock or Church. 3. The King determines whom he will
tolerate, countenance and maintain.

XXXV. Though a man may be Ordained but once to the Ministry unfixed in the
Universal Church, (to which I said the Peoples consent is not necessary) yet
may he be often removed from one particular Church to another, on just cause, to
which the peoples consent (if not Election) is still necessary. Though to avoid
Ambition, the old Canons forbad Bishops to remove.

XXXVI. It Is lawful to be ordained sine titulo only to the Ministry in general;
but in settled Churches it is usually inconvenient: And he that is ordained to
a fixed Church, does at once become a Minister in the universal Church (and may
act as a Minister, and not as a Layman, when called elsewhere) and also a fixed
Minister of a particular Church; even as he that is baptized into a particular
Church, is a member of both: Though Baptism and Ordination qua tales enter but
into the Universal.

XXXVII. It is not this or that mode of signification of consent that is
necessary to either relation of Pastor or Flock; but Consent signified
intelligibly: where Laws and Custom order it that actual ordinary attendance
in public worship and communion, and submission to necessary ministration,
shall be the signification, all that so do express consent by it. And therefore
our ordinary Parish-Assembling and Communion, being express consent to the
mutual relation, have that which is necessary ad esse to true Churches; and
they slander them that say, they are not such. But ad melius esse more may
oft-times be profitable; 1. Because that is the best means, which is best
fitted to the end: But the end of Signs being Notification, that is, caeteris
paribus, the best which is most notifying; as that is the best Language which
is most significant and intelligible. Why should playing in the dark, or
dealing underboard, be preferred in the greatest things? 2. It often falls out,
that some that live in the Parish are known Church-Papists, Church-Atheists and
Infidels, and will tell in their meetings to their companions, [I believe not
the words of the Parish Priest: It is his Trade to talk for gain: I will do
what the Law requires of me, for my safety; but I will have no more to do with
him, nor do I take him for a true Pastor, that has any Authority but by Law,
nor for any Pastor to me.] And 3. there are many Heretics and Schismatics,
engaged Members of other Churches; who yet to avoid suffering, will do that in
the Parish Church, which the Law requires. 4. And the Ancient Churches used
express Consent, yea and Election. So for the Minister; he is no Pastor without
his signified consent: but actual Ministration may be such a signification.
This is enough to reconcile the difference about Church-covenants.

XXXVIII. They that rail against a more express consent in cases truly dubious,
as if it were tyranny and destructive to Christianity, do suppose that if the
King and Law commanded such a thing they commanded Tyrannically that which
destroys Christianity; and contradict themselves when they say that Rulers
may make various orders of Church Governors, and determine of undetermined
Modes.

XXXIX. As it is not needful and usual to set up a Coordinate Imperium
artificum vel Philosophorum in Imperio Civili; so it seems also of an
Imperium Religiosum. The first Question is, whether Christ has Instituted
such: The second, whether he has given power to Men to make it. There is not
in any Kingdom that I hear of, (but somewhat toward it in China) such a
Society of Physicians, Astronomers, Navigators, Lawyers, Schoolmasters,
Philosophers, etc. who set up a Coordinate Empire or Government, that shall
have all degrees of self-governing power as a National Socity, with one
Supreme, either Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical Head, according to
the order of Civil-government: Nor does any reproach Schools, Colleges,
Hospitals, or any trading Societies, that they are confused, Independent, and
ungoverned, because they have no common Governor but God and the King, nor any
particular Governor, but the Principal, or Master and Fellows of the Society;
nor any National association, besides their subjection to one King, and their
voluntary correspondence for concord and mutual assistance with one another.
And much less is there any Coordinate, Political Regiment of any of these
through all the world, under one visible humane Head, personal or collective.
And yet many think that there is such a Society and Regiment for Religion;
National say some, Universal say others: That all that will serve God and be
saved, must be under one Coordinate power over all the Kingdom, or World,
besides Christ and the Supreme Magistrate: and they contend whether this power
be Monarchical or Aristocratical, etc. I am so far Independent, as to think
that Christ has Instituted no such Universal or National Power and Head of
Religion: but that 1. his own Universal Kingdom: 2. And particular Churches
under their several Bishops and Teachers: 3. And Synods for concord and mutual
help: 4. And Christian Magistrates to rule all by the Sword: 5. With the
improvement of Men's eminent gifts and opportunities, that these be Instituted
by Christ I doubt not: 6. And whether some should succeed the Apostles
(excepting their extraordinary powers) in having a visiting, instructing,
ordering care of many Churches and their Bishops and Teachers, I confess my
self uncertain; and therefore will never strive against such, nor deny due
obedience to them, who show a true call to such an employment. Nay, if Christ
have made no such Institution; yet 1. if the Christian Magistrate, 2. or the
Churches by consent, choose some faithful Ministers to such a power, only to
direct, instruct, guide, admonish, reprove, exhort the Bishops and Teachers of
the particular Churches, without any other force than the Apostles used, and
not destroying any of their proper power and duty, or that Church Order which
the Apostles settled; I am no opposer of any such, though my uncertainty
disables me from subscribing and swearing to the right of their Authority. The
Scots themselves, even by Knox's consent, set up Super-intendents over many
Churches (John Spotswood Super-intendent of Lothian, and so others.) And the
power of a President, Principal or Rector of a College of Physicians,
Philosophers, or Divines, does not make him of any other Order or species of
Office and Profession than the rest. But if any affirm more than this, I will
learn, but cannot yet swear or subscribe it.

XL. Those that are for the obligation of the Jewish order, I have fully spoke
to in my first Plea for Peace. Those that are only for the power of man to make
such several Orders or Ranks of Governors in the Church, as are in Armies, and
Kingdoms, 1. Must tell us what sort of power may be given them: 2. And who must
give it. And 1. No men can Institute a power of the same species, or another
species from that which we call the Sacred Ministry, or as the Fathers, the
Sacerdotal, but what is subordinate about the Accidentals of Religion and the
Church. 1. Not the same species, because it is Instituted by God already: No
Man can create a creature already created. 2. Not of another supra-ordinate or
coordinate: for 1. they can prove no power given them to do it: 2. And that
were to accuse Christ of insufficient doing his undertaken work, and being less
faithful in his house than Moses: 3. And it will infer Man's introduction of a
new coordinate Doctrine, Worship, or Religious Ministration: for the
Ministration of the word and Sacraments, and Keys, is already appointed by
Christ: And the Office or Order is specified by the work and terminus; and a
new Office has new work. But in the same species of Religious Ministration,
there are abundance of accidentals and circumstances; and Princes or consenting
Churches may give men power in those accordingly. But not to forbid what Christ
commanded, nor destroy the works and power of his Institution. And if they that
are for other superior or coordinate species of Church Power, besides what is
afore-granted, say that it is a lawful humane Ordinance: 1. Those that say,
Princes only may make it, confess the Church had none that was lawful for three
hundred years. And they must prove the Commission. 2. Those that say the
Inferior Bishops made it by consent; 1. feign Inferiors to have power to make
a power above their own, (which is more than for Presbyters to ordain their
like.) 2. Why may not Archbishops then make Patriarks, and they a Pope, ad
summum ascendendo? 3. They must prove their power; and that they are so far
equal to Apostles, (who yet were but to teach the Nations what Christ commanded
them; which these Men know not but by the Scripture.) 4. What Man makes, Man
may unmake. And how came we to be less free than our Ancestors that made such
Offices?

XLI. In my Book of Concord where this is granted, yet I say, that let
Church-Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Primates, Archbishops, or Diocesans, like
ours that have no Bishops under them, be never so probably maintained to be
lawful, yea, and desirable; yet the uniting in them by consent and approbation,
will never become the terms or way of Universal Concord, which I have fully
proved; even all that is true and good, will never be the terms of Universal
Concord, nor just Christian Communion; much less that which has so much matter
of doubt, and great suspicion of evil. But I will live in Christian love,
peace, and submission my self, on terms incapable of common concord, or my own
approbation of the things as imposed or done by all others.

XLII. Lay-Chancellours may do what belongs to a Magistrate, but not use the
Church-Keyes, nor be the Church-Judges of Men's Communion, because Christ has
Instituted the Sacred Office for it.

XLIII. A Church is Ens Politicum (in the sense in hand) and the form of it is
Relative, in the predicament of Relation.

XLIV. The parts of the Universal Church are similar and dissimilar, more
simple or more compound. And the word [whole] applied to a part, disproveth not
its being a part of the whole Christian world or Church. A whole hand, foot,
head, etc. is part of a whole Body; and a whole Body part of a whole Man, and a
whole Man part of a whole Family, and a whole Family part of a whole street,
and that of a whole City, and that of a whole County or Kingdom: A whole
College of a whole University, etc. All Members save Souls and Atoms, are
compounds.

XLV. When we call all the Christian world [The Catholic Church] and call e.
g. Hippo [A or the Catholic Church] the word [Catholick] and [The] are not
univocal: In the later we mean only [The Church at Hippo] which holds the true
Catholic Faith, and is a true part of the Catholic Church in the first sense.
Penuria nominum necessaria reddit aequivoca.

XLVI. Particular Churches are Visible in the Regent and Governed parts: The
Universal Church is Visible in the Governed part, and in the Head only, so far
as he was once on Earth, and is now visible in Heaven (his Court) and will be
visible at last to all, and rules by visible Laws; but not as a Head now
visible on Earth: nor is this any deformity to his Church, nor any reason why
it may not be called Visible; as I have fully proved in two Books against W.
Johnson, alias Terret.

XLVII. Those that deny an Universal Visible Church, differ only de nowine, not
de re: They only deny any Universal Regent power, Monarchical, or
Aristocratical, or Democratical, under Christ; but I know no Christian that
ever denied the fore-described.

XLVIII. Forma dat esse: Diverse constitutive forms, or specifying differences,
make diverse Essences. Therefore the form of a Troop being the Captains
Government, differs from the form of a Regiment, which is the Colonels
Governing Relation, and both from the forms of the Army, which is the Generals.
The formal Essence of a College, is diverse from that of an University; and of
a Family from a Corporation, or City; and that from a Kingdom. And as forma dat
nomen, they have diverse names: A Family quatalis, is not a Kingdom, etc.
Reader, forgive the mention of these things, which Children know, and till now
I never read or heard any man deny or question. In that which follows, you
shall see the Reasons that excuse me.

CHAP. III. What Mr. Cheyney says against these things: And 1. Of Church-Forms
and Essence.
1. THough it tempt me not to Conformity as the way of Concord, where I see the
great difference of such as plead for it amongst themselves, yet I must do that
right to the Conformists, as to tell the world that they must not be judged of
by Mr. Ch 's opinions; and that I know no other Conformist (or Nonconformist)
of his mind about Church-Forms.

2. But I must add, that his Case does increase my Conviction against himself
and them, that their Conformity is so far from being the necessary Cement, that
it is utterly destructive of it, as so imposed: and that it must be on few
plain necessary things, that common concord must be held, or we must have none.
Mr. Chapter thinks me one who may be endured in the Ministry, and I think so by
him; and yet how far easier and plainer than our Controversies of Conformity,
are those things in which we differ to the height of his following Accusations?
If none should be endured that cannot Covenant, Swear, Subscribe, Declare and
Practice, as is required, how much less can such as he and I be endured in one
Church, if we differ as he says we do? O what pardon and forbearance does our
peace require!

3. Of Church-Forms and Essence, hear some of his Judgment.

Page 3. [The several Congregations and Assemblies of Pastors and People
throughout the Kingdom, are not limbs and parcels of a Church, but they are so
many Churches -- consisting of a Pastor Governing, and people governed, joining
together in public worship -- It is called [the Church of England] as all the
Christian Pastors and people throughout the world, are called the Universal
Church -- One Church, of which Christ is the transcendent Head -- I do not see
but it is proper to call all the Christian Pastors and people of England -- One
Church. -- P. 6. Christ is the Head of the Church of England, -- and under
Christ all the Parish-Ministers are subordinate Guides and Rulers of their
Flocks respectively. -- P. 7. Some are as Colonels of Regiments, others as
Captains of Troops; the Body is but One, the Members many. -- P. 13. The New
Testament says, -- The Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1. 2. the Churches of Judea,
Asia, -- Yet One body. -- All the faithful make One heavenly City, -- one
Church of the first born; -- so that Gods Church on Earth is Many Churches, and
yet but One Church. -- (Do you not think now that we are agreed? But hear him
judge himself.) P. 15. I will show one common Error or mistake in multitudes
of our able Divines, -- That those we call particular Churches, are counted
Parts and Members of the Church Universal. This I deny, -- Mr. Baxter makes the
Church of England, or the Churches of England, to be an integral part of the
Church Universal, -- as a Troop of an Army, or a City of a Kingdom. So the
Independents. I overthrow this Error by this Argument. One and the same thing
cannot be both a Body and a Member, a whole and a part, a society and one
single person. -- But that which we call a single or particular Church, is not
a Member but a Body; it is not a limb or part of a Church, but a whole and
entire Church, -- It has a whole within it. -- London is not a Member of
England, but a City and aggregation of Members. It Is no less than a flat
contradiction in terms, -- what Dr. Ames says, Medul. l. 1. c. 32. that a
particular Church est Membrum ex aggregatione variorum Membrorum singulorum
compositum, contrary to common reason and plain Scripture. -- P. 18. A bare
Member in the Body has no Authority, but acts by mere natural life and
appetite, and is not endued with rational authority, nor can be capable of any.
-- That which we call a single Church, is a Catholic or Universal Church. It
has an Universal Head. To be a Christian, is to be of an universal impartial
spirit; -- where there is an All, there is an Universal. -- But every single
Church has an All within it, the Pastor and all his flock. -- The Church
Universal and particular, do only differ as to place and number; -- A Church of
godly Ministers and people in France, Holland, -- and England, differ but as to
place. -- Every Church (of Christians) must needs be a Church Universal; not a
limb or member of another Church, but a true body, or entire Christian society.
-- P. 20. Christ's Body is One: not as one is opposed to Multitude -- but to
division, contrariety, and destruction.

4. P. 21. This leads me to show the unsoundness of another part of Mr. Baxters
Doctrine, and some others with him: He says, [There are two essentially
different Policies or Forms of Church Government of Christ's Institution, never
to be altered by man: 1. The Form of the Universal Church as Headed by Christ
himself, which all Christians own as they are Christians, in their Baptism. 2.
Particular Churches headed by their particular Bishops or Pastors, and are
parts of the Universal, as a Troop of an Army, or a City of a Kingdom. -- And
he defines the Universal Church to be, The universality of Baptized Christians,
headed by Christ himself. These his sayings contain many Errors; I will first
note them out, and then confute and prove them to be Errors. 1. It is an
Error in the art of defining, to put in those words, [Headed by Christ
himself.] 2. It is another Error to define the Universal Church without Guides
and Ministers, as one essential constituent part. 3. It is another Error to
say, that the Universal Church, and Churches particular, differ essentially. 1.
It is an Error in the art of desining to say, -- Headed by Christ himself]
that is supposed, but need not be in the definition. He finds fault himself with
such a defect in the definition of a particular Church. Grant them to be
Christians, and you grant they own Christ. -- 2. It is an Error to define the
Universal Church without Pastors, -- So does the Assemblies Confession, and Mr.
Hudson -- His definition of the Church without Pastors, is, as if he defined a
living healthful man, without a stomach, liver or lungs. -- P. 24. 3. If there
be an essential difference between Church and Church, what then is the
difference between the Church and the World! Heaven and Hell! the righteous and
the wicked! -- How can any man know which is the right Church? We shall never
be able to confute Popery nor Infidelity by this Doctrine: For this Doctrine
supposes two essentially different Churches: The Universal Church without
Pastors, and of this Christ is Head himself: Particular Churches, of which
Christ is no Head, but particular Pastors are the Heads. -- By this Doctrine
the same thing shall be contrary to it self. -- Christ's Church in this world is
but one! And can one and the same thing have two different Essences, beings,
and definitions? Quae convenient uno tertio, etc. But the Church Universal and
particular agree in uno tertio. They stand on one foundation, are directed by
one rule, quickened by one spirit; an addition of homogeneous Particles makes no
essential difference. It will necessarily infer, that God is contrary to
himself, and that the essentiating principles of Church holiness, order and
government, are black and white, darkness and light, -- P. 25. If this opinion
stand, Religion cannot stand, Two essentially different Forms of Churches, will
infer two sorts of Holiness, the one repugnant to the other, (yet) subordinata
non pugnant. If Christ set up two repugnant, or essentially different
Church-Forms, he is not the Savior, but the deceiver of the world. (O
dreadful!)

5. P. 92. A word more ad hominem of that opinion, That particular Churches are
parts of the Universal, as a Troop is of an Army, or a City of a Kingdom.

This is Mr. Baxters opinion: why then do you blame the turning all the
Parish-Churches into Chapels, and making them to be but parts of the Diocesan,
as a Troop is of an Army, etc. who sees not that your Doctrine does the same
that you condemn, etc. If they are but parts and Members of another Church,
(the Universal) then they are not Churches. -- It is not unlikely but you can
find somewhat to say in defense of this your self-contradicting Doctrine; but I
believe it will match your wit, were it ten times more, and prove too hard for
you. Look to it; if your disputations against Prelacie stand, down goes this
main assertion of yours. If your disputations against Prelacie be found to have
a hollow and false bottom, then you have made you work for repentance, you have
greatly injured the Church of God, and particularly the Church of England, and
have deceived a great many. Look what Bellarmine makes the Pope to be to all
the Pastors, Churches, and Christians through the world, That do you make this
which you call the Church Universal: for you say that particular Churches, as
headed by their respective Bishops and Pastors, are parts and members of
another Church called the Church Universal: By which assertion you set up an
Universal Head or Government over all the Pastors, Churches, and Christians in
the world besides Christ; and you say this is of Divine Institution; and you
lay the concord of all the Churches upon it. Do but grant the Papists this one
assertion, that particular Churches, as headed by their respective Pastors, are
parts and members of the Universal Church, as a City is of a Kingdom, and
overthrow the Popes headship over all if you can. It will follow that there
must be, besides Christ, an Universal Ecclesiastical Monarch on Earth, either
personal or collective, who must have the Supreme power. P. 96. But indeed you
have gone beyond Bellarmine in seting up Papal Monarchy. Your other assertion
sets up Atheism, by making the Holy God the Author and Founder of two
essentially different Churches, or Church-Forms. According to Bellarmines
assertion for the Pope, there would be Pastors, etc. But according to your
assertion, all the world must be Atheists, of no Religion at all. -- P. 224,
225. Your division of the Church into Universal and particular, is plainly
against that Rule in Logic; Membra omnis bonae divisionis debent esse inter se
opposita. But in this your division the Membra dividentia are not inter se
opposita: you oppose the same thing against itself. You make the Church at
Corinth a particular Church, -- The whole or the Universal Church at Corinth is
sound and good. You plainly leave out of your description, the differencing
Form or token of that which you call a particular Church, and that is
Neighborhood, or dwelling or abiding in this or that place, -- you make a new
essential of Church Membership and Church Communion, and lay the peace of all
the Churches on it, and say it is Divine, sure, harmless, fitted to the
interest of all good men. This startles me, I strive to be silent and cannot:
The more I strive, the more I am overcome Alas! then there is no remedy!
. Mr. Cawdrey was lately with me, and we had Conference about this point, --
suspecting mine own judgment; I have conferred with diverse about your other
Notions, two Churches, or two Church-Forms differing essentially; and they
cannot apprehend how it can stand! you make the Universal Church-Form, and the
particular Church-Form to differ essentially, and this by Divine Law. I prove
to you from the nature of the thing it self, and the express word of God, that
the Universal Church of God at Corinth, and the particular Church of God at
Corinth, are one and the same. -- To oppose the Universal and particular
Church, and say they differ essentially, is to oppose the same thing against
itself, and make the Lord Jesus Christ the Author and Founder of
selfsubverting Principles. P. 226, 227. As for that other point, of the Church
particular being part of the Church Universal, it is to say, that the whole
Church at Corinth is a part of the whole Church, which is absurd.

Reader, I must not Transcribe the whole Book: the rest is too like this;
exercise your patience in receiving a short Answer to the several parts which
seems needful.

CHAP. IV. A Defense against the foresaid Accusations.
1. WHat Christians heart can choose but mourn for the Church of God, and the
puzzling confounding temptations of the ignorant, that must hear men charged
thus publicly with Atheism, and the overthrow of all Religion, for that which
the Christian world agrees in; and this by Preachers of professed humility,
sincerity and zeal? How shall the unlearned know when they are safe? yea, what
snares are thus laid to rob men of their time, as well as their Faith and
Charity? I must not give such lines their proper names: but I will say that it
remembers me of Isa. 1. 6. and it cries out unclean, unclean. How few words
of Truth, and soberness, and soundness, can you number among all these? Had he
written and published it in his sleep, as some talk, and walk, it were some
excuse! But for a Man, a Minister, awake, and after public admonition,
deliberately, on consultation, a second time, to talk at this rate in the
Press! -- And yet cannot we be endured without their Ceremonies, etc. When the
Friendly Debater and Mr. Shurlocke have compared such Books as this with those
that they reprehended, perhaps they will say, Iliacos intramuros, etc.

To begin at the end, I am sorry to read what he says of the Diverse he
Conferred with, etc. 1. I never till now read or heard Papist, Protestant, or
any Christian of his mind: And, alas, are diverse of it now? Are Conformists
come to that? Either they were at Manhood, or in breeches at least, or not: If
not, he should have chosen other Counselors: If yea, were they Laymen or
Clergymen? He was to blame if he took up with the former alone in such a case.
If the later, he greatly disgraceth them.

But we must say somewhat of our Atheistical Errors. The beginning of his
words, which say the same thing which he so abominateth, I will not charge with
contradiction in sense from the rest: for if he mean the same thing by [One and
Two, A Church and no Church, A part and no part, Yea and Nay] they are no
contradictions in sense. And indeed I cannot perceive that he understands
what he reads and answers, nor well what he says. And therefore I am not
sure when I understand him; but I will review some of the things that his words
seem to accuse in order.

I. The Universal Church, as I defined it, is a True Church. Proved: Where
there is a true Church-Head and a Body of all Christians on earth, united and
subjected to that Head by mutual consent and Covenant, there is a true
Universal Church: but such is that which I named and defined as the Church
Universal. -- Ergo. -- The Major is from the definition to the thing
denominated. As to the Minor, 1. That Christ is the True Head. 2. And all
Christians the Universal true body, (visible as Baptized, and mystical as
Heart-Covenanters.) 3. And that mutual Covenanting is a sufficient bond for
this Churchunion, the Christian Reader will chide me if I stay to prove.

11. Particular Churches existent, are true Churches in Essence. Proved to him:
1. He often confesses this and the former. 2. A true pars dirigens and pars
subdita, necessarily qualified, ad esse, and united in those relations for
Church-ends, are a true particular Church: But such are many existent
particular Churches (and all that I defined:) Ergo. 1. That a true Bishop, at
least with his Presbyters, is a true pars dirigens: 2. And a qualified flock, a
true pars subdita: 3. And that such are found united in these relations, I will
take for granted with the Reader, except Mr. Chapter And the Major is the
definition.

III. That the Relative union of the governing Part, or nearest Head to the
Governed body, is the specifying form. The proof being de Ente politico and
notione Logica, is the consent of all Politics, Logicks, and use of speech by
the professors of both, known to us in the world. I often enough distinguishing
de nomine aequivoco, have told men that it is not every Christian Assembly that
we speak of, but societas politica. And all Politics call the form of the
Government, the specifying form of the Politic Society, throughout the known
world. So Monarchy, Aristocracie, Democracie, are specifying forms of
Republics: And Schools, Armies, Navies, have diverse Relative forms, specifyed
by the union of the various Regent Relative parts to the rest.

IV. The Form is a chief essential part.

V. Therefore diverse specifying forms, prove diverse essences in specie.

VI. It is not the generical form that specifieth. Else all things that are
ejusdem generis, should be ejusdem speciei. All bodies are not Animate, nor all
Animals Men, nor all Men Bishops or Physicians.

VII. The Genus denominated without defining it, with the specifying form or
difference, makes the Definition of the Species. Else the Definition of the
species infima, would be confounded by the conjunct definitions of all the
superior Genera: He that defines a King, must not put in it the definition of
Homo, of Animal, of Vivens, of Corpus and Anima, of substantia.

VIII. The highest species must be defined by its proper highest form, though
not the subordinate species. The King must be put in the definition of a
Kingdom, but not of a City, Country, Church, Family, School; he is there
supposed in a Kingdom. And so of others.

IX. The higher Genera must not be named in the definition of the species, but
the next, which is the superior species. Therefore Mr. Chapter mistook his Art of
defining, when he said I mist it, by naming Christ as the Head of the Church
Universal, and adding that I blame my self that defining of a particular
Church. As in Relations it is not the ultimate end, but the nearest that must
be in the definition; so is it not the highest but the next Genus that must be
named. In defining all the lower species, the higher Genera are but employed in
the naming of genus proximum, and not named.

X. The Relation of Jesus Christ, and of a humane Bishop, are not the same
Relation, in specie, though both be called Heads or Rulers. Proved: There is
not the same subjectum, nor the same fundamentum, vel ratio fundandi, nor the
same Correlate, (for all the Christian world and a Diocese are not the same)
nor the same nearest terminus: Ergo, not the same Relation.

XI. Therefore the Universal Church Headed by Christ only, and a particular
Church subordinately Headed by a Bishop or Clergy-head, are essentially diverse,
and two: Proved: Where the formal specifying Head or Regent part is two, or
diverse, and the Body diverse, etc. there the societies are diverse in specie, or
essentially: But so it is here: Ergo. That One and One are Two, I will not
undertake to prove to Mr. Chapter nor think it needful to prove to others, nor yet
that Christ is One, and a Bishop one; and not the same. That Christ is the
formal Head of the Universal Church, all Christians confess, and therefore to
be named in the definition, whether Mr. Chapter will or not, and not supposed:
Baptismal Union and subjecting to him, makes us Christians, and not supposes
us such (in visible Church State.) That Christ is not the formal specifying
Head of a particular Church as such, but of the Universal, and so the Supreme
Head only of the particular, is proved before. 1. Because the specifying forma
totius heterogenei, is not the specifying form of the parts. 2. Else all that
Christ is Supreme Ruler to, should be such particular Political Churches: which
is false; It is not true of single persons, of Christian Armies, Troops,
Markets, Parliaments, Courts, etc. as such. 3. Christ himself by his Apostles
has ordained a subordinate humane species of Church-heads or Rulers. 4. From
parity of cases: Natural and Political. The forma animalis, is not forma
hominis, nor forma hominis forma oculi, manus, pedis, etc. The General is the
formal Head of the Army, but not of a Regiment, but the Colonel: Nor the
Colonel of a Troop, but the Captain; nor the King of a City, but the Mayor or
other subordinate head: Nor the King or Mayor of a Family, School, College,
but the Pater-familias, the Master, the Rector, etc. Depose the subordinate
Head, and it is part of the Kingdom still, but no Family, School, College,
Troop, Regiment, etc. All Mankind that profess dealing in such subjects, (as
far as I know) are agreed in all this. As to the Body related also, a Diocese
is not all the Christian world.

XII. Every true particular or single Church, is part of the Universal, (which
is Headed only by Christ.) That it is part of the Universal, I know not that
ever man denied till now, that a conformable pious Divine makes this with the
former Atheistical, making God and Christ a deceiver, driving all Religion out
of the world, Popery, worse, etc. Proved. Quae unita totum constituunt sunt
parts: At Ecclesiae omnes particulares, cum membris caeteris and Christo
Capite totam seu Universam Ecclesiam Redemptorum constituunt: Ergo, sunt
Ecclesiae Universae parts. Ecclesia universa constat ex horum unione. Ergo,
haec omnia sunt ejus parts. Again, If the single Churches be no parts of the
Universal, either they are Coordinate Churches with the Universal, or there is
no Universal. If the Universal be All without them, than they are none: If not,
then it is not Universal, if there be other Churches which are no parts of it.
Again, If they be no parts of the Church Universal, they are no parts of the
Body or peculiar people or Kingdom of Christ, (for that is but one, 1 Cor. 12.
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. and 5. etc.) But they are parts of the Body of Christ. Ergo.

XIII. To say that the whole Church, e. g. at Corinth, and the whole Church in
the world are the same, and what is predicated of one is also of the other, is a
saying -- not to be justly denominated. The subjectum, relatum, correlatum,
fundamentum, terminus, proximus, and so the relation are diverse. The whole
Church and its Head, and a part and its subordinate Head, are not the same. The
Kingdom and the City, the City and a Parish or Ward, the University and a
College, the Man and a hand, etc. are not the same.

XIV. To say as he does, that a Family is not a part of the street, or that of
the City, and London no Member or part of the Kingdom, is stuff that -- I will
not name: an ill foundation for the charge of Atheism, Blasphemy, and all
Impiety. But I am out of all fear that he should make one Proselyte that is sani
cerebri. If any accuse him of less than denying God and Christ, even but of
Deposing the King from most of his Kingdoms, and saying that London, and so of
every one City, Corporation, etc. is no part of it, I would desire them to
allow him his own Exposition: for he mcaneth not so ill as he says.

XV. To say that one whole cannot be a Member or part of another whole, is yet,
if possible, more -- than the former. What, may not Corpus politicum be a
member of a larger body Politic? Is there any part of the Universe if this be
true? at least save Atoms and Spirits: And in what sense an Atome, or Anima,
or Spiritus, may be called totum, Scaliger, and the Schoolmen, and
Metaphysics, commonly tell you. Are not whole stones part of Mountains? and
whole Trees of the Forest? and whole Herbs of the whole Garden? and whole
Fields of the whole Country? and whole Parishes of the whole Diocese and
County, and those of the Kingdom? and that of Europe? and that of the world? Is
not a whole hand or foot part of a whole man? Is not the mateial Universe made
up of compounded parts? What a trick has he found to exempt us all from
Government? every man may say, I am a whole man: therefore I am no part of the
Bishop of Londons Diocese, or of the Parish, or of the Family. Deny or destroy
all such parts, and you deny or destroy the whole. Did he think that all Noun
Substantives signified the same thing, which have the same Adjective; and that
a whole Man, and a whole Dog, or World, are all one?

XVI. It Is little better when he argues that homogeneal parts make not a new
species. As if he could prove that the Church is Totum homogeneum. Are not
Christ and Christians, the King and the Subjects of the Universal Church,
parts heterogeneae, in esse politico relativo? Are not Bishops and Laics
parts heterogeneae? Had he forgot how much of his Book is to prove even
Bishops and Presbyters as widely different? No Christian denies it of the
Church Universal, nor any of single Churches, that denies not a Ministry, and
the being of such Churches as Political.

XVII. While thus he makes National Churches Metropolitical, Diocesane,
Parochial, and the very Independent, which he most revileth, all one, or of one
essential species, it seems that he knows not how he unsaith most that he
said before.

XVIII. It is little better that he makes several Churches, viz. at Paris and
at Plymouth, etc. to differ only in Number and Place. 1. Do not the Popish,
Protestant, Episcopal, and Presbyterian, differ in the Form of Government? 2.
Do not those of the same Form differ as Individuals by their several Rulers?
besides abundance of accidental differences?

XIX. And what Doctrine is it to say, Christ's Body is one; not as one is
opposed to multitude, but to division and destruction? Has Christ a multitude
of Bodies univocally so called? even such a Body as we treat of? Has Christ
many Universal Churches containing all Christians headed by Christ?

XX. When he had so grossly wronged himself, as to say, It is an error in the
art of defining, to say of the Universal Church, it is Headed by Christ
himself; what other Head or formal Regent part does he name? will he have
another? or will he have none in the definition? Is that the art of defining?

XXI. It Is little better to say, Is is an error to define the Universal Church
without Pastors, as the Assembly did. What! a better Logician than all the
Assembly too? Alas, how fell the good man under this temptation? He instanceth
in a body defined without Liver, Stomach, etc. But 1. I hope he does not think
all is excluded that is not to be named? 2. Is there no better definition of a
man, than Animal implume, bipes, etc. or one that has a Liver and Stomach,
etc. When to the Entelechia or anima, he added Corpus organicum, Aristotle
thought he said enough of the body. Is not Animal rationale a just definition
of a man, without naming his Liver and Spleen, or Heart? Is not the Genus and
differentia enough for a definition? Definitiones debent esse breves; and nihil
otiosum continere: otiosum est quo ablato, definitio reliqua rei essentiam
explicat. A Kingdom is defined by naming no more than the King and Subjects in
general, without naming Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, etc. There are no
constitutive principles in Nature, but Matter, materiae dispositio and forma:
And the imperfect definitions of accidents, must be as like as may be to those
of substances. The specifying form here, is only Christ the Head so related:
Though he made Christians before Ministers, and were all Pastors dead, the
Church were still Christ's Universal Body; yet I grant it is not a just
organized body without Pastors: but that makes them but to be the nobler part
of the disposed matter: men do not use to play the Anatomists in definitions,
and instead of Animal, or of Corpus organicum, to name Heart, Stomach, Lungs,
etc. But it is a healthful man that Mr. Chapter is defining. Answ. 1. But it is not
a healthful Church, but a true Church in essence that I was defining. 2. If it
had been otherwise, the name of the parts need not enter the definition of
health. And are these his saving truths?

XXII. And what an intimation is it, that if there be an essential difference
between the Universal and particular Church, there is none between the Church
and the world, the righteous and the wicked, Heaven and Hell. These things are
fitter to be answered by Interjections (which be no words; but voces non
vocabula) than by Speech. If Christ and a Bishop in esse relationis politicae
differ essentially, must good and bad, Heaven and Hell be all one? If an Army,
and a Regiment, and a Troop, differ in their formal specifying essences, must a
Subject and a Rebel, the Court and the Gallows therefore be all one. Proh!
apage!

XXIII. Next he asks, How can any man know the right Church then? Answ. What!
no way but by making Christ and a Bishop formally the Head? we know the
Universal Church by its true definition; and a true particular Church by its
true definition and properties.

XXIV. Yea, he says, we shall never be able to confute Popery and Infidelity
by this Doctrine. Answ. Alas, will the good man turn Papist or Infidel, unless
the Universal Church and a Diocesane have the same specifying difference, or
formal Head? Then what remedy?

XXV. I have no Interjection deep enough for that which follows, viz. This
Doctrine supposes two essentially different Churches: The Universal Church
without Pastors, (Putares) and of this Christ is Head: particular Churches, of
which Christ is no Head] Putares! Where said I any such thing! Is this lawful?
As if 1. there must be no Pastors, unless they be the formal Head of the
Universal Church. 2. And as if there must be no Christ the Supreme Head, if the
Bishop be the formal differencing specifying subordinate Head: and all but the
named parts are denied: As if he would have more than the genus proximum, and
differentia specificans in a definition: yea, even the genus supremum! and
Christ shall be the specifying Head, or none!

XXVI. He says, [So the same thing shall be contrary to itself.] As if 1.
Christ and a Bishop, in formal relation were proved to be the same. 2. Or
things subordinate were contrary, (which he denies himself.)

XXVII. He says, [Christs Church in this world is but one.] Answ. If there be
but one particular Church, 1. Then numerically the Church of London and Basil
are one: And then if I separate not from the Church at Basil, I separate not
from the Church of London. 2. If de specie there be but one, then a
Patriarchal, Diocesane, Parochial, Presbyterian, and Democratical Church are
but of one species: And why then did you use so many words to tell us of the
need of Bishops over Bishops, and of the several sorts of supra-ordinate
Church-Rulers? Then a National Church and a Parish Church are but one.

XXVIII. He adds, [Quae convenient uno tertio, convenient inter se; but the
Church Universal and particular agree in uno tertio, etc.] Answ, As if
Convenientia generica, were convenientia totalis vel specifica? or,
Convenientia partialis and totalis, Accidentalis and Essentialis, were all one?
What pretty Logic is here, to prove a King and a Constable all one, because
they are both Men, both Christians, and both Rulers? I hope then a Bishop and a
Presbyter are all one, that in your sorry sense agree in uno tertio? But let us
hear the inferred Charge against us.

XXIX. An Addition of Homogeneous Particles (says he) makes no essential
differences. Answ. Christ and a Bishop are heterogeneous: Yea, a Diocesane and
a Parish Priest: have you proved that they are not? or that they are?

XXX. It will necessarily infer that God is contrary to himself, says he.
Answ. O Temerity in the dark! that is, unless his Church-relation be the same
with the Bishops? As if the King be contrary to himself, if his Kingdom and a
Corporation or School be not of the same species?

XXXI. He says, [If this opinion stand, Religion cannot stand. An. Do you mean
in you or in me, or all others? Do you resolve to cast away all Religion, if
Christ and a Bishop be not the same informing regent parts of the Church
Universal and particular? Think better of it first; for Religion is more
necessary than so. Do you think that the Christian world, which has ever been
of the opinion which you detest, had never any Religion? Nor has now any?
Which way do Churches that are parts of the Universal, cast out all Religion?

XXXII. If Christ set up two essentially different Church-Forms, he is not the
Savior but the deceiver of the world. Answ. And must Christ bear such a charge
as well as I? I should sooner have expected it from a Turk or Jew, than from
you.

XXXIII. He says, [Why then do you blame turning Parish-Churches into
Chapels, and making them but parts of a Diocesane, as a Troop of an Army?]
Answ. Putide putares. When shall we meet with a true Sentence? It is not for
making them parts of a Diocesane Church as Troops of an Army, but for making
them no Political true Churches, but disbanding all the Troops, by making them
no Troops, but such parts of a Regiment as Squadrons are. It is for putting
down Inferior Bishops, and not for being themselves Bishops over them; yet on
this does he ground his charge of my deceiving men, and wronging God and his
Church, etc.

XXXIV. He adds, [Look what Bellarmine makes the Pope, etc. that do you,
etc. for you say that particular Churches, as headed by their respective
Bishops and Pastors, are parts of another Church called the Church Universal.
By which assertion you set up an Universal Head -- besides Christ, and you say
this is of Divine Institution, and lay the Concord of all the Churches on it.]
Answ. If you are sani Cerebri, this is so gross, that your putarem has no
excuse. Had you not your self repeated my definition, and carpt at those very
words, [Headed only by Christ] and many times your self repeated it as my
opinion. 2. Or had you tried your wrangling wit to have proved, that [if Christ
only be asserted to be the Head, I thereby assert another Head] or that [If I
make Bishops particular specifying Heads, I therefore assert a humane Universal
Head,] you had some cloak for your putarem: But now -- If you next print that I
said that a Dog is a man, I will no more wonder at it than at this. See Reader
how my Church-Concord is oppugned, and by what weapons Satan does that work. As
if he that says the King only is the specifying Head of the Kingdom, and the
Captain of his Troop, or the Diocesans of a Diocese, were a Traitor, and did
assert another Head of the Kingdom than the King.

XXXV. Do but grant the Papists (says he) this one assertion, that particular
Churches, as headed by their respective Pastors, are parts and members of the
Universal, as Cities of a Kingdom, and overthrow the Popes Headship over all if
you can. It will follow, that there must be besides Christ, an universal
Monarch on earth, etc. Answ. 1. Affirmanti incumbit probatio. Did you think we
must take your bare word in so great a case? Do you say one word to prove your
affirmation? Must we all turn Papists upon your immodest naked saying, it is
so? 2. But your immodesty is in this excessive to me, that have written two
Books against Johnson, alias Terret, and the later but lately and largely, to
prove that the Church has no Universal Head but Christ, notwithstanding the
particular Regency of the Bishops; and for you to give me not a word of answer
to them, and bid me now prove it if you can, when I have voluminously proved
it! This is such dealing as I will not name. -- 3. But I am heartily sorry,
what ever did it, that you are got so near to Popery. As if you will be a
Papist, unless all the writers of the Christian world are deceived, and if the
particular Church be a part of the Universal, which ^^^^ dare boldly swear it
is, and sober men doubt not.

XXXVI. He adds, [Indeed you have gone be^ond Bellarmine, in setting up Papal
Monarchy. Your ^ther assertion sets up Atheism, by making the holy God the
author and founder of two essential different Churches, or Church-Forms.]
Answ. Putares. But if all the Christian world be of the same mind, do they all
set up Atheism, and are you only free? As for Tho. Hooker whom you cited,
though it be twenty four years, or thereabouts, since I read Mr. Hudson and
him, (and will not taste away my time in perusing them) my memory doubts not
that it was only a Universal Church made one by one universal humane policy,
that he denied; and that they differed but about words. Did ever Christian
before you, deny particular Churches to be distinct policies, and parts of the
Universal? Have we so many Books written of Ecclesiastical Policy, and is
there no such thing? or no Churches that are Politic Societies?

XXXVII. He adds, [According to your assertion, all the world must be Atheists,
of no Religion at all.] Answ. Then all the world of Christians are so; for as
far as writings notify, they are generally of this mind. Alas, Brother, did
you show this to any man before you Printed it? for their honor I must think
you did not; and for your sake I wish you had.

XXXVIII. He adds, [Your division of the Church into Universal and particular,
is plainly against that Rule in Logic, Membra omnis bonae divisionis debent
esse inter se opposita] but you oppose the same thing against it self. Answ.
Thus do men humble themselves by forsaking humility! Had it not been better for
your to have let your Logic alone, than to bewray that which you might have
concealed? Are not diversa distinguishable as well as opposita? And is there no
diversity in part essentiae, (as in subalternis) where there is not a
diversity in tota essentia, (as there is in summis generibus?) is there not
both diversity and opposition, inter totum and partem, and between the species
of an universal and particular Society? Are they not Relative opposita? May you
not distinguish Army, and Regiment, and Troop, Kingdom and City, Christ and a
Bishop? etc.

XXXIX. He adds, [You make the Church at Corinth a particular Church.] Answ.
And do not all Christians? Is it all the Christian world?

XL. You plainly (says he) leave out of your description the differing form or
token of that which you call a particular Church, and that is, Neighborhood,
etc. Answ. Anne putares? 1. Have I so often expressed it, and yet will you say so?
2. But it was in descriptions indeed, and I was far from your Logical belief,
that Neighborhood is the differencing form. And I hope no one else is of your
mind. 1. If Neighborhood be the differencing form, then all Christian
Neighbors are particular Churches: But that is false: Ergo. -- 1. Those that
dwell together only for Trade, are not therefore Churches. 2. Those that hold
that there are no particular Churches or Pastors, but that all Christians are
as Priests. 3. Those that hold that the Minister of the Parish where they live
is no true Minister, nor the Parish a true Church. 4. Those that profess
themselves Members of no particular Church. 5. Those that profess to be no
Members of that Church, but of another. 6. Papists and Sectaries that stand in
opposition to that Church. 7. Those that dwell near another Parish Church, and
many miles from their own, are not Members by proximity. 8. Those that are
Excommunicated, which is de facto all professed Non-Conformists. 9. In places
where the Magistrate tyeth not Churches to Parish-bounds, persons of the same
street and house may be of several Churches. 10. No man that consents not is
a Churchmember. 11. And who knows not that proximity is but dispositio
materiae, and not the differencing form? All these singular novelties should
have had better proof than these dry assertions, contrary to all Christian
sense.

XLI. [This startles me: I strive to be silent and cannot, (says he) and the
more I strive, the more I am overcome.] Answ. If you are so far gone, I shall
hereafter, I think, without any striving with my self, let that which is within
you talk on, and not resist you. For who can hold that which will away? But I
wish you the benefit of some stiptick remedy, and a sober mind.

XLII. [I prove to you (says he, when there is nothing like one proving word)
etc. you make the Lord Jesus the author and founder of subverting principles.]
Answ. Read the Ninth Commandment. I conclude with these requests to him, as my
true friend; viz. to consider: Qu. 1. Whether a man so far from persecution,
and yet condemning us of Atheism, blaspheming, and destroying all Religion,
etc. be not much more uncharitable, than they that charge no such thing upon
us, but trouble us for refusing Forms are Ceremonies? or is it not the same
spirit?

Qu. 2. Whether he justify not the silencing and ruining of all whom he so
accuses? should not such impious Atheists be silenced?

Qu. 3. If he knew that the generality of the Christian world in all ages hold
what he thus censureth, what will he call it, to charge all Christians so far
with Atheism, and casting out all Religion, and making God and Christ a
deceiver? If he knew it not, what will he call it, to venture thus to publish
such an accusation, before he knew that which an ordinary Inhabitant of the
world might so easily have known? As if he had published [All that say a City
is specified by its subordinate Form of Government, and is a part of the
Kingdom, specified by the Monarch, are Traitors, and depose the King, or make
him a deceiver and no King, and deny all obedience.] What will you call this
dealing?

Qu. 4. Was it well done to write such a Book, while he understood so very
little of the very plainest passages which he wrote against?

Qu. 5. Was it excusable to confess some error of the last, and to add far
worse, and after warning a second time, so to speak evil of what he understood
not?

Qu. 6. Was it humility to make ostentation of the Logic he understood not.

Qu. 7. Does not the extreme bold confidence of the falsest of his own
conceptions, show a very unhumbled overvaluing of his own understanding? To be
ignorant is common to Mankind; yea, and to be much ignorant of our ignorance,
and to think that we know more than we do: But to have so little sense of this
calamity, and so little suspicion of ones own understanding, as to be confident
to such a height of accusation of the grossest falsehoods, where a lad of
fourteen years old, that had read any thing of Logic and Politics, might have
better taught him; (that I say not, the reason and use of Mankind) this seems
somewhat beyond the common measure of self-conceitedness.

Qu. 8. Whether the great number of asserted untruths here, show not some want
of necessary tenderness, or care of writing?

CHAP. IV. Mr. Chenies Accusations of me about Church-Covenants, and rigid
Independencie, and the odiousness hereof, considered.
1. WHen he had said, that [it leads to two contrary Gods, which is to make no
true God, p. 69.] He proceeds [Mr. B. has devised and framed two Covenants,
the one to make a man a Member of the Church Universal, the other of the
particular, p. 97. I will show, 1. That this is the same with the upstart way
of the Independents: 2. The unsoundness of it, p. 101. Mr. B. and the
Independents now, are contrary to their own principle in baptizing the Infants
of Non-Confederates, p. 129. [I do utterly withstand it as Wickedness and
Abomination in Gods Church; I am to die and burn at a stake before I yield to
any such thing: This is Mr. Baxters way: He offers it to Bishop Morley and
Bishop Gunning, in his Preface to his last Book of Concord, that posterity may
see what it is that he would have had, and labored to set up in all the
Churches: And accordingly, let both the present and future Ages see and know,
p. 130. Your way is not so innocent as that of re-baptizing. For the very
matter and terms of your Church Covenant are unsafe, and plainly Schismatical!
As if Constables and people of each Town must Confederate to be a Corporation,
an Independent body having all jurisdiction within themselves, and such as will
not enter into this Confederacy, must be counted none of the Kings Subjects. --
To say there are no Churches in the world but a few Independent Churches, --
were to go beyond Brownism: It were rather to teach Infidelity: such an opinion
would be abhorred by all: Now Mr. Baxter and the Independents Doctrine says
it. -- Their error, should they hold it habitually, predominantly, and
practically, would be certainly their damnation. -- p. 141, [I see not but
Pagans, gross Heretics, Apostates, Thieves and Robbers might combine together
and say, I take thee for my Pastor, and I take you for my people: Does not your
Doctrine infer it? p. 143. If I yield to their assertion, I must subvert the
office of Christ and his Apostles, and all his faithful Ministers, and all the
Churches to this day; which I will not do for fear of the censure of any man
living, no nor of a whole Council of men, p. 57. The way that Mr. Baxter
offers, seems to be a worse way, -- It is the way of rigid Independencie. --
Indeed Mr. B. in all his Writings seems to be against the Office of Lay Elders:
But that he is not for them under another notion, as Heads and delegates of the
people, mutually chosen by the Pastor and people, for assistance in Discipline,
may be doubted. He seems to hint at it, etc.

2. How little truth is in all this, and abundance such? 1. either it is truth
that I am for rigid Independency, or not. If not, -- if yea, I am glad that the
Independent way is no worse. I am not much acquainted with them: But, if this
man say true, 1. They are for no Covenanting, but consent to the relation
signified. 2. They are not for binding any to continue in that relation. 3.
They are not for binding any from a regular use of any other Minister, or
Churches Communion. 4. In places where Parishes are divided by Law, and the
ordinary attendance on the Pastors Ministration goes for a sign of consent,
they are true Churches and Members that thus signify it; and ad esse it is
usually enough, though ad been esse in doubtful cases the more express, as more
intelligible caeteris paribus is best. 5. They are against an Office of
Lay Elders, distinct from Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, as of Gods
institution for Church Government. 6. They are against Democracie, or the
Church-governing power of the People. 7. They take reformed Parish-Churches for
the best Order, not taking all for Members that are in the Parish, but all the
capable. 8. They are against gathering Churches out of such Parish-Churches,
without great necessity. 9. They are greatly against requiring any
qualification as necessary to Communion in point of holiness, but express
consent to the Baptismal Covenant, or profession of Christianity, not
disproved. 10. They make not the peoples Election of their Pastors necessary ad
esse, but mere consent, though the Patron or others Elect them. 11. They
suppose that the peoples Election or consent is not necessary to make a man a
Minister in the Universal Church, but only to make him their Pastor. As to make
a Physician, and to make him my Physician, differ. 12. They suppose that a true
Minister officiateth as such, where ever he does it. 13. They suppose that
associations or correspondencies of Churches for concord and help, and Synods
to that end, and dependencie on such Synods, is usually a duty where it can
well be had; and needless discord a fault. 14. They refuse not to submit in
practice to the instructions or admonitions of any general Visiter or Overseer
of many Churches, called by some Archbishops. 15. They refuse not the
precedence of one Pastor in every particular Church over the rest of the
Presbyters. 16. They refuse him not the name of the Bishop, nor yet to submit
to his negative voice as of the Quorum (or the Archbishops either) in
Ordinations and all great public matters. 17. They are for separating from no
Christians, further than they separate from Christ, or would force them to sin;
but are for universal Love and Concord. 18. They are for obeying the Magistrate
in all lawful things belonging to his function. 19. They take the most
extensive Love, Peace, and Concord for the most desirable and best. 20. It is
next their obedience to Christ and his sufficient Laws; the great reason why
they are against the terms imposed in most places of the Christian world, where
things unnecessary and suspected are made necessary to Communion. Reader, Mr.
Chapter is so honest a man, that it were unjust to take him for a deliberate
studied Liar. Therefore seeing he says that my way is rigid Independency, and
often makes me a downright Independent, I that know my own Judgment, and knew
not theirs so well as he seems to do, am glad to hear that they are no worse,
and that they are wronged by such as accuse them of denying any of those Twenty
points.

3. And supposing that he says true, and that they hold but my way, as he
calls it, I will now try the force and honesty of his charge against them.

And first, it savours of a spirit worse than his own, that when he had before
used the word [Oath] as owned by me, and then said, he repented of it, that he
still uses the word [Covenant] here as mine, instead of Consent, which is the
word which I use, and over and over say, that I own no Covenant but any
signification of Consent to the relation; only because I said, that not ad
esse, but ad been esse, plain or express Consent in doubtful cases is best.
This smells of an ill intention; and now I will try his arguments against this
Consent.

4. P. 101. he says Mr. B. acts contrary to his own Principles in baptizing
the Children of No^ confederates. The Universal and Particular Church make but
one Church of God. He that refuses one Essential of Church Communion, is no
Christian, and is to be debarred the Privileges of Christians. But according
to you, Non-confederates refuse one essential of Church Communion -- I may not
baptize you, you are to me a Pagan.

Ans. Putares, sed calumniaris. Here is fallacia aequivocationis, and so
quatuour termini. This Parish Church and the Universal are not the same. The
word Church in the Major, signifies one thing, and in the Minor another. All
is not essential to Communion in the Church Universal, which is essential to
Communion with this or that, or any particular political Church. To the later,
there must be, you say, Neighborhood; and I say, proper Pastors and Flocks for
personal Communion. But the Eunuch, Acts 8. was baptized into the Universal
Church, and not into any Neighborhood, Parish, Diocese, Assembly, or had any
stated Pastor. He came into no Churchmeeting. Philip (the Deacon supposed) was
snatched away from him in the open field, etc. Baptism as such, enters us into
no particular Church. Your words [you are a Pagan to me] are too false for a
Christian to have used. He that believes with all his heart is no Pagan. I am
a Minister of Christ to the world; but Infidels are not my Flock, or a Church.
Catechizers should teach Children all this plain truth.

5. II. P. 102. [Ask Mr. Baxter (says he) Whom do you mean by the word Church,
and at last he must come to one man the Pastor (as the Papist^ the Pope.) He
that covenanteth first, covenantet^ with none but the Pastor. You change your
terms. What Church must he covenant with that was first baptized? Ans. Christ
was baptized, and his first baptized Disciple and he were the Embryo of the
Universal Church, if you can prove that one was baptized alone. And as to a
particular Church, the Gatherer at first is only a Minister in the Church
Universal, and authorized to that gathering which shall be the Foundation of
his future relation: And the first person that consents, and he, are not a
proper Church; for it is an Embryo, and in fieri, as a Troop when the Captain
has listed the first man. But usually many are made Christians first, and then
they are materia disposita, and Consent makes the Pastors and them to be
particular Churches, Acts 14. 23. They ordained them Elders in every Church.
Elders of their own, Acts 20. the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and so of
the rest of the Churches, are mentioned. And is the Captain a Troop, or the
Pastor a Church, if he be the gatherer of it?

6. III. You name not Christ, (says he) but the Pastor. Ans. When we say
Captain A. B's Troop, we name not the General. When we say, the Bishop of
London 's Diocese, the King's Dominion, etc. we name not Christ, or God: For
only the Genus proximum is to be in definitions. The Superior are supposed:
they are Christians first.

7. IV. You say (says he) that before this Covenant men are but hewed stones,
that is, all the faithful are Pagans. Ans. Putares. To be prepared for Baptism
is somewhat more than to be Pagans: But till consent Christians are not Members
of any particular Church. The Eunuch was but a hewn stone, as you call it, as
to a formed Congregation; but he was no Pagan, but a Member of the Body of
Christ.

8. V. This (says he) makes the most excellent Ministers, Apostles, etc. mere
Laymen, such as go up and down preaching to Pagans where Christ is not known
-- plainly subverts the Gospel, etc. Ans. They are Christ's Ministers, and not
Laymen, while they convert Pagans, and yet Pagans are no Church: And till they
are a Church, no Apostle is a Pastor of them as a Church. The Gospel stands
for all this.

9. But (says he) may not a man be a Shepherd by calling and occupation,
unless he have a Flock, as well as a Physician? etc. Ans. Either you quarrel de
re or de nomine. If de re, do you mean any more than that he is authorized to
gather and rule a Flock? If more, what is it? If not, you calumniate if you
pretend that I deny this; but if it be only de nomine, whether the name of a
Pastor may be given him that yet has no Flock, or of a Captain to him that
has no Troop; I answer, 1. When you wrangle but about Names, try once more to
stay that list of laying the overthrow of the Gospel on your Names. 2. Titles
of Relation may be given aptitudinally ex intention de futuro: But if one may
be called a Pastor by relation to an intended Flock, much more to an actual
Flock, and still it is a Relative to such a Flock intended. 3. Try in
Scripture, and Councils, and all Church-writers, whether the title Pastor be
not usually given only to those that have actual Flocks. But to avoid your
quarrel, call you them by what name you list, if that will ease or please you.

10. VI. According to this Doctrine, a Minister has no Office or Authority but
just to those of his own charge, he preaches elsewhere but as a gifted man.
Ans. Still false, as to me, of whom you speak! what a strange Chain of
Calumnies can you make? A Minister is 1. Christ's Officer to the world to
convert them. 2. To gather a Church in fieri. 3. To officiate pro tempore in
any other Church, as a Licensed Physician to others (even to Physicians) does
his office.

11. VII. It makes void (says he) Gods Ordinance of Ordination: for either
they are Ministers by Ordination, or not: If yea, this Doctrine is erroneous.
Ans. Unproved: Ordination, sine titulo, makes a man a Minister to the World
and to the Church indefinitely. Ordination with Institution does that and more,
viz. it tieth a Minister to a consenting people. Your Writings are all
stigmatized with the shame of naked affirmations without proof, and then
forgetfully you often say [I have proved.] Why may not Consent, and Ordination,
and Institution, and Induction too, be all needful? Is a man and woman's Consent
needless, unless the Ministers marrying them be needless? May not a Town,
Hospital, or Person, choose a Physician as theirs if he were licensed bebefore?
If a Captain have commission to raise a Troop, is consent of the Listed
needless? So of a Major; a Pilot, or any relation which requires Consent.

12. VIII. It infers (says he) that the Church is before the Officers, viz.
Pagans a Church. Ans. All fictions as to me to whom he speaks: I said before,
they are as the Heart to the Body; the punctum saliens is the first organical
part to make the rest; but not a part of the Body till the Body be made. They
are Ministers to gather Churches, and then Pastors of Churches only by
consent. And when Churches are gathered, and the Pastor dead, the people are
Intentionally a Society, but actually but a Community, till a Pastor related to
them make them a politic society: And then relata sunt simul --

13. IX. This Doctrine puts a new clause into Baptism, which Christ never put
in, and alters Christianity (says he.) Before I baptize you, I must have an
antecedent Covenant or signified Consent from you to submit to me; and you must
be baptized in the name of Paul, etc. No Church Covenant, no Churchmember, no
right to any Church-ordinance. Ans. Confundendo fortiter caluminaris. 1. The
Eunuch consented to be a Christian of the Church Universal, but not to be of a
particular Church; without that Consent he had not been baptized: but this was
not needful to it. 2. The dispute whether Laymens baptism be valid, I leave to
you. But if yea, it is not necessary that I judge the Baptizer a Minister. If
not, then it is necessary, and my consent is necessary to make me a Christian,
but not him a Minister: But mutual consent is necessary to his Pastoral
relation to a particular Church. 3. An Ordinance common to the Church
Universal, and proper to a particular Church, should not be confounded, nor so
much as the modal ministration. Do I add to Baptism, if I say that by the
Canons and Custom of all the Churches for one Thousand years, a man was not to
be taken for the Bishop of any Church without mutual consent? what is this to
Baptism? And what temerity is it to feign men to wrong Christ by that which was
his Institution, and so judged and used in all the Churches?

14. X. [Saith he] It makes the people Church-Rulers or Copartners in office
with the Pastors, so that without their Consent they can do nothing; not
baptize. Ans. Of me the calumny has no excuse, I have written so much to the
contrary: Yea, the very Act calumniated essentially contains the contrary in
it. As he that consents to be a Servant, consents not to be Master, but to
obey: So they that consent to be Lay-members of a Pastors Flock, consent that
he, and not they, shall rule, and that they will be the obeying part. How could
you wink so hard, as not to see that your false witness confuteth it self? And
what if he cannot be their Governor without their consent, does this give them
any part in governing? Nay what if he cannot baptize a Non-consenter, or give
him the Lords Supper, is the Refuser a Church-governour? The man had got a heap
of Notions against the Independents in his mind, or his instigator that has
the same disease had thrust them in, and out they must come against he knew not
whom or what, upon the word [Consent.] What work would he make in the Church,
if he should deny the necessity of this Consent, and have the Church made a
Prison where Infidels should be crammed and drencht with the Sacrament?

15. XI. [It sets up (says he) Rebaptization by a Law -- For it requires of
godly baptized ones an antecedent Covenant to be Members of the particular
Church: As if a man should covenant to be a godly Citizen of London -- to be a
Member of Gods Church at K. and hold communion therewith: the people are called
on to be new Christians, as if they had been no Christians before] Ans. It is a
sin to read such words without grief and indignation. What! is every renewal of
the Covenant of Godliness or Christianity a Rebaptizing, or supposes us
Pagans? Is this made by a Minister a heinous sin? Are we not to do it in every
partaking of the Lords Supper? Yea, explicitly or implicitly in every prayer.
Is Mr. Allen's Book for Covenanting, and Mr. Rawlet's of Sacramental
Covenanting, such unchristening Heresies? Is it damnable or sinful to covenant
to be a godly Servant, or a godly Husband or Wife, or a godly Minister or
Magistrate? Does this suppose them ungodly before? with wat weapons are we
assaulted?

16. XII. He adds [It binds people to be dwellers within the precincts of
that one Church, to hear no other Minister, to join with no other Congregation.
Ans. Concatenated Calumnies, as to me: They only consent to the Relation of
Lay-members till they remove their dwelling or relation. They consent to take
that Church but as a part of the Universal, and therefore to hold just
Communion with all others, and receive what benefit they can from any other
Ministers. I abhor a Covenant that renounceth Communion with the Universal
Church, or any part of it, without necessary cause. Putide haec putares.

17. XIII. He adds, [What shall godly Strangers, Travelers, etc. do? your
Doctrine makes them invaders.] Ans. 1. If I have no notice of their consent to
communicate with us pro tempore, they expect it not: And de ignotis non judicat
Ecclesia; and non apparere is equal to non esse. If I have notice of their
Consent, it supposes some notice that they are baptized, or Christians, and
have more right than Heathens to Communion: And if so, 1. They consent to be
Members of the Universal Church, and as such I shall give them the Sacrament
and Communion, though I were no Pastor of any particular stated Church. 2. They
consent to a Transient Temporary Communion with me as a Minister in the
Catholic Church. And 3. They consent to transient temporary Communion with
that particular Church, and transient temporary Communion I will give them;
yea, and may call them transient Members of that Church; but no further any of
these than they consent. A Christian giving evidence of his Christianity, has
right to transient Communion in all Churches in the world where he comes: yea,
all are not bound to live in stated Churches; some are Travelers, some
unsettled Ambassadors, some Factors amongst Heathens, some of no Habitation,
Beggars, Pedlars, Tinkers, and such wandering Trades; some live where is no
Church with whom they may hold lawful Communion, etc. Now we have a new Divine
risen up in the end of the world, that seems to make all the settled Churches of
Christ in the world for many hundred years, to be all Traitors to Christ,
because these wanderers must not consent to their special relations, nor enjoy
their proper Privileges; and because they consent themselves to a more settled
relation and Communion than these wanderers or refusers are capable of. What
would all the old Church, that made so many Canons about their proper
Communion, have thought of this man's Doctrine, if he had come among them at
their Elections, Discipline, Distributions to the Widows and Poor, and said,
Hold Sirs! You are all destroying Baptism and Christianity, by consenting to
more toward one another than you owe to every unknown wanderer, or refuser of
a settled Churchstate? As if with our new Politician all Cities and Corporations
are Traitors, or deny or wrong the King, because all Subjects are not Citizens,
some being Vagrants, some in Villages, some Soldiers, some in odd Houses,
etc. and because Cities consent to a special sort of Government which the rest
have not. Between the Anathematizers and these over-wise Censurers, there are
few Christians in the world that are not condemned as no Christians for being
sound Christians.

18. XIV. He was aware that we say that every one that may come into the Temple
is not a part of my special Charge as a Pastor, which I cannot do for all: And
he says, [It's all one to your Doctrine if he refuse your Church Covenant --
The Minister all this while is no Minister; the People all this while are no
Christians. -- They are no more lawful Pastor and People, than Whoremonger and
Whore going together, and committing acts of filthiness, and living in
Fornication all their days -- Ans. Continued Calumny as to me. Is no modesty or
tender fear of sinning against the Ninth Commandment left? 1. He that refuses
Consent to be a stated Member, is none such: But is he therefore no Christian?
Awake, Conscience! Do any Independents say that none are Christians but their
special charge; yea, or stated Members of particular Churches? If there be any
such, what is that to me? 2. Such persons may be Members of the Universal
Church, and I am a Pastor in the Universal Church; and as such may communicate
with them. 3. If he desire temporary Communion, he consents to as much as he
desires, and that he may have: If he desire more, he shall have more. 19. But
(says the Accuser) what speak you of Literae Communicatoriae, These are
nothing to yourcase; (he says it, ergo, he proves it.) It shuts him out of
all particular Churches and Congregations under Heaven, except, etc.] Ans.
Putares! of me it is thus true or false. 1. He that consents not to be a stated
Member of any Church, none, because he would be none: and it is blind
self-contradiction, to say that I shut him out, because he will not come in. 2.
He that consents to be a Member of the Universal Church shall not be shut
out. 3. He that by literas Communicatorias, or any good testimony, shows
himself a Christian, and desires only one days temporary Communion with a
stated particular Church, shall not be denied that which he desires, nor will
we urge him to more.

19. XV. He adds [It lays waste Parishbounds, leaving people to go to what
Church they will -- Intimating, that being a godly man and a Parishioner, does
not make him a Member of the Parish Church -- Teaching people to be
disorderly.] Ans. 1. A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia. I said enough
before to prove the falsehood of your Church Estate. 1. Then there were no
Church till there were Parish-bounds 2. Then if Papists, Anabaptists, etc. be
godly, and dwell in the Parish, they are Members against their wills. 3. And
they are Members of two particular Churches; one in despite of them, and of
the other as Consenters. 4. There are some Houses that are in no Parish (that I
have known.) Alas, these must be of no Church. 5. Some parts of one Parish are
in the middle of another. The truth is, Parish-bounds are ordinarily of good
use for Order, and Order is for Edification, and to promote the thing ordered:
and he lays it not waste, 1. That gives it no more than its due, as a humane
mutable circumstance, and not as essential. 2. Nor he that refuses it when it
is turned against the end and the res ordinanda.

20. XVI. He adds, [Then if the Pastor set over them be a son of Belial -- and
sinfully tolerated by the Magistrate; the people of the Parish who can neither
remove him, nor sit under a more edifying Minister, must covenant to him, etc.
Ans. Strange! who would have thought but this was nearer your opinion than
theirs? Briefly, if the man be tolerable, they must rather accept of him than
have none. If he be intolerable in the Ministry, they may use such common gifts
as he has, (as we read even a Cicero) but they must be of no particular
Church, till they can be so on lawful terms. Even a Council of the Popes
decreed, that till men can have lawful Pastors, they must forbear that
Communion that supposes such: And who can doubt of it?

21. XVII. Next, he quibbles only with a Question [How long shall it last?]
Answ. How long will you be of the Parish Priests or the Diocesans Flock, or of
a Physicians Hospital? We cannot secure men from providential changes a day,
and therefore would not have them to bind themselves but on such suppositions
-- He that means to go to morrow to another Country, should consent but to
this days Communion. He that intends here to dwell, must consent to the
relation of a stated Member of that Flock till he remove, or till God show him
just cause to change that relation: till then, he should know his proper
Pastors.

22. XVIII. Next, he questioneth, [Who shall degrade them that prove Heretical
or Scandalous? etc.] Ans. The Ordainers made him a Minister by Investiture,
etc. and yet without our consent he was not related to us as our Pastor, or we
to him as part of that Church. And so we may withdraw our consent, and become
none of his special Church-flock, and leave it to the Ordainers to degrade him
if he must be degraded, as to the world and Church Universal. One would think
this Answer should be undeniable. But he goes on with his dismal accusations,
p. 116. [The particular Church Covenant is a thing of man's invention, no where
required of God; it is destructive to the Church and Souls, should it be
practiced.] Ans. Seeing Covenanting and known Consenting are all one with him,
what a dreadful damning sin does the man make it for to consent to be under our
Pastors Office? Then he that would escape damnation must not consent to the
office of the Parish Priest, much less of the Bishop: much less swear obedience
to the Bishop: And least of all, say or swear never to endeavor any
alteration. We have need to bless us from Conformity, if Consenting be so
damnable. But what meant he to say [should it be practiced?] Does he not know
that it is practiced by them all? and so that this Judge does damn them all.

23. XIX. He next answers two of our pretenses. 1. From the Election of
Ministers by the people: And says, Election is quite another thing; till they
are ordained, they are no men in office -- but persons designed -- Ans. Alas,
that the man that has all this while been damning others, should not see that
he has so damned himself; yea, and quite exceeded my damning error. This it
is to print with the zeal described Jam. 3. before men know what it is that
they talk of. Note, that he is not against the peoples election (if he be
intelligible) and yet elsewhere [They are Rebels and no Christians] that stand
not to the King and Parliaments election. 2. Note, that he talks of one
election, (to the Office of the Ministry as such) and I talk of another
election, even to be our particular Pastor: For this Physician to be my
Physician. 3. Note, that the man's bare word must, against all common use and
reason, persuade us that Consent which I require is more than Election, which
is much less. The Elector nominateth and first determines of the person.
Consent may come after, even in obedience to the Elector. The King electeth the
Bishop, and the Patron the incumbent Parson. Does every one that after
consents do more? or must we lay by our senses in believing such Writers
against damning error? 4. Note, that he quite overgoeth the truth on the
popular extreme, which he accuses others of: As if the people must elect a man
to the indefinite Office of a Minister as such, which is false. Christ sent out
his Apostles, and the Apostles sent abroad a converting Church-gathering
Ministry without any popular election. The Ordainers must choose who shall be a
Minister (by his consent.) The Christian people should choose [and must consent
at least] who shall be the special Guide of their own Souls; or their Pastor in
particular. And the Magistrate must choose, 1. Whom he will maintain and
encourage. 2. Whom he will tolerate. How came he to think that Election is
nothing to the case, as if Consent were something more? yet is he at it again,
P. 119. [They make it another Baptism.]

24. XX. Next, he answers our saying that [No man can be a Pastor to a people
against their wills.] And does he say Yea, or Nay? Neither plainly, but talks
of somewhat else, and says, [He is a Pastor by Office and Calling whether the
people will or not, and so Pastor and people are not simul natura.] As if the
equivocating with the word [Pastor] warranted him to damn his Brethren, and
confound Church Order: As [a Pastor] signifies but a Minister commissioned to
become the actual undertaking Guide of a particular Church-flock when he is
called to it; so this man may be called a Pastor aptitudinal, as a man is a
Captain that has Commission to raise a Troop: But as the word [Pastor]
signifies one that is actually the Overseer of a particular Church-flock, he
is none till he have a Flock; and in both senses Pastor and Flocks are relate
and correlate, and simul natura: that is, in the first, simul in esse cognito
and intentionali: In the later, in esse existente. But, says he, [God is God
whether the people will or no; and Christ is Christ, Apostles are Apostles --
and so faithful ordained Ministers are Pastors.] Ans. This is but the fallacy
of the foresaid equivocation of the word [Pastor.] 1. God is not made God, nor
Christ made Christ, nor Apostles or indefinite Ministers such by contract or
humane consent: But he that said, Come out from amongst them, etc. I will be
your God, and you shall be my people, and makes some a holy Nation and
peculiar people, etc. is so related to none but Consenters. Christ is an
offered Savior to refusers; but he is not the Savior and Head of any as
Christians, or a Church actually, but Consenters: without consent we are not
materia disposita receptive of the peculiar relation. A man may be authorized
to be a Tutor, Schoolmaster, Physician, Captain, Master, etc. without my
consent: but he is not my Tutor, Master, etc. till I consent, save
aptitudinally, not actually. 2. And these relations are more dependent on
humane Contract or Consent, than Gods being God, etc. But, says he, [If all be
Pagans, the Minister lawfully ordained and appointed to convert and baptize and
be a Pastor to them, is a true, full, and complete Pastor before he have
christened one soul of them. Ans. True or false as the equivocation is taken:
As one decreed to be a Husband to a Wife that is yet unborn, may by the
deceiving improper language of an equivocator be said to be the true, full and
complete Husband of her yet unborn or unmarried; that is, one designed to be a
Husband hereafter in a proper sense; so here. But Pastor est ovium seu gregis
Pastor: Analogum per se positum stat pro significato famosiore. Heathens are no
Church; Ergo, no man is a Pastor of them as a Church. Is he a complete Pastor
of a Flock that has none?

25. XXI. But says he, [Mark the matter, you are baptized a godly man; I have
nothing against you, only this, I cannot take you for one of my Flock, unless
by a voluntary consent, etc. I must shut you out as an Apostate, or a Pagan.]
Ans. Calumny and Deceit conjunct. 1. It Is immodest calumny to say, [as an
Apostate or a Pagan] I take him for a Christian, and on due testimony shall
admit him to such Communion (lawful) as he himself desires. 1. Whether as a
Member of the Universal Church. 2. Or also as a fixed Member of another Church
desiring temporary transient Communion here. 2. It is gross Deceit to say [I
put him out] that refuses to come in. If I give him no more than he is willing
of, what do I put him out from? If I take him not for a Member of my proper
stated Charge, it is because he desires it not. I thank God I never was a
proper Pastor to any People against their wills, nor ever will be, were I
capable of more service.

26. But, says he, [This makes against you -- Can any man forbid these people
from being Members of the Particular Church that are of the Universal?] Ans.
Self-contradiction! Do we forbid them that are not willing, or do they forbid
themselves? Does the Physician forbid them to be his Patients that consent not?
Do we shut them out that will not come in? Yet he feigneth us to do no less
than cast them out of the Church Universal, as casting them out of all
Particulars under Heaven. Ans. Calumny has got such a channel, that his
Writing runs commonly that way. 1. I cast them out of no Church under
Heaven, who will not consent to come in. 2. Were they of no particular Church,
they may be in the Universal, as I before proved, of many sorts.

27. He next notes, that it is but signified Consent that I require: But he
says, neither Christ nor his Apostles mention it, and all the Church are
without it. Ans. Let us try here whether this be true or false, and all his
damning and unchristning censures fall not on the Holy Ghost and all the
Churches. I. It is certain, that besides Ministers unfixed and of general
indefinite work, there were by the Holy Ghost in the Apostles time fixed
Churches of Neighbor-christians settled. II. It is certain that these had fixed
Pastors of their own, that were related to them specially as their special
Charge, so as they were not related to all or any other Churches. III. It is
certain that these Pastors had not equal authority to go into all other men's
Diocesses or Parishes, and say, You are as much my Charge as any others, and
play the Bishops in other men's Diocesses; though when they had a Call, they
might be Ministerial Temporary Helpers. IV. It is certain that these Pastors
were specially obliged to many Offices for those peculiar Flocks, which to
other Churches they were not so obliged to (but only to occasional help.) Dr.
Hammond names many of them, and so do the Scripture and Canons. 1. A constant
public Teaching them, which they owe not to all others or any. 2. Constant
Government by the Keys. 3. Constant Administration of the Lords Supper. 4.
Constant leading them in public Worship, Prayer, Praise, etc. 5. A special
care of the Poor. 6. Ordinary Visitation of the Sick. 7. Comforting the
Afflicted, admonishing Offenders, watching over all. The Canons will tell you
much, which every man owes more to his own Charge than to others. V. It is
certain that this Flock owes a more special attendance, and account, and
obedience to these Pastors, than to Strangers or others of other Churches. 1.
To hear them. 2. To receive the Communion ordinarily of them. 3. To maintain
them; and so in the rest. V. I. It is certain that none of this was done or can
be done without mutual Consent. VII. It is certain that this Churchstate,
Office, and Duty was settled by Christ's Apostles, and continued by the common
consent of the Churches on Earth from age to age.

28. That it was an Apostolical Establishment is plain in Acts 14. 23. They
ordained them Elders in every Church. To omit the sense of (...), which in the
most usual sense includes Suffrages, it is evident that (...) implies the
fixing of the several Elders to their several Churches, so as to make them the
stated Elders of those Churches as their Flock in pepeculiar. Acts 20. 17. Are
they called the Elders of that Church over which, as their Flock, the Holy
Ghost had made them Overseers to feed the Church of God, to imitate Paul that
taught them publicly and from house to house; and was this no peculiar
pastoral relation? or were any but Consenters Members of that Church? Tit. 1.
5. when Titus was to ordain Elders in every City, it is equal to every Church.
And it stated them as their peculiar Pastors, even Bishops, as Gods Stewards
over them in particular, v. 7. more than others. Jam. 5. 14. the sick that must
call for the Elders of the Church, were their proper Flock, as is supposed. The
Angels of the seven Churches Rev. 2 and 3. were not equally the Angels of other
Churches. Phil. 1. 1. the Bishops and Deacons of the Church at Philippi had a
fixed peculiar relation to them as theirs: Archippus had a proper Ministry at
Colosse, Col. 4. 17. And Laodicea had a peculiar Church, v. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13. shows the common state of the Christian Churches: Know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake. And be at peace among your selves.
Here Pastors to labor, and admonish, and be over them, are to be known, owned,
esteemed, beloved persons, dwelling among them, and knowing their own Flock,
and the peoples duty to them and one another laid down. And shall a Christian
Minister say, [O but do not promise, no nor signify any consent to do it, for
that is to be rebaptized, and is damning to the practisers.] The Bishops and
Elders that Timothy is instructed about, were such as had their proper Flocks,
and took care of them as the Church of God, that were to rule them well, and
labor in the Word and Doctrine; to preach the word in season and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine, etc. 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. the Elders that Peter writes to were to feed the Flock of God
which was among them, taking the oversight of them (more than of all the world)
not by constrain, but willingly, (and may they not signify willingness?) not
as Lords, but Examples to their Flocks, and Shepherds under the chief Shepherd.
Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. fully expresses it, Obey them that have the rule over you;
they watch for your Souls as those that must give account, not of all the
world, but of that Flock that they oversee. The same Church had Bishops that
had Deacons, and some Deaconesses, Widows, etc. but it was never known that
Deacons were to be indefinite Overseers of the poor of all Churches, but they
had ever relation to particular Churches. This is the ordering of the Churches
appointed by the Holy Ghost, Tit. 1. 5. And yet this man makes it an abuse or
injury against Christ, and overthrow of the Gospel.

29. II. As for the constant judgment and practice of all Churches, I am
ashamed that such usage should put me to such a work, as to prove that they
ever held and practiced that which this man condemns in me. He knows
nothing of the Churches state, and History, and Canons, that knoeth not, 1.
That all Churches were Societies of Christians united under their proper known
Bishops or Pastors, fixed to those Flocks by proper relation, though also
related to the World and the Church Universal. 2. That the people did not only
Consent, but Choose their Pastors, and he was to be no Bishop that had not their
consent. 3. That the Laity of other Churches promiscuously had no power to
choose them, but only those whom they were set over. 4. That the Bishops, as
Ignatius speaks, were to know the particular Members of their Churches, and see
that they came constantly to the Assemblies, even to enquire after Maids and
Servants, says he, by name. 5. That they made multitudes of Canons for
exercising particular Discipline on each person that needed it, by long
suspending some from Communion, restoring others, taking care of the poor and
of all. 6. That they took not the Catechumens for the Church, but Candidates,
and prepared and tried them before admittance. 7. That it was not mere
baptizing that made them of that Flock; for they preached and baptized in other
places. 8. That it was not mere neighborhood of Christians; for there were
sometime diverse Churches in one City, as in Meletius case at Alexandria; and
Dr. Hammond thinks the Jewish and Gentile Christians at first had several
Bishops and Churches in the same Cities ordinarily. And the Audians,
Luciferians, Donatists, and others that were of the same Religion, had diverse
Churches, besides such as the Novatians, that had some little Doctrinal
differences: and none till now ever thought that these were all the same
Pastors special Flocks, and the same particular Churches. Yea, I have elsewhere
cited that Council that decreed that if any Bishop neglected to convert the
Heretics, etc. he that converted them should have them (as his Flock or
Church.) In a word, all Church History and Canons describing their particular
Churches, and their Elections, Orders, Offices, Privileges, Discipline, etc.
and limiting them that strove for the greatest, from encroaching one on
another, tell us so fully that they were so many incorporate Christian
Societies consisting by mutual Consent of their proper Pastors and Flocks, that
Et pudet and piget, that such a task as the proofs should be thus imposed on me
by a Minister.

30. The same is still continued, even by the Conformists. 1. The Ministers are
even to swear Obedience to the Diocesane, and the Diocesane promise it to the
Archbishop: And this is a Covenant and more. 2. They are to attend him at
Visitations, and otherwise to express their consent to his Government, which
they do not to the Bishop of the Neighbour-diocesses. 3. The Parishioners
signify their consent to their Relation to that particular Church and
Incumbent, by their constant Attendance, Submission, Communion, etc. 4. The Law
and Canon command their Consent; yea, to keep their own Parishes, though the
Minister preach not at all, suspending Neighbour-ministers that receive such to
their Communion that come from such a Reader to them. And the Conformists say
that men are bound to obey these Canons.

31. Either Parishioners are supposed thus to signify Relation-consent to that
particular Pastor and Church, or not: If yea, this Accuser falsely supposes
that no Church but the Independents do so. If not, then he gives up most of
their Cause to the Brownists, that say the Parish-Churches are none: For it is
easy proved that Non-consenters are none. Thus rash men confute themselves.
Nay we are all silenced for not Covenanting to the present frame of Diocesane
Churches, and never to endeavor an alteration. Yet says this man [It is not
in any of the Churches, unless Independents, neither explicit nor implicit.]
Then none should so much as implicitly show Consent to the Relation to his
Diocesane or Parish-pastor or Church.

32. But says he, (to me with gross falsehood) [Your Covenant is to this
effect, you shall not only submit to me as your Pastor, but bind your self by
a particular antecedent Covenant so to do: You shall dwell in the Parish, and
Covenant so to do, etc.] Ans. I wish, that though design brought the word
Covenant infread of Consent into his mouth, it might not so long stick there as
to choke his Conscience, to think that any use of it is lawful. Where and when
did I engage any to dwell in the Parish? If they dwell there, I never hindered
any from removing. 2. But the Consent required is beforehand! very true. The
Liturgy bids men come tell the Ministers beforehand that they desire the
Communion: Shall I ask them to consent to their duty when it is past? Or can I
know who are capable till I know who consents? But, says he, Why not a
Church Covenant for all other Duties? Ans. Why not a Marriage-covenant to make
one a Priest? etc. Why not an Oath of Allegiance to make one a Coblar? etc.
Consent necessary to the being of a Relation, is one thing; and Consent to
every Duty, is another; which yet in general all Christians should promise
sincerely to perform. Must we write Books against such things as these?

33. To the Objection, [I am not bound to take every one that comes into the
Parish for one of my Charge: he has no better answer than to tell us of
Parish-bounds settled by law, and binding me to do my best for all.] Ans.
Deceitfully confounding [Charge] the Genus with [Church:] As if Heathens, and
Atheists, and Papists, and Refusers are of that Church, because I have a Charge
to seek their Conversion: Or as if I had no special Charge of that Church. 2.
He did not see that he confuteth himself, implying that we must consent because
of the Law. 3. And he forgot the many hundred years before Parish-divisions.

34. His zeal at last thus swells [p. 129. I do utterly withstand it, as
wickedness and abomination in Gods Church: I am to die and burn at a Stake
before I yield to any such thing. You make two Churches, two Church-forms, as
two Baptisms -- p. 130. to teach Infidelity, -- etc.] Ans. Let him that thinks
he stands, take heed lest he fall. Alas! for the Church, whose Guides are no
wiser and better men, and tenderer Conscienced than he or I, which ever is in
the wrong. 1. You will make me think you are deeply melancholy! Is it so
frightful a thing for me to say, I will be no Pastor to any that consent not,
as to put you into talk of dying and burning at a Stake? Had the Martyrs been
burnt, if men had been of this mind? Did you ever know any put to death or
burnt at a Stake for your Opinion? Which is liker to be the burning party! they
that say [We will rule none but Consenters or Volunteers,] or they that call
this wickedness and abomination, and so are for the contrary course? Which
Party has killed more for Religion? Reader, you see my wickedness and
abomination.

CHAP. V.
I Had thought to have gone thus over the rest of his Book; but it is such
stuff, that my Reason and Conscience bid me spare my own and the Readers time.
I. He begins with telling me what the Church of England is, and all is worse
than nothing: Instead of telling me what is the Constitutive, Formal, Regent
part, he tells me of Bishops, Pastors, Convocation, King, etc. as if he defined
a Man to be one that has a Head, Eyes, Liver, Stomach, etc. II. It grieveth me
to read what he says of Popery. 1. His Supposition that Popery is sound, if
the Particular Church be a part of the Universal, having its subordinate form
of Government under Christ's. 2. His Supposition of the Emperor of
Constantinople's turning Christian, and becoming the Universal Prince and
Bishop of his Empire, as a lawful thing. 3. His Supposition of the Pope's
resigning his Place to St. Peter, if he were alive, etc. 4. His Note that to
claim but St. Peter's Place is not to claim Christ's, with more such, are
unwise Temptations to Strangers to fear lest London-Air have done him hurt.
III. His many words about the Princes power to choose Pastors for all his
Subjects, and that if faithful, he is no Christian that refuses to accept
them. 1. Is all a bare saying over what he thinks; taking little or no notice
of my Discourse on that subject in my first Plea; where all that is against us
is answered before, and I will not repeat it. 2. And it shamefully condemns
his foresaid Condemnations. Is not Consent then necessary to the imposed
Pastor, if not consenting Unchristen men? 3. It supposes that the political
Controversy [Whether the King be authorized by God to choose what pastoral
Guide all the Subjects shall trust their Souls with?] (any more than what
Tutor, Physician, Wife, Diet, they shall take) is an essential of Christianity,
and yet it is not in the Creed, etc. When yet it is notorious that all Churches
for most Ages since Christ, if not almost all in the world to this day, were
and are of the contrary mind, and so are all unchristened by him. 4. And
though I urge him, he will not answer what I said of the Question, Who shall
judge whether the Minister be faithful? 5. If the Patron present a weak
ignorant man, that is faithful, but of little use comparatively; and people
that feel their need, and regard Eternity, choose before him such a one as
Hildersham, Rogers, Dod, Preston, etc. he declares them not only Sinners, but
Rebels against Christ, and no Christians. IV. His recitals of the particular
Controversies in the end, take so little notice of my former Answer to him, and
do but pour out much of the same, that I resolve hereafter to take as little
notice of what he shall say that ringeth on like a Bell, and has all Tongue
and no Ears. He is full of his own, that must come out, he cannot stop it; and
his Oil increases by pouring out: He is fuller than before, and has no room
for the reception of what he greatly needs.

There is a Law against Lying, To which we must Conform: OR Truth pleaded for
Peace, Against The many Falsehoods of an un-named Impleader; who pretends to
Answer several Writings of the Author Richard Baxter.
CHAP. I. PREFATORY. Our Accuser's Advantages.
1. I Know when I wrote for Christianity, the Souls Immortality, against
Popery, Perjury, Lying, Covenanting against Reformation; and when I wrote
against Antinomianism, Anabaptism, Schism, that all that I had so written was
easily answered by Male or Female, at Age or under Age, Learned or Unleaned:
For Nature and Parents teach Mankind to talk betimes, and we have many Schools
to teach them to read and write: And I hear by my Neighbors when they fall out
about Interest or Words, that without a School or University, they can attain
to copious fluent pungent Oratory, to describe each other as all that is
naught; and prove all so undeniably by vehement asseveration or Oath, that he
shall pass for Criminal that will not take their words for demonstration. And
what an advantage and improvement would it be to this natural promptitude and
fluencie, if one were but hired or engaged to the work by an Hundred or a
Thousand pound a year; yea, and also by the stream and interest of the Army or
Sect, in which he is listed by Heart and Hand, and by such necessitating
interest of Reputation (contrived by the Listers) as that accusing others shall
seem a necessary diversion of the Charge from himself and of his Conscience
from disquieting him, like her that is called A continual dropping? But yet if
Academical Education should train men up to the degree of Masters or Doctors of
the talking and contending Trade, what an elevation of the faculty would it be?
And yet all this is little to the pondus of an inbred enmity to the thing
first, and consequently to the persons, whom they are to make and prove
intolerable. And there i^ one that, unseen, can prompt and furnish them with
materials of all sorts; yea, and help their Subtlety, Vehemence, and most
fearless Asseve rations. I have heard of a Cambridge Doctor ^^ the Chair, that
was called, The certain infallible Doctor, that was so far from seeming to know
what Doubting was, that he took him for intolerable that was not of his
opinion. And it is like Bonner and Gardener were such, and that it is much of
the Roman Catholic Infallibility: for sure they durst not wrack, burn, and
massacre, and ruin all sorts, for that which they did not think themselves
certain of; yea, and certainly necessary to the noble ends of Unity,
Government, and Peace.

2. To talk it out to the last with these infallible Talkers, is a task for one
that has as many Tongues as all they, and is as ready a Linguist, and that is
like to overlive them, and that has no better work to do, and that thinks
that they will read or hear him without the ferment of tumifying impatient
Pride: Or else that it is necessary to save the endangered people from
seduction, to overtalk the seducers in length and number of words, and that
Souls are still unsafe and loose to the truth, as long as there are any to talk
against it. I confess, that if you will hive the Swarm aright, it is usually
necessary that with a louder noise you drown the Voice of the Misleader. But I
have no such sounding Voice: I am not for the Celeusma, Cannons and Guns, with
the shouts of the multitude; and that on the higher ground can easily silence
me, or drown my Voice. Reason speaks not so loud as these.

3. I was lately where it was made a question, Whether Mr. Kettleby and such
other Booksellers, be not Enemies to their own Trade, by Printing such Books as
the Impleaders, Mr. Hinkley's, Mr. Cheyney's, etc. The Affirmer said, It would
make Books as contemptible as Ballads, and no body would regard and buy them.
As when News-books were weighty and credible, most bought them; but when
beggarly Forgers took up the Trade, you may hear the Hawkers cry a Book, a
Book, a Book; News, great News, and no body regard them: This therefore will
break the Booksellers at last. The Opponent answered, [Set but the Supposition
right, and you will see how you confute your self. You suppose most men to be
wise, than which nothing is more false. If you hear not Christ and Paul, hear
Seneca's saying, [A wise man must be content of few approvers.] It is the
gainfullest way that the Booksellers could have taken: What Books sell better
than Play-books, Ballads, and Romances, and Books of Tales, and Complement, and
Jeasts? What Booksellers break faster than those that confine their Trade to
rare Pieces of Antiquity, Learning, Reason, and serious Piety? Do not men pay
dearer for a place in a Playhouse, than in the Church? And I have often heard
some gentile Sons of the Church of England say, that they can profit more by a
Play than by a Sermon. You think that such Books will make the
Book-sellers-shops, like the Toy-shops: And what if they do? Will there not be
Children and indulgent Parents while the world lasts? What Shops have more
trading, or seldomer break, than Toy-shops, that sell Babies, and Puppets, and
Hobby-horses, and Pipes? etc. and those that sell Perriwigs, Pide-silks and
Ribbons? You think that the Booksellers Shops will grow like Alehouses and
Taverns which sober men will rarely visit. And what if they do? Let those sober
men pass by; Do such Houses want custom? The Throat will be the Throat still,
and Mirth will be Mirth; and the lightest Heads shall be the greatest number.]
And this prevailed.

4. I must seriously profess, that I find in our present Controversy, that my
Opponents and Accusers have a great advantage of me, and such as I see no great
probability to overcome. I mean in the quality as well as the number of their
Hearers and Readers. 1. Can I expect that men of great Wealth, and Power, and
Honor, and who would still fain be greater, should be as willing to believe
that those are in the way of Truth and Righteousness who are by Law judged what
we are judged, and adjudged to such Reproach and Punishment; and that go under
the Censures, Suspicions, and Contempt, as we have here long done, and are
hunted and laid in Jayls with Rogues? 2. Can I expect that men that never were
studious or bookish, especially in matters of Divinity and Holiness, but have
been bred up in fullness and pleasure, in courtship and converse with such as
themselves, who will take him for a Fanatic that does but talk much and
seriously of Heaven, or Scripture, or things Divine, that scarce ever heard
what a Nonconformist has to say for himself, nor ever seriously examined the
cause, or read a Book which opens their case in all their lives. I say, can I
expect that such should be able or willing to understand us? I mean, not as if
All were such; but it has been my hard hap to meet with few persons, even of
Gentile Education, who ask me, Why do you not Conform? that do not presently
show me in Conference, that they are quite out of their Element when they
meddle with such matters, and talk of things which they never studied or
understood; and indeed do not think it belongs to them, but to the Church:
And that is, to those Churchmen that the King and the Patron please to choose;
which makes the Papists say the Laity of the Church of England cry down our
believing as the Church believes, when they do the same by their own
Churchmen. The Question is but whether it be our Churchmen or theirs that are
to be believed? And when Kings were on out side, it was our Churchmen that
were to be believed: and when they are on their side, it is theirs. And Mr.
Hutchinson, alias Berry, spoke harshly when he said in Print, that there was so
little of conscionable Religion in the people of the Church of England, that if
one were but touched with the Conscience of Religion, he turned Puritan o^
Papist. I showed him the injury of his Speech; but I would he had much less
occasion for it. Dr. Stillingfleet told me, that there was scarce an^ of his
Hearers or Readers, how mean soever ther^ capacities were, but could discern
the weakness of no Evasions. I dwell near the Verge of his Parish. I have talked
with some of his Auditors, and enquired of many others; and I think verily he
is more in the right than I at first believed: For I find that abundance of
his Auditors hear him some once, some twice, some thrice a year, and some of
them know not whether Christ be God or man, or both; or whether he had a humane
Soul, or what a man differs from a Beast; nor what is the true sense of many
(if any) Articles of the Creed. And I am persuaded these whom he calls of the
meanest capacity, are the likeliest men to discern the weakness of My
Arguments, I have talked also with diverse of his Readers, and I found that they
understood this much, that Dr. Stillingfleet wrote his Sermon against the
Nonconformists; and that he is a Dean, and may be greater; and is a man that
can talk with any of us. It may be some that I have not met with know more, as
being of a higher Form; and some few I have met with that indeed know more, and
those lament the Doctor's undertaking; and when they have read my Answer or
Account, confess that they cannot justify his Charge. Could I but tell how to
get most of the Church of England to know what Religion is, and to be seriously
of any Religion, and to understand Baptism, and the Lords Supper, the Creed,
Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments; how boldly should I expect their Christian
sense and candor in our Cause? But till then, I confess that the Accusers have
the advantage of us, and their Books unread will do more than ours.

5. And it is a great advantage which they have got by the Oxford-Act of
banishing above five Miles from Cities and Corporations all that swear not as
is there required. For though the King's Wisdom and Clemency have let down he
Floud-gates, and somewhat stopped the impetus of the Clergy-stream, yet it was
many years before Nonconformists durst be openly seen in Cities or
Corporations, much less at Court, or among great Men; and modesty and prudence
yet obliges them to abstain from the presence of their Superiors, where the
Law forbids it; so that the Ears of Country-Nobles, and most of our Rulers,
hear but what our Accusers say, and have no knowledge of our Cause, but as
described by them, whose descriptions are many of them no more credible than if
they said that we are Turks.

6. And their Art has got us to such a straight, that whether we speak or are
silent, we are guilty; and whatever we do except swearing, saying, and doing as
they require, it shall turn to our Accusation. For instance, Do some think that
Dr. Stillingfleet is in the right, that pronouneeth Damnation without
Repentance against them that prefer not the purest Church, and thereupon come
not to the Parish-Assemblies? Against such they cry out [Separatists,
Schismatics, preparing for Rebellion; away with them, execute the Laws.] But
if others do as I do, who daily join with the Parish Church in all their
Worship, and Communicate in their Sacrament, and oppose Separation;] Some say
[Such are like Ap^ that are the ugliest Creatures, though likest unto men while
they are not men.] And others say, [We know not what to make of Mr. B. he is
neither Flo^ nor Fish: He is like one that will go one step on one side the
Hedge, and another on the other side, to avoid Uniformity.] And the men are not
altogether mistaken: I profess that I once made it the most earnest action of
my life to have prevented the building of a separating Wall, or a dividing
Thorny-hedge in the midst of this part of the Vineyard of Christ, to separate
one part of the faithful Ministers and people from the rest: And that I
earnestly desire to see that Wall or Hedge pulled down, that Christ's Flock
among us may be one: And I will do the best I can whilst I live to get it down,
that there may be no such separation. And seeing this is a work above my power,
I will go sometime on both sides the Hedge, though by so doing I be scratcht,
and a Thorn in the Flesh by a buffetting Messenger of Satan reprehend me. But
reverend Doctors hear my Reasons: It is not to avoid Uniformity, but
Separation. I am a Catholic, and not a Sectary: I am for Communion with the
Universal Church: If you will hedge in one corner, and the Anabaptists another,
and the Separatists another; and so other Sects that must have their peculiars,
and turn Christ's house into your several Chambers, and his Commonfield into
your little Enclosures; and then say, Keep only in our Room, and go into no
other; Keep only in our Enclosure, and go not on the other side of the Hedge:
I shall tell you, that I abhor your separation. I have business on both sides:
I believe the holy Catholic Church and the Communion of Saints, and not only
your Enclosure, and the Communion of your Conformists: I have some business on
your side the Hedge, the Law and your own expectation will tell you part of it:
I see some of my Fathers Family with you. I have business, on the other side the
Hedge: There are as good as you; and such as I am nearly related to, and
commanded to love as my self, and to receive as Christ received us; and not to
doubtful disputations, (to prove or approve all your Jurisdictions,
Assumptions, Oaths, Covenants, Subscriptions, Reordinations, Formalities and
Ceremonies.) Your thorn-hedge has enclosed but one corner of Christ's Vineyard,
and I have business in the rest: It has separated Parents from Children,
Husbands from Wives, as to Church Communion, Masters and Servants, Brethren
from Brethren, Neighbors from Neighbors: If they that made the hedge can
justify it, let them do it, it will be tried before a jealous God ere long! if
those of you that in learned Books and Sermons exhort us (with somewhat hissing
Rhetoric) to separate from those on the other side the hedge, can prove that
themselves are all Christ's Church, and that God would have us separate from all
save them, and give over Preaching and all public Worship of God, till we can
conscionably conform to all their Impositions: I say, if all these silencing
Preachers can make good their accusation of the Brethren, and their
conclusions, let them that undertake it speed as they perform it: but for my
part, I will not separate from Father, Mother, Brother, Friend, and all good
Christians save a domineering Sect, because that Sect will else call me
Separatist. I was wont to draw the Map of the Church Universal as one Body or
Field, or Vineyard of Christ, hedged in indeed round about from Infidels, and
distributed into thousands of particular Churches, as Streets and Families in
one City: But if any will say, Hold Communion with one Street or Family, and
separate from the rest, and then say that you are a Schismatic for not being
for that odious Schism; I will hear such, as I do the people that talk through
the windows on the west side of Moor-fields, when they say that all are mad or
Schismatical, that are not in their Cubs and Chains. Mr. Cheney was never there
I think, and yet it was (per album an atrum nescio) revealed to him that I am
downright for an Independent Covenant, which has twenty Arguments extant to
batter it, and prove it guilty of irreligiousness, or somewhat worse: And they
say (for I am not acquainted much with their practice) that the Independent
bind their flock to hold Communion with none but their own Sect, nor to depart
without leave from their particular Churches. I am apt to believe that they are
slandered (for whoever falls sick, I will first fear the most epidemical or
common disease:) but if it be no slander, I profess that I will never be of a
particular Church, which claims to be the universal, and will forbid me
Communion with all save them. And if in this the Prelatists agree with the
Independents, I am against the separating, Sectarian, Schismatical presumption
of them both. I take the Kitching and Cole-house to be parts of the house, and
I have sometimes business in them both. But I am most in my Study and Chamber,
and I will take both Chamber and Colehouse for Schismticks, if ever I hear
either of them say, I am all the house, or [it is lawful to be in no other
room.] Lord pull up the separating Schismatical Thorn-hedge, which has
cursedly divided thy family and flock.

CHAP. II. The Impleaders Truth examined.
1. CHrist says, that the Devil is the Father of Lies; and doubtless he has
subtilty to excuse them and improve them: and it is a great advantage to them,
that they are so disowned by humane nature, that it is taken for an injury to
humanity, to charge any man to be a Liar; and a Ruffian will say it deserves a
challenge or a stab. You will think it a paradox, that natural dislike should
be turned to the advantage of a sin. But it is but natural light convincing the
understanding, not changing or fortifying the will against it. And therefore it
is but pride of reputation and impenitency, that is indeed the fortress of the
sin.

2. Accordingly it has many times been my hard hap, to have such Books written
against me, (and that by men whose Reputation is not undervalued by themselves
or their followers) as were to be answered chiefly by a Mentiris from end to
end, if it would not seem by custom to be uncivil. And to tire the Reader by
turning a Mintiris into a civil long Parenthesis, and this as frequently as
gross falsehoods are openly said or intimated, is tedious, even when necessary.
With one I was put to use my Arithmetic, and to answer him by numbering the
untruths asserted: But I have forborne it with others far more guilty, lest
their reverence and power should make truth intolerable, whose passion or
interest, or error, had made gross Lies seem true and necessary.

3. This Impleader has been taught too much by the same. Master; and had he
not spent part of his Book on Doctrinals, where his Errata are but mendae, but
been all Historical where there are too many Mendacia, I might have been put to
the way of answering beforementioned: But be they Mendae or Mendacia, they
need aniendment, and the Reader may need an antidote against them.

4. Some beginning we have on the Titlepage, [pretending to show the Reasons of
the sinfulness of Conformity.] Mend. 1. I pretend in my Plea to show but the
matter of Nonconformity, and Historical Narrative of our judgment and matters
of fact, passing by the Reasons or Arguments that must prove the things
unlawful; though Reason may be gathered by the Reader, from the matter or
History itself.

5. The same is repeated p. 1. [He pretends to give Reasons for the sinfulness
of Conformity, M. 2.] And he overpasseth the chief part of my Book, in which I
state the case of Government and Separation, on pretense that it is [a dark and
dirty way in which I have lost my self. M. 3. And a little will satisfy him,
that regards such an easy, dark and dirty answer.

6. He guesseth that kneeling at the Sacrament [for that was then discourst of]
was one and the chief of those many heinous sins of Conformity: Mend. 4. It
seems the man was present. Reader, look to thy belief when thou art among such
men. 1. There was not a word spoken then against the lawfulness of Kneeling at
the Sacrament. 2. I openly declared that I held it lawful, and none of my
Brethren contradicted. 3. The thing which we proved unlawful then was, [Casting
those faithful Christians out of the Church Communion in that Sacrament, who
dare not take it kneeling, for the reasons which cause them to think it sinful.]

7. Impl. [He will not urge the case, but barely mention matters of fact (...)
much less do we here give the reasons of our Cause.] He dare not be so bold yet
as to venture to displease us. But this Hypocrisy is so thin, that the weakest
eye may look through it.] Mend. 5.

Answ. 1. The Printer put [urge] instead of [argue] which he was told in the
Errata. And he makes the error his own, by feigning the words to be mine. 2.
If I have disputed the Case by Reasons, Why did he not cite them, and tell
where? 3. He allows the Reader to take him for a Calumniator, who will judge
the heart which he knows not, and bring no proof of the hypocrisy, which he
says the weakest eye may see. -- Indeed the weakest is liker than the
strongest to see as he does. 4. I will show him three Reasons, why it is not
like to be Hypocrisy. 1. Because there are severe Laws against all that shall
deprave the Common Prayer Book, or accuse Conformity of being sinful, which is
Excommunication ipso facto, etc. And also Printing such a charge, might have
cost both Printer and Writer dear: And the Book was written diverse years (as
many can witness) before the Act that restrained the Press expired. And is it
not credible that every man loves himself, and is unwilling to be ruined? I
knew how easily you are displeased, and I felt a little what you can do when
you are displeased, and others felt more. And is it hypocrisy then to say, I
feared to displease you? And verily, I was afraid by it of occasioning your
wrath and contentious Writings against many others, and making the breach
wider, which I desired to heal.

2. When it is visible in the Book that I avoid Argumentation, does not that
prove that I said true?

3. The third Proof, if God will, is yet to come: when you see my Arguments
added to the History, you will confess that it was not Hypocrisy to tell you,
that I used them not before.

8. Impl. [For whereas the Right Reverend and Learned Bishop of Eli had told
Mr. B. as he confesses -- That he would petition Authority, that they might be
compelled to give their Reasons, he there says, [To answer the earnest demand
of our Reasons by you, the Lord Bishop of Eli, I have published an Historical
Narrative of our Case and Judgment.]

Answ. Had he not mentioned weak Eyes, you might wonder that he saw not how he
here confuteth his own falsehood: when in the words cited I profess to give but
the Historical Narrative of our Case and Judgment, and not the Arguments or
Reasons for it: But he thinks, [If the History be given in answer to him that
demanded the Reasons, then the History contains those Reasons;] Negatur
Sequela: The matter of Fact must go first. The Bishop demanded of me an account
of our Nonconformity. This is the beginning of an Answer. The Reasons may come
next.

9. Impl. [And if he may be believed, they are not only Mr. Baxter's Reasons,
(m. 6.) but of many others (m. 7.) for p. 3. it is said [We that publish this
here, give an account of our own judgment, how far we hold it lawful or
unlawful to gather or separate from Churches, or to differ from what is
established by Authority.

Answ. The man knows not the difference between giving an account of our
judgment in Thesi, and in Hypothesi. If I tell you in what cases I hold it
lawful or unlawful to separate from Churches, or how far humane Power may go
(as I have done in the second Plea) is that to tell what I take for sin in our
Conformity, and the Reasons of it? What if I show how far Lying is unlawful?
Does that say that Conformity is Lying, etc.

10. Impl. [Where is that allowance from Authority, which he pretends to have
so long waited for, and begged on his knees (m. 8.) And where is that care not
to displease or provoke the Conformists, by showing the many heinous sins in
their Conformity (m. 9.) When without leave of God (m. 10.) or man, he not only
endeavors to displease (m. 11.) but to ruin us. (m. 12.) If any thing may be,
this is worse than his hypocrisy, it is mere distraction and rage (m. 13.)
When our common Adversaries the Papists, etc.

Answ. 1. It was leave that I desired, but I never said, I begged it on my
knees: but that I would gladly do it, could that prevail.

2. I never showed the heinous sins of the Conformists, but over and over
professed that I accused not them, nor meddled with their case; but only said,
How heinous a sin it would be to us to Conform, till we knew more reason for it
than we do!

3. That it is without leave of God, that we give a reason of our not
conforming, I take for false, while our Superiors so long and earnestly
commanded it, and it is so necessary to abate the dividing odium raised against
us, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men.] And if we are taken for intolerable Malefactors, is not
undeceiving our Accusers and Haters a necessary means of Peace?

4. It Is false that an endeavor to undeceive the offended, is an endeavor to
displease them.

5. And it is more palpably false, that [I endeavor their ruin.]

6. How false is it then, that [this is distraction and rage?] And what more
necessary to unite us against the common Adversaries? What Physicians has this
poor Nation, that know no way to unite us, but laying us in Jails with Rogues,
till we can believe all to be lawful which they impose?

Reader, Pity the case of this poor Land! What hands are we fallen into? What
false Doctrine is charged on us? What is the Crime that we have committed? We
are forbidden to Preach Christ's Gospel, though we were solemnly devoted to it
by Ordination, under the Penalties of great Mulcts, and Imprisonments, and
ruin, till we will do that which after our best enquiry we verily judge would
be our heinous sin. We forbear many years to tell them so much as what it is
which we dare not to do; till at last, the Bishops themselves tell us, They
will petition Authority to constrein us to it: And Parliament Men long asked us,
What is that you stick at? And when after about seventeen or eighteen years
Silence, I do but tell them what it is, the Clergymen are so displeased, that
they tell me, that It is distraction, and rage, and an endeavor to ruin them.
When I never moved to put one Priest of them out of his Benefice, nor Bishop,
Dean, Archdeacon, Canon, Prebend, out of a Farthing of his maintenance, nor one
Bishop from their Lordships, or Parliament-Power; much less did I ever motion
the silencing of any one of them, or making them pay Forty Pound a Sermon, or
laying them in ^ayl, as we are used; and yet they cry out, that we endeavor to
ruin them. The Lord pity his poor Flock! What a case are we in, when our
Pastors seem to think, that they are ruined, if we be but suffered to Preach
Christ's Gospel, and to live out of a Jayl: and think that if we offer to refel
the Slanders that render us odious to them, and do but speak for our Ministry
and Liberties, as every Malefactor is allowed by the Judges to speak for
himself, we seek the ruin of our Clergy-Accusers? Do not Heathens abhor such
Injustice as this?

My Purse is less to me than my Ministry; and all that any man can take from
me, will be much less than Forty Pound a Sermon: And yet if any men on the
Highway, or in my House, should not only take away all that I had, but
afterward prefer a Bill against me, as seeking their ruin, because by Reason I
entreated them to forbear, and that in vain, it would be one of the oddest
Cases that has come into Westminster Hall. I was once neighbor to a valiant
Knight, who yet was so gentle, that when the Hookers in a Moonshine-night were
hooking his Clothes and Goods through the window, and he lay in Bed and saw
them, he lay still, and mildly told them, Gentlemen, This is not well done,
These things are not yours; If you are taken, you may be hanged for it. And by
that time his Sermon to them was done, they had got what they came for, and
were gone. But I never heard that they entered a Suit against him, for seeking
to ruin their Trade by his reprehension. But if any of you have such a trade,
as will not endure the Plea of innocent Sufferers for Peace or Mercy, without
your ruin, I would some one that you have more regard for, would persuade you
quickly to lay by that trade, lest when Christ is Judge, and says, Inasmuch as
you did it to one of the least of these, you did it to me, your Clergy will not
save you from his Sentence; were it but the devouring of Widows houses, it is
not the longest Liturgy that will excuse you by a Legit; nor will you escape
with Burning in the Hand, unless Repentance now prevent it. The evil Servant
that stuffs his guts, and beats his Fellows, presuming on his Lords delay, you
know is threatened with a sharper penalty.

11. Impl. p. 4. No person of any Note, that I have heard of, in all that Party
who were in places of Trust and Public Employment, did on the late Test refuse
to communicate with the Church of England.

Answ. 1. How far does your hearing reach? 2. How many of that Party have you
known in such places of Trust? I suppose you know, when the Test in the
Corporation-Act was imposed, that Party were then turned out of all
Corporation-power? In some places not two of the old staid in: And is it any
wonder then, if none of that Party be in such Power? 3. And is Communicating in
the Lords Supper all the Conformity that is scrupled? And what is all this to
our Controversy?

12. Impl. [When all our United strength is too little to withstand the
attempts of our common Adversaries; it is a wonder to me, with what Confidence
and what Design he should not only proclaim Conformity on the Ministers part
to be impossible, but endeavor also with all his might to withdraw the Laity
from our Communion.] m. 14.

Answ. 1. Is it a Truth, that one that holds Communion with your Church, and
speaks and writes for it, and disswadeth none from it, does endeavor with
all his might to withdraw the Laity from it? Can you not forbear this ill
custom a few Lines together?

2. Ex ore tuo: See, Reader, the man confesses the need of our United strength.
Hold him to that word: And I repeat, If he and the rest of that Tribe do
believe, that it was morally possible that the two Thousand Silenced Ministers,
and all that came after them, should believe all the things which I named in my
Plea for Peace, and all the rest which many scruple, are lawful for them to do;
I wonder not at any Confusion, Calamity or Corruption that shall befall a Church
that is conducted by such men! Who would have thought that there had been such
men among Christians, and Pastors of a Reformed Church? But I do not believe
that there are many such, that think it morally possible that we should all
believe all Conformity lawful; they would never else have trusted so much to
Mulcts and Jails, as to think their Church undone without those Helps. They are
not such strangers to Sense and Conscience: It is the wearing out of the
present Generation of Non-Conformists, and alluring or affrighting Youth from
following them, which the men of any Brains have trusted to.

Judge by these Evidences of this man's Wit and wondering. 1. By the great
number of the things which we judge sinful: They might dispute men into their
Opinion in some few differences, that cannot in so many. 2. The Sins feared are
so heinous, as that Conscience will not quickly universally swallow them. 3.
The number of the Dissenters: To dispute a few men out of their Judgments in
difficult cases proves hard, much more many hundreds or thousands. 4. Consider
the quality of the silenced Ministers: Could they think that such men as
Anthony Burges, Sam. Hildersham, Mr. Hughes, Dr. Manton, Dr. Seaman, etc. did
not consider what they did, neither in their Health, nor before their Death?
Did they never read or hear what might be said for the New-Conformity? Had they
not Learning or Wit enough to understand it? Or had they no Conscience living
or dying? So many hundreds that after their best enquiries, and hearing all,
remain Non-Conformists, are unlike to be all brought to Conform. 5. Judge by
old experience: Were old Hildersham, Ames, Dod, and hundreds like them, brought
to Conformity heretofore? Mr. Sprint, Dr. Burges and some others were, but more
were not. Did not even the Westminster-Assembly of old Conformists forsake it
as soon as they could? 6. Judge by the change of the Case, and the Writings even
of the old Conformists: Such things are put into the New-Conformity, as Bilson,
Hooker, Usher, and other old Conformists have written against. And would they
also repent and change their minds, if they were alive? I again profess, that I
am bound in Charity and Reason fully to conclude, that had Usher, Bilson,
Hooker, Jewel, Preston, Sibbes, Whately, Bolton, and all such, yea Dr. Jo.
Burges, Sprint, and such others of their mind that writ for the old Conformity
bin alive, they would all have bin Nonconformists to our new Impositions. 7.
Judge by the means that are used to convince us: Is there any thing said that
has such cogent Evidence as to convert so many hundred men to your Opinions?
Did such men as Dr. Twisse, Mr. Herle, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Vines, etc. want the
Instruction of our present Lords, to make them wise enough to Conform? When I
know none of the Conformists writings that have so much as named some of the
things that we think worst of. 8. Judge by present Experience: Why is it not
done, if it be morally possible? Have you not had near twenty years Trial, by
your Reasonings, Preachings, Writings, Reproaches, Allurements, Threatenings,
Canons, Fines, Jails, Informers, crying out for execution of the Laws, etc. and
is it yet done? Have there not since more (of the Laity) turned from you, than
have turned to you? Will not Experience convince you? 9. Judge by the great
diversity of men's conditions and capacities, which I have elsewhere opened.
Will ever men of such different Capacities, Educations, etc. agree in such and
so many things? 10. Judge by the requisites to such a Concord. It must be by
bringing all the Ministry to a higher degree of Knowledge, or Conscience and
Honesty than all the Nonconformists. For it can be nothing that you think keeps
us from Conforming, but Ignorance or Badness. (Dr. Asheton undertaketh, as
going to the bar of God, to prove that it is Pride and Covetousness) And how
can you hope to make us all so much Wiser and Better than we are? Do you
believe that the seven Thousand that had Conformed to the Directory, and staid
in by Conforming to your Law, 1662. were so much Wiser and Better than the two
thousand that were cast out? Or that the greater part of your Countrey-Priests
now (if the lamenting people wrong them not) do Conform, because they know
more, or are Better men than we? If it be so, he is unworthy to be a Pastor,
that knows not how hard a matter it is to make all the Ministers of a Nation
so much wiser and better. He is blind that sees not that it is Fines, Jails
and Death, that our Prosecutors trust to. And will true Conscience be convinced
by such Arguments? Would you your selves change your minds in Religion, if you
were but Fined and Imprisoned? If so, you are men of no true Religion: If not,
why expect you it from us?

13. But what am I doing? Will it not more tire than profit the Reader, if I
should number abundance more of his Untruths? I will step to his concluding
Farewell to me, and then see how he justifies the trade, by pleading for
Equivocation, Page 128. [You gave several intimations that the King was
Popishly affected, as Bishop Bramhal affirms,] Mend. 15.

Answ. Why did not the man tell where and when? I have Printed the contrary in
the time of highest Usurpation, that the King was no Papist. Is he not a
Calumniator, unless he prove it? But he says [Bishop Bramhal affirms it.]
Answ. A man that never saw me: why did he not cite Bishop Brambal's proof? But
see what this sort of men are come to! Do they think it enough to warrant their
slanders of us, because one of their Archbishops has slandered us before them?
What Credit then is to be given to such men's History or Reports? Is this it in
which the Authority of Archbishops consists, that they must be followed in
slanders? No: It is not their Obedience to Archbishops, but their Conformity to
a calumniating Spirit: For Brambal's Predecessor, Archbishop Usher (a man
honored by all good men that knew him, for Learning, Piety, and Honesty) was
of no such Authority with them; but we are scorned for conforming to his
Judgment. But you see that a Calumniator with you is no singular person. They
are not ashamed to tell the world, that their Archbishops lead them, and are as
bad as they.

14. Impl. p. 128. [You applauded the grand Regicide, as one that prudently,
piously and faithfully, to his immortal Honor, did exercise the Government.]
Mend. magn. 16.

Answ. Reader, Do not wrong this man so much, as to think he is the Father of
this. He takes it up but in Conformity to his Fathers and Brethren that have
often printed it before him: and he must keep company and be Conformable. Alas!
It is not one or two such men as are the Guides of Souls in England: But what?
Had he no pretense for it? Yes, more than for many of the rest. He that
undertook to be a Lying Spirit in the mouth of all Ahab's Prophets, never
undertook to deceive them without any pretense. I have somewhat else to do than
to write the History of my actions in those Times, as often as any such man will
tell such a Story as this.

In short, I thought then that both sides were faulty for beginning the War;
but I thought the Bonum Publicum, or Salus Populi, made it my Duty to be for
the Parliament, as Defensive against Delinquents, and as they professed to be
only for King, Law and Kingdom: When at the New Moddle they left out [for the
King] and changed their Cause, I changed from them, and was sent by two
Assemblies of Divines to do my best though to my utmost labor and hazard, to
dissuade them. Cromwell having notice of it, would never let me once come near
him or the Headquarters. I continued on all occasions publicly and privately
to declare my judgment against him as a rebellious Usurper till he died. But
being at London a year or two before he died, the Lord Broghil (since Earl of
Orery) would needs bring me to him; where I dealt so plainly with him, in
demanding by what Right, against the Will of almost all the Kingdom, he pulled
down our lawful English Monarchy that we were sworn to, and the Parliament, as
cast him into such Passion, as broke out in reviling many of the worthiest
Parliament Men, that he knew me to be familiar with. The last time the Earl of
Orery saw me, he told me, he had told the King of that Conference, and that he
should love me the better while he lived, for my Faithfulness. He and Lambert
and Thurloe were (silently) present. A Twelvemonth after, Sir Francis
Nethersole would needs dispute me into Repentance for being for the Parliaments
Cause, by way of Writing: I told him, that the sad effects were enough to make
us all suspicious; but I would give him those Reasons that had moved me, with a
true desire to know the full truth, that if I had erred, I might not remain
through Ignorance without Repentance: He wrote to me, that in the mean time,
seeing I was satisfied against Cromwels Usurpation, I should go to London to
set it upon his Conscience to persuade him to restore our present King: I sent
him word, that as he took me for his Adversary, so his Conscience was not so
easily persuaded to give up such a prey; and that this was not now to do; I had
been lately with him, and I and others had tried such persuasions, or the like,
in vain. While I was preparing my Papers for Sir Francis Nethersole, comes out
Mr. Harrington's Oceana, contriving the Settlement of a Democracy, which they
called a Commonwealth; and Sir H. Vane was about another Model: I wrote
somewhat against them, and Mr. Harrington printed a Paper of Gibberish,
scorning at my Ignorance in Politics: Against him I wrote my Political
Aphorisms, called A Holy Commonwealth, in the beginning pleading for the Divine
Universal Sovereignty, and next for Monarchy as under God; and next (seeing
they were all on New Modelling) I told them, how Piety might be secured and
promoted by Monarchy; and to get Sir Francis Nethersoles Answer for my fuller
satisfaction, I added as to him, as I promised, the reasons that had moved me
to be for the Parliament. While I had purposed the later part first, Oliver
died, and his Son Richard was set up while I was writing the Book: Before I had
finished it, the Army had pulled down first his Parliament, and next Richard
himself; I never had known a Parliament more inclined to Piety and Peace. My
deep displeasure against the Madness of the Army, that had rebelliously pulled
down all Power, King, Parliaments, and at last him whom they set up themselves,
drew me first to write the sad Meditations in the end, and then a sharp Preface
to the Army against their Rebellions: In which I aggravated their Crime in the
last instance among the rest, in putting down suddenly Richard their Protector,
whom they had lately Courted and Set up: and I used these words, [It was
written while the Lord Protector (prudently, piously, faithfully, to his
immortal Honor, how ill soever you have used him) did exercise the
Government,] etc. Now so congruous are these men's Principles and Practice, that
they fear not to tell the world in Print, and that successively from one
another, that I [said this of the grand Regicide] Oliver, whom I so openly and
so deerly opposed: And a putarem, or a non putarem, will excuse a Volume of
such tricks, if the cheat or falschood be discovered. They might easily have
seen by the whole scope of that Preface, that it was Richard, and not Oliver,
that I spoke of. It was not Oliver that they misused and pulled down. And I
praised him, to show the evil of their Rebellious Proceedings. It was not
Taking the Government, which he had no Right to, which I praised; but his short
Exercise: And I thought him praiseworthy on many accounts.

1. He never meddled in any War against the King, notwithstanding all his
Fathers Interest and Power, but was suspected to be for the King. 2. We never
heard that he sought or expected the Government, but it was thrust upon him. 3.
When he was offered help presently to apprehend them that suppressed him; he
refused it, and renounced the Government at a word, resolving not to shed a
drop of blood to keep that which was so thrust upon him. 4. He set himself by a
Parliament of pious peaceable men, to have suppressed Heresy and Confusion, and
to have restored Order, and Equity, and Peace. 5. The Kings chief Friends about
us told me, that Richard was for the King, and that some were Treating with him
to Restore him: Though I confess, I hardly believed that his Self-denial was so
great. I thought all this had so much laudable, as to aggravate the madness of
that Army, who when they had destroved the King, and pulled down the
Parliament, did also put down him whom they had Set up and Sworn Fidelity to
themselves. His want of Right did not justify their Perfidiousness. Thus the
Conformist grounds his Accusation.

15. Impl. p. 128. He repeateth a Leaf of my own words to Mr. Bagshaw, against
the Armies Rebellion against King and Parliament, and setting up the Protector,
and the rest of their Injuries; not seeing that he confuteth his own Calumny,
while to prove that I am for those actions, he proves that I have condemned
them as heinous sin: See here how strongly these men argue!

16. Impl. p. 131. [His applauding the first Boutefeus, as glorious Saints in
Heaven, his vindicating the Authority and War of the Parliament against the
King, his pertinacious adhering to the Covenant, crying down the Royal Martyr
as a Papist, after he had sealed the sincerity of his heart to the Reformed
Religion with his Blood; and the crying up his Murderer for a prudent, pious
and faithful Governor: His Principles in his Holy Commonwealth, and his
present practices in defending Schism, and so sowing Sedition, etc. Cry aloud
for Repentance and Retraction, etc.]

Answ. Here are his Doctrinal Principles exemplified: He has now got the art
of linking and condensing falsehoods so close, that I must cease numbering them,
while one is made up o^ so many.

1. The first Accusation went before, p. 88, 89. where he mentions Brook, Pym,
Hampde^, and White, etc. saying, [What if they are gone to another place? --
You were ashamed to continue them in your (Book) being left out in your later
Editions.

Answ. 1. I left them out, because the Book could not be Licensed else: And
should I not rather leave out a few Names, than cast away the whole Book? Had I
done it in Repentance or to please such as you, you tell me how it would have
been taken.

2. I never spoke with one of them; but I have heard so credible testimony of
their conversation, especially of Hampden and White, that I am far more
confident that they are in Heaven than that such as you will ever come thither.
Impartial men of both sides honored them; I heard an ancient grave Gentleman,
that was no Phanatick, nor accounted a Puritan, but a sober honest man, say,
1644. [If I might choose what person in all the world I would be, I would be
John Hampden.]

3. It is not only Bishop Jer. Tailor, but Politicians commonly that
acknowledge, that It has not pleased God to make Politic Cases of the degrees
and forms of Power so easy to us, as that all good Christians can decide the
Controversies about them. It Is commonly agreed, that God has not forbidden
Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, or Mixed Government; nor made only one of
these to be lawful. And it is past Controversy then, that it is National
Fundamental constituting Contracts, Laws or Customs, and not any express
Scripture, that must tell us de facto and jure, what is the Species of each
Countries Government. It is not in the Creed, Lords-Prayer, Decalogue, or
Sacraments: Therefore the knowledge of it is not of absolute Necessity to
Salvation: I find it not in the condition of the Covenant of Grace. Methinks
they that say Heathens may be saved, should grant it of Christians that know
not when a sinful division falls out between King and Parliament (and that with
many difficult circumstances) which it is that should be then obeyed or
defended. Christ was drawn by Hypocrites to pay Tribute to Caesar, rather than
offend; but he would not be drawn to justify his Dominion over the Jews. Paul
commands Obedience to the Higher Powers as of God, and as watching for our
good: But he would not be drawn to declare, Whether it was Caesar or the Senate
which was the Higher Power, when they came to be divided in their Commands.

4. I have produced too large Testimony from Antiquity, how ordinarily the
Bishops of East and West too quickly owned and praised the Usurpers of the
Empire, when once in possession: Not only the Synods in Martius time that owned
Maximus, but Ambrose and Theopl. Alexand. to Eugenius, and Gregory the first,
and many Western Bishops, and ordinarily far most of the Eastern Bishops
presently owned Usurpers, that came into the Empire by the Murder or Deposition
of their Predecessors. And are all these Fathers and Christians damned?

5. The Liturgy requires that when such are Buried, they are openly pronounced
saved; that is, That God of his great Mercy has taken to himself their Souls
out of the miseries of this Life, and that we hope to be with them: We must be
Silenced and Imprisoned if we will not say this, and subscribe to it, and
reproached if we do: This is the Conformity which they would have us yield.

6. Do you not tremble your self, when you question whether they be not gone to
a worse place and revile us for the hopes of their Salvation? Does not your
Conscience ask, If such men be not saved, what will become of me, that
deliberately write such Volumes of Falsehoods against God's true Servants, and
their present serving him, as if they must cease Preaching and all
Church-worship, till they dare Conform to all imposed? O why will you condemn
your self in others!

7. I find many of your selves honoring Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, and Mr.
Hooker, and such others that held the Principles which those men went upon; and
you never yet, that I heard of, reviled any man for hoping that they were
saved: No nor Grotius, nor Barclay, nor the common sort of Lawyers, and
Politick-Writers, that have said more of the Cases in which Kings may be
Resisted and Deposed, than they did, or than I ever said. If such Principles
may stand with the Salvation of Grotius, Hooker, Bilson, Althusius, Alstedius,
Willius, etc. Why not of theirs that I have mentioned?

8. You know, I suppose, that it was mostly Episcopal men that began the War;
Lords, Commons, and Soldiers on both sides. (If you will not know, and can be
ignorant when you list, your Will has a freedom which mine has not.) And are
you sure that your Conformists also are damned?

9. You hereby teach them that are confident that the Laudian Clergy were the
chief Causers of the War, to conclude therefore that they are damned. And so
our Clergy on both sides will be like Gregory the Seventh's and the Emperor's
in Germany, first exciting and encouraging the Princes and People of the two
sides, and then taking Oaths against each other, and lastly damning one
another; till a Reverend Council of Bishops Decreed, that all the Bishops on
the Emperors side should be Deposed, and the Dead dug out of their Graves
and burnt.

10. You will open the eyes of the people to see what manner of Spirit you are
of, and that it is no wonder if you cannot endure us to Preach and Live by you;
who take us for Criminal for hoping that men are saved, who otherwise were of
most exemplary Lives; but being in point of Politiques on the Parliaments side,
and doing accordingly, while they professed to arm only against Subjects,
holding the person of the King to be inviolable. I find not that even in the
Barons Wars, or the Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York, no nor King
Stephens, the Censures were so high. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury is
Sainted, that was against his King.

17. The second Charge is, my Vindicating the Parliaments War against the King]

Answ. 1. I believed then that it was not against him, when their Commissions
were for him. 2. I proposed my Reasons upon a Learned Knights demand,
requesting satisfaction by an Answer: And had you or any of you ever since
confuted them, it had been more charity than only to Recite them and Condemn
them. But I have over and over publicly declared my revocation of that whole
Book, (though not of all that is in it) and wished that I had never written it,
for more Reasons than I will now name to you. 3. My Judgment about the King's
Power, and our Obedience, I have fully declared in The Second Plea for Peace.

18. The third Accusation is, [His pertinacious adhering to the Covenant.]

Answ. 1. The man knows that I own not the imposing it, specially as a Test
for the Nations Concord, it being an engine of Division so imposed. 2. That I
own not the taking it so imposed. 3. That I deny that it obliges me to any
thing that is evil, yea or from any Obedience to the King in things lawful, nor
to any thing but what I have a former obligation to from God himself. 4. But I
confess that I dare not say, that it obliges no man to repent of his Sin, nor
to be against Popery, Profaneness or Schism, nor to endeavor any amendment of
Church Government. And I will not deny, but that I take Perjury to be no
indifferent thing; which of these is the Crime of Adherence, he tells me not.

19. The next Accusation is, [Crying down the Royal Martyr as a Papist.]

Answ. I have said, Till he tell me where, and how he proves it, I must take
him for a gross Calumniator, and wonder not that he Conformeth. In my Key for
Catholics he may see where I prove the contrary, that the King was no Papist.
I will confess that which he knows not: 1662, and 1663. when the Kings Letter
in Spain to the Pope was Printed out of Mr. de Chesne by Prynne, I was struck a
while with doubt and suspicion; But I soon considered, 1. That the words
promised but Endeavors for Unity. 2. And that it was written in the Spaniards
power, in a straight.

20. The next is, [Crying up his Murderer.]

Answ. A repeated malicious falsehood.

21. The next Accusation is, [His Principles in his Holy Commonwealth.]

Answ. 1. I often told you, The Book is revoked long ago. 2. The Principles which
I own I have published as aforesaid in the Third Plea: and he does not confute
them. 3. Of the Wars I spoke before: What other does he name? Bishop Morley
recited many of them; and the first as I remember was, that I say, [That
pretense to unlimited Monarchy is unlawful, or Tyranny, because God has
Limited all Humane Power.] If this be Heresy or Disloyalty, I hold it still: I
mistake much, if any Kings have Power from God to command all their Subjects to
blaspheme or deny God or Christ, or to renounce his hope of Heaven, or to
worship the Devil, and sell his Soul to him, nor to murder Father, Mother, Wife
or Children. I will venture to dispute this with any Conformist. But as to the
harder question, Whether Kings may kill any or all their Senators or innocent
Subjects for nothing, or burn all their Cities, or take all their Wives,
Children and Estates, I will leave it to Statesmen to debate. I am sorry that
ever I wrote so much about their matters.

22. The next charge is, [His present practices in defending Schism.]

Answ. Prove it, or number it with your Slanders. What is the Schism? Is it
Schism to say, That it is unlawful like Atheists to cease all Public Worship
of God, till Conscience can find it lawful to Conform? Others think that the
contrary is both Schismatical and Atheistical. Can you prove that I am for
Silencing faithful Ministers, and making partition separating hedges in the
Vineyard of Christ? My Rule is, to go no further from any Christian than he
goes from Christ, or would force me to sin for his Communion.

23. The next charge is, Sedition; that is, not giving over God's Worship, till
I can swear, say and do all that is imposed. Where is the proof of all these
Accusations? But their method of Justice is, first to do execution (casting out
2000) and next to justify it by an Accusation behind our backs, and next to
bring their Witnesses, when we are dead or forbidden to speak; and they are one
another Witnesses. This man's proof is, that Bishop Bramhall of Ireland said
it: The next man's may be, that This man said it: Dr. Ashetons proof was, that
the Debate-maker said it; and who said it to him I know not.

And p. 100. This man has an infallible witness, Bishop Morley then of
Worcester. And what says he? Why first, That I did what I could to make the
King odious to his people. But where is his proof? It Is enough; The Bishop said
it. 2. I sowed the seeds of Sedition at Kederminster: The proof is the same;
the Bishop said it. 3. The Bishop taught him to add, [I my self have heard
him, in a Conference in the Savoy, maintain such a Position, as was destructive
to the Legislative Power of God and man.] But what if the Bishop spoke as
falsely, as if he had said that I pleaded for Mahomet? Where is your proof
then? I after Printed the words with the Dispute of the Dr's, to which they
were an Answer: And I have in my Second Plea, in a Disputation of Scandal,
vindicated them. Let any man of brains read both, and believe the Bishop and
you if he can. But, Reader, if such men's renewed Accusations cause me yet to
Print that Answer to the Bishop's Letter, which for peace I cast away; blame
not me, but them that force me to it: I am for peace, but they are for War.

24. But what good will it do the Reader, to have this man's Falsehoods detected
and numbered? They are so many and so gross, that it is a troublesome work; as
p. 107. [Your Principles which assert, that the King may be Deposed.]

Answ. Burn any Book of mine with scorn, where I ever asserted any such thing:
But if it be a Forgery, believe such men accordingly.

So p. 112. [Refusing the Tests of Obedience, which require only the
disclaiming of Rebellious Principles and Practices.] Answ. See my Profession
and Renunciation, second Plea, Chap. 3, 4 and my Confutation of Hooker, Chr.
Direct. Par. 4.

Page 112, 113. He joins with those that would bring us into the Plot, and
fathers his Accusation on the Acts of Parliament against us.

Page 113. He says, I have [a better opinion of the Papists, than of the
Conformists,] because I say, I had rather be saved from the Gallows by a
Papist, than hanged by a Conformist.

So p. 132. [To withdraw your avowed Communion] Answ. A Fiction: witness the
Parish-Assembly.

Page 133. Your Practice continues and encourages Separation from our
Communion.] False.

Ibid. Cartwright, after he had written as much as he could against Conformity,
repented and Conformed at last.]

Answ. A Fiction: No more than I Conform. Many a time have I been in Warwick,
where he last lived Master of the Hospital, and the ancient people there and at
Coventry knew the contrary. If to join in the Liturgy and Sacrament (and
perhaps rather than be Silenced, to wear the Surplice) be Conforming, you abuse
many whom you reproach and silence as Nonconformists.

Page 134. He mentions my Positive opposing and hindering their Communion. The
Book is much made up of such untruths in matter of Fact.

25. His Postscript is his Ingenuous Conjectures, if not Proofs, that I am a
Liar and an Hypocrite, in the dating of my Prognostication; and that it was
written 1680. Answ. Should I abuse the Reader by a particular Answer to them?
That it was not written 1680, many persons that saw them can witness. Will his
Reasonings make me ignorant of such a matter of my own fact? All that I know of
it is this, 1. As far as I can remember, it was shortly after the
Savoy-Conference, that the first Copy was written; but just the Month I do not
remember. 2. Finding this Copy among my rude neglected Papers, I wrote it fair
in 1671. And my Memory is not so strong, as to be sure that I altered not a
word: For I cast away the first rude Copy. 3. After that, I thought it had been
lost, not seeing it some years: Till Mr. Matthew Silvester told me, that I had
long ago lent it him to read: I did not think it worth the Publishing. But one
of judgment that he showed it to, thinking otherwise, I added a few Lines in
the End: This is the Truth, and if it be the Impleaders interest to believe it
to be false, let him use his Intellect and Pen accordingly, I Will no more strive
against him.

CHAP. III. His Answer to the first Plea for Peace Examined.
1. BEcause the great Charge against the Non-Conformists is, 1. Their Not
Conforming. 2. And that till they can Conform they cease not Preaching and all
public Worship o^ God (which is to live like Atheists, and chus^ Damnation.)
The first thing that I did in the First, Plea, was to Declare our Judgment
about Churches, Ministry, Church Communion and Separation, (in what Cases we
hold it sinful or lawful.) To my great wonder, almost all this i^ past over by
all my Accusing Answerers that ^^^^ have seen, as if it had bin little to them.
And they go on to take it for granted, that we are guilty of Schism and sinful
Separation, or in wondering that we do not grant it. 2. And as to the second
part of our Charge, I have seen none yet but Mr. Cheney and this Impleader that
pretend to bring proof of the Lawfulness of the^^ Points of Conformity which we
avoid. And to Mr. Cheney I gave a Reply, which I judged satisfactory; and this
man where they agree repeateth the same things, as if I had not Replied; and
therefore I refer him to that Reply, rather than write the same over again. But
in some things they as much differ from each other as from me.

2. Page 4. He premiseth, 1. What are the Parts of the Book to which we are to
declare our Assent and Consent? Answ. All things contained and prescribed in
and by it. Are not these words plain? We are not for Equivocation: What he
says of this, is answered to Mr. Chapter

2. Page 9. He says, [It is granted by the Non-Conformists, that the
Common Prayer Book, as it is now amended and abstracted from the Declarations
and Subscriptions required by the Act of Uniformity, is better to be assented
to, than as it stood before.

Answ. 1. I know none of those Non-conformists: It Is better in some things (as
the Translation of the Epistles and Gospels) and worse to them in other. 2. But
what is this to the Case?

3. Page 11. He says, [Non-Conformists grant, that it is better to submit to
the practice of a doubtful small evil, than to forbear a necessary great Duty.]

Answ. This I answered to Mr. Chapter I know one of them that grant it. They
suppose that a doubtful Evil] is really evil; and the Doubt will not make it
Lawful (or Better,) but Less Evil than a greater: And that no Duty should ^e
forborne, while Duty, nor Evil done. But ^e must not forbear Duty till we can do
it without adherent evil: But we must do our best to ^^rbear all-evil.

Ibid. He speaks against over-strict Interpre^tions of Impositions. Answ. I
stand to Bishop ^anderson's Solutions, whom he cites, which ^e in the end of
The First Plea for Peace.

Page 12. 4. He says, [Practice is the best Ezounder of the Law: many Laws are
worded for terrorem iniquum petere, ut quod aequum est ferant; Lex non curat
minima. Neither the Lan of God or Man is sollicitous about Circumstances and
the lesser Punctilios.]

Answ. 1. When they either comprehend the Least in Generals, or name them
particularly, we think they extend to them: And that he that breaks one of
the Least, and teaches (...) all be called Least in the Kingdom of ^^^^ Mat.
5. 2. The seven thousand Ministers (and more) that Conformed to the new-made
Law 1662, did not stay till Practice expounded it. 3. And whose practice must
it be that is the Exposition? When your practices much much differ? 4. I think
you abuse the Law and Lawgivers, by making them first injust, iniquum petendo,
and next unintelligible, and lastly opening a door for disobedience.

Page 13. 5. He notes that we are not agreed what is unlawful in Conformity.

Answ. 1. Nor are we agreed of all forbidden in Gods Laws; Must we therefore
forbear no sin? 2. We are agreed (as far as I know) of all the many particulars
enumerated in the Plea: Deliver us from what we are agreed against. 3. The
Bishops of England are not agreed in how many things we must differ from the
Papists: All are not for so much of theirs as the Greeks, or as Grotius, or
Bishop Bromhal, or Mr. Thorndike, or Will. Forbes of Edenborough were for. And
what of that? Must not Popery be renounced till you are all herein agreed?

53. Page 14. He notes what I said of the root of the first difference between
the old Nonconformists and Conformists, One part cleaving to the Scripture, and
the other being for reteining all that came in before 600, and common to them
with the Greeks, [which (says he) doubtless was the sounder Opinion; so that
the Foundation of Nonconformity was laid on a false Principle, and they that
built thereon frequently raised Sedition, etc.]

Answ. 1. They that thought each mutable circumstance of Worship must have a
particular Command in Scripture, erred; but there were few such, at least of
any Learning: But those that took the Law of God in Nature and Scripture, for
the only and perfect universal Law, did not err.

2. So many Corruptions in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline came in before 600,
and are retained by the Greek Church, that we cannot make that the measure of
our Reformation: If you are for all [that is common to the Papists and Greeks]
How prove you that you may Silence and Imprison all that are not?

3. And if this be the Rule, you are yet ill reformed. It is more than three
and three Ceremonies and Additions which you yet want, which the Papists have:
I could name such a Catalogue as might make Englishmen better understand what
your Conforming Principles are, and what must be further expected when you are
able. And the Council of Florence will tell us, when once England is of the
Greek Religion, how possible it is to step over to the Pope. But why does not
the Church of England conform to the Greek Church now, if it be so great a
Duty, as will warrant the Silencing and Imprisoning of Refusers? I hear but of
few that grow in love with their Worship, since the Greeks had a Church in
London; especially Scholars that understand them.

4. But what if the first Non-Conformists erred? What Is that to us any more
than to you? We reverence the Primitive Example more than theirs; and never
took them for the Masters of our Faith.

5. Your Charge of their Sedition is much more sharply laid on the Protestants
in general by Pateson, the Image of both Churches, and by Philanax Anglicus,
and many others, than you lay it on the old Non-conformists: and all parties
can talk at that rate against others, as Pryn does of Prelates Treasons.

4. Page 15. Of Assent and Consent to all things, and Subscription that nothing
is contrary to the Word of God. 1. He tells us, What men have subscribed. 2.
That we must allow it a just and favorable Construction.

Answ. I grant that worthy men have subscribed, and that as favorable a
construction must be made, as will stand with Truth and Justice. But this does
us no good.

5. Page 16. Impl. [All Lawgivers do leave to the Judges and Magistrates a
Power to interpret the doubtful Letter of the Law, and to mitigate the rigor
of its execution, in order to the public good.]

Answ. 1. I have answered this to Mr. Cheney: There is an Interpretation which
gives us the general obliging sense of the Law; which Conscience must judge
by, if we will subscribe: and this belongs only to the Lawgivers, as I have
proved. And there is an Interpretation which only directs the Judicial
Sentence, in this or that man's particular Case, as whether he shall be punished
as guilty or not; and this is it that belongs to the Judges: If the Judges
will put a false sense on the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, I may not take
them in that sense. Their Expository Power must direct their own Sentence, and
that the Execution; but if I be put to Swear or subscribe my self to any
imposed words, no Judge can Absolve me from taking them in the usual sense,
unless the Lawgivers give another. This is our Rule, and we dare not Equivocate.

2. As to your confused talk, that [Magistrates can dispense with the lesser
parts of the Law,] it is useless to me: The Lawgivers can expound, suspend and
change the Law: The Executive Magistrate can suspend his own Sentence and
Execution in some cases; but not the sense of the Law, nor allow my Conscience
to change the sense.

6. Impl. [All that is required by the Act, is unfeignedly to Assent and
Consent that there is such a measure of Truth and Goodness in the Book of
Common Prayer, as qualifies it for the public worship of God.]

Answ. 1. Gratis dictum. Who authorized you to say that [Assenting and
Consenting to all things contained and prescribed] means not as it says? but
only an useable measure of Truth and Goodness? Is this the usual sense of [All
things, etc.] If not, where have the Law givers given us another? If you can
think so, why must all be silenced that think otherwise, and dare not be so
bold?

7 Impl. [The title of the Act is the Key -- If Uniformity be observed, the Act
is satisfied.]

Answ. (...) is not de fine only, but de medio, to secure Uniformity, by
professed Assent, etc. All Lawyers know that Laws have usually more in the Body
than is in the Title.

8. Impl. [They say, 1. Assent implies the Truth, and Consent the Goodness. 2.
All things they say, means all words and expressions. 3. By [to the use] is
meant those things that come not into use. 4. When it is said, in sensu
composito, contained and prescribed in and by, etc. they extend it to all
things that are contained as well as prescribed.]

Answ. I see that Wit is useful to many ends: Here are so many and rare
Expository Evasions, as Escohar or Bauny could not have excelled in them.

1. If Assent signify not Judging all to be true, it has lately got a new
signification: Consent indeed signifies often an object practicable and existent
for some good motive of Consent.

2. If the [all things] in the Books, mean not [all the words] but [things]
distinct from [words] I would we could know what they are: Sure it is not the
Paper and Ink that the Parliament mean. Prayers and Forms are words. Actions or
Ceremonies that are not words, are but little of the Book, or rather none of
it, being but the matters commanded by it.

3. There is no word or part of the Book that was not made for some use. If
not, how shall we know which words are useless?

4. I do not think that there was a man in the Parliament when the Act was
made, that ever thought of this subtle Exposition, that any man would take [all
contained and prescribed] only in sensu composito? And so that we profess
Assent to nothing contained in the Book, but that which is prescribed also. If
so, is not [conteined] an idle word when all men know that all that is
prescribed is contained? And yet by that time prescribed Doctrines, Calendars,
Rules, Forms, etc. are taken in, they will prove more than my Assent and
Consent will reach to.

. 9. Whereas the Commons brought the Lords to agree with them, for not limiting
the sense of the Declaration of Assent and Consent to the Use of all; he
answers, 1. That the Bishops then were more our friends than the Commons: As
if the Bishops always went with the major Vote of the Lords.

2. He gives Reasons, why it is meet that men Approve as well as Use what they
do. And what else is it that we say, but the Using without Approving,
satisfies not the imposition?

10. He cites my words, That we may take an Oath, whose words in the plain and
proper sense are lawful. But the Question is, Whether these be such?

11. II. page 21. He defends the words, [Easter-day on which the rest depend,
is always the first Sunday after the first Full-Moon, which happens next after
the 21 of March.] Which being often false, he says, 1. Being a General Rule, it
may be allowed to have some exception. Answ. And so they say [Always] and they
mean not always, but sometimes.

2. He proceeds: [The Rubric does not say, [a Rule! but [Rules] in the
Plural: and where the first Rule fails, the defect is supplied in the second.]
Answ. What may not such a Wit prove true and lawful, if the man be willing? 1.
The Rules contained in that Section under that Title, are only this, and one
for Advent and other Sundays, and none for Easter but this. 2. To say, This is
always so, and after to say the contrary, is but to say, One is true, and the
other false. Always excludes your acknowledged Falsehood sometimes.

3. He says, The Defect never comes into practice. Answ. It Is an useable
Rule, and so you covenant to practice it, if the Use of all things be intended:
and so you must keep two Easter-days.

Object. 4. [Mr. B. might as well have objected against the Almanac, which
says February has 28 days.] Answ. So I should if it had said [always] and
[only 28.]

12. III. Impl. p. 22. defends these words, [We are fully persuaded in our
judgments, and we here profess it to the world, that the Book as it stood
before established by Law, does not contain any thing contrary to the Word of
God.] And 1. he blames me for omitting the condition of a just and favorable
Construction, etc. Answ. I undertook not to transcribe the whole Book, which is
in so many hands: A just construction is still supposed, and as favorable as
will stand with Truth. I have often enough told him the Rule by which we
Interpret words, viz. The ordinary sense in which they are understood by men of
the profession which they belong to, unless the Speakers otherwise expound
them. If he thought this Rule to be false, he should have disputed that. If on
pretense of [favourable Interpretations] you resolve to put a good meaning on
any words which your Interest persuades you to take, nobis non licet, we
cannot do so: else we could take any Oath in the world, while all words have
diverse senses, and are arbitrary signs, which we can put what sense upon that
pleases us.

13. Impl. p. 22, 23. [He well knows our Assent to the words there mentioned is
not required, nor could be intended. Answ. Utterly false: I know it not, but
verily believe the contrary.

Impl. For it is only a profession of our Superiors that were then in being,
what their judgment and belief was, etc.] Answ. So the Rubric and the 39
Articless were the judgment of your Superiors: But are not they, and that
Preface, parts of the Book? If not, tell us how we shall know what are parts of
it, and to what we must consent? And must you not Assent and Consent to all
things in it? I like not those Equivocations, which will make Oaths and
Promises to be but what the Speaker please.

14. Impl. [Mr. B. does very ill to recount those mistranslations in the old
Book, which are amended in the new, etc. -- which Mr. B. knows to be false,
(viz. that Assent to them is required.)

Answ. 1. How did this bold man know my thoughts? I know these words to be a
deliberate Printed Falsehood, and this man to have so many such, as that to me
he is incredible.

2. When the New Book justifies the old, as having nothing contrary to the
word of God, and you must Assent to all things in the new one, I think you
assent to that justification. If you mean otherwise, tell men your own
thoughts; but if you would any more be believed, speak not falsely of other men,
whom you never knew.

3. The old Translation of the Psalms is still used, unreformed. Do you not
Assent to that neither?

15. He tells us that [Psal. 105. 28. the two Translations are not
contradictory, They were not obedient to his word, and they Rebelled not
against his word: Because some Translaters understood it of the Egyptians, and
others otherwise.]

Answ. And had the Text those contrary senses? If not, is not one of them
contrary to the Text?

16. Impl. p. 24. [The same Answer will serve the exception against the
Collects of the old Book, which for diverse days together used the word [This
day.] Answ. And the same Reply will serve: You dare not say that on
Christmas Day, Whitsunday, etc. [This day] signifies not the very particular
Day, but the Week or Time of the Year. And has not the same Collect the same
sense on the next days? Are your words like Ciphers, that change their power by
such additions?

17. Impl. [Little reason have they to object against any words or phrases in
the Liturgy, who are still fond of singing Psalms according to the Translation
of Strenhold and Hopkins, etc.]

Answ. Little reason has any man to be forward to believe your Affirmations,
that are so used to falsehood. I find none so willing to use other Versions as
they that you say are fond of this: many use the Scot's Version, many Barton's,
some Rous's, and some Mr. Patrike: And the reason why they no more forsake the
old one, is not because they are fond of it, but lest they too much displease
the Church of England, which has allowed no other, and those that are apt to
turn all Reformations and Varieties into reproach.

18. IV. To what he says of the Apocrypha, I answered already to Mr. Cheney,
and will not now repeat. The Objections against the Fictions in Tobit are
Bishop Barlow's, now of Lincoln, in a Learned M. S. written to satisfy Mr.
Dodwell.

19. V. Our great doubt about the abuse of Godfathers, and excluding Parents
from their proper Office, he says nothing to that needs any reply; but what is
in the Book which he answers, and in the Reply to Mr. Cheny, he answers as if
he understood not the question: and feigns the Liturgy to lay that on the
Parents which it does not, but excludes them from it, and lays it on incapable
persons.

20. Impl. p. 30. [Mr. B. excepts against the Rubric, which says, It is
certain by Gods Word, that Children, which are baptized, dying before they
commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved.] This being a Rubric, and never
coming to Use in the Public Worship, it cannot reasonably be thought to be
imposed as an Article of Faith on others, but only as the judgment of our
Superiors.

Answ. I perceive the Parliaments Act and Declaration is to you a mere Nose of
Wax; It means what you will, or none can tell what. 1. Are Rubricks of no
use? Yea those that determine of Doctrines, which are not only de Fide, but
matters of Salvation, certain undoubted Salvation of all baptized Infants? What
is of Use if these be not? 2. Are such Doctrines of certain Faith no parts of
the Book? nor contained in it? Is not your Superiour's judgment imposed on you
to Assent to? What then is imposed to be believed?

21. But p. 31. he cites Texts as proving the truth of the Article.

Answ. Not a word to the purpose. He seems not to understand that it is not of
the Salvation of true Believers Infants that we doubt: But whetherthis be true
of all without exception that have such Godfathers as ours, that take not the
Children for their own; even the Children of Atheists, Infidels, Heathens,
Mahometans, etc. all which the Minister is bound by the Canon to Baptize, if
offered.

22. VII. Impl. 31. [Mr. B. is the first that has accused the Church of
England of instituting a second Covenant of Grace.]

Answ. Still more untruths. I have no such Accusation: It is but for making and
imposing on pain of Rejection, etc. another Sacrament, or a Sign too much
Sacramental, of the same Covenant of Grace, which Baptism is the Sacrament of.
2. And of this he cannot truly say that I am the first.

I proved from the imposed words and ends, that it is appointed to the uses of
a Sacrament, but indeed not by Christ, and therefore is but a humane Sacrament;
And I answered his Objections to Mr. Che. which he takes no notice of.

He cites me as saying, that Parents may offer their Children to Baptism,
though they cannot have it without the Cross, it being the Ministers sin, and
not theirs. And what then? Is it therefore none of the Ministers sin, 1. To
consent to it. 2. To use it. 3. To refuse to Christen Children whose Parents
dare not submit to it. 4. Nor the Bishops to silence Ministers that refuse such
Conformity?

23. p. 34, 35. He would explain the Rubric by Art. 27. Those that rightly
received Baptisine, etc. and Christian Proprietors may offer their Children,
etc.

Answ. 1. The Canon forbids the Minister to refuse any as aforesaid; What Is
this then to the rest? 2. Right coram Ecclesia gives the Church Power to
receive them: But it must be Right coram Deo to Remission, etc. that must
assure their Salvation: which we cannot prove that the Children of Atheists,
Sadduces, or Infidels have. 3. The Conformists are here themselves divided: One
part of them give that certain Salvation only to all baptized Infants, which
the other give to all in the world, baptized or unbaptized. See Mr. Che. and
the Answer.

24. VIII. About our Refusing Children, whose Parents refuse the foresaid
Crossing, and abuse of Godfathers, he says, p. 36. [1. That in private
Baptism, and consequently in other cases of Necessity, the Church allows the
omission of Cross and Godfathers. 2. That they have a low esteem of the
Sacrament, that for this withdraw.]

Answ. 1. Your Consequence is contrary to the Canon: And it is known that the
Church allows not Ministers to forbear them on pretense of such Consequences.

2. Much less do they allow the refusal of Dissenters for such a Necessity.

3. And it may be no contempt of the Sacrament, when men are afraid of a sinful
use of it though they mistake.

4. Nor is it such a fault of the Receiver or Parent, that will warrant a
Minister to deny them Christendom, or a Sacrament by your selves judged so
necessary to Salvation.

25. p. 36. He returns to the case of Crossing, as a transient Image in
worship, etc. I think few will judge his Answer worthy of a Reply.

26. p. 37. IX. The next is, [That no man should come to the Sacrament without
a full trust i^ God's Mercy and a quiet Conscience.] I would make nothing worse
than it is: I do not think the Imposers meant that all men should stay away
till they had a full trust and quiet Conscience. But that is the plain
importance of the words: Here therefore it is more ill words than ill meaning,
which I do deny Assent and Consent to.

27. X. Page 38. About compelling each Communicant to receive thrice a year, he
says, 1. It is the Statute, not the Minister. 2. It is only the duly
qualified.

Answ. 1. The Bishops are Statute-makers. 2. Nothing more common with the
Canoneers, than to call to Magistrates to execute such Laws. 3. The Canons and
Liturgy require it. 4. It is not true, that it is only the duly qualified: It
is all that are not Naturally, but Morally unfit, that is, that are at Age, and
have Reason and Health. If the Priest should put away any as unfit, he must
accuse them to the Chancellor, and they must be Excommunicate and lie in Jayl
while they live, unless they Communicate. So that here is a plain Exposition.
4. There are multitudes unfit to Communicate, whom the Minister cannot put
away, that were they not constrained, would keep away themselves; as secret
Atheists, Infidels, Sadduces, Socinians, Arians, Seekers, secret Fornicators,
Thieves, Drunkards, etc. that are conscious of their Sin and Impenitence: But
rather than lie in Jayl, will all Communicate.

28. Impl. [What deplorable times are we fallen into, that our highest
Privilege should be counted a great grievance, etc.]

Answ. Still deceit. 1. Is it our highest Privilege to have unfit men
constreined to profane holy things, and profess themselves what they are not;
and the dogs forced in, that should lie without? Is Christ's Discipline against
our highest Privileges? 2. Who knows not that Infidels, Sadduces and wicked
men do account these Privileges to be none: Cure them of their Contempt, and
you need not force them by a Jayl. Till then, is it the Pastors that refuse
such till they voluntary seek it, or the Contemners of these Privileges, that
are to be reproved? Christ gives pardon and life to none but desirous
Consenters; and if you will seal and deliver the promise of it to those that
will but prefer it to a Jayl, and make up your Churches on such terms, we dare
not imitate you. The Church-Keys exercised are, as Tertullian speaks,
Praejudicium futuri judicii, and should intimate to men, who they be that shall
be let into Heaven, or shut out: And to say, Come all and take Christ, Pardon
and Life, who will rather take the Sacrament than lie in a Jayl, is like
another Gospel.

29. XI. The pronouncing Salvation to all that they bury, save the three
excepted sorts, (Unbaptized, Excommunicate, and Self-murderers) is the next.
And 1. he will not have the words to signify Salvation. The words are
[Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, of his great Mercy, to take to
himself the Soul of our dear Brother here departed.] And [we give thee hearty
thanks, for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our brother out of the
miseries of this sinful world.] And [That we may rest in Him (Christ) as our
hope is this our brother does.] If all this signify not Salvation in your
judgment, it does in ours: We accuse not you of deceiving Souls, at a time when
it will take the deepest impression; but we only tell you, we dare not Assent
and Consent to that, which to us would be false Equivocation, and that in so
serious a thing: And if the difference be but Grammatical, does it deserve our
Silencing and ruin, to believe that those words import Salvation?

30. But 2. he says, [Christian Charity teaches us to hope the best of all
that die in the Communion of the Church.]

Answ. It is not Christian Charity which is contrary to the Christian Verity
and Covenant: Nor that which tends to undo the living by false hopes: Hobbes
and such others as oppose Fundamentals, deride Christianity, or the Immortality
of the Soul, some by Writing, some by common Talk, do die in the Church of
England: I have heard Preachers lament their Numbers, Impudence and Increase;
but never heard one of them Excommunicate, nor brought to public Repentance.
All die in the Church, that Communicate rather than lie in Jayl and be ruined;
yea thousands that will not Communicate, notwithstanding such Severities; When
in a Parish of 8000 or 10000 Communicants, no more (even on a Whitsunday) than
about 100 Communitate, though the Minister be one of the best; yet the rest are
still in your Church. We desire the highest degree of Charity. But such a
judgment of men's future state, though called Charitable, seems to us so
fearfully uncharitable, that it is one of the greatest things in which we seem
to differ: And I will not show the rise, and the import and tendency of it,
lest Dr. Fullwood, and the Reflecter on Sacril. Desert. say again, that I
gather too hard Consequences from our Difference. But nobis non licet, Must we
be Silenced and ruined for want of such Charity?

31. XII. Silencing such as think the Surplice unlawful, is the next, page 42.
And he says, [If any man, against such Authority and Arguments, should think
the Surplice unlawful, it is better he should be Silenced, than that the
Churches Peace and Order be disturbed, or ancient Laws abrogated.]

Answ. You have owned it: If it be well done, you may partake of the Reward; If
ill, of the Punishment. Qu. Whether consenting so to Silence 2000 (and 9000 if
they had not Conformed) will not make your Reward greater, than if you had
consented and subscribed to the Silencing but of one? His blood be on us and on
our Children, were the words of Factious Zeal, that escaped not without
punishment. Paul that consented to the death of Stephen, and hunted others,
says, He was mad, yea exceeding mad against them. Christ never laid the Order
and Peace of the Church, nor the Preaching of the Gospel on such things; nor
ever encouraged any to do it. Of which see Bishop Jer. Tailor in the words
largely cited in my Second Plea.

32. XIII. Though Athanasius Creed as to the damnatory part was that which Mr.
Dodwell scrupled, I will not answer this man's equivocating Exposition of it,
lest I be thought to tempt others to blame the Creed itself, which I honor.
Where he says, p. 43. [I frequently and falsely accuse the Conformists of
Socinian or Antitrinitarian Doctrine: Let him tell us where, or else I accuse
him as a false Accuser. But it is his mode.

33. XIV. Whereas all must Assent and Consent to read the Common Prayer every
day of the year, (if not specially hindered) he tells us what reason there is
for it: But 1. will it not necessitate the omission in many places of more
necessary works? 2. What encouragement have we to embody with that Tribe, who
all Consent to this, and not one of multitudes of them do it? Is such
Conformity tolerable, and our Preaching intolerable without it?

34. XV. Page 46. He calls it a Calumny that I say the Liturgy is defective and
Disorderly.

Answ. I did in 1660. draw up a Catalogue of the mere defects and disorders,
but never offered it, to avoid offending them.

He tells us, 1. of the disorders of the Directory. (And had he proved it, is
that a justification of the Liturgy?) 2. And also he tells us of the defects
and confusions which were in Mr Baxter's eight days exploit, (our Additionals,
or Reformed Liturgy, 1661.) when as neither this Accuser, nor any of the
Bishops or Dissenters then said one word of particular accusation against it,
nor any other that ever I knew of to this day, save an impertinent quarrel of
Mr. Roger le Strange, that we used not more imposing words, and such trifles.

35. XVI. Next comes the Profession of the Antiquity of Three Orders in the
Preface of the Book of Ordination and elsewhere, p. 47. And he cites me,
Christ. Direct. p. 127. as against my self; falsely intimating, that I assert
three Orders, because I am uncertain whether there be not diverse Degrees in one
Order. I cited out of Spelnian the Canons of Aelfrike, showing that the Church
of England, even in times of Popery, took Bishops and Presbyters to be the same
Order, as many Papists-Schoolmen do. And the man should have known, that it is
not the Bishops of a particular Church that I mentioned in my Direct. but only
such as have the care of many Bishops Churches.

36. XVII. He next defends the Scenical Call to the people, to [come forth and
show reason, why the person may not be Ordained.] As if he knew not, that it is
not the sense of the words that is questioned; but that this insignificant
Ceremony should be set in the place of the ancient demand of their free consent
over whom the Minister is set, to seem as if they had still that liberty, when
it is no such matter; nor do the people, whose Souls he is to have the charge
of, know any thing usually of his Ordination; nor at his Institution, which
sets him over them, have they any Call. Nor are so much as these Shows used at
the Ordination of Bishops, which by the old Canons was void without the Peoples
Consent.

37. XVIII. Of the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. he says less than Mr.
Cheny, whom I have answered.

38. XIX. So have I there answered (p. 11, 12.) what he says for the Oaths of
Obedience to Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors, etc. 1. It Is one thing to Obey
them, and another to Assent to the Oath of Obedience. 2. And it is one thing to
swear Obedience to them, as exerci^ing the power of Magistrates under the King;
and another thing as Laymen exercising the power of the Church-Keys, etc. And I
have elsewhere cited diverse old Canons, that condemn such Oaths as dangerous.

39. XX. In the 20th Chap. to Mr. Cheny I have abundantly answered what he
says here about keeping men from the Sacrament, and informing the Ordinary.

These be [the Number] of our Exceptions which the Impleader could find,
though the rest were as plainly written.

40. XXI. As for our Objections against the Declarations and Oaths required by
Act of Parliament, because it is not the sense of the Liturgy, but of an Act
of Parliament that we doubt of, he refers us to the Executioners of the Law for
our Instruction, (their natural way of satisfaction:) the Justice and Jailor I
suppose. Did these satisfy him to Conform herein? Does he take such Arguments
for unanswerable? Why did he pretend to defend the rest, which are imposed in
the same Act? These are greater matters than the Ceremonies, and need as clear
a Justification.

41. But that you may see the measure of his Knowledge, he can tell you, that
our mistake is wilful, and an act of pure malice and revenge.

Answ. Our Rule often mentioned is agreed on by Casuists, viz. To take such
Oaths, Promises and Professions, in the sense of the imposing makers of them,
(if they are our Rulers) and unless they give us another sense, we must take
the ordinary sense that those words are used in to be theirs. Therefore we take
[on any pretense whatsoever] and [those Commissioned by him] and [any
alteration of Government in the Church] and [not at any time endeavour] and [no
obligation on any other person] as well as [Assenting and Consenting to all
things contained and prescribed] to have that meaning, which not only our
Parents that taught us to speak, and our Masters and Dictionaries, and the use
of such as we hear talk, has taught us to take such words in; but also in the
sense of the Lawyers and Law Books which we are acquainted with, unless any
odd persons differ from the rest. And this sagacious man has found, that this
Exposition is a wilful mistake, in malice and revenge. Just as others of them
can prove before God, that it is through Covetousness that we Conform not; viz.
Two thousand Ministers (England knows of what sort, though the Accusers do
not) have forsaken all Church-maintenance, and their Rulers countenance, and
put themselves under a Law that mulcts them 40 l. a Sermon, banisheth them from
Cities and Corporations, lays them in Jayl, etc. reproacheth them as seditious;
and all this in Covetousness, Malice, and Revenge. I have seen a Child throw
away his meat in revenge, but he returned to it in less time than 18 years: I
have heard of a woman that cut her throat, and another that drowned herself and
Children, in a revengeful passion against her drunken cruel Husband: but sure,
if she had 18 years deliberated, it would have calmed her passion: But that
2000 such Ministers should choose ruining Fines, and Poverty, and Jails, and
wilfully damn their own Souls by sin, and all to be revenged on Parliament or
Prelates, is somewhat strange! Especially when it is that which that Parliament
and Prelates themselves are pleased with, who chose the terms. What kind of
Revenge has our Malice found out, which destroys ourselves and pleases our
Afflicters!

42. And here p. 55. he falls with scorn on my Book of Concord; and that his
Book may be Conformable to itself, describes my terms of Concord by downright
fiction and falsehood; as if he had thought none would ever open the book to
shame his Calumny. He tells you, that the result of all is, That every Pastor
be independent, free from any superior to control him, and have an arbitrary
Power, and arbitrarily exercise the power of the Keys without Appeal; to have
the power of Ordaining who they will, the power of altering the Laws in Church
and State, etc. All which I have expressly written against at large.

Besides what I have written, 1. For Bishops in each Church. 2. For Archbishops
or general Overseers. 3. For Synods. 4. Had it been no more than what I have
written for the Magistrates Governing of all Pastors and Churches, it would
prove the falsehood of this man's Assertion.

Yet that you may see that his Charity and his Veracity are proportionable, he
hence inferrs, p. 57. [Did ever any Bishop aspire to such Tyranny as this, the
Pope only excepted? Is not the King and whole Nation greatly culpable not to
trust themselves with the ingenuity of this people, etc.]

Answ. Reader, which is liker to be guilty of Tyranny, 1. We that desire no
power but to plead God's Law to men's Consciences. 2. And that but with one
Congregation. And 3. with no constrained unwilling persons, but only voluntary
Consenters. 4. And to rule over none of our Fellow-Ministers. 5. And only to be
but Freemen, as Schoolmasters and Philosophers be in their Schools of
Volunteers, that we may not against our Consciences be the Pastors of the
unwilling, or such as we judge incapable according to God's Laws, but to use
the Keys of Admission and Exclusion as to that particular Church. 6. And to do
all under the Government of the Magistrate, who may punish us as he may do
Physicians, Schoolmasters, or others, for proved maladministration, and drive
us (not from, but) to our Duty. 7. And to be ready to give an account of our
Actions to any Synod, or Brethren that demand it, and to hear their Admonitions
and Advice. Yea, and to live in peaceable submission where Archbishops or
General-Visitors are set over us; and upon any Appeals or Complaints, to hear
and obey them in any lawful thing belonging to their Trust and Power. 9. And if
we be judged to have worngfully denied our Ministerial help and Communion to
any, we pretend to no power to hinder any other Church or Pastor from receiving
him. 10. And if we be by Magistrates cast out or afficted for our Duty, we
shall quietly give up the Temples and public Church-maintenance, of which the
Magistrate may dispose, and without resisting or dishonouring him, endure what
he shall inflict upon us, for our obedience to God. This is our odious Tyranny.

2. On the other side, our Accusers, 1. Some of them are for power in
themselves to force men by the Sword, that is, by Mulcts and corporal
Penalties, to be subject to them, or be of their Church and Communion. 2.
Others are for the Magistrate thus forcing them, when the Bishop Excommunicates
them. 3. They thus make the Church like a prison, when no man knows whether
the people be willing Members, or only seem so, to escape the Jail. 4. They
would be such forcing Rulers over many score or hundred Parishes. 5. They would
have power to Rule, Suspend and Silence the Pastors of all these Parishes, when
they think meet. 6. They hinder the Pastors of the Parish-Churches from that
exercise of the Keys aforesaid in their own Parish-Churches, which belongs to
the Pastors Office. 7. They would compel the Parish-Ministers to Admit,
Absolve, or Excommunicate (at least as declaring other men's Sentences) when it
is against their Consciences. 8. They would make Ministers swear Obedience to
them, and Bishops swear Obedience to Archbishops. 9. Some of them are for their
power to Excommunicate Princes and greatest Magistrates, though contrary to the
fifth Commandment, it dishonor them. 10. Some of them say, that if the King
command one Church Order, or Form, or Ceremony, and the Bishop another, the
Bishop is to be obeyed before the King: As also if the King bid us Preach, and
the Bishop forbid us, 11. And they say, that their Censures, even Clave
errante, must be obeyed. 12. And that he whom a Bishop cuts off from one
Church, is thereby cut off from all, and none may receive him. 13. And that it
is lawful to set up Patriarchs, Metropolitans, etc. to rule the Church,
according to the state and distribution of Civil Government. Look over these
two Cases, and judge which party is liker to Church-Tyrants; and then judge
what Credit is due to such Accusers of the Non-Conformists in this Age.

43. II. As to Reordination, I have answered to Mr. Cheny what he says: He
deceitfully avoideth determining the first Question, whether they intend a
Reordination or not: Whereas I have proved, 1. That the Church of England is
against twice Ordaining. 2. That they call it and take it for a true Ordination
which is to be received from them, by such as Presbyters had Ordained. 3. And
therefore that they suppose the former Null. 4. And this is much of the reason
of men's doubting whether they should receive the second, which is given on such
a Supposition. But this man is little concerned in the true stating of the case.

44. III. What he says of the Ministers power for Discipline, is answered
already to Mr. Cheney that has the same.

45. About the Covenant, 1. he falsely makes me say, that the King took it:
Whereas (whether he did or not) I only say, that he was injuriously and
unlawfully drawn to seem to own it and declare for it.

2. Next he aggravates this Injury: And who contradicts him?

3. He pleads, That the King is not obliged by it to make any alteration in
the Government of the Church.

Answ. I will not examine your Reasons: The King never made me his Confessor,
nor put the question to me; Why then should I make my self a Judge of it? And
why must my Ministry lie on a thing beyond my knowledge? But am I sure that no
Parliament Man that took that Vow is bound there in his place to endeavor a
Reforming Alteration, when I am past doubt that much is needful?

He would 1. make it doubtful, Whether it was a Vow to God? I think it not
worth the labor to prove it to him that doubts of it after deliberate
reading it.

2. He says, [Any lawful endeavors are not denied.] Answ. But the Obligation
to lawful endeavors are denied. Are not the words universal?

3. He says, [The Covenant condemned as unlawful, cannot lay an Obligation.]

Answ. A Vow to God unlawfully imposed and taken, may bind to a Lawful Act.

4. He calls it [unnecessary alterations against the Law of the Land.]

Answ. I suppose I shall prove some reforming alteration necessary; And it is
not against Law for a Subject to petition for it, or a Parliament Man to speak
for it. Yet when the man seems to me to be pleading Conscience out of the Land,
he says, [Would not this cause the Christian Religion in a short time to be
exploded out of all Kingdoms?] Alas poor people! what uncertain Guides have you?

5. He concludes, that the power of Reforming being in the King, the Vow was
null. Answ. The Regal Power of Reforming is only in the King: To change Laws
without him, is Usurpation. But Parliament Men may speak for it, and Subjects
petition, and on just causes write and speak for needful Reformation: And I
speak for no other.

45. IV. About not taking Arms against those Commissioned by the King; He
plainly professes that we must not distinguish where the Law does not. And if
it be an unlimited Universal Negative, it will quite go beyond Mainwaring or
Sibthorpe: And for all his talk, my ignorance of the Law shall suspend my
Subscription. 1. King John gave up his Kingdom to the Pope: I cannot say it had
been unlawful for the Kingdom to resist such as he should have Commissioned to
execute it. 2. Nor such as should be Commissioned to dispossess the right Heir,
and settle it on a Stranger, or an Enemy. 3. Nor such as should be Commissioned
to seize on all the Subjects Estates or Lives, yea or lay Taxes contrary to
Law, in cases where the Law enableth the Sheriff by the Posse Comitatus to
resist. 4. Nor if any get the Broad-Seal to Commissions to seize on the King's
Garrisons, Forts, Navies, Treasures, Guards, whereby a traitorous Lord Keeper
might at any time Depose the King. I have told you, that old Parliaments Popish
and Protestant, and Archbishop Abbot, and Bishop Bilson, etc. were as much
Nonconformists in this as I am.

And so much to the Impleaders Accusations of the Nonconformists, and his
Reasons for the justifying of their Silencing and ruin, and the Lawfulness of
some of the things which they judge to them unlawful: Let the impartial Reader
try and judge. The rest of my Book, which is the far greater part, he answers
by contempt and silence.

CHAP. IV. Of his dealing with the Second Plea for Peace.
WHile we hear men, that should be our Brethren, go on to call to Magistrates
for Execution of the Laws (which they have got) against us, and for want of
matter of Accusation against those that they prosecute, raking up odious
Criminations from the late Wars, which few of the now Silenced Ministers had
any hand in; and never ceasing to tell men, that the Beginners of that War were
guilty of the King's Death. After 17 or 18 years Silence, 1. I told them, That
two parties of the Episcopal Conformists being the beginners, in England, it is
wondered that they see not how they accuse themselves: And why do they not
profess Repentance first? 2. I fully told them what are our Principles of
Government and Obedience, and entreated them to show me, wherein they are
disloyal or culpable. And this man is the first that I find pretending to
assault it, and shame lessly passes over the Book itself, and by his silence
seems to justify our Doctrine. And yet to show his Will, he takes occasion
again to take up the foresaid actions of the evil Civil War, as if that were
any thing to the present Cause; or as if he were calling the dead to Judgment:
(For we have often offered them thanks, if they will Silence only those that had
a hand in those Wars.) 2. He takes on him to answer my Historical Preface; and
therein heapeth abundance of untruths, part of which I mentioned in the second
Chapter, and the rest I have so fully confuted in my Answer to Mr. Hinkley, and
in an Historical Index of those affairs, that I will not waste my own and the
Readers time, by saying the same things here again. And his Accusations of my
Concord and Moral Prognostication, I have answered before. It is the manner of
the man to name Books, and take occasion from somewhat in them, to pour out
that which he most abounds with; and to try, whether men will take this for a
Confutation. O miserable world! Where the very Preachers of Holiness, Love and
Peace, go on to the Grave, and Judgment, and Eternity, fighting against
Holiness, Love and Peace; forbidding others to worship God, (that cannot
swallow all their Inventions) and not enduring their Brethren to live in Peace
among them. But it is Letter in the World of Holy Love and Peace.

A REFLECTION on the REFLECTER on a Book against Sacrilegious Desertion of the
Sacred Ministry.
1. WHen the King, being more merciful than the Canoneer Clergy, had granted
Licenses to the Nonconformists, for the public worshipping of God in peaceable
Assemblies, many of the Clergy still cried down such Assemblies as
Schismatical; when before they seemed to lay the charge of Schism on them, for
their want of Authority: And these are the men, that when it is for their
Interest, are zealous defenders of the Royal Power against some Parliaments
Limitations; but their Interest can extol, or at least absolve Mr. Hooker
himself. Some of them would have persuaded us to forbear the Liberty which the
King had granted us, and so to be the Silencers of our selves, and to forbear
Gods public Worship till we dare Conform. And no wonder, when they apprehended
such dismal Consequents to their Church from our Preaching, as Mr. Hinkley in
his Letter-book has told you. Among others, Dr. Fulwood would have drawn us
into half this guilt, on pretense of persuading us to the moderate use of our
Licenses. On which occasion I wrote a small Book, to prove that wilful
deserting of our Ministry even when it is forbidden unjustly, and yet remains
notoriously necessary to the ends of the Institution) is downright Sacrilege,
and worse than alienating Church-Goods or Lands. But I took occasion in it to
deal as plainly with those Non-Conformists who are inclined to unwarrantable
Separations, as with our Accusers. Dr. Fullwood wrote an Answer to this Book: I
never replied, partly that they may see that I can give such men the honor of
having the last word, and partly to save mine own and the Readers time. But now
either he, or some other unnamed Author that is marked M. A. has published
more Useful Reflections on that Book. He knows to what use, and let him use
them accordingly.

2. I. Part of his Reflections are Citations out of that and other of my Books,
of such words as seem to be for them, and against the Non-Conformists and my
self. II. The other part is his descant on the words, which he disliketh, and
sets them to the Tune which suits his Inclination, and may serve his turn.

Should I Print an Answer to such stuff as this, and in many Sheets tell men
where and how such men speak amiss, the Reader might think that Satan has such
power on me, as by any of his Instruments, at his pleasure, to draw me to cast
away my own and other men's precious time.

3. All therefore that I shall say to him shall be this, I. As to the first,
that 1. I can reconcile my own words, though he cannot: And as he never desired
me to teach him to do it, I am not at leisure to offer him my Service: All is
not contradiction, which men that understand not words do think so. 2. Readers,
You see here when they call for Moderation, and would have us come as near them
as we can, they do but turn it to reproach. And one that grants them all that
they cite out of my Books, and comes as near them as I do, is nevertheless
thought unsufferable by them, in the exercise of the Ministry and out of Jayl.
This is the spirit of the men.

4. II. To the other part I only say, The man mistakes all the question; which
is not, Whether I be good or bad, learned or unlearned: Let this be determined
with him as he will. I am so ignorant and bad, that I will not now trouble him
with much contradiction. But the question is, 1. Whether the two thousand
Ministers were justly Silenced? 2. And whether if they wilfully (though so
Silenced) desert the Ministry to which they were Devoted and Consecrated, they
will not be guilty of damnable Sacrilege and Perfidiousness? If the man will
speak to purpose to this question, it is like that some one will confute his
Defense of so great a sin, when I am past this unpleasant Military Work.

A Note on J. Varney's Book against the Dissenters from the Church of England.
INstead of Confuting it, I commend the reading of it to such as would see
which side has Phanaticks. It declares that J. Varney has by Faith pulled
down the Devils Kingdom; and that King Charles 2. shall be Emperor of all
Nations, by whom Christ will govern them; greater than Turk, Pope, or French.
And the way is, The Dissenters from the Government of the Church of England
must be made Hewers of wood and Drawers of Water, and must pay all Taxes and
Payments of the Land, to maintain the Forces that shall preserve the Land
against them: Like Decimation.

Notes on Mr. Le Strange 's Casuist uncased.
I Have had some gentle Touches from this Musical band heretofore, which I
found not my self obliged to answer. Nor shall I now say any more than this:

I. That he that fetches his chief Stings and Scorns from a Book, and the leaf
of another Book about twenty years or longer at least revoked and obliterated,
shows that if with Austin we wrote Retractations, such men would turn all to
reproach.

II. That I make not Mr. Le Strange 's judgment the measure of my Repentance or
Retractations.

III. That I have never had the Schooling of him, and so never taught him to
understand my Writings, and therefore undertake not that things congruous shall
not seem contradictions to him. But I can reconcile more than he can. For
instance, 1. My Disputation of Scandal, Plea Second, reconcileth what he
dreamed was contradiction, about imposing things evil by accident. 2. I can
reconcile the Kings having power about the circumstances, yea and substance of
Religion; and yet that he has none but what he had from Christ. But I have not
leisure for such work as this.

IV. Mr. Le Strange quite mistakes the Non-Conformists Question, as the
Reflecter does; as if Hissing and Stinging were disputing. He seems to make
the Question to be, Whether I be not a giddy, mutable, self-contradicting Fool
and Knave: Let him in that believe what pleases himself. Our Question is,
Whether Silencing, Fining, Imprisoning the Non-Conformists, be the way of
Peace, and of the desired Concord of Protestants? Yea, Whether Concord be
possible on those Terms, and they will ever end our sad Divisions.

Notes on a Dialogue between the Pope and a Phanatick.
MR. L. Strange's Dialogue minds me of this, for it is a Book not to be
forgotten: The Scope of it is to show, that the Non-Conformists are designing
to Destroy the King; that their Principles are rebellious; that they have so
far prevailed already, that we must have no King, or no Parliament; which yet
being needful, and the genius of the Parliament thus corrupted, the King must
choose his own Counselors, and take the choice from the People (to this
sense), and all the Loyal Subjects must give their hands, and list or engage
themselves to defend the King against these Conspirators. Just the Meal-Tub
Plot! But my Second Plea was written to answer such as this; and I leave the
fuller Answer to those that are more concerned in it.

So much against this Regiment of Accusers. Turba gravis Paci placidaeque
inimica qui^ti.

FINIS.

