A LETTER from a MINISTER to a Person of Quality, showing some Reasons for his
Nonconformity.
MADAM,
YOU were pleased to require of me the reason of my Nonconformity; in
compliance with your command, I promised to give you some account of it, but
not the tithe which might be said in the cause; and therefore shall not put the
whole matter and issue, upon what I have here suddenly committed to Paper, but
only to satisfy you, that I have somewhat of apology for my not conforming,
and that I seem (at least to my self) not wilful and fanatical, but rational
and conscientious in refusing.

Three grand declarations are required to be made by all those who will
conform: The first concerning the Book of Common Prayer; the second concerning
taking up arms against the King; the third concerning the Solemn League and
Covenant. Now with reference to all these (especially the first and last) I
have had hitherto insuperable objections against the making any such
Declaration.

The first Declaration concerning the Book of Common Prayer is to be made in
these very words, viz. I A. B. do declare my unfeigned assent and consent to
all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book, entitled, The
Book of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and other rites
and ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England;
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or
said in Churches, and the form and manner of making, ordaining, and
consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

Madam, Here is required assent and consent, yea unfeigned assent and consent;
and not only to all in general, but to every thing in particular contained in
and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, even whatsoever is there printed,
and set down from the very beginning of it to the very end of the same. Surely
words could not be devised by all the wit of man more comprehensive, and more
significant, to testify our highest justification and commendation of every
point and syllable, of every rite and ceremony, of every matter and thing
contained in the whole Book, and in every page and line of it. A man might well
think that this Book of Common Prayer dropped immediately out of Heaven, and
that it is nothing else but a continued Oracle from first to last. I think here
is as much fully to be declared concerning the Book of Common Prayer, as
possibly can be concerning the Book of God, the Bible it self. Yea I question
whether many a sober man would not scruple to declare so much concerning any
copy of the Bible now extant in the world in any language whatsoever, even the
Originals themselves not excepted, which by transcribing may have their faults,
and therefore, every thing contained in them not to be unfeignedly assented and
consented unto.

Madam, We Protestants protest vehemently against the Popes Infallibility, and
with the same reason against the Infallibility of Councils, whether General,
National, or Provincial; now they who devised and compiled this Book of Common
Prayer themselves were Protestants, and at the most and best but a National
Council; and therefore (if true to their own faith) must needs acknowledge
themselves far from being infallible in every point and thing devised and
compiled by them; and yet for these mortal erring men, like unto our selves, to
enjoin and require of all others such an unfeigned assent and consent to all
and every thing contained and prescribed by and in their devised form and
system of Worship, do notwithstanding (in so doing in a diametrical opposition
assume unto themselves an infallible spirit, else stand guilty of an high
presumption in requiring such a Declaration.

Madam, In the Preface to this Book of Common Prayer they profess their own
firm persuasion that there is (nor was before their last revising of it)
nothing in the whole Book contrary to the Word of God or to sound Doctrine, or
which a godly man may not use or submit unto with a good Conscience. Now though
this be their persuasion, yet it is not every man's persuasion, and therefore
unreasonable to force others to the same profession. Have thou faith? have it
to thy self, force it not upon others; compel them not to think as thou
think, believe as thou believe, to declare as thou declarest; study thine
own and neighbors peace better, and the rather, because thou art a fallible
creature, and may be in an error as well as any other. And according to the
tenor and candor of this blessed rule such was the practice and proceedings of
our preceding Governors with reference to this Book of Common Prayer from and
since our happy Reformation. For they never went about thus strictly to enjoin
the Ministers to declare their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every
thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book, but only appoinned it to be
read and used, and the rites and ceremonies of it duly to be observed, and no
more. This was their moderation and piety, at least their prudence and policy
in respect of scandal and further inconveniency: and not without cause; for had
the Ministers in those days been rigorously required to declare their unfeigned
assent and consent to all and every thing contained in the said Book, as we do
in our days; I am prone to believe that Hundreds of those who conformed and
submitted to the use of things then established in the Church, would have
thereupon turned as great Non-conformists as any among us, and so continued
till their last breath. For what a conscientious person may think meet to use
and submit unto is one thing, but what he declares, he owns and approves, is
another of a different nature. Though for peace sake I could swallow down some
gnats, and make no bones of them; yet if at the same time I shall moreover be
compelled to say and avouch, That these gnats are no gnats; or though I know
them to be gnats, yet that I like them, and love to swallow them down; now
these gnats are changed into Camels, and my throat is not wide enough to give
them any passage. Upon which very account I doubt not to declare, That present
Conformity is foreign and quite of another nature from conformity heretofore;
Conscience being now much more forced and violated by them in the Chair. I
would to God therefore they had required no more in conformity, than use and
submission, as they there speak; for Jobn his driving on furiously is
dangerous, and I heartily pray the Chariot may not be overturned in the end;
but in the interim I cannot keep pace with them, nor declare my unfeigned
assent and consent to their great zeal, nor yet to the great product and
manifesto of it in any such imposition.

Madam, As to a Book of Common Prayer in general, or an established Liturgy in
the Church, I shall object nothing; for according to my poor understanding I
never yet heard a sound reason given, why a man may not pray in a form of words
prescribed as well as from his own present or premeditatd conception,
especially where the things prayed for are not fluctuating and falling under
changeable circumstances (as the private concerns of particular persons) but
settled in their own nature, and always the same from time to time (as the
public concerns of a Nation) as the life of the King, the prosperity of the
Kingdom, rain in drought, fair weather in harvest; wherefore I see no exception
why Prayers about these (if so commanded) should not be made in the very same
words; so likewise the Word and Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper are
always the same without any variety of intention; and therefore I judge we may
always beg a blessing upon them by a prescribed form without any variety of
expression. And as I say nothing against a Liturgy or prescribed form of
public Prayers in the general, so neither against the main Doctrine contained
in the the Prayers of this Book of Common Prayers in particular. But withal I
look upon it as quite another thing to be bound up to declare my unfeigned
assent and consent to all and everything contained in the Book, together with
those Prayers.

My reason is this: because I cannot but take assent and consent, according to
the general sense and meaning of those words among all writers and speakers in
all Languages, viz. That assent with reference to the party assenting, relates
to his understanding and with reference to the thing assented to, that it
relates to the truth and rightfulness of it. So again, that consent with
reference to the party consenting, relates to his will; and with reference to
the thing consented to, that it relates to the goodness, expediency and
behoofulness of it. Wherefore (according to the natural and genuine
interpretation of these words assent and consent) when I declare my unfeigned
assent to all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book, it
is all one as if I had declared, That I own and acknowledge, profess and
witness, that all and every thing contained in and prescribed by the Book of
Common Prayer is true and right, and not the least error in it from top to
bottom, not in any rite or ceremony, not in the form and manner of making,
ordaining, and consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons, no not so much as in
pointing the Psalms, or in any other tittle or circumstance: So again, when I
declare my unfeigned consent to all and every thing contained in it, it is all
one as if I had declared, That I heartily and cordially close in and choose
every thing mentioned and prescribed in the said Book as good and expedient, as
most eligible and behooful to be done, practiced, and observed Now that this is
the true meaning of the word consent, the Lawgivers themselves (who best
understood their own mind and intention) make it most evident; for in the very
body of the same Act speaking of Lectures, viz. what these are to do and
declare, instead of the word consent they put in the word approve, as a word
equipollent, and of the same signification; For the Lecturer is bound openly
and publicly to declare his assent to and approbation of the said Book, and to
the use of all the Prayers, Rites, Ceremonies, forms and orders therein
contained and prescribed. Now taking these words assent and consent this sense
and meaning (and otherwise I cannot take them to make any found sense of them)
I dare as soon eat hot fire-coals as declare my unfeigned assent and consent to
all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book of
Common Prayer; because several things are therein contained and prescribed,
which I deem scarce right and true, much less good and expedient to be done and
embraced. And here to omit many things which I scruple, I shall pitch only upon
two or three, which I cannot approve.

1. I neither do nor can approve of the Order appointed for the reading of the
holy Scripture; my reason is this, Because many Books of the Apocrypha are
commanded to be read for the Lessons of the day, as the fabulous Legends of
Tobit and his Dog, Bell and the Dragon, Judith and Baruch, with the rest; and
these are not only to be read wholly and entirely morning and evening two
months together, but all of them also under the title and notion of holy
Scripture; for so in the whole lump together they are styled in the order, and
no note of discrimination to make any distinction between one and other. But
now in the interim, in the said order (as appears by the Calendar) some Books
of the Sacred Canon are wholly left out and never to be read; some of them
within a very little; some of them but half to be read, and many of them
mutilated and curtailed as to several Chapters contained in them. Here I cannot
declare my unfeigned assent and consent.

2. I neither do nor can approve of the order appointed for the Ministration of
Baptism. 1. Because of Godfathers and Godmothers. 2. Because of the Cross. 3.
Because of what is annexed at the end of the Sacrament. I do not approve of the
strict requiring of Godfathers and Godmothers to stand as Sureties and
undertakers for the Child to be baptized, viz. That he shall renounce the Devil
and all his works, and constantly believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep
his commandments. 1. Because it is unscriptural. 2. Because in the interim the
father of the child is left out, if not wholly thrust out, I am sure he is not
mentioned nor taken notice of at all in that public stipulation, as if he had
no concern in it; though it must needs be his proper and peculiar Province and
place to undertake such a charge for his own child and flesh, according to the
Law of God and nature. Scripture requires not Godfathers but fathers to bring
up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 3. Because
Godfathers and God mothers are generally brought to the Font to avouch a great
untruth, and make themselves obnoxious of lying and perjury in the face of God
and the Church. For experience shows, that though they solemnly engage in
such a promise, yet they never (or very rarely) perform it; perhaps some of
them never see the child more after the Christning day, nor ever enquire more
about it. Yea though they so solemnly engage on the behalf of the Infant, yet
they hold themselves never the more engaged, but look upon all as a mere
Christning Ceremony and complement. For suppose a Parent afterward should
challenge his Gossips and say, you promised when you stood Sureties for my
child at the Font, to call upon him to hear Sermons, and to see him well
instructed in the rudiments and principles of Religion, etc. but you have not
done it; and through your neglect he does not hear Sermons, he is not
Catechized, he does not renounce the works of the Devil, but is in the high way
to ruin, notwithstanding your engagements: What now would be the answer of
these persons to the Parents of the Child? Should we look after him or you?
whose child is he, yours or ours? He is your own proper charge notwithstanding
our standing at the Font; he is a Talent committed to your trust, and therefore
if he do otherwise than well for lack of your care, the blame will be yours,
and his blood will be upon your head, as the only criminal. Indeed none in my
observation blame the Godfathers and Godmothers if Children be not well
disciplined and educated, neither do they blame themselves, nor show any
conscience in this matter; though yet it is evident against them, that if
Covenants be not performed by them to the utmost of their power, they have
broken their faith. Therefore upon the whole matter I judge it far better that
such persons should not be called to be Sureties, nor such promises required at
their hands.

2. Again, I cannot approve of the Cross in Baptism, especially the Sacramental
and mystical way and manner of signing with this sign, as thus, We receive this
Child into the congregation of Christ's flock, and do sign him with the sign of
the Cross in token hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of
Christ crucified, and manfully fight under Christ's banner, against Sin, the
World and the Devil, etc. This word, in token, I confess to me is a mere
riddle, and I know not what to make of it, and therefore cannot assent and
consent to such an expression; and the rather because I am apt to believe the
generality may much mistake it, as if when it is said, in token, it had been
said, in virtue and power of this sign the person baptized should not be
ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, but should fight manfully
under Christ's banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil; surely even such an
occasion of a misunderstanding to the vulgar and injudicious, should be taken
away.

The baptizing it self of any person in the name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, ipso facto, does oblige the person baptized to confess the Faith of
Christ crucified, and withal exhibits a virtue and power also to every worthy
partaker of it to fight against Sin, the World and the Devil; and therefore
after such a person is baptized, such an obligation is upon him, and such a
virtue and power supposed to be imparted and communicated unto him; and
consequently (if at all) next immediately after washing or sprinkling in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that form of words, In token hereafter
he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, etc. would
more properly and congruously be used and applied. But now to remove them from
their due place, and reserve them to the sign of the Cross, as if baptizing
with water were not sussicient of it self, but moreover the sign of the Cross
needful to bind the Conscience, and confer the blessing, this I confess seems
to me not only preposterous but very dangerous. Crossing in this manner is too
too like a Sacrament upon a Sacrament, the devised Sacrament of man to the
instituted Sacrament of God.

Though Christians in the Primitive times might make use of the sign of the
Cross, yet the very same reason which might put them upon that use with a
reference to the Heathens, should now move us wholly to disuse it with a
reference to Papists; Professors then signed themselves with the sign of the
Cross to distinguish themselves from the Pagans, who scorned the Cross together
with every sign and token of it; and with parity of reason we should now
forbear so doing to distinguish our selves from the Idolatrous Papists; who
superstitiously adore the Cross, foolishly, fondly, and wickedly signing
themselves with it upon every occasion, thinking themselves no good Catholics
without so doing, putting no little hope and confidence in it to free and
protect them from all evil, and to furnish and invest them with all good. Now
to witness our dislike and detestation of their vanity herein, I cannot
unfeignedly assent and consent to the sign of the Cross.

3. I cannot approve what is annexed in the end of the Sacrament, viz. It is
certain by Gods word, that children which are baptized dying before they commit
actual sin are undoubtedly saved. I would they had quoted the place, for I
confess mine own ignorance that I know no such word in Scripture; no such word
as will give me a certainty of persuasion beyond all possibility of doubting of
the Salvation of Infants, though baptized, and though dying before they have
committed actual sin.

Are not the Children of wicked Parents (filthy Whoremongers and Whores living
openly in all notorious sin, and wholly without God in the world) constantly
baptized? and many of them dying immediately after Baptisim? Now are we sure by
the Word of God, and without doubt that all these go to Heaven? Methinks that
in the second Commandment gives some scruple to my faith, I will punish the
iniquity of the fathers upon their children to the third and fourth generation.

Suppose a Christian King should conquer a Country of Pagans, and Mahometans,
or Jews, and compel all their Infants forthwith to be baptized, and some of
them immediately expire, at least before they have committed actual sin; is the
Salvation of all such sure and past all doubt, and this to be made out, and
cleared by the Word of God?

Is it in the power of man to make Infants sure and certain of Salvation? It is
in the power of man to kill a poor Infant, and to choose his time for doing of
it; I am sure many Whores murder their Babes before Baptism, and they may as
well do it after, immediately after, and so assuredly send their Infants
thither, whither they shall never come themselves except they repent. And so
might the foresaid King and Conqueror (after by Baptism he had given them their
sure and unquestionable pasport for Paradise) he might even in charity and
kindness immediately cut them off, and without any further hazard give them
possession of eternal bliss. I had thought no mortal wight had had such power
over souls.

May a Minister, since Baptizing gives such an unquestionable title unto
Heaven, deny or suspend the Ordinance to any Infant whatsoever, if he might be
permitted to administer it? Suppose Turks or Jews should quietly permit him to
baptize their Children, yea and desire him to do it for them, though merely
upon some by-pretence and foreign to Christianity; shall he deny them? But
suppose a true Believer and a good Christian should bring his own Child to the
Font, and beg there of the Minister to have it baptized, but yet either out of
weakness or tenderness of conscience scruples Godfathers and Godmothers, and
the sign of the Cross, and dares not admit of them; shall therefore the
Minister deny his Babe Christendom, which according to his own persuasion would
give the Babe a certain assurance of Salvation? and keep it in the interim
under a suspicion of damnation, and this also according to his own persuasion?
for as he denies it Christendom, so also he would deny it Christian burial, if
it die unbaptized; (though by the way I see no great reason for it, nor can I
approve of it) but so it is appointed, viz. That the Office of the Dead shall
nor be used for any who die unbaptized: And why not used? Because they have no
sure and certain hope of a Resurrection unto life concerning such a person, and
therefore the unbaptized in that Order are ranked with self-murderers and
excommunicate. But now shall a Minister dare to withold so much good from,
and endeavor so much evil to the souls of poor Infants in denying them their
Christendom, and all merely upon the account of some accessories and scrupled
accidents invented and imposed by man, and nothing at all of the essence of
Baptisin it self? Besides the impiety and irreligion of such a Process, the
Minister (according to his own faith) would be most cruel and unmerciful in so
doing, and deserved if possible to be unchristened himself again, and turned
among Canibals as one more deeply dipped and baptized in their barbarous
inhumanity than any of themselves; and yet if he be a true Son of the Church,
and punctually observe his prescribed rule, he must not baptize any Infant
without Godfathers and Godmothers without signing of it with the sign of the
Cross, whether it be saved or damned. But these things are hard to assent and
consent unto, and I cannot do it.

3. I cannot approve of the order for the burial of the Dead particularly that
passage of it, Forasmuch as it has pleased God of his great mercy to take unto
himself the soul of our dear Brother here departed, we therefore commit his
body to the ground, etc. My reason is this, Because though we be bound to judge
according to the utmost Bounds of charity concerning all, yea even of those
with whom we would not change souls, nor be in their condition after death for
ten thousand worlds, yet positively and peremptorily without all limitation or
discrimination to say and avouch concerning every one whom we bury, That God in
great mercy has taken his soul, viz. by death out of the body, and taken it to
himself; this I profess is utterly beyond my faith, and of the Gospel also;
which (if I understand aright) speaks altogether in another language to
impenitent sinners. It is past contradiction that thousands are cut off by God
in the midst of their sins, drunkenness, whoring, swearing, without all signs
of repentance from first to last, so living and so dying; now how can it be
said, That God took away such persons out of this world by death in mercy, in
great mercy? Inasmuch as at the same instant they were taken away from all
possibility of future repentance and amendment of life, we may rather fear,
That God took them away in wrath, in great wrath, provoked hereunto by the long
abuse of his patience, and their own impenitency. Yet nevertheless the Priest
must not only say, That God took away all such persons in mercy, in great
mercy, but moreover positively affirm, That God took them to himself; that is,
into Heaven, if we believe the Lords-Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven,
there God is said to be in a most eminent manner. Scripture says expressly,
That neither Adulterers, nor Fornicators, nor Drunkards, shall ever go to
Heaven, yet in a perfect opposition, when I bury a known Adulterer, Fornicator,
Drunkard, I must declare and avouch that his soul is assuredly gone thither. I
dare not thus damn a person while he is living, and yet save him when he is
dead. Nor yet again can I commit his body to the ground in a sure and certain
hope of a Resurrection unto eternal life; which words must necessarily be
spoken with reference to the person then interred, inasmuch as they are the
continuation of the foregoing declaration, viz. God's taking his soul to
himself. Besides it follows (which puts it out of doubt) in the last Collect or
Prayer, That when we shall depart this life, we may rest in him ( viz. Christ)
as our hope is this our Brother does. Alas, I am so far from having any sure
and certain hope of his Resurrection unto eternal life and salvation, that I
rather have a sure and certain fear of his Resurrection unto eternal death and
damnation.

Madam, These are some of my Objections against the first Declaration, which
stop up my way from conforming.

Your most humble Servant, A. B.


