Rich. BAXTER'S REVIEW OF THE STATE OF Christian's Infants.

Whether they should be entered in COVENANT With God by BAPTISM, and be Visible
Members of His CHVRCH, and have any Covenant-Right to Pardon and Salvation?

Or whether CHRIST, the Savior of the World, has shut all Mankind out of his
Visible Kingdom, and Covenant-Rights and Hopes, 'till they come to Age? And
whether he did so from the beginning of the world, or after his Incarnation?

Occasioned by the Importunity of Mr. E. Hutchinson, (and of Mr. Danvers, and
Mr. Tombs,) who called him to this REVIEW in order to his RETRACTATION.

An Impartial Reading is humbly requested, of those Dissenters who would not be
found Despisers of holy Truth, nor such as judge before they hear.

London, Printed for Nevil Simons at the Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

READER,
I Once more stew the World, that is is in the power of other men, if God
permit them, to hinder us from greater service to the Church, by making things
far less in themselves, to become accidentally at that time more necessary? By
which kind of Impediments in Contentious times, Satan frustrateth the better
desires and designs of many of the Servants of Christ, who would fain be better
employed; yea, and uses herein the service of such men, as in other respects
are none of his Servants. And thus, though Scriptures be our General Rule, the
Providence of God, and the great Ends of all our life, are the Determiners of
the Circumstances of our Duties.

The Cause of this REVIEW is a Letter of one Mr. E. Hutchinson, sent me, very
large in considerable Oratory, to let me know his Contempt of my last (and
former) Book of Baptism, and to humble me for the great sin of abusing the
world with such frivolous writings, which seem to do something, but prove
nothing, and leave Mr. Danvers, etc. unanswered; so that it is an Answer that
he would have: And he vehemently urges me to Repentance and Retraction of what
I have written for Infants Church Membership, Covenant and Baptism; as did Mr.
Tombs more than once before him. Should I Print his Letter without his
consent, perhaps he might take it for an injury; and if he would have it done,
it is like he will do it himself. But because it refereth to a Printed Paper of
Mr. Danvers, against me, called his Third Reply, which I never saw till his
Letter informed me of it, I thought that it was more than himself whom he
importuned me to satisfy.

I have told him here truly, how little the mere difference about the outward
Baptism of Infants does abate my esteem and love of any Godly Peaceable men:
Two sorts of Persons called Anabaptists I can live in as friendly concord with,
as with most I hold Communion with: First, those that deny not the
Covenant-Rights, and Church-Relation of the Infants of Believers, confessing
them to be Holy; but only think that their Baptism, being but the solemnization
of their foregoing Covenant, and the public Investiture of them in their
Relation, may, as the Coronation of an Infant King, be deferred till they come
to some understanding; of which mind were Tertullian and Nazianzene. Secondly,
those that being in doubt only of the Sufficiency or Lawfulness of
Infant Baptism, do receive a second or a third Administration (as some Married
by Justices lately, were married again by Ministers; and as Mr. Humphrey pleads
for a second Ordination, especially if Hypothetically done) to satisfy their
doubting Consciences, and then live in peace, and orderly Communion afterward
with other Christians, as knowing that in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision
avails, nor Uncircumsion, but a new Creature. I say none of these shall be
more willing of loving Communion with others, than I shall be with them.

But 1. If men will deny and scorn our Infant-Right in the Covenant of Grace,
and in Christ, Pardon and Salvation; and Visible Church-Relation, and will so
far deny the Kingdom and Grace of Christ, as to maintain that he excludes all
mankind from any Visible Right, or Hope of Salvation till Adult, and has given
such Right no more to Christian's Children than to Heathens! And if they will
make this Opinion the measure of their Communion, and will divide the Church,
and Unchristen, or Unchurch all that are not as unthankful and injurious to
Christ, and to the Holy Seed as themselves, it is not I that separate from
these men, but they from me, and all sober Christians.

And I will here add but these two or three Notes to the Reader; 1. If he will
peruse two short Disputations which I have lately published of ORIGINAL SIN,
(the Primary and Secondary) he will see it fully proved, that both Naturally,
and by Supernatural Revelation God has declared such an Interest of Parents
and Children in each other, as is much of the Reason of all that I here plead
for: And he that will accurately observe the whole current of the Scripture
herein, shall find this Conjunct-Interest asserted from end to end.

2. I am past doubt that it is a principal design of Satan to mortify our
Christendom it self, by keeping Parents from that intelligent and serious
Covenanting with God, in their solemn dedication of their Children to him,
which the greatness of the work and case requires; and to turn our very
Christening into a Ceremony, or lifeless Formality: And it is not the least
part of my Nonconformity, that I dare not deliberately profess my Assent and
Consent, that no Parent shall be suffered in the Church to enter his own Child
into the Covenant of God, nor to speak one Covenanting, Promising, Undertaking,
nor Dedicating word; (nor must be urged to be so much as present) But that
Godfathers and Godmothers; who never give us any cause to believe that one of
many thousands of them take the Child for their own, nor ever purpose to
Educate him, or do what there they Vow and Covenant to do, must be the only
Covenanting Undertakers; and so that so much notorious false Vowing to God, or
Perfidiousness, must defile our Baptism: And now come these Anabaptists, and
instead of calling the Parents to Seriousness, and Holy Fidelity in so great a
work, they tell them that it is none of their Duty at all.

3. And how light soever some make of Unity, I know that it is even Essential to
the Church; As the Union of the Stones and Timber is to the House, and of King
and Subjects to the Kingdom; and of the several parts, to a Clock or Watch: For
the Form is Relative. And do you think then that they befriend Christ or his
Church, who turn the Sacrament of our Union into the occasion of our great
Division? yea, and Unchristen and Unchurch all the Christian World in Infancy;
yea, and a thousand parts to one of the Christian Church of the Adult, because
they are not Re-baptised at Age. Passion, and Prejudice, and Partiality (when
men have espoused the Interest of a Cause as the best and holiest in their
eyes) may make men swallow such things as these, and think that they serve God
in reviling all that are against them. Were we agreed against Infants
Covenant-Right, when should we ever be agreed at what Age it is that they are
to be received? and when a Child's Profession were Valid? But he that thinks
that 1. All the Christian World will ever Unite in the Renouncing of all
Infants Covenant-Rights and Hopes. 2. Or that without Unity, (in the
Essentials) or without Love and Peace the Church, of Christ is in a prosperous
State, does not judge as I do upon the most serious thoughts that I am able to
exercise, and as I doubt not but I shall judge to the last breath, which is not
like to be far off.

TO Mr. E. HVTCHINSON.
SIR,
WHen I read you general Accusation of my Firey discouraging of Reprovers, etc.
I began to bethink me who they were in all my life time that had to my face
reproved me, and been discouraged by any unthankful passionate returns of mine;
and not remembering any one in my life, (unless you will call my Contradicting
men in disputation and Altercation in case of differences of Judgment by that
name) I did read on, in expectation of fuller information, and I perceived that
it was not any verbal rejecting any reproof of my present Monitors, that you
meant, but my published Writings against those called Anabaptists. I have long
had far louder calls than yours to Review my Life and Writings, and to judge of
them as impartially as I can. Upon the Review I am Conscious, 1. That I never
meddled at first with Mr. Tombs, till he unavoidably constrained me, by
sending those whom he had prevailed with to me, to tell me, that if I would not
answer him, they must lay their change so far on my refusal to satisfy them.
We lived to gether till then, without any meddling with the difference by me.

2. I find that when he had (without my consent) published these Papers which I
privately sent him, with his Answer, I gave not a word of Reply to them, till
Mr. Danvers made it seem necessary to me, though it be above 20 years since
they were written. Surely my silence was no furious Contradiction.

3. I find that when Mr. Tombs published them so long ago, and they have been
in your own hands in Mr. Tombs his Book, neither you nor others till now that
I know of, showed me any such fury in them. And those that I have spoke with
say, that there is no such thing, but that his Reply is passionate, (which I
leave to others judgment that yet may read them in his Book together.)

4. I find that in 1659. when I endeavored to persuade Mr. Lamb and Mr. Allen
to Christian Concord, that I did not strive against their Anabaptistry, but
only to satisfy them, that holding that difference, they yet ought to satisfy
themselves, in that which they took to be their Duty, and to hold loving
Communion with the Churches and Christians of the other mind. And when they had
renounced their Separation, it was not I but their own Light, Experience and
Consideration (by what other helps I know not) that made them Renounce their
Anabaptistry.

5. When before that, there was a Treaty in London for the Reconciling of the
Presbyterians and Iudependents, I did first at home to the Ministers of
Worcestershire, mantain by a set Disputation, that it was our Duty to seek
Peace and Communion with the Anabaptists; and after sent up the Terms of that
desired Concord to London, to Mr. Allen, who at some Meetings for that purpose,
told me the business went hopefully on, till the Confusions in 1659. disturbed
and overthrew all.

6. I have above 20 years in Print and Pulpit frequently told the Churches,
that they are greatly beholden to Gods Providence in permitting the Anabaptists
to call us so loud to the serious confideration of of our Baptism; and that if
those that were Baptized in Infancy be not brought to as serious understanding,
and resolved a renewing of that Covenant, as if they had never been Baptized
before, yea and pass not out of the state of Infant Church Membership into that
of the Adult, by a solemn transltion in owning of their Covenant, these Church
Corruptions will be continued which are the Scandal and Temptation of the
Anabaptists. And to that end I wrote a Treatise of Confirmation.

7. I have Printed in this last Book (recited by Mr. Barret in the end of his
Queres) such an Offer of Brotherly Concord with the Anabaptists, (supposing our
continued difference in that point) even the very words of such a Profession on
which both parties may with mutual forbearance live in brotherly Love and
Communion, as never any man did to me accuse either of Rigor, Unlawfulness, or
Insufficiency to that end. And if you resolve that you will have no Communion
with any in the world, but those that are of your Opinion against
Infant Baptism, your Communion will be narrower than mine, and such talk as
this of yours is never like to draw me to your mind.

8. I have many years insisted more upon the terms (and improvement) of our
Baptismal Covenant, as containing that very Touchstone, or state of Evidence,
by which both our sincere Grace, and our right to Church Communion must be
tried, than any man that I know of; of which my Family Book is a full proof.

9. To the Reconciling of men herein, I have often showed, that If our Childrens
part in the Covenant of Grace upon their Parents dedication of them to God, and
so their Church Membership, were but yielded, the rest (whether they should
actually be Baptized with Water) would be much less cause of our distance and
alienation, than on both sides it is usually judged. Yea, if the Anabaptists
would but say, [I Dedicate this Child to God, as far as he has given me power,
and heartily desire that God may be his Father, Christ his Savior; and the
Holy Ghost his Sanctifier:] And did ever any of you prove this to be a sin? And
we are ready on our part to profess that [Infant-Baptism will save none at age
that consent not to the same holy Covenant.]

10. I have often told the world that though the Ancient Churches denied not
their Childrens part in the Covenant of Grace, nor their right to Pardon and
Salvation, and Infaut Church membership by that Covenant, yet the Time when
Children themselves should be solemnly Baptized, was left in the Churches for
above 200 years to every ones free choice; some (and the most Christians)
usually Baptizing them quickly, and others thinking as Tertullian, that it
would bind them faster if they stayed somewhat longer; or, as Nazianzene
thought, till they were three or four years old: even as one that has right to
a Crown in his Infancy, may have his Coronation performed either then, or
afterward.

11. I have often told the world that I would have this liberty and moderation
again revived, and that I would have no Anabaptist persecuted or excommunicated
for that his Opinion.

12. I never persecuted any of them, nor persuaded any to do it; nor never
endeavored to hurt them, nor denied them any good that I could do them;
(though I told you truly that even they of Mr. T's. Church that had seemed my
old Friends, sought my life or ruin, by way-saying a man that told them he
carried Letters of mine, violently taking them from him and carrying them up to
London to the Council, to Sir H. V. etc.)

This is the account that my Reviewing Conscience gives me of my dealing with
the Anabaptists, with whom to this day I still plead for Love and peaceable
Communion upon terms of mutual forbearance: And whether it be holy Patience and
Humility that takes this for Fire and Fury, and cannot bear it, consider.

But yet Fury and Folly you copiously exclaim against, and call me to Repent: I
thank you unfeignedly for that honest wholesome word [Repent] whether well or
ill applied. But your many scorns at my Repentings scarce well agree with the
invitation. Were I like to have Life and Leisure for such a work, I would
resolve to Review all my Writings just in the method that Austin did, and to
tell the Readers what I dislike in them; which having no reason to expect, I
have so dealt already with those that most needed it, and corrected others in
the later Impressions. If you need no Repentance, and have written as much as
I, and that without any fault, you have been happier than I. And yet I intend
not to give over Writing, Preaching, Praying, praising God, or Conference with
men, because I cannot do any of them innocently, in a manner that needed no
Repentance.

But upon the full perusal of your Letter, I must say, I never had a more
Wordy, Windy, Empty Invitation to Repentance, that I remember in my life. I
looked still when the fault was told me, and some words at least named that
were guilty of the folly or firyness mentioned; or some of my particular sins
proved, that I might be convinced: I looked to find some one Argument of my
Books confuted and proved vain, or fallacious. But it renewed in me that grief
and pity, for the strange diseasedness of such Dissenters, (which Mr. Danvers
had before caused) to find such abundance of Rhetorical Invectives, without one
word of Proof: As if you had prevaricated, and had a design to have kept me
from Repentance, by telling me I had no particulars to Repent of that you could
show.

What do all your Generals of [no answer] and tergiversation, and abundance the
like signify, to any man of common sense, unless this be the meaning of them,
[It is Mr. Danvers his Opinion and mine that you are foolish, firey, injurious,
frivolous, etc. Therefore you must Repent of this, though we say nothing that
should convince a reasonable man.]

But, I must retract what I have written against Anabaptists; for you invite me
to it by a torrent of General Accusations, and letting me know that Mr. D. and
you do think me Hetorodox.] And just so does Mr. Pen and the Quakers do also:
And so do the Papists, and with as great confidence and Oratory perhaps as
yours: And so do the accusers of the Non-conformists in many Volumes: and so do
many other Parties: And must I be therefore of all their minds? Or why more of
yours than of theirs, if I have nothing from you but confident Gnerals, which
they can say as well as you? Yea thus do the Infidels themselves now use me,
and must I therefore yield?

But I have written Fierily against Mr. Danvers! 1. Did I begin with Mr. D. or
he with me? 2. Have I said any thing offensive to him, besides the detecting of
his mavelous audacity in strange heaps of untruths in matters of Fact? and
his lamentable injury thereby to the Church of Christ?

Sir, I know you not, and should I tell you what a Spirit in your self, your
copious outcryes, and extreme tenderness of our dissent and contradiction of
you, shows, and how unlike to the voice of a sheep of Christ it is to cry so
loud, as if the knife were at your throat, when we do but tell the Church of
your Errors and Injuries to the Truth, upon the urgency of your restless
importunity: Should I tell you what strange Partiality you show in finding
Meekness, Truth, and Reason in Mr. Danvers his Books, and Folly, Fire, and
No-answer in mine, I could not expect that you should ever the more be
convinced, or Repent, but rather take that also for Fiery, as taking me for an
incapable Monitor. But I desire you only to ask the Opinion of the judicious
and impartial herein; for Repentance to your self should be no odious thing.
And whereas you tell me over and over what all wise men now think and say of
me, and of my Writings, am not I an unhappy man that never met with one of
those wise men, but your self and such professed opposites (Anabaptists,
Quakers, Papists, or such like.)

But what if I be foolish, and you be wise? Cannot you suffer fools gladly,
seeing you your selves are wise? And is your impatient and general Invectives,
and your self-justifying, an infallible proof of your great Wisdom?

Brother, upon the deepest search that I am able to make in above 20 years
Consideration, I am satisfied that you heinously wrong the Mercy of God, and
the Church, and true Believers, and their Seed, by denying them that part in
Gods Covenant and Mercy, which I have proved he has stated on them in his
Word: I am fully satisfied that God never had Church-Laws on earth, whether in
innocence, or since the Fall, which extended not the privilege of a Covenant
and Church State to the Infants of the Church, if they had such (on that
supposition;) and that the Church from the days of Adam till now has had
Infants members by Gods appointment; and that Christ so found them, and so
continued them; and that it was then a thing that none did controvert: I am
satisfied fully, that all that are Discipled are by command to be Baptized; and
that Nations should be Discipled, and the Kingdoms of the world made the
Kingdoms of Christ; and Christ would have gathered to his Church the whole
Jerusalem, as the Hen gathers her Chickens, and none were broken off but for
unbelief, and therefore the Children of believing Jews were not broken off; and
that we are graffed into the same Olive: I am satisfied that they that so
hardly digested the forbearance of Circumcision, would never have silently past
over the Vnchurching of all the Infants, without one word of exception; nor
Christ have so far countenanced the Excepters, as to be angry with those that
would have forbid Children comeing to him, because of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven, nor the Scripture have talked so much of Baptizing Households. I am not
hardened enough to reject so plain a Text as, [The unbelieving Husband is
sanctified, etc. else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy.] Nor
in that one text to expound Sanctifying for Lawful Marriage, and Holiness for
[Legitimation] when the words are never so taken else in the Bible, and mamany
hundred times in another sense: nor to say, that all Pagans Children are holy
if they be not Bastards. I am satisfied that man must not teach God how to
speak, but carefully enquire what he has spoken; And if but one Text of
Scripture acquaint us, directly or consequentially of his mind, we must be
faithful in observing it: I believe that these are your thoughts as well as
mine, and that you verily think that you hold close to the Scripture, and that
I depart from it: But as I am as willing to understand it as you are, and at as
hard a rate of cost or labor, so I well know that one mistake once deeply
received, does let in abundance more, and fights against all the light that
would detect and shame it: And he that once accounts Falsehood to be Truth,
will account the Defenders of Truth to be its Enemies. Otherwise how could you
and such others bring your Consciences to wrest and wrangle against such
abundance of plain Scripture Texts? Were it but this one, what could be
plainer? What is wresting Scripture if this be not, to force a sense of
Holiness and Sanctification upon one Text, which is never found else in any
Text, and the contary, or different sense near six hundred times; is this
impartial dealing with Gods word? And do you think that Paul mentions that as
a great and comfortable privilege of Believers, which belongs to Heathens
equally with them? Why do you not your selves still use that language then, and
say, that the Children of Infidels are holy, when too many will scarce allow
the title to any Adult Christians that are not of your Sect, much less to the
Children of Christians, though dedicated by Baptism to God?

But being called by you to a Review, I am again remembered, that our Savior
himself was a Church member in his Infancy, even the chiefest, that is, the
Head; Mr. Tombs confesses it: Let not your opinions interest draw you to deny
it, nor to call my assertion [rotten dictating.] If you should, I would ask of
you, at what age Christ began to be Christ, and the Churches Head, as we ask
the Socinians, At what age he began to be God? And if an Infant was capable of
being the Head, King, Priest, and Prophet Relatively, though yet he had never
Ruled, Sacrificed, or Taught, then there is nothing in the Infant Age, which
makes it incapable of being Members, Subjects, and Disciples of Christ: And it
is like that Irenaeus was not deceived, who says that he Sanctified the state
of Infancy by being an Infant; and we have reason to judge, that he did thereby
give us notice that the Infant Age is not unacceptable to him, nor incapable of
Church Relation.

Truly Sir, the serious thought of Christ's Infant Relation is a very great
confirmation of me against those that exclude all mankind in their Infancy from
the Covenant and Church; even as Christ's ordinary Communion in the Synagogues
and Temple, is an insuperable argument with me against unlawful Separations.

And God himself calling Infants his Servants, who do no actual service, Levit.
25. 41, 42. yea and calling them Disciples, Acts 15. 10. prevails more with
me, than the words of any one that shall say, They are incapable of being
Servants, or Disciples. If the Infant-age did not render them incapable of
being Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and Members of his Church (Universal and
Particular) before Christ's Incarnation, it makes them not since incapable of
the like or same Relations.

And why should I suspect such incapacity? are not Infants members of other
Societies? are they not members of Families? and may not a Family be Sanctified
by dedication to God? are they not members of all the Kingdoms in the world?
and is it not the common light of Nature, which teaches all men so to esteem
them? are not Infants the Kings Subjects? and why may they not as well be
Christ's Subjects as the Kings? Have they not Right of Inheritance and Honor;
even of Crowns, Lordships, and Lands? Do any Nations under Heaven level all
Children, as if the Parents communicated neither good or evil to them? What
reason then to suppose that Christ obliterateth even Natures Laws?

And if you deny not Original Sin, why should you think that God is so
unproportionably prone to punish and damn more than to pardon and save; as that
while all Infants are made sinful and miserable by their Parents, yet not one
in the world shall have so much as a part in Christ's meritorious Righteousness,
and the free grace and pardon of his Covenant, upon the Parents dedication of
him to God, and entering him by consent into his Covenant? Does sin abound so
much more than Grace, as that Condemnation is passed upon all Infants for and
by their Parents sin, and the free Covenant gift does not pardon any sin to any
one Infant in the world upon any condition which the Parent can perform (nor
any other.)

You never yet by all your words (for all words are not Light and Proof) did
convince me that it was no Benefit to Infants before Christ's Incarnation to be
Covenant-members of his Church (particular and Universal,) Nor that Christ came
to deprive them all of that benefit: Mr. Tombs his pretenses that it is a
Benefit to Christians to have all their Infants put or kept out of the Church
State and Mercies, is so absurd, against Nature, that I am ashamed to say any
more against it: If it be our Benefit to have no Covenant-gift of Christ,
Pardon and Life to our Children, may you not next say, It is our Benefit to
have them damned? And if it were so, Nature teaches us to be loath to receive
our Benefits by such means; as one would be loath that a Physician should cure
his Sickness by a draught of the heart blood of all his Children.

Sir, I could the easilyer bear with your delay of external Baptism; if you did
not deny all Infants their part in the Covenant of Life. But when you dare not
only do that, but reproach our assertion of Gods Covenant-Grace to them, as
[Absurd and Heretical] it is no Fieryness to say, that I will not follow you.
Where there is no Covenant or Promise there is no Hope, which we can call
Divine; and if we have no Hope of the Pardon or Salvation of our Children upon
any Promise of God, it is no Promise of Man's that can keep us from Despair. We
may not then say as David, I shall go to it] any farther than to the Grave.

Nay do you not do worse than deprive us of our hopes, even lay such grounds as
destroy and exclude them, by a sentence of damnation? For God [addeth to the
Church such as shall be saved.] And if Infants be not added to the Church, are
they not excluded from Salvation? For Christ washes and sanctifies his
Church, and he is the Savior of his Body only; And if they are not of his
Church or Body, he washes them not, nor is their Savior effectively. The same
Text that says, He that believes shall be saved, says, He that believes not
shall be damned.] And He that believes not is condemned already.] If therefore
you allow them no participation in their Parents Faith, but require personal
Belief of them, as necessary to their Salvation, according to the Promise, you
must also require the same of them to save them from Damnation, by the
Threatening.

Did you but leave Christians no more hope than you do Pagans and Turks of
their Childrens Pardon and Salvation, I would not be ambitious of the Joy of
your opinion; much less if you positively condemn them. And what do you less,
if finding them condemned by the violated Covenant of Innocence, you totally
exclude them from the Remedying, Pardoning, and Saving Covenant, and from
Christ's Body which he does save.

If you say that they may be of his invisible Church, which is the saved Body;
I answer, 1. What they may be, tells us not what they are. If they be not so
much as visible Members, who can say that they are invisible ones? 2. They are
by Nature visible Members of the Kingdom of Satan, and Children of wrath, and
visibly under the Laws Condemnation: Therefore 'till we can prove them visibly
by grace translated out of this state of nature, their visible Condemnation
cannot be denied.

And what a jumble make you, if you make a great part of Mankind to be at once
condemned visible members of the Kingdom of the Devil, and invisible saved
members of Christ? Men may be visibly Christians, (Hypocrites) and yet
invisibly wicked; but to be visibly condemned members of the Kingdom of
Darkness, and yet invisible members of Christ is strange to me; especially
considering that Hypocrites are visibly what they are not really, and
invisibly, because they falsely profess what they have not: But a condemned
Infant does not deceive men by dissembling, but we actually know that as a
child of Adam, he is a child of sin and death: It is truly so. Therefore we
must conclude that as Gods Word is true, he continues so, till he be delivered
by Grace. And the Covenant of Grace is the Conveyance of, and title to our
gracious privileges, as the threatening is of wrath.

Shall not all that are judged, be judged by Gods Law? (the Law which they were
under?) And what Law shall Infants then be judged by? If they are under no
Covenant of Promise that gives them title to life, how can they have title by
it, or be judged by it?

Are they Justified or not Justified? If not Justified, they are condemned
certainly; and shall not be glorified; for it is the Justified that are
glorified, Romans 8. 30. But if they are Justified, either it is by some
Justifying Promise and Covenant, or without: If without, 1. Do you not give
hope also to all Heathens and Wicked men, that though they are condemned by the
Law of Innocence, and not justified by any Covenant of Grace, yet they may be
justified without? 2. And by what means is it? by any or none? If by any, by
what? If by none, how know you it? But if it be by any Covenant-Grant that they
are justified, it must be by that of Grace which I am pleading for or none. For
we will not now receive another Gospel.

To talk therefore of mere Election, is nothing to any of this that I have
said. Election Justifies not, nor dissolveth the condemning Sentence of the
Law. God judges not men merely on the grounds of his unreveled Election, but
by his Word, which is the Rule. And were it otherwise if unrevealed, none can
prove it, and therefore must not affirm it: And were it reveled that God will
save some that he promises not to save, nor gives them any antecedent right
to it; yet 1. No man could know by this, whether any one in England or Europe,
or in the World in his age shall so be saved: nor whether it be many or few, or
more than a dozen in the world. 2. And no one can know who any of these be? and
so can have no notice of comfort for any of his own. 3. Nor that Christians
Infants shall be saved any more than the Heathens.

These things, Sir, are not to be submitted to by all Christians, for fear lest
you else revile them, or lest Mr. T. says, Their blood be on their own heads.
Austin is called Durus Pater Infantum, for too sharp a censure on the
unbaptized; (though many mistake him.) But we should be harder, did we leave
all visibly condemned without a pardoning word, or any visible remedy and hope.

And truly me thinks you too much honor the Kingdom of the Devil, if you make
it visibly contain all the Seed of the Woman, even of the Faithful, till they
come to age. It is too great, I will not feign it to be greater. Were all the
Circumcised Israelites, and all the holy seed till Christ, at once both in the
Church, and in Satan's Kingdom? If not, sure it is not so now.

Sure I am that the Scripture tells us of a larger Church, and a better
Covenant, and Promises, and greater Salvation under the Gospel; and do you
bring it down to this, to give us all up to the Devils visible Kingdom, without
any visible Remedy, till we come to age?

And he is scarce so like to prove a member of Christ at age, who is trained up
in the Kingdom of the Devil till then, as he is that is educated in the
Household of God. There is more of Gods blessing to be expected in his own
Family than in the Devils.

Either it is a Mercy or no Mercy to be in Christ's Family or Church? if none,
why do you value it? if it be, why should we think that the Savior of the
world procures it to no Infants? nay that he came to leave them out. Would you
not take it for a Mercy if you believed that God in Scripture gave it, to all
the Seed of the Faithful dedicated to him? I think you would.

For my part I believe that the Seed of the Righteous is blessed, Psalm. 37. 26.
and that the Children of Satan, and the condemned unjustified seed are not
blessed: That blessed are they whose sins and iniquities are forgiven and
covered, and to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and that this blessing comes
even on the uncircumcised; But not on them who are unpardoned, and condemned
already.

I hear many sad Mothers lamenting their dead Children, for fear lest they are
damned: And though I never was a Father, I can perceive what the concerns and
bowels of Parents are. But what would they do, if they were taught to believe,
that no Infant ever in the world, had any justifying, pardoning Promise, nor
visible Remedy, but all till age are under condemnation, by the undissolved
Obligation of the Law.

The Antinomians of late years have attempted to persuade men, that secret
Election justifies from Eternity, and dissolveth the Laws Obligation, (before
it did oblige, even to non-existent Subjects:) But few believe them, the Error
being sufficiently laid open. And yet what other than this feigned Antinomian
Justification do the Anabaptists allow to any Infants in the world? But the
Obligation of a Law or Covenant to punishment, must according to Gods
established order, be dissolved by a Law or Covenant, even by the Pardoning Law
of Grace. No doubt but all elect persons, before Regeneration are in the
visible Kingdom of the Devil, and heirs of hell, and under the condemnation of
the Law, as undissolved, and they not pardoned: and is this the case of the
best of Infants?

Had Infants Church Membership been a mere Jewish Ceremony, or a mere piece of
the Mosaical Policy, giving no right to any spiritual benefits, nor extended
to any other but the Jews, we should have judged of it as of the rest: But I
dare say that I have given full proof of the contrary in both my Books, not
here to be recited; and have produced more than [rotten dictates] that from
Adams days Infants were esteemed as under the Blessing or the Curse, as
belonging to their Parents, and interested in their actions and conditions.
Besides that any heathen might have brought in his children as Proselites into
Church Membership with the Jews; whereas now you allow not so much to any
Christians.

And it was before Circumcision was instituted, that Marriage was regulated by
God, that there might be [a Seed of God] Mal. 2. 15.] And I will not be so
audocious, as to expound that title, of all the Devils Children that be not
Bastards.

But still you say, There is no Scripture, President, or Precept for Infants
Baptism.]

Answer, 1. Abuse not your selves and others: we are first to agree Whether
Infants may be Church members, and under the Covenant of Grace with their
Parents? And then we shall next consider, at what age, and in what manner they
should be solemnly invested. Confound not differing Questions: the first must
be first resolved. 2. There is no Scripture president for Baptizing any Kings;
must none therefore be Baptized? 3. Scripture tells us not all that was then
done, but all that must be done. 4. When Baptism was first instituted and
practiced, the Parents must first be Converted and Baptized. 5. Yet over and
over the Baptizing of Households is recorded. 6. Infants Church Membership was a
thing that they were before in profession of, and no sort that ever I read of
questioned it: Therefore what need Christ institute it anew, any more than to
new make the Ten Commandments? 7. If it had ever been his meaning to dispossess
them all, he would have told us so in some word of Scripture, or some mention
sure had been made of it. 8. But certainly he told them that he would have
gathered Jerusalems Children to him, which is the Nation that was before Gods
Church. 9. And he took Children in his arms and blessed them, and was angry
with those that kept them from him, and said, Of such is the Kingdom of God.
10. And how can we obey Mark 9. 36, 37. and receive Children in Christ's name,
and as belonging to Christ, if none do visibly belong to him?

2. But I answer fully, There is a full Command for Infant Baptism Mat. 28. 19.
Go ye Disciple me all Nations, Baptizing them.

Where note, 1. That it is not the effect that is made their duty, but their
endeavor; else the Apostles had sinned when the hearers believed not, and
because all Nations were not Discipled.

Note that to be Disciples and to be Christians, Acts 11. are made all one; and
to be Discipled and to be Christened.

3. Note that it is not here and there one, but Nations, that they must
endeavor to Disciple: And as the Jews are called a holy Nation, so it is said,
I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, Psalm. 2. and Isa. 55. 8.
Mal. 1. 10, 11, etc. the Conversion of the Nations and Heathens is promised:
and the Word and our Experience have both said, The Kingdoms of the World are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. But Kingdoms and Nations
contain Infants; and he Discipleth not a Nation that Discipleth no Infants in
the Nation.

The Apostles were commanded to Discple whole Nations: the Infants are parts of
whole Nations: therefore the Apostles were bound to endeavor to Disciple
Infants.

Object. It is only the capable parts: but Infants and Idiots are not capable
parts.

Answ. I have before [and elsewhere fully] proved Infants capable parts, as
Christ was of being Head, and as Infants are of Societies, and of a part in
Covenants with men: and Idiots having not the use of reason from the birth, are
in the same case with Infants; and the Distracted, after at age, are nothing to
our case, but are capable of being Distracted members; and Distraction is not
Excommunication, nor Unchurcheth any.

Object. 2. They must be made Disciples by Teaching.

Answ. 1. If they be made Disciples any way, they must be Baptized. 2. As a
man's hand or foot does not understand by teaching, and yet is part of a
Disciple that is made such by teaching; so Infants understand not, and yet are
Infant Disciples, as being naturally so much appertaining to their Parents,
that by Gods Law the Parents Will goes for theirs in consenting for their
good. They are Subjects before they obey, and servants of God before they serve
him (as those were to Abraham that were born to him in his house,) and as
Christ was a Priest before he Sacrificed, etc. And so they are Disciples before
they learn; and made such by these teaching which made their Parents such, and
taught them to dedicate them to God.

If the King should send Ambassadors to persuade the Heathens in New England
at once to become Christians and his Subjects; would any man doubt but when the
Ambassadors prevail with all the Adult to become the Kings Subjects, they do
thereby make the Nations, and so all Infants as dependents on the Parents to be
Subjects also? And if the same speech of the same men make the Parents both
Christians and the Kings Subjects, may it not as truly be said that that speech
made the Infants Christians (when the Parents consent) as Subjects when they
consent?

3. If actual Learning or believing were necessary to the Christianity, or
Church Membership of all, then whenever any one were Mad or Distracted, or in
an Appoplexy (if not every night while he is asleep) he should cease to be a
Christian and Churchmember.

And if Infants as part of Nations must be made Disciples, and all that are
Discipled be Baptized, (as the Investing act) then here is a plain cmmand to
Baptize Infants: All that must be Discipled must be Baptized: Infants must be
Discipled: Therefore Infants must be Baptized: What have you more for Baptizing
Kings?

And if men ask for Scripture Presedent, or fuller proof; 1. I also require
them to give me any one Scripture Presedent, where ever any one that was the
Child of a Christian, and not at age when the Parents were made Christians, was
afterward Baptized when he came to age? Prove that and you will prove something.

2. I ask them whether many points in Divinity be not now taken as necessary,
or sure, for which not the fourth part so much is produced out of Scripture as
I have done for the Church Membership of Infants.

And seeing you have so importunately called me to a Review; I will add these
few things more, [I.] What Benefits I perceive comes by Infant Baptism. [II.]
What hurt would come if you could prevail against it. [III.] What sin you would
draw men to by rejecting it. [IV.] And I will tell you what thanks therefore I
owe to God for preserving me from your mistakes and way.

I. And I cannot but think that all these following are Mercies not to be
despised. 1. To be Gods Children, and God to be their God and Father. 2. To be
Christ's Members, and Christ to be their Head and Savior. 3. To have the Holy
Ghost in Covenant with them, to give them his Grace and help as shall be
necessary to them upon the further terms on which it is by degrees to be
communicated. (of which more anon.) 4. To have the pardon of all Original sin,
as to the damning punishment, and so to have the Laws Condemnation disabled. 5.
To be members of so holy, safe, and honorable a Society as the Church. 6. To
have their Love and Prayers as Members. 7. To have Parents obliged solemnly to
endeavor to educate and use their Children as members of Christ, fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God. 8. To have right to
Heaven, so dying, by Gods gift. 9. For Parents and Friends to have comfortable
notice of all this. 10. And that they are not under the power and Kingdom of
the Devil, as those that are Rebels against the Covenant, or that are without.

II. Should your persuasions prevail against Infant Baptism, these evils I
think would follow. And whereas you say, that your Think is as good as my
Think, pardon my modesty, and while you follow your own Think, give me and
others leave to judge of mine, by the evidence at least of probability which I
bring.

1. I think that Christian Parents would want one of their Motives to live in
Thankfulness to God, and to magnify the Grace of the Redeemer, if they did
beleve that all Infants are in the visible Kingdom of the Devil, and have no
Promise or Covenant-Grant of Pardon, Remedy, or Life.

2. The want of this Demonstration of Divine Love would be a disadvantage to
their Love to God: For where much is forgiven, there will be much Love.

3. It would deprive Christian Parents of all the forementioned Comforts for
their Childrens good, and leave them to mourn for the dead as those that have
no hopes, which any Promise of God allows them.

4. Parents would be more negligent in the pious education of their Children,
than they are; for their solemn Vow and Promise is a great additional
Obligation.

5. Young Persons would be more bold in sin, when they know that they are under
no Covenant, Vow or Promise to the contrary: And they would usually delay their
Repentance and Baptism; as Constantine, and many in those times did; as
thinking that [all sin is done away when I Repent and am Baptized; but it is
more dangerous to sin after Baptism than before: And so most would think it
best to live out of the Church, and to die in it; to live as Infidels, and die
as Christians; to live after the flesh as do the wicked, and to be regenerate
before death, and to die the death of the Righteous.

6. These delays would do [as delay of Repentance now does to many.] even
drive away Gods Spirit, forfeit grace, harden the heart, so that few delayers
would be converted.

7. By these delayings of Repentance and liberty of sins, wickedness would more
abound, and so Gods judgments against the land be more increased.

8. Pagans and Infidels would be hardened and encouraged, by the multitudes of
the unbaptized, and the paucity of Christians.

9. For Christians would be but few in comparison of the multitude: just as Mr.
Tombs thinks Christ would have it, [here one and there one.]

10. And while some delayed their Baptism in scruple, (as many now do the Lords
Supper) and others to take the liberty of sinning (which were like to be the
common case of youth) and others in senseless negligence, the Baptized and
Unbaptized would grow (like our Non-conformists and Conformists) into distinct
Parties, upon distinct Interest in point of Reputation; and so the unbaptized
become the Adversaries (for the most part) of the Baptized.

11. And the Rich, and the Multitude being usually the Unbaptized party, they
would be still the strongest, and the Governors of the rest; and the Laws and
Government would be such as the Governors.

12. And hereupon the Church would be (as before the days of Constantine)
ordinarily under Persecution.

13. This Persecution would detein the most from looking toward Christianity,
and so hinder multitudes from comeing in to Christ: and woe to them that so
offend or hinder such little ones; It were better a millstone were hanged about
their necks and they were cast into the depth of the Sea.

14. There would then be no sanctified Families dedicated to God, (except those
few that had no Children.)

15. Much less would any Nation be Discipled, or any one Kingdom be the Kingdom
of the Lord, and of his Christ.

This is not the Condition that I desire and pray for: If you doubt of all or
any of this, look to the Easterni parts of the world, and be not worse than
those that will learn by nothing but experience. Judge whether under the
Turkish Government the Greek Church be grown better, and whether the Christians
are more and holyer than heretofore. And yet the Turks give Liberty of
Religion, which most Unbaptized Princes do not.

O dreadful Case! That ever Religious persons should Study, Preach, Pray, and
fervently Dispute and Write to bring the Christian world to this, as for the
advancement of Religion!

III. To tell you of sinning, I suppose will be taken for fiery fury; or a
Reproach of the Godly: But I may tell you why I am not of your mind, and what
sin I think I should be guilty of, if I were.

1. God made it a duty for Parents solemnly to enter their Children, by
Dedication, into the Covenant of God (as is often proved.) And how will men
answer the nonperformance hereof any more than their not Praying for them, or
not feeding or Clothing them?

2. What a sin is it to rob Christ of so great a part of his Church?

3. What a sin so to deny the Gospel Grace and Promise, and to hide so much of
the Love of God?

4. What a sin so far to confound the state of Christians and Pagans, as to
their Childrens blessing?

5. What a sin so to enlarge and honor the Devils Kingdom, as to give him all
mankind visibly, till they come to age?

6. What a sin to rob Parents of so much of their due comfort.

7. What a sin to deprive so many millions of Covenant-pardon, Grace and Life,
by hindering the acceptance and consent?

8. What a sin thus to change and take from the Word, yea from the very
Covenant of God?

9. What a sin to vilify so great Mercy, as if it were none, and to preach
such ingratitude?

10. What a sin so to dishonor Christ, as if sin abounded so much more than
his Grace, as that all Infants being visibly condemned, not one in the world is
visibly pardoned or justified?

11. Yea to make Christ so like Satan and contrary to himself, as to come into
the world to cast or keep all mankind in Infancy out of the Church and Covenant
of Grace; And when his Name is called Jesus, because he saves his people from
their sins, he will take none for his people, till age, nor save any Infant
visibly from sin, either guilt or habit, and so be no Jesus to any but the
Adult, that we can know of: when yet before his comeing it was otherwise; And
so to make the Gospel much harder than the Law, and the yoke of Christ harder
than the yoke of Circumcision.

12. Yea and to make the Gospel Church more narrow and unhappy than all the
Pagan Nations were before, whose Children might have been Proselited with the
Parents.

13. What a sin is it to teach men to be thus unnatural, and cruel to their
Offspring?

14. What a sin to teach all that are not Rebaptized, that they break no
Baptismal Vow or Covenant, nor sin against it, because they never were Baptized.

15. And is it nothing so to cross our Prayers, [Let thy Kingdom come] and to
pray and endeavor that Christ's Kingdom may not extend to any of mankind, till
they actually at age believe.

But the great difficulty which it will be expected that I resolve, is, Whether
I do not imply, That all the Children of true Christians dedicated to God,
having saving Grace in their Infancy, many after fall from it, seeing experience
tells us, that too many prove ungodly.

I Answer, 1. So much of Scripture, and so great and many Mercies must not be
all denied, when a difficulty arises in the way, which we cannot at the
present answer: Else what would become of most men's Christianity it self?

2. This was no difficulty to the ancient Fathers, no not to Augustine and his
followers, and so to all the known Church of Christ for a thousand years after
the Apostles, who commonly held that even of the Adult, many fall from true
Grace, Justification, and a state of Life; some appropriating perseverance to
the Elect, (as Austin) and some to the confirmed in Grace, and some to both.

3. It is hard that they that cannot extricate themselves out of such
difficulties, will but reproach those that offer them their help: But this is
not the first time that I have ventured upon their Ingratitude: I speak of it
still as a difficulty; but what I have said in my [More Reasons for Infants
Church Membership.] seems most probable to me, viz.

1. All Christians confess that Adam fell from a state of Salvation, or right
to Life, at present.

2. Adams Grace which he lost, was a Power to Love God, and obey him, which he
could use or suspend.

3. Beyond a mere Power, there is in the sanctified by the in-dwelling Spirit
of Adoption; Gracious Habits of Love and Obedience: What Adam had of this I am
not here to determine.

4. Beyond mere weak Habits, there is in some, such Habits as are strong,
confirmed and radicated.

(5. And in Heaven above all these, there is full Perfection.)

Now I apply this, 1. Actual and Habitual, Love and Obedience, is in the
sanctified Adult by the indwelling Spirit; For Actual Love and Obedience is
their Duty, which the Habit is joined to.

2. Vocation gives Faith and Repentance in Act, with some seminal disposition
to the said Acts and Habits of Love and Obedience, (as Amesius Medull. de
Orat.) not yet Habits; and this Vocation goes before Sanctification, Faith
being the Condition on which the Spirit of Adoption and Sanctification is
promised.

3. So much Grace may be given to Infants, as was to Adam, as to mere Power to
do what he did not, and as the Dominicans call sufficient, or necessary Grace;
and perhaps such as is the innitial Disposition before full Sanctification. And
this much may qualify them for present Pardon and Justification, For Actual
Love and Obedience is not their Duty, and consequently not the proper habit,
beyond a Power and seminal Disposition, as of necessity to their first state of
Grace: And as Adam lost this much, so may they.

4. The Sanctifying Spirit of Adoption, is not promised to Infants to work such
Acts in them as they are not yet capable of, nor such Habits, as in Gods usual
order follow such Acts; But he is Related to them as their Sanctifier, because
Christ will send the Spirit as they come to the use of Reason, to help them in
holy Acts, and so to Habits, if they forfeit not his help. Which some do
(besides the perfidious neglect of Parents) and so lose that Infant-Grace.

5. But all Gods Elect shall certainly have more than this Grace of sufficient,
necessary, losable Power and Disposition, and shall at age have actual Faith,
Love, and Obedience if they live.

6. What ever Infant dies in the state of that Grace and Disposition (which we
call sufficient, and in its nature was as loseable as Adams) shall be perfected
in his access to the perfecting Glory (as all imperfect Saints are,) and is one
of the Elect, and shall by Promise be saved: (allowing degrees of Glory:) If
there be no need, or evidence of this solution, and you have any other surer
way, then cast this by as [rotten dictating.]

Thus far I have given you an account of my Review: But yet I here repeat
again; That if you would be contented your selves, to satisfy your own
Consciences to be Rebaptized, (as one that doubted whether he were well
Married would secure it by being Married over again) and would afterward live
peaceably in communion with your Brethren, and not appropriate Church Communion
to your Sect. And if you would not deny our Infant part in the Covenant of
Grace, the promise of Pardon, and life by Christ, and our Infant
Church Membership, and only delayed the Baptismal Investiture, as Tertullian
desired, for the more solemn inauguration, and obligation; Though I should not
be of your mind, I should live in as loving forbearance and Communion with you,
as with other Christians.

But if when we are for Peace, you are for Church-Wars, and cannot differ from
us without Dividing, Unchurching, Unchristening, avoiding, and even Contemning
or Slandering almost all the Christians in this and former ages, in such things
I will have no Communion with you.

The Fathers likened Re-ordaining, and Re-baptizing. If any would satisfy his
own Conscience with being ordained again for surety, not Unchurching,
Degrading, Avoiding, Reproaching, Persecuting those that are not of his mind, I
would break no peace with such a Re-ordained Person: But if the Re-ordaining
Sectaries will say as you, Our way only is right, we only are the true
Ministers and Churches, and turn like to Donatists, I am not of their mind.

And I here profess, that while I tell you of my dissent from your Extreme, it
implies no liking of the contrary extreme of those that would confound the
Christians and the Heathens, so far as equally to Baptize all their Children,
if any Baptized person will but perfidiously promise that for them, which they
never made any intelligent man believe that ever they intended to perform: Nor
can I love the Hypocritical Religion of the Pharisees, which turns almost all
into Ceremony, as if they had to do with none but Children; nor the turning of
Catechizing and Confirmation into a lifeless Formality, to be instead of a
serious Profession at age, of the Christian Covenant, and a solemn intelligent
transition to the Church Privileges of the Adult. I know that it is Satan's
game, first to draw Hypocrites to mortify Gods Ordinances, and turn Religion
into an Image or a Carcass; and thence to stir up others in several Sects,
instead of Reviving them, to Loath and Bury them. Woe to the World because of
Offenses, and Woe to them by whom they come.

Before I come to my Fourth Part, which is my Application to my self, I must
take notice of some more of your Applicatory Letter in the way: And if I
disorderly repeat some things, in following so disordered a Leader, you (at
least, whatever others do) must take it patiently, it being far short of the
tedious work which you seem to call for: You would have Mr. Danvers his Letter
Answered, and you would have better Proof for Infant Baptism. It is not in my
power to believe the Reasons of my two Books, which you generally take for
none, to be no sound Reasons; nor to believe Mr. Danvers his Books not to be
such a bundle of most gross mistakes and Vutruths, as I scarce ever before met
with, from a professed Christian. If I mistake, it is not in my power to do
otherwise, were I to die this hour. And if I have offended the Anabaptists by a
faithful persuading them to Repent of the doleful work which they have made in
England, my Conscience more accuses me for doing it no more, than for doing so
much. If you take all men for as bad as you describe me, that wish your
Repentance for such works, and also for our woeful Church Divisions, and differ
from you about Infant Baptism, and that yet beg for mutual forbearance, and
peaceable Communion with you, I am not of your spirit or mind, and hope neither
to live nor die in so narrow a Communion.

As for any more Answering any of you, those that I converse with, tell me it
is needless; I repent that I have been drawn by Contenders so often to
interrupt more useful work. If more be needful, let them do it that have
leisure, and longer life.

You say, that It is now a common question whether ever I will die a Martyr?

I am sorry that your Acquaintance are hardened, and used to questions that so
little concern them, and that are so unmeet for their Determination: If
Suffering be the best State, how happy has this Kingdom been made by the
OVERTURNERS? Do you mean that you doubt whether ever the Anabaptists will have
Power enough to effect it? they attempting what they did against me too late,
just when they and their Copartners were a pulling down themselves and others?
Or do you mean, that till we are Martyred we are not capable of your good
Opinion? (And are all the Anabaptists Graceless that are yet Unmartyred? Or
have more Anabaptists than Poedobaptists been Martyred in our times?) Or is it
only your Prognostic on supposition of my Trial? I have more cause to distrust
my self, and beg Gods strengthening Grace, than boastingly to foretell, Though
all men deny thee, yet I will not.] But your talk of [my flight, and others
suffering by proxy for me] does but show that you have not that care of
avoiding Falsehoods in matter of Fact, which might invite us to think that you
are liker than others to be sound in Doctrine. But had you not mistaken, yet I
might have admonished you, not to have condemned every Anabaptist that has
taken a grosser flight, than a sick man's going for his health into the
Country, when he had neither any Flock, nor Undertaking, nor Call to hinder
him: At least that you mock not at Paul for being let down by the wall in a
Basket, nor at Christ for his flight into Egypt, or withdrawing into the
Wilderness, and into Gallilee, etc. nor for saying, When they persecute you in
one City, flee to another: or at least pass no hard sentence on your self for
being yet alive; no nor on Mr. Tombs for Writing against Separation, and for
Communion with the Parish Churches.

But in the end you [Beseech me in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, and as I will
shortly answer at the great and dreadful Tribunal that among my other Errata, I
would repent of that absurd and Heretical position, of a Baptismal Covenant of
Grace running in a Fleshly Line.

Answ. But 1. Just thus the Quakers dreadfully adj^re me to repent of all
that is against their way; and must I therefore do it? And yet Mr. Hicks, Ives,
and other Anabaptists treat them far more sharply than cover I did the
Anabaptists.

2. I have so many years looked for my appearing at the Tribunal of Christ,
that if I should not be true to that Light which does appear to me, I were more
unexcusable than yet you think me. But will your word at that Tribunal pass for
Law, or for my Justification, if I should contradict the Grace and Covenant of
God, and his Church Laws and state from the days of Adam to this day? How
shall I be sure that it is the Bowels of Christ, and not Self-conceitedness,
and the Zeal of a dividing Sect, in which you make this carnest suit to me?

3. Especially when you so unintelligibly recite my supposed Error, and give
me not a word of Answer against that abundance of Scripture proof which I have
brought? This is too unsatisfactory an answering of Books, to Beseech us to
repent of them?

4. The Wisdom from above is Pure, and Peaceable, and without Partiality. Is
yours so? Ask any Impartial man whether you write like one that knows
himself? You here call us to Repent of a Position as Absurd and Heretical? Did
I ever call your Opinion Heretical. Not that I remember? Such writing as this
of mine is fiery; but your large Invectives without one word of proof, and your
charge of an Heretical Position, is nothing but Christian Gentleness.

Your Phrase of a Covenant running in a Fleshly Line, is your own. The words of
a position charged as heretical, should have been truly recited. Tell me where
I ever used such. I refer you to my late two Disputations of Original Sin,
besides my two Books of Baptism, for full proof that God has taken the
Children of the Godly and the Wicked as participants, into Promises of Love and
Mercy, and threatenings of punishment, with their Parents: How far, I have there
opened. Your telling me that such Reference is to set you the task of Sysiphus,
shall not so befool me as to tempt me to write the same over again: For by the
like reason, others of as great authority as you may call me to write it twenty
times. And if I give near thirty Scripture Testimonies or Arguments for our
Infant Mercies, we that see no reason to invalidate them, will not so despise
God and his Laws and Benefits, as to deny or reject all, because such a man as
you require it, and tells us that they are all invalid. If we must take our
Faith on Trust: it were more excusable to take it from Councils, than from you.

I have told you my judgment herein so often, that it is the more disingenuous
in you to give it in such senseless or ambiguous words, as [A Baptismal
Covenant running in a Fleshly Line.] Gods Covenant as Instituted, runs no
where; but is recorded in the Scripture, Preached, and Ministerially applied by
his Ministers. Man's Convenanting Act, is absurdly said to [run in a Fleshly
Line.] But men that have Flesh as well as Souls, do accept Gods Covenant, and
enter themselves and Infants in the mutual Convenant by dedicating both to God.
Natural Generation (communicating essence) makes your Children to be naturally
yours, which is so near an interest, that Original Sin and suffering tells us
that God esteems not our Children naturally guiltless of the Parents Crimes:
And he has provided a Remedy for both, and not for the Parents or Adult only:
And the Remedy is a pardoning saving Covenant procured by a Mediator. This
Convenant is Universal to the Adult, as offered on the condition of Believing
acceptance: And is there no Promise, no Covenant for Infants? Why so? Have they
no need of Pardon, and a Savior? or are they left remediless as the Devils? Or
is the Promise of their Salvation without any Condition? If so, is it to all,
or to some only? if to all, and so all are Christ's members, then all (Turks and
Pagans) Children should be Church Members. This were to make it run unto a
Fleshly Line indeed? If not to all, to whom, or to how many? Is it to more than
twenty in the world? or more to Christians Children than others? If it be a
Promise of Pardon and Life, and neither tell to how many, nor to whom; 1. This
is a strange Promise, and is no mutual Covenant? Show us where in Scripture we
may find it? 2. This then must be another Species of a Covenant of Grace,
distinct from the Baptismal Covenant; and to feign and add a second sort of
Covenant is another kind of adding to the Word of God, than adding of
Ceremonies is. And who can say in all the world, that any Child of his has any
part in such a Promise? or that Pagans have not as much of it as Christians?
All Promises of Pardon to the Adult are conditional, and some means for certain
Title is prescribed? Is there no means for the certain pardon of our Infants?

2. But if you will say that it is conditional, what is that Condition? That
which I have still said is this, The Condition is, that they be the Children of
the Faithful dedicated to God: not merely that they be our Fleshly Line; that
does but make them ours, and (with Gods Law) enable and oblige us to dedicate
them in Covenant to him: But being thus in our power, and our Wills for them as
their own, it is our dedicating them to God, that is the immediate Condition:
And every true Christian does dedicate himself, and his Children to God, as far
as he thinks himself enabled: This dedication is virtually in our own actual
sanctification, and actually when we have Children, which is solemnized in
Baptism. What we devote to God by his Will he does accept: And we can show his
Promises to the Seed of his Servants, and will not plead against our Mercies.
Should we Apostatize our selves, the Mercies promised to the generations of
them that love God, would be intercepted, and would not run to a Fleshly Line:
But an Infant by Believers dedicated to God, is not unclean but holy, and so
better than a mere Fleshly Line. To pour out your Clamours against our Proof,
full and plain proof, of this, from the whole current of the Scripture, and to
vaunt, and talk with such Confidence as you do in the dark, as if all this were
un-proved, (and the very second Commandment were again cast out, and Gods own
Proclamation of his Name, Exodus 34. 6, 7.) and to call for more Answers, while
you cry out of too much; and to talk against dictating, while you thus obtrude
your Quakerlike Oratory, Contempt, and Obtestations, instead of Argument and
Answers; this must not make us unthankful Despisers of the Promises of God. If
you would thus Hector men out of their Inheritances, or the title of their
Infants to them, few would think you argued cogently: And should the words of
such self-conceited singular persons, which we take to be against the scope of
Scripture, and consent of Christ's Church, make us give up all Infants
Convenant-title to Churchmembership, Pardon and Salvation? You read frequently
in the Gazetts, that many set so much by their Dogs, as to cry them about, and
offer great rewards to those that find them, and will bring them home; And
shall all Christians set so little by their Children (and so by all our own
Infant Privileges) as to be hectored out of our hopes, and renounce their
great and precious Promises, which number them with the household of God: and
that by such Rhetorical Canting as a man of equal wit may use, in almost any
other Controversy?

As Cicero wondered at them that pleaded against the immortality of the Soul,
that ever men would be such enemies to themselves, as to study for reasons
against their own interest and hopes; so I say, Though our mere Interest prove
nothing to be true, it tells us, what we should desire; and when we find Gods
word so excellently suited to our Interest, let them dispute against it that
will, for I will not. Let the Enemies of mankind or of Christians, plead
against the Interest of mankind and of Christians, and not themselves.

It Is an unavoidable straight that we are in, between them that silence and
ruin us in this world, among such other things, for not professing our Assent,
that [It is certain by the Word of God, that Infants Baptized (none in the
world excepted) and dying before actual sin, are certainly Saved*] not allowing
us to preach Christ's Gospel if we cannot say that all This is certain; (were it
Faith in Christ himself, the weak in Faith should be received;) and such as you
on the other side, that account us even Heretical if we will not be so
unthankful to God, as to deny and reject the precious Covenant Hopes, and
Church-relation of our Children. You know that with what measure you mete it is
measured to you again by many; and that no small number of Christians have
numbered Anabaptists with Heretics; and yet I that have dealt otherwise with
you, am your most fiery Adversary? And why? Any judicious By-stander may see,
though you cannot: just as as W. Pen lately seemed to think more favorably of
me than of others, till in an open dispute I had detected the evil of his
cause; and then [he had rather be a Socrates at judgment, than such a nominal
Christian as I: so you and your Brethren that are like you, because a Book or
two of mine have crossed the Interest of your Party, think I deserve all that
you pronounce of or against me; so powerful is Interest with most men's
understandings: so far as it is your mistake of the Interest of Christ that
does mislead you, I easily bear it as the infirmity of a weak and prejudiced
judgment: But so far as it is the interest of your Party which is abused
against the public interest of Christ's Church it is selfish, and such as is
described at large in James 3.

As for your talk of Mr. Danvers his words against my Heterodoxes in other
matters, and your supercilious insulting as if he were unanswered, I say, 1. I
take him to be fully answered, and if you do not, that proves it not to be as
you affirm. 2. What more should I answer? What does he but recite some scrap of
my words? Had he done it truly and fully, had that been any Argument against
them? Do I need to answer my own words, before any Charge against them be
proved, or proof once attempted? Was it not enough for me to lay down the
Contraries to my Doctrines, and leave the Reader to choose which he sees best?
Dare you not own the Contraries, and yet continue your accusation of my words?
Would not the World (whom I blame not if they think that I have written too
many Books already) condemn me for a fool indeed, if in the condition that I am
in, the Cant of such men as he and you, should draw me to write another Volumn
in Defense of a Volumn that defends it self to all judicious Impartial
Readers, and that against one that proves nothing in it to be Erroneous?

And as for those that will not impartially peruse the words accused, I have no
reason to think that they will make any better use of a Defense if I should
write it? And as I am past doubt that Mr. D's Quarrels, and your Justification
of them, are the effect of mere ignorance, self-conceit, partiality, and
passion; so if you prove to be the knowing men, and I the ignorant, I am sure
it is not through my neglect of Study, nor unwillingness to know or own the
Truth: And I have no cause to envy you the felicity of your greater Wisdom. But
if it be a Wisdom that tends to bitter strife and to confusion, and
destroys your Love to those that differ from you, I will remember that my
peace lies more on my Love to you, than on yours or any man's else to me.

As for your talk about my words in my first book that some did then Baptize
naked, I have given you a true answer. To contradict what I said, were to lie:
I know not that you Baptize any at all but by report of others; and so I heard
that then of some so credibly as that I am not able now because you call for
proof almost thirty years after, to disbelieve it: I undertake not to prove it
now; (nor that the Quakers then used to Quake or Vomit, seeing now no such
thing is seen among them:) If really it was a misreport, and never any Baptized
naked in England, nor in other Lands, I wish that no man may believe it. But
did Mr. Danvers take this for so heinous an injury, and yet himself in2 Books
labor to prove, that for many hundred years Baptizing naked was the ordinary
Custom! O how far will partiality blind men? Was it the Custom of all the
Churches, and yet a Reproach to be retracted, to say that at one time diverse
did so, if fame, not then denied by any of those Anabaptists that I converst
with, may be believed?

To conclude, Sir, The importunity of Mr. Danvers and you have not been
unprofitable to me: It has caused me, as you desired, to Review my old
thoughts of Infants Church Membership and Baptism, and to renew my thanks to
the God of Mercy, who has not left all the World in their Infancy unredeemed,
nor without a Promise or Covenant of Grace; nor left Christian Parents to mourn
for their dead Infants, as those that are without hope of their Salvation, and
have no Promise on which to ground their hope: It has renewed my sense of the
great obligation that lies on believing Parents, both of gratitude to God, and
duty for their Children: It tells me that they may now love their Children, as
the members of the Church of Christ, and need not, nay must not take them as
members of the Kingdom of the Devil; nor yet stretch their Brains to prove that
there is a middle Region (like Purgatory, or Limbus Infantum hereafter) between
the Kingdom of Christ, and the Kingdom of the Devil; And that it is a sad
employment for Parents to dispute their own Children out of the Blessings of
Gods Covenant, and to prove them to be in Satan's Kingdom, and not in Christ's:
Yea it has reminded me how much the Interest of Infants in their Parents case
is founded by God in nature it self, and to bless God for that inscription in
Stone of the second Commandment, and that mavelous voice from Heaven, Exodus
34. 6, 7. I believe that the Synod of Dort said truly, Acts 1. 17. That
Faithful Parents need not doubt of the Election and Salvation of their Children
dying in Infancy, (before the violation of the Baptismal Covenant.)

And seeing God has pronounced our Children holy, and not unclean, and told us
that of such is the Kingdom of God, it remindeth me how careful Parents should
be, as thankfully to dedicate them to God, so carefully to educate them
according to their Covenant, remembering that as the Parents Consent and
dedication of them to God, is the Condition of their first right to the
Covenant benefits, so those Parents do Promise their pious education; and if
they after prove false in such Promises on their part, they must not charge God
with unfaithfulness, if it go worse with their Children than on supposition of
the Parents fidelity it had done; (though still at age they may be accepted
upon Repentance and personal Belief:] Of which Mr. Whiston has written more
judiciously than any on that point that I remember.

Also I have been hereby made thankful that God kept me from the snare of
Anabaptistry; for though I lay not so much as some do on the mere outward act
or water of Baptism, believing that our heart consent and dedication qualifieth
Infants for a Covenant Right before actual Baptism (which yet is Christ's
regular solemnization and investiture,) yet I make a great matter of the main
Controversy, notwithstanding that I hereticate not the Anabaptists for the
bare opinion sake, nor would have them persecuted; for now I better see than
ever what God has thus preserved me from.

1. How much else might I have been led to, that tends toward the denying
the Kingdom of Christ, and denying him to be the Savior of the world; yea how
near might I have been led toward the making him to be the Destroyer, or
Abaddon, as comeing into the World to condemn the world, and to take from them
the Promises and Hopes of Salvation: For, 1. I find that all are lost in Adam,
and that God made an Universal Covenant of Grace with fallen mankind in Adam
after his fall, and renewed it with Noah: I find that it is but a small part of
the world that had the Law of Moses, the Jews being to the earth, but as one
Village to England; and to be King but of a Village is not to be King of
England. I find that the making of Abraham's or Moses his Covenant was no
repeal of the Universal Law of Grace; nor put them into a worse condition than
he found them in. And I find that past all doubt Infants were Church Members,
and in the Covenant before Christ's Incarnation, not only the Circumcised but
the Uncircumcised Females, and all the Uncircumcised Males in the Wilderness,
yea and out of the Jewish Nation, as well as in it, (though the Covenant of
Peculiarity was proper to them.)

And yet notwithstanding all this, I find, 1. that many now do exclude all the
world out of Christ's Kingdom before his Incarnation, except the Jews, or at
least a few rare individuals more, when Abraham hoped there had been fifty
Righteous in Sodom. 2. That the same men suppose that since Christ's
Incarnation, the old Law of Grace made to mankind in Adam and Noah, is
repealed, and they that cannot have the Gospel are left under the mere Law of
Innocence or none. 3. And that all mankind in their Infant state is put or left
out of the Church of Christ, and the Covenant of Life.

And had I been seduced into all this, 1. To hold that for 4000 years Christ
had a Kingdom no bigger than England. 2. That he came to deprive all the world
that have not his Gospel, of the former Law of Grace that was made to them. 3.
And that he came to cast out of their Church State, or Covenant-mercies all
mankind while they are Infants; and to leave us no hope that is grounded on his
Covenant or Promise of any Infants Salvation, or any description or condition
whatsoever: Alas, what should I have been led to? and what guilt against
Christ, and of furthering Infidelity, should I have incurred, under the
pretense of promoting the purity of his Kingdom?

II. And if God had thus left me, I had been likely (as I see by others) to
have gone yet farther, and narrowed the Gospel Church it self so much, as to
have confined it to the Anabaptists; or to have thought all the rest of the
Christian world incapable of Church Communion; I might have come to revile the
Doctrine of Gods gracious Promise or Covenant to our Children, as Absurd and
Heretical; and when Gratitude is the complexion of Gospel obedience, this
Ingratitude might have been mine.

III. And then I should likely have been left to a proud over-valuing of my own
Opinion, and the singularity of my Wisdom and Integrity, as quite beyond all
the Christian worlds that differ from me: And out of a selfish unobserved
adherence to my own conceits, to have magnified the Sect that was of my own
mind, above all others.

IV. And then I might have been seduced to have had a hand in all the Turnings
and Overturnings, setting up and pulling down, Praying and Unpraying, Owning
and Disowning, Bloody days and Thanksgivings for them, that were since Triplo
Heaths-Parliament till 1660. and more than so, to have justified them in
others, yea and that after Gods most remarkable disowning them; yea and to have
abhorred and derided the very name and motion of Repentance for them, and to
have despised the Religious Retreat of Nath. Ward, a wise though jocular
Interpendent, though Repentance be the only Plank after Shipwreck, and the
great and merciful concession of the Gospel.

V. I might have been drawn hereby to divide Christ's Kingdom, and to set up
Antichurches, whose employment should be to cry down others, and draw men into
odious thoughts of one another, and to destroy Christian Love and Concord in
the world.

VI. And hereby I might have been one that prepared Professors to turn Quakers,
Seekers, or Ranters, to have finished the work that I began.

VII. I might have been tempted to do all this as in the Name of Christ, and
for his Truth, Word and Church; and so to have entitled God to all, and put his
holy Name to these works of Darkness, and pretended his own Commission for my
opposing him.

VIII. I might have been tempted hereby to write Letters as long and vehement
as yours, in as or^^^cal and pious a strain, which should have been b^^ birth
of my ignorance and self-conceit, and made ^ of Hypocrisy; all along
pretending that I am offended with my Adversary for want of an Answer or proof,
when indeed it were the success of his Answers and Cogent Proofs, prevailing
with multitudes against my Opinion, that was the true cause of my anger: and
when partiality had filled my heart with bitterness against my Brother for such
success, I might have been drawn to cover all from my self and others, by
accusing him of fieryness or folly in generals, and by summoning him to
Repentance and Recantation, as the Quakers do, by the dreadful Tribunal of God,
when I cannot resist the Scripture evidence which he brings.

IX. And I might have been tempted when once Prepossession, Prejudice and
Interest of Reputation had engaged me to so bad a cause, to have studied all
that I can rake together to maintain it; and to have stretched all my wits to
have opposed all that is brought against it, and to have made it the chief work
and Religion of my life, in which my thoughts, affections, time and industry
should be laid out to carry on this mistaken and destructive cause, and to keep
the Churches of Christ from Loving-Unity, Communion and Peace, till they will
all unite against Infants Church Membership and Baptism, which they never did,
nor never will do: Yea, and I must have taught all Christian Parents, that
though they must love their Children as they are their own, (as Heathens do)
yet that they must not Love any one Infant in the world, as a Member of Christ,
or of his Church, and in his Covenant.

X. And by all this, what a Scandal should I have given to the Atheists,
Infidels, Papists and Profane, to harden them in their Contempt of Godliness,
and Derision, or Accusations of Religious men; as if all serious Religion among
us were but Pride, Contention, Humor and Hypocrisy, and a Cloak for our
Mala^ies and Crimes. Yea I might have tempted them to Persecution, and quieted
their Consciences in silencing Christ's Ministers, for the sake of such, whom
they think they use not so ill as they deserve.

XI. And alas what a distraction and scandal should I have caused to the
ignorant and weak, when they see so many ways, and hear men calling them this
way and that way, and terrifying them with Gods Judgment, and the charge of
Sin, if they be not of this mind or of that, till poor people (that have a
plain Rule left them by Christ) are driven out of all Religion, or out of their
Wits, as not knowing of what side and way to be.

XII. And I should have been like enough to have been drawn into the guilt of
Persecution my self, while I cried out against Persecution. I might have
Persecuted my Brethren with my Tongue, and thought it necessary to the
promoting of the cause of God, to blast their just Reputation, and to make them
by falsehoods to become despised, lest their names should hinder my design. Yea,
who knows but I might my self have joined with those whom you judged the
persecuting Silencers of the Ministers of Christ, and Ruiners of the Churches
Peace, by endeavoring the continuance of those same Impositions, and keeping
Ministers out of the public Ministry, and depriving them of all the
established Maintenance, which in the judgment of the Sectaries themselves is
heinous sin, and all this lest Repentance and Altering such Impositions (unless
they will do it as far as the said persons desire) should weaken their Party,
and leave them under greater disagvantages; and to have thus desired men's
impenitent Continuance of that which is accounted heinous Persecution and
Devastation of the Churches, and starving many thousand Souls, and undoing
Ministers* and their Families, might have made all this to be my own by such
consent, yea and endeavor; and the pitiful shift of [opposing a Comprehension,
to keep off our own Sufferings, or our weakening, and the dividing of the
Non-conformists.] might have been an Opiate to my Conscience for so heinous an
Iniquity.

XIII. Yea, who knows but I might have come to that inhumanity, and immodesty
as to falsify public History, against the common notice of all the Learned
world; and to have faced down mankind that the Novatians were against Infant
Baptism, and so were the Donatists; and that Austin wrote diverse Books against
them, as holding that Opinion; and that the Britains of old were of the same
mind, and the Waldenses since, and Wickliffe also, etc. And if Learned men had
wondered at my impudence, I might have comforted my self that my followers will
believe me: yea and to have furiously calumniated those that detect my sin, and
call me to Repentance, and to have reproached them as foolish and fiery who
will defend the Mercies of Christ, and their Infant hopes and title to pardon
and salvation.

These and many more evils I might have been seduced into, if I had yielded to
those reasonings that would have drawn me to deny the Graces of the Covenant;
and which in my youth once did cause some doubting in me, till I diligently
studied the point; my ignorance of the true nature of the Covenant and Baptism,
and the weakness of many Writers Arguments against the Anabaptists, being then
my great Temptations.

And now, Sir, I thank you for calling me, in the bowels of Christ, as I will
answer it at Gods dreadful Tribunal, to a Review of the Cause which I was drawn
by your Brethren to defend: For it causes me in the Review of the Nature and
Reasons of it, to renew my thankfulness to God for my preservation, and that he
has made any use of me to vindicate his Covenant, and the Mercies given by it
to mankind, and for saving me from this fore-described deluge; and I solemnly
protest in his sight, that knows my heart, that if I knew, or by study could
find out that Papists, Conformists, Separatists, Anabaptists, or Quakers were
in the right, I would quickly and joyfully declare my consent, and be glad
before I die, to join with them, and recant what I have held, or said, or done
against them. But the Reasons which I have given in my two Books, and which Mr.
Jos. Whiston (above most others) has lately given, seem to me unanswerable.
And yet I doubt not but Mr. Danvers or you can answer them all; there being few
Causes so clear that a man may not talk against, as long as his talking faculty
holds out: But do not expect that I should offend you by Replying, to words
which I think need no Reply, unless the necessities of such as are deceived by
you do require it. Blessed be that Mercy that will shortly Reconcile his dark
mistaken wrangling Children in the World of Reconciling Light and Love, in the
perfect Unity, which Grace is now preparing us for, and they that live in Faith
and Love, are breathing after: And woe to them who by dead Formalities elude
and hinder men's solemn intelligent owning of their Baptismal Covenant at age,
and thereby make Anabaptists, and make Infantbaptism seem a Crime.

London, December. 31. 1675. Rich. Baxter.

Mr. Danvers his Third Reply Considered, at Mr. Hutchinson's Invitation.
BEfore the Receipt of Mr. Hutchinsons Letter, I knew nothing of Mr. Danvers
his Third Reply, which I have now perused: Though by his Conclusion one would
think that he took open Rebuke for a tolerable, yea acceptable, friendly
office; yet finding how impatiently he receives it, and that the detection of
his Voluminous Untruths does but occasion him to defend them, and to stir up
all his Forces to render the Reprover odious, and so does but exasperate his
Disease, I thought my self disobliged from any farther attempts to bring him to
Repentance; And those that yet need more to save them from the belief of his
Historical Misreports, are persons that I have not leisure enough to satisfy.

I again profess, that the experience of these last fifteen years, of the
strange incredibility of some men on both extremes, [the Violent and the
Dividing] about notorious matters of Fact, has done more to bring me to great
unbelief of all mankind, so far as I find them pre-engaged by Contention, and
by a Carnal, or a sideing factious Interest, than all that ever I before had
read, or heard, or seen: I should once have thought that I had been injurious
to humanity it self, if I had thought such men as incredible as some have now
declared themselves in Print to be: I scarcely now believe any mere humane
History any farther than the agreement of men of contrary minds and interests,
in matters of common and easy notice, gives a kind of natural evidence to it,
beyond what it borrows from the honesty of the Writer; or at least farther
than the footsteps of very great Candor, Conscience and unbyassed impartiality
shall speak more for my belief, than the Authors most confident words or Oaths.
And herein modest men, and disinterested Peacemakers are now believed by me,
before all the greatest, the learned, and the most zealous Contenders in the
world. David's saying, that All men are Liars, and Paul's [Let God be true, and
every man a Liar,] were too much overlooked by me, till men themselves had told
me what they are; and warned me to cease from man, as vanity.

Mr. Danvers his accusations were partly of such public parties (the ancient
Churches, the Novatians, the Donatists, the old Britains, the Waldenses, the
Wickliffians, etc.) and partly of such public Writings (as Augustines and many
others) as one would think any Scholar that will read the cited Books might
soon see whether he or I be the falsifyer, especially about a practical matter,
in which their Judgments could not easily be hid from all the Adversaries about
them, no more than from those of their own mind and way.

His accusation of the Novatians he neither defends (that I see) nor
confesses to be a slander; but silently passes all the matter by.

His Accusation (for such it is) of the rest (for the most part at least) he
still defends. He cannot Repent of it; and I can no more believe him when I
have read the Books that are our Records, than I can if he would as fiercely
contend, that the Bishops, or Church of England are Anabaptists, because of his
accusation of the now Bishop of Lincoln. But should I be so injurious to the
Reader and my self as to cast away precious time in again and again answering
his untrue Citations and expositions of words which are before our eyes? and
which neither his word or mine can satisfy any Reader of, who must know the
truth by the Books themselves! when he tells men of my writing for Popery,
Conformity, etc. can his yea or my nay go for proof with any that is in doubt
which of us says true? Must not the perusal of the full words decide the Case?
And so it must as to his Accusations of the several Churches and Parties in
questions: And if his Believers would be persuaded that the Welsh Tongue is the
common Language of England, if he do but vehemently affirm it, and revile such
as contradict him, I could not help it, nor must I write books about it, as
long as he has leisure, Ink and Paper to hold on. His Exclamations of the
unsatisfactories of these general answers, (or refusals) shall not tempt me to
cast away the little relicts of my time, in numbering and disproving all the
Untruths that he has written, and will write. By what Law am I condemned to
such a Drudgery? The very first Paragraph of this his third Reply has more
than one or two.

But the chief substance of his Book is his reiterated accusation of my words
in my first Book, that [many then Baptized naked] for which, as a heinous
Calumny, I must Repent. Readers, my Conscience tells me that Repentance is
such an excellent healing Duty, that I shall loath my self so far as I find my
self unwilling of it? But is it possible for a man to Repent of all that the
several contradicting Sects (Papists, Quakers, Anabaptists, etc.) call him to
Repent of, when that is best with one side which is the worst to diverse others?
We are openly agreed, 1. That the Baptizing naked is not the usual way of the
Anabaptists in England. 2. That it was not the way of the most of them when I
wrote that book. 3. That we heard of none with us in England that for any
considerable time continued it. The Questions remaining are 1. Whether when I
wrote those words, the common Fame or Report of the Country where I lived took
it not for as certain that diverse then in some places did it, as the most
Scriptural way, as that the Quakers Quaked, and that the Ranters Swore? 2.
Whether ever any Anabaptist that then was acquainted with me, yea or any one
person denied it to my hearing or knowledge? 3. Whether Mr. Tombs denied it
when I wrote it? All these I will no farther trouble the Reader about, than to
tell him that he neither does, or can disprove me, and should I recant what I
said of these three questions, I must tell three downright Lies? And is that a
safe way of Repenting? 4. But let the question be whether I did well to believe
it? I answer, I believed it not as a Divine Revelation, but as a Humane Report;
which constrained a proportionable belief, which it was not in my power to
deny? 5. But should I not yet disbelieve it? Answer, I am more willing to do it
than not, but I am not able: I do believe (according to the measure of the
aforesaid evidence) that it is a Truth? I cannot believe the contrary: I hear
not a word to warrant me to disbelieve it: it is not in my power, and I must
not lie, to say that I believe it not. 6. But the next Question is, Did I not
say more, or mean more at least, than that it was but [at that time] [the
practice of many but not of most, or their ordinary way] and that I knew it no
otherwise than by uncontradicted Fame?] Answer, Either I did say or mean more,
or I aid not. If I did, I hereby renounce it, and declare that I wronged them.
If I did not, (as I know I did not) to say I did were to lie; and is it worthy
his writing a Book to tempt a man to lie?

If he will prove that I said more, the words must decide it if; that I meant
more, he is not to be believed of my heart, as if he knew it better than I.

But he proves it (that I intended them all) contrary to my most express
words. 1. He says, it is my scope and design? 2. From my Arguments, which take
in the whole Party? 3. From the Instance, etc. Reader, If I were to teach a man
to understand my book, before he wrote against it, I should have some little
hope of true dealing in his Report, how weak soever his Arguing were: But when
I must deal with a man that understands not plain English, because partiality
will not suffer him, and will not learn to understand what he does not, and yet
cannot forbear a public contradicting it, till he understand it, would it not
be a slavery to be tied to write against such a man as long as he would write,
should I live so long? I joined together, as the mode of their Re-baptizing,
their doing it in cold water or Rivers, some naked, and the rest (the usual
way) next naked, that is, in a linen Shift, or Vest, only to cover them. I
took that which in the hotter Countries was safe, to be in our frigid Countries
a breach of the sixth Commandment; and can prove, that he that said, [Go learn
what that means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice] would not have plunging
over head in Cold Water, to be the ordinary way with us. I supposed that as
among the naked Indians, use makes nakedness a less provocation to Lust, than
it would be here; so also in the hotter Regions, of the world, their appearing
publicly next to naked, in one linen Vest or Shift, was less unseemly than it
would be here: David might dance so before Ark, though Michel thought it
impudent; and they might usually were such Garments as would not have kept
their Nakedness from being seen, if they had gone by steps upon the Altar; and
such as if it were but turned aside would leave their nakedness as Noah's was
to spectators: Custom is of great signification in such things. But I appeal
to common Modesty with us in England, whether it would not be a breach of the
seventh Commandment to come to Church, or walk the Streets, or appear in
Assemblies in our Shirts and Smocks? Now this man first feigneth me to say that
it is Adultery, because I say it is a breach of the seventh Commaadment, as if
nothing but Adultery were there forbidden?

Next to prove that I mean it of them all, that [They Baptize naked] he
alleges that I said, that all or most did it, [naked or next naked] and, are
these all one? pray does he not disprove himself? Is it not sure that he that
says, [some Baptize naked, and others next naked] does not say of all [that
they Baptize naked] What should one say to such a man as this?

But he says, that [some naked and next naked are much at one.] Answer, That Is
but another of his Untruths, from whom they flow so easily that I may not
number them. A grosser and lesser breach of the seventh Commandment are not
much at one with me. I never said or thought that they were. If I had, is that
any thing to the question in hand? Can he prove that I said [All Baptized
naked?] if I had said, that I took [next naked] to be as bad.

2. But de facto, does he deny the latter? it seems here that he does. I
profess also that I go in this but by Common Fame. If they Baptize not next
naked in one linen Shift, I never heard it denied till now? I renounce the
mention of it if it be untrue; but it is not in my power to disbelieve it. But
because I never saw it, if he will say that they Baptize them all in hats,
bands and cuffs, I will not peremptorily deny it.

But he will prove that I meant not [Common Fame] because I add [Experience,
etc.] But sure I never alleged my own Experience.] I never saw any of them
Baptize: I never heard a Ranter Blaspheme, (though I have read Letters full of
it;) nor I never saw a Quaker quake. If you say that they never did so, I will
not prove it. But how shall other men's Experiences be known to me, but by
Report or Fame? And I think that the more common and uncontradicted the Report
is, it is the more probable.

I have not leisure to go on at this rate with such a Writer; I again profess
that I had rather Retract what I said than not, if I could do it without lying,
but I cannot. But, Reader, what is all this to the Question, Whether our Infants
are in Covenant with Christ, or Visible Members of his Church? Is it not a mere
Diversion?

But the last Question is, Have I not wronged their Cause by wronging the
Persons, in believing Fame, that ever any of them Baptized naked? Answer, 1. I
have not the books now to peruse, (men of his Spirit, though of another
Opinion, have disabled me at this time from confuting him by books.) But I am
past doubt, that I have read of their Baptizing naked in foreign Writers.

2. But, Reader, Could one that had read this Book of his against me, for this
passage as injurious, believe if he had not seen his other Books, that it is
this same man himself, who in his two former Books maintains it against us,
that for many hundred years, Baptizing naked was the Churches Practice? Was
this no injury? Or shall the same man take me as injurious for believing the
same of some of them for a very little time? I hope I have almost done with
such Disputers.

As to what he says of Mr. Lambs and Mr. Allens. (who have left them,)
exceedingly as he hears, blaming me for broaching, much more for defending this
slander.] I answer, 1. His Heresay's have quite lost their credit with me: I
believe it never the more for his hearing it: They never blamed me to my face:
and I think that they are men likely to do it in that friendly way, if any way;
and therefore at least I may hear from them hereafter; and if so, their reproof
shall be willingly considered. If it be true, I suppose it is, because they
have mistaken me as he does, as if I had spoken that of their ordinary
practice, which I mentioned only as the practice of some only at that time;
which was as short and confined as the Quakers quaking. 2. Is it a slander of
Mr. Tombs his citing Vossius, or of Vossius cited by him, to say that some
Baptized naked in former times? 3. Is it then no slander of Mr. Danvers to say,
and stiffly defend it, that the ancient Churches ordinarily did so? Does he who
so pleads for Immersion, because it was the first way, now take it for well
done in the ancient Churches, and an intolerable slander that it should be
said to have been done of any of late?

He next comes to defend his false Report of a Paper which I read to some
people that I preached to: The first hour that ever I spoke to them, I openly
professed that we met not there as separating from the public Assemblies, but
for the necessary instructing of the people, who else had none, nor any public
Worship of God: The Parish of Giles where I lived, and the Parish of Martins
where I preached are supposed to have 1000000. souls or near: of these it is
supposed that not above 6000. can hear in the Parish Churches at the most (and
the incumbent of one had not officiated at all for many years:) it grieved me
to think that while the King aintainerh a Corporation and Revenew for
propagating the Gospel in America, and the Jesuits are justly praised for
doing so much to propagate it in the East Indies, we should sluggishly suffer
America and the Indies to come so near Whitehall, and so famous and Religious a
City as this, to be (to so great a number) without any public worship of God,
while Mahometans are not quite without. Therefore to my great cost I preached
near a year over the Market-house at St. James's. And when the Informers began
with me, and accused me to the Justices of meeting contrary to the Act against
Conventicles, I gave my Reasons to some Justices, and others, in word and
writing, to prove that neither I, nor such others, might be judged breakers of
that Act, because we did not meet to worship God with any other manner of
Worship than what is according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England* For though we did not so much as they, we did nothing but what they
do: For we did but Read the Scriptures, Pray freely in the Pulpit, and Preach
the Christian Doctrine; and all this the Church of England does: And though I
did not read my self, but another did it, it was because I was not able, which
if I were, I would do it. And expecting quickly to have the Cause come to a
Trial, I wrote the sum of this in a Paper, and read it openly, and then gave it
the Clerk, that none might misreport me: And though some able and pious Lawyers
that perused my large Reasons, thought that they were very useful for others as
well as me, yet the noise and murmuring of some Women first, and such as Mr.
Danvers after, sent abroad my Reproaches for it through City and Country, with
so many false additions, and so much displeasure, as added somewhat to my
former knowledge of the difference between Sectarian and Christian Zeal. Surely
these men do think themselves very grear haters of sin, who would render that
man odious as a heinous sinner, who does but speak those words to vindicate
himself and others from the accusation of Informers, which he verily believes
to be true and useful: when a man has for about fourteen years, not only
preached without pay, but at many score pounds a year charges; when he has
never taken away one of their Communicants from any Parochial, or
Non-conformists Church, nor meddled with either Sacrament, nor ever set up his
own preaching against theirs, but desired to preach to a few of those many
thousands that have none at all, nor have any public worship of God, no not so
much as the reading of the Liturgy; and when for endeavoring this in
languishing and pains, by great charge and labor, his utter ruin, if not
death, shall be unreconcileably endeavored by one party, and for not hateing
that which is good in the Liturgy as much as they, or upon every surmise of a
diseased brain, shall become the common obloquy of another, (the Sectarians,
and the Women that are infected by their disease:) Reader, judge whether the
true belief of Gods acceptance, and better than the Hypocrites reward, be not
necessary to keep such a one from imitating Jonas, and quietly leaving men to
their beloved ignorance and sin? and whether, if we had not many soberer men
between them, that are for neither of the extremes, it would not be harder
preaching in England than in America? Yet with most hearty thanks to God, I
must say, that notwithstanding the opposition of both these extremes, God has
abundantly sweetened his service to me; by the ready reception and profit of
such people, as men so much labor to keep in darkness.

I speak all this with reference to Mr. Danvers his following words also of my
preaching in the Parish Churches.

The foresaid paper of mine he published in his last Book, as matter of
Accusation; and did it, according to his custom, falsely: I briefly mentioned
his falsification: He now Printeth that Copy as received from his Bookseller,
in one Column, and on the other, another, called [The Copy obtained from the
Original.] to show that there is but two words difference that is, His Copy
spoke of my Reading the Liturgy, and mine spoke of my own Reading what my
Assistant read (the Scripture.) But 1. If this be all one with him, are we not
so to judge of his other Expositions? I know one whose oversight in writing
usually lies in leaving out [not] and [un.] and what is one Syllable? The
Kings Printer, who as Dr. Heylin says, was Fined in the Star Chamber for
Printing [Thou shall commit Adultery.] left out but one poor syllable. But he
did not justify it as Mr. Danvers does. 2. If it be his excuse to lay the Copy
on his Bookseller, may we not take it also for his answer, that all the
untruths that he has said of the Novations, Donatists, Britains, Augustine,
etc. he had them from -- some body of as great authority as his Bookseller; and
then all is well. 3. But, Reader, do thou not expect that at least he should
now say true after so much warning, and that this should be a true Copy which
he says, without exception, is [obtained from the Original.] I assure thee on
the word of a Christian, it is yet so far from being true, that diverse lines,
even a considerable part of the writing is left out. Take heed therefore to thy
belief hereafter. Believe not every Spirit, nor every man that raileth at
others as less wise or spiritual than he; what wonder if he untruly tell us of
the opinion of whole parties, Novatians, Donatists, etc. and tell us of whole
Books that have not one word of what he affirms, but somewhat for the
contrary, when he will not only falsify my own writing, even a few lines, but
defend his so doing against my self that have the Copy by me, and that by a
greater falsehood than the first. Are this man's Citations to be credited?

Yet he goes on and averteth that [there is not another Syllable different]
And he will prove moreover, that* If I meet not on pretense of any Religious
exercise in other manner, etc. I must accordingly read the Common Prayer my
self. Answer, So said the Informers, but were I at the Sessions upon my Appeal,
I would be bold to deny it, and to say that he that says but the Lords Prayer,
does not use another manner of Worship than the Church? and that to do less, is
not to do that which is of another manner. But if I mistake in so thinking, it
follows not that I prevaricate, or mean dishonestly, as he insinuates.

But if he want more matter of Reproach, or any such as he, I will voluntarily
give him more, so careless am I of such Censures: I do therefore tell him that
I am no greater an Adversary to the Liturgy than were the old Non-conformists,
Mr. Hildersham, who persuades men to come to the beginning of it; Mr.
Knewstubs that constantly read much of it; Mr. Ball, that wrote the Trial of
Separation; Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Paget, Mr. Gifford, and such others that did the
like: And that, as before the Wars, when I was accounted a Nonconformist, I
did (at Bridgnorth) usually read most of the Lords days part of the Liturgy,
(and as in 1660. the Ministers of London consented so to do) to would I do
again, on the same terms: And that if my Nonconformity did consist only in the
contrary, I should have little reason to blame the Conformists for the sharp
Censures which they write against me.

He keeps constantly in his way, and addeth[ -- It is confidently affirmed by
some, that Mr B. has lately in Hartfordshire or Buckinghamshire, in order to
obtain the Pulpit (where he several times Preached in public) read the Common
prayer, or at least some part of it, out of the Service book.]

Answ. 1. Who is it that this man converseth with whose confident reports he
published? Are his Reporters infected with his Disease? 2. Why does he Print
this confident Report if not to be believed? And if so, alas, will he put no
bounds to this sin, while he thinks that he cries down our sin? I thank God
for my time, strength and liberty, I did preach fourteen times in several
Parish Churches of those Counties, after thirteen years exclusion from the
Pulpits of such Churches; and it is not in the power of this man's pen to make
me repent of it. But in all those times, I never read either one word of
Common Prayer, nor one Chapter or Psalm, save once, when I Preached where there
was no one to Read, I read the Scripture as I would have done at home. Will not
the presence of thousands of witnesses secure a man from the forgery of any
unnamed Slanderer? No, it will not: As after our Savoy Conference untruths were
Printed against me, contrary to the most notorious evidence of Writings and
Witnesses; so sometimes where I Preach in London, it is not the multitude of
Witnesses that secureth me from the gross false reports of this kind of
Auditors, (who have not so much kindness for their own souls as either to stay
away, or forbear their untruths.) No wonder then if witnesses at 26 years, or
26 miles distance, or near, be no security against such a one as Mr. Danvers,
or his confident Reporters.

He adds, [Though it is also said that he has obtained that public liberty by
virtue of a License he has from the Arch Bishop of Canterbury: But whether it
be one formerly granted by him, when the Bishop of London before the Act of
Conformity, (when by the Bishop of Worcester he was Silenced in those parts) or
since is worthy inquiry?

Answ. It Is like you have enquired, and found that it was the former; if not, I
tell you now: But to some it is almost as hard to believe a Truth that is
against their Spleen, as to speak it.

He next says, as the Exposition of my Sufferings, [viz. To fly from his place
and Charge, if not to avoid the Cross of Christ, and to shun a suffering
Witness when so loudly called thereto]

Answ. 1. Did you hear his case, or do you judge before you hear it? 2. These
Passages are too conformable to the rest. How prove you that it was a flight?
How prove you that it was from my Charge? (Reader, it is fifteen years since I
had any Charge, of any one Congregation, more than over the rest of the Land,
unless my dwelling made my Neighbors become my Charge? I had no Charge of any
but my Family there, unless my great Charge in Preaching to them for nothing,
and paying assistant, etc. and building a place in hope of more such Labor,
made them my Charge? And if I give an hundred pounds to one man, when I owed
him no more than others, does that make him for the future become my Charge?)
And how proves he that I was lowdly called to suffer? Or that it was the Cross
of Christ that I avoided? This man is against dictating! I would he were more
against untruths! My Sufferings have been enough to show what men are that
procured them, but to me so small, that except my restraint from Preaching, I
account them not worthy of the name of the Cross. But yet I will hope that he
will so far suspend his Custom, as not to say, that any Sectarian Preacher in
England, Anabaptist or Separatist, (to go no farther) that lost not his Life,
has lost more of the World, by his mere Nonconformity, than I have done?

He sends my Conscience here to diverse Scriptures, 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, 6. Acts 20.
11, 12, 13. Mat. 10. 38, 39. John 10. 12, 13. Mat. 23. 2, 3, 4. I am willinger
to hear these Texts than him. I suppose he means not those that I before
minded Mr. Hutchinson of, of Christ's early flight into Egypt, or his often
avoiding the Jews, in Nazareth, and other parts of Galile, the Wilderness, etc.
nor his, bidding us when Persecuted in one City flee to another; nor Paul's
being let down the Wall by a Basket; nor the scattering of the Disciples, by
the Persecution at Jerusalem, nor Paul's Circumcising Timothy, non his shaving
his Head for his Vow, nor his Appeal from the Jews to Caesar, nor his crying
out that he was a Pharisee, nor his denying that he had done any thing against
the Temple or the Law, nor any such like. And if he condemn Christ and Paul it
will be no suffering to them.

The first Text tells us that Paul in much Patience bare Afflictions,
Necessities, Distresses, Stripes, Imprisonments, etc. Answ. What thence? Is it
Ergo R. B. did ill to come out of the Goal when he was put in? Or that he did
ill not to put himself in again? Did Paul sin for not scourging and imprisoning
himself?

The next Text speaks of Paul's Preaching till midnight? Ergo R. B. should not
Preach in the Summer in the Country? I deny the Consequence. It may be he meant
Acts 21. 13. Paul was ready to be bound or die at Jerusalem! What thence? Ergo
he sinned in avoiding suffering often before? Or, Ergo R. B. should not have gone
into the Country either for Health or Preaching; yea if it had been in case of
danger to have Preached to many instead of fewer that had often heard him? I
deny the Consequence.

The next Text tells us that we must take up our Cross and follow Christ, etc.
And what thence? Ergo we must make our own Cross, and take up that instead of
Christ's? Or, Ergo, Christ sinned in avoiding the Cross so often before? Or, Ergo,
R. B. must go into a Prison that he may give over Preaching the Gospel? I deny
all these. What kin are they to the Text? Have all the Anabaptists and
Separatists lived all this while in sin, that lived out of Prison? or that have
had maintenance and quietness, while R. B. has been laid in the common Goal,
and hunted by one sort, and reviled by the other? Why will not the persecution
of your Pen or Tongue prove a comfortable suffering for the Truth, as well as
if I pleased your Spleen in preferring a chosen Prison before a Pulpit?

The next Text tells us, that the Hireling deserts the Sheep by fleeing. Thus
the Quakers also talk to me when they call me Hireling. But, Sir, I am not so
much as a Hireling? much less the owner of the Sheep? I would I knew which of
these two you judge your selves to be? for my part I am neither. Christ is the
Owner? I am not so much as the Pastor of any Flock: And (that I may not
discourage your contempt, I add) nor ever, that I remember, called to be such
these 13 or 14 years: Nor have I so long taken any Hire. And did Paul flee like
a Hireling when he went from places of less liberty to other more commodious
places to Preach? Did not Pain, Weakness, and want of Money for so chargeable a
work disable me, my Conscience would command me (by the motive of Experience)
to go about Preaching from place to place, though every d^g in the streets
where I pass, should bark nothing but [Hireling, Hireling.]

The last Text is against Separation; The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
his seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do,
but do not ye after their works, for they say and de not, for they bind heavy
burdens, and grievous to be borne, etc. And what from hence? Ergo I should not
Preach in the Parish Churches? Or is it, Ergo I should have bound heavy burdens
for my self? Or is it, that I should not ^ave made such for others? This is the
likest sense; f^r the best way of expounding Authors is by similar passages.
And were not this an untruth it would be non-conformable to the rest aforesaid.

But (says he) is not this a strange Paradoxe that he should suffer at the
rate for a Nonconformist at London, and yet act the part of a Conformist to so
high a degree in the Country?

Answ. This is very conformable to the rest. To Preach in the Parish Churches
(for his story of Reading the Common Prayer is like his Books) is the high
degree of Conformity. This is expository. I now perceive what it is in me to be
[for Conformity and against it, for Popery and against it, for Arminianism and
against it,] as he says. The equivocation makes all true. I am for the
Conformity, and the Popery, and the Arminianism of Preaching Christ's Gospel in
Parish Churches (which the Papists say they sometime said Mass in) and for the
Conformity and Popery of Infants part in the Covenant of God, for their
Baptism, and for the reading of Gods Word, for the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and
the ten Commandments; and for the Love of Brethren, and the Unity, Peace and
Concord of Christ's Church; however I be against that which the world commonly
knows by the name of Conformity and Popery. O what a high degree of
Conformity did the old Non-conformists exercise in this man's sense! I have
lived long to little purpose it such a man by the bare names of Conformity,
Popery, or Arminianism can frighten me out of my Christianity, my Honesty, my
Charity, my Min^stry, and my Wits.

Next relating my story with more caution than usual [with an [If I be not
misinformed:] (O that this sentence had been twice or thrice in every page of
his Books) with some truth, some mistake, and more omission, he subjoyneth,
that [by Proxy (that is his fiction) I suffer Imprisonment for a Nonconformist
in London, and in person out do all the Non-conformists by his public
Preaching in the Country as a Conformist.]

Answ. 1. Reader, by this you may see at what rates we Ministers must do our
Masters work. Woe to us if we Preach not: And if we do, one sort Imprison us,
and seek our Ruin; and the other Revile us, as if our greatest Duty were our
greatest sin.

2. You see what abundance of Enemies the Preaching of the Gospel has, when
Satan can stir up such men of Zeal to take it for a Crime. Paul might Preach
even in the Jews Synagogue: I must not in a Parish Church.

3. You see how certain it is that the two Extremes are much of the same
Spirit, and that they that most cry out against Persecution are often of a
persecuting mind, when such men as this would silence us, or have us give over
Preaching to the multitude that most need it, as well as others. And so would
the Quakers.

4. You see what they mean that cry down a Comprehension: They would not have
us Preach in the Parish Churches to the needy multitude, unless they may have
all first altered according to their desire. Thus W Pen called me cruel for
desirng a Comprehension as leaving the Quakers to the Dogs: so that they would
have us all silenced, even by those Impositions which they themselves account
sinful, till they and all such have their will.

5 You see here what a Reproach these men would bring on Nonconformity, and
what strong Invitations they give men to Conform, by making Conformity to be
Preaching in Parish Churches.

6. Or you see what need you have instead of disputing longer with such men, to
pray God to give them tenderer Cnnsciences, that may fear to multiply Untruths,
which thousands of Witnesses, (of whom some were Anabaptists and of other
Sects) are ready to confute. Especially to Pray that the Churches, and the
peoples souls may be delivered from such as would not only Unchurch all mankind
till they come to age, but make it a sinful Conformity than to Preach the
Gospel in the Parish Churches.

FINIS.

