Tuesday May the first, 1660.
Ordered,

THat the thanks of this House be given to Mr. Baxter for his great pains in
carrying on the work of Preaching and Prayer, before the House at Saint
Margarets Westminster yesterday, being set apart by this House for a day of
Fasting and Humiliation. And that he be desired to Print his Sermon, and is to
have the same Privilege in Printing the same, that others have had in the like
kind.

And that Mr. Swinfin do give him notice thereof.

W. Jessop Cler. of the Commons House of Parliament.

A SERMON OF REPENTANCE. Preached before the Honorable House of Commons,
Assembled in Parliament at Westminster, at their late solemn Fast for the
settling of these Nations, April 30. 1660. By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. and A. M. for Francis Tyton and Jane Underhil, and
are to be sold at the sign of the three Daggers in Fleet Street, and at the
Bible and Anchor in Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

TO THE HONORABLE THE House of Commons ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
AS your Order for my Preaching, persuaded me you meant attentively to hear; so
your Order for my publishing this Sermon, persuaded me that you will vouchsafe
considerately to read it. (For you would not command me to publish only for
others, that which was prepared for, and suited to your selves.) Which second
favor if I may obtain, especially of those that need most to hear the doctrine
of Repentance, I shall hope that the Authority of the heavenly Majesty, the
great concernment of the subject, and the evidence of Reason, and piercing
beams of sacred verity, may yet make a deeper impression on your souls, and
promote that necessary work of Holiness, the fruits whereof would be effectual
remedies to these diseased Nations, and would conduce to your own everlasting
joy. Shall I think it were presumption for me to hope for so high a reward for
so short a labor? Or shall I think it were uncharitableness not to hope for
it? That here is nothing but plain English, without any of those Ornaments,
that are by many thought necessary, to make such discourses grateful to
ingenuous curious auditors, proceeded not only from my present want of
advantages for study (having and using no book but a Bible and a Concordance,)
but also from the humbling and serious nature of the work of the day; and from
my own inclination, less affecting such ornaments in sacred discourses, then
formerly I have done. It is a very great honor that God and you have put upon
me, to conclude so solemn a day of prayer, which was answered the next morning,
by your speedy, and cheerful, and unanimous acknowledgement of his Majesty's
authority. May I but have the second part, to promote your salvation, and the
happiness of this Land, by your considering and obeying these necessary Truths,
what greater honor could I expect on earth? Or how could you more oblige me to
remain

A daily Petitioner to Heaven for these mercies, on your own and the Nations
behalf, Rich. Baxter.

A SERMON OF REPENTANCE.
EZEKIEL. 36. 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your
iniquities, and for your abominations.
THE words are a part of Gods prognostics of the Jews restoration, whose
dejecton he had before described. Their disease begun within, and there God
promises to work the cure. Their captivity was but the fruit of their
voluntary captivity to sin; and their grief of heart, was but the fruit of
their hardness of heart; and their sharpest sufferings, of their foul
pollutions; and therefore God promises a methodicall cure; even to take away
their old and stony heart, and cleanse them from their filthiness, and so to
ease them by the removing of the cause. How far, and when this promise was to
be made good to the Jews, as Nationally considered, is a matter that requires a
longer disquisition then my limited hour will allow: and the decision of that
case is needless, as to my present end and work. That this is part of the
Gospel Covenant, and applicable to us Believers now, the Holy Ghost in the
Epistle to the Hebrews has assured us.

The Text is the description of the Repentance of the people, in which the
beginning of their recovery does consist, and by which the rest must be
attained. The evil which they Repent of is, in general, all their iniquities,
but especially their idolatry, called their abominations. Their Repentance is
foretold, as it is in the understanding and thoughts, and as in the will and
affections. In the former its called [Remembring their own evil wayes] In the
latter its called [Loathing themselves in their own sight, for their iniquities
and abominations. Montanus translates it [Reprobabitis in vos]: but in c. 20.
v. 43. [fastidietis vos] The same sense is intended by the other versions: When
the Septuagint translates it by [displeasure] and the Chaldee by [groaning] and
the Syriack by [the wrinkling of the face] and the Sept. in c. 20. 43. by
[smiting on the face:] the Arabic here perverts the sense, by turning all to
Negatives [ye shall not, etc.] yet in c. 20. 43. he turns it by [the tearing of
the face.] I have purposely chosen a Text, that needs no long explication, that
in obedience to the foreseen straits of time, I may be excused from that part,
and be more on the more necessary. This Observation contains the meaning of the
Text, which by Gods assistance, I shall now insist on: viz.

The Remembering of their own iniquities, and loathing themselves for them, is
the sign of a Repenting people, and the prognostic of their Restoration. (So
far as deliverance may be here expected.)

For the opening of which, observe these things following.

1. It is not all kind of [Remembring] that will prove you penitent. The
impenitent Remember their sin that they may commit it: They Remember it with
love, desire and delight: The Heart of the worldling goes after his aerie or
earthen idol: The heart of the Ambitious feeds on his vainglory, and the
peoples breath: And the filthy Fornicator is delighted in the thoughts of the
object and exercise of his lust. But it is a Remembering, 1o From a deep
conviction of the evil and odiousness of sin; 2o And with abhorrence and
self-loathing; 3o That leads to a resolved and vigilant forsaking, that is
the proof of true Repentance, and the prognostic of a peoples restoration.

2. And it is not all self-loathing that will signify true Repentance. For
there is a self-loathing of the Desperate and the damned soul, that abhors
it self, and teareth and tormenteth it self, and cannot be restrained from
self-revenge, when it finds that it has wilfully, foolishly and obstinately
been its own destroyer: But the self-loathing of the truly penitent, has these
following properties.

1. It proceeds from the predominant Love of God, whom we have abused and
offended: The more we Love him, the more we loath what is contrary to him.

2. It is much excited by the observation and sense of his exceeding mercies,
and is conjunct with Gratitude.

3. It continues and increases under the greatest assurance of forgiveness,
and sense of love; and dies not when we think we are out of danger.

4. It contains a Loathing of sin as sin (and a Love of Holiness as such) and
not only a love of ease and peace, and a loathing of sin as the cause of
suffering.

5. It resolves the soul against returning to its former course, and resolves
it for an entire devotedness to God for the time to come.

6. It deeply engages the penitent in a conflict against the flesh, and makes
him victorious; and sets him to work in a life of holiness as his trade and
principal business in the world.

7. It brings him to a delight in God and holiness; and a delight in himself,
so far as he finds God, and Heaven, and Holiness within him: He can with some
comfort and content own himself and his conversation, so far as God (victorious
against his carnal self) appears in him. For as he loves Christ in the rest
of his members, so must he in himself. And this is it that self-loathing does
prepare for.

This must be the self-loathing that must afford you comfort, as a penitent
people in the way to restoration.

Where you see it is employed, that materially it contains these common acts.
1. Accusing and Condemning thoughts against our selves. It is a judging of our
selves, and makes us call our selves with Paul, foolish, disobedient, deceived,
yea mad (as Acts 26. 11.) and with David to say, I have done foolishly, 2 Samuel
24. 10. 2. It contains a deep distaste, and displeasure with our selves; and
a heart-rising against our selves. 3. As also an holy indignation against our
selves; as apprehending that we have played the enemies to our selves and God.
4. And it possesses us with grief and trouble at our miscarriages. So that a
soul in this condition is sick of it self, and vexed with its self-procured woe.

2. Note also, that when self-loathing proceeds from mere conviction, and is
without the Love of God and holiness, it is but the tormentor of the soul, and
runs it deeper into sin; provoking men here to destroy their lives; and in hell
it is the never dying worm.

3. Note also, that it is [themselves] that they are said to loath: because it
is our selves that conscience has to do with, as witness and as judge: It is
our selves that are naturally nearest to our selves; and our own affairs that
we are most concerned in. It is our selves that must have the Joy or Torment:
and therefore it is our own actions and estate that we have first to mind.
Though yet as Magistrates, Ministers, and neighbors, we must next mind others,
and must loath iniquity wherever we meet it; and a vile person must be
contemned in our eyes, while we honor them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4.

And as by Nature, so in the Commandment, God has given to every man the first
and principal care and charge of himself, and his own salvation, and
consequently of his own ways. So that we may with less suspicion loath our
selves, then others; and are more obliged to do it.

4. Note also, that it is not for our troubles, or our disgrace, or our bodily
deformities or infirmities, or for our poverty and want, that penitents are
said to loath themselves: But for their iniquities and abominations. For 1o
this loathing is a kind of Justice done upon our selves; and therefore is
exercised not for mere infelicities, but for crimes. Conscience keeps in its
own Court, and medleth but with moral evils, which we are conscious of. 2o And
also it is sin that is loathed by God, and makes the creature loathsome in his
eyes: And Repentance conformeth the soul to God, and therefore causes us to
loath as he does, and on his grounds. And 3o there is no Evil but sin, and that
which sin procures. And therefore it is for sin that the penitent loathes
himself.

5. Note also, that it is here employed, that till Repentance, there was none of
this Remembering of sin, and Loathing of themselves. They begin with our
conversion, and (as fore-described) are proper to the truly penitent. For (to
consider them distinctly) 1o The deluded soul that is bewitched by its own
concupiscence, is so taken up with Remembering of his fleshly pleasures, and his
alluring objects, and his honors, and his earthly businesses and store, that
he has no mind or room for the Remembering of his foolish odious sin, and the
wrong that he is doing to God and to himself. Death is oblivious: and Sleep
has but a distracted uneffectual memory, that stirs not the busy dreamer
from his pillow, nor dispatcheth any of the work he dreams of. And the
unconverted are asleep and dead in sin. The crowd of cares and worldly
businesses; and the tumultuous noise of foolish sports, and other sensual
passions and delights, do take up the minds of the unconverted, and turn them
from the observation of the things of greatest everlasting consequence. They
have a memory for sin and the flesh, to which they are alive; but not for
things spiritual and eternal, to which they are dead. They Remember not God
himself as God, with any effectual remembrance: God is not in all their
thoughts, Psalm 10. 4. They live as without him in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. And
if they remember not God, they cannot remember sin as sin, whose malignity
lies in its opposition to the Will and Holiness of God. They forget
themselves, and therefore must needs forget their sinfulness: Alas, they
remember not (effectually and savingly) what they are, and why they were made,
and what they are daily nourished and preserved for, and what business they
have to do here in the world. They forget that they have souls to save or lose;
that must live in endless joy or torment: you may see by their careless and
ungodly lives, that they forget it. You may hear by their carnal frothy speech,
that they forget it. And he that remembers not himself, remembers not his own
concernments. They forget the end to which they tend: The life which they must
live for ever. The matters everlasting (whose greatness and duration, one would
think should so command the mind of man, and take up all his thoughts and
cares, in despite of all the little trifling matters that would avert them,
that we should think almost of nothing else; yet) these, even these, that
nothing but deadness or madness should make a reasonable creature to forget,
are daily forgotten by the unconverted soul, or uneffectually remembered. Many a
time have I admired, that men of reason that are here to day, and in endless
joy or misery to morrow, should be able to forget such unexpressible
concernments! Me thinks they should easier forget to rise, or dress themselves,
or to eat or drink, or any thing, then to forget an endless life, which is so
undoubtedly certain, and so near. A man that has a cause to be heard to
morrow, in which his life or honor is concerned, cannot forget it: A wretch
that is condemned to die to morrow, cannot forget it. And yet poor sinners,
that are continually uncertain to live an hour, and certain speedily to see the
Majesty of the Lord, to their unconceivable joy or terror, as sure as now they
live on earth, can forget these things for which they have their memory; and
which one would think should drown the matters of this world, as the report of
a Canon does a whisper, or as the Sun obscureth the poorest glowworm. O
wonderful stupidity of an unrenewed soul! O wonderful folly and distractedness
of the ungodly! That ever men can forget, I say again, that they can forget,
eternal joy, eternal woe, and the eternal God, and the place of their eternal
unchangeable abode, when they stand even at the door, and are passing in, and
there is but the thin vail of flesh between them and that amazing sight, that
eternal gulf; and they are daily dying, and even stepping in. O could you keep
your honors here for ever; could you ever wear that gay attire, and gratify
your flesh with meats, and drinks, and sports, and lusts; could you ever keep
your rule and dignity, or your earthly life in any state, you had some little
poor excuse for not remembering the eternal things, (as a man has, that
prefers his candle before the Sun:) But when death is near and inexorable,
and you are sure to die as you are sure you live; when every man of you that
sits in these seats to day can say, [I must shortly be in another world,
where all the pomp and pleasure of this world will be forgotten, or remembered
but as my sin and folly] one would think it were impossible for any of you to
be ungodly; and to Remember the trifles and nothings of the world, while you
forget that everlasting All, whose reality, necessity, magnitude, excellency,
concernment and duration, are such, as should take up all the powers of your
souls, and continually command the service and attendance of your thoughts,
against all Seekers, and contemptible competitors whatsover. But, alas, though
you have the greatest helps (in subserviency to these commanding objects) yet
will you not Remember the matters which alone deserve remembrance. Sometimes
the Preachers of the Gospel do call on you to Remember; to Remember your God,
your souls, your Savior, your ends and everlasting state, and to remember your
misdoings, that you may loath your selves, and in Returning may find life: But
some either scorn them, or quarrel with them, or sleep under their most serious
and importunate solicitations, or carelessly and stupidly give them the hearing,
as if they spoke but words of course, or treated about uncertain things, and
spoke not to them from the God of heaven, and about the things that every man
of you shall very shortly see or feel. Sometime you are called on by the voice
of conscience within, to remember the unreasonableness and evil of your ways:
but conscience is silenced, because it will not be conformable to your lusts.
But little do you think what a part your too-late-awakened conscience has yet
to play, if you give it not a more sober hearing in time. Sometime the voice of
common calamities, and National or local judgments do call on you to remember
the evil of your ways: But that which is spoken to all, or many, does seem to
most of them as spoken unto none. Sometime the voice of particular judgments,
seizing upon your families, persons or estates, does call on you to remember
the evil of your ways: And one would think the rod should make you hear. And
yet you most disregardfully go on, or are only frightened into a few good
purposes and promises, that die when health and prosperity revive. Sometime God
joyneth all these together, and pleads both by word and rod, and adds also
the inward pleadings of his Spirit: He sets your sins in order before you,
Psalm. 50. 21. and expostulateth with you the cause of his abused love, despised
Sovereignty and provoked Justice; and asks the poor sinner, Have thou done
well to waste thy life in vanity? to serve thy flesh? to forget thy God, thy
soul, thy happiness? and to thrust his service into corners, and give him but
the odious leavings of the flesh?] But these pleas of God cannot be heard. O
horrible impiety! by his own creatures! by reasonable creatures (that would
scorn to be called fools or mad men) the God of heaven cannot be heard. The
brutish, passionate, furious sinners, will not Remember. They will not
Remember, what they have done, and with whom it is that they have to do, and
what God thinks and says of men in their condition; and whither it is that the
flesh will lead them? and what will be the fruit and end of all their lusts and
vanities? and how they will look back on all at last? and whether an holy or a
sensual life will be sweetest to a dying man? and what judgment it is that
they will all be of, in the controversy between the flesh and spirit, at the
later end? Though they have life, and time, and reason for these uses, we
cannot entreat them, to consider of these things in time. If our lives lay on
it, as their salvation, which is more, lies on it, we cannot entreat them. If
we should kneel to them, and with tears beseech them, but once a day, or once a
week, to bestow one hour in serious consideration of their latter end, and the
everlasting state of Saints and sinners, and of the equity of the holy ways of
God, and the iniquity of their own, we cannot prevail with them. Till the God
of heaven does overrule them, we cannot prevail. The witness that we are forced
to bear, is sad: It is sad to us: but it will be sadder to these rebels, that
shall one day know, that God will not be out-faced; and that they may sooner
shake the stable earth, and darken the Sun by their reproaches, then out-brave
the Judge of all the world, or by all their cavils, wranglings or scorns,
escape the hands of his revenging Justice.

But if ever the Lord will save these souls, he will bring their misdoings to
their remembrance. He will make them think of that, which they were so loath to
think on. You cannot now abide these troubling, and severe meditations: The
thoughts of God, and Heaven, and Hell, the thoughts of your sins, and of your
duties, are melancholy unwelcome thoughts to you: But O that you could
foreknow the thoughts that you shall have of all these things! Even the
proudest, scornful; hardened sinner that hears me this day, shall shortly
have such a Remembrance, as will make him wonder at his present blockishness. O
when the unresistible power of heaven shall open all your sins before you, and
command you to remember them, and to remember the time, and place, and persons,
and all the circumstances of them, What a change will it make upon the most
stout or stubborn of the sons of men? What a difference will there then be
between that trembling self-tormenting soul, and the same that now in his
gallantry can make light of all these things, and call the messenger of Christ
that warns him, a Puritan or a doting fool! Your memories now are somewhat
subject to your wills; and if you will not think of your own, your chief, your
everlasting concernments, you may choose. If you will choose rather to employ
your noble souls on beastly lusts, and waste your thoughts on things of naught,
you may take your course, and chase a feather with the childish world, till
overtaking it, you see you have lost your labor. But when Justice takes the
work in hand, your Thoughts shall be no more subject to your Wills: You shall
then Remember that which you are full loath to remember; and would give a world
that you could forget. Oh then one cup of the waters of oblivion, would be of
unestimable value to the damned! O what would they not give that they could but
forget the time they lost, the mercy they abused, the grace which they refused,
the holy servants of Christ whom they despised, the wilful sins which they
committed, and the many duties which they wilfully omitted! I have often thought
of their case, when I have dealt with melancholy or despairing persons. If I
advise them to cast away such thoughts, and turn their minds to other things,
they tell me they cannot; it is not in their power; and I have long found, that
I may almost as well persuade a broken head to give over aching. But when the
holy God shall purposely pour out the vials of his wrath on the consciences of
the ungodly, and open the books, and show them all that ever they have done,
with all the aggravations, how then shall these worms be able to resist?

And now I beseech you all consider; is it not better to Remember your sins on
earth, then in hell? before your Physician, then before your Judge? for your
cure, then for your torment? Give me leave then, before I go any further, to
address my self to you as the Messenger of the Lord, with this importunate
request, both as you stand here in your private, and in your public
capacities. In the name of the God of Heaven I charge you [Remember the lives
that you have led: Remember what you have been doing in the world! Remember how
you have spent your time: and whether indeed it is God that you have been
serving, and Heaven that you have been seeking, and Holiness and Righteousness
that you have been practicing in the world till now? Are your sins so small, so
venial, so few, that you can find no employment on them for your memories? Or
is the offending of the Eternal God, so slight and safe a thing, as not to need
your consideration? God forbid you should have such atheistical conceits!
Surely God made not his Laws for naught; nor does he make such a stir by his
Word, and Messengers, and Providence against an harmless thing? Nor does he
threaten Hell to men for small indifferent matters: Nor did Christ need to have
dyed, and done all that he has done to cure a small and safe disease. Surely
that which the God of heaven is pleased to threaten with everlasting
punishment, the greatest of you all should vouchsafe to think on, and with
greatest fear and soberness to remember.

It is a pitiful thing, that with men, with Gentlemen, with professed
Christians, Gods matters, and their own matters, their greatest matters, should
seem unworthy to be thought on; when they have thoughts for their honors, and
their lands, and friends; and thoughts for their children, their servants, and
provision; and thoughts for their horses, and their dogs, and sports! Is God
and Heaven less worth then these? Are death and Judgment matters of less
moment? Gentlemen, you would take it ill to have your wisdom undervalued, and
your reason questioned: For your Honor sake do not make it contemptible your
selves, in the eyes of all that are truly wise. It is the nobleness of objects
that must ennoble your faculties; and the baseness of objects does debase them.
If brutish objects be your employment and delight, do I need to tell you what
you make your selves? If you would be noble indeed, let God and everlasting
Glory be the object of your faculties: If you would be Great, then dwell on
Greatest things: If you would be High, then seek the things that are above, and
not the sordid things of earth, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. And if you would be safe, look
after the enemies of your peace: and as you had Thoughts of sin that led you to
commit it, entertain the Thoughts that would lead you to abhor it. O that I
might have now but the grant of this reasonable request from you, that among
all your Thoughts, you would bestow now and then an hour in the serious
Thoughts of your misdoings, and soberly in your retirement between God and your
souls, Remember the paths that you have trod; and whether you have lived for
the work for which you were created? One sober hour of such employment might be
the happyest hour that ever you spent, and give you more comfort at your final
hour, then all the former hours of your life: and might lead you into that new
and holy life, which you may review with everlasting comfort.

Truly, Gentlemen, I have long observed that Satan's advantage lies so much on
the brutish side, and that the work of man's Conversion, and holy Conversation,
is so much carried on by Gods exciting of our Reason; and that the misery of
the ungodly is, that they have Reason in faculty, and not in use, in the
greatest things, that I persuade you to this duty with the greater hopes: If
the Lord will now persuade you but to retire from vanity, and soberly exercise
your Reason, and Consider your ways, and say, What have we done? and What is
it that God would have us do? and What shall we wish we had done at last? I
say, could you now but be prevailed with, to bestow as many hours on this work,
as you have cast away in idleness, or worse, I should not doubt, but I should
shortly see the faces of many of you in Heaven, that have been recovered by the
use of this advice. It is a thousand pitties, that men that are thought wise
enough to be entrusted with the public safety, and to be the Physicians of a
broken State, should have any among them that are untrusty to their God, and
have not the Reason to Remember their misdoings, and prevent the danger of
their immortal souls. Will you sit all day here, to find out the remedy of a
diseased Land; and will you not be entreated by God or man, to sit down one
hour, and find out the disease of, and remedy for your own souls? Are those men
likely to take care of the happiness of so many thousands, that will still be
so careless of themselves? Once more therefore I entreat you, Remember your
misdoings, lest God remember them: And bless the Lord that called you this day,
by the voice of Mercy, to Remember them upon terms of Faith and Hope. Remembered
they must be first or last: And believe it, this is far unlike the sad
remembrance at Judgment, and in the place of woe and desperation.

And I beseech you observe here, that it is your Own misdoings that you must
Remember. Had it been only the sins of other men, especially those that differ
from you, or have wronged you, or stand against your interest, how easily would
the duty have been performed? How little need should I have had to press it
with all this importunity? How confident should I be, that I could convert the
most, if this were the Conversion? It grieves my soul to hear how quick and
constant high and low, learned and unlearned are at this uncharitable
contumelious remembering of the faults of others: how cunningly they can bring
in their insinuated accusations: how odiously they can aggravate the smallest
faults, where difference causes them to distaste the person: how ordinarily
they judge of actions by the persons, as if any thing were a crime that is done
by such as they dislike, and all were virtue that is done by those that fit
their humors: How commonly Brethren have made it a part of their service of
God, to speak or write uncharitably of his servants; laboring to destroy the
hearers charity, which had more need in this unhappy time, of the bellows then
the water! How usual it is with the ignorant that cannot reach the truth, and
the impious that cannot bear it, to call such Heretics that know more then
themselves; and to call such Precisians, Puritanes, (or some such name which
Hell invents, as there is occasion) who dare not be so bad as they! How odious,
men pretending to much gravity, learning and moderation, do labor to make
those that are dear to God; and what an art they have to widen differences, and
make a sea of every lake, and that perhaps under pretense of blaming the
uncharitableness of others! How far the very Sermons and discourses of some
learned men are from the common rule of doing as we would be done by: and how
loudly they proclaim that such men love not their neighbors as themselves; the
most uncharitable words seeming moderate which they give; and all called
intemperate that savoureth not of flattery, which they receive! Were I calling
the several exasperated factions now in England, to remember the misdoings of
their supposed adversaries, What full-mouthed and debasing Confessions would
they make? What monsters of Heresy, and Schism, of impiety, treason and
rebellion, of perjury and perfidiousness, would too many make of the faults of
others, while they extenuate their Own to almost nothing! It is a wonder to
observe, how the case does alter with the most, when that which was their
adversaries case, becomes their own. The very prayers of the godly, and their
care of their salvation, and their fear of sinning, does seem their crime in
the eyes of some that easily bear the guilt of swearing, drunkenness,
sensuality, filthiness, and neglect of duty, in themselves, as a tolerable
burden.

But if ever God indeed convert you, (though you will pity others, yet) he
will teach you to begin at home, and take the beam out of your own eyes, and to
cry out, [I am the miserable sinner.]

And lest these generals seem insufficient for us to confess on such a day as
this, and lest yet your memories should need more help, is it not my duty to
mind you of some particulars? which yet I shall not do by way of accusation,
but of enquiry: Far be it from me to judge so hardly of you, that when you come
hither to lament your sins, you cannot with patience endure to be told of them.

1. Enquire then, whether there be none among you that live a sensual careless
life; clothed with the best, and faring deliciously every day? in gluttony or
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife or envying, not putting on
Christ, nor walking in the Spirit, but making provision for the flesh, to
satisfy the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 13, 14. Is there none among you that spend
your precious time in vanities, that is allowed you to prepare for life
eternal? that have time to waste in complements and fruitless talk and visits;
in gaming and unnecessary recreations, in excessive feasting and
entertainments, while God is neglected, and your souls forgotten, and you can
never find an hour in a day, to make ready for the life which you must live for
ever. Is there none among you that would take that man for a Puritan or
Phanatick, that should employ but half so much time for his soul, and in the
service of the Lord, as you do in unnecessary sports and pleasures, and
pampering your flesh? Gentlemen, if there be any such among you, as you love
your souls, Remember your misdoings, and bewail these abominations before the
Lord, in this day of your professed humiliation.

2. Enquire whether there be none among you, that being strangers to the New
birth, and to the inward workings of the Spirit of Christ upon the soul, do
also distaste an holy Life, and make it the matter of your reproach, and
pacify your accusing consciences with a Religion made up of mere words, and
heartless outside, and so much obedience as your fleshly pleasures will admit;
accounting those that go beyond you, especially if they differ from you in your
modes and circumstances, to be but a company of proud, Pharisaical,
self-conceited hypocrites, and those whom you desire to suppress. If there
should be one such person here, I would entreat him to remember, that it is the
solemn asseveration of our Judge, that Except a man be converted, and be born
again, of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
Joh. 3. 3, 5. Mat. 18. 3. That if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, Romans 8. 9. That if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old
things are past away, and all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. That without
holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. That the wisdom that is from above,
is first Pure and then Peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. That God is a spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth, John 4. 23, 24. That
they worship in vain, that teach for Doctrines the commandments of men, Mat.
15. 8, 9. And that Except your righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5. 20.
And I desire you to remember that its hard to kick against the pricks; and to
prosper in rage against the Lord: and that its better for that man that
offends one of his little ones, to have had a millstone fastened to his
neck, and to have been cast into the bottom of the Sea, Matthew. 18. 6. It is a
sure and grievous condemnation, that waits for all that are themselves
unholy: but to the haters or despisers of the holy Laws and Servants of the
Lord, how much more grievous a punishment is reserved?

3. Enquire also, Whether there be none among you, that let loose your passions
on your inferiors, and oppress your poor Tenants, and make them groan under
the task, or at least do little to relieve the needy, nor study not to serve
the Lord with your estates, but sacrifice all to the pleasing of your flesh,
unless it be some inconsiderable pittance, or fruitless drops, that are
unproportionable to your receivings. If there be any such, let them Remember
their iniquities, and cry for mercy, before the cry of the poor to heaven, do
bring down vengeance from him that has promised, to hear their cry, and
speedily to avenge them, Luke 18. 7, 8.

4. Enquire, Whether there be none that live the life of Sodom, in Pride,
fullness of bread and idleness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. and that are not pust up with
their estates and dignities, and are strangers to the humility, meekness,
patience, and self-denial of the Saints: That ruffle in bravery, and contend
more zealously for their honor and pre-eminence, then for the honor and
interest of the Lord. For pride of apparel, it was wont to be taken for a
childish or a womanish kind of vice, below a man; but its now observed among
the gallants, that (except in spots) the notes of vanity are more legibly
written on the hair and dress of a multitude of effeminate males, then on the
females; proclaiming to the world that pride, which one would think even pride
it self should have concealed; and calling by these signs to the beholders to
observe the emptyness of their minds, and how void they are of that inward
worth, which is the honor of a Christian, and of a man: It being a marvel to
see a man of Learning, gravity, wisdom, and the fear of God, appear in such an
antic dress.

I have done with the first part [the Remembering of your own evil ways and
doings.] I beseech you practically go along with me to the next, [The loathing
of your selves in your own eyes, for all your iniquities and abominations.

Every true Convert does thus loath himself for his iniquities; and When God
will restore a punished people upon their Repentance, he brings them to this
loathing of themselves.

1. A converted soul has a new and heavenly Light to help him, to see those
matters of humbling use, which others see not.

2. More particularly, he has the knowledge of sin, and of himself. He sees
the odious face of sin, and sees how much his heart and life, in his sinful
days abounded with it, and how great a measure yet remains.

3. He has seen by Faith the Lord himself: The Majesty, the holiness, the
jealousy, the goodness of the eternal God whom he has offended; and therefore
must needs abhor himself, John 42. 6.

4. He has tasted of Gods displeasure against him for his sin already. God
himself has set it home, and awakened his conscience, and held it on, till he
has made him understand that the consuming fire is not to be jested with.

5. He has seen Christ Crucified, and mourned over him. This is the glass that
does most clearly show the ugliness of sin: And here he has learned to abhor
himself.

6. He has foreseen by Faith the End of sin, and the doleful recompense of the
ungodly: His faith beholds the misery of damned souls, and the Glory which
sinners cast away. He hears them beforehand repenting and lamenting, and
crying out of their former folly, and wishing in vain that all this were to do
again, and that they might once more be tried with another life, and resolving
then how holily, how self-denyingly they would live! He knows if sin had had
its way, he had been plunged into this hellish misery himself, and therefore he
must needs loath himself for his iniquities.

7. Moreover the true Convert has had the liveliest taste of mercy; of the
blood of Christ; of the offers and Covenant of grace; of reprieving mercy; of
pardoning mercy; of healing and preserving mercy; and of the unspeakable mercy
contained in the promise of everlasting life: And to find that he has sinned
against all this mercy, does constrain him to abhor himself.

8. And it is only the true Convert that has a new and holy nature, contrary
to sin; and therefore as a man that has the Leprosy does loath himself
because his nature is contrary to his disease, so is it (though operating in a
freer way) with a converted soul as to the Leprosy of sin. Oh how he loathes
the remnants of his pride and passion; his excessive cares, desires, and fears;
the backwardness of his soul to God and Heaven! Sin is to the new nature of
every true Believer, as the food of a Swine to the stomach of a man; if he have
eaten it, he has no rest till he has vomited it up; and then when he looks
on his vomit, he loatheth himself to think how long he kept such filth within
him; and that yet in the bottom there is some remains.

9. The true Covert is one that is much at home; his heart is the Vineyard
which he is daily dressing; his work is ordinarily about it; and therefore he
is acquainted with those secret sins, and daily failings, which ungodly men
that are strangers to themselves, do not observe, though they have them in
dominion.

10. Lastly, A serious Christian is a workman of the Lords, and daily busy at
the exercise of his graces; and therefore has occasion to observe his
weaknesses, and failings, and from sad experience is forced to abhor himself.

But with careless unrenewed souls it is not so; some of them may have a mild
ingenuous disposition; and the knowledge of their unworthiness; and customarily
they will confess such sins, as are small disgrace to them, or cannot be hid;
or under the terrible gripes of conscience, in the hour of distress and at the
approach of death, they will do more; and abhor themselves perhaps as Judas
did; or make a constrained confession through the power of fear. But so far are
they from this loathing of themselves for all their iniquities, that sin is to
them as their element, their food, their nature, and their friend.

And now, Honorable, Worthy and beloved auditors, it is my duty to enquire,
and to provoke you to enquire, whether the Representative body of the Commons
of England, and each man of you in particular, be thus affected to your selves
or not. It concerns you to enquire of it, as you love your souls, and love not
to see the death-marks of impenitencie on them. It concerns us to enquire of
it, as we love you and the Nation, and would fain see the marks of Gods return
in mercy to us, in your self-loathing and return to God. Let conscience speak
as before the Lord that sees your hearts and will shortly judge you: Have you
had such a sight of your natural and actual sin and misery, of your neglect
of God, your contempt of Heaven, your loss of precious hasty time, your
worldly, fleshly, sensual lives, and your omission of the great and holy works
which you were made for; have you had such a sight and sense of these, as has
filled your souls with shame and sorrow? and caused you in tears or hearty
grief to lament your sinful careless lives, before the Lord. Do you loath your
selves for all this, as being vile in your own eyes, and each man say, What a
wretch was I? what an unreasonable self-hating wretch, to do all this against
my self? what an unnatural wretch! what a monster of rebellion and
ingratitude, to do all this against the Lord of love and mercy? what a deceived
foolish wretch! to prefer the pleasing of my lust and senses, a pleasure that
perishes in the fruition, and is past as soon as its received, before the
manly pleasures of the Saints, and before the souls delight in God, and before
the unspeakable everlasting pleasures? was there any comparison between the
brutish pleasures of the flesh, and the spiritual delights of a believing
soul, in looking to the endless pleasure which we shall have with all the Saints
and Angels in the glorious presence of the Lord. Was God and glory worth no
more, then to be cast aside for satiating of an unsatisfiable flesh and fancy!
and to be sold for a harlot, for a forbidden cup; for a little air of popular
applause, or for a burdensome load of wealth and power, for so short a time?
where is now the gain and pleasure of all my former sins! what have they left
but a sting behind them? How near is the time when my departing soul must look
back on all the pleasures and profits that ever I enjoyed, as a dream when one
awaketh; as delusory vanities, that have done all for me that ever they will
do, and all is but to bring my flesh unto corruption (Gal. 6. 8.) and my soul
to this distressing grief and fear! Add then I must sing and laugh no more! I
must brave it out in pride no more! I must know the pleasures of the flesh no
more! but be levelled with the poorest, and my body laid in loathsome darkness,
and my soul appear before that God whom I so wilfully refused to obey and
honor. O wretch that I am! where was my understanding, when I played so boldly
with the flames of hell, the wrath of God, the poison of sin! when God stood by
and yet I sinned! when conscience did rebuke me, and yet I sinned! when Heaven
or hell were hard at hand, and yet I sinned! when to please my God and save my
soul I would not forbear a filthy lust, or a forbidden vanity of no worth! when
I would not be persuaded to a holy, heavenly, watchful life, though all my
hopes of Heaven lay on it. I am ashamed of my self: I am confounded in the
remembrance of my wilfall self-destroying folly! I loath my self for all these
abominations: O that I had lived in beggary and rags, when I lived in sin: and
O that I had lived with God in a prison or in a wilderness, when I refused a
holy heavenly life, for the love of a deceitful world! Will the Lord but
pardon what is past, I am resolved through his grace to do so no more, but to
loath that filth that I took for pleasure, and to abhor the sin that I made
my sport; and to die to the glory and riches of the world, which I made my
idol; and to live entirely to that God that I did so long and so unworthily
neglect; and to seek that treasure, that Kingdom, that delight, that will
fully satisfy my expectation, and answer all my care and labor, with such
infinite advantage. Holiness or nothing shall be my work and life; and Heaven
or nothing shall be my portion and felicity.

These are the thoughts, the affections the breathing of every regenerate
gracious soul. For your souls sake enquire now, Is it thus with you? or have
you thus returned with self-loathing to the Lord, and firmly engaged your souls
to him at your entrance into a holy life? I must be plain with you Gentlemen,
or I shall be unfaithful; and I must deal closely with you, or I cannot deal
honestly and truly with you. As sure as you live, yea as sure as the word of
God is true, you must all be such converted men, and loath your selves for your
iniquities, or be condemned as impenitent to everlasting fire. To hide this
from you, is but to deceive you, and that in a matter of a thousand times
greater moment then your lives. Perhaps I could have made shift, instead of
such serious admonitions, to have wasted this hour in flashy oratory, and neat
expressions, and ornaments of reading, and other things that are the too common
matter of ostentation, with men that preach Gods word in jest, and believe not
what they are persuading others to believe. Or if you think I could not, I am
indifferent, as not much affecting the honor of being able, to offend the
Lord, and wrong your souls, by dallying with holy things. Flattery in these
things of soul concernment, is a selfish vilany, that has but a very short
reward; and those that are pleased with it to day, may curse the flatterer for
ever. Again therefore let me tell you, (that which I think you will confess,)
that it is not your greatness, nor your high looks, nor the gallantry of your
spirits that scorns to be thus humbled, that will serve your turn when God
shall deal with you, or save your carcasses from rottenness and dust, or your
guilty souls from the wrath of the Almighty. Nor is it your contempt of the
threatenings of the Lord, and your stupid neglect, or scorning at the message,
that will endure, when the sudden unresistible light shall come in upon you and
convince you, or you shall see and feel what now you refused to believe! Nor is
it your outside hypocritical Religion, made up of mere words or ceremonies,
and giving your souls but the leavings of the flesh, and making God an
underling to the world, that will do any more to save your souls, then the
picture of a feast to feed your bodies. Nor is it the stiffest conceits that
you shall be saved in an unconverted state, or that you are sanctified when you
are not, that will do any more to keep you from damnation, then a conceit that
you shall never die, will do to keep you here for ever. Gentlemen, though you
are all here in health, and dignity, and honor to day, how little a while is
it, alas how little, till you shall be every man in Heaven or hell! (unless you
are Infidels you dare not deny it.) And it is only Christ and a holy life that
is your way to Heaven, and only sin, and the neglect of Christ and holiness
that can undo you. Look therefore upon sin as you should look on that which
would cast you into hell, and is daily undermining all your hopes. O that that
this Honorable Assembly could know it in some measure, as it shall be shortly
known? and judge of it as men do, when time is past, and delusions vanished, and
all men are awakened from their fleshly dreams, and their naked souls have seen
the Lord? O then what Laws would you make against sin? How speedily would you
join your strength against it, as against the only enemy of our peace, and as
against a fire in your houses, or a plague that were broken out upon the City,
where you are? O then how zealously would you all concur to promote the
interest of Holiness in the Land, and studiously encourage the servants of the
Lord! How severely would you deal with those, that by making a mock of
Godliness, do hinder the salvation of the peoples souls? How carefully would
you help the Laborers that are sent to guide men in the holy path? and your
selves would go before the Nation, as an example of penitent self-loathing for
your sins, and hearty conversion to the Lord. Is this your duty now, or is it
not? If you cannot deny it, I warn you from the Lord, do not neglect it; and do
not by your disobedience to a convinced conscience, prepare for a tormenting
conscience. If you know your Masters will and do it not, you shall be beaten
with many stripes.

And your public capacity and work, does make your Repentance and holiness
needful to others as well as to your selves. Had we none to govern us, but
such as entirely subject themselves to the government of Christ; and none to
make us Laws, but such as have his Law transcribed upon their hearts, O what a
happy people should we be. Men are unlikely to make strckt Laws, against the
vices which they love and live in: or if they make them, they are more unlikely
to execute them. We can expect no great help against drunkenness, swearing,
gaming, filthiness, and profaneness, from men that love these abominations so
well, as that they will rather part with God and their salvation, then they
will let them go. All men are born with a serpentine malice and emnity against
the seed of Christ, which is rooted in their very natures. Custom in sin
increases this to more malignity; and it is only renewing grace that does
overcome it. If therefore there should be any among our Rulers, that are not
cured of this mortal malady, what friendship can be expected from them to the
cause and servants of the Lord? If you are all the children of God your selves,
and Heaven be your end, and holiness your delight and business, it will then be
your principal care to encourage it, and help the people to the happiness that
you have found your selves. But if in any the original (increased) enmity to
God and godliness prevail, we can expect no better (ordinarily) from such, then
that they oppose the holiness which they hate, and do their worst to make us
miserable. But woe to him that striveth against his Maker. Shall the thorns and
briars be set in battle against the consuming fire and prevail? Isa. 27. 4, 5.
Oh therefore for the Nations sake, begin at home, and cast away the sins which
you would have the Nation cast away! All men can say, that Ministers must teach
by their lives, as well as by their doctrines; (and woe to them that do not.)
And must not Magistrates as well govern by their lives, as by their Laws? Will
you make Laws which you would not have men obey? Or would you have the people
to be better then your selves? Or can you expect to be obeyed by others, when
you will not obey the God of Heaven and Earth your selves? We beseech you
therefore for the sake of a poor distressed Land, let our recovery begin with
you. God looks so much at the Rulers of a Nation in his dealings with them,
that ordinarily it goes with the people as their Rulers are. Till David had
numbered the people, God would not let out his wrath upon them, though it was
they that were the great offenders. If we see our Representative body begin in
loathing themselves for all their iniquities, and turning to the Lord with all
their hearts, we should yet believe that he is returning to us, and will do us
good after all our provocations, Truly Gentlemen, it is much from you that we
must fetch our comfortable or sad prognostics, of the life or death of this
diseased Land. Whatever you do, I know that it shall go well with the
righteous; but for the happiness or misery of the Nation in general, it is you
that are our best prognostication. If you repent your selves, and become a holy
people to the Lord, it promises us deliverance: But if you harden your hearts,
and prove despisers of God and holiness, it is like to be our temporal, and
sure to be your eternal undoing, if saving grace do not prevent it.

And I must needs tell you, that if you be not brought to loath your selves, it
is not because there is no loathsome matter in you. Did you see your inside,
you could not forbear it. As I think it would somewhat abate the pride of the
most curious Gallants, if they did but see what a heap of phlegm, and filth,
and dung, (and perhaps crawling worms) there is within them. Much more should
it make you loath your selves, if you saw those sins that are a thousand times
more odious. And to instigate you hereunto, let me further reason with you.

1. You can easily loath an enemy; and who has been a greater enemy to any of
you, then your selves? Another may injure you; but no man can everlastingly
undo you, but your selves.

2. You abhor him that kills your dearest friends; and it is you by your sins
that have put to death the Lord of life.

3. Who is it but your selves that has robbed you of so much precious time,
and so much precious fruit of Ordinances, and of all the mercies of the Lord?

4. Who is it but your selves that has brought you under Gods displeasure?
Poverty could not have made him loath you, nor any thing besides your sins.

5. Who wounded Conscience, and has raised all your doubts and fears? was it
not your sinful selves?

6. Who is it but your selves that has brought you so near the gulf of misery?
and endangered your eternal peace?

7. Consider the loathsome nature of your sins, and how then can you choose but
loath your selves?

1. It is the creatures rebellion or disobedience against the absolute
universal Sovereign.

2. It is the deformity of Gods noblest creature here on earth; and the abusing
of the most noble faculties.

3. It is a stain so deep that nothing can wash out but the blood of Christ.
The flood that drowned a world of sinners, did not wash away their sins. The
fire that consumed the Sodomites, did not consume their sins. Hell it self can
never end it, and therefore shall have no end it self. It dies not with you
when you die: Though Churchyards are the guiltiest spots of ground, they do not
bury and hide our sin.

4. The Church must loath it, and must cast out the sinner as loathsome if he
remain impenitent: and none of the servants of the Lord must have any
friendship with the unfruitful works of darkness.

5. God himself does loath the creature for sin, and for nothing else but sin,
Zech. 11. 8. My soul loathed them. Deuteronomy. 32. 19. When the Lord saw it he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons and daughters.] Lev. 26.
30. My soul shall abhor you.] Psalm. 78. 59. When God heard this he was wroth,
and greatly abhorred Israel. Lam. 2. 7. He abhorred his very Sanctuary.] For he
is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. In a word, it is the
sentence of God himself, that a wicked man is loathsome and comes to shame,
Prove. 13. 5.] so that you see what abundant cause of self-abhorrence is among
us.

But we are much afraid of Gods departure, when we see how common self-love is
in the world, and how rare this penitent self-loathing is.

1. Do they loath themselves that on every occasion are contending for their
honor, and exalting themselves, and venturing their very souls, to be highest
in the world for a little while?

2. Do they loath themselves that are readier to justify all their sins, or at
least extenuate them, then humbly confess them?

3. Do they loath themselves for all their sins, that cannot endure to be
reproved, but loath their friends, and the Ministers of Christ that tell them
of their loathsomness?

4. Do they loath themselves that take their pride it self for manhood, and
Christian humility for baseness, and brokenness of heart for whining hypocrisy
or folly, and call them a company of Priest-ridden fools, that lament their
sin, and ease their souls by free confession? Is the ruffling bravery of this
City, and the strange attire, the haughty carriage, the feasting, idleness and
pomp, the marks of such as loath themselves for all their abominations? why
then was fasting, and sack cloth and ashes, the badg of such in ancient times?

5. Do they loath themselves for all their sins, who loath those that will not
do as they? and speak reproachfully of such as run not with them to the same
excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. and count them precisians that dare not spit in
the face of Christ, by wilful sinning as venturously and madly as themselves.

6. Or do they loath themselves for all their sins, that love their sins, even
better then their God, and will not by all the obtestations, and commands, and
entreaties of the Lord, be persuaded to forsake them? How far all these are
from this self-loathing, and how far that Nation is from happiness where the
Rulers or inhabitants are such, is easy to conjecture.

I should have minded you what sins of the Land must be remembered, and loathed
if we would have peace and healing. But as the glass forbids me, so, alas, as
the sins of Sodom they declare themselves. Though through the great mercy of
the Lord the body of this Nation, and the sober part, have not been guilty of
that Covenant Breaking persidiousness, treason, sedition, disobedience,
self-exalting, and turbulencie as some have been, and as ignorant foreigners
through the calumnies of malicious adversaries may possibly believe, yet must
it be for a lamentation through all generations, that any of those that went
out from us, have contracted the guilt of such abominations, and occasioned
the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; and that any in the pride or simplicity
of their hearts, have followed the conduct of Jesuiticall seducers, they knew
not whither, nor to what.

That Profaness abounds on the other side, and drunkenness, swearing,
fornication, lasciviousness, idleness, pride and covetousness, do still survive
the Ministers that have wasted themselves against them, and the labors of
faithful Magistrates to this day! And that the two extremes of Heresy and
Profaneness, do increase each other; and while they talk against each other,
they harden one another, and both afflict the Church of Christ. But especially
woe to England for that crying sin, the scorning of a holy life, if a wonder of
mercy do not save us. That people professing the Christian Religion, should
scorn the diligent practice of that Religion which themselves profess! That
obedience to the God of Heaven, that imitation of the example of our Savior
who came from Heaven to teach us Holiness, should not only be neglected,
unreasonably and impiously neglected, but also by a transcendent impious
madness, should be made a matter of reproach! That the holy Ghost into whose
name as the sanctifier these men were themselves baptized, should not only be
resisted, but his sanctifying work be made a scorn! That it should be made a
matter of derision, for a man to prefer his soul before his body, and Heaven
before earth, and God before a transitory world, and to use his reason in that
for which it was principally given him, and not to be wilfully mad in a case
where madness will undo him unto all eternity! judge as you are men, whether
hell it self is like much to exceed such horrid wickedness! and whether it be
not an astonishing wonder, that ever a reasonable soul should be brought to
such a height of abomination. That they that profess to believe the holy
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, should deride the holiness of
the Church, and the Saints and their communion! that they that pray for the
hallowing of Gods Name, the coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of his will
even as its done in Heaven, should make a mock at all this that they pray for!
How much further think you is it possible, for wicked souls to go in sinning?
Is it not the God of Heaven himself that they make a scorn of? Is not Holiness
his image? Did not he make the Law that does command it; professing that none
shall see his face without it? Heb. 12. 14. O sinful Nation! O people laden
with iniquity, Repent, Repent, speedily and with self-loathing Repent of this
inhumane crime, lest God should take away your glory, and enter himself into
judgment with you, and plead against you the scorn that you have cast upon the
Creator, the Savior, the sanctifier to whom you were engaged in your
baptismall vows! Lest when he plagueth and condemns you he say, Why
persecuted you me? (Acts 9. 4.) Inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of
these my brethren, ye did it unto me.] Read. Prove. 1. 20. to the end. When
Israel mocked the messengers of the Lord, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets, his wrath arose against his people till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. And O that you that are the Physicions of this diseased Land,
would specially call them to Repentance for this, and help them against it for
the time to come.

Having called you first to Remember your misdoings, and secondly to loath your
selves in your own eyes for them; I must add a third, That you stop not here,
but proceed to Reformation, or else all the rest is but hypocrisy. And here it
is that I most earnestly entreat this Honorable Assembly for their best
assistance. O make not the forementioned sins your own; lest you hear from God,
quod minus crimine, quam absolutione peccatum est. Though England has been
used to cry loud for liberty, let them not have liberty to abuse their Maker,
and to damn their souls, if you can hinder it. Optimus est reipublicae status,
ubi nulla libertas deest, nisi licentia pereundi, as Nero once was told by his
unsuccessfull Tutor. Use not men to a liberty of scorning the Laws of God, lest
you teach them to scorn yours: For can you expect to be better used then God.
And cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quam licet (Gell. l. 17. c. 14.) We
have all seen the evils of Liberty to be wanton in Religion: Is it not worse to
have Liberty, to deride Religion? If men shall have leave to go quietly to hell
themselves, let them not have leave to mock poor souls from Heaven. The
suffering to the sound in faith is as nothing: for what is the foaming rage of
mad men to be regarded? But that in England God should be so provoked, and
souls so hindered from the paths of life, that whoever will be converted and
saved, must be made a laughing stock (which carnal minds cannot endure,) this
is the mischief which we deprecate.

The eyes of the Nation, and of the Christian world, are much upon you, some
high in hopes, some deep in fears, some waiting in dubious expectations for the
issue of your counsels. Great expectations, in deep necessities, should awake
you to the greatest care and diligence. Though I would not by omitting any
necessary directions or admonitions to you, invite the world to think that I
speak to such as cannot endure to hear, and that so Honorable an Assembly does
call the Ministers of Christ to do those works of their proper office, which
yet they will be offended if they do; yet had I rather err in the defective
part, then by excess, and therefore shall not presume to be too particular.
Only in general, in the Name of Christ, and on the behalf of a trembling yet
hoping Nation, I most earnestly beseech and warn you, that you own and promote
the power and practice of Godliness in the Land, and that as God whose
Ministers you are (Romans 13. 4.) is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
Heb. 11. 6. and has made this a principal Article of our Faith; so you would
imitate your absolute Lord, and honor them that fear the Lord, and encourage
them that diligently seek him. And may I not freely tell you, that God should
have the precedencie? and that you must first seek his Kingdom and the
Righteousness thereof, and he will facilitate all the rest of your work. Surely
no Powers on earth should be offended, that the God from whom, and for whom,
and through whom they have what they have, is preferred before them; when they
should own no interest but his, and what is subservient to it. I have long
thought that pretenses of a necessity of beginning with our own affairs, has
frustrated our hopes from many Parliaments already: and I am sure that by
delays the enemies of our peace have got advantage to cross our ends and
attain their own. Our calamities begun in differences about Religion, and still
that is the wound that most needs closing: and if that were done, how easily (I
dare confidently speak it) would the generality of sober godly people, be
agreed in things civil, and become the strength and glory of the Sovereign
(under God?) And though with grief and shame we see this work so long undone
(may we hope that God has reserved it to this season.) Yet I have the
confidence to profess, that (as the exalting of one party by the ejection and
persecuting of the rest, is the sinful way to your dishonor and our ruin, so
the terms on which the differing parties most considerable among us, may
safely, easily and suddenly unite, are very obvious; and our concord a very
easy thing, if the prudent and moderate might be the guides, and selfish
interests and passion did not set us at a further distance then our principles
have done. And to show you the facility of such an agreement, were it not that
such personal matters are much liable to misinterpretations, I should tell
you, that the late Reverend Primate of Ireland consented (in less than half an
hoursdebate) to five or six Propositions which I offered him, as sufficient for
the Concord of the moderate Episcopal and Presbyterians, without forsaking the
Principles of their Parties. O that the Lord would yet show so much mercy to a
sinful Nation, as to put it into your hearts to promote but the practice of
those Christian principles which we are all agreed in: I hope there is no
controversy among us whether God should be obeyed and hell avoided, and Heaven
first sought, and Scripture be the rule and test of our Religion, and sin
abhorred and cast out. O that you would but further the practice of this with
all your might: We crave not of you any Lordship or dominion, nor riches, nor
interest in your temporal affairs: we had rather see a Law to exclude all
Ecclesiastics from all power of force: The God of Heaven that will judge you
and us, will be a righteous Judge betwixt us, whether we crave any thing
unreasonable at your hands. These are the sum of our requests: 1. That
Holiness may be encouraged, and the overspreading profaneness of this Nation
effectually kept down. 2. That an able diligent Ministry may be encouraged, and
not corrupted by temporal power. 3. That Discipline may be seriously promoted,
and Ministers no more hindered by Magistrates in the exercise of their office,
then Physicions and Schoolmasters are in theirs; seeing it is but a Government
like theirs, consisting in the liberty of conscionable managing the works of
our own office that we expect: Give us but leave to labor in Christ's Vineyard
with such encouragement as the necessity of obstinate souls requires, and we
will ask no more. You have less cause to restrain us from discipline then from
preaching: for it is a more flesh-displeasing work that we are hardlier brought
to. I foretell you, that you shut out me and all that are of my mind, if you
would force us to administer Sacraments without Discipline, and without the
conduct of our own discretion, to whom the Magistrate appoints it; as if a
Physicion must give no Physic but by your prescript. The antidisciplinarian
Magistrate I could as resolutely suffer under as the superstitious; it being
worse to cast out Discipline, then to err in the circumstances of it. The
question is not, whether Bishops or no? but whether Discipline or none? and
whether enough to use it? 4. We earnestly request that Scripture sufficiency as
the test of our Religion, and only universal Law of Christ may be maintained:
and that nothing unnecessary may be imposed as necessary, nor the Churches
unity laid on that which will not bear it, nor ever did. O that we might but
have leave to serve God only as Christ has commanded us, and to go to Heaven
in the same way as the Apostles did! These are our desires; and whether they
are reasonable God will judge.

Give first to God the things that are Gods, and then give Caesar the things
that are Caesar's. Let your wisdom be first pure, and then peaceable. Not but
that we are resolved to be loyal to Sovereignty, though you deny us all these:
whatever malicious men pretend, that is not nor shall not be our difference. I
have proved more publicly when it was more dangerous to publish it, that the
generality of the Orthodox sober Ministers, and godly people of this Nation,
did never consent to King-killing, and resisting Sovereign Power, nor to the
change of the ancient Government of this Land; but abhorred the pride and
ambition that attempted it. I again repeat it: The blood of some, the
imprisonment and displacing of others, the banishment or flight of others, and
the detestations and public protestations of more; the often declared sense of
England, and the wars and sad estate of Scotland, have all declared before
the world, to the shame of calumniators, that the generallity of the orthodox
sober Protestants of these Nations, have been true to their allegiance, and
detesters of unfaithfullness and ambition in subjects, and resisters of heresy
and schism in the Church, and of Anarchie and Democraticall confusions in the
Commonwealth. And though the Land has ringed with complaints and threatenings
against my self, for publishing a little of the mixture of Jesuiticall and
Familisticall contrivances, for taking down together our Government and
Religion, and setting up new ones for the introduction of Popery, infidelity
and heresy; yet I am assured that there is much more of this confederacy, for
the all-seeing God to discover in time, to the shame of Papists, that cannot be
content to write themselves for the killing of Kings when the Pope has once
excommunicated them, and by the Decrees of a General Council at the Laterane,
to depose Princes that will extirpate such as the Pope calls Heretics, and
absolve all their subjects from their fidelity and allegiance, but they must
also creep into the Councils and Armies of Protestants, and taking the
advantage of successes and ambition, withdraw men at once from their Religion
and allegiance, that they may cheat the world into a belief, that Treasons are
the fruits of the Protestant profession, when these masked Juglers have come by
night and sown and cherished these Romish tares. As a Papist must cease to be a
Papist if he will be truly and fully loyal to his Sovereign (as I am ready to
prove against any adversary;) so a Protestant must so far cease to be a
Protestant before he can be disloyal. For Romans 13. is part of the Rule of his
Religion. Unhappily there has been a difference among us, which is the higher
Power, when those that have their shares in the Sovereignty are divided: But
whether we should be subject to the Higher Power is no question with us.

Gentlemen, I have nothing to ask of you for my self nor any of my brethren as
for themselves: But that you will be friends to serious preaching and holy
living, and will not ensnare our consciences with any unscripturall inventions
of men, this I would beg of you as on my knees: 1. As for the sake of Christ,
whose cause and people it is that I am pleading for. 2. For the sake of
thousands of poor souls in this Land, whose salvation or damnation will be
much promoted by you. 3. For the sake of thousands of the dear servants of the
Lord, whose eyes are waiting to see what God will do by your hands. 4. For your
own sakes, who are undone if you dash your selves on the rock you should build
on, and set against the holy God, and turn the cries of his servants to Heaven
for deliverance from you, Luke 18. 8. If you slumble on Christ he will break
you in pieces; but if he fall upon you he will grind you to powder. 5. For the
sake of your posterity, that they may not be bred up in ignorance or
ungodliness. 6. For the Honor of the Nation and your selves; that you turn by
all the suspicions and fears that are raised in the Land. 7. For the honor of
sound Doctrine and Church Government, that you may not bring schism into
greater credit then now you have brought it to deserved shame. For if you frown
on godliness under pretense of uniformity in unnecessary things, and make times
worse then when Libertinisme and schism so prevailed, the people will look
back with groans and say, what happy times did we once see? and so will honor
schism, and libertinisme, and usurpation, through your oppression. 8. Lastly,
I beg this of you, for the Honor of Soveragnty and the Nations Peace. A Prince
of a holy people is most Honorable. The interest of holiness is Christ's own:
Happy is that Prince that espouseth this, and subjecteth all his own unto it.
See Psalm. 1. 1, 2. and 101. and 15. 4. It is the conscionable, prudent, godly
people of the Land that must be the glory and strength of their lawful
Sovereign. Their Prayers will serve him better then the hideous Oaths and
Curses of the profane. Woe to the Rulers that set themselves against the
interest of Christ and holiness. Read Psalm. 2. or that make snares for their
consciences, that they may persecute them as disobedients, who are desirous to
obey their Rulers in subordination to the Lord. See Dan. 3. and 6. 5, 10, 13. I
have dealt plainly with you, and told you the very truth. If God have now a
blessing for you and us, you will obey it: but if you refuse, then look to your
selves and answer it if you can. I am sure in spite of earth and hell, it shall
go well with them that live by faith.

FINIS.

