A SAINT OR A BRUTE.

The Certain Necessity and Excellency of Holiness, etc. So plainly proved, and
urgently applied, as by the blessing of God may convince and save the
miserable, impenitent, ungodly Sensualists, if they will not let the Devil
hinder them from a sober and serious reading and considering.

To be Communicated by the Charitable, that desire the Conversion and Salvation
of souls, while the Patience of God, and the day of Grace and Hope continue.

By Richard Baxter.

The First Part: Showing the Necessity of Holiness.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, at the three daggers in
Fleet Street, and Nevil Simmons Bookseller at Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1662.

To my dearly beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of Kederminster in
Worcestershire; and my late Auditors in the City of London: Confirming Grace,
with Patience, Love and Peace be multiplied.
Dear Friends,
ONce more, through the great mercy of God, I have liberty to send you a
Preacher for your private families, which may speak to you (truly and plainly,
though not elegantly) when I cannot, and when I lie silent in the dust. I take
it for no small mercy that I have been so much employed about the Great and
Necessary things, in despite of all the malice of Satan, who would have
entangled me, and taken up my time, in personal vindications and barren
controversies. As I never knew that I had one enemy in the world that ever was
acquainted with me; so those that know me, dissuading me from Apologies against
the accusations of those that know me not, have spared my time for better work.
Though there is about fifty writings (in whole or part) against me published,
(by Infidels, Seekers, Familists, Enthusiasts, Quakers, Papists, Antinomians,
Levellers, Covenant-breakers, State-subverters, Church-dividers, besides
impatient dissenting Brethren, and Dependants that took it for the rising way),
I yet find no cause (as to the present age, and those that know me) to be at
any great care or pains for a defense; while malicious lies do but make men
wonder, that wrinkled Envy should be so mad as to come so naked on the Stage,
and show her ugly deformities to the world, and could not stay at least till
Wit had helped her to a Cloak.

I was also when I first intended Writing under another temptation; being of
their mind that thought that nothing should be made public, but what a man had
first laid out his choicest art upon; I thought to have acquainted the world
with nothing but what was the work of Time and Diligence: But my conscience
soon told me, that there was too much of Pride and Selfishness in this; and
that Humility and Self-denial required me to lay by the affectation of that
style, and spare that industry, which tended but to advance my name with men,
when it hindered the main work, and crossed my end: And Providence drawing forth
some popular unpolished Discourses, and giving them success beyond my
expectation, did thereby rebuke my selfish thoughts, and satisfy me that the
Truths of God do perform their work more by their Divine Authority, and proper
Evidence, and material Excellency, than by any ornaments of fleshly wisdom: and
(as Seneca says) though I will not despise an elegant Physicion, yet will I
not think my self much the happyer, for his adding eloquence to his healing
art. Being encouraged then by Reason and Experience, I venture these popular
Sermons into the world; and especially for the use of you, my late Auditors,
that heard them. I bless God that, when more worthy Laborers are fain to weep
over their obstinate, unprofitable, unthankful people, and some are driven away
by their injuries, and put to shake off the dust of their feet against them; I
am rather forced to weep over my own unthankful heart, that did not
sufficiently value the mercy of a faithful flock, who parted with me rather as
the Ephesians with Paul, Acts 20. and who have lived according to this Plain
and Necessary doctrine which they have received: Among whom Papists, that
persuade men that our doctrine tends to divisions, can find no divisions or
sects: Who have constantly disowned both the Ambitious usurpations which have
shaken the Kingdom; and the Factions, Censoriousness, and cruel violence in the
Church, which Pride has generated and nourished in this trying Age. Among whom
I have enjoyed so very large a proportion of mercy, in the liberty of so long
an exercise of my Ministry, with so unusual advantage and success, that I must
be disingenuously unthankful if I should murmr and repine at the present
restraining hand of God: But I must say with David, 2 Samuel 15. 25. [ If I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again and show me the Ark
and habitation (There or elsewhere use me in his service): But if he say, I have
no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as it seems good unto
him.

And now with this Treatise, let me leave you these few seasonable requests.

1. Be faithful to your faithful Pastors: Think not that you can live in order
and safety without their Ministry. When you can, attend their public Ministry!
Refuse not their more private help: Read well my two sheets for the Ministry:
Where the lawful Pastor is, there the Church is: Be not either impiously
indifferent in your worshipping of God, or peevishly quarrelsom with what is
commanded or practiced by others, nor disobedient to Authority in lawful things.

2. Maintain still your ancient Love and Unity and Peace among yourselves, and
improve your company and converse to the advantage of your souls. Be daily
interlocutory preachers to one another: Speak as the Oracles of God; and Preach
by a holy, patient, harmless, charitable and heavenly life. This kind of
Preaching none can silence but your own corruptions.

3. Improve the profitable books which are among you. 1. Read them frequently,
and reverently, and seriously to your families; when you have called them
together, and prayed for Gods blessing. 2. Carry them abroad with you, and when
you fall into company where you cannot better spend your time, read to them
some seasonable passages of such writings. 3. Give or Lend them to those that
need, and want either Purses or Hearts to provide them; and get them to promise
you to read them, and enquire after the success. By such improvement Books may
become such Seconds or Substi^utes to public preaching, as that they may not
be the least support of Religion and means to men's edification and salvation.

4. Make special and diligent provision to satisfy your selves and others
against Popery, which is like to be none of the least of your temptations. To
this end, I pray you read well the single sheet against Popery which I
published, and give of them abroad to others where there is need: Read also my
other books against it: (My Safe Religion, and Key for Catholics, and Dispute
with Mr. Johnson) and Dr. Challoners Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam: And
when their sophistry puzzleth you, 1. Call your able Pastors to debate it. 2.
And remember that they have the Scripture, and the far greater part of the
universal Church, and the senses of all the world to confute, before they can
make good the cause their of ambitious Clergy. If you are but sure you know
Bread and Wine when you see, and feel, and smell, and taste them, then you are
at the end of controversy with the Papists. Above all, see that you maintain
the Love of God, and a heavenly mind, and mortified affections, and grow not
opinionative, superficial or loose in your Religion: For he that is heartily of
no Religion, is prepared to be of any Religion: And it is because men are false
to the acknowledged Truth, that they are given up to make a Religion of deceit
and falsehood: Your fidelity to your King and Country, obliges you to do your
part to preserve the subjects from a disease so injurious to them. Says Dr.
Sherman in his late [ Account of Faith] against the Papist, Pres. p. 4, 5. [ If
Kings would think upon it, there mi^^^ be no Popes; since if Popes could well
help it, there should be no Kings.]

5. Take heed of all temptations to turbulency, resisting of Authority, or
other unlawful means in the obeying of your passions or discontents. As God
chose most eminently to Glorify his Power under the Law of Works, and the
spirit of bondage to fear did much prevail; but under the Gospel he has chosen
most eminently to magnify his Goodness, Love and Mercy; so accordingly is the
impress made upon his servants hearts: They are animated by Love, for the
propagating of Love; and therefore must work with Instruments of Love. And if
we had well learnt the Doctrine and Example of our Lord, and made it our work
to Love all, and to do good to all, and hurt to none, and with meekness and
patience to let any hurt us, rather then do any thing for our own defense,
which is against the Law of Love, we should see that Christianity would better
thrive, when it would be better understood by the practice of the professors.
Often have I noted that a whole flock of sheep will run away from the smallest
dog, and yet there is few of them killed by dogs, because they are under their
Masters care; when a Woolf or Fox is pursued by all, and few of them suffered
to live. And often have I observed, that when men that shift for themselves can
scarce pass the streets, yet children play in the way of Carts and Coaches
without hurt, while every one takes it for his care to preserve them, that
cannot take care of and preserve themselves. And though the Deer that is within
the Park is killed when the Owner please, yet he is preserved there from
others, when the wild and straggling Deer that are abroad, are a prey to any man
that can catch or kill them. He that saves his life shall lose it, and he that
loses it for Christ shall save it.

The Lord stablish, strengthen, direct, and preserve you to his Kingdom, and
keep you from the passions of corrupted nature, and from the snares and rage of
a deceitful and malicious world; I beseech you continue yet your prayers for
him that desires no greater advancement in the world, than to be

The servant of Christ, and Helper of your Joy, Rich. Baxter.
June 7. 1662.
The Contents.
Part 1.
PReface: The contempt of Godliness rebuked, page 1 Godliness described: What
it contains; and what I mean by Godliness throughout this Treatise, p. 5
Signs of true Godliness, p. 14 Directions for such as will be soundly and
sincerely godly, p. 18
LUke 10 41, 42. The design of the Treatise, p. 1 The Text explained, p. 3,
etc. 1. Obs. Nearest natural relations are not always of one mind in the
matters of salvation, p. 8 2. Obs. When Christ comes into the house, he is
presently at work for the hearers souls, p. 8 3. Obs. When the word is preached
we must hear, p. 9 4. Obs. The humility of Disciples in those times. ib. The
sense of the Text in seven Doctrines, p. 10 Doct. 1. One thing is Needful: It
is One thing that is absolutely Necessary; but they busy themselves about
many, that neglect this one, p. 11 In what respect it is One, and but One,
ibid. How the troubling matters of the world are many, p. 13 How far the One
thing is Necessary, p. 15 Q^. Are not other things Needful in their places? p.
18 The Application 1. by way of inquiry, how you have sought the One thing
Necessary, p. 20 How a true Christian differs from all hypocrites, p. 22 1.
Whatever you have been doing in the world, you have but lost your Time, if you
have not done the One thing Needful, p. 25 2. And you have lost all your
labor, p. 26 3. You have been busily undoing your selves, p. 29 4. You have
unmanned your selves, and lived below your Reason, and as beside your wits, p.
32 The madness of them that are afraid of being Godly, lest it make them mad,
p. 34 5. You have but abused and lost all your mercies, p. 37, 38 6. You have
neglected Christ, his Grace and Spirit, p. 40 7. Your hopes and peace are but
delusions and irrational, p. 41 Use 2. To lament the distracted course of
worldlings, p. 43 Use 3. Exhortation: What course will you take for time to
come? p. 48 Consider 1. It is Necessity that is pleaded with you, p. 51 2. It
is but One thing that God has made Necessary, p. 56 3. This One thing is that
Good part, p. 59 4. This Good part is offered you, and you have your choice,
whether God or the world, heaven or earth shall be your portion, p. 61 Qu. How
is it in our choice? have we free will? p. 63 5. If you choose it, it shall
never be taken from you. p. 65 A full confutation of those ungodly ones that
deny the Necessity of a holy life, p. 69. in 30 Queries. Obj. It is not
Godliness, but your procise way that we call needless. The particulars of a
holy life examined, p. 83. 1. Much preaching and hearing, p. 85 2. Reading
Scriptures, 3. and servent Prayer, p. 86 3. Diligent instructing families, p.
88 4. The holy observation of the Lords Day justified, p. 89 7. Strictness of
life in avoiding sin, p. 92 8. The rigor of Church Discipline, p. 94 Obj. It
is but few that are so strict. p. 97
The second Part.
CHap. 1. Holiness and its fruits are the Best part: Wherein the Happiness of
Saints consists, p. 101. Why most men choose it not. What is set in the
Balance against it, p. 110 The excuses of refusers answered, p. 112 Chap. 2.
What he must do in reason, that will be resolved which is the best part and
way: And who shall be the judge, p. 114 Chap. 3. Twenty Queries for the full
conviction of all Rational men that are willing to understand the truth, that
There is a Life to come of Happiness to the Godly, and Misery to the Ungodly:
With fifteen Queries for the conviction of Infidels, that the Gospel is the
infallible Word of God, p. 130 [Those that have not read the second Part of my
Saints Rest, and Treatise against Infidelity, and doubt of the Truth of the
Scripture or the life to come, may read this third Chapter first, and so
proceed to the rest of the Book.] Clem. Writer's Objections answered, p. 157
Chap. 4. Holiness is Best for all Societies, p. 159 1. It uniteth all in One
head and Center, p. 160 2. It has the most uniting, excellent, powerful end of
duty, p. 161 3. It takes away the Ball of the worlds contention that breaks
Societies, ibid. 4. It destroys selfishness, which is the destroying
principle, p. 162 5. It has the most righteous Laws, ibid. 6. It is contrary
to all disturbing evil, ibid. 7. It effectually disposes the mind to duty, p.
163 8. It cleanses the very heart, and kills secret sin. 9. It cementeth
Societies with unfeigned Love, ibid. 10. It makes Princes and Rulers a double
blessing: Manifested in five particulars, p. 164 11. It makes the most Loyal
and obedient subjects. For 1. it makes them know themselves p. 166. 2. And to
see God in their Rulers. 3. And to obey and submit for conscience sake, p. 167.
4. And destroys self-seeking. 5. And consists in Charity. 6. Proc^reth
Divine blessings. 7. And makes men meck, and patient, and forbearing. 8.
Disposes to concord. 9. Assures of the greatest rewards of obedience. 10* And
confirms against all temptations to disobodience, p. 168 Object. Have not the
greatest rebellions been caused by your godly men! as the Waldenses, Bohemians,
French and others nearer us? Answered, p. 169, 170. specially to Papists, p.
173, 174 12. Godliness makes men true to their Covenants; ibid. 13. It teaches
the true method of obeying, p. 175 14. It makes men of public spirits. 15. It
makes it their business to do good. 16. It makes men love enemies, and forgive
wrongs. 17. It interesseth Societies in the favor and protection of God, p.
176 18* It is the surest way to all supplies. 19. It is the Honor of
Societies. 20. It must be best that is so heavenly, p. 177 Chap. 5. Times of
Holiness are the Best Times, p. 178. Those that say, It never was a good world
since there was so much Godliness, and so much preaching, are fully confuted by
twenty Arguments. And their cavils answered. p. 181, etc. Chap. 6. Holiness is
the only way of safety, p. 196 Chap. 7. Holiness is the only Honest way. The
dishonesty of the ungodly proved, p. 205 Chap. 8. Holiness is the most Gainful
way* proved, p. 219 Chap. 9. Holiness is the most Honorable way, p. 232. A
reproof of the reproach of Holiness in England: And full proof of the Honor of
a Godly life. ibid. Obj. It tends to make the godly proud to tell them of their
Honor. Answ. Many Reasons for full confutation of this Objection, p. 258 The
baseness of the ungodly, p. 265 Chap. 10. Holiness is the most Pleasant life,
p. 269 Proved: I. From the Nature of the thing, and 1. From the Revelations of
God, and the Knowledge of Believers, p. 270 2. From the Will and Affections,
the nature and operations of Grace therein, p. 277 3. From the quality of
External holy duties, p. 282 4. From the Objects of holy Acts, p. 302, 303
Objections answered, p. 307, 308 II. From the Helps and Concomitants, p. 310
From the Effects, p. 312 The Aggravations of the Delights of Holiness compared
with the Delights of sin, p. 314 Obj. Of the sad lives of Believers, Answered,
p. 323 Obj. Does not God command men to fast and mourn? p. 339 Use: Reproof to
those that can find no matter of pleasure in a holy life. p. 341 The greatness
of their sin and misery, p. 342 Directions, Showing such graceless persons what
to do, that they may come to Delight in God and Godliness, p. 348 Use 2*
Reproof to those self troubling Christians, who live as sadly as if there were
little pleasure to be found in God, p. 353 Considerations fit to cure this sad
disease, p. 354 Qu. Whether it be not Hypocritical affectation, to seem
conformable for fear of discouraging men from Religion: Fully answered, p. 359
Obj. I could rejoice if I knew my title to the promises, p. 362 Obj. I have
cause of sorrow, p. 363 The considerations prosecuted, p. 364 Twelve Directions
to sad self-troubling Christians, how they may live a Joyful life, and find
Delight in God and Godliness, p. 374.
Errata.
Page 277. lin. ult. for Law read Love; p. 35^. l. 5. for that once r. but
once; l. 7. r. fermentations; l. ult. r. sweeter; p. 358. l. 30. for
unanswerable r. answerable; p. 367. l. 23. r. Physicion; l. 38. after of r. in;
p. 374. l 17. for is r. are; p. 375. l. 37. blot out when; p. 381. l. 37. r.
terrors.

Smaller literal errors and mispointings being not many I omit.

THE INTRODUCTION.
To all such as neglect, dislike, or quarrel at a life of true and serious
Godliness.
IT has been the matter of my frequent admiration, How it can be consistent
with the Natural self love, and Reasonableness of mankind, and the special
ingenuity of some above others, for men to believe [that they must die, and
after live in endless Joy or misery, according to their preparations in this
life*] and yet to make no greater a matter of it, nor set themselves with all
their might to enquire what they must be and do if they will be saved; but to
make as great a business and bussle to have their Wills and Pleasure for a
little while, in the small impertinent matters of this world, as if they had
neither hopes or fears of any greater things hereafter. That as some melancholy
persons are caetera sani, as rational as other (...) all matters saving some
one, in which yet their de^ makes them the pity or derision of observers; so
many that have wit enough to avoid fire and water, and to go out of the way
from a wild beast or a mad man, yet have not the wit to avoid damnation, nor to
prefer eternal life before a merry passage unto hell: Yea that some that
account themselves ingenuous, and men of a deeper reach then the unlearned, can
see no further through the promises or threatenings of God, then through a
Prospective or a Tube; and have no wit that looks beyond a grave; yea are
ready to smile at the simplicity of those that care whether they live in Heaven
or Hell, and use but as much diligence for their salvation, as they use
themselves for that which Paul accounted dung.

Many a time I have wondered how the Devil can thus abuse a man of reason, and
such as think themselves no fools! and how such unexpressible dotage can stand
with either learning, ingenuity, or common understanding; and what shift the
Devil and these men make to keep them from seeing that have eyes, or from
seeing the Heavens, that can see the smallest dust or atome. But my admiration
is abated when I consider, that the wit that serves to move a poppet, is not
enough to Rule a Kingdom; and that sleeping Reason is as none; and that it is
the very art and business of the Devil to charm sinners to sleep and wake at
once. Dormire Deo, at mundo vigilare: to be asleep to God, and awake to the
world: And that present things engage the senses, and call off Reason from its
work: And that the seeming distance of the life to come, occasioneth the
neglect of stupid half-believing souls, till they find it is indeed at hand:
even as Death though certain, affects few in youth and health, as it does
when they perceive that they must presently be gone: And withal, that a man is
not a man in act till he be considerate: and that it is as good be without
eyes, as still to wink. We know what detained our selves so long in sleep and
folly, and we know what makes us yet so slow: and therefore we may know what it
is that thus unmanneth others.

Reader, if thou be one of these unhappy souls; Whether thy brain be so sick as
really to think that there is no life to come for man, or that there needs no
such care and diligence to prepare for it; or whether thy heart be so corrupt
and bad as to be against the things which thou confessest to be Good and
Necessary; or whether thy Reason be cast so fast asleep, as never soberly to
consider of the only thing of everlasting consequence and concernment to thy
self; or whether thy Heart be grown so dead and stupid, as to be past feeling,
and never moved and affected with the things which thou hear, and know,
and considerest to be so great and necessary; which ever of these be thy sad
condition, I have now this one request to thee, as a friend that truly desires
thy salvation; and I tender it to thee with as earnest a desire, as if thou
saw me upon my knees entreating thee for the Lords sake, and for thy souls
sake, and as ever thou hopest for the comfort of a dying man, and as ever thou
carest what becomes of thy soul for ever, and as ever thou will answer it to
Christ and thy own conscience with peace at last, that thou neither deny me,
nor put me off with a careless reading, nor with contempt or disregard: My
request to thee is but this reasonable thing; [That thou will so long make a
stand in thy way, and grant me so much of thy time, as once to read throughout
this Treatise, and S^^IOUSLY to CONSIDER of what thou Read, and heartily to
beg of God upon thy knees, to teach thee and lead thee into the truth, and then
to be true to God and to thy Conscience, and Resolvedly to do that which thou
art convinced is Right, and Best, and Necessary.] This is all my request to
thee at the present: Put me not off with a denial or neglect, as thou will
answer it to God, and as th^^ wilt not be a wilful self-condemner: Have thou
spent so many hours and days in vain, and cannot I beg a few hours of thee, to
Read and Think of thy Everlasting state? If thou dare not Read and Think of
what can be said about such things as these, it is a sign thy case is indeed so
bad, that thou have more need then others to Read and Think of them. I know the
Devil dare not give thee leave to do it, if he can binder thee; for fear lest
thy eyes should be opened to see, and thy heart awakened to feel, the things
which he so labors to keep away from thy sight and feeling, till it be too
late: And will thou grant him his desire to thy damnation, or Christ and his
servants their desire to thy salvation? Think of it well before thou answer it
by word or deed.

Being in hope that thou have granted my request (to Read, Consider, Pray for
help, and faithfully do what God shall teach thee) I shall now begin to open
thee the way to the matter of this Treatise: The sum of my business is to
teach thee, 1 Timothy 4. 8. that [bodily exercise (in Religion) profits little,
but Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.] I think it meet therefore to tell thee
here in the beginning [What Godliness is] which the Apostle distinguishes from
[bodily exercise] in matters of Religion, and which I have proved so Necessary
and Excellent in this Treatise. And this I must do, 1. lest thou deceive thy
soul by taking something else for Godliness; 2. and lest thou lose thy labor
in the Reading of this Book, and hearing what Scripture and Preachers say for
Godliness; and 3. lest thou wrong me and thy self (according to the custom of
this malicious age) by imagining that by Godliness, I mean either Superstition,
or Hypocrisy, or Schism, or that I am persuading thee to sedition, humor, or
needless singularity, under the name of Godliness and Religion. I shall
therefore tell you distinctly here, What Godliness is indeed; and What it is
not.

In General GODLINESS is our DEVOTEDNESS TO GOD. And all these things following
are Essential to it, and of ind spensible Necessity to salvation.

1. That materially it contain these three things.

1. The true internal Principle, Soul and Life of Godliness; which is the
Spirit of God, Romans 8. 9. The Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. The new, and soft,
and single heart, Jer. 32. 39. Ezekiel. 11. 19. The seed of God abiding in us, 1
John 3. 9.

2. The Intention of the true ends of Godliness: which is the Reward in Heaven,
Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Luke 18. 22. Matthew. 6. 20, 21. Romans 8. 17, 18. The Pleasing
of God and the Beatifical Vision and fruition of him with Christ and his
triumphant Church in the New Jerusalem for ever.

3. The Reception and Observation of the true Rule of Godliness: which is [the
Will of God revealed partly in Nature, and fully in the Holy Scriptures:] This
must be in our very hearts, Psalm 37. 31. Jer. 31, 33. and with delight we must
meditate in it day and night, Psalm 1. 2. To cast away and despise the Law of
God, is the brand of the rebellious, Isa. 5. 24.

2. It is Essential to Godliness that it formally contain these three Relations.

1. It is a Devotedness of our selves as HIS OWN to GOD as our OWNER, or
Proprietary, or Lord; quitting all pretense to any coordinate title to our
selves, and resigning our selves absolutely (and all that we have) to him that
by the right of Creation and Redemption is our Lord, Psalm. 100. 3. and 119. 94.
Joh. 17. 6.

2. Godliness contains a Devotedness of our selves as subjects to God as our
Supreme and Absolute Governor, to Rule us by his Laws, his Officers and his
Spirit: To give up our selves to be Ruled by him as our King: to Learn of him
as our Teacher; to work for him as our Master: to ^ight under him and follow
him as our Captain and Commander, Isa. 63. 19. and 9. 6. Luke 19. 27. etc.

3. Godliness contains a Devotedness of our selves as Beneficiaries to God in
Christ as our Great Benefactor, in Love and Gratitude. Or as Children to our
Reconciled Father to Love him and thankfully obey him, and depend on him, and
be happy in his Love.

3. It is essential to Godliness and necessary to salvation that this
Devotednesse to God, be with a true Renunciation, Resistance, and Forsaking of
the three great contraries or Enemies to God and us:

1. Of the Devil as the Deceiver and Principle of wickedness.

2. Of the world (its Profits, Honors, and Pleasures) as the bait by which
the Devil would deceive us, and steal away our hearts from God, and take up our
time, and turn our thoughts from the one thing necessary.

3. Of the Flesh, as the rebelling faculty that would exalt it self above our
Reason, and be pleased before God, and so would take its Pleasure as our
felicity and End, instead of the true felicity and End.

4. It is Essential to Godliness subjectively, that God have the pre-eminence
above all Creatures, 1. In the Habitual Estimation of our Judgments,
preferring him as the most Great, and Wise, and Good, before all others. 2. In
the Wills habitual Consent and Choice; refusing all in comparison of him, and
Choosing him as our Lord, our Ruler, and our Best, and Consenting truly to the
Relations in which he is offered to us. 3. In the wills Resolution to seek him
and obey him, and endeavor to express these inward principles, so as to prefer
no Competiter before him.

5. The Soul or Internal part of Godliness consisting Essentially in the things
already mentioned; the Body of it, or Godliness expressive and visible
consists in these three things.

1. In our Covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; our Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier; our Owner, Governor, and Father (or Benefactor.) It
is essential to visible expressive Godliness, that there be such a Covenant
made: and regularly it is to be solemnized by Baptism: And those that are
Baptized in Infancy, must necessarily renew, and perform it themselves when
they come to age, and that understandingly, deliberately, freely, and seriously.

2. Godliness visible and expressive consists in our Profession of that
devotedness to God, and that forsaking of the Devil, the world, and the flesh,
which we have before described as the Essence of Internal Godliness, and to
which in the holy Covenant we oblige our selves. Christ will be confessed
before men, and will be ashamed of them before God and Angels, who are so far
ashamed of him before men, as ordinarily to refuse to own him and confess him.
The public worshipping of God in Christ, in Prayer, Thansgiving, Praises,
Sacrament, is appointed as the Professings acts, by which we openly own our
Lord: And therefore ordinarily the Assembling our selves together for this
public worship is not to be forsaken, through negligence or fear; but with
Daniel we must pray though we are sure to be cast to the Lions den; For though
no duty be at all times a duty, yet the disowning of our God, or denying him,
or being ashamed of him, or inordinately afraid of man, is at all times a sin:
and ordinarily and seasonably to Profess true Godliness, our subjection and
devotedness to God, is essential to External Godliness.

3. Visible Expressive Godliness does essentially consist in the Practice of
our fore-described Covenant and Profession: That our faces be truly
Heaven-wards, and that our walk be in the way of God, through we sometimes slip
and stumble and if we step aside, that we turn not back again, but return by
Repentance in our way: that the drift and aim, and bent of our lives, be for
God and our salvation: and that there be in us no sin, which truly and
habitually we had not rather leave then keep: And that our great business in
the world be the pleasing of God, and the saving of our souls: and that neither
Honors, nor Profits, nor Pleasures of the flesh, have the pre-eminence, and be
preferred: that Christ be not put under the Great ones of the world, nor put
after your commodity, nor put off with the leavings of the flesh, but that all
be made to stoop to him, and take his leavings: All this is of necessity to
salvation, and essential to expressive Godliness.

By this time Reader thou may easily see, 1. that Godliness is not an
uneffectual opinion, or dead belief; If thou were the most Orthodox professor,
or Preacher in the world, thou art ungodly if thou have no more. All have not
Faith that say the Creed; The notional apprehension, and the practical
judgment are often contrary; The opinion that is insufficient to change the
Heart, to move the will, to renew the life, shall prove insufficient to save
the Soul.

2. You may see that Godliness is not the adhearing to a Party, though such a
Party as pretends to some special excellency, or calls it self the only
Church, or the purest Church. It is a sin to make and cherish parties,
divisions, and factions in the Universal Church, and it is not Godliness to
sin. A Godly man through weakness may be of a sinful party, but that is
contrary to his Godliness. He will worship God with his best, and be where be
may have best advantage to his Soul, and therefore if he can, will hold
personal local communion with the best and purest congregations; but not as
separating from the rest, and betaking himself to a Party set against the
Church universal, or a Party sinfully distant from others in the Church
universal. The grand design of the Devil is, when men will needs look after
Religion, to make them believe that to be of such a Church, or Party, is to be
Religious, and to trust to that instead of Godliness for the saving of their
Souls. And carnal self-seeking Teachers are the principal instruments of this
deceit; who for their honor or commodity would draw away Disciples after them,
and make poor Souls believe that they must be their followers, or of their
side, or opinion, or Church, if they will be saved: The Papist says, You must
follow the Pope, and be of our Church, or you are no true Catholics, nor in
the true Church, and cannot be saved: And some other Sects say the like of
their Churches. And how many thousand ungodly wretches do think to be saved,
because they are such a Church or party. But the Catholic or Universal Church,
is the whole company of Believers Headed only by Christ: and Godliness must
prove thee a Living member of this society, unless thou will be burnt with the
withered branches: And God will never condemn any one that is truly Godly
because be is not of this sect or party, or of that: And the Papists that are
the most notorious sect and grand dividers of the Church, and condemners of the
justified, shall know one day, that Ambition was not true Religion; and that
the name of unity, and universality and Antiquity, were unmeet instruments to
be used to the destruction of Unity, and contradiction of Universality and
Antiquity: and that God has set apart himself the man that is Godly, though
the Accuser of the Brethren would cast such out, Psalm. 4. 3. And who shall
condemn when it is Christ that justifies? Romans 8. 33.

You may see now, that Godliness is not any mere external act or worship:
External worship there must be, and that with all decency and reverent
behavior: but it is hypocrisy if there be nothing but the Corpse without the
Internal Godliness which is the life and soul. Bodily exercise is here by the
Apostle distinct from Godliness.

4. You may now see that Godliness is not the mere forbearance of the outward
acts or practice of any sin. For else a sleep, or a prison might make a man
Godly by restraining him from the acts of sin: He is ungodly that had rather
live in the sin which through some restraint he does forbear. If you would do
it, you have done it, in Gods account.

5. You may see also that whatsoever Religiousness, Obedience, or Endeavors
subject Christ to the flesh and world, and make him give place to them and come
behind, do not deserve the name of Godliness. You are not Godly, how far soever
else you go, if God and your Salvation take not place before all the honors,
profits and pleasures of the world. As he is not God that has any Greater,
Wiser or Better then himself; so that is not Godliness which gives the
precedence practically to any thing but God: that pretends never so highly to
Honor him, and yet more esteems their own Honor with the world: or that
professes Love and Obedience to him, and yet Loves and obeys a Lust before
him, and sets more by Love and Obedience to themselves, then by their own or
other men's Love or Obedience to God. All these are the cheating counterfeits of
Godliness.

6. And if none of these be Godliness, much less does it consist in any sin: in
superstition, Idolatry, or in cruelty, blood and persecution through a carnal
zeal: in a bringing all others by violence to our proud impious wills: in
murmuring, sedition, rebellion, or resisting lawful Powers, under pretense of
propagating religion: Godliness consists not in Jesuitical contrivances, and
undermining others, and equivocations and pious frands: in disturbing Kingdoms,
killing Kings, blowing up Parliaments: absolving subjects from allegiance, and
giving away the Dominions of Temporal Lords if they will not obey the Pope in
exterminating their Heretics, (as is Decreed to be done in the Approved
General Council at the Laterane under Innocent 3. Can. 3.) nor does it consist
in murdering thirty thousand or forty thousand treacherously in a few weeks,
as in France, or much above twice as many in Ireland; nor in butchering
Christians by hundreds or thousands as they did long ago by the Waldenses and
Albigenses, and Bohemians: Nor in racking and tormenting them by Inquisition,
nor in frying them in the flames of fagots, as in Queen Marics days, and
frequently elsewhere: This is the Religion of the father of malice, that
thirsts for blood, and not of the Merciful Prince of Peace. Godliness is not
the running to arms, and pulling down Governments, to set up the proud
self-conceited actors under pretense of setting up Christ and preparing for his
Kingdom: snatching in their dream at Crowns and Kingdoms, and finding when they
awake that they have caught agallows. When the Friars had spawned the turbulent
people among us in England, that thought they must do any thing and overturn
the Governments of the world to make Christ the fifth Monarch, and bring him
from heaven to Reign visibly on earth before he is willing to come, I must
confess l^oft thought that their cunning was much more wonderful to keep these
people from being undeceived, then at first to deceive them. To keep them (in
despite of all our discoveries and warnings) in such furious blindness, as to
go on and do their fathers work, and rage against these that told them their
original, and whither they were going. The poor seduced people never read such
Books as Friar Campanella's de Regno Dei, and sacerdotio Christi, etc. wherein
he brings up all the Prophetical Texts in Isaiah, Daniel, etc. which these men
use, and labors to show what a golden Age is coming, in which divisions
shall cease, and unity become the strength and beauty of the world, and this by
the Universal reign of Christ: and what a happy people the Saints will be, and
how they shall then judge and rule the world (and, O the comfort! the time is
near;) and just such words he uses for his fifth most glorious universal
Monarchy, as others now do: But when all comes to all, the mystery unveiled is
but this; that Christ must reign by the Pope his Deputy; and that all Princes
and Nations must submit and stoop; and their Kingdoms must all become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, to be governed by his Deputy the Pope:
and (the power falsely called spiritual, being first well-settled) the other Key
or Sword also (the temporal) must for unity sake be put into the same hand: The
Heavens therefore should rejoice, and the earth be glad, for the Lord thus
comes to judge the world: The fifth Monarchy is at hand: The Universal holy
reign of Christ, not by profane Princes, but by his Holiness the Pope, and by
the Saints (the Friars, Jesuits, Monks, and Clergy) that shall judge the
world, to whom ere long all knees shall bow.

But you will say, We are so far from joining with these Friars, that we hate
the Pope much more then you do. I answer, You have received their frame of
doctrine of the Universal fifth Monarchy that is at hand: there is but one
thing to do, and you are theirs; which is to convince you that Christ is not to
come and reign here personally, but by his Great Vicegerent. And they that
could bring you to believe things more improbable, may more easily easily bring
you to them from your unreasonable conceit.

Pardon this Digression; I thought meet to tell you that Godliness lies not in
breaking the Law of God, nor in obeying Pride, nor being the enemies of
Government and order in the world, nor in an impatient striving by right or
wrong, to break away from the yoke of suffering, that God for our sin (or for
his cause) shall lay upon us. And now I have fully and distinctly told you,
What Godliness is, and What it is not.

And now go thy way, malicious soul, and say, if thou dare, (as the Devils
informers frequently do) that it is sedition, or faction, or schism, or
disobedience, that we draw the people to under the name of Godliness: Hold on
if thou will a little longer in such impudent calumniations against me and
other Ministers of Christ: But know that thy day is coming, and that for all
these things thou shall come to judgment; and if thou justify the ungodly,
yet remember, that [It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment; and
he that says to the wicked, Thou art Righteous; the people shall curse him,
Nations shall abhor him.] Prove. 24. 23, 24. [He that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.]
Prove. 17. 15. [ Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter -- which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him: therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so their root shall be rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as the dust, because they have cast away the Law
of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the holy one of Israel.] Isa. 5.
20, 23, 24. Let the malicious serpent accuse Job before God; in the end it
shall turn to his own confusion. And if any of the Princes of the earth, will
by Doegs be provoked to destroy the Priests, or by jealousy kindled by
malicious whisperers, be incited to do by the servants of Christ, as they did
by the Waldenses, Bohemians, Protestants in many places, etc. we will remember
the memorable words of David, 1 Samuel 26. 18, 19. and let the sufferers imitate
him in the submissive part, [Wherefore does my Lord pursue after his servant?
for what have I done? or what evil is in my hand? Now therefore I pray thee let
my Lord the King hear the words of his servant: If the Lord have stirred thee
up against me, let him accept an offering: but if it be the children of men,
cursed be they before the Lord; for they have driven me out this day from
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other Gods] (By going
where they are served.)

HAving fully showed you [What Godliness is] I now beseech thee, Reader, to
enquire, Whether this described case be thine? Art thou Devoted to God without
reserve, as being not thine own but his? And have thou devoted all thou have to
him with thy self, to be used according to his Will? Art thou mere subjected to
his Authority, and observant of his Laws and Government, then of man's? and can
his word do more with thee, t^en the word of any mortal man, or then the
violence of thy lusts and passions? Art thou heartily engaged to him as thy
felicity, and do thou give up thy self to him in filial Love, dependence and
observance, as to thy dearest friend and Father? Do thou highlyest esteem
him, and resolvedly choose him, and sincerely seek him, preferring nothing in
thy Estimation, Choice, Resolution, or Endeavor before him? Try by these and
the other particulars in the Description, whether you are Godly or ungodly; and
do it faithfully; for the day is at hand, when the ungodly shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners in the Assembly of the just, Psalm. 1. 5.

And besides the marks expressed in the description, let me offer you some from
the plain words of the Text^, that you may see what God accounts Godliness,
and consequently ^w to judge your selves.

1. In John 3. 3, 5, 6. it is written, Verily except a ^an be born again, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of ^od -- That which is born of the flesh is
flesh, and ^at which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.] 2 Cor. 5. 17. (...) any
man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things ^e passed away, behold all
things are become new.] ^om. 8. 9. If any man have not the spirit of Christ,
the ^me is none of his.]

From these Texts you see, that a heart and life made new ^y the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, is absolutely necessary to true Godliness.

2. Psalm 119. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes.] Romans 7.
18. To will is present with ^e.] Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee,
and there is none on earth, etc.] Isa. 26. 8. The desire of our soul is to thy
name, and to the remembrance of ^hee.]

From these and such like texts it is evident, that [The principal desires of a
godly man, and the choice of his will, is to be what God would have him be.]

3. Psalm 1. 2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he
meditate day and night. 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk
of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.] Luke 10. 42.

From these and such like Texts it is manifest, [That all the Godly do Love the
Word of God, as the food of their souls, and the director of their lives.]

4. Matthew. 6. 20, 21, 33. Lay up for your selves a treasure in heaven, etc. For
where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also: Seek first the Kingdom
of God and his righteousness.] Matthew. 7. 13. Luke 24. [Enter in at the strait
gate -- strive to enter in -- for many shall seek and shall not be able.] 2
Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.] Romans 12. 11.

From these and such texts you may discern, that [Godliness consists in such
diligence for salvation, as to seek it before any earthly thing, and not to
think the labor of a holy life too much for it.]

5. Romans 8. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13. Gal. 5. 18, 19. Read them and you will see that
[Godliness consists in living after the spirit, and not after the flesh, and
in mortifying the deeds of the body by the spirit, living not by sensuality,
but by Faith.]

6. John 3. 19, 20. [ And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil:
For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved: but he that does truth comes to the light,
etc.] 1 King. 21. 7, 8: And the King of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, there is
yet one man (Micaiah) by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for
he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil: And Jehoshaphat said, Let
not the King say so.]

From these and such like Texts you see, that [The Godly love the discovering
light, and the most searching faithful preacher; but the ungodly cannot endure
the light which shows them their sins, nor love the Preachers that tell them
of their sin and misery.]

7. 1 Cor. 13. John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if you love one another.] 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed
from death to life, because we love the Brethren.] Psalm. 15. 4. [In whose eyes
a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord.

From these, and such like texts, it is evident, that [All that are truly
Godly, have a special Love to those that are Godly: they love and honor Christ
in his Image on his Saints.]

8. Acts 2. 42. and 4. 32. You may see, that [The Godly love the Communion of
Saints, to join with them in holy doctrine, fellowship and prayers.]

9. 1 These. 5. 17. Pray continually] Luke 18. 1. Christ spoke a Parable to them
to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to wax faint.] Acts 9. 11.
Behold he prays.] Zech. 12. 10. I will pour out -- the spirit of prayer and
supplication -- ] Romans 8. 26. The Spirit helps our infirmities; for we know
not what to pray for as we ought, etc.]

From all these, and such like it is evident, that [Prayer is the breath of a
Godly man: he is a man of Prayer: When he wants words, he has desires with
tears or groans.]

10. Matthew. 15. 8, 9. This people draws near me with their lips, but their
hearts are far from me -- ] John 4. 23, 24. God is Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.]

From such texts it is evident that [Every Godly man does make the inward
exercise of his soul the principal part of his worship unto God, and does not
stick in bodily exercise, or lip service.]

11. Josh. 24. 15. As for me and my household, we will serve the Lord.] So Deuteronomy.
6. and 11. and 1 Pet. 2. 17, 18. and 3. 10. and Ephesians. 5. and 6.

From many such Texts it is evident, that Godly men desire the sanctification
of others, and make conscience of the duties of their relations, and would have
their households or friends to serve the Lord as well as they.]

12. Luke 14. 26, 33. and 18. 22. Matthew. 10. 37. Romans 8. 17, 18.

From these and other texts it is evident, that [all things are below Christ
and heaven in the practical esteem of a Godly man, and that he will forsake
them all rather then he will forsake him.] All these are Scripture Marks of
Godliness.

HAving hastily run over these things to help you in the Trial, I will add some
Directions to help you in the practice, and therein yet fullyer to acquaint
you, Wherein true Godliness does consist.]

Briefly to lay before you first the mere enumeration of the chief points
wherein sound Godliness does consist, to help your memories, while you see them
close together. 1. Sound Godliness consists in a solid understanding of the
substantial points of Religion. 2. In a sound belief of the Truth of Gods word,
and the reality of the unseen things. 3. In an adhearing to the holy Scriptures
as the Divine Rule of faith and life. 4. In the Love of God in Jesus Christ,
excited by the belief of his Love revealed by Jesus Christ. 5. In true
humility, and low thoughts of our selves, and low expectation from others. 6.
In a heavenly mind that most regards the things above, and seeks them as
our only felicity at home. 7. In self denial, and mortification, and
temperance, and victory over the desires of the flesh. When we can deny our own
conceits, and interests and wills for God: and are dead to the world, and are
not servants to our fleshly appetites or senses, or to the things below. 8. In
thankfulness for received Mercies, and Praising the Glorious name of God. 9 In
the willing and diligent use of the means that God has appointed us for
salvation. 10. In charity or Love to all men, even our enemies; and a special
love to true Believers. 11. In a love to the holy communion of Saints,
especially in public worship. 12. In a tender desire of the unity of the
Saints, and their concord and increase of Charity; and a trouble at their
discord and divisions. 13. In dealing Justly in our places with all men, and
carefully avoiding all that may be injurious to any. 14. In studying to do all
the good we can: and doing it to our power; especially to the household of
faith. 15. In a conscionable discharge of the duties of our relations, as
Rulers, Teachers, Parents, Masters, subjects and inferious. 16. In watchfulness
against Temptations, and avoiding occasions of sin. 17. In serious preparations
for sufferings and death, and patient bearing them when they come. These are
the things that Godliness does consist in.

And now out of all I will draw up ten practical directions, which in a special
manner I would entreat you to Practice, if you would be solidly Godly, and not
be deceived with names or counterfeits.

Direct. 1. Be sure to live upon the substantials of Religion, and let them
receive no detriment by a pretense of zeal for lesser points: Lay not your
Religion in uneffectual opinions; and let lower truths and duties keep their
places, and not be set above the higher.

Dir. 2. See that your Religion be principally seated in the Heart. Understand
it as well as you can (lest it be taken from you;) but never think it is
savingly your own while it is but in the brain: so much you believe indeed as
you Love, and as has imprinted the Image of God upon your hearts: Ever see
that your wills be Resolved for God and holiness; and that you be able truly to
say, I would be perfect: and I would fain be better then I am.]

Direct. 3. Be sure you take up with God alone as your whole felicity, and
think not that there is a necessity of the approbation of men, or of liberty,
plenty, life or any thing besides God. Do not only think that there is a God,
and a life of Glory for you: but Live upon them, and be moved and actuated by
them: Trust to them; and take them for your part. Live by faith, and not by
sight.

Direct. 4. Live daily upon Christ as the only Mediator, without whom we have
no access to God, acceptance with him, or receivings from him. Look for all
that you have from God to come by him; Live on him for Reconc liation, for
Teaching, for Preservation, for Communication, for Consolation, and for
Salvation. Let Christ make your thoughts of God more familiar, as now
Reconciled and Condescending to us.

Direct. 5. Obey the sanctifying motions of the spirit: and if you have
disobeyed, Repent; not despairing, but returning to obedience; but see that you
live not in any known sin, which a sanctified will can enable you to avoid.
Resist sins of passion; but most carefully take heed of sins of interest,
deliberately chosen, and kept up* as necessary or good.

Direct 6. Make it the principal work of your Religion and your Lives, to
inflame your hearts with the Love of God, as he is presented amiable in his
wonderful Grace in Jesus Christ. Strive no further to effect your hearts with
Fears or Griefs, or other troubling passions, then as tends to the work of
Love, or is a just expression of it. Go daily to promises, and mercies, and
Christ, and Heaven, of purpose for fuel to kindle Love: Be much therefore in
Thankfulness and Praise, which are works of Love. All goes on sweetly, and
easily, and acceptably, that is carried on by Love. That is the best soul, and
likest to God, that has most of Love to God and Godliness (...) that is the
best service, and likest to the work of (...), that has most of Love: Let the
principal striving and pleading with your hearts be to kindle Love: and your
principal complaints for the want of it.

Direct. 7. Keep up Charity to all, even unto enemies; and special Love to all
the Godly. And therefore hate backbiting and slandering, and making the worst
of other men's actions: Take them as thieves that come to rob you of your
Charity: He that speaks evil of another, persuades you so far to hate him
(unless it be in Charity, persuading you to seek his cure.) Hear the reproacher
and back-biter understandingly, as if he said, in words, as he does in sense,
[I pray you hate such a man, or abate your Love to him.] As the way to cause
Love is to represent the object Lovely, which does much more then to command me
to Love it: So the way to cause Hatred, is to represent the object hateful or
unlovely, which is more then to bid us hate our brother. And he that hates his
brother is a manslayer; and none such have eternal life abiding in them. Away
theresore with those Volumes of Learned slanders and reproaches, begotten
betwixt uncharitableness and self love, (or pride;) and take them as the Devils
Books, that are written to draw thee to hate thy Brother. Frown also upon the
censorious: Take heed also of divisions and parties, because they are enemies
to universal Love; and are but Imposthumes or Biles of the Church, where Zeal
and Love are diseasedly drawn into a narrow compass; and that is appropriated
to a few, that should be common to all Believers. Cherish meekness and
patience, and reject all that carnal Zeal or Envy, Contention and Animosities,
which are contrary to Love. Read and study well the third Chapter of St. James,
and the Epistle of John.

Direct. 8. Understand the preciousness and use of time. Love Diligence the
better, because it is a Redeeming of time; a doing much in a little time. Hate
that which would rob you of so precious a commodity.

Direct. 9. See that there be no predominant selfishness or worldly interest
unmortified at the heart. Study duty, and do it faithfully, and trust God with
Life, Estate, and Events: and shift not for your selves by sinful means.

Direct. 10. Maintain your authority over your sense and fleshly appetites:
Captivate not Reason to the Brutish part; especially under pretense of liberty.
Use your bodies as may strengthen them, and best fit them for the work of God:
Let them have so much delight in things allowed as conduces to this; but take
heed of making the delights of flesh and sense your end, or allowing your
selves in an unprofitable pleasing of your enemy; or of corrupting your minds,
and rellishing too much sweetness in the things of the flesh, and losing your
relish of Spiritual things. Set not the bait too near you: Keep the Gunpowder
from the fire. He that believes that if ever he be damned, it will be for
Pleasing his flesh before God; and if ever he be saved, he must be first and
principally saved from the inordinate Pleasures of the flesh, will not be so
forward as brutish Infidels are, to seek out for ^elights, and plead for all
that pleases them as harm^^ss.

Having thus in the Introduction showed you [What Godliness is,] and How it may
be known; and What you must do to be soundly and sincerely Godly, I hope you
are prepared for the following Discourse, of the Certain Necessity and
Excellency of Godliness, which tends to ^etch over the delaying, resisting,
unresolved wills, of those that are yet in the BRUTISH state, and are strangers
to the Dispositions, Employments, Desires, Hopes and Joys of true Believers.
The Lord concur effectually with his Blessing!

Amen.
LUKE 10. 41, 42. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou
art careful and troubled about many things; but One thing is Needful: and Mary
has chosen the good part which shall not be taken away from her.
IN order to the decision of the Great Controversy practically managed through
the the world, Whether Godliness, or worldliness and sensuality be better? I
have already performed the first part of my task, in proving the Certainty of
the Principles of Godliness, and of Christianity; which of it self will infer
the Conclusion, which I undertake to prove; that the Reasons for Godliness are
so sure, and clear, and great, that every one must be A SAINT or A BRUTE: He
that will not choose a life of HOLINESS, has no other to fall into but a life
of SENSUALITY: Either the superior faculties proper to a Rational Nature must
be predominant; and then we can be no less than SAINTS* Or else the inferior
brutish faculties will be predominant; and then, (though from your natural
Powers you are called MEN, yet) if you may be denominated from your intended
END, and from the USE of your faculties in order to that END, you are but an
ingenious kind of BRUTES; exceeding A^^^ and Monkies in the cunning contrivance
of your unhappy designs; but incomparably worse in your successes* because you
were indeed entrusted with the noble faculties and gifts of MEN, while you
captivated them unto your Appetites and Sense, and lived but to the END of
BEASTS.

The second thing that I have to do, for the conquering all opposition to this
Conclusion, is, to prove the NECESSITY of HOLINESS: which (being now to speak
to such as profess to believe the holy Scriptures,) I may easily do from this
plain and pregnant Text: To which I shall annex such cogent REASONS as may
silence those that will not acquiesce in the authority of the holy Word.

So great is the difference between a dreaming Opinion in Religion (called a
De^^ Faith); and a serious, hearty, practical Belief, that if they that say
(and do but say) they believe the holy Scriptures, and yet are ungodly, had
soundly Believed, Considered and digested this very Text, it would have made
such a change both in their Hearts and Lives, as would have told them by happy
experience, that the Gospel is not a dead letter, nor saving faith a lifeless
uneffectual thing; and that God sent not his son into the world only to be
complemented with, and reverently treated with a few good words; nor his Gospel
and Ministers merely to be entertained with a demure, silent, and respectful
audience; nor has proposed his Kingdom to be merely the matter of commendation
or discourse: But that as man is a creature of a Noble and Capacious Nature, so
he has an high and noble End, and consequently the highest employment for his
Reason; and that Religion is the most NECESSARY, and must be the most SERIOUS
business in the world. Did they believe this Text, as verily as they pretend to
believe the Gospel, it would help to the recovery of the understandings of the
Ambitious, and make the proud ashamed of their glory, and settle the drunken
aspiring minds of those that think it worth more than their salvation, to sit
upon the highest perch: It would call off the covetous worldling from his
immoderate seeking provisions for the flesh, and save them that are drowned in
the cares of this life, by showing them the true and necessary treasure: It
would spare them many a vexatious thought, and a great deal of unnecessary
labor, and prevent the shame and horror that must befall them, when in the
end they find their labor lost, and all their expectations frustrate: It would
quickly stop the mouths which prejudice, ignorance, malignant enmity and
deliration, have opened against a life of faith and serious Godliness; and
cause them that scorn it as a Needless thing, to make it their daily business
and delight. It would tell the sluggish senseless sinner, that he has work of
everlasting confequence upon his hand, and that it is no time to dream or
loyter: And it would tell the brutish sensualist that there are more sweet and
durable delights; and the time-wasting fool that time is precious, and he has
none to spare and cast away, having so great a work to do. It would set men on
seeking with greatest diligence, the Kingdom which before they did but dream
of; and would turn the very stream of their hearts and lives on that which
before they minded but as on the by. In a word, it would make the earthly to
become heavenly, and the fleshly spiritual, and the sloathful to be diligent,
and rotten-hearted sinners to become renewed SAINTS, as all must do that ever
will be saved. And if these words of Christ be not thus received by you, and
work not such wonders on men's hearts, it is not because there is any want of
fitness in the Text, but because men's hearts are hardened into a wilful contempt
of the most precious truths, which in themselves are apt to change and save
them.

Of all ways of Teaching, History is accounted One of the most effectual;
because it has the greatest advantage on our apprehensions, as setting our
lesson before our eyes in the great character of Example, and not only in the
smaller letter of a naked precept. And of all History, What can be more
powerful, then I Where one of the actors is the eternal son of God: and that
not above our reach in Heaven, but here in our flesh, on the stage of this
sublunary world. 2. And the other actors are such as most ^itly represent the
different actions of all the world, at least that live within the sound of the
Gospel; and lay open the great question about which the world is so much
divided. 3. And when the matter it self is of the greatest consequence, that
can be imagined; even concerning the present choice and resolution of our
hearts, and that expending of our Time, and that business and employment of our
lives, on which our Endless life depends. All this you have here set out even
to the life, before your eyes, in the glass of this example in my Text: And the
Lord of Life does call you all to see your faces in it; and here plainly
shows you what will be expected from you* and what you must be, and do, and
trust ^o; and this not in any long and ^edio^^ discourse; that might overcharge
your memories, or weary your attentions; but in very brief, though full
expressions.

As Jesus entered into Bethany, Martha (who it seems was the Owner of the house)
received and entertained him: No doubt but a great company followed Jesus; or
his Disciples that ordinarily accompanied him, at the least. Martha thinks that
having entertained such a guest, it were a great neglect, if she should not
provide for him and for his followers: and therefore she is busy in doing what
she can; but the number is so great, that she is oppressed with the care and
trouble, and finds that she has more to do then she is able: Her sister that
she thought should have helped her in such a case, is sitting with the
Disciples, at the feet of Christ, to hear his Word. Martha seeing this, is
offended at her sister, and seems to think that Christ himself is too
neglective of her, or partial for her sister; and therefore thus ^^e^^s her
cause with Christ, [ Lord, do thou not care that my sister has left me to
serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.] As if she had said, [Is it a
fit thing that both thy self and all this company should be unprovided for, and
have neither meat no^ drink? O^ is it fit that all should be laid on me, even
more then I can do, while she sits hearing with the Disciples? Deal equally and
mercifully and bid her help me.] And indeed most people would think that this
was but a reasonable motion, and that when Christ was made the Judge between
them, he should have decided the case on Martha's side: But he did not so: But
1. instead of commending Martha for her care and diligence, he shows her
error, by a gentle, but yet a close reproof: [ Martha, Martha, thou art
careful and troubled about many things]. 2. Instead of reproving Mary for
negligence of her duty in the house, he highly commends her for the
seasonable doing of a greater work. [ Mary has chosen the good part.] 3. He
groundeth the Reason of his Judgment on the different Nature and Use of their
employments: [ One thing is Needful] in comparison of which, the rest were all
unnecessary things, and such as then might have been neglected. 4. And so he
passes sentence on Marie's side, that the good part which she has chosen [
shall not be taken away from her]: In which ^e not only answers Martha with
an express denial, as if he should say, [I will not take off Mary from the work
which she has chosen]; but also on that occasion does point out the durable
nature of the Good which she had chosen, and promise the continuance of it.

Concerning Martha, some expositors run into two extremes. ^e think that she
was an unregenerate worldling, and savour^ only fleshly things, and that these
words of Christ, describe (...) state as one that had not yet made choice of
the one thing ^edful, and the better part. But it is only her present action
that Christ does reprehend and censure, and not her state: Her entertainment of
Christ, and speeches to him, and other passages, ^we us great probability that
she was a true disciple, as after it is said that Jesus loved her, John 11. 5.

On the other side, One Learned Annotator thus Paraphraseth ^e words of Christ
to Martha, [ Thou take a great deal of unnecessary, though not culpable
pains]; as if Christ's words were ^o reprehension of her, nor her course
blameworthy.

But the plain truth lies between these two extremes: Martha, though most
probably a true Disciple, was here too blame, in preferring a lesser duty
before a greater, and doing that unseasonably, which in due time was to be
done, and in neglecting an opportunity for the hearing of Christ's word, which
Mary took. It was not only blameless, but a duty in it self, to make provision
for Christ and his attendants: but ^he should have been hearing first while he
was preaching, and taken that opportunity for the benefit of her soul: It was
no ordinary Preacher that was come under her roof: His stay was not like to be
long: his doctrine concerned her salvation: She knew not whether ever she
should have the like opportunity again: And therefore she should have rather
stayed for his own direction, when to go make provision for their bodies, then
to have omitted the hearing of his word.

But you will ask perhaps, [ When a Sermon and other worldly business fall out at
once, are we always bound to hear the Sermon?]

I answer, No, not always: For else in great Cities that have frequent
preaching, you should do nothing ^lse but hear: We have a Body as well as a
Soul; and must have meet employment for both; and must make due provision for
both; and must be serviceable to the bodily welfare of others, and to the
common good. Our bodily labor and temporal employment must be conscionably
followed, as well as our spiritual; For God has determined that in the sweat
of our faces we shall eat our bread, Genesis 3. 19. and even in innocence Adam was
put into the garden to dress or till and keep it, Genesis 2. 15. with quietness we
must labor and eat our own bread; and if any will not work, neither should he
eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. 10. See Paul's example, v. 8. [ Neither did we eat any man's
bread for naught: but wrought with labor and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you] We must labor, working with our hands,
that we may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. And if our bodies
have not competent employment; they will grow such rusty unfit instruments for
the soul to work by, that when Melancholy, or other diseases have disabled
them, the soul it self will have the loss; and he that will do nothing but
hear, and pray, and meditate, is likely shortly to be scarce able to pray and
meditate at all, (unless it be one of a very strong and healthful
constitution.)

No one therefore from this determination of Christ to Martha, is to be driven
from their lawful Calling into a contrary extreme. But this was not the case
between Mary and Martha: It was a special opportunity which then was to be
taken: We must first seek Gods kingdom, and its righteousness: and prudently
take such opportunities for our souls as we can, without omitting greater
duties, and as our case requires: not taking as much food as we can ingest,
but as much as we can digest: It is possible to eat too much, but not to digest
too well. A Christian must have prudence, when two duties come together, to
know which at that present time is the greatest, and to be preferred: which
depends much on the necessity, and the ends: the good that will follow the
doing of them, and the hurt that will follow the omission: And without this
prudential discerning of time and duty, we shall never order our conversations
aright, but shall live in a continual sin, when we are doing that, which in its
own nature and season is our duty.

A poor man may not Read and Hear so frequently as a Rich (ordinarily,) nor a
Servant as the Master; because there would greater evils follow the omission of
their common labor at that time.

Thus much being said for the Explication of the Text, there is no more
necessary but what will fall in most conveniently with the Matter: The sense is
as if Christ should have said (...) Martha, Martha; I know thou do all this
in love to me, and ^anest well in it; and it is no more then what is thy duty in
its ^per season: But O what is the food that perishes in compari^ of that
which endures to everlasting life! It is my meat ^d drink to do the will of
him that sent me, in feeding and in ^ing souls: Thou had now an opportunity
to hear my word; (...) word of the Son of God, thy Savior, and thereby to have
^moted thy Everlasting happiness, as Mary does; and this should have been
preferred even before this provision for our bodies: and (...) for this thou
had now omitted thy care and labor about eat and drink, I would not at all
have been offended with thee: thou had thy choice, and Mary had her choice;
Thou have chosen ^e and trouble about many things, and made thy self a great
^al ado; but Mary has chosen that one thing that was necessary, which is the
better part, and therefore it shall not be taken from ^er, but she shall
possess the benefit of her choice.]

Where note for the fuller understanding of it, the true oppo^ition between the
case of Mary and Martha.

1. As to the Matter, Martha had many things in hand; multifarious care and
trouble; but Mary had but One.

2. As to the Manner and effects of their employments: Martha was full of care
and troubles, distracted or disturbed by the ^mberance of her businesses: but
Mary was quietly hearing and learning how to be free from care and trouble, and
how to ^ttain Everlasting rest.

3. As to the quality of their business; Martha's was of less necessity or
concernment, though good and honest in its place: but Mary's was about the
thing of absolute necessity.

Also Martha's was Good in its season, but a lesser good: but Mary's was [ that
Good part,] which contains all other good, or refers to it, and therefore
was to be preferred.

4. And therefore as to the continuance, Mary's being a more eligible
employment, and about an everlasting treasure, shall not be taken from her,
when the fruit of Martha's employment will quickly have an end.

Yet in these different cases, each one had her choice: Had Martha chosen
better, she had had better. And the choice much proceeded from the judgment
and disposition: Had she judged better, and been inclined better, Martha would
have chos^^ better.

Before we come to the principal Doctrines, we may profitably note these
Observations by the way.

1. Note here that [ the nearest Natural Relations (as Brothers and Sisters,
yea, Parents and Children) are not always of one mind or way in the matters of
their salvation.] Greater difference may be between them, then this between
Martha and Mary in the Text. They may rise up against each other, and seek each
others lives, as Christ foretold, Mark 13. 12. And therefore Father, Mother,
Brother Sister, and all are to be denied for Christ (that I say not hated, as
Christ says, Luke 14. 26.) when they stand in opposition to him. The same
parentage and education made not Esau and Jacob of a disposition, or of one
mind or way: nor Isaac and Ismael: nor Sem and Cham: not would restrain Cain,
the first man born into the world, from cruel murdering his brother, upon a
difference about their Religions, caused by his own ungodly mind; even because
his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous and acceptable to God, 1
John 3. 12. And therefore Parents must patiently submit (having done their
duty) if even the children of their bodies should prove reprobates: And
Brothers and Sisters must submit, if these in so near a relation be
Cast-awayes: God has not promised that all our kindered shall be saved.
Rejoice that you are not your selves forsaken; and be glad that any and so many
are sanctified, though further from you in the flesh; and love them in their
more excellent relation to Christ and you.

2. Note here, how our Lord does spend his time in the place and company where
he is. When he enters into a house, he is presently at work in teaching poor
souls the way to God; Or else how could Mary have been employed in hearing him?
In our places and measure we should imitate him in this: Can you come into any
house or company, and find nothing to say or do for God? Is there none wiser
then your selves that you may learn of, as Mary did of Christ? nor none more
ignorant whom Charity requires you to teach? Nor none that need a quickening
word, to mind them of their everlasting state? As soon as worldly, or vain
ungodly people get together, they are presently upon some worldly, or vain
discourse: And if you be indeed a heavenly and spiritual people, should you not
be more ready when you come together, for heavenly spiritual discourse? Have
you not a thousand fold more to set your tougues on work? The necessities of
the hearers: the hopes of doing good; the presence of God; the sense of the
duty; the sweetness of the subject; the avoiding of sin; and the blessing of
Gods acceptance to your selves? O had we but the skill, and will, and
diligence, that this interlocutory preaching by holy conference does require,
what a supply party would it be for the promoting of men's salvation, where the
more public preaching of the Gospel is wanting? Who can forbid us by familiar
discourse to exercise our charity, in minding poor regardless sinners of the
life to come? and exhorting them to due preparation, and repentance; and to
open to them the riches of Christ, and set forth his love, and draw them to
embrace him.

3. Note here, how carefully we should take the present opportunities for our
souls, to hear and learn as Mary did. She stands not carelling like our full
stomackt hearers, that ask, How can you prove that I am bound to hear such a
Lecture, or to come to Church and hear a Sermon twice on the Lords day, or to
come to the Minister to ask advice, or be instructed by him? No more then a
hungry man will ask, How prove you that it is my duty to eat every day? Or then
a sick man will say, How prove you that I am bound to seek to the Physicion, to
go or send to his house, and to look after him? As there is much in the very
New nature, and health, and relish of a gracious soul, to decide such
Controversies as these without any subtilty of argument; so a Christians
prudence and care of his salvation will tell him, that when Christ has a voice
to speak to him, it beseems him to have an ear to hear; and that the Sermon
tells the hearer the season of his duty, and the offer of a mercy tells us
when it is our duty to accept it, without any other more particular obligation:
unless when we can truly say as before God, that some duty that at that time is
greater, hinders us. These are easy questions to those that savor the things
of the Spirit. When Christ is speaking, Mary will be hearing; and lesser things
shall not call her off.

If any shall say, [ So would we too, if we could (...) Christ] I answer;
Remember that he never intended to (...) himself on earth, and teach his Church
personally by his own mouth; but has appointed Messengers and Officers to
proclaim his Laws unto the world, and tender them his grace, and says, [ He
that hears you hears me; and he that despises you despises me, Luke 10.
16. and he that despises, despises not man but God, 1 These. 4. 8. And he that
will not now believe and hear Christ speaking by his Ministers, when he is
acknowledged to be the son of God, and his sealed Word has had so long
possession in the world, would hardly have regarded Christ himself in a time
when he appeared in the form of a servant, and was found in fashion as a man,
and was believed on but by a few persons then counted but inconfiderable.

4. Note also, the humility and teachableness of Disciples in those times, who
were wont to sit learning at their Teachers feet: Which was then an ordinary
case, and not of Christ Disciples only. Paul was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Acts 22. 3. Not like the proud and self-conceited part of our hearers
in these times, that come to hear somewhat for their malicious or contentious
minds to quarrel with, and expect that their Teachers tell them nothing but
what is agreeable to their own conceits, and think us to be injurious to them,
if we would heal their ignorance or impiety, and make them any wiser or better
then they are; and that reproach us and set themselves against us as their
enemies, if we will not be ruled by them and humor them in all our
administrations, as if we were the patients and they the Physicion, we the
learners and they the Teachers, yea we their servants, and they our Guides and
Rulers in the matters of our own Office.

But let us come closer to the words themselves, and consider of the
Instructions which they afford us. which are these.

Doct. 1. It is but One thing that is of absolute necessity; but it is many
things that those are taken up with, that neglect that one. Doct. 2. The One
thing needful leads to content; but the many things of the world do trouble,
and disquiet, and distract the soul. Doct. 3. All men where the Gospel is
preached, have their choice whether they will seek and have the one thing
necessary, or trouble and distract themselves with the many things that are
unnecessary. Doct. 4. They that choose the One thing necessary, do choose the
good part; and they that choose any other, do make an evil and unhappy choice.
Doct. 5. The One thing needful shall not be taken from them that choose it: but
they that choose it not, shall have no better then they choose. Doct. 6. Those
that make the bad unhappy choice, are apt to grudge at them that choose better,
and will not think and do as they. Doct. 7. When the matter is brought before
the Lord Jesus Christ, he will not take part with those that murmr at his
servants choice, and speak against them; but will commend their choice, and
condemn the contrary.
All this you see lie plain here in the Text, and it is all worthy our larger
consideration: But the first is like to hold me so long, that to avoid
prolixity, the rest shall be but touched under that.

DOct. 1. One thing is Needful: It is one thing only that is absolutely
Necessary; but many things that men busy themselves about, that neglect this
one.

In handling this, I must show you, 1. In what respect it is that this Needful
thing is said to be but One.

2. How it is that the troublesome matters of the world, are called many.

3. Whereto and how far this one thing is necessary.

4. Whether the rest are indeed unnecessary.

5. I shall assist you in the application of it to your selves, that it may
reach the end to which I do intend it.

I. In what respect is the Needful thing but One?

Which will be the easier understood, when you know what the One thing Needful
is: And it is, most directly, that which is our End, To be saved, and to Please
the Lord, or to Glorify God and enjoy him in Glory for ever: Which
comprehends or implies the necessary means.

And this blessed state is One, considered 1. Objectively: It is One God that
we have to please, and to behold, and love, and praise for ever. 2. It is One
formally: that is, It is only the souls fruition of this One God that is our
End and Blessedness. And thus the End being principally meant, it is said that
One thing is necessary; though the Means may be more then One that are
necessary to obtain it.

And yet even with respect unto the means, it may be said that One thing is
necessary, by a General Comprehensive speech, as One contains many parts: As
to cure a sickness may be said to be the One thing needful to preserve a man's
life; when yet that cure must be done by many acts and means: The means are but
One thing as denominated from their End; even our everlasting happiness. And
they are but One as denominated from their Original, they being all but the
Will of God revealed in his Word for man's direction to salvation. And they are
all One in the principal stock that proceeds from this Original or root: and
that is, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is therefore eminently called the
way; because there is no other way or means, but what stands in a due
subordination to the Redeemer as the chief means, as well as to the pure
Godhead as the End.

Also as all the means of Gods appointment, have a union of Nature or
similitude with the End: And as Gods Image is One in all his children, so is
it, in their kind and measure, in all his Ordinances and Means: They also in
their kind and place are partakers of the Divine nature: The name of God is as
it were written upon them, and his blessed nature legible in them.

Also the means are all but One, as all are parts of One holy frame, which most
harmoniously concur to the doing of one work: As all the wheels and other
parts are but One Coach which carries us to our journeys end. As Christ and
his Church are one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 12. So Christ and all subordinate means for
the recovery and salvation of his own, are one Kingdom of God, and one way to
the Father, and one salvation: I shall fullyer open it under the next head.

And now for the Negative, you may discern by what is said, 1. That here is no
such unity as even in the end must confound God and man, or his glory and our
salvation.

2. Nor is here any such Unity as does confound the End and Means: no not the
Godhead with the manhood of the Redeemer, much less with the inferior kind
of beings.

3. Nor is there any such Unity as does confound all the means among
themselves, and make all one; or exclude the rest by exalting one; but rather
each one does suppose the rest, to constitute the perfect frame. Christ does
not exclude Faith; nor Faith ^xclude Repentance; nor Faith and Repentance
exclude Obedi^nce; nor does the office of one of these exclude the use and
^ffice of the rest. Public duties exclude not private; nor do ^rivate exclude
public: One part excludes not another: ^eading excludes not preaching, nor
both of them praying; ^ut their nature and use bespeaketh a conjunction; The
whole ^ody is not an eye or hand; nor does the Unity exclude but in^lude even
the smallest members.

4. Nor is there such a Unity as excludes difference of Degrees: ^or one means
may be more necessary and excellent then another: and the same person by
growing does differ from himself as he ^as before: and one will hereafter
excel another in Glory, ^s now they do in holiness and faithful improvement of
their ^alents.

II. Let us next lay both together; and see how the troubling matters of the
world are called [ Many] in opposition to ^his One.

And 1. Every creature to a sensual man, is made by him in ^ome sort, his End
and God: For he does not Use it only, and ^eferr it as the godly do, to an end
that is One; but he would En^y it, and make it objectively his end it self, and
so idolize it. And therefore though in the general notion of Delight they all
ageee; yet materially what abundance of ends and gods have carnal men? Every
sense must have its own delight: the eye must have its delight, and the
appetite its delight; and so of the rest.

2. And also these fleshly baits and pleasures are discordant even among
themselves: They draw the sinner several ways; and one of them fights
against the other: The riches of the sensualist do usually contradict his ease;
and often his voluptuous humor: and his ambition and pride does bridle his
disgraceful lust; and one sin will not let another have its end, but robs
him of the poor expected fruit: And thus they do distract the sinners, and tear
their very hearts in pieces; and divide and dismember them, where God would
heal them and unite them in himself. And the toilsome cares and labors by
which these things must be obtained, are many, and often contrary to each other;
and a great deal of stir it is that a deluded sinner* makes to little purpose.

The sum then of both these Heads is this. The matter of a Christians Faith,
and Religion, Desire, Hope and Love, is therefore called One thing, because God
who is One, is the sum of all. It is but One Sun, though it has many beams,
and all these beams are nothing but the emanations of the Sun; and have nothing
but what they have from it: God is All to the Religion and the Soul of a true
Believer: and therefore All to him is One: Creatures, and Duties, and
Ordinances which are many, are all but One to him in God. His Faith beholds
them, and his Affections relish them as united all in God. 1. As their spring
from whom they flow. 2. And as the Life by whom they are all animated; and as
the matter and sense which they signify and import. 3. And as their end to
which they tend, and in which they all terminate and agree.

Many branches are but One Tree, and have One Stock: and many members are One
body, because they are animated with One soul. Many letters, syllables and
words may make One sentence; and many leaves may make One Book, and treat but
of One subject. Many actions of a Plowman are called Plowing, and of a Weaver,
Weaving, etc. as being all united in One end: I know these similies have their
dissimilitude, but this is the sum; that It is God that the Believer sees,
and seeks, and loves, and converseth with, and intends in all the
Ordinances of grace, in all his duties, and in all the creatures: and in God
they are united, and One thing to him. He has nothing to do at Church, or at
home, in private or public, but live to God, and seek after the everlasting
enjoyment of him. If weakness and temptation put any other business into his
hands, he is so far stepped out of the Christian way. In his very common labors
and mercies, (so far as he is Holy) God is to him, the spring, the life, the
sweetness, the beauty, the strength, the meaning, and the end of all, and
therefore All in All.

But the creatures in the hands and use of the ungodly, (or of the godly so far
as they use them sinfully) have no such Unity. Though in themselves they so
depend on God, that none can make a separation, nor can they at all exist
without him; yet in the sense, estimation, ends and use of the ungodly, the
creatures are separated from God, and are as branches cut off from the tree;
and departing from God, these men are gone from Unity, and are lost, distracted
and confounded in the multitude of the creatures; and will never have Unity
till they return (...) God.

III. In the next place let us consider, What is the Necessity ^t is here
spoken of, and How far this One thing is Necessary (...).

And 1. One thing is Necessary Morally [ for it self] which ^ur ultimate end:
When other things are Necessary but [ for ^t.]

2. Comprehensively of the Means we may say, that One thing, ^t is,
Sanctification, is Necessary to the Pleasing of God; which ^o be regarded, 1.
As the end of Obedience, and 2. As the end (...) Love: by the obedient soul in
way of duty; and by the loving ^l devoted to God, as its Delight.

The world has many contrary Masters, and therefore has any things to do to
please them; and when they have done ^ir best, they cannot please them all, but
may leave more dis^ased then they please: For those that they must please,
expect (...) possibilities; and many a single person perhaps may look for (...)
much as you can give to all: And they have such contrary ^rests, which you must
serve if you will please them; and con^y minds which you must humor, that the
same things that (...) expects to please him, will vehemently displease
another; and ^rhaps the more displease the other, because it is pleasing to ^t
one.

And our selves have our contrarieties in our selves, and are as ^rd to be
pleased by others or our selves. We have our sensual ^sires which are
unreasonable and inordinate, unseasonable and ^portunate, and will take no Nay.
A sensual, covetous, ambi^ous fantasy, is a bottomless vessel: Your pouring in
does no ^hit fill it: It is a devouring gulf; a consuming (that I say ^ot an
unquenchable) fire: Like the horse-leech it cries, ^ive, Give, and the more
you give, the more it craveth, and is ^ever less satisfied, then when it has
glutted it self with that from which it seeks satisfaction*

But God is One, and with this One thing is he pleased; even with a Holy heart
and life: He has no contradictory interests or assertions: and therefore has
no contradictory* commands* that which must please him, must be suitable to his
blessed nature* He is infinite in Wisdom, and therefore has no pleasure in
fools, that bring him sacrifice, and refuse obedience, and know not that they
do evil, Eccles. 5. 1. and have not the wit to know what they do, and whom they
speak to; and to know that which only is worth the knowing: How often do we
read him rejecting the sacrifice of the wicked, and casting their costliest
offerings in their faces, as things that he abhors, when they come to him
without that humble, loving, and obedient heart, which he requires! Psalm 50.
8, etc. Isa. 1. 11, 12. to ver. 20. Their oblations are v^in, the multitude of
their sacrifie is to no purpose, and incense is an abomination to him; their
Feasts and Sabboth^ his soul hates, they are a trouble to him, he cannot bear
them, if they come without the One thing necessary. Without this he cares not
for their fastings, or formalities, Isa. 58. 5. It is not thousands of rams, or
ten thousand rivers of oil, nor the fruit of their body, if they would give it
for the sin of their soul, that he will accept: But he has showed thee O man
what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and
love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? Mic. 6. 7, 8. The conclusion of the
whole matter is this; Fear God and keep his commandments: for this is the whole
duty of man, Eccles. 12. 13.

You are never the better beloved of God for being Rich, or honorable in the
world, nor yet because you are poor, or in a mean condition, nor because you
are sick or well, weak or strong* comely or uncomely; but because you Love him
through his Son, and Believe in him whom the Father has sent, John 16. 27.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: Heb. 11. 6. The new man must be
put on, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him,
where there is neither Greek, ^^r few. Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but
Christ is all and in all,] Col. 3. 10, 11. [ For in Christ Jesus circumcision
avail^th nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a New Creature, and Faith that works
by Love, and the keeping of the commands of God, Gal. 5. 6. and 6. 15. 1 Cor.
7. 19.

This One thing (even Godllness which is profitable to all things) is necessary
in us, (supposing the necessaries in Christ) to render us acceptable to the
Holy God: and without this all the accomplishments imaginable, will make us but
as sounding brass, or as a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1.

3. One thing is needful to the saving of our souls; without which all things
else are vain. There are many ways to Hell* but to Heaven there is but One:
There are a thousand ways to delude and blind a soul, but only one for its
true and saving illumination. Erroneous Sectaries are blinded in some
particular points, by the seducing words of men: And ungodly sensualists are
blinded in the main, and damnably err from the necessary practical doctrines of
salvation, being deceived by the inclination of their own concupiscence: Errors
are multifarious; and abound even in many that inveigh most fiercely against
the erroneous: But Truth is simple; We have One Teacher to instruct us; One
Spirit to enlighten us, One Word of God to be our Rule; One Light to guide us
through all the darkness and mazes of the world, and recover our deluded
darkened minds. Thousands are ready to draw us away from God; Temptations lie
thick on every hand; Within us, and without us; before us and on each side:
Which way can you look or go, but you will meet with baits and snares? And if
Eve be once deceived, Adam is the easilier overcome. When the appetite and
senses are ensnared by their objects, and the imagination corrupted, the
understanding is in danger of deceit. You may go into an Hospital, and see
variety of diseases: but Health is one and the same: One has the pestilence,
and another has the leprosy, and another a palsy, and another is distracted:
but among a thousand people in Health, you see no such difference: Health only
is formally the cure of all.

What abundance of miserable sinners be in the world, that are almost at Hell
already? But only one sort of men, even the regenerate, are rescued by grace,
and shall be saved from it. Many inventions have men found out for their
destruction; but there is no way but by Christ, through faith and holiness, to
their salvation. Set as light by Christ and Holiness as you will, and deride it
as foolishly and perversely as you please, you will find at last, that this way
or none must bring you to Heaven. Either ignorance, or pride, or covetousness,
or malice, or gluttony, or drunkenness, or voluptuousness or lust, or any one
sin of an hundred may be your ruin: But there is only One salve to heal these
sores; and only one cordial or antidote that can expel these several sorts of
poison from your hearts: Godliness is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Drudge for the world as long as you will, and gape after honor and applause
from men, and try a thousand ways for your content; but when you have all
done, you must return by sound Repentance into the way of holiness, or you are
lost for ever. When you have slighted grace, you must give up your selves to
the power of that grace: When you have set light by a life of holy Love to God,
and the fruition of him in Glory, you must make it your treasure and delight,
and your hearts must be upon it, or you are undone: Matthew. 6. 21. When you have
made a jest of a Holy life, you must come about, and take your selves that
course that you jeasted at, though you be as much jeasted at by others; yea,
and make it the principal business of your lives, or perish in hell under the
vengeance of the Almighty, whose justice you provoked, and whose mercy you
neglected: Choose you whether, but one of them will be your part. Even as Saul
that was exceeding mad against Believers, and persecuted them even to strange
Cities, Acts 26. 10, 11. was glad to become one of them himself though he
suffered as much as he had caused them to suffer; and accounted it the greatest
mercy of his life, that God vouchafed him such a change, what ever it cost him.

IV. Quest. But is nothing necessary but this One? Are not other things also
Needful in their places?
Answ. I told you that other things are not other, so far as they stand in due
subordination to this one, or are the parts of it: He that says to a sick man,
[You would do well if you had such a skillful man for your Physicion] does not
by these words intend to exclude his Apothecary, or his medicines, or the
taking of them, or the instruments and means by which they are applied; but
rather includes and implies all these in the One thing mentioned to which
they do subserve. So all Gods graces, and all the means of grace, and Christian
duties, are contained or employed in the One thing Necessary, or supposed to it.
Because it is One thing that is necessary as the End, therefore many means are
necessary to the obtaining of it: Though there be also a kind of unity (as has
been showed) among those means.

Quest. But are not outward things also necessary: Must we not have food and
raiment? and must we not labor and provide it, and take care for our families,
and follow our callings? Must we not by lawful means avoid reproach and
poverty in the world?

Answ. In the way of Duty it is as necessary that we labor in our callings,
and provide things honest, and subserve Gods providence for the maintenance of
our selves and others; And the things of this life and Needful so far as Life
is needful, that we may have Time and strength to do our works, and be
supported while we seek the One thing needful. But that which is not Necessary
for it self, but for another thing, is not simply or principally Necessary. So
far as Heaven may be obtained, and the work of Christianity done without the
accommodations of the flesh, so far these worldly things are needless. There is
no Necessity that you be Rich or Honorable, or that you live in Health or
Wealth; or that you escape the hatred, and reproach, and trouble of a malicious
world: There is no Necessity that you should save your lives when Christ
requires them: For he that so saves his life, shall lose it, Matthew. 16. 25.
And that Usefulness (which you may in a lower sense call Necessity) that any of
these things are of, is but in their respect to the One thing Necessary, as
they are sanctified means to the service of God and our salvation: If your
daily bread be to be called Necessary, it is not for it self, or for your
fl^shly pleasure, nor ultimately for your life it self; but to sustain your
life while you are seeking after life eternal, and serving him that is the Lord
of life: Your Credit, or Honor, or Pleasure in the world, are no further
Necessary or Useful to you, then they promote this great End for your selves
or others: Nothing but God is simply Necessary for himself, and Nothing else is
any way truly Necessary but for him.

And therefore as by Necessity of precept you must labor in your Callings, and
seek provision for your selves and families, you must most carefully watch your
Hearts that your desires and labors be not carnal, as tending only to carnal
ends; ^ut that you sincerely subject the things desired, to the One thing
necessary, for which you must desire them; and therefore that you desire but
such measures and proportions as are most suitable to that End which is only
for it self desirable: Even life it self must not be desired simply and
ultimately for it self.

As you must pray but for your daily bread, and be content with food and
raiment, so you must see, that these be but for better things; even in order to
the doing of the Will of God, the promoting of his Kingdom, and the Hallowing
of his Name, which must be first and most desired. The order of your duty is,
to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and then other things
are promised with it, Matthew. 6. 33. and therefore for it, must be desired and
sought.

And if your very food and life must be desired but for this everlasting End,
then it is still but one thing that is necessary, and finally to be desired.
For the Means is willed but with an imperfect willing, because not for it self;
and that only has our full and perfect Love, which is Loved for it self: Even
in the act of Love unto the Means, it is more properly the End that is Loved
then the Means, and the Means is chosen for that End. So that you see that for
all the necessity of creatures, and of diligence in our Callings, the truth is
still clear, that it is only One thing that is truly Necessary.

Use.
THE understandidg is the subservient faculty, to let in that light, which may
by direction and excitation, guide the will: Having showed you the Truth, I am
next to show you how you may improve it, and so to apply it, as may best help
you to apply it to your selves.

And if I should here fall upon things impertinent, or make it my work to claw
your ears, or exalt my self in your esteem, by an unseasonable ostentation of
learning or eloquence, or carry on any such corrupt design, while I should
faithfully do the work of God, my Text it self would openly condemn me. If One
thing be needful, it is that One that I must do my self, while I am exhorting
you to do it: And woe be to me, if I should lay by that, to do any other
unnecessary work, even to fish for the applause of Carnal wits, while my very
subject is the Reproofs of Christ against a much more tolerable error.

And as to the manner of my admonition, if One thing be needful, I hope you
will allow me to be as plain and serious as I can, about this One: And my first
address to you shall be for trial.

And I shall make it now my earnest request to you, that you ^ill bethink you
how much you are concerned, to compare your ^arts and lives with this passage,
and judge your selves by the Word of God that is now before you: And for your
own sakes ^^ it seriously and faithfully, as passengers that are hasting to the
^^eat Assize. What say your Consciences, Sirs, to this Question? Have you
indeed lived in the world as men that believe that One thing is necessary? Has
this One had your chiefest care and labor, and have you chosen rather to
neglect all other things then ^is? Look behind you, and judge of the course
that you have taken by the light of this one text. I do not ask you Whether you
have heard that One thing is Necessary: nor whether you have talked of it, and
confessed it to be true: nor whether you have been called Christians by your
selves and others, and have come to Church, and forborne those sins that would
have most ^^emished your honor in the world: This is nothing to the question:
Thus many thousands do, that were never acquainted with the One thing
Necessary. Nor do I ask you, Whether you have used to allow God half an hours
lip-service or formal ^rowsie prayer at night, when you have served the world
and ^^esh all day? Nor whether you have been Religious on the by, and given God
some lean devotion which cost you little, and which your flesh can spare
without any great diminution or de^iment in its ease, and honor, and profit,
and sensual delights: Nor whether you run to some kind of duties of Religion,
to make all whole, when you come from wilful reigning sin; and so make Religion
a fortress to your lusts, to quiet your Consciences while you serve the flesh:
I confess such a kind of Religioussess as this, the world is acquained with:
But this is unanswerable to the Rule before us.

But the question is, Whether this One thing has been the Treasure and Jewel
of your estimation; the darling of your affections; the prize of your most
diligent endeavors, and the only felicity of your souls?

Sirs, as lightly as you hear this question now, you will One day find that
your lives, yea your salvation lies upon your answer to it. Can you say truly,
as before the searcher of hearts, that it is he that has had your hearts? That
this One thing has been more esteemed by you, than all the world besides? That
other things have all stooped unto this One, and served under it? And that this
has had the stream of your heartiest affections, and the drift of your
endeavors, and has been the matter that you have had first to do, and the
thing for which you have lived in the world?

If this be not so, never talk of your Christianity for shame: Your Religion is
vain, if this be not your Religion. Alas I know that we have all of us yet too
much of the flesh, and are too cold in our affections, and too slow and uneven
in our endeavors for our end: But yet for all that I must still tell you, (as
I have often done because it is necessary) that here lies the difference
between the truly sanctified soul, and all the hypocrites and halfChristians in
the world: [ Every true Christian is devoted unto God, and has made an hearty
and absolute resignation of himself and all that he has unto him; and
therefore loves him with his superlative, most appretiative love, and serves
him with the best he has, and thinks nothing too good or too dear for God, and
for the attainment of his everlasting Rest: Christ has the chiefest room in
his heart, and the bent and drift of his life is for him: He studyeth how he
may best serve and please him with his time, his interest, and all that he
has: and if he fall, as it is contrary to the habitual resolution of his soul,
and contrary to the scope and current of his heart and life, so he rises again
by repentance with sorrow for his sin, and loathing of himself, and sincerely
endeavors to amend, and goes on resolvedly in his holy course.] This is the
state of every one that is in a state of life.

But for all hypocrites and half-Christians, their case is otherwise: The world
and flesh is dearest to them, and highest in their practical estimation, though
not in their speculative: and it has their highest affections of Love and
Delight, and the very bent and stream of heart and life, while God is served
heartlesly on the by, for fear lest they be damned, when they can enjoy the
world and sin no longer, and is put off with the leavings of the flesh, and
has no more of their hearts, their tongues, their time, their wealth, then it
can spare: They ask their flesh how far they shall be Religious, and will go no
further then will stand with their prosperity in the world: With the first and
best they serve the flesh, and with the cheapest and the refuse they serve the
Lord: When they go highest in their outside carnal Religiousness, they go not
beyond this hypocritical reserved state; (and usually, as Cain, they hate Abel
for offering a more acceptable sacrifice): God must take up with this from
them, or ^^ without: They always serve him with this reserve, though it (...)
not always explicit and discerned by them, [ Provided that ^^ may go well
with me in the world, and* I may have some competent proportion of honor,
profit or pleasure, and Religion may not ^^ose me to be undone:] If God will
not take them on these (...), (as most certainly he never will) he must go look
him ^^^er servants: and so he will; and make them know at last (...) their
sorrow, that he needed not their service, but it was (...) that needed him, and
the benefits of his service.

I thought meet (though I have done it often before) to give ^^^ this difference
between the Hypocrite and the sincere: And ^^w it is my earnest request unto
you all, that you will presently ^^ your souls to an account, and know which of
these two ^^rses you have taken; and which of these two is your own ^^ondition.

If nature had made you such strangers to your selves, as that (...) were
unable to answer such a question, I would never trouble (...) with it: but I
suppose by faithful enquiry, you may know (...) much of your selves, if you are
but willing. You know where it is that you have dwelt, and what it is that you
have been ^^^ng in the world, and you can review the actions of your lives,
though they have been of smaller consequence. Why then may (...) not quickly
know if you will, so great a thing, as What has ^^ the very End and Business
for which you have lived in the ^^rld till now? Have you been running so long,
and know not ^^ what is the prize that you have run for? Have you forgot the ^^
and that you have been so long going on? Have you been ^^sie all your days
till now, and know not about what or why? ^ertainly this is a thing that may be
known, if you are willing and ^igent to know it: It is for one of these two
that you have, ^^ed; for the world, or for God: To please your flesh, or to
^ease God and be saved: Either to make provision for Earth or ^raven: Which of
these is it? Deal plainly with your selves, ^or your salvation is deeply
concerned in the account.

Perhaps you will say, that It was for both: for as you have a soul and a body,
so you must look to both: Yea, but so as one ^^at knows, that One thing is
Needful: As your body is but ^^e prison, the case, the servant of your souls;
so it must be pro^^ded for and used but as a servant, and maintained only in a
fit^ess for its work: But the question is, Which of them has had the
pre-eminence? Which has had the life of your affections and endeavors? Which
of them was your end? and about which has been the chief business that you
have most carefully and diligently carried on? This is the great question.

You cannot have two masters, though you may have many instruments and
fellow servants: You cannot acceptably serve God, if you serve Mammon: Every
wicked man may do something in Religion, and every good man may do something
that is contrary to Religion: A carnal man may do something for God, and for
his soul; and a spiritual man ought to do something subordinately for his body,
and too often, alas, does something for it inordinately: But which bears the
sway? and which is first sought? and which comes behind, and has but the
leavings of the other?

Be not deceived: God is not mocked: Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap: If you sow to the flesh, of the flesh you shall reap corruption: but if
you sow to the spirit, of the spirit you shall reap everlasting life: Gal. 6.
7, 8. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world (for
themselves): for if any man love the world, (with his chiefest Love) the Love
of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. Is it not a wonder that any
reasonable man can be such a stranger to himself, as not to know what he lives
for, and what has had his heart, and what has been the principal business of
his life? Some by-matters you may easily forget or overlook: but can you do so
by your end, which has been your chiefest care and business?

If indeed you no more know your own minds, nor what you have all this while
been doing in the world, ask those that you have conversed with; *and judge by
the effects and signs: Others can tell what you have most seriously talked of:
They may conjecture by their observation, what you have most carefully sought,
and resolutely adhered to. Whether it be God or the flesh; this world or
Heaven? The One thing Needful, or the many troubling trifles in your way: It is
like that wise and godly observers can help you to discern it; though
sensualists will but deceive you.

A man's Love, at least his chiefest Love, cannot be hid, but will appear in his
behavior: If you Love God above the world, you will seek him and his Glory
before the world: and if you do so, it may partly be discerned, if you have
conversed with discerning men: Heaven and earth are not so like, nor the way to
each of them so like, but it may partly be discerned which way men are going,
and what they drive at in their daily course.

But I will urge you no further to the trial: I will take it for granted that
your Consciences are telling many of you, that you have been troubled about
many things, while the One thing Needful has been neglected: And if indeed
this be your case, suffer me to tell the guilty plainly, what it is that they
have done.

1. Whatever you have been doing in the world, you have lost your Time, if you
have not been seeking the One thing necessary. If you have been gathering
riches, or growing up in honor as the rush grows in the mire, ( Job 8. 11.)
or filling your purses or your barnes, or pleasing your fantasies and flesh;
you have but fooled away your time, and done just nothing, and much worse:
Nothing is done, if the One thing Necessary be undone Believe it, Time is a
precious thing, and ought not to have been thus cast away. When you come to the
end of it, the worst and proudest of you shall confess it is precious. Then O
for one year more! O for a few days or hours more, to make sure of this One
thing, which you should have spent your lives in making sure of. Will you then
think thus, and yet can you now afford to cast away twenty or thirty years upon
Nothing? If Time be worth Nothing, your Lives are worth Nothing: And why should
a man desire to Live for Nothing? You Love your lives too much, and yet will
you so contemptuously cast them away? He has lost his life, who has lost the
End of his life. The loss of an hundred pound in money is not (to your selves)
so great a loss, as the loss of a days or hours time. What then is the loss of
so many years? Did you ever well consider of this? If you live a thousand
years, it is all lost, if you have not spent it in making sure of the One thing
Necessary. For is not that lost, and worse a thousand times then lost; that is
spent in crossing the End that it is given for? and which is no comfort, but
terror in the review, and which leaves no fruit, but grief and
disappointment? Let me tell you, if you hold on thus unto the end, you will
wish and wish a thousand times, either that you had never had an hours time, or
else that you had had hearts, to have better perceived the worth and use of it,
then to cast it away as you have done upon nothing. It is but One thing that is
worth your Time and Lives.

2. Whatsoever else you have been doing, you have lost all your Labor with
your Time, if this One thing Needful have been neglected. No doubt you have
been busy since you came into the world, but to little purpose. You might as
well have been idle, as so laboriously doing nothing. No doubt many a journey
you have rode and gone, and many a hard days labor you have taken, and
sharpened perhaps with care and grief: But you have lost it all, if it were an
hundred times more, if it have not been said out upon the One thing necessary.

And is it not a pitiful thing that men of reason, should vex themselves, and
coil their bodies, and suffer hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and make such
a stir and pudder in the world, and all for nothing, and in a vain show? How
many mornings have you risen to your labor, and how many days and years have
you spent in it, and now it is all lost? How many thoughts and fears, and
cares, have possessed and pestred your minds, and now they are all lost? Some
of you have followed your trades, and some your husbandry, and some have run up
and down after recreations: some of you have been scraping riches, and some
contriving to keep up their reputation, and some to satisfy their appetites,
and live in pleasure and contentment to the flesh; and now look back upon all
that you have done and gotten, and tell your selves whether all this be not
lost, yea alas much worse then lost: If you be not ready to pass this
conclusion at the very heart, it is because your hearts are yet blinded and
hardened in sin; but God will soon bring that to your hearts, that shall
convince you of it. If God have made use of any worldly sensual person of you,
for public good, of Church or state, as men do of thorns for hedging to their
lands, or of briars to stop a gap, or of firewood to warm their family; yet as
to any durable benefit to your selves, I may well say that all your Labor is
lost.

And this is not all; but the pains also that you have taken in your formal
hypocritical Religion, your hearing, reading, receiving Sacraments, and
pretended prayer, all the thoughts that ever you had of death, and judgment,
and the life to come, and all that you have done with reservations and by
halves for your own salvation, this also is all lost: Except as a less measure
of misery may go for gain. If you miss of the One thing necessary, you do but
lose your labor, whatever else you seem to gain.

A great stir you make in seeking for preferment, or dominion over others, or
about your lands, your honors or your delights; so great that your neighbors
can scarce live quietly by you; and the Kingdom cannot be quiet for some of
you, nor your own consciences be quiet within you for the desperate work that
you engage them in, which they know must be heard of another day: And when all
is done, you will find you have been but hunting of a feather: You would see
this now if God would open your eyes by grace: but if you miss of so seasonable
an information, you will see it too late in the land of darkness: When death
has opened your eyes, and your impenitent souls do suddenly awake in another
world, you will understand that you made all this stir but in your sleep: As
busily and seriously as you acted the parts of Lords and Ladies, of Gentlemen,
Tradesmen, or Husbandmen in the world, if you did not seriously and first do
the work of true Believers for the world to come, you will then find too late
that your labor is lost, and all was acted but as in a dream.

Do you believe this now, or do you not? If you do, will you yet go on? If you
do not believe it, show me now what you have gotten by all the stir that you
have made in the world, that will follow you one step further then the grave,
and that you can say shall be your own to morrow? If you were to die this hour,
will it be any lasting comfort to you, that you have labored to be Rich or
Honorable, or that you have attained it? or that you had your glut of sensual
delights; and a merry life as to the fleshly pleasure as long as it would last?
Will you dye the more comfortably for any of this? or much the less? That yet
you are alive, is the great mercy of God, and not to be ascribed to any of
these: And when you cease to live, then these will be your grief and torment.

Beloved Hearers, I have no desire the Lord knows to discompose your minds, or
to disquiet you with any molesting unnecessary scruples; nor causelessly to
dishonor either you or your employments: But I must needs say, that it is a
doleful case, that men in their wits, should spend a life of precious time,
and also a great deal of care and labor, in doing* Nothing, and much worse
then Nothing, when they have a work of everlasting consequence to do, and they
know that the Devils chiefest hopes do consist in the success of these
diversions! I must seriously profess to you, that I am constrained by the word
and teachings of God, and by undeniable reason it self, to look upon all the
labor of your lives, the highest, and the busiest, but as the picking of
straws, or playing with a feather, or riding upon a staff or a hobbyhorse, or
such like actions as children, fools or mad men use, as long as you mind not,
and seek not after the One thing necessary. What ever they may be to others,
they are no wiser or better to your selves: This is my judgment; yea, this is
the judgment of the Spirit of God: Phil. 3. 8. If Paul was not mistaken, your
gain it self is to be accounted Loss, and all but dung in comparison of the
knowing and winning of Christ, that you might be found in him, and have his
righteousness: Think not the name of dung too base, when God himself has
written it here upon your highest endowments and honors, by his Spirit. And
indeed what will they all do more then dung to procure you the favor of God,
or the pardon of your sins? If you offer him gold, will it do any more then if
you offered him so much dirt? Is not the prayer of a beggar heard as soon as of
a Lord or Gentleman? If they would do any thing to buy you peace of Conscience,
or everlasting life, or if they would but keep you alive on earth, I should not
marvail at your course: But when they will do none of this, but make your way
to Heaven more difficult, yea, your salvation a thing impossible while you thus
live after the flesh ( Romans 8. 13.) how then can any easier sentence be past
upon your choice? Be you the Greatest or the Wisest in your own esteem, or in
the esteem of others of your mind, I believe, yea, I am sure, that you are all
this while but laboriously idle, and honorably debasing your selves, and
delightfully tormenting your selves, and wisely befooling your selves, and
thriftily undoing your selves for ever. I have reason to say that your rising
and honorable and voluptuous employments, are not only like childrens playing
in the sand, and making them houses with sticks and stones: but so much more
pitiful, as the reason which you abuse exceeds theirs. And could you all
attain to be Lords and Ladies, I should look upon you but as a King or Queen
upon a Chess-board, as to any felicity that it brings to your selves;
whatsoever use the overruling providence of God may make of you for his
Churches. The wise Merchant is he that seeking pearls does find this One of
greatest price, and sells all that he has and buyeth it; even all the
worldly treasures which you so highly value: Mat. 13* 45* 46. There is more
true Riches in this One pearl then in a thousand loads of sand or dirt. If you
will load your selves with mire and clay conceiting it to be your treasure,
your backs will be broken before you will have enough to make you rich.

O Sirs, with what eyes, with what hearts do you use to read such passages of
Christ that speak so plainly to you, as if he named you, and so piercingly as
one would think should make you feel, Luke 12. 19, 20, 21. Soul, thou have much
goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry: But
God said to him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? so is he that lays
up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.] Would you have Christ
speak plainer to to you: or closelyer apply it, that you may perceive he speaks
to you? You have lost all the Labor of your lives; but that's not all.

3. But furthermore consider, that if the One thing needful have been
neglected, whatever else you have been doing, or whatever you have got, (unless
as preparatory to this) you have not only lost your labor, but you have all
this while been busily undoing your selves, and laboring for your own
perdition.

If it were but the loss of your Time and Labor, you would then die but as
brutes, and be as if you had never been: and to those that have brutified
themselves, this will seem more tolerable, then to live in holiness to God: But
alas, you have done much worse then this; You have not only been digging your
own graves, but barring up against your selves the doors of heaven, and
kindling the unquenchable fire to torment you; Mar. 9. 44.

I beseech you give me a considerate hearing, you ambitious Gentlemen, you
covetous worldlings, and you that serve your lusts and pleasures! Do you think
you had been doing the the work of wisemen, if you had all this while been
burning your own fingers, or cutting your own flesh, or setting your own or
your neighbors houses on fire? What would you have us call that man that would
live in such employments as these, and yet would be accounted wise or
honorable? Do I need to tell thee, as Nathan did David, that [ Thou art the
man?] Do I need in so plain a case to tell you, that you have been doing worse,
(I speak not rashly) a thousand times worse, against your souls, then this
would have been which is supposed to be only against your bodies! Alas
self-destroyers, what do you mean? Did God send you hither on no better an
errand than to kindle and blow the fire of his wrath, and fall into it when you
have kindled it? Have you no better work in the world to do, then to prepare
your selves a place in hell? and with a great deal of care, and cost, and stir,
to labor for damnation, as if you were afraid of losing it?

I know you will say, [ God forbid, we hope better, we intend no such thing]
But alas the question is not, What you intend, but what you are doing? Not
whether it be your desire that everlasting death should be the wages of sin,
but whether it be the Law and unchangeable will of God? Romans 6. 23. If you seek
not first Gods Kingdom and his righteousness, and look not after the One thing
needful, with your chiefest Estimation, Resolution, and Endeavors, as sure as
Christ is true, this will prove your case at last, though now you wink, and
wilfully go on, and will not believe it: As sure as the Gospel is true, this is
true. There are but two Ends, Heaven and Hell; and if you miss the former, you
fall into the latter. If you live after the flesh, you shall die, whatever you
imagine: and you must mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, if you
will live, Romans 8. 13. If you see a man cutting his own threat, and you ask
him, [ What are you doing man! will you kill your self?] and he answers you,
No, God forbid; I have no such meaning; I will hope better]. Would you think
that this would save his life? or that his hopes and meanings would prove him
ever the wiser man? I tell you from the Word of God, it is one of the plainest
truths that is there contained, that if you value not, choose not, and seek not
the One thing Needful above all other things whatsoever, you are all this while
but sowing the seeds of endless misery, whose fruit you must reap in outer
darkness, where will be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 13.
42, 50. You are treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will give to every man
according to his works, Romans 2. 5, 6. You are sowing in pleasure to the flesh,
in eating, and drinking, and mirth, and honor: but you shall reap in
corruption, lamentation and woe. Gal. 6. 7, 8. For woe to you that now laugh,
for you shall mourn and weep: Woe to you that are rich (and have no better, but
want the everlasting riches), for you have received your conselation: Woe to
you that are full, (and yet are empty of Christ and grace) for you shall
hunger, Luke 6. 24, 25. These are the words of Christ himself; and therefore
true if Christ be true.

Yea more then this, let me have leave to tell you, (for why should I not tell
you of your greatest folly, and that which is necessary for you to know?) As
long as you neglect the One thing necessary, you are acting the part of the
most deadly enemies against your selves. No enemy that you have in all the
world, could do that against you, as you do against your selves. You abhor the
Devil; and I blame you not; for his malice and enmity deserves it: But you do
much worse against your selves then the Devil himself could ever do. To tempt
you to sin is not so much as to Consent to it and commit it. He can but entice
you, and not constrain you: It is you that are the neglecters of your Maker and
Redeemer, and the wilful rejecters of your own felicity: Satan does bad enough
against you by temptation; but you do worse by yielding and sinning; much worse
then all the Devils in hell could do against you. For God has not given all of
them so much power over you, as he has given you over your selves.

Lord, what a distracted case is the ungodly world in! They hate any man else
that they do but imagine is their enemy! Though he do but diminish their
worldly wealth or honor, they cannot forgive him: If a man give one of them a
box on the ear, he cannot bear it: And as for the Devil, who is the common
enemy, they spit at his name, and (think they) bless themselves from him: And
yet these same men do spend all their care, and time, and labor, in doing more
against themselves, then all their enemies could do in earth or hell: and are
worse then Devils to themselves; and yet they never fall out with themselves
for it; but can forgive themselves as easily as if they did themselves no harm.

This is true, too true Sirs, as harsh as it seems to your ears; And if it
displease you to hear of it, bethink your selves what it is to do it; and how
God and all wise men must judge of you that have no more mercy on your selves:
Certainly it is much worse to do it, then to tell you what you do. God tells
men of their sin, and God does nothing but what is good; but it is themselves
only that commit it: I beseech you do but understand what you are doing, as
long as the One thing necessary is neglected by you.

4. Consider also, that whatsoever else you have been doing in the world, if
you have not done the One thing needful, you have unmanned your selves, and
lived below your Reason, and in plain English, you have lived as be sides your
wits.

I give you no harder language then God himself has frequently given you in
his Word, and then you will shortly give your selves, if you repent not; yea
and sooner if you do repent. If you have (in this) the use of your Reason, you
must needs know what you have your Reason for: And I beseech you tell me for
what you have it, if not to serve and please your Maker, and prepare for your
everlasting state? Is it only that you may know how to plow and sow, and follow
your trades and pleasure in the world, and satisfy your flesh a little while,
and then die as the beasts that perish? None of you, I suppose, will say so,
that calls himself a Christian: If God had made you for no higher things then
beasts, he would have given you no higher faculties and endowments. As they be
not made to enjoy God, so they have no knowledge of him: he sends not his
Word to them, and calls them not to learn the knowledge of his will: But you
know, or may know, that there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; and are capable of Loving him, intending him, and serving
him, and therefore of enjoying him: Beasts are not ruled by the hopes and fears
of a life after this: For their nature and end do not require it. But men must
be thus ruled, or else there can be no sufficient ruling of them, in an
ordinary way: Which shows that the Nature of man is capable of the things which
are the matter of their hopes and fears.

Verily Sirs, I think, as to any good that comes by it, there is very little
difference between having Reason, and having none, if we had nothing to do with
it, but cunningly to lay up our food, and make provision for this corruptible
flesh, and had not another life to mind. It were no such great difference, in
my opinion, as it commonly goes for, whether we were men or dogs, if it were
only for the matters of this transitory life. For though I may not deny but yet
man were the nobler creature, yet alas the difference would be but graduall and
small, as an Ape or Dog excells a Swine: And as to his Happiness, it is
doubtful whether Man would not have the worst of it. For as brutes have not
man's knowledge, so they have not his toil and trouble of mind, his care, and
fear, and griefs, and disappointments: Nor have they so terrible fore-thoughts
of death through all their lives, as man must have, much less such fears of
what would follow after death.

And therefore I may boldly say, that you have thrown away your wits, and laid
by your Reason as to the principal use of it, if you have forgot, or have not
chiefly sought the One thing necessary. Where were your wits when a lump of
flesh was preferred before immortal souls? and when the trouble and dung of a
transitory world, was more esteemed then God and endless Glory? Where were your
wits when you might have had Christ, and Life in him, and his pardoning,
healing, sanctifying grace, and you had no mind of him, and were not sensible
of your necessity, and past him by with as much neglect, as if you could have
been saved without him? When you might long ago have made sure of Heaven; and
now you are even ready to drop into Hell, and stay but for a Fever, or
Consumption, or some other disease to cut the thread, and turn the key, unless a
speedy sound conversion shall yet prevent it. What have you done in all your
lifetime, that should make a wise man judge you Reasonable? Is that your
Reason to be penny wise and pound foolish; to be wise to do evil, and to have
no knowledge to do good? Jerem. 4. 22. To run up and down for I know not what,
and to leave that undone that you were created and redeemed for? Can you think
that it is Reasonable to make such ado for the air of dying men's applause, and
to be well thought of, or to live like Gentlemen, or to the contentment of a
fleshly mind, when you know that you are just ready to pass out of this world
into an endless life of Joy or Torment, (yea certainly of torment, if you thus
hold on)? Where all these things will afford you no relief or benefit; but the
memory of your course will be the fuel of your misery: Can that man be wise
that damns his soul? Can he deserve the name of a sober man, that will sell his
salvation for so short, so small, so filthy a pleasure as sin affords? Is he
worthy the name or reputation of a wise man, that has not wit enough to escape
eternal fire? nor wit enough to forbear laying hands upon himself, and doing
all this against his own soul? What think you, is not the case here plain
enough?

Be not offended if I speak yet plainlyer to you; for in a case so lamentable,
how can we be too plain or serious? Suppose you knew a Prince or Lord, that had
an itch upon him, which the Physicion offers speedily and easily to cure; but
he has so much pleasure in scratching, that he does not only refuse the cure,
lest it deprive him of his delight, but he will give his Kingdom or Lordship to
one that will scratch him but a little while, though he be sure to live a
beggar after it all his days. I put it to your selves, What name you would
give this man, or what esteem you would have of him: Do you think that any
ungodly worldly person is wiser than this man? Alas their case is so much
worse, that there is no comparison: They are more foolish then your hearts can
now conceive, or then I am able fully to express. You have now the itch of
Pride and Lust; and your throats must be pleased in your meats, and drinks; and
you itch after riches, and honor, and recreations; and Christ tells you by
his Word, that these are but your sick desires, and that the pleasing of them
tends to kill you; and he offers you for nothing, a safe, and certain, and
speedy cure: But you refuse it, and will not hearken to him: You must be
scratcht whatever it cost you: You must have your riches, and honor, and
fleshly pleasure, as the felicity which you cannot part with, though it cost
you your salvation. Though God be neglected, and his favor lost, and your
souls be lost, and the One thing needful cast aside, you must have your carnal
imaginations gratified: And is this your wisdom? The Lord bless us from such a
kind of wisdom.

Yet this is not the worst: I will show you one strain more of the distraction
of the ungodly world. If these men do but see one person of an hundred that are
more diligent for Heaven then carth, to fall into Melancholy, or distress of
soul; or suppose it were into some loss of reason; they presently cry out
against Religion, and strictness, and preciseness, and making so much ado to be
saved; and say it is the way to make men mad: Hence comes the proverb of the
Papists [ Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus melancholicus]; and of the profane
among our selves, that [ A Puritan is a Protestant frightened out of his wits]:
They dare not study the Scripture so much, nor meddle with such high matters as
their salvation, nor be so godly, nor meditate on the world to come, lest it
should drive them out of their wits. O miserable men! As if it were possible
for you to be more dangerously mad, then you are already! (Unless by growing
unto greater wickedness!) Do you lay out your wit, and strength, and time, in
feeding a corruptible body for the grave, and spend your lives in running after
your own shaddows, while your everlasting life is forgotten or neglected! Do
you sell your Savior with Judas for a little money; and change your part in
God and Glory, for the brutish pleasures of sin for a season? And are you
afraid of altering this course of life, and turning to God, lest it should make
you mad? Lord, what a besotting thing is sin! What a cunning cheater is the
Devil! What a deluded distracted sort of people are the ungodly? Will you run
from God, from Christ, from Grace, from mercy, from Scripture, from the godly,
and from Heaven it self for fear of being mad? Why what greater madness can you
fear then this? What worse is humane nature capable of? Unless it be the
addition of a further measure of the same, and unless it be to hold on in that
way, and persecute the contrary with such like aggravations of your madness, I
know not of any worse that you should fear. Will you run to Hell to prove your
selves to be in your wits? Again I say, the Lord bless us from such a kind of
wit. Nay Hell it self has no such distractedness as yours: The difference
between the One thing needful, and your many things, is there better, though
too late understood! Is Loving God the way to be mad? and loving the world and
fleshly pleasures the way to be wise? Is conversing with God in humble prayer,
and believing his love, and loving him, and delighting in him, and speaking of
his name, and word, and works unto his praise, and hoping to live with him for
ever, I say, is this (which is the work of a Believer) a liker course to make
men mad, then serving the Devil, and drudging in the world, and living under
the curse of God, and in continual danger of damnation? What men are they, that
dare entertain such horrid and unreasonable suggestions?

I confess we are not unacquainted with the sadness and melancholy that some
persons have contracted by Religious employments; and perhaps one of a thousand
may lose their wits: But I must tell you, all these following points, that will
show you that Religion is not to be blamed for it, nor avoided.

1. It is ordinarily persons of the weaker sex, or of very weak brains and very
strong passions, that are naturally inclined to it, and are not able to bear
any long and serious thoughts, about matters of that moment, which are apt to
make the deepest impressions: But persons that naturally are of sound and calm
dispositions, are seldom troubled with any such affects.

2. It is usually the case of persons that mistake the nature of Religion,
though not in the main, yet in some particulars of great concernment: That
study not sufficiently the Love of God declared to us in our Redeemer, but feed
their griefs and troubles only by the thoughts of their own infirmities; and
that consider not that the chief part of Religion does consist in Love, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost, and in Thanksgiving and delightful praising our Creator. So
that it is not long of Religion if men will leave out the chief parts of
Religion, and make themselves a Religion of so much only as may breed their
trouble.

3. And I must further tell you, that as I have had opportunity of knowing the
state of as many troubled distempered minds, as any one of you whoever he be;
so I must needs bear witness, that I have met with many that have been
distracted by worldly cares, or sorrows, or discontents, for one that ever I
knew distracted with the cares about the matter of their salvation. And yet
though it be worldly care and sorrow that most commonly brings death and
madness, you will not therefore give over your Callings, and resolve that you
will meddle no more with meat, or drink, or clothes, or houses, or lands, or
friends, or children: Nay it were well if you would be brought to moderation,
and taken off your inordinate desires.

4. And yet in the conclusion I must tell you, that, though I know that the
loss of a man's understanding is a very grievous affliction, and such as I hope
God will never lay upon me, yet I had a thousand times rather go distracted to
Bedlam with the excessive care about my salvation, then be one of you that cast
away the care of your salvation for fear of being distracted, and will go among
the infernal Bedlams into hell for fear of being mad. The height of your carnal
wisdom is more deplorable then their distraction. For God will condemn no man
because he is distracted, nor so much as blame him for it, (unless as it is the
fruit of sin,) no more then he will condemn or blame an Idiot or a beast,
because they have no use of reason: If David had been as he seigned himself to
be, 1 Samuel 21. 13, 14. it would not have cast him out of Gods favor, so far as
one sin did, much less so far as the ungodly are. A man may go to Heaven from
such a madness. But you that have Reason for the world, but none for God; that
are wise to do evil, that have wit to destroy your selves and serve the flesh,
but none to look after your recovery and salvation, its you that shall have the
stripes, the many, the great, the endless stripes. You that have so much wit as
that you glory in it, and think your selves wiser then the rest of the world,
and yet have not wit to know, and love, and serve your maker: nor to value and
seek first the One thing necessary, it is you that will prove the miserable
fools.

If you had not had a natural capacity of understanding, you had had no sin:
But now you have no cloak for your sin, when you have the worldly wisdom which
is foolishness with God, and have a sinning, self-destroying wit, and are
wilfully void of the wisdom that should save you, (1 Cor. 1. 25. and 3. 19.
Jer. 8. 9.) when you have not a necessitated, but a voluntary distraction: and
this is your condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and you have
loved darkness rather then Light, because your deeds were evil, John 3. 19.

If you think this wilful and senseless neglect of the One thing needful is
not a sufficient evidence to prove that miserable distraction which I charge
upon you, will you but believe your Maker, and let the word of God be Judge
between us, and mark what language it gives to such as I now describe 2 Thessalonians.
3. 2. Jer. 4. 22. Eccles. 7. 25. 2 Pet. 2. 12. Psalm 92. 6. and 94. 8. Jer. 10.
8. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Psalm 73. 3. 22. 2 Samuel 14. 10. In these places your course
has no better titles, than unreasonable, foolish, brutish, sottish, etc. even
from the God of Wisdom himself, who is the fittest to give you the character
that you deserve. When you have truly considered of your way, if indeed you
find that you have dealt like wise men, hold on and say so at the last, when
you have eaten the fruit of your doing, and have seen the End.

5. Furthermore Consider, that what ever else you have been doing in the world,
if the one thing necessary be yet undone, you have lost and abused all the
mercies that God has bestowed on you: Many a thousand precious mercies have
been given you: And to what use, but to help you to everlasting mercy, and to
prevent your everlasting misery! This is the End, and this is the Life and
excellency of all your mercies: For all present mercies have the Nature of a
Means to a further End: And the Goodness and nature of the Means consists in
its fitness to promote the End. And therefore you have lost all the Mercies
that you have received, if you are never the nearer your End for them; and if
they have not promoted the Love of God, and your salvation. You have had
health, and strength, and time, and peace, and liberty, and some of you also
wealth and honor in the world. But you have lost them all, if your salvation
be not furthered by them. Many a preservation you have had, when others have
been cut off before your faces, and many a deliverance from dangers known or
unknown, and much of the fruit of that Patience of God, which has till now
attended you in your sin: Many a Sermon you have heard, and many a warning you
have had, and you have been planted in God, Vineyard, and daily watered with
the Ordinances of grace: But all these are lost if the One thing necessary has
been neglected: Nothing in this world does you good indeed, any further then it
promoteth your Everlasting good. And do you think that you have dealt kindly or
justly with God, to deal so contemptuously with all his mercies, as to cast
them away, and tread them under foot? When you want but food, or raiment, or
liberty or health, you value them and pray for them; and when you have them,
what do you with them, but throw them as in the channel, and sacrifice them to
your lusts and enemies: When Death looks you in the face, you begin to know
the worth of Time, and then O what would you not give for a little more, and
that God would try you a few years longer: And when you have Time, what do you
with it, but serve the Devil, and cast it away for nothing, and spend it in
preparing for everlasting sorrows? How can you for shame cry to God for Mercy
in your next distress, when you have contemptuously thrown away the Mercies of
twenty, or thirty, or forty years already: If your own children should ask you
for meat or drink, and when they have it should throw it to the dogs; or ask
you for money, and cast it into the dirt, and do thus an hundred and an hundred
times over, would you go on to give it them because they cry for it?

O Sirs, that you could but use your Reason in the matters for which it was
given you by your Maker! Either time and mercy is worth something, or nothing:
If it be worth nothing, never beg for it, and never be sad when it is taken
from you. Why make you such a stir for that which is nothing worth? (I mean
your corporal mercies, for spiritual mercies you can be too well content to be
without) But if they be worth any thing, why do you cast them away, and make no
better use of them? What good do you with them? or what good do they do you?
Believe it, sinners, God does not despise his mercies as you do. He will not
always give you meat, and drink, and health, and strength, and life, to play
with, and do nothing with. He will teach you better to value them before he
has done with you. Not that he thinks them too good for you; but he would have
them be better to you then you will let them be. He would have every bit you
eat, to be used to strengthen you in your walk to heaven, and every hour of
your time to help you toward eternal happiness, and every present mercy to
further your everlasting mercy; that so by the improvement, their value may be
advanced, and they may be mercies indeed to you. Be ruled by God, and you shall
receive more in one mercy, then you do now in a thousand. But if you will do
nothing with them, blame him not if he take them from you, and leave you
destitute of what you knew not how to use.

Nay your sin is greater then merely to cast away your mercies: You do not only
lose them, but turn them all into a curse, and undo your souls with that which
is given for the sustentation of your bodies: While you know no better use of
mercies, then to please your senses, and accommodate the flesh, and forget the
One thing needful, which is the End of all, you turn them all into sin, and
fight against God by them, and strengthen his enemy and your own, and block up
your way to Heaven by them, and treasure up wrath for the dreadful day, when
your wealth shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were
fire, Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3. Romans 2. 5. You contemptuously cast that bread to dogs,
which he gives you to supply your own necessities: You treacherously carry
over his provision to the enemy. Consider this, you that say you hope to be
saved, because God is merciful: You have found indeed that God is merciful, by
large experience: But if you do not learn, and quickly learn to make a better
use of his mercies, abused mercy will prove your everlasting misery: O what a
reckoning will you have? What a load to press you down to Hell? Unless you
would have used them better, it had been easier for you, if these temporal
mercies had been denied you: Can that man look to be saved by mercy, that would
not be entreated to consent that mercy should save him in the day of salvation?
in the accepted time? but served the Devil with those very mercies that would
have saved him? God sends you his mercies to kill your sins, and sanctify
you, and engage you to himself; and if you will feed your sins with them, and
make them your idols, and forsake God for them, and be false to him, to your
Covenant, and your duty, and neglect that One thing for which he gave them to
you, you do not only lose them, but turn them to a curse. And, alas, poor
sinners, what will you have to fly to, to trust in, or to comfort you, when
mercy abused has not only forsaken you, but falls upon you as a mountain, and
feeds your aggravated endless misery?

6. Moreover, whilst you neglect the One thing necessary, you neglect Christ
himself, and reject the saving benefit of his bloodshed, and refuse the healing
work of his Spirit, and the precious benefits which he has offered you in the
Gospel. And how can you escape if you neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3.
How will you be saved, when you refuse the only Savior? There is indeed enough
in Christ to heal and save the humbled soul, that thirsts for his
righteousness and salvation, and valueth and seeks him as a Savior: and if
you would thus come to him, you might have life, John 5. 40. But whiles you
give your selves to please the flesh, and follow the world, and look so little
after Christ, or after the ends and benefits of his sufferings and grace,
Christ is as no Christ to you; and Grace is as no Grace to you; and the Gospel
is as no Gospel to you; and you will be never the more saved, then if there had
no Savior ever come into the world, or there had never Grace been given to the
world, or there had never been promise made, or Gospel preached to the world:
For Christ will not save them that continue to neglect him, and set light by
all the mercy that he offers, and the salvation which he has purchased, and
do not esteem and use him as a Savior, and cannot find enough in God and
Glory, to take off their hearts from the pleasures and idols of the flesh. If
Christ would have gathered you as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings,
and you would not (Matthew. 23. 37.) you will be as far from being saved by him,
as if you had never heard of his name.

And yet that is not all: If you prevent it not by true Conversion, you will
wish a thousand and a thousand times, that this were all: But there is worse
then this: For Christ will not leave a man of you as he finds you: If you are
so far in love with worldly wealth and fleshly pleasure, that you can taste no
sweetness in his Grace, and see no desirable glory in his Kingdom, he will make
you taste the bitterness of his wrath, and feel the weight of his severest
justice. The most compassionate Savior is the most dreadful Judge, to those
that will not be saved by his grace. It will be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of Judgment, then for those that were the obstinate refusers of his
Gospel, Matthew. 6. 11, 12. He that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy, under
two or three witnesses; of how much sure punishment shall he be thought worthy,
that has trodden under foot the son of God? Heb. 10. 28, 29. See therefore
that ye refuse not him that speaks: For if they escaped not that refused him
that spoke on earth, how much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven? Heb. 12. 23.

7. As long as you neglect the One thing Needful, whatever good conceits of
your selves you have entertained, and whatever hopes, or peace, or comfort, you
have built upon those conceits, they are all but mere delusions and irrational,
like the laughter of a mad man, that is no comfort to the standers by, who know
that it is but the fruit of his distemper, and makes him an object of more
compassion. What wisdom is it to look high and carry it gallantly in the world,
when you know not but vengeance may overtake you the next hour? Alas man, thou
have to do with God: Though thou see him not, it is he that upholds thee, and
observes thee, and looks for Love and Duty from thee, and will be Glorified
by thee, or thou shall dearly answer it: God will not be neglected and abused
at so cheap a rate as sottish Infidels imagine. He despises thee, if thou
despise him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and thou despisest him, if thou despise his
Messengers, and Word, and Ways, Luke 10. 16. 1 These. 4. 8. And if God despise
thee, what honor is it to thee to be stout-hearted and high in thy own
conceit, and to live applauded by thy self and others? Think of your selves as
well as you will, God counts you worse then the basest brutes, as long as you
make your selves so, by neglecting the One thing for which you have your
reason. When you swagger it out in the world, you do but gingle your fetters,
and glory in your shame, Phil. 3. 18, 19. While fools admire you, God abhors
you; he langheth you to scorn, and has you in derision, as he expresses
himself after the manner of men, Prove. 1. 26. 27, 28. Psalm 2. 4. When you are
proud of your riches, or honor with such as your selves, you are but proud of
the bonds of your captivity, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Though you live as carelessly and
merrily, and laugh as heartily, and sport your selves as fearlesly as if all
were safe, and nothing ailed you, yet your mirth is but your madness, Eccles.
7. 4, 6. and 2. 2. and God sees that your day (a woeful day) is coming, Psalm
37. 13. and you know not but you may the next hour be tormented in hell, that
this hour are so pleasant and confident on earth. And is this a desirable or
rational kind of mirth? Did you but now foresee the end; did you see what you
must see, or feel a little of what you must feel, you would presently be far
from mirth or laughter; it would spoil your sport, and turn your tune to
doleful lamentations. O short unsatisfactory pleasure! O endless, easeless woe,
how quickly will thou surprise them that little dream of such a change! You say
Religion is a Melancholy thing, but verily your condition is so much worse then
melancholy, that it may make a man melancholy to think of men in so sad a case.
If any thing in the world will make a man melancholy, methinks it should be to
stand in your unhappy state, and thence to look into eternity! and to think of
your enmity to heaven, and that you have no part in Christ, no title to his
Kingdom, and to think what haste you are making to your infernal home, and how
fast the wheels of night and day do hurry your unprepared souls to Judgment,
and that your judgment lingreth not, and your damnation slumbreth not, as the
Holy Ghost speaks, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Whether you sleep or wake, be sure it
sleeps not. In a word, to neglect the One thing needful, is to neglect Heaven
it self and your salvation: to neglect Heaven is to lose it: and lose Heaven
and lose all. And what comfort can the fore-thoughts of life everlasting afford
a soul in a state of sin, that is passing to everlasting misery? And what
comfort can any thing in this transitory life, afford that man that has no
matter of comfort in the life to come, yea that must there live in endless
sorrows! O let me not taste of that frantic and unreasonable mirth, that
tends to such heaviness, and drives away those wise recovering thoughts that
are necessary to prevent it! For the Lords sake, and for your souls sake, all
you that neglect the One thing needful, will you but search the Scripture, and
soberly consider whether all this be not certain truth: and if it be, how it
should affect you, and what a change in reason it should make upon you! I have
done with this Use: If you have taken a survey of your own hearts and lives,
will you next for the exercising of your compassion look a little further.

Use 2.
IF One thing be Needful, and the neglect of this be so unreasonable, so
unmanly, and so dangerous, as we have seen it proved, then what an object of
compassion and lamentation is the distracted world? Look upon this text of
Scripture, and look also upon the course of the earth, and consider of the
disagreement, and whether it be not still as before the flood, that all the
imaginations of man's heart are evil continually: Genesis 6 5. were it but possible
for a man to see the affections and motions of all the world at once, as God
sees them, what a p^^tisul sight would it be? What a stir do they make, alas
poor souls, for they know not what? while they forget, or slight, or hate the
One thing necessary. What a heap of gadding ants should we see, that do nothing
but gather sticks and straw? Look among persons of every rank, in City and
Country, and look into the families about you, and see what trade it is that
they are most busily driving on, whether it be for Heaven or earth? and whether
you can discern by their care and labors that they understand what is the One
thing necessary? They are as busy as bees, but not for honey, but in spinning
such a spiders web, as the beesome of death will presently sweep down, Job 8.
14* They labor hard; but for what? for the food that perishes, and not for
that which will endure to everlasting life John 6. 27. They are diligent
seekers; but for what? Not ^^st for God, his Kingdom and Righteousness; but for
that which they might have had as an addition to their blessedness. Matthew. 6.
33. They are still doing; but what are they doing? even undoing themselves by
running away from God, to hunt after the perishing pleasures of the world:
Instead of providing for the life to come, they are making provision for the
flesh to fulfill its lusts, Romans 13. 14. Some of them hear the Word of God; but
they choke it presently by the deceitfulness of riches and the cares of this
life, Luke 8. 14. They are careful and troubled about many things, but the One
thing that should be all to them, is cast by as if it were nothing. Providing
for the flesh, and minding the world, is the employment of their lives. They
trouble themselves with it, and trouble their families, and nearest relations,
and oft-times trouble the whole Towns or places where they live; so that unless
we will let them have their bone to themselves, and give them our cloak when
they have taken our coat, and say as ^sheth [ Let him take all] there is no
living quietly by (...) A dog at his carrion, or a swine in his trough, is not
more greedy then many of these sensualists, that labor of the Caninus
app^titus to their trash: But to Holiness they have no appetite, and are worse
then indifferent to the things that are in^sirable: They have no covetousuess
for the things which (...) commanded earnestly to covet, 1 Cor. 12 31. They
have ^tle hunger and thirst after righteousness, that a very little or none
will satisfy them: Here they are pleading always for ^^deration, and against
too much, and too earnest, and too long: And all is too much with them that is
above stark naught, or dead hypocrisy: and all is too earnest and too long
that would make Religion seem a business, or would engage them to seem serious
in their own profession, or put them past jest in the worship of God, and the
matters of their salvation. Let but their servants or children neglect their
worldly business, (which I confess they should not do) and they shall hear of
it with both ears: But if they sin against God, or neglect his Word or Worship,
they shall meet with more patience then Eli's sons did: A cold reproof is
usually the best; and it is well if they be not encouraged in their sin; and if
a child or servant that begins to be serious for salvation, be not rebuked,
derided, and hindered by them. If on their days of labor they over-sleep
themselves, they shall be sure to be called up to work, (and good reason); but
when do they call them up to prayer? When do they urge them to read, or
consider, or conferr of the things that concern their everlasting life? The
Lords own day, which is appointed to be set apart for matters of this nature,
is wasted in idleness or worldly talk. Come at any time into their company, and
you may have talk enough, and too much, of news, or of other men's matters, of
their worldly business, sports and pleasures: But about God and their
salvation, they have so little to say, and that so heartlesly and on the by, as
if they were things that belonged not to their care and duty, and no whit
concerned them. Talk with them about the renovation of the soul, and the nature
of holiness, and the life to come, and you shall find them almost as dumb as a
fish, or as dry as a chip, or as erroneous or insensible as those that speak
but words by rote, to show you how little they savor or mind the things of the
Spirit. The most understand not matters of this nature, nor much desire or care
to understand them: If one would teach (...) personally, they are too old to be
catechized or to learn, though not too old to be ignorant of the matters which
they were made for, and are preserved for in the world: They are too wise to
learn to be wise, and too good to be taught how to be good ^ough not too wise
to follow the seducements of the Devil ^he world, nor too good to be the slaves
of Satan* and the de^rs and enemies of goodness. If they do any thing which
the^ a serving of God, it is some cold and heartless use of word^ake themselves
believe that for all their sins they shall be saved; so that God will call that
a serving of their sins and abomination, which they call a serving of God. Some
of them will confess that Holiness is good; but they hope God will be merciful
to them without it: And some do so hate it, that it is a displeasing irksom
thing to them, to hear any serious discourse of holiness, and they detest and
deride those as fanatic troublesome Precisians, that diligently seek the One
thing necessary. So that if the Belief of the most may be judged by their
practices, we may confidently say, that they do not practically believe that
ever they shall be brought to Judgment, or that there is any Heaven or Hell to
be expected; and that their confession of the truth of the holy Scriptures, and
their profession of the Articles of the Christian Faith, are no proofs that
they heartily take them to be true. Who can be such a stranger to the world, as
not to see that this as the case of the greatest part of men? And which is
worst of all, they go on in this course against all that can be said to them,
and will give no impartial considerate hearing to the truth which would recover
them to their wits, but live as if it would be a felicity to them in Hell, to
think that they came thither by wilful resolution, and in despite of the
remedy. And is it not a sad prospect to a man that believes the Word of God,
and the life to come, to look upon such a distracted world? O Sirs, if Jesus
Christ be wise that condemns their course and them, then certainly all these
men are fools: And if Christ knew what he said, we must needs think that they
know not what they do. O what is the matter that reasonable men should have no
more use of their reason in things of such importance, then thus to neglect
their everlasting state for a thing of naught? Did God make them unreasonable,
or give them understandings incapable of things of such high concernment? Or
rather, have (...) not drowned their reason in sensuality, and wilfully
poiso^th malicious aversness to God and Holiness? What is ^ter that the One
thing needful is no more regarded? Has God made them believe that they shall
dwell here for ever, and never die? No surely, this is so gross a lie, that the
Devil himself cannot make them believe it. They know that they mus^ sure as
they are alive: And yet they prepare not, but w^eir days in scraping in this
dunghill world, as if they wer^o no further. Did God never warn them by a
Sermon, or (...), to prepare for the life which they must live for ever? Yes ^y
a time; but they would take no warning. Did God never ^^ll them that after this
life there is another, where they must live in endless joy or torment? Yes, and
they professed that they did believe it: They heard it an hundred times over,
till they were weary of hearing it. Did God make them believe that they shall
die like beasts that have no further to go, nor any other life to live? No: if
they do believe this, it is the Devil and not God that makes them believe it.
What then is the matter that the One thing needful is no more regarded? Has
God shut up their souls in desperation, so that it is in vain to seek, or
trouble themselves for that of which there is no hope? Oh no! his compassion
has provided them a full remedy: by the death of his Son Redemption is
procured, and he has made them a deed of gift, of Christ, and pardon, and
eternal life, and tendered it to them, that upon the^^ acceptance it may be
theirs. Many a time has he offered this mercy to them, and many a time has he
urged them to accept ^t: He has set before them life and death, and given them
their choice, and directed and persuaded them to choose aright: Impossibility
of attainment is not their hinderance; for Mercy be^eecheth and importuneth
them to accept it, and grace and salvation are brought unto their hands. O
wonderful! What then ^s left to take off a reasonable creature, from minding
and preferring its own everlasting great concernments? Is it because they have
done their work already, and having made sure of heaven, have time to turn
themselves to other matters? Alas no: the most are far from any such assurance;
and have done but little to procure it. If they were to die this hour, they
know not where their souls shall be the next: And if death even now should lay
its terrible hands upon them, they have no other comfort then to yield ^^to
necessity, and leave their souls by a short security, to (...) passage of their
unavoidable change: Unless they are com^ by such presumptuous self-deceit,
which the next moment after death will vanish, and never return unto them more.
Job 8. 13, 14. and 11. 20. and 27. 8. Prove. 11. 7.

This is the case of the miserable world; but they have not hearts to (...)
themselves, nor can we make them willing to be delivered* ^use we cannot make
them know their case. If a man fall in (...) pit, we need not spend all the day
to persuade him that he is there, and to be willing to be helped out of it: But
with these fleshly^^iserable souls, the time that should be spent by themselves
and us for their recovery, must be spent to make them believe that they are
lost; and when all is done, we leave them lost, and have lost our labor,
because we cannot prevail with them to believe it. Drown they will and perish
everlastingly, because the time that should be spent in saving them, must be
spent in making them know that they are sinking, and after all they will not
believe it; and therefore will not ^ay hold on the hand that is stretched forth
to pull them out. The Narrative of the savage people of Soldania does notably
represent their state: Those people live naked, and feed upon the carrion-like
carcasses of beasts, and hang the stinking guts about their ^ecks for
ornament^, and wear hats made of the dung, and carve their skins, and will not
change these loathsome customs: Some of them being drawn into our Ships, were
carried away for England: when they came to Landon, and saw our stately
buildings, and clothing, and provisions, they were observed to sigh much,
which was thought to have been in compassion of their miserable Country, which
so much differed from ours: When they had stayed long among us, and got so much
acquaintance with our civility, and order, and all that belongs to the life of
man, as that they were thought fit to communicate it to their Contrymen, the
next Voyage they were brought back, and set on shore in their own Country, to
draw some of the rest to come into the Ships, and see and enjoy what they had
done (who had purposely been used as might most content them): But as soon as
they were landed, they lept for joy, and cried, Soldania, and cast away their
clothes, and came again in the sight of our Ships, with dung on their heads,
and guts hanging about their necks, triumphing in their sordid nakedness. Just
so do worldly sensual men, in the matters of salvation: If against their wills
they are carried into cleaner ways and company, and the beauty of holiness,
and the joys of heaven are opened to them, they are aweary of it a^ the while;
and when we expect they should delight themselves in the felicity that is
opened to them, and draw their old acquaintance to it, and be utterly ashamed
of their former base and sinful state, they are gone when the next temptation
comes, and return with the dog unto their vomit, and with the washed Swine to
wallow in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22. and glory in their filth and shame, and
only mind their earthly things, Phil. 3. 18.

Use 3.
BY this time you may see your selves that the disease of sinners is in their
own hearts, and it is that that must be healed if they will be saved. But what
should we do to get into those hearts, to search your sores, and work the cure?
I come now to the principal part of my message to you; but will you indeed
entertain it, if it prove it self to be from God? How the case stands with
mankind, you have heard in my Text from Christ himself: How One thing is
needful; and how the busie-idle world is diverted from this One thing, by many
needless troublesome things to their own destruction: If hence I warn you of
your danger, and tell you of your duty, and exhort you to take another course
then you have done, I hope you will confess I do but what is needful both for
you and me, and what you have no reason to contradict. Come then, for the Lords
sake, and let us treat practically and successfully about so great a business;
and make something of it before we leave it; and end not till we amend what we
find amiss. What course then will you take for the time to come? Will you go on
to trouble your selves about Many things, and neglect the One thing needful as
you have done? Dare you harbor such a purpose? Or dare you stifle those
thoughts and motions that would tend to better purposes? Or may I not hope that
the Light has shamed your sleepiness and works of darkness, and that you are
grieved at the heart for the sinful negligence of heart and life, and resolved
now to be new men? For Gods sake Resolve, Sirs. What will you do? Waver not,
but Resolve: Its more then a thousand lives that lies on your Resolution: I
come to you this day as the Minister of the great Pastor of the flock, that
spoke these words, not only to acquaint you, if you know not, or to remember
you if you know, that One thing is needful; but also with authority to command
you in his name, to Value it, to Love it, to Choose it, to seek it, and labor
for it as the One thing needful. What say you, will you or will you not? This
unspeakable mercy I offer you from the Lord: He is willing to put up at your
hands, all that is past, and to lay all your sins on the score of Christ, and
freely to forgive you through the virtue of his blood, if you will now at last
bethink you better, and come to Christ, and live as men that know what they
have to do: If you will but see your former folly, and heartily bewail it, and
set your hearts on the One thing needful, he will encourage you, and help you,
and bid you welcome, and number you with his sons, though you have lived as his
enemies. Though you have lived like Swine and Serpents, he will put you into
his bosom, if you will but be washed and changed by his grace. Though you have
set more by your worldly riches then by his glory, and have set more by the
favor of mortal man, then by his favor, and though you have set more by your
bellies, and your brutish pleasures, and little toys, then you have done by
everlasting life, he will yet be merciful to you, and put up all these
indignities at your hands, and take you into his dearest love, if you will but
Now become new creatures, and give your hearts to him that made them, and seek
that first that is worth the finding, and lose not the rest of your lives and
labor upon unprofitable things. What can you say against this offer? Is it not
unconceivable and unspeakable mercy? O what would the damned give for such an
offer? O what would you your selves give another day for such an offer, if you
now neglect it? What say you then, will you accept of this offer of mercy while
it may be had, and close with Grace, while Grace would save you, or will you
not? As ever you look for mercy in the hour of your distress, when nothing but
mercy can stand your souls in any stead, take mercy now while it may be had:
Refuse it not when it is offered you, as you would not be refused by it when
Hell and Desparation would devour you. If you slight it because it is free, you
slight it because it is great, and therefore greatly to be valued. Think not
hereafter to have it at your beck, if you neglect it now when it seeks for your
acceptance. Do not say, I will a little longer keep my sins, and a little
longer enjoy my pleasures, for I can have Christ's offer at any time before I
die. O little do thou know what a stab such a trifling purpose may give to
the very heart of all thy hopes and happiness! and how terribly God may make
thee know, how ill he takes thy unthankfulness and contempt! and how dear one
other week of sinful pleasure may cost thy soul? In the name of God I warn you,
do not so despise everlasting happiness! Do not so trample on the blood of
Christ, if you would be saved by it: Do not abuse the Spirit of Grace, if you
would be sanctified by it: Play not any longer with the consuming fire, the
wrath of a jealous and Almighty God: Jest not with damnation. Though Grace be
now offered you, it will not be at your command: Despise this motion, and you
may be out of hearing before the next. What can you expect, if you will slight
such mercy, but either that Death should shortly bring you to your reckoning,
or that God should leave you to your selves, and give you up to the hardness of
your hearts: And if you will needs choose the world, and fleshly pleasure, and
God and Glory shall be thus contemptuously past by, you may take your choice,
and see what you will get by it: But remember what an offer you had this day,
and that heaven was once within your reach, and that it might have been yours
for ever if you would.

But because I am loath to leave you so, I will try by some such Arguments as
the Reason of man must needs approve, Whether yet you may not be brought to
your selves, and yield to grace that you may be saved. And they shall be the
Arguments that lie before you here in the Text.

1. REmember, it is Necessity that is pleaded with you in my Text. One thing is
Necessary. Necessity, and your own Necessity, is such an Argument, as one would
think of it self should turn the scales, and fully resolve you, and put you
past any further deliberation or delay. If Necessity, your own Necessity, and
so great Necessity to so great an End, will not prevail with you, What will?
Necessity is that ingens telum that natural reason takes to be unresistible.
Men think they may do almost any thing, if they can say Necessity commands
it: Omnem legem frangit, magnum illud humanae imbecillitatis patroeinium, says
Seneca. What is it that Necessity seems not sufficient to justify with the
most? And we will grant the Argument to be undeniable, if it be from absolute
Necessity indeed, and if men will not dream that it is more Necessary to be
Rich, or Honorable, or to Live, then to be Holy, and to be Blessed with God,
and to please him that created them. Ubi necessitas incumbit, non ultra
disputandum est, sed celerrime and fortiter agendum. Words signify nothing
against Necessity: Reason is but hindering troublesome folly, when it pleads
against Necessity. Omni art, omne ratione officacior necessitas. Curt. In
worldly matters, how quick-sighted, how resolute, how active is Necessity? What
conquerable difficulties will it not overcome? What labor will it not endure,
if it have but the encouragement of hope? And yet this Necessity is indeed no
true Necessity at all. For that which is Necessary but to my credit, or estate,
or health, or life, can be no more Necessary then is my credit, and estate, and
health, and life it self. When men do but fancy a Necessity where there is
none, yet that will carry them through thick and thin. But O Sirs, you have a
real undeniable Necessity to be Holy, and to set your selves to the work of
your salvation; such a Necessity as is founded in your Nature, and laid on you
by your Maker, and as all the true Reason in the world will confess to be
indispensable Necessity. Faxis ut libeat quod est necesse.


Make no more words then, but Resolve and stir when it is a matter that must
be done. It is pity and shame that the Amiableness of God and Holiness will
not prevail with you of themselves: But if you cannot yet perceive them to be
Delectable, acknowledge them to be Necessary. Be ashamed that pretended
Necessity for the Body, should be more powerful with others, then real
Necessity for salvation is with you. Look upon almost all the travel and labor
that is under the Sun, and all the diligence that is used here in the world,
and consider Whether it be not a thousand fold smaller Necessity then I am now
pleading with you, that sets almost all on work? The Rich will not toil and
labor, but will take their ease, because they think they are under no
Necessity: but the poor will labor, because they must: Though the command of
God to Rich and poor should make them equally diligent in their several
callings, in obedience to their Creator, yet many thousands that labor all the
year in obedience to their own Necessities, would soon give it over and take
their ease, if they could but be well maintained without it, notwithsanding the
commands of God: And the poor that reproach the rich for idlendss, would be
idle themselves if they were but rich. The Tradesman follows his trade, and
the Husbandman his hard labor all the year: and What reason will they give
you, if you ask them why they do it, but this, We cannot live else: We must do
it to maintain cur selves and families. And is not the reason thousand times
stronger for our souls? May we not better say, [ We must please God, and set
our hearts on the life to come, and mind and seek the One thing needful,
whatever becomes of other things; for me cannot live else; we cannot be saved
else.]

Necessity makes the Traveller trudge from morning till night; and the Carryer
to follow his horses through fair and foul from year to year; it makes some dig
into the bowels of the earth, in mines and cole-pits; and some to hale Barges;
and some to cut through the terrible Ocean, and venture their lives among the
raging waves and storms; and some even to beg their bread in rags from door to
door: And O what will not Necessity do that can be done? And yet how many
thousands trisle or do nothing for their souls, as if there were no Necessity
of being saved; or no Necessity of being Holy that we may be saved. When alas,
all the Necessity in the world, is no necessity at all, in comparison of this.
You must beg, or starve, or famish, if you do not work: But you must burn in
Hell, if with fear and diligence you work not out your own salvation, Phil. 2.
12. (for all that it is God that works in you). You must lie in prison if
your debts be not paid: But you will be cast into outer darkness, if by the
pardon of your sins, you be not discharged from your debt to God. You may
become beggars if you be idle in your Callings: But you will be the prisoners
of Hell, and shut out of all the Happiness of the Saints, if you labor not for
the food that does not perish, and strive not to enter in at the strait gate,
and give not diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. John 6. 27.
Matthew. 7. 13. Luke 13. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 10. You must suffer hunger and nakedness,
if you have not food and raiment: But you must suffer everlastingly the wrath
of God, if you have not the One thing necessary. You will be the scorn and
laughingstock of men, if you fall under their contempt and lose your honor:
But you will be the enemies of God, and hated by him, if you continue to
contemn his grace.

O had you but seen the Life to come, you would say, There is a Necessity of
attaining it! Had you been one hour in Hell, you would think that there is a
Necessity of escaping it, and that there is no Necessity to this.

What say you to all this? Is it not of Truth and Weight? Can you deny it? Or
should you make light of it? None but an Infidel can deny it; and none but a
dead-hearted sinner can make light of it. Believe the Word of God, and the
Truth of it will be past question with you: Consider but that you are men that
have immortal souls; and the weight of it will appear inestimable to you; above
contempt; above neglect. Believe it Sirs, you may as well see without light,
and breath without air, and be supported without earth, or live without food,
as be saved without Holixess, or happy without the One thing necessary. Heb.
12. 14. John 3. 3, 5. Matthew. 18. 3. And when this is resolved of by God, and
stablished as his standing Law, and he has told it you so often and plainly, for
any man now to say, [ I will yet hope for better; I hope to be saved on easier
terms, without all this ado] is no better then to let his face against the God
of heaven, and instead of believing God, to believe the contradiction of his
own u^godly heart; and to hope to be saved whether God will or not; and to give
the lie to his Creator, under the pretense of trust, and hope: It is indeed to
hope for impossibilities: To be saved without Holiness, is to see without eyes,
and to live without life: And who is so foolish as to hope for this? Few of you
are so unreasonable as to hope for a crop at harvest, without plowing or
sowing; or for a house without building; or for strength without eating and
drinking; or to sleep and play, when you have nothing to maintain your
families, and say, You hope that God will maintain both you and them. And yet
this were a far wiser kind of hope, then to hope to be saved without the One
thing necessary to salvation; and without a heart that is set upon it, and a
life that is employed for it. It is the Holy Ghost that calls you to answer
the question, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
If you know how, then enter the lists with God, and dispute the case with him:
How will you escape, if you be neglecters of the Only way that he has provided
for your escape? Is there any device or shift of wit, that can procure your
escape? Is there any power or interest of men or Angels that can procure your
escape? How can that be done, that God has resolved shall not be?

I beseech you now, beloved Hearers, to remember this urgent motive of
Necessity, and use it when you are tempted to delay or trifle about the
business of your salvation, as if it were some indifferent needless thing.
Without worldly Riches you may be rich in faith: Without worldly honors, you
may have the honor of being the sons of God: and without worldly pleasures, or
health, or life, you may have the favor of God and Life eternal: But without
the One thing needful, you have nothing that is durably or satisfactorily good,
but are undone for ever. Without the things of the world, you will live in want
for a little while, and then you will be equal to the greatest Princes: But
without this One thing, you must live in endless woe and misery, and be far
worse then the basest prisoner in the Dungeon, or than the toades and vermin
that lie in the uncleanest holes or sinks of the earth. And yet dare you delay
another day before you make so Necessary a change? You have hearts of stone, if
your Own Necessity thus urged upon your Consideration will not awake you. If
your hearts were not dead within you, while you hear these things, one would
think suth a Necessity should make you feel, and resolve upon a speedy change,
and make you stir in the diligent performance. Can you go on in security, in
negligence and worldliness, when you hear of your Necessity, that you must
change, or you are lost for ever? O stupid souls, that will not be moved with
Necessity of everlasting consequence! O what has God, or Christ, or heaven, or
holiness, done against these men, that will rather lie in Hell for ever, then
they will live in the love and service of this God, and in the practice of
holiness, and in the hopes of Heaven! How meet are they for Hell, that will
venture upon it deliberately and upon choice, to escape the trouble of living in
the holy Love, delight and service of the ever blessed God? that is, to escape
the trouble of Heaven. Is it so great a sin to shut up the bowels of compassion
against our brother in his need? 1 John 3. 17. And is it not more unnatural to
deny compassion to your selves in your own necessity? and in the greatest
necessity? O poor sinners, remember your Necessities! Your own, your great,
your absolute Necessities: When you hear men that gather alms cry [ Remember
the poor] does it make thee think [ What a poor necessitous soul have I to
remember?] As Paul says of Preaching to others, I may say much mote to you, of
minding and practicing this great work of your salvation [ Necessity is laid
upon you, and woe to you if you do it not.] 1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe to you that ever
you were born, and that ever you were reasonable creatures, or rather, that
ever you so abused your Reason, if you neglect and miss of the One thing
necessary.

I know you have other wants to be supplied, and other matters to look after in
the world: But alas, how small are they! God will supply all your other wants,
if you will first and saithfully look after this. Phil. 4. 19. Matthew. 6. 33. 1
Pet. 5. 7. Or if life and all go, you* will find all in heaven: But if you miss
of this One thing, nothing in the world can make supply, or do you good. And
though now your feeling tell you not these things, alas how quickly will God
make you feel, and teach you by that sensible way that you would needs be
taught by?

Awake then you sluggish careless souls! Your house over your heads is on a
flame! The hand of God is lifted up! If you love your selves, prevent the
stroke: Vengeance is at your backs: The wrath of God pursues your sin; and woe
to you if he find it upon you when he overtaketh you: Away with it speedily: Up
and be gone, return to God; make Christ and mercy your friend in time, if you
love your lives. The Judge is coming, for all that you have heard of it so
long, till you believe it not: You shall shortly see the Majesty of his
appearance, and the dreadful glory or his ^a^^, and yet do you not begin to
look about you, and to ma^e ready for such a day? Yea, before that day, your
separated souls shall begin to reap as you have sowed here. Though now the
partition that stands between you and the world to come, do keep unbelievers
strange to the things that most concern them; yet Death will quickly find a
Portal to let you in; and then sinners you will find such doings there, as you
little thought of, or at least did sensibly regard on earth. Before your Corpse
can be wrapped up in your Winding-sheets, you will see and feel that which will
tell you to the quick, that One thing was necessary. If you do die without this
One thing Necessary, before your friends can have finished your funerals, your
souls will have taken up their places among the Devils in endless torment and
despair: and all the wealth, and honor, and pleasure, that the world afforded
you, will not ease you. This is sad, but it is true, Sirs; for God has spoken
it.

Up therefore and bestir you for the life of your souls. Necessity will awake
the sluggard. Necessity we say, will break stone walls: The proudest will stoop
when they perceive Necessity. The most sloathful will bestir them when they
feel Necessity. The most careless will look about them and be industrious in
Necessity. Necessity is called the Tyrant of the world, that can make men do
any thing that is possible to be done. And yet cannot Necessity make you cast
away your sins, and take up a Holy and Heavenly life? Necessity will make men
fare hard, and work hard, and travel hard, and go bare, and suffer much; yea it
will even cut off a leg or an arm to save their lives: And yet can it not
prevail with reasonable creatures, to cast away the poison of a fruitless,
filthy, deceitful sin? and to be up and doing for their salvation! O poor
souls! Is there, think you, a greater Necessity of your sin then of your
salvation? and of pleasing your flesh for a little time, then of pleasing the
Lord, and scaping everlasting misery? I beseech you consider your own
Necessities.

2. COnsider also, that, It is but One thing which God has made Necessary for
you. And I showed you before, how that the means themselves though they are
many, have a certain unity in their harmony and connection, and as they center
in the ultimate end, which is One. If God had sent you upon such a multitude of
errands as the flesh and the world does; and set you on such disagreeing
contrary works, then you had been excusable, if you had neglected some of them:
But he has sent you but upon One errand, even to seek and make sure of
everlasting life; and therefore if you neglect this One, you are unexcuseable.
If the world be divided into a thousand opinions, or go a thousand several
ways, they may thank themselves who are the Authors of this confusion; but God
is no cause of it, or friend to it. He has made them but One work, and set
them but One way to heaven, and given them One Master, Jesus Christ, to teach
that way; and written but One Law, even his holy Scripture, to be their sure
and constant guide: And if men would stick to this One Master, and not make
flesh and blood their master, or the multitude their master, or the Rulers of
the world, or the custum of their fore fathers the master of their fatih: and
if they would stick to this One Word of God, and not run after the Traditions
of men, they would not be in such a maze, nor of so many minds as now they are:
But they do in their doctrines as they do in their practice: God has marked
them out but One way in the holy Scripture, which is the good and the sure way,
the way that Peter and Paul and the rest of the Apostles went to heaven in, and
this way will not serve men's turns, but they will run an hundred ways instead
of this One: and they must make new ways which the Apostles of Christ were
never acquainted with.

If God had loaded your memories with many things, you might possibly have said
[ we cannot remember them all] but he has set you finally but one thing to
remember, even to lay hold on everlasting life, and press on to the Crown that
is set before you; and he has an ill memory that cannot remember One thing,
and such a thing as this is too.

It may be you are Ignorant and cannot learn many things; but God has set you
but this One thing to learn as of Absolute Necessity: And he is dull indeed
that cannot learn one thing, and such a thing too. If you cannot understand the
depths of Sciences, nor reach the height of learning that others do attain, yet
learn this One thing, to know God in the Redeemer; and if you know this, you
know all. Paul was not only contented with this knowledge, but resolved to know
nothing else but Christ and him crucified; that is, Nothing that is wholly
alien to this: Nothing but what does keep its due subordination to this, and so
may be reduced to the knowledge of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2 He would not own any
other knowledge as knowledge, but disclaimeth it as Ignorance and Foolishness,
though it seemed wisdom in the eyes of the world, 1 Cor. 3. 19. This seeming
knowledge and wisdom of the world, that is totally disjunct from Christ, is
part of the [ all] that we must sell to buy the Pearl, if we will obtain it.
Matthew. 13. 46. and part of the [ all things] which Paul accounted dung and
loss, that he might win Christ and be found in him. Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. For
they that know not this One thing, know nothing, whatsoever they may seem to
know: and they that would go beyond the knowledge of Christ, and think it too
low for them, and trouble their brains and the Church with their speculations,
they do not know indeed, but dream. And if they would see their faces in the
glass of Scripture. 1 Timothy 6. 4. They are proud knowing nothing, but doting
about Questions and strifes of words; whence comes envy, railing, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
Truth.

Moreover, if your strength be so small that it will not suffice for every
thing, at least you should lay it out on this One thing.

Your time, I know, is small, your lives are short, and therefore you may say,
We have not time for many things; but when you have but One thing given you to
do, that must be done, you may sure find time for this for which you have your
time.

If you set your servant to work, and bid him be sure to do one thing, whatever
else he do, you will not take it well if that one shall be neglected. If you
send him on an errand, and bid him be sure to remember one thing, whatsoever he
forget, you will not take it well if he forget that one. If you trust him but
with one thing, and bid him be sure to keep that one, you will not take it well
if that be lost; especially if he wilfully throw it away.

O consider, Whether this be not your case. God has sent you into this world
but on one errand, even to make sure of everlasting life, and will you neglect
that one? He has trusted you with one thing, and will you cast away that one?
He has given you one lesson to learn, even to please him and to save your
souls, and will you not learn and remember that one? If you had forgot your
food and raiment, or forgot the houses you dwell in, it had been a small matter
in comparison: but to forget that one work that must be done, that one friend
that you must always trust to, that one place that you must live in for ever,
this is most unreasonable; and when you have recovered your understandings, you
shall confess it to be so.

3. COnsider further, that this one thing is that good part: You see it is here
called so. [Mary has chosen that good part] Other things seem good to sense,
and to perverted reason that is blinded by sense; but this is it that seems
good to reason illuminated by the spirit of Faith. Other things seem good for a
while, but this is that good that will still be good.

I may not only say, that the Good of other things is small in comparison of
this, but that it is nothing at all, but as it is related unto this. This is
that good that makes all things else good that are good. As they come from God,
and reveal God to us, and lead us up to God, and are means to this eternal
life, so they are good; but otherwise there is no goodness in them.

And therefore, seeing that Goodness is naturally the object of man's will, one
would think you should quickly be resolved of your choice. Sensual good, is but
a nominal good, if it reach not higher. All that you hunt after so eagerly in
the world, is nothing but real vanity and vexation, a shadow of good, a picture
of profit, a dream of d^^^ght, which one frown of God will turn into
astonishing horror and despair. Like a tender flower that is nipt with one
frosty night, or withered with one scorching day; but it is only this one
thing, that is the solid, substantial, and enduring good. The pleasure of the
flesh is a good that is common to men with brutes; They can eat, and drink, and
play, and satisfy their lusts, and master one another as well as you. But it
is the spiritual good that is proper to a reasonable creature. The pleasure of
the flesh may melt you into foolish mirth, and make you like drunken men, that
are gallant fellows in their own eyes, while sober men are ashamed of them, or
pity them, or they become a laughing stock to others. But it is this One thing
only which is that Good which wisdom it self will justify. A man that is
tickled may laugh more then he that is possessed of a Kingdom, or has the
desires of his heart; but he is not therefore to be accounted the happier man,
nor will any wise man so account him. Oh Sirs, one would think, that to men
that have read and heard what we have done, and have had that experience which
we have had, these things should be plain and past all question; and that
spiritual, heavenly, everlasting things should be confessed by us all to be
that good part that should possess all the fervent Desires of the soul.

But oh that we could see the Truth of this Belief in the choice of your wills,
and the drift of your endeavors. If God would open your eyes and show you
things as they are, and save you from your wilful blindness, you would then see
which is the better part, and you would be ashamed that ever you should make
any question of it. That is the good part, which bears the most lively Image
of God, which is goodness it self, yea which possesses us of this good: That
is the good part which will make us good, and not that which deceives us and
makes us worse: That is the good part which the wisest and best men judge to be
so, yea which God himself does judge to be so; and not that which the most
blind deluded sinners do judge the best: That is the good part which is best at
last, and which is an enduring Good, and not that which perishes in the using,
and flies from us when we have greatest need: That is the good part which all
men will say is good in the Conclusion, which the wicked themselves that are
now of another mind, will confess at last to be the best; and not that which is
commended only in prosperity, while the frensy or dream of sensuality does
beguile men, ^^^ which they will all cry out against at last. If you would know
which is the best part, take counsel of God, and see what he says, and ask men
of wisdom and of greatest experience, that have tried both, and men that have
staid the end, and seen what fleshly pleasures, and profits, and honors can do
for them: For how can men make so true a judgment that do not either stay the
end, or else foresee the end by faith? Do not take their judgments that are
drunk with their sensual delights, and that will confess they must repent
themselves, and therefore confess they must be of another mind: Take not their
judgments that neither have seen nor yet foresee the end; the worst is yet to
come with them: Their states and minds are near a change: The day is near when
they will say, that heaven was the better part, and be convinced by punishment,
that would not be convinced by instruction.

Surely Sirs, it is so easy a Question to reason it self, where sin has not
blinded it, whether God or the world be the better part, that one would think
there should be left no room for doubting. Dare any of you speak out and say,
that earth is better then heaven, or sin then grace, or temporal pleasure then
eternal happiness? I think you dare not: Shame will forbid you, and Conscience
will contradict you, if you should say so: And will you commend God by your
words, and discommend him by your lives? Will you say, heaven is best, and yet
seek the world before it; and not let it have the best of your affections and
endeavors? Shall it be highest in your mouths, and lowest in your hearts and
lives? Shall it have the first place in your prayers, and the last in your
labors? Why then you commend God but to his dishonor, and your condemnation:
You extol heaven and heavenly things but to the confusion of your own faces,
that your own confessions may be brought in hereafter as witnesses against you.
In the name of God therefore I charge you, if you know which is the better
part, condemn not your selves by making choice against your knowledge.

4. COnsider also, that, this good part is offered you, and you have your
choice, whether God or the world, whether heaven or earth shall be your portion.

It is not Purchasing, or proper meriting, but choosing the good part, that you
are called to: It is not [ Mary has purchased or merited the better part] but
[ has chosen the better part.]

Two things are here contained. 1. That it is not matter of Impossibility that
you are called to; you are not excluded from the hopes of salvation, by any
exceptions that God has put in against you, in his promise, but it is
conditionally made as well to you as to others.

2. And the condition is not any thing ^^reasonable, but your own consent.
Christ and salvation are offered to your choice: If you will but prefer them
before the trifles of the world, you may have them. The door of Grace is open
to you as well as to others; if you will but enter you may live: you are not
left in a remediless case, nor given over to desperation: you cannot say, [
Repenting and Believing will do us no good; we cannot have Christ though we
were never so willing:] You cannot say, [ We would fain have Christ and his
Spirit to s^nctifie us, but we cannot: we are willing to be his Disciples, but
he is not willing to accept us, and to be our Saviour] you cannot say so, and
say truly: you cannot say he is set to sale to you, and that he expects such
a price as you are unable to give; for you are called to take him freely; and
though this be sometimes called buying, yet it is a buying without money and
without price, Isa. 55. 1; 2, 3, 4. And though you must sell all you have for
this unvaluable pearl, Matthew. 13. 46. yet that is but a Metaphorical selling, a
parting with your sin and fleshly pleasure, as troubles and impediments that
would keep you from salvation: As a sick man sells his diseases for health; or
at least, as he has health by forbearing some hurtful things that please him:
Or as a prisoner purchases the liberty that is freely given him, by consenting
to come forth and cast off his fetters. Your hands are full of dirt, and God
offers you gold, and you cannot receive it till you throw away the dirt. This
is your Purchase: You give God nothing as a valuable price for his mercy, but
you throw away the sin that is inconsistent with your happiness. Still I shall
tell you, [ you may have Christ if you will] pleasures and profits are
flattering you to your destruction, and God calls you from them, and offers
you his son and everlasting life, and entreats you to accept them. And here
you have your choice. The offer is, whosoever will, let him take of the water
of life freely* Rev. 22. 17. And if you will but choose that happiness that is
offered you, and Christ the way to that happiness, all the world cannot bereave
you of your choice: It is brought to your hand and urged on you. You have now
your choice, whether you will have Christ or the flesh, grace or sin, heaven or
hell: As you choose, so you shall have: And if you miss of life, it will be
because you did not choose it: Even because you would not come to Christ that
you might have life* John 5. 40. and would not have him to rule over you, Luke
19. 27. and would not have the Lord indeed for your God, P^^^m 81. 11. and did
not choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1. 29. yea, when Christ would have
gathered you, you would not be gathered, Matthew. 23. 37. It is this turning away
of the simple that does slay them, because they refuse when Christ calls them,
and regard not when he stretches forth his hand, but set at naught his
counsel, and will have none of his reproof, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 32. See therefore
that you refuse not him that speaks; for if you turn away from him that
speaks from heaven, and neglect or make light of so great salvation, how do you
think it possible you should escape? Heb. 12. 25. and 2. 3. Mat. 22. 5.

But perhaps some of you will think to excuse your selves for want of
Free Will, and say, How is it in our choice when God must give us to will and
to do? and we can do nothing of our selves? have we free will or power to choose
the better part? You must not set up the power or will of man too high.

Answ. No: its you that would set up your wills too high, in making us believe
that you are not wilfully ungodly and impenitent, but omit all the good and do
all the evil that you do, because you cannot help it. You cannot but know that
he is the sinner to be blamed and punished, that Can and Will not, rather then
he that would but cannot do good, and forbear the contrary. You know that it is
wilfulness, and not unwilling impotency that the venom of malice and
naughtiness lies in; and therefore you are excusing your wills, and laying all
upon your Impotency, which is but to excuse your faults. I would make you know
the baseness of your wills, and that it is long of your badness that you are
like to be undone, if grace prevent it not by your through Conversion. I do not
say that you have any power, but what you have from God; but I say you have the
Natural and Legal Power, and more then Power, even a Grant and Offer of such a
mercy from God: You have humane faculties, and leave, and offers, and
entreaties, and you may have Christ and life as he is offered if you will. When
I say, It is in your choice, I do not say that you have the wit or the heart to
make a right choice. No: if you had but so much wit and grace, I need not use
all these words to you, to persuade you to choose the better part. Your Wills
are free from any force that God puts upon them to determine them to sin; or
from any force that Satan or any enemy you have, can use to determine them to
sin: All they can do is morally to entice you. God do^^ ^ot make you sin. If
you choose ^^ur death, and forsake your own mercy, it is not God that
determines your Wills to make this choice. Yea, he commands, and persuades,
and urges you to make a better choice: And though Satan tempt you, he can do
no more. You have so much power, that you may have Christ if you will: you
cannot say, I am truly willing to have Christ and cannot. Thus much free will
undoubtedly you have.

But I must confess that your Wills are not free from the misguiding^ of a
blinded mind, nor from the seduction of a sensual inclination; nor from a base
and wicked disposition of your own. This kind of free will you show us that you
have not. But is your wickedness your excuse? and is your wilfulness your
innocence? What then can be culpable?

Sirs, I would not have you abuse God, and befool your selves with names and
words, saying, You have not power and free will, as if you might thus excuse
your sin: I have opened the matter in plain terms to you, that children may
understand it, though learned men have endeavored to obscure it. God gives
you your choice, though your own wickedness do hinder you from choosing aright.
You have a price in your hands, but fools have not a heart to their own good,
Prove. 17. 16. I know you want both wisdom and a sanctified will; and I know
that your minds and wills are contrarily disposed. You need not tell me that
you are wilful and wicked, when there must be so many words spoken, and so many
Books written, and so much mercy and patience of God, and so many afflictions
from his hand, and all will not serve to make you choose the better part. But if
you were willing, if you were truly willing, the principal part of the work
were done: For if you are willing, Christ is willing; and if Christ be willing,
and you be willing, what can hinder your salvation?

Having laid this groundwork from the plain Word of God, methinks I may with
this advantage now plead the case, even with common Reason. One thing is
needful; the Good part is that one; and this is tendered to you by the Lord:
What is it then that you do make choice of? and what do you resolve? May you
have Christ, and Pardon, and Everlasting life, and will you not have them?
Shall it be said of you another day, that you had your choice, whether you
would have Christ and life, or sin and death; and you chose destruction and
refused life? I beseech the^ Reader, whosoever thou art that read these
lines, that tho^ouldst a little turn thine ears to God, and withdraw thy self
from the delusions of the flesh and world, and use thy reason for thy
everlasting peace; and consider with thy self what a dreadful thing it will be,
if thou be everlastingly shut out of the presence of God, upon thy own choice?
And if thou lose thy part in Christ, and Pardon, and everlasting Glory upon thy
own choice: And if thou must lie in Hell fire, and Conscience must tell thee
there for ever* Thou have but the fruit of thine own choice: Heaven was set
open to me as well as others. I had life, and time, and teaching, and
persuasions as well as others; but I chose the pleasure of sin for a season,
though I was told and assured that hell would follow, and now I have that which
I made choice of; and taste but the fruit of my own wilfulness! Will not such
gripes of conscience be a hellish torment of themselves, and an intolerable
vexation, if thou had no more? Had you rather have sin then Christ and
Holiness? Alas, I see by your lives you had! But had you rather have Hell then
God and Glory? If not, then choose not the way to Hell. Why do you give God such
good words, and prefer your sin when you have done, before him? Why do you
speak so well of Christ and Heaven, and yet refuse them? Why do you speak so
ill of sin and the world, and yet choose them to the loss of your salvation?
Surely if you were soundly persuaded that Christ is better then the world, and
holiness then sin, you would choose that which you say is the best: For that
which men think indeed to be the best, and best for them, they will choose and
seek after. And therefore, when you have said all that you can in commendation
of Grace and a holy life, no wise man will believe that you are heartily
persuaded of the Truth of what you say, as long as you run away from Christ,
and follow the flesh, and take that course that is contrary to your profession.
For that which you like best you will certainly choose and seek with the
greatest care and diligence. Now you have your choice; if you would have the
better part, now choose it.

5. I Have one other Motive yet from the text to persuade you to choose the
better p^ If you choose it, it shall never be taken from you. You hear (...)
Resolution of Christ himself concerning Marie's cho^ that which is spoken of
her will be as true of you, if ^he same choice. If all the enemies you have in
the world should endeavor to deprive you of Christ and your salvation, they
cannot do it against your choice. If by Power or by Policy they would rob you
of your Portion, they cannot do it: For which way should they do it? They
cannot turn the heart of God against you, nor make him break his Covenant with
you, nor repent him of his Gift and Calling which he has extended to you. For
he is unchangeable, and loves you with an everlasting love. Mal. 3. 6. Jer.
31. 3. Isa. ^^^. 8. Jer. 33. 20, 21, 23. 50. 5. Romans 11. 29. They cannot
undermine the rock that you are built upon, nor batter the fortress of your
souls, nor overcome your great Preserver and Defense, nor take you out of the
hands of Christ. Psalm. 73. 26. and 31. 2, 3. and 62. 2. and 59. 9, 16. Joh. 10.
28. Cast not away the salvation that is offered you, and then never fear least
it be taken from you. See that you choose the better part, and resolvedly choose
it, and it will be certainly your own for ever. For man cannot take it from
you, nor Devils cannot take it from you, and God will not take it from you.
Rust and moths will not corrupt this Treasure; nor can thieves break through
and steal it from you, Mat. 6. 19, 20.

But you cannot say so of worldly riches. If you choose to be Lords and Princes
on the earth, you cannot have your choice; but if you could, you cannot keep
it. If you choose the wealth and credit of the world, and were sure to get it,
you were as sure to leave it: For naked you came into the world, and naked you
must go out, Job 1. 21. If you choose your ease, and mirth, and pleasure, these
will be taken from you: If you choose the satisfying of your fleshly desires,
and all the delight and prosperity that the world can afford you, yet all must
be taken from you; Yea quickly and easily taken from you. Alas! one stroke of
an Apoplexy, or a few fits of a Fever, or the breaking of a small vein, or many
hundred of the like effectual means, are ready at the beck of God, to take you
from all that you have gathered for your flesh: And then, whose shall all these
things be? None of yours, I am sure; nor will they redeem your souls from death
or hell. Luke 12. 20. Psalm 49. 7. If you be in honor* you abide not in it,
but are (as to your body) as the beasts that perish. If you think to perpetuate
your houses and your names, this your way is but your ^olly, though your
posterity go on to approve your sayings, and succeed you in your sins. Psalm
49. 11, 12, 13. The worldly wise man does perish with the fool: as sheep they
(...) laid in the grave, Death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have
Dominion over them in the morning, ver. 10, 14. They shall soon be cut down
like the grass, and whether as the green herb. Psalm. 37. 2. I have seen the
wicked in great prosperity, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he
passed away, and lo he was not; yea I sought him, but he could not be found.
v. 35, 36.

You think it a fine thing to have the fullness of the creature, to be esteemed
with the highest, and fed and clothed with the best, and fare deliciously
every day, as the rich man, Luke 16. but has he not paid dear think you for
his riches and pleasure by this time? His feeding and fullness was quickly at an
end; but his torment is not yet ended, nor ever will be. You think it a brave
thing to clamber up to riches, and that which you call greatness and honor in
the world: but how quickly, how terribly must you come down! Go into the
Sanctuary of God and understand your end: Surely God has set them in slippery
places, and casts them down into destruction: How are they brought to
desolation as in a moment! They are utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream
when one awakeneth, so at the awakening, shall their Image (or shadow of
honor) be despised, Psalm 73. 17, 18, 19, 20.

How short is the pleasure, and how long is the pain! How short is the honor,
and how long is the shame! What is it under the Sun that is everlasting? You
have friends, but will they dwell with you here for ever? You have houses, but
how long will you stay in them? It is but as yesterday since your houses had
other Inhabitants, and your Towns and Countries other Inhabitants, and where
are they all now? You have health, but how soon will you consume in sickness?
You have life, but how soon will it end in death? You have the pleasure of sin;
you say unto your selves Eat, drink and be merry, but how soon will all the
mirth be marred, and turned into sadness, everlasting sadness! When you hear,
Thou fool, this night shall they require thy soul, and then whose shall these
things be? Luke 12. 20.

Oh miserable wretch! If thou had chosen God instead of thy sin, and the
everlasting Kingdom instead of this world, thou would not have been thus cast
off in thy extremity: God would have stuck better to thee: Heaven would have
proved a more durable Inheritance: For it is a Kingdom that cannot be moved,
Heb. 12. 28. The day is near when thy despairing soul must take up this
lamentation, [ My dearest friends are now forsaking me, I must part with all
that I labored for, and delighted in. I have drunk up all my part of pleasure,
and there is no more left. My merry company, and honors, and recreations are
past and gone; I shall eat, and drink, and sport no more: but God would not
have used me thus, if I had set my heart upon him and his Kingdom. Oh that I
had chosen him, and made him my portion, and spent these thoughts, and cares,
and labors, for the obtaining of his love, and promised Glory, which I spent
for the pleasing and providing for my flesh. Then I should have had a happiness
that death could not deprive me of, and a Crown that fades not away. Neither
life nor death, nor any creature could have separated me from his love. I need
not then have gone out of the world as a prisoner out of the Gaol, to the ^^rr
and to the place of execution. My departing soul should not then need to have
been afraid of falling into the hands of an unreconciled God, and so into the
hands of the Devils as his executioners, nor of passing out of the flesh to
hell.

Oh poor sinners, for how short a pleasure do you sell your hopes of
everlasting Blessedness, and run your selves into endless pains! O what
comparison is there between the time of your pleasure, and the everlastingness
of your Punishment! How short a while is the cup at your mouths? or the drink
in your bellies? or the harlot in your embracements? or the wealth of the world
in your Possession? And how long a time must you pay for this in hell? How
quickly are your merry hours past! but your torments will never be past. When
your corpses are laid in the grave, men can say, [ Now he has done his
satisfying the flesh and following the world] but never man can truly say, [
Now he has done suffering for it.] Your life of sin is passing as a dream, and
your honors as a shadow, and all your business as a talc that is told: but the
life of Glory which you rejected for this, would have endured for evermore.
Suppose as many thousand years as there are sands on the Sea, or piles of grass
on the whole earth, or hairs on the heads of all men in the world, yet when
these many are past, the Joy of Saints and the Torments of the wicked are as
far from an end as ever they were: The eternal God does give them a duration,
and make them eternal.

When our joys are at the sweetest, this thought must needs be part of that
sweetness, that their sweetness shall never have an end. If our short
fore-taste be Joy unspeakable and full of glory, what shall we call that Joy
which flows from the most perfect fruition and perpetuation? 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8. We
have Joy here, but alas how seldom! Alas how small in comparison of what we may
there expect! Some Joy we have, but how often do Melancholy or crosses, or losses
in the world, or temptations, or sins, or desertions interrupt it! Our sun is
here most commonly under a cloud, and too often in an Eclipse; and we have the
night as often as the day. Yea our state is usually a Winter; Our days are
cold and short, and our nights* are long. But when the flourishing state of
glory comes, we shall have no Interscissio^s nor Ecclipses. T^^ path of the
just is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day,
Prove. 4. 18. And the perfect day is a perpetual day that knows no interruption
by the darkness of the night. For there shall be no night there, nor need of
candle or Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for
ever and ever, Rev. 22. 5. This is the life that fears no death; and this is
the feast that fears no want or future famine; the pleasure that knows nor
fears no pain; the health that knows nor fears no sickness; this is the
treasure that fears no moth, or rust, or thief* the building that fears no
storm nor decay; the Kingdom that fears no changes by Rebellion; the friendship
that fears no falling out; the Love that fears no hatred or frustration; the
Glory that fears no envious eye; the possessed Inheritance that fears no
ejection by fraud, or force, or any failings; the Joy that feels or fears no
sorrow; while God who is Life it self is our life; and while God who is Love,
is the fountain and object of our Love, we can never want either Life or Love:
And whiles he feeds our Love, our Joyful praises will never be run dry, nor
ever go out for want of fuel. This is the true perpetual motion, the
c^rculation of the holy blood and spirit from God to man, and from man to God.
Being prepared and brought near him, we have the blessed Vision of his face, by
seeing him; and by the blessed emanation of his love, we are drawn out
perpetually and unweariedly to Love him and Rejoice in him; and from hence
uncessantly to praise and honor him. In all which, as his blessed Image and
the shining reflections of his revealed glory, he takes complacency, which is
the highest end of God and man, and the very term of all his works and ways.

I Thought here to have ended this First Part of my Discourse; but yet
compassion calls me back: I fear lest with the most I have not yet prevailed;
and lest I shall leave them behind me in the bonds of their iniquity. I daily
hear the voice of men possessed by a spirit of uncleanness, speaking against
this Necessity of a holy life, which Christ himself so peremptorly asserteth. I
hear that voice which foretells a more dreadful voice, if in time they be not
prevailed with to prevent it. One says, What need all this ado? This
strictness is more ado then needs. Another says, You would make men mad, by
poring so much on matters that are above them. Another says, Cannot you keep
your Religion to your self; and be Godly with moderation, as your neighbors
be? Another says, I hope God is more merciful then to damn (...) that ^^ not
so precise. Another says, I shall never endure so strict a life* and therefore
I will venture as well as others. The sum of allis, They are so far in love
with the world and sin, and so much against a holy life, that they will not be
persuaded to it; and therefore to quiet their consciences in their misery, they
make themselves believe that they may be saved without it, and that it is a
thing of no Necessity, but their coming to Church and living like good
neighbors may serve the turn without it, for their salvation. And thus does
the malicious Serpent, in the hearts of those that he possesses, rise up
against the words of Christ. Christ says that this is The One thing needful:
And the Serpent says, It is more ado then needs: and What needs all this ado?
Though I have fully answered this ungodly objection already in my Treatise of
Conversion, sect. 36. page 284. etc. and more fully in my Treatise of Rest,
Part 3. Chap. 6. yet I shall once more fall upon it. For death is coming, while
poor deluded souls are loytering: and if Satan by such senseless reasonings as
these, can keep them unready in their sin, till the ^atal stroke has cut them
down, and cast them into endless easeless fire; alas, how great will be their
fall? and how unspeakably dreadful will be their misery? Whoever thou be,
whether h^gh or low, learned or unlearned, that have disliked, opposed or
reproached serious godly Christians, as Puritanes, and too precise; and that
think the most diligent labor for salvation to be but more ado then needs,
and have not thy self yet resolvedly set upon a holy life, I require at thy
hands so much impartiality and faithfulness to thy own immortal soul, as
seriously to peruse these following Questions, and to go no further in thy
careless, negligent, ungodly course, till thou art able to give such a rational
answer to them, as thou dare stand to now at the Bar of thine own
Conscience, and hereafter at the Bar of Christ.

Quest. 1. Can thou possibly give God more then is his due? Or love him more
then he deserves? Or serve him more faithfully then th^^ art bound, and he is
worthy of? Art thou not his creature? made of nothing? and have thou not all
that thou art and have from him? and if thou give him all, do thou give him
any more then what is his own? If thou give him all the affections of thy soul,
and all the most serious thoughts of thy heart, and every hour of thy time, and
every word of thy mouth, and every penny of thy wealth (in the way that he
requires it) is it any more then is his due? Should not he have all that is
Lord of all?

Quest. 2. Is it not the first and great Commandment. [ Thou shall Love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and might?] And do not heathens
confess this by the light of nature: And has not thy tongue confessed it many a
time? And does not thy conscience yet bear witness that it is thy duty? And is
it possible thou should thus Love him, with all thy heart, and soul, and
might, and yet not seek and serve him with all thy heart, and soul, and might?
Or can the most sanctified person do any more, if he were perfect?

Quest. 3. Do thou not confess that we are all sinners? And that the best is
still too bad? And that he that loves and serves God most, does yet come
exceeding short of his duty? And yet would thou have such men come shorter?
and dare thou persuade them to do less? Must not the best confess their daily
failings, and beg pardon of them from the Lord, and be beholden to the blood of
Christ, and lament their imperfections? And yet would thou have them be such
odious hypocrites, as to think they serve God too much already, while they
confess that they come so short? Shall they confess their failings, and
reproach those that endeavor to avoid the like? Shall the same tongue say, [
Lord be merciful to me a sinner] and [ Lord, I am good enough already: What
need there so much ado to please and serve thee any better?] What would you
think of such a man?

Quest. 4. Is it not an unquestionable duty to grow in grace? and to press
toward perfection as men that have not yet attained it? 2 Pet. 3. 18. Phil. 3.
12, 13, 14. And must Paul, and Peter, and the holiest on earth, still seek to
grow and labor to be more holy? and shall such a one as thou say, What need I
be any more holy? that art utterly unsanctified.

Quest. 5. Is it not one of the two grand Principles of faith and all Religion,
without which no man can please God, Heb. 11. 6. Whoever comes to God must
believe, first, that God is (that there is a God, most powerful, wise and good)
secondly, that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him?] yea this is
one of natures principles. It is the Diligent seekers of God that he will
reward. And yet dare a fleshly negligent sinner, reproach the diligent seeking
of God, and take it for a needless thing, and say, What needs all this ado? Are
not these the Atheists seconds; even next to them that deny that there is any
God, or that blasphem^ him? And indeed, if he be not worthy of all the Love and
service that thou can give him, he is not the true God! Consider therefore
the tendency of thy words, and tremble.

Quest. 6. Does not that wretch set up the flesh and the world abo^^ the Lord,
that thinks not most of his thoughts, and cares, and words, and time, and
labor for the world to be too much ado, and yet thinks less for God and heaven
to be too much? And do thou think in thy conscience that the flesh is better
worthy of thy Love, and care, and labor* then the Lord? or that earth will
prove a better reward to thee then Heaven? Who, think thou, will have the
better bargain in the end? The fool that laid up riches for himself, and was
not rich to God, and shall lose all at once that he so much valued, and so
carefully sought, ( Luke 12. 20, 21.) or he that laid up his treasure in
Heaven, and there set his heart, and sought for the never fading Crown? Matthew.
6. 20, 21, 33. and counted all as loss and dung for the excellent knowledge of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8. Do you think that there is any thing more worth your
care, and time, and labor, or can you more profitably lay it out?

Quest. 7. Have you not immortal souls to save or lose? And are not your bodies
for their service? and to be used and ruled by them? And should not your souls
then have more of your care and diligence, then corruptible flesh that must
turn to dirt?

Quest. 8. Dare any one of you say that you are wiser then the Allknowing God?
Is not thy wisdom less to his, then a glowworms light is to the Sun? And has
not God most plainly and frequently in his Word commanded thee a holy life? Yea
every part and parcel of it, is nothing else but the obeying of that Word: For
if it be not prescribed by the Lord, it is not Holiness, nor that which I am
pleading for. And when the living God has told the world his mind and will,
shall a sinful man stand up and say, I am wiser then my Maker? I know a better
way then this? What need there all this stir for Heaven? What do thou less
then thus blaspheme, and set up thy folly above the wisdom of the Lord, when
thou condemnest or reproachest the holiness which he commands?

Quest. 9. Dare you say that God is not only so unwise, but so unrighteous and
tyranical, as to give the world unnecessary Laws, and set them upon a needless
work? What King so tyranical as would require his subjects on pain of death to
go pick straws against the wind? What Master or Parent so foolishly cruel as to
command their servants or children, to weary themselves with hunting
butter-flies, and following their own shadows? And dare thou impute such
foolish tyranny to the God of heaven? as if he had made a world, and set them
upon a needless work? and commanded them to tire themselves in vain?

Quest. 10. Can a man be too diligent about that work which he was made for,
and is daily preserved and maintained for, and for which he has all the
mercies of his life? Thou had never come into the world but on this business,
even to serve and please God, and prepare for everlasting happiness: And are
you afraid of doing this too diligently? Why is it, think thou, that God
sustaineth thee? Why dyedst thou not many years ago? but only that thou
might have time to seek and serve him. Was it only that thou might eat,
and drink, and sleep, and go up and down, and fill up a room among the living?
Why beasts, and fools, and madmen do all this, as well as thou. Why have thou
thy Reason and understanding, but to know and serve the Lord? Is it only to
know how to shift a little for the commodities of the world? Or is it not to
know the way to life eternal? Look round about thee on all the creatures, and
on all the mercies which thou do possess; every deliverance, and privilege,
and accommodation; every bit of bread thou eatest, and every hour of thy
precious time, are all given thee for this One thing needful: And yet will thou
say that this One thing is needless, for which thou have all things? Thou
may then say, that God made the world in vain; and preserves and governs
it in vain. For all this is but for his service, which thou call vain.

Quest. 11. Does not Reason tell thee, that the place in which thou must live
for ever, should be more diligently minded (and prepared for) then this in
which thou must continue but for a while? Alas, it is so short a time that we
must be here, that it makes all the matters of this world (as such) to be
inconsiderable things, as dreams and shadows. What great matter is it for so
short a time, whether we be rich or poor, well or sick, in credit or in
contempt! whether we laugh or weep! When our part will be so quickly acted, and
we must go naked out of the world as we came into it. For so short a time, a
poor habitation may serve the turn, as well as the most splendid Palace: A
painful, obscure, afflicted life, may do as well as the most plentiful
provisions, and the greatest ease and worldly honors. The purple and fine
linen, the silks and bravery will be soon forgotten; and the soul in Hell will
be no more the better for them, then the rotten carkase in the grave. The taste
of the delicious meats and drinks will quickly be forgotten: and sportful youth
will be turned into cold and languid age: and the most confirmed health into
dolorous sickness; and mirth and laughter into mournful groans. And is such a
transitory life as this, more worthy of your care and greatest diligence, then
life eternal? O one would think that the world that you must be ever, ever in,
should never, never be forgotten! There is the company that you must live with
for ever: There is the state that you shall never change: There is the Joy or
Torment that shall have no end; and while you forget it, you are posting to it,
and are almost there. And can you be too careful for eternity?

Quest. 12. Consider also but the infinite Joys of Heaven, and tell me,
Whether thou do think, they are not worthy the greatest cost or pains that
thou can be at to get them? Do thou think that Heaven is not worthy of the
labor; that is bestowed for it by the holiest Saints on earth? Will it not
requite them to the full? Will any that comes thither repent that they obtained
it at so dear a rate? If now thou could speak with one of those Believers,
mentioned in Heb. 11. that lived as strangers and pilgrims on earth, as seeking
a better, even a heavenly Country, that preferred the reproach of Christ
before the treasure of the world, and chose affliction with the people of God,
before the pleasures of sin for a season, that were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might receive a better resurrection; that had trial of
cruel m^^kings and scourgings, and of bonds and imprisonments, and were s^oned,
sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword, wandered about in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, though men of whom the
world was not worthy: Would any one of these now tell you, that they did or
suffered too much for Heaven? Or that it was not worth ten thousand times more?
If thy tongue dare say that Heaven is not worth the cost or trouble of a holy
life, (or if thy life say so, though thy tongue dare not) thou judge thy self
unworthy of it, and sentencest thy self unto damnation.

Quest. 13. And are the torments of Hell so small and tolerable, that thou
think a holy life too dear a means for to prevent them? Do thou believe
the threatenings of the Lord, that he will come in flaming fire to take
vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power! 2 These. 1. 8, 9. and yet can thou
say, What needs all this ado, to escape such endless misery! Thou will take any
medicine to cure but the gowt or stone, if once thou have felt them? Thou will
draw out a tooth to prevent the pain of it. And is Holiness so hateful or
grievous a thing to thee, that thou will venture on Hell it self to avoid it?
If so much of Hell be in thy heart already, blame none but thy self if thou
have thy choice.

Quest. 14. Why wast thou baptized into the Covenant of holiness, to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, if thou think it n^^dless to perform thy Covenant?
A holy life is no more then* in Baptism thou wast solemnly engaged too: There
did thou renounce the flesh, the world and the Devil; and tookest God for thy
portion and absolute Lord, and gave up thy self to be ruled by him, and saved
by Christ, and sanctified by the holy Spirit; and do thou now say, What needs
all this ado? Are we all by our Baptismal Vow engaged to a needless thing? I
tell thee, there is not the holiest man on earth, that does any more then what
he is bound to by the Covenant-Relations which he undertook in Baptism.

Quest. 15. Moreover, What an Hypocrite art thou to profess thy self a member
of the Holy Catholic Church, if Holiness which is the life of the Church, seem
needless to thee? Why do thou profess to believe and desire the Communion of
Saints, if the life of Saints seem needless to thee, and thou will not have
Communion with them in their sanctity? Do thou not plainly renounce thy
Covenant, and faith, and duty, when thou renouncest a holy life as a thing
unnecessary?

Quest. 16. Do thou think, or dare thou say, that the bloody death, and
holy life of Jesus Christ were more then needs in order to thy salvation?
Unless thou be a prosessed Infidel, I know thou dare not say so: And if thy
soul were worth the sufferings of the Lord of Life, is it not worth all the
cost and labor of thy duty? Christ lived a life of perfect holiness: he never
sinned: he fulfilled all righteousness: he prayed all night, and with greatest
fervency: preaching and doing good was his employment. Though he hated
Pharisaical superstition, and the teaching for doctrines the Commandments of
men, and serving God according to men's traditions, yet was there never so holy,
and pure, and precise, and strict, and heavenly a life as Jesus Christ's: And
this was for our redemption, and our example. And dare thou say that this was
needless? Should we not endeavor to imitate our pattern? Are they better that
are likest Christ, or they that are most unlike him? And which do thou think
is liker Christ, the holy or the unholy? Sure we that fall so short of the
example that Christ has given us, are far from being more diligent then needs,
when Christ went not too far, nor was too strict, that went so very far beyond
us.

Quest. 17. Look upon all the institutions of the Lord: On Magistracy, and
Ministry, and the great works of their office: On prayer, and preaching, and
Sacraments, and Discipline, and all other Ordinances of God; and also on all
the frame of the holy Scripture; and also on all the workings and graces of the
Holy Ghost; and tell me whether thou dare say, that all or any of these are
in vain? and whether that Holiness which all these are appointed for, can be a
vain and needless thing?

Quest. 18. Dare thou say that Christ does more then needs, in his
Intercession for us with the Father now in Heaven? It is he that sends the
spirit to sanctify us: It is he that prays that we may be sanctified by the
truth? We have no grace and holiness but what we have from him. And dare thou
say he does too much? It is he that sends his Ministers to call men to a holy
life: Look into his Word, and see whether the doctrine which they preach be not
there prescribed to them; and the duties of holiness there commended. If
therefore it were erroneous or excessive, it would be long of Christ, and not
of his Messengers or Disciples, that speak and do no more for holiness, then he
bids them; but fall exceeding short.

Quest. 19. Art thou wiser in this, and more to be believed, then all the
ancient Prophets, and Apostles, and servants of God in former ages, and then
all that are now alive on earth, that ever tried a holy life? The Scripture
will tell thee that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and all the rest of the
Saints that were then most dear to God, were so far from thinking that a holy
life was more then needs, that they thought they could never be holy enough,
and blamed their defects when they excelled such as now thou blamest as too
precise. And if thou will prefer the words and example of a worldling, or of a
sottish sensual man, before the judgment and example of these Saints, the
company that thou choosest, and the deceivers whom thou followest, shall be
also thy companions in calamity, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
when ye shall see the Saints from East and West, from North and South, sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and
you, and such as you thrust out: Even when the last in time (whom you here
despised) shall be equal to the first and ancient Saints, Luke 13. 27, 28, 29,
30. Why do you hypocritically honor the names and memorials of the Prophets,
Apostles, and other former Saints, and keep Holy Days for them* and yet
reproach their holy course, and prefer the judgment of a drunkard or a
malignant enemy of godliness before theirs? For so you do when you argue
against a holy life.

Quest. 20. Do thou think that there is now one soul in Heaven or Hell, that
is of thy profane opinion, and would say, that a diligent holy life is more
ado then needs for men's salvation? Certainly those in Heaven have more
knowledge; and experience, and love to God and man, and goodness, then to be of
so impious a mind, or once to entertain such beastly thoughts: And those in
Hell, though still ^^ holy* have learned to their cost to know the great
Necessity of ^ss: And would tell you, if they could speak with you, that the
most strict and heavenly life for millions of ages were not too dear, for the
escaping of the everlasting misery. Why else do we find one of them in Luke 16.
described as so desirous, that o^ the dead might be sent to his Brethren, to
warn them that they come not to that place of torment? And what is it that he
would have had them warned of, but that they should live a holy self-denying
life and with all their diligence lay up a treasure in the life to come,
instead of liying so sensual, and voluptuous, and ungodly a life as he had
lived. The scope of the story tells us that this would have been his message,
if he might have sent.

Quest. 21. Do thou think in thy Conscience that at the hour ^^ thy death, or
at least at Judgment, thou shall think thy self that Holiness was unnecessary?
Does not thy heart tell thee that then thou shall be of another mind? and wish
with the deepest desires of thy soul, that thou had lived as strictly, and
prepared for everlasting life as seriously, and served God as diligently, as
ever did any Saint on earth? But alas, those wishes will be then too late. Now
is thy day: and now thou take thy work to be needless: And to see the
Necessity when time is gone, will be thy torment, but not thy remedy. Not one
in this Congregation, or Town, or Country, not one in England, or in all the
world, but shall be forced at last, whether he will or no, to justify the
wisdom of the godly, and the worst of you shall then with ten thousand
fruitless groans desire, that you had imitated the holiest persons that you
knew. Not a tongue then shall say, What needs all this ado for heaven? Not a
man there dare call his neighbor Puritan, nor take up a contemptuous jear,
against the diligent servants of the Lord.

Quest. 22. Is not that man at the heart against the Lord, that reproacheth his
serious diligent servants, and counts his work a needless thing? Men are more
willing to please those that they love; and more ready to do the works they
love. If your son or servant speak against your service, but as you do against
Gods, what would you think of their affections? Doubtless it is no better then
a secret hatred to the holiness of God, and a Serpentine e^^ity to his holy
ways, that causes all these senseless cavils, and impious speeches, against
the life that he has commanded us to live.

Quest. 23. Is it not most unreasonable impiety, for that man ^^ speak against
too strict exact obedience, and against serving God ^^ much, that has served
the world, the flesh, and the Devil in ^^ vigor and flower of his days, and
this with pleasure, and never said, It is too much? When thou wast drinking and
sporting, thou wast not aweary: When it comes to a matter of riches, or honor,
or ease, or pleasure, to gratify thy worldliness, pride, laziness and
voluptuousness, then thou never say, It is too much? And is all too little
for sin and the Devil, and all too much for thy soul and God? Let Conscience
tell thee whether this be just.

Quest. 24. Is it not a foolish wickedness, for that man to cry out against
making haste to heaven, and going so fast in the ways of God that has
loytered already till the evening of his days, and lost so much time as thou
have done? If thou had begun as soon as thou had the use of reason, and
remembered thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and never lost an hour of thy
time since then till now, thou had done no more then what thy God, thy soul,
and all right reason required of thee! For surely he that made thee, has in
wisdom proportioned thy time to thy work, and has not given thee an hour too
much. A long life is short enough to prepare for everlasting. And shall a
loytering Rebel that has wasted so much of his little time, cry out, What
needs so much ado?

Quest. 25. Is it not the graceless miserable sort of men, that cry out, What
needs all this ado? Certainly it is: For Scripture, and Reason, and Experience
tell us, that all that are godly, are of another mind: The more grace they
have, the more they would have: The more they love God, the more they would
love him. The more good they do, the more they would do. Do you not see how
they labor after more grace? and hear how they complain that they are no
better? O how it would glad them to be more Holy and more Heavenly! It is
therefore the strangers and despisers of grace, that never knew by experience,
the nature, and power, and sweetness of it, than say, It is more ado then
needs. And is it not a most unreasonable thing for a man that has no saving
grace and holiness at all, to cry out against excess of holiness? And for a man
that is in the captivity of the Devil, and ready suddenly to drop into Hell, if
death do but strike the fatal blow, before he be regenerate, to talk against
doing too much for heaven? And for a man that never did God one hours pleasing
service, ( Heb. 11. 6.) to prate against serving God too much? O poor wretch!
were thy eyes but opened, thou would see that of any man in the Town or
Country, this language ill beseems thee. When God has been so long
offended; and thy soul is almost lost already, and death and hell is hard at
hand, and may swallow thee up in endless desperation for ought thou know,
before thou have read this Book to the end, or before thou see another year, or
month, or day, is it time for such a one as thee to say, What needs so much
ado? One would think if there be any life in thee, thou should stir as for
thy life: and if thou have a voice to cry, thou should cry out to God hoth
day and night in the fervor of thy soul, even now while mercy may be had, lest
time should over-slip thee, and thou be shut up in the place of torment: If
Hellfire will not make thee stir, What will? Should a weak Christian that is
cast behind hand by his negligence, but once speak against a diligent life, he
were exceedingly too blame. But for thee that art yet in the gall of
bitterness, and the misery of an unregenerate state, to speak against holy
diligence for salvation, when thou art in such great and deep distress, and
like a man that is drowning, or a house on fire, that must presently have help
or perish; this is a madness that has no name sufficient to express it by;
which its a wonder that a rational soul should be guilty of.

Quest. 26. Art thou not afraid of some sudden vengeance from the Lord, for
thus making thy self his open enemy, and contradicting him to his face? Mark
his language, and then mark thine. Christ says, [ Enter in at the strait gate:
For wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be which go i^ thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way, which leads unto life, and few there be that find it.] Matthew. 7. 13,
14. [ Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will
seek to enter in, and shall not be able.] Luke 13. 24. [ See then that ye walk
circumspectly (or exactly) not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time.]
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. [ For I say unto you, th^^ except your righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scrib^s and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of heaven.] Matthew. 5. 20. [ Wherefore brethren, give all diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure.] 2 Pet. 1. 10. [ Workout your salvation
with fear and trembling.] Phil. 2. 12. [ Seeing then all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness, looking for and hasting to the coming of the day of God.] 2 Pet. 3.
11, 12. [ And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear.] 1 Pet. 4. 18. [ Lay not up for your selves a treasure on
earth, etc. but lay up for your selves a treasure in heaven, etc. For where
your treasure it, there will your hearts be also.] Matthew. 6. 19, 20, 21. [ Seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness] Matthew. 6. 33. [ Labor not for
the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life.] John
6. 27. [ The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force.] Matthew. 11. 12. [ Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all,
but one receives the prize? So run that ye may obtain: And every man that
striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things: Now they do it to obtain
a corruptible Crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as
uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beats the air: but I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means when I have preached
to others, I my self should be a castaway.] 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. [
Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness; incline your ear, and come
unto me; hear and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you.] Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. [ Be servent in spirit, serving the Lord.] Romans
12. 11. [ For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all
men; teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
sanctify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.] Tit. 2. 11, 12,
13, 14. [ Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully.] Jer. 48.
10. [ Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: For there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whether thougoest.]
Eccles. 9. 10.

These and such like are the sayings of God, by which thou may easily
understand his mind concerning the necessity of a serious, diligent, holy life.
And shall a blind and wretched worm come after, and dare to contradict him, and
unsay all this, and say, What needs so much ado? What! dare thou thus openly
resist God to his face? What art thou? and what is thy word, that we should
regard it before the Word of God?

Quest. 27. Do thou not know that by thy speaking against a diligent holy
life, thou gratifyest the Devil, and openly servest him, and say the very
things that he would have thee say? What can more please him, and advance his
Kingdom, and suit his malicious ends, then to stop and cool men in the service
of the Lord, and make them believe that holiness is but a needless thing? If
the Devil might have leave to walk visibly among men, and speak to them in
their language, he would speak to them as thou do, and say the same things
which he (...) into thy mouth; and would do all that he could to keep men from
a holy life. And dare thou thus openly play his part?

Quest. 28. Can thou think (when eternal life is at the stake) that a man so
weak in the midst of so many hindrances and enemies, has cause to count his
diligence unnecessary? When Satan like a roaring Lion, is seeking day and night
to devour thee (1 Pet. 5. 8.) when his malice, subtilty, and diligence is so
great, and so unwearied; when his instruments are so many, so subtle, and so
powerful; when the world abounds round about thee with such dangerous
enticing snares and baits; when thy traiterous flesh so near thee is thy most
perilous enemy, uncessantly drawing thee from God unto the creature; and when
thou art so impotent to resist all these assaults; art thou then in a condition
fit to cry out against the greatest diligence for thy soul? Should a man going
up the sleep hill, when it is for his life, be afraid of going too fast?
When thou have done all thou can, it is well for thee that ever thou wast
born if it suffice. If weaknesses and enemies cause such a difficulty that the
righteous themselves are scarcely saved (that is, with much ado) is it then
time for thee to ask What needs so much ado?

Quest. 29. D^st thou not deal exceeding unthankfully and unequally with God?
When he thinks not the Sun and Moon and all the creatures too good to serve
thee, nor all his mercies too great for thee; no not the blood of his beloved
Son, nor his Spirit, nor Heaven it self if thou will accept them in his way;
will thou think thy best too good for him? and thy most diligent service to be
too much? When thy All is next to Nothing; and thy Best does not profit the
Almighty, but thy self, and the gain will be thy own. If a man should think it
too much to put off his hat and thank thee, when thou have given him a thousand
pound; or to go a mile for thee, when thou have saved his life; thou would
say he were not a man, but a monster of ingratitude. But thy unthankfulness is
ten thousand-fold worse to God, who would deliver thee from everlasting
torments, and give thee everlasting glory, and save thee from Satan and all thy
sins, if thou will but take his safe remedies* and thou churlishly refusest, as
if all were not worth so much ado.

Quest. 30. Do thou know what a life it is that thou accountes^ an
unnecessary toil? It is a life of the greatest Safety, Commodity, Honor, and
Delight, (besides the justice and honesty of it) of any in the world; and
indeed thou can not choose any other but at thy peril, and to thy greatest
loss and ruin, and to thy present and everlasting shame and sorrow: It is the
sweetest and most pleasant life on earth, that thou ignorantly accountest such
a tedious toil. The manifestation of this shall be my work in the second Part
of this Discourse.

And now I dare affirm, that when the dreadful God shall shortly judge thee who
have read or heard these words, it will be found indelibly written upon thy
Conscience, that thou had here such Reasons laid before thee, to prove the
Necessity of a serious, diligent, holy life, as all the wit in earth or Hell,
is not able solidly to confute; and that an ungodly sensual life is most
unreasonable; and that, if after this, thou continue in an unsanctified fleshly
state, thou shall justly perish as one that wilfully refused salvation, as in
despite of God, his mercies and his messengers, and of the plainest undeniable
Truth and Reason: And that in refusing to be a SAINT, thou made thy self in
the greatest matters no better then a BRUTE, wilfully subjecting thy Reason to
thy sensuality, and judging thy self unmeet for everlasting Happiness.

BUt here I know the self-deceiving Hypocrite will object, That all this that I
am proving so diligently is confessed, and nothing to the point in question:
Which is not, Whether One thing be needful, and Holiness be of Necessity to
salvation? For who denies this? But the question is, Whether it be this
Puritanical precise way of serving God which only deserves the name of
Holiness? and Whether they be net as truly godly and sanctified that say their
prayers morning and night, and go to Church on Sundays, and follow their
businesses the rest of the week, without any more ado?

Answ. Either it is the substance of holy duties, or but the circumstances,
which you quarrel at as Puritanical and precise. If it be only the
circumstances, (as Whether we should receive the Lords Supper standing, or
kneeling, or sitting? Whether we should pray publicly without Book, or on the
Book? and Whether a Scripture-form or another be better? and Whether a
continued speech, or versicles, anthems, and oft-repeated words and sentences
be better? What form of Church Government is best ^ by Diocesane Bishops, or by
all the Pastors? and the like) It is not of such things as these that I am
pleading with thee: Though some of them are matters of considerable moment, for
the helping or hindering men in godliness; yet it is greater matters then these,
that I am now contending for. Agree with us practically in the substance, in
Faith, Repentance, Love, Obedience, Mortification, Heavenliness, Humility,
Patience, and serious diligence and zeal in all, and then I am none of those
that will condemn or censure you; but one that will rejoice in you, as those
that I hope to rejoice with for ever.

But if it be the substantial duties of godliness that you resist, while you
own but the Name of godliness in the general, I must tell you that it is not
Names and Generals that will save you; nor prove that you have your selves one
spark of Grace. Nothing more eafie and common then for the most ungodly to say,
they are all for a godly life; and God forbid that any should be against it;
when yet they hate and reject it indeed, when it comes to the practice of those
particular duties in which it does consist. It is not godliness that they hate
and reproach, but it is fervent prayer, holy conference, meditation,
self-denial, mortification of the desires of the flesh, heavenly mindedness,
etc. In general, they will say that Gods Law must be obeyed, and his Will
preferred before their own: But when it comes to the particulars, they Love him
not above all, they take his name in vain, they keep not holy his day, they
disobey superiors that would reform them, they are envious, malicious,
covetous, lustful, and break all the Commandments in particular, which in
general they profess to keep. As if your servant should promise to do your
work; and when you set him to it, one thing is too hard, and another he is not
used to, and so he has his exceptions against the greatest part which he
undertook. As if one should wound one of you in the head, and stab you to the
heart, and cut off an arm or a leg, and say, I wish the man no harm; It is not
the man that I hate or hurt, but only the head, the heart, the arm, etc. Even
so, it is not holiness that these men hate, and speak against; but it is so
much praying, and meditating, and reading the Scriptures, and making such astir
about Religion, when less ado way serve the turn.

But wretched soul, if thou have not the wit to see the contradictions of thy
deceitful tongue, and the venom of the malignant heart, do thou think that
such sottish shifts as the^ will blind the eyes of heavenly Justice, and save
thee from the vengeance of a Holy God, which he has denounced against
rebellious hypocrites? But come on; let us try whether the several parts of
godliness which thou questionest, or call Puritanism or preciseness, are not
most expressly and peremptorily commanded in the Word of God.

1. Is it so much preaching and hearing Sermons that thou quarrellest with?
Hear then how Christ and his Apostles preached, and how they required men to
hear. Mark 1. 35, 37, 38, 39. [ And in the morning rising up a great while
before day, he went out and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed:
And Simon and they that were with him followed after him; and when they had
found him they said unto him, All men seek for thee: And he said, Let us go
unto the next Towns, that I may preach there also; for therefore came I forth:
and he preached in their Synagogues throughout all Galilee.] Mark 2. 2. [ And
straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to
receive them; no not so much as about the door, and he preached the Word unto
them.] Mark 3. 19, 20, 21. [ And they went into an house, and the multitude
comes together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread: and when
his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him; for they said, He is
beside himself.] Acts 5. 42. [ And daily in the Temple, and in every house,
they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.] Acts 4. 4. [ They that were
scattered went everywhere preaching the Word.] Acts 20. 20, 28, 31. [ I kept
back nothing that was profitable to you, but have showed you, and have taught
you publicly and from house to house -- Take heed therefore to your selves and
to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed
the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood -- Therefore
watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every
one night and day with tears.] Romans 10. 14, 15. [ How shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?] Phil.
1. 18. [ Every way whether in pretense or in truth Christ is preached, and I do
therein rejoice, yea and will rejoice.] 1 Cor. 1. 21. [ It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.] Col. 1. 28, 29. [ Whom we
preach, warning every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, etc.] 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. [ I charge
thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, preach the word; be instant in
season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and
doctrine.] 1 Cor. 9. 16. [ Necessity is laid upon me; yea woe unto me if I
preach not the Gospel.]

What say you now? do we not fall much short of those that we should imitate,
rather then do too much in preaching? But what need we more then the text it
self, where for hearing, Mary is so commended, and her sister blamed for
neglecting it, though it was to make provision for Christ himself and those
that were with him? Acts 20. 7. [ And upon the first day of the week when the
Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached to them, being to depart
on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight.] Jam. 1. 19. [ Let
every one be swift to hear.] Rev. 2. 7. etc. [ He that has ear, let him hear.]
Luke 8. 21. [ Jesus said, My mother and my brethren are those which hear the
Word of God and do it.] I hope you see this duty is past question.

2. Is it the reading of the Scripture that is the Puritanism or too much ado
that you blame? Or is it the frequent meditating on such high and holy things?
Hear what the Spirit says of this: Psalm 1. 1, 2. [ Blessed is the man that
walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners,
nor sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night -- The ungodly are not so.
-- ] Psalm 119. 97. [ O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day.]
99. [ Thy testimonies are my meditation.] v. 148. [ Mine eyes prevented the
night watches, that I might meditate en thy Word.]. Job 23. 12. [ I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food.] Psalm 119. 72. [
The Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.] Mark
12. 10. [ Have ye not read the Scriptures?] John 5. 39. [ Search the
Scriptures.] Acts 8. 28. [ The Euuuch sitting in his Chariot read Esaias the
Prophet.] 1 Timothy 4. 13. [ Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine.] I hope you see also that this part of godliness is past question.

3. Is it much and fervent prayer that is the preciseness or too much ado that
you make question of? Hear then what the Holy Ghost does say of that: Phil. 4.
6. [ In every thing by Prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God.] 1 These. 5. 17, 18. [ Pray without ceasing: In
every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God concerning you] Luke 18.
1. [ And he spoke a parable to them to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to wax faint, etc.] Luke 11. 8, 9. [ I say unto you, though he
will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs: And I say unto
you, Ask and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall
be opened unto you.] Luke 6. 12. [ He went out into a mountain to pray, and
continued all night in prayer to God.] Daniel would not give over praying three
times a day in his house, for thirty days space, at the Kings command, no not
to save his life from devouring Lions. David says, Psalm 119. 164. [ Seven
times a day do I praise thee.] Lam. 2. 19. [ Arise: cry out in the night: in
the beginning of the watches pour out thy heart like water before the face of
the Lord:] Psalm 14. 4. it is part of the wicked Atheists description, that [
They call not upon the Lord.] Jer. 10. 25. [ Pour out thy fury upon the heathen
that know thee not, and the families that call not on thy name.] Psalm 145. 18.
[ The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him; to all that call upon him in
truth.] When Paul was converted, the Lord lets Ananias know it by this token,
Acts 9. 11. [ For behold he prays.] Acts 1. 14. [ These all continued with
one accord in prayer and supplication.] Acts 2. 42. The three thousand Converts
[ continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers.] Col 4. 2 [ Continue in prayer, and watch in
the same, with thanksgiving; withal praying also for us, that God would open
to us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ.] Romans 12. 12. [
Continuing instant in prayer.] Jam. 5. 16. [ The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much.] 1 Timothy 4. 5. [ For (every creature) is sanctified
by the Word of God and prayer.] 1 Timothy 5. 5. [ She that is a widow indeed and
desolate, trusts in God, and continues in supplications and prayers night
and day.] Jude 20. [ Praying in the Holy Ghost.] 1 These. 3. 10. [ Night and day
praying exceedingly.] Ephesians. 6 18. [ Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all Saints; and for me, etc.] 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. [ What prayer or
what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel,
when every one shall know his own sore, and his own grief, and shall spread
forth his hands in this house, then hear thou from Heaven, etc.]

I hope by this time, if you have eyes you see, that more frequent and fervent
prayers then any of us use (and that without Book) were used by the ancient
servants of the Lord, and were not thought too much ado, nor more ado then God
requires of us.

4. Is it constant, diligent teaching, instructing, and catechizing your
families, and laboring that your selves and they may understand and practice
the Law of God? Hear also what the Spirit says of this: and then judge whether
it be too much preciseness.

Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [ My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my
Commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thy heart to understanding: yea if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up
thy voice for understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for
her as for hidden treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God.] Deuteronomy. 6. 5, 6, 7. and 11. 18, 19, 20. [ And
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might: And these words which I command thee this day shall be in
thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way,
and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: And thou shall bind them for
a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes; and
thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.] Genesis 18,
19. [ For I know Abraham that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.] Josh. 24. 15. [ But as for
me and my household, we will serve the Lord.] Prove. 22. 6. [ Train up a child in
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.] Ephesians. 6.
4. [ Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.] These and many
such passages show you that the most diligent instructing of your families, is
not more ado then God requires, but a most weighty needful part of godliness.

5. Is it the meeting of diverse neighbors together (distinct from
Church-meetings) that you question? Why, if it be Schismatical in opposition to
the public meetings, or to do any unlawful work, we are against it as well as
you. But if it be but for the redeeming of their time, for their spiritual
advantage, and orderly, peaceably, and soberly observed, by some that have more
time, or care of their souls, then the rest of their neighbors; sure you will
not for shame imagine, that neighbors may lawfully meet to make merry, and
feast, and sport, and conferr about their worldly business, and yet may not
meet to pray, and praise God, and repeat what instructions they have received
of their Teachers, and prepare for and improve the public Ordinances? Hear
what the Spirit says also in this. In the text here you find just such a
meeting, where Christ was teaching, and Mary and his Disciples hearing, and
Martha cumbred with providing for the company, and blamed for neglecting the
advantage for her soul. Acts 12. 12. Peter came out of prison to the house of
Mary, where many were gathered together praying.] Acts 10. 24. [ Cornelius
called together his kinsmen and near friends] to hear Peter; who there preached
to them, converted and baptized them. I need to instance in no more, because
this was the ordinary practice of Christ and the Apostles. If you say, Those
were times of persecution: I answer, True: But, 1. yet such times in which
public Assemblies were ordinarily held, and public preaching used. 2. And as
the good of men's souls required it in times of persecution, so when the good of
souls requires it, in times of liberty, it is from the same general reason a
duty; but never forbidden by Christ in any times of greatest prosperity and
peace.

6. Is it the holy observation of the Lords day that is the preciseness that
you cannot away with? Of all men, it beseems not them to quarrel at this, that
own our Homilies, and with the Commonprayer, use after the fourth Commandment
to say, [ Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law;]
When they have heard, [ Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, thou, thy
Son, thy daughter, thy manservant, thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates.] You see all the foresaid duties must be
performed, and public Assemblies for Gods worship and our instruction
continued: And therefore there must be some known appointed time for these. And
do you know any other day that is fitter? I think you will not pretend to that:
You would not have another day instead of this; but you would have no day at
all for such holy works; but a day for ease, and idleness, and sports, and vain
discourse, and pleasures, with some little formal public worship intermixed to
cheat your souls. It is not then the Day, but the serious, diligent, holy
employment and duty that you are against; and that I have proved to be Gods
will before. Doubtless if you leave all men to serve God when they will,
without any stated time, his worship will soon be brought to nothing, and they
that pretend to keep every day holy, will keep none. Look upon the places where
the Lords day is kept holy, and see whether godliness flourish not there
incomparably above all other places. And I think none can doubt but that more
souls have been converted and brought home to God on that day, then on any day
of the week, if not then all the rest beside. And there is not the peevishest
malignant soul of you, that can with any show of reason prove that the holy
observation of the Lords day is unlawful, if it were not necessary: So that we
are at least on the safest side of the hedge: For we can say that we take a
most happy opportunity for the good of our own souls, and the worshipping of
God; and that we are sure we do that which is no sin; our adversaries
themselves do not charge us with doing that which is forbidden, but that which
they conceit unnecessary: But if we should do as they, and neglect this day, we
are not sure but it may be a great sin; (nay indeed we are sure it would be so.)

But what says the Holy Ghost now to this question? To pass by the fourth
Commandment, at this time, the letter of it, and the equity and reason of a
seventh day; the advantage of reason why there should be no less under the
Gospel, and such like; I shall only now say these two things. 1. It is plain in
Scripture that ( de facto) the Apostles and Churches used to meet for holy
Communion in Gods worship on the Lords day: And consequently that this was
appointed by the Apostles, or immediately by Christ himself, there being then
no other that pretended to any such authority: and that Apostolical allowance
no man questioneth. The Apostles then having the extraordinary gift of the
Spirit, by which they were enabled infallibly to make known the will of God,
and being commissioned as well as enabled here unto; as their writing of the
holy Scriptures, so their constitutions for the ordering of the Church, being
the effects of that Authority received from Christ, and that Ability given them
by the Spirit, are Divine, and principally the acts of Christ and the Holy
Ghost, whose agents the Apostles were. Now that the first Churches did by their
appointment, observe the Lords day for holy actions, is apparent. As Christ
first laid the groundwork by R^sing on that day, so he began that very day to
preach unto Mary the comfortable doctrine of his Ascension, in words that
deserve to be written in gold, or rather in the deepest room of every true
Believers heart: [John 20. 17. Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend
unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God and your God]; The first Sermon
that ever was preached on a Lords day, even on the first Lords day by Christ
himself, even to a beloved penitent woman, whom he chose to be as it were his
Apostle to his Apostles, to deliver them this Message as from him.

On the same day the Disciples being Assembled, he owned and blessed their
Assembly, and gave them the Holy Ghost and Apostolical power.

When Thomas being absent from the Assembly the first Lords day, did miss the
sight of Christ and was unbelieving, Christ left him a whole week in his
unbelief, and would not heal him till the next Lords day, which he honored
with that cure. Then the Disciples being met again, Christ came among them, and
convinced Thomas.

On another Lords day, they were all with one accord in one place, and the Holy
Ghost was in the extraordinary measure given them. And Acts 20. 7. it is
mentioned as the custom of the Disciples, to come together on the first day of
the week to break bread; and Paul then preached to them even till midnight. And
1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. the Collections for the Saints were made every first day of
the week in all the Churches of Galatia, and at Corinth, because they had then
their holy Assemblies. And therefore Rev. 1. 10. it is called peculiarly the
Lords day.

2. But to clear this past all rational doubting, we find in all the writings
of the ancients, and history of the Church, that all the Churches through the
world unanimously observed the Lords day as instituted by Christ or the Holy
Ghost in the Apostles; none ever questioning or contradicting it, that ever I
read of. He that has read the writings of the Ancients, and denies this, is
unworthy to be disputed with. The practice of the universal Church is a full
exposition of the forecited Scriptures; and though it be no Law to us it self,
yet is it a full discovery of the fact (telling us what was the primitive
practice) and so a discovery of the Law. And shall any private ignorant man,
come in alter one thousand six hundred and twenty six years, and say the
Apostles and all the Churches in the world have been deceived till this day,
and we must rectify the mistake? Shall these fellows come in at the end of the
world, and call the Apostles and all the Churches of all ages Puritanes, for
keeping holy the Lords day? Or will any but a brainsick person hearken to such
shameless men as these?

Object. But the ancient Churches did not keep that day as a Sabbath, but only
as a day for public worship.

Answ. We will not stick with you for the name: We urge you not to call it the
Sabbath, (though the Ancients sometimes did so: See our Homilies of the Place
and Time of Prayer) if you will call it as Scripture and the Churches did, by
the name of the Lords day. And it was then the custom of the Churches, to spend
almost all the day in public Worship and Holy Communion, and therefore they
had but little time for any private duties that day. And yet (though the
private practices of particular persons on that day be little mentioned in
Church History) no man can prove that they used to spend any remaining hours of
that day as common time in common business. So that to quarrel against the holy
observation of the Lords day, is but to quarrel with the Holy Ghost and the
Apostles, and all the Churches of all ages since, and with the happyest season
for the worshipping of God, and seeking our own and other men's edification.

7. What is there yet remaining then that you quarrel with as too much
preciseness? Is it the strictness of men's lives in forbearing sin, and not
doing as their neighbors do, in rioting and vain recreations, and delights?
For this I need not stand to justify them, with any impartial sober man. If
sin be evil, and displease God, and deserve damnation, he that most fully and
carefully avoideth it, is the honestest and the wisest man. You will not blame
your child or servant for being loath to offend and disobey you even in the
smallest matter. You like not him that offers you the least abuse, so well as
him that offers you none. You had rather be well then have the least disease.
You will not take a little poison; nor would you feel a little of hell: Why
then should we not avoid the least sin so far as we are able? If sinning be
good, then Devils are the best creatures, and Angels and Christ (in his
manhood) the worst. But if sin be the greatest evil, What will you call those
men that do not only wilfully commit it, but plead for it, and reproach those
that would fain avoid it? Or what if some of those that you reproach, are
mistaken in some point, and (...) that to be a sin that is none? Or what if you
think it to be no sin which they scruple? Will you blame a man that loves God,
to be afraid of that which he suspecteth may offend him? Or will you blame him
that cares for his salvation, to make as sure of it as he can? and to keep as
far from the brink of hell as he able? How is it that you observe not that your
very reproaches do confute themselves? What is it that you are offended at in
the servants of the Lord? Is it Good or Evil? Surely it is some fault or other
of theirs, that you will pretend to be the cause. For scarce any but the Devil
himself will openly and professedly oppose Goodness under the name of Goodness.
And if it be a (real or supposed) fault that you speak against them for, does
it not intimate that they should avoid all faults as far as they are able? And
yet will you at the same time reproach them for being too strict and fearful to
offend? as if it were their fault that they are unwilling to be faulty?

But let us hear what God says of this. Prove. 14. 9. [ Fools make a mock at
sin.] verse. 34. [ Righteousness exalts a Nation: but sin is a reproach to any
people.] And yet you would make the avoiding it, a reproach.) Genesis 4. 7. [ If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies
at the door.] Numb. 32. 23. [ Be sure your sin will find you out.] Jam. 1. 15.
[ Sin when it is finished brings forth death.] 1 These. 5. 22. [ Abstain from
all appearance of evil.] Matthew. 12. 36, 37. [ But I say unto you, that every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment: For by thy words thou shall be justified; and by thy words thou
shall be condemned.] Matthew. 5. 19. [ Whosoever shall break one of the least of
these Commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called least in the
Kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and ^e^^h them, the same shall be
called great in the Kingdom of heaven.] verse. 22. [ But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment -- but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
fire. verse. 28. [ I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart.] Verse. 34,
35, 36, 37. [ I say unto you, swear not at all: Neither by heaven for it is
Gods throne: nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: -- But let your
communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil.] Jam. 4. 12. [ But above all things, my Brethren, swear not; neither
by heaven, neither by the earth, nor by any other oath: but let your Yea be
Yea, and your Nay, Nay, lest you faell into condemnation.] Epes. 5. 3, 4. [ But
fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not once be named
amongst you as becomes Saints: Neither filthyness, nor foolish talking, nor
jeasting, which are not convenient but rather giving of thanks. An hundred such
passages of Scripture I might recite, that might quickly satisfy you, what God
expects, and whether it be too much preciseness to fear the smallest sin.

8. But perhaps it is the rigor of their Church discipline that makes you
offended with those that you count too pure and precise: because they will not
let other men alone, but are reproving them, and bringing them to open
penitence and confession of their open sins, and casting those out of the
Communion of the Church, which do refuse it. Answ. But do they do this of
themselves, or does God command it them? Do you think that the Communion of
Saints, is to be turned into a rabble of impiety? and the Church into a
swine-stye? Do you not know that the Canons of the ancient Churches for many
hundred years after Christ, are stricter in this Discipline by far, then those
that now offend you by their strictness? And hear what he Holy Ghost ^aith.
Lev. 19. 17. [ Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy (...): thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and (...).] Matthew. 18. 15. 16, 17. [ If thy broth^^
(...) t^ll him his fault between thee and (...) gained thy brother. But if
(...) thee one or two more, that (...) every word may be established: And if
(...) unto the Church; but if he neglect (...) the Church, let (...) be unto
thee as an Heathen mar or a (...).] ^ Cor. 5. For I verily at absent in body
but present in ^^irit, have judged already as though I were present concerning
him that has done this deed, that in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye
are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to deliver such a one to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus -- Know ye not that a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out therefore the old leaven -- Now I
have written to you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be
a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such a one no ^ot to eat -- therefore put away from among
your selves the wicked person.] 2 These. 3. 6, 14. [ Now we command you,
Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which
he received of us -- And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note
that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.] 2 John 10. [
If there come any to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.] Jam. 5. 16. [ Confess your faults one to another.]
Josh. 7. 19. [ Give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and tell me now what thou have done; hide it not from me.]
Prove. 28. 13. [ He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.] Does not all this justify the
exercise of Discipline, and condemn the neglect of it?

9. But (says the impious person) why make they such a difference between
themselves and other men? extolling themselves as the only servants of the
Lord, and condemning others as ungodly and children of the Devil, and
terrifying men's consciences with the fears of hell?

Answ. If any do so against such as are sanctified and renewed, and have the
Spirit of Christ, and live to God, they deal uncharitably; and if you dislike
their censoriousness, so do I, and so do all the sober, considerate servants of
the Lord. But if it be only against the carnal unsanctified world that they do
thus, it is God that makes the difference and not they. Do you not find the
whole Scripture dividing all the world into two ranks, the godly and the
ungodly? the regenerate and unregenerate? the converted and unconverted? the
sanctified and unsanctified? the carnal and the spiritual? the earthly-minded
and the heavenly-minded? the pardoned and unpardoned? the justified and
unjustified? the children of God, and the enemies of God? the servants of God,
and of the Devil? the heirs of heaven, and the heirs of hell? To prove this
would be to repeat the Bible. Read Psalm 1. and 37. and 15. and 10. Matthew. 5.
Romans 8. Joh. 3. Matthew. 13. 1 John 3. etc. Do you not find Christ himself
acquainting you before hand that one sort shall be set at his right hand in
judgment, and the other at his left; and one part sent to life everlasting,
and the other to everlasting punishment? Matthew. 25. Do they speak any mo^e of
the everlasting torments, the worm that dies not, the fire that is
unquenchable, then Christ himself has done? Matthew. 13. 2 These. 1. etc. Do you
love to be flattered into Hell? and deceived in a matter of everlasting
consequence? Is it not better for you to search your hearts, and try whether
you have the spirit of Christ or not, and then search the Scripture, and try
whether any man be his that has not his spirit, Romans 8. 9. or can be saved
that i^ not converted and born again of the spirit, Matthew. 18. 3. John 3. 3, 6.
[ Examine your selves whether you be in the faith: Pr^^ your own selves. Know
ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be
reprobates? 2 Cor. 12. 5.

10. But you will say, that the Reason of your distaste against these that are
so forward in Religion is, that they are inwardly ^^ bad as others, and as
proud and worldly; and why do they not excel others in good works, as much as
they do in their de^^tions?

Answ. 1. So they do, according to their ability: Twenty years trial and more I
have had of them since I was a Minister of Christ; and I can truly say, that
ordinarily I have known of many a shilling, if not pounds, that have come from
the purses of these that you call Puritanes and precise, for one groat or penny
that I have known come from most others about me of their rank, to any pious
and charitable use. But all that are godly, a^^ not rich: and though Christ
extolleth the widows two mites, the standers by regarded them not: Matthew. 12.
42. 43. 2 Cor. 8. 12. [ If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.] And he
that has said, [ Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be seen of
them; otherwise you have no reward of your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 6.
1.] has hereby kept his servants from making the world acquainted with much of
their deeds of charity: And for the sins of the heart that you charge them
with, they (...) known to none but God, unless they be discovered in their
lives. But malice in all ages has been used to such unproved slanders of the
servants of the Lord.

2. But suppose them as bad as malice does imagine: Is that any reason why both
they and you should not be better? It is Holiness and not sin that I am
pleading for. Is their godliness and care of their salvation necessary, or not?
If it be, why do you not imitate them in that? and if you know any fault in
them, take warning and avoid it: But be not so mad as to run into Hell, because
some fall in the way to Heaven, or some miss the way that seemed to go thither.
Imitate not the Judas in Christ's family, but the rest of his Disciples, and
that not in their falls, but in their faith and piety. All that shall be saved,
have both Holiness toward God, and Justice and Charity to men. The wisdom from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, Jam. 3. 17. If you want the first, you are ungodly; if
the later, you are hypocrites: And if the hypocrite and the ungodly will stand
snarling here at one another, they shall perish together, in that misery that
will convince them that neither of them were the heirs of life: when Saints
indeed, and none but they, shall live with Christ.

Object. But it is but a few that are of so strict a mind and life; and shall
none be saved but these few?

Answ. Christ has told you whom he will save: He will not falsify his word,
nor take the unsanctified into heaven for want of company. He has told you
that the gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads to life, and few there
be that find it, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. and that it is a little flock to whom the
Father will give the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. You shall not want company in
heaven, nor find comfort in your company in hell.

But if you would have the number of the godly to be greater* why do you not
increase it by your joining with them? Why do not all the Town and Parish agree
together, and bind themselves in a Covenant to serve and seek the Lord, as the
Israelites. Josh. 24. 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. O happy people that will thus
accord, and heartily perform it.

And now, Beloved Hearers, I have finished this first Part of my task, and
proved to you the Necessity of a Holy life; That One thing is needful, while
you pitifully cumber your selves about many things, is the message that from
Christ I have been hitherto delivering to you. What say you? Are you yet
resolved to seek this One thing with the chiefest of your desires, and care,
and labor, or are you not? Dare any one of you say that you have not heard
that which should resolve a sober considerate man? I think you dare not. But if
you dare, I am sure you shall never be able to make it good, and justify your
words, to God, or to your Consciences at last, or to any wise impartial person.
Now take your choice, whether you will now be SAINTS and for ever like ANGELS;
or now be like BRUTES, and for ever like DEVILS: For one of these must be your
case, as sure as you have heard these words.

FINIS.
A SAINT OR A BRUTE.

The Second Part.

Clearly Proving by Reason as well as Scripture: 1. In general, that Holiness
is Best, and Necessary to our felicity. 2. Particularly, that it is Best, 1.
For Societies; 2. For individual persons; And more distinctly, 1. That it is
the only way of Safety. 2. Of Honesty. 3. The most Gainful way. 4. The most
Honorable. 5. The most Pleasant; And therefore to be chosen by all that will
obey true Reason, and be Happy.

LONDON, Printed Anne Dom. 1662.

A Saint or a Brute.
The Second Part.
CHAP. 1. Holiness and its fruits are the Best part: Wherein the Happiness of
Saints confisteth.
Luke 10. 42. But One thing is Needful: and Mary has chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken away from her.
THough I have before taken up this latter part of the Text by way of Motive,
in the Conclusion of the former Part of this Treatise, I am very loath that a
subject of so great importance should be so lightly passed over: And therefore
by Gods assistance, I shall attempt a fuller handling of it. The Necessity of
Holiness I have spoken of already: It is the Goodness of it that I am next to
speak of.

And before I enter upon it, let me entreat thee Reader, whoever thou art that
openest this Book, to remember that I am writing and thou art reading of the
greatest and highest matters in the world; and therefore come not to it with
common affections, and read not this as thou would do a History or a
Rheroricall Oration, to find delight for a curious mind, but confessing thy
self a Scholar to Christ, with reverence take thy L^ from him, as that which
thou came into the world to L^ which all thy comforts, thy hopes, thy safety,
and thy ev^ happiness depend upon.

And here in the entrance, I will freely tell you what more me to fall upon
this subject, and be so earnest with you in th^^ point. One thing is the
observation of the carelessness and wilfulness of the most, that live in the
neglect of Holiness and Everlasting Life, for all that can be said to persuade
them to a wiser course: While they all profess themselves to be Christians, and
to take the Scripture for the Word of God, and confess this Word in particular
to be true, that it is Heaven and Holiness that are the most Necessary, and
most to be desired and sought after, yet will they not be moved to Live
according to this Profession, nor to Love that Most which they confess to be
the Best, nor to seek that first which they confess to be most Needful. They
have the case here decided by the mouth of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
as plainly, and fully, and peremptorily decided ^^ they could wish. If they
were Infidels, and understood but the Law of Nature, even Reason might tell
them that there is no doubt of it, but that Eternal Life is more to be sought
after then transitory things: And yet they live as if the case had never been
decided by Christ or by reason; or as if they had never heard of any Life but
this: Look into most Towns, and see whether there be not more at Martha's work,
(and worse) then at Mary's* Look into most families, and see whether they be
not (...) Martha, troubling themselves with many things, when the (...) part is
almost cast aside. Even in the Families of Lords, K^ and Gentlemen, that are
doubly obliged to God, and pr^ be wiser then the ignorant Vulgar, the matters
of their (...) are turned out of doors, or thrust into a corner, and the (...)
of their bodies do take up the day. How many Martha's, ^^ one Mary, shall we
find among both Rich and Poor*

Yea that is not the worst, but they that are so blind, and wicked as to choose
the worser part themselves, would have all about them do so too; And as Martha
grudged at Mary's practice, and conplaineth to Christ against her, so these
repine at the choice of the Godly, and think them but melancholy crack-br^ind
people that make more ado for their salvation then they need: And th^^ are not
content to keep such ungodly thoughts in their brea^ to their Own damnation,
but they must be the Devils mouth to spit reproach in the face of Holiness, and
consequently in the face of Christ, as if they bid defiance to the Lord, and
would make it their employment to jeere and scorn men's souls from Heaven. If
one in a family do with Mary choose the better part (though without any neglect
of their calling in the world,) the rest make a wonder of them, and some deride
them: and some hate and vilify and threaten them, and few will imitate them:
and who more forward to distaste and despise them then the Masters of the
Families that are bound to teach and lead them in that way! so that a poor soul
(even in a Land and Age that countenanceth Holiness more then almost any other
in the world) can scarcely sit at the feet of Christ, and Learn his word, and
seek his Kingdom and Righteousness first, but they are gazed at, and censured
and derided, as if they did some very foolish, needless, yea or wicked thing!
As if it were the only folly for a man to follow Jesus Christ, and obey his
God, and save his soul, and do that work with greatest diligence, for which he
is a man, for which he has his Life, and Time, and Mercies, and which if he
neglect, he is lost for ever! The Lord have Mercy upon the poor deluded world!
whence comes this general dampe and dottage upon the understandings and the
hearts of men! of Great men, of Learned men, of men that are accounted wise in
the world!

It is Good and Evil that constituteth all that wonderful difference that is
between the Reasonable creatures, both here and hereafter: The Good of
Holiness, and the evil of sin do make the difference, between the Godly and the
wicked: the Good of Everlasting Happiness, and the Evil of Everlasting Misery,
does make the difference between the Glorified and the Damned. Goodness in
General is so naturally the object of man's will, that Evil as Evil cannot be
desired, and Good as Good cannot be hated. What then is the matter that few
attain the greatest good, and few will escape the greatest misery? It is because
they would not Choose that Good, and refuse the way and cause of Misery. But
how comes it to pass that men will make no wiser a choice? Is the case so
doubtful that they cannot be resolved in it? every man would have that which he
thinks is Best for him. Why do men follow after wealth, or pleasure, or credit
in the world, but because they take it to be Best for them? Why do they set so
light by Holiness, and Christ and Heaven, b^ cause they apprehend them not to
be Best for them? W^ men refuse, and obstinately against all persuasions refuse
a Holy life, if they took it practically to be Best for them? what! will they
contrive their own destruction? do they long to do themselves a Mischief, and
the greatest Mischief in the world? No, that's not the case; But the matter is
this: Their senses draw them another way; Their eye, their ear, their taste,
their feeling, every sense has a Pleasure of its Own, and this sense or flesh
is violent and unreasonable, and would fain be satisfied: and Reason that was
given us to Rule it, is bribed and blinded and perverted by it, and so is ready
as a servant to obey it, and to take its part; and the fleshly mind discerns
not the things of God, for they are spiritually discerned: the Will also and
the Affections are by the byas of a fleshly inclination corrupted, and
habitually lean to the fleshly part: And that which men Love, they will easily
think well of, and are glad of any thing like Reason to defend it; and that
which is against the Inclination of the Will, will hardly be thought well of,
and any thing like Reason will serve against it. This depravation of the mind
and will of man, enslaved and ruled by the Flesh or sensuality, is the very
cause that most men will not choose the Better part, and so the cause of their
perpetual misery. And till the Holy Ghost send in a heavenly light of Wisdom
into the mind to show them the true difference between the Good and the Evil,
and a new Inclination into the Will, that shall turn their hearts from the Evil
to the Good, they will still go on, and the matters of God will seem
foolishness to them; and they will take those men for the veryest fools that
follow the Wisdom of the Lord, and provide most carefully for eternal life; and
they will take those for the wisest men, that are most contrary to the God of
Wisdom, and that dare leap most fearlesly into Hell; Or if this be not their
Opinion, but conviction force them to a wiser kind of language, yet will it be
their Practical estimation and their Hearts, as their Choice and Lives will
easily declare. For that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
born of the spirit is spirit, Joh. 3. 6. The fleshly man will have a fleshly
mind and will, and openly or secretly will Live after the flesh, and such are
the heirs of death, Romans 8. 5, 7, 13. Fleshly generation cannot make a
spiritual mind or heart in any, but it must be by spiritual Regeneration: and
therefore except a man be born again of the spirit as well as of water, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3. 3, 5.

This inward difference of Inclinations is the true cause of the difference of
the judgments and the courses of men, about the matters of God and their
salvation.

This is it that makes so many to think none wise but those that are more
dangerously mad then men in Bedlam; and that makes so many others stand in
doubt as men unresolved what to choose, and what course to follow: As if it
were really a difficult point for a man to be resolved in, Whether it be best
and wisest to follow the teachings of God, or of the flesh: and to seek first
the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, or to make a pudder for nothing in the
world; and to claw this itching flesh a while, though they must smart for it
for ever, or to master the flesh and live to God!

In a word, the world are half unresolved, [ whether it be better to be Holy
with Gods promise of Eternal Glory, or to take the Pleasures of sin for a
season, and neglect this Holiness, though this course be threatened by the
Living God with Everlasting torments?] This is the true state of the Question,
which I say one part of the world does seem to be unresolved in, and another
part are resolved on the worser side, against their souls and a Holy life; and
only those that the illuminating sanctifying spirit has resolved, do choose
the needful better part.

The reason of this distracted judgment of the most, is within themselves. It
is not because that there is any such difficulty in the case, as should put a
wise man to a stand; Nor it is not because they have not sufficient evidence in
the word, or that God denied them Teachers, Books, or any Necessary Means for
their information. The Light is among them; but they Love it not because their
hearts and deeds are evil, and their darkness does not comprehend it; and this
is their delusion, and their condemnation, Joh. 1. 6, 7, 8. and 3. 19.

When I am preaching to a congregation of many hundred or thousand souls, if
the salvation of all that people did lie upon any other question no harder then
this that we have in hand, so it were such as fleshly interest, and corrupted
minds and wills had no quarrel against, how easily, how surely should I save
the souls of all that heard me! Reader, let me have thy judgment. If the
Question were, Whether Light or Darkness be the Better* Whether a dead corpse be
better then a Living man? Whether a cottage for a day, or a Rich habitation for
term of life be better? Whether as much drink as will make thee drunk, or a
nights lodging with a wh^re, be better then Lands and Lordships for thy life
time, or for a thousand years? Whether one sweet cup with shame and beggary all
thy life after, or one bitter draught with perpetual prosperity, should be
rather chosen? Whether a sick man were better take an unpleasing medicine that
would cure him, or a pleasant poison that would kill him? Whether he were
better pay a little to the Physicion, or dye to save his money? Whether that
Prince be wise that will sell his Kingdom for a cup of wine, or for childrens
rackets? Or whether that child ^e virtuous that cannot abide his Fathers sight
or house or commands, but loves better to do that which he knows displeases
him, or to tumble in the dirt with swine? I say, if any of these were the
Question to be Resolved, and the salvation of all that heard me lay upon the
true Resolution, I leave it to your own judgments, Whether I were not like to
save the souls of all that heard me? And yet in a case as clear in it self, and
much more clear, how few do we prevail with? Is not the Question [ Whether God
or the Creature, Holiness or Sin, Earth or Heaven, Short or Everlasting
pleasures should be preferred?] as plain to a wise man as any of those that I
mentioned before? Is it not as plain a case to a man of judgment, [ Whether
Holiness, with Everlasting joys, be better then fleshly pleasures with
damnation?] as whether a Kingdom be better then a Jayle, or Gold then dirt, or
health then sickness? Yet do your salvations lie upon this Question, this easy
Question. I must again repeat it; All your salvations lie upon the practical
resolution of this easy Question. Be but Resolved once that God is Best for
you, and Heaven is Best for you, and accordingly make your Resolute Choice, and
faithfully Prosecute it, and God will be Yours, Heaven will be yours as sure as
the Promise of God is true. But if you will not Choose God and Glory as your
Best, but will Choose the world and simple pleasures as Better for you, you
shall have no better then you chose, and shall suffer a double condemnation,
for neglecting and refusing so great salvation.

You hear now by men's talk, and you see by their lives that the world is
divided upon this Question, What it is that is Best for a man, and which is his
Best and Wisest course? One part (and the greater) think in their hearts that
present prosperity is best, because they think that the promised happiness of
the life to come is a thing uncertain; or i^ there be such a thing, they may
have it after the pleasures of sin; These are the Infidels.

Another part have a superficial dead Opinion that Heaven and Holiness are
Best: but the Love of the flesh and the world lies deeper at their hearts, and
bears the greater sway in their lives: and these are the Hypocrites; that is,
Christians in Opinion and Profession, and so much of their Practice as will
stand with their fleshly interest, but Infidels in their Practical estimation,
and at the Heart, and in the reserves and secret bent of their lives.

Another part, being illuminated and sanctified from above, Believe the
Certainty and Excellency of Glory, and see the vanity and vexation of this
life, and taste the sweetness of the Love of God, and perceive the Necessity
and sweetness of that Holiness, which others so abhor, and hereupon give up
themselves to God, and set themselves to seek for the Immortal treasure, and
make it the principal care of their hearts and business of their lives to
escape damnation, and live with Christ in endless Glory.

All the world consists of these three sorts of men, Infidels, Hypocrites,
and true Believers. Now the Question is, Which of these three are in the right?
Both the other do condemn the Hypocrite that halteth between two opinions; and
One thinks that Baal is God, that the World is Best, and therefore he gives up
himself to it: and the other thinks, that The Lord is God, and Heaven is best,
and therefore he gives up himself to it. And if it would do any thing with
those that doubt, toward the turning of the scales, to tell you which side
Christ is on, its told you here in my Text, as plain as the tongue of man can
speak [ One thing is Needful: Mary has chosen that Good part, which shall not
be taken away from her.

THe Doctrine which I am now to handle to you from the plain words of the Text,
is this.

Doct. That those that prefer the Learning of the word of Christ, to guide them
by Holiness to Everlasting Happiness, before all the lower matters of this
world, are they that choose the Better part, even that which shall never be
taken from them.

If now the word of Christ alone would serve your turn, I had done my work: I
needed not to go any further: You would be now resolved, that Heaven and
Holiness is best, and would set your hearts and lives to seek it; and so it
would be your own for ever. But this Text has long stood in the Gospel, and
men have heard and read it often, and yet the most are not persuaded; and
therefore I must try to open it a little farther to you, and plead it with you,
and work the Reason of it upon your minds.

Reader, our business is but to enquire, What it is that is Best for Man to set
his heart on and seek after in his Life, and Enjoy for ever? I say, it is the
Everlasting Enjoyment of God in Heaven: For Christ says so. If thou think
otherwise, let us debate the case. If thou believe as I do, Live as thou
professest to believe. If men did but deeply and soundly know what it is that
is best for them, it would set right their hearts and lives, and make them
happy. But not knowing this, is it that keeps them from God and Holiness, and
everlastingly undoes them.

Though I have often opened this heretofore on other occasions, yet my present
subject now requires, 1. That I tell you, What that is that here is called [
The Good part.] 2. What it is that is set against it, and by fleshly minds,
preferred before it? And having briefly opened these two things, I shall come
to the Comparison, and show you which is the better part.

1. That which Christ calls here [ that good part] is 1. Principally, the end
of man, or our everlasting Happiness with God in Heaven. 2. Subordinately, the
Means by which it is attained. 3. That Happiness which is the end,
comprehends in it these particulars, which if you distinctly apprehend, you
will much the better understand the nature and excellency of it.

1. The true Believer has the small beginnings, and earnests, and foretastes
of the Everlasting Blessedness in this Life, in his approaches to God, and
living upon him by Faith and Love, and ^^ his believing apprehensions of the
Favor of God, the Grace ^^ Christ, and the Happiness which in Heaven he shall
enjoy for ever.

2. At death, the souls of true Believers do go to Christ, and enter upon a
state of Happiness.

3. At the last day, the body shall be raised and united to the soul, and the
Lord Jesus Christ will come in glory to judge the world, where he will openly
absolve and justify the Righteous, when he condemns the ungodly, and will be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that do believe, and the
Saints shall also judge the world, and be themselves adjudged to everlasting
Glory.

4. Their everlasting habitation shall be in the Heavens, even near unto God,
and in the presence of his Glory.

5. Their company will be only Blessed Spirits, even the holy Angels and
glorified Saints, with whom we shall be One Body, and constitute the New
Jerusalem, and be perfectly one in God for ever.

6. Their Bodies shall be perfected and made immortal, spiritual, incorruptible
and glorious bodies, shining as the Stars in the Celestial Firmament: No more
subject to hunger, and thirst, or cold, or weariness, or shame, or pain, nor
any of the frailties that now adhere unto them, but be made like the glorified
body of Christ.

7. The Souls of the Saints united to these Bodies shall also be Perfected,
having far larger capacity to know God and enjoy him then now we have; being
freed from all ignorance, error, unbelief, pride, hard-heartedness, and
whatsoever sin does now accompany us; and perfected in every part of the Image
of God upon us.

8. The eyes of the Glorified Body shall in Heaven have a Glory to behold that
is suitable to their Bodily capacity: Heaven being not a place where the
Essence of God is confined, but where a prepared glory will be manifested to
make Happy the Angels and Saints with Christ. And whatever other senses the
Glorified Bodies shall then have (whether formally or eminently, we cannot now
conceive what they will be) they will all be satisfied with suitable Delights
from God.

9. The Blessed person of our Redeemer in our Nature Glorified, will there be
the Everlasting object of our delightful i^^uition and fruition: An object
suitable to the eye of the Glorified Body it self. We shall for ever live in
the sight of his face, and in the sense of his unspeakable Love.

10. The Glorified Soul (whether mediately or immediately) shall behold the
Infinite most Blessed God, and by knowing him, be perfected in knowledge: As we
shall see the person of Jesus Christ, and the glory of God with open face, and
not as in a glass as now we do, so we shall know so much of the Essence of the
Deity as we are capable of, to our felicity.

11. With the Knowledge of God and the Beatifical Vision will be joined a
perfect Love unto him, and closure with his blessed will: So that to Love him,
will be the everlasting employment of the soul.

12. This Love will be drawn forth into everlasting praise; and it will be our
work before the Throne of his Glory, to magnify the Lord for ever.

13. In all this Love, and Praise, and Glory, and in the full fruition of the
Eternal God, we shall Rejoice with full and perfect Joy, and we shall have full
content, delight and rest.

14. In all this Blessedness and Glory of the Saints, the Glory of God himself
will shine, and Angels shall admire it, and the condemned spirits with anguish
shall discern it, that God may be Glorified in our Glory.

15. In all this Happiness of Believers, and his own Glory, the Lord will be
well pleased, and that Blessed Will which is the Beginning and the End of all,
will be accomplished, and will have an Eternal complacency, as the Saints shall
have an endless complacency in God.

This is the Glory promised to the Saints; This is that Good part which they
choose. I cite not the Texts of Scripture that prove all this, because the
things are all so plainly and frequently expressed in the premises. And I shall
have occasion to do somewhat of this anon. And so (in brief) I have told you
what the Good part is.

2. We are next to enquire, What it is that is put by worldly* carnal men, into
the other end of the scales, and is set up in comparison with all this
Everlasting Glory? Yea what it is that is preferred by ungodly men before it?
What is it that fin and the world will do for men? What do they find that lose
the Lord? What do they get that miss of Heaven? What do they choose, t^^^
refuse the Needful, Better part?

And here I am even amazed at that which I must give you an account of; O
wonderful astonishing thing, that ever such base unworthy trifles should by
Reasonable men be put into any comparison with God! Wonderful, that so much
madness and wickedness can enter into the mind and heart of man, as to let go
all this Glory for a toy? And yet more wonderful, that this should be the case
of the greatest part of men on earth! And yet more wonderful, that so m^^y make
so mad a choice, even when the case is opened to them, and plainly opened, and
frequently opened; and when they are earnestly entreated to be wiser, and
importuned to make a better choice!

In a word, All that is set against the Lord, and All that is preferred before
this Everlasting Life, and All the Portion of ungodly men, is no more then
this; The Pleasure of sin for a season: The satisfying of the flesh: A little
ease, and pelf, and fair words from men as miserable as themselves; and all
this but for a little, a very little time, when Temperance is as sweet at
least; a little that is excessive or forbidden, in wealth, or meat, or drink,
or clothes, or lust, or other fleshly pleasures, is the Joy, and the Heaven,
and the God of the ungodly. The fleshly pleasures which are common to the
beasts, and a little vainglory among men, and this for a short uncertain time,
(and then to pa^^ to everlasting punishment) this is the chosen portion of the
wicked. This is All for which they refuse the Lord, and for which ^^^y refuse a
Holy life: This is All (...) which they part with (...) and part with their
Everlasting Peace! This is All that they have for Heaven and their salvation!
and All for which they se^^ their souls! To the everlasting shame of sin and
sinners, it shall be known that this was All! To the abasing of our own soul^*
that sometime were guilty of this madness, I shall tell you again that this is
All! To the humbling of the best, to the con^ounding of the wicked, and the
amazement of us all, I must say ^^^^ this is All! This dirt, this dream, this
cheat i^ (...) wicked have for God and Glory! This Nothing ^^ (...) obstinately
prefer and choose, before him that (...) O wonderful madness, stupidity, and
deceit^* so (...) wilful! and so uncureable! till tender (...) cure it, in them
that shall be saved.

Well, the balance is now set before yo^ in the One end and in the other: You
see the (...) choose, and the part that is chosen by the rest of the world; And
are you not yet resolved which is Best? and which to choose?

TWo sorts I look to meet with here, to whom I shall apply my self distinctly,
before I come to the comparative work. First some will tell me that all these
are needless words; and that there is no man so senseless as to think that
Temporal things are better then Eternal, or the world then God, or sin then
Holiness.

Answ. O that this were true! how happy then were all the world? I grant that
many are superficially convinced, that are not converted; and that many have a
slight opinion that Heaven and Holiness is best, that yet have no Love to it,
and will not seek it above All. But their practical judgment does not go along
with their Opinions. Thy relish the world as sweetest unto them. In the
prevailing deepest thoughts of their hearts, they set most by the pleasures of
this world; Why else is their Heart most toward them? Why else do they choose
them, and refuse to Live a Holy life? Why have they no delight in God? and why
have we so much ado with them, to bring them to a heavenly mind and life, and
all in vain? What! will not men be persuaded to choose that which they know is
best for them?

Object. Temptations are strong, and men are weak, and so men go against their
knowledge.

Answ. 1. What do Temptations prevail with you to do? Is it not to think well
of sinful pleasures, and to think more hardly of the ways of God? Is it not to
like a worldly fleshly life better then a Holy life? If not, how can you follow
those temptations? And if it be so, then they draw you for that time to think
that fleshly pleasures are the better part.

2. But if indeed it be as you say, you are the most unexcuseable miscreants in
the world. What! do you know that God is best for you, and yet will you fly
from him? Do you know that heaven is the only happiness, and yet will you seek
this world before it? Do you know what is Best for you, and will not h^^^ it?
and what is worst, and yet will keep it? Will you go to (...) and know whither
you are going? And will you run from ^ven and damn your selves, and know that
you do so? Yea; (...) that while we day by day entreat you to the contrary? If
this be the case of any one of you, the God of Justice shall teach you to know
what you are doing, by his everlasting vengeance: Heaven and earth shall be
witness against you; your own Consciences, and such Confessions of your own
shall bear witness against you, that you justly perish, and are damned, because
you would be damned, and are shut out of Heaven, because you would not be
persuaded to come thither.

Object. But we hope we may have Both, Pleasure here and Heaven hereafter: and
that we may be saved by the mercy of God and the blood of Christ, without the
sanctification of the spirit, and though we do not live a Holy life.

Answ. And who gave you these hopes? Is it God on whom you pretend to trust? or
the Devil that does deceive you? Certainly not God; For he has told you over
and over, that he will save none but the sanctified, Acts 26. 18. and that
except a man be born again, even of the Spirit as well as of water, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3, 5. and that without holiness none
shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. And is it God that persuades you that his
Word is false? Doubtless it is the Devil. When God had told Adam and Eve, [
That in the day that they did eat the forbidden fruit, they should die the
death] was it not the Serpent that gave them hopes of living, and told them
that they should not die? If you be at that pass that you will take on you to
trust in God, and yet will not believe him, but your trust is but trusting that
God is a liar, you are as sottish in your presumption, as Heathens are in their
Infidelity: For who is worse? he that believes that there is no God (as
Atheists do) or he that believes that God is a Liar, which is to be no God and
worse?

If therefore you do believe indeed that Heaven is Best, you must needs believe
that Holiness is Necessary; yea and Best too, when Heaven consists so much in
perfected holiness. And therefore you must choose and seek with greatest
diligence, that Happiness which you confess is Best, or never hope that it will
be yours. O did you at the heart believe it to be Best, and that for you, you
would love it, and seek it, and be a holy people without delay. You cannot so
turn away from that which you heartily judge to to be Best for you indeed.

But the most that I have to deal with, are they that cannot be persuaded at
the heart, but that feasting, and drinking, and lust, and wealth, and worldly
honor are Better for them then a Holy life, with such promises of Heaven as
God has left us. For all or most ungodly men have this persuasion next their
hearts, whether they observe it, and know of it, or not.

Now with such deluded unbelieving souls, I am next to plead this weighty
cause. If thou that Read this be one of them, that take a worldly
felicity, with Gods threatenings, to be Better and rather to be chosen, then
Holiness with his Promise of future happiness, I will now debate the case with
thee, and undertake by the light of Christ, to open the horrible folly of thy
mistake* And if I do not give thee such sound and weighty undeniable evidence,
that no man of Reason should resist, to prove the choice of Holy persons to be
the wisest, and their part the best, I will give thee leave to call me a Liar,
and a deceiver for ever.

CHAP. II. What in Reason he must do that would be certainly resolved which is
the best part and way. And who shall be Judge.
BUt before we come to the debate, I have two Questions to p^^ to thee, that in
Reason must be first resolved.

The first is, Whether thou art willing to know the Truth, and resolved to
choose the best part when thou know it? It is in vain for me or any man to
Reason with thee, if thou would not k^^^; and to show thee the Truth, if thou
hate it, and wilt not acknowledge it when thou see it; and to bring thee in
the clearest light, if thou be before hand resolved to shut thy eyes. And if
thou will not choose that which thy conscience shall be convinced thou should
choose, as being absolutely best, to what purpose then should it be revealed to
thee? Would thou be a happy man or no^* Would thou have Joy or Sorrow? Good
or Evil? stop here, and before thou go any further, make me this Promis^
before the Lord, [ That thou will not wilfully resist the ligh^ that thou will
choose, and presently, and resolvedly choose that (...) that thy conscience
shall tell thee upon certain evidence is the (...) Promise but this, which no
man of Reason (...) and then we may make something of our debate.

My second Question is, [ Who it is that shall be Judge between us in this
debate? or whose witness it is that you will take for current?]

I am willing to stand to the Judgment of any that understand the case, and
are impartial. I hope you will consent that we shall take the most competent
witnesses and Judge. And if so, 1. You know that the Devil is no competent
Judge. It is he that persuades you that present delights are the better part,
and rather to be chosen then a Holy life. But he is Gods enemy, and therefore
no wonder if he speak against him: He is your deadly enemy; and therefore no
wonder if he would deceive you: He is cast out of heaven himself, and would not
have you possess the room that he has lost: He is a wicked lying spirit: and
therefore is not to be believed. He is a murderer from the beginning, and
therefore will not speak for your salvation, Joh. 8. 44. If the Devil be to be
believed, then none are wiser then the ungodly sensual worldly men; and none
are in a worse condition then those that are despised by the world for
Holiness, and that suffer all things for a Life unseen. But the enmity that is
planted in your very natures against the Devil, I hope, will help you to
confess, that he must not be the Judge.

2. And truly Ignorant ungodly men are unmeet Judges. And it is they that bawle
against Religion, and speak against they know not what. 1. They are Blind by
nature, and more blind by customary sin: And must a Blind man be your Judge or
witness, in a case of everlasting moment? 2. They are unexperienced in the ways
of God. How can they judge of a state that they were never in, and of a way
that they never went? They never tried the work of the new birth, nor never
tried the holy exercise of faith, or Love or any Grace; and therefore you may
as well take the Judgment of a simple man concerning another country that was
never there, or concerning Navigation, that never was at sea, or concerning
Learning that never read a book, or concerning Music that never touched an
Instrument, as the Judgment of an unsanctified man concerning Holines^* and
Communion with God: unless it be those that have a common convincing light,
that causes them to approve of that which they neglect themselves.

3. And certainly your own s^y and fleshly mi^d^ are unfit Judges of the case:
For they also are Blind and unexperienced: They are not suited unto spiritual
things. To which I may add, 3. That they and all ungodly men are Partial in the
case, and (...) unfit to be witnesses, or Judges? All the Scripture speaks
against the Devil, and the wicked, and the lusts of the flesh: and therefore
they are a party, even the party that is to be ejected. 4. Yea they are
enemies, and therefore their testimony or judgment is not to be regarded. And
what else will speak a word against a Holy life, but the Devil, the flesh and
wicked men? Not any* And therefore let it be concluded that these are
incompetent Judges in the case.

But who then shall be Judge? Let God be Judge, let Christ be Judge; Who can,
who dare refuse this Judge? Refuse him not: for none but he is fit and
competent: Refuse him not; for he will be Judge whether you will or no; and
therefore your refusal will be vain. 1. He is most wise, and knows all
things: and therefore cannot be deceived. 2. He is Infinitely Good, and
therefore cannot do any wrong: He is impartial and respects not the persons
of the greatest; He is most just, and therefore cannot pass an unjust sentence.
3. He only is the Judge that has full authority to make a final decision of
the case. 4. And in a word, he is so absolutely perfect, that he is liable to
no just exceptions, nor can men or Devils have any thing to say against his
judgment. Are you agreed then that God shall be your Judge? Will you take that
for the better part, which he calls better? If so, the controversy is at an
end. The living God has given us his judgment long ago. If you ask me, Where;
I Will tell you anon, when I have examined some of the witnesses of the case.

And though I am resolved to own no proper final Judge but God, yet under him
there are many witnesses that are worth the hearing. Indeed I am content to
refer the cause to any one that does but know what he says, and is not
unfaithful, (reserving to God the final judgment.)

And 1. Go to the wisest men on earth, and let them be witnesses* What think
you of all the Prophets and Apostles, and of all the ancient Fathers of the
Church? Were not these men wiser then you, or then the sottish scorners that
revile the way^ which they never went, and speak evil of that which they
understand not? I^ Prophets and Apostles were not for Holiness (...) a fleshly
worldly life, then I will be of your mind. But if they all as with one heart
and mouth do cry down sin, and cry up Holiness, why should you then refuse
their Testimony? Are you wiser then all these?

2. What think you of all the godly able Ministers of Christ that are now
alive, or ever were? Are they not wiser then you, and a few drunkards that have
scarce wit enough to do the Devils service without such sottishness as shames
his cause? Have none of Christ's Ministers, that spend their days in studying
and searching after knowledge, more wit even in the matters of God, then a
carnal Gentleman, or ignorant malicious wretch, that never used the means for
Knowledge as these have done? In any other matter you will allow men that have
made it the study of their lives to know more then you. If you want counsel for
your states, you will go to one that has studied the Law. If you are sick, you
will sooner seek advice of one that has made it the business of his life to
understand diseases and remedies, then to one that never studied it. You Will
sooner take the judgment of every tradeseman in his trade, then your own or
another that never learned it. Allow but those men to be competent witnesses
that have bent their thoughts and prayers and cares this way, and the
controversy is resolved. For what is it that all our Sermons plead for but
Holiness in order to Everlasting Happiness? What is it that so many thousand
Books are written for, but for Holiness? Open the Books of the wisest men, and
see which side it is that they are on? Go to the wisest ablest Ministers, and
ask them which is the better part?

3. If Wisdom suffice not, let the best and honestest men be witnesses. Who
better then Christ, then his Apostles, then all the holy Martyrs and Confessors
of the Church, and all the Doctors and faithful Ministers of Christ? which side
think you were they on that laid down their lives for the cause of Christ? sure
they that would rather burn at a stake, or suffer all the scorns and torments
of the world, then forsake a Holy heavenly life, did take it to be better then
all the pleasures or profits of the world. Sure all the holy Doctors and
Pastors of the Church that lived so Holy lives themselves, and spent their days
in Praying, and watching, and meditating, and preparing for the life to come,
contemning all the vanities of the world, did think that this was the Better
part, which they followed after with so much diligence and patience as they did.

Hear me a few words, you proud and self-conceited sinners, that will plead for
your ungodly ways, and plead against a holy life, and quarrel with the most
faithful administrations of you^ Pastors: It is a matter of Everlasting moment
that you and we do differ about: and which of us is liker to be in the right? I
confess I am a weak and ignorant man; but is the sottish ungodly quarreller any
wiser then I am? How came thou man to thy knowledge, that thou think thy
self wiser then me, and all the Pastors of the Church? My Knowledge that is but
little, has cost me almost forty years hard study? Have thou read and
meditated and studied more? Had thou better helps and means of Knowledge? God
usually gives his gifts in the painful use of means. If I should think my self
wiser in thy trade, and able to control thee, thou would judge me a
self-conceited fool. What have thou done for thy knowledge that I have not
done? Have thou prayed for it day and night? So have I. Have thou had any
private way of Learning that no man knows? Truly I have marvelled at the
^aces of many ignorant careless men, that they do not blush when we have thus
expostulated with them, when they quarrel with their Teachers, and set against
them with as brazen a face as if they were all Doctors, or had studied forty
years, and we were as they are: Yea as if they were wiser th^n all the
Apostles, Doctors and Pastors of the Church. Were it not a wonder indeed if God
should give more knowledge about the matters of salvation to a sensual
voluptuous Gentleman, or to an idle droan, or a fellow that scarce ever read
over the Bible, and to such as live a worldly fleshly and ungodly life, then to
all his Ministers and Servants that love his Laws, and meditate in them day and
night, and live in Prayer, and other holy exercises, and make it their daily
care and business, to conform their hearts and lives to the holy Doctrine which
they study? Surely God will sooner reveal his mind to a diligent searcher, that
fears and loves him, then to a lustful Epicur^, or a drunken, swearing,
worldly sot. He that every day abuses the Holy Ghost that should be his
Teacher, is not so likely to come to Knowledge, as he that humbly learneth and
obeys him. It is ^ strange evidence that most wicked men do give us to prove
themselves wiser then their Teachers: when they can scarce give (...) wise
account of the Principles of Religion contained in a Catechis^^, they will
prove themselves wise by despising wisdom, and railing at the Wise. They prove
themselves Learned by reproaching the learned: They prove themselves godly
enough to be saved, by hating and scorning them that are Godly; and prove
themselves the servants of Christ by speaking against his service; They prove
themselves wise enough to Teach or quarrel with their Teachers, by refusing to
Learn, and to be any wiser, and by babbling out their sinful folly. And when
they have done, they prove that their hearts for all this are as good as the
precisest, by prating against that Holiness which is the only health and
goodness of the heart, and by showing us to our grief that they neither know
what Goodness is, nor what is in their hearts. They prove to us that they have
Hopes for all this, of being saved and seeing the face of God, by hating them
that are Pure in heart, that have the promise of seeing his face, Mat. 5. 8.
and by reviling or forsaking the way of salvation, and by showing us on their
souls the open Marks of the wrath of God, and of a state of condemnation. This
is the Devils Logic. And this is the wisdom of the wicked. They may next go
further* and prove that they are chaste by reviling chastity; and prove that
they are sober by speaking against sobriety, and by wallowing in their vomit:
or prove that they know all arts and trades, and sciences by reviling them: And
as they now prove that they are the freemen of Christ, by showing us the Devils
fetters upon them, so if they hold out, they will shortly have nothing to prove
themselves in Heaven, but by showing us the flames of Hell which they endure.

If therefore all the Holiest and wisest men on earth may be admitted to be
witnesses, then Holiness must be your Best, and all things else be nothing
worth in comparison of it.

5. Moreover, if yet you would have more witness, shall those be heard that
have tried both states; the state of Sin, and the state of Holiness? and that
have gone both ways; and therefore are able to speak to us by experience?

If you were to take advice about any worldly business, you would choose a man
of Experience for your Counselor, an experienced Physicion for your bodies:
and an experienced Tradesman for your work. You will sooner believe a Traveller
that ^ath seen the places that he speak of, (if he be honest) then another;
godly men have tried both ways. Alas they have known, and too much known the
way of sin; and they have tried the Holy way that you dislike. I think
therefore that they are competent Witnesses: And if their witness be worth any
thing* the cause must go against the ungodly. For their Lives tell you their
Judgment. Their hatred to sin, their diligent seeking after God, their
constant endeavors in a Holy course, their suffering any thing rather then
forsake this Holy way, when once they have sincerely chosen it; all these do
fully acquaint you with their judgment. Do you think it is for Nothing that
the holy servants of the Lord, do stiek so close to him, and labor so
constantly in his work? surely if they had not found that this way is beyond
comparison the best, you might draw them from it, into a state of ungodliness
again; at least fire and sword and torment might persuade them to forsake it.
Something he finds in it that is good, that will let go his life and all the
world for it.

What say you now! have you any just exceptions against the testimony of these
Experienced men? The ungodly cannot be competent witnesses; for they have tried
but one side: They have had experience of a profane, a fleshly, worldly life:
but they never yet tried a Holy life. And therefore how should they be fit to
tell you, what Good is in the way of God, which they never traveled in? Or
what Gain is in the Heavenly Treasure* which they never traded for? Or what
Beauty is in the face of Christ and Glory, which they never had an eye of faith
to see? Or what sweetness is in the Hidden Manna, which they never tasted? If
you say that many that have tried the way of Godliness, have turned from it,
and are against it! I beseech you weigh my answer.

1. It is not One of a hundred that does so, no not in these apo^^^ tizing
times, when all seducers are let loose. And is one man's judgment more
regardable then a hundred, yea, many hundred?

2. Nay, it is no One at all! Those that you say turn off, ar^ only such as
tried an Opinionative Religiousness, and some of the Outward duties of
Christianity, but they never tried the power of a living rooted faith, nor the
predominant Love of God in the soul, nor a Living Hope of the Heavenly Glory,
nor the sweetness of a Heavenly life; nor the mortification of the fleshly
inte^^^^* and true self-denial: These are the vital parts of Christian^^^ which
these few Apostates never tried; though some of them have had some acquired
counterfeits of them, and some good gifts of common grace, and think that none
had more then they had.

Sinner, I beseech thee for the Lords sake, deal faithfully with thy poor soul,
when all lies at the stake. Will thou take the judgment of a swaggering
Gallant, or a scoffing, worldly or ungodly Sot, that none of them ever truly
tried a state of Holiness: And will thou refuse the judgment of God, and of
all his servants that have tried it? Go to any Godly man, and ask him which of
these ways he has found by experience to be best? and hear what he will say
to thee? He will be ashamed to hear thee make a Question of it. He will tell
thee [ Alas friend, I was once deceived by sin, and deceived with the pleasures
of my flesh, and the glittering glory and riches of this world, as you are now!
I once was a stranger to the life of faith, and the Hopes of Heaven, and the
Holiness of the Saints. But it was by the mere delusion of the Devil, and it
was the fruit of the blindness, and deadness of my heart. I knew not what I
did, nor where I stood, nor what I chose, nor what I set light by! I never well
considered of the matter, but carelessly followed the sway of my fleshly
inclination and desires! But now I seee I was the Devils slave, and my
Pleasures were my fetters, and my own corrupt affections were my bondage; and I
now find that I did but delude my soul; I got nothing by all that the world did
for me, but provision for my after-sorrows: I had been now in Torments if I had
but dyed in that condition. I would not be again in the case that I was in for
all this world, or a thousand such worlds! That life that once I thought the
best, has cost me dear, even the breaking of my heart: and a thousand thousand
fold dearer would have cost me, if the dearest blood, and recovering Grace of
my dearest Lord had had not prevented it. O had I not been unspeakably beholden
to the Mercy of the Lord, even to that Mercy which I then made light of, I had
been undone for ever; I had been laid under Everlasting desperation before
this. Now I find that there is no life so sweet as that which I then was so
loath to choose! Now it is my only grief that I was holy no sooner, and can be
no more Holy then I am. O that I had more of that quickening, comforting, saving
Grace! O that I were further from my former sinful fleshly state? O that I
could get nearer God, though I parted with all the prosperity of this world! I
now find what I lost by my continuing in sin so long: but then I knew it not. O
friend, as you love your soul, take warning by me, and make use of my
experience, and give up your self to God betimes!] This, or to this purpose,
would the answer of an experienced person be, if you should ask him, Which is
the better way?

But if you say, that thus we would be our selves the Judges, and bring the
matter into our own hands, I answer you, 1. It is true, we would be our selves
your Helpers, and do the best we could for your salvation: And if you will
neither help your selves, nor give us leave to help you, take what you get by
it; we have done our part.

But, 2. I will not yet so part with you. I will further make you this
reasonable offer. I demand of thee, whoever thou art that Read these words,
Whether thou know of any man on earth that thou think to be a wiser man then
thy self? If not, thou art so like the Devil in Pride, that no wonder if thou
be near him in malignity and misery. If thou do know of any wiser then thy
self, go with me, or with some faithful Minister to that man, and ask him,
Whether a diligent holy life, be not much Better then any other life on earth?
and if he do not say as I say here, and as Christ says in my Text, that [ the
godly choose the better part] or else if I prove him not a very sot before thy
face, I will give thee leave to brand my understanding in thy esteem, with the
notes of in^amy and contempt.

Yea more then so, I will allow thee to go to one that differs from me in the
way of his Religion: Ask an Anabaptist, if thou think him more impartial,
whether A Holy and Heavenly heart and life be not the best? and try whether he
will not say as I do. Ask those that you call Episcopal, or Presbyterian, or
Independents, or Separatists: Ask an Arminian, or one of the contrary mind: Yea
ask a Papist, and see whether he will not say as I do? It is true, they are
every one of them of minds somewhat different about some points in the order
and manner of their seeking God. But all of them, that are but sober men, will
confess as with One mouth, that God should be loved above all, and sought and
served above all, and that all should live a Holy, Diligent, Heavenly life.

2. But yet if all this will not satisfy you, I will come yet lower: Who is it
that you would have to be Judge or Witness in the case? Is it thy malignant, or
worldly, or drunken, and ungodly friend? I am contented that the case be
referred even to him, and to as many of them as thou will, upon condition that
he will but first Try the way that he is to judge of. Let him but make an
unfeigned trial of a life of Holy Faith, and Love, and Obedience, and
Self-denial, as long as I have done, and we will receive his Testimony: Nay
more, let him thus try a life of Holiness, (inwardly and outwardly) but one
year, yea or but one month, or day, or hour, and we will take his Testimony:
But to be judged by a man in a matter of salvation, that speaks of what he
never knew nor tried one hour, but speaks against he knows not what, this is a
motion too bad to be made to a very Bedlam.

6. If yet you are not resolved which is the Better part and way, to whom do
you desire to referr it? Shall Heathens, Jews, and Infidels be Judges? Why if
they be, they will give the cause against you. Jews and most of the Heathen
world do profess to believe a life to come, where some are happy and some are
miserable; and they commonly profess that all men should obey their Maker, and
make it their chiefest care and labor in this life, to be happy in the next:
Heathens will confess this. And yet I suppose you will easily confess that
these men are none of the fittest Judges. The way to Life by Jesus Christ they
do not understand: But that the world is vanity, and nothing to be preferred
before our happiness in the world to come, this they will commonly acknowledge.
And if the lives of the most of them contradict this profession, yet still they
are forced to confess the truth: and truth is not the less truth, because they
that confess it will not obey it. Nay what greater testimony can you wish to
silence your unbelieving thoughts, then the witnesses of the enemies of the
truth, who as they condemn themselves by bearing witness to that which they
refuse to practice, so shall their witness aggravate your condemnation, if you
will live below it. What, are you Christians? and yet refuse to come up in your
choice and lives to the doctrine of Heathens and Infidels?

7. I know you will think at least that those Heretics that are daily here
bawling against us, will not be partial on our side: ^f you think that this
Doctrine is contrived by us for any ends and interests of our own hearken then
to our enemies. These railing Quakers that can scarce tell how to speak a word
of the Ministers of Christ, but what is the spawn of venomous, fiery, bitter
malice, do for all this cry up Holiness of life. Though they corrupt the
doctrine of Christ so odiously, and speak like Heathens in many of their
ecstasies and writings, yet do they openly cry down your sensual worldly ways.
Do you not hear how they rail at us for your sakes that are vicious and
ungodly, and tell us that you are the fruit and shame of our Ministry? Though
these words be the fruit and shame of their malicious Heresy (for all the
world may know that it is our daily work to procure your Conversion, and that
you keep your sins, and refuse a holy heavenly life, in despite of us) yet I
must tell you, that these wretches shall condemn you. The streets and
Congregations have heard them cry out against your ungodly lives: and yet you
will not turn to God. Must good and bad, must Ministers and raging Heretics
give in their testimony against you, and yet will you not be satisfied and come
in?

8. If yet you know not the better part, to whom will you appeal? Will you go
to the Multitude and put it to the vote, not only among Christians, but
throughout the world? Truly there is no great reason for this, when most men
are so blind and wicked: but yet if you should, they would go against you,
twenty, if not an hundred to One. I know well enough that when it comes to
practice, they will not live a holy Life, and show thereby a root of
bitterness: But if you ask them what their judgment is, Whether God or the
world, whether Heaven or earth, whether Holiness or sin be best and to be
chosen, most men are against you, and would give it you as their judgment
under their hands, that God and everlasting life should be first sought: Though
by this Confession they condemn themselves, yet is it their Confession. As I
told you before, the Jews are for this doctrine; the Turks and other Mahometans
are for it; most of the Heathen world is for it, doctrinally, though they will
not practice it: Only there are three sorts against it in the world, that ever
I heard of. One sort are the Cannibals that eat men's flesh, and go naked, and
live like beasts, and never heard of another life; and some such savages as
they. Another sort is a few of the Heathen Philosophers and and their
followers, that differ in this from all the rest. A third sort is here and
there a debauched apostate, that by the righteous judgment of God are so far
forsaken by his Grace, for their pride and falsehood against the truth, that
they have lost the belief of a Life to come, and live under the visible plagues
of God upon their souls, as men that have sinned wilfully against the truth,
and have no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment and
fire that shall devour the adversary, Heb. 6. 6, 7. and 10. 26. and are near
the state of the Devils themselves, that are reserved in the chains of
spiritual darkness to the judgment of the great day, Jude 6. Job 21. 30. And
will you take the judgment of here and there a forlorn wretch, a deplorate
apostate, an Epicure, or a Country of inhumane Cannibals, before the judgment
of the most wise and godly, and of almost all the world? What excellency has
the understanding of these singular men, that it should be so valued above all
others? You know partly in this place, who they be that are of this Opinion:
And is their Number, or Wisdom, or Conversation such as should move you to be
of their Opinion? Shall half a dozen desperate apostates of ungodly lives, seem
wiser to you then all the world? And yet I am persuaded that if you go to any
even of these few apostates, whatever they think, they will confess that a Holy
life is best: And yet have you not witness enough against you?

9. Who then shall be the Judge? Shall we appeal to the very Things themselves,
and to the daily experience of the world? You see that worldlings labor for
the wind. You see that all their care and pains will not avoid the stroke of
death, that turns the proudest flesh into a clod, and makes dirt of the
greatest Prince. You see that wealth and honor do but mock men, and leave them
in the grave, to darkness and corruption. And when you are sure that this will
be the upshot of all your fleshly pleasure and worldly gains, are you not
satisfied past all doubt, that the smallest hopes or possibility of another
life should be sought with far more care then this?

10. If none of these witnesses be regarded by thee, I know not whom to appeal
to, but thy self! And will thou needs thy self decide the case? Have thou
knowledge and experience, honesty, and impartiality enough to fit thee to be
judge: If thou had, thou would make no doubt of it, but have been resolved
for Heaven and Holiness ere this. Thy unresolvedness proves thee blind and
partial, and very much forsaken by the spirit of light: And should such a one
be judge? But go to, I will much refer thy case to thy self (reserving still
the final judgment to the Lord) upon these just and reasonable conditions.

1. Will thou first thy self but use those necessary means for knowledge, in
Reading, Fasting, Praying, Watching, Meditation, Conference with the wise, and
such like, as all those do that come to ripe and saving Knowledge? If I referr
my health to thee as my Physicion, thou must not refuse to try my pulse, and
see my urine, and use the means to find out the disease. Would thou be my
Lawyer, and refuse to read my Evidences, and study my case? And will thou needs
be judge thy self of the matters of thine own felicity or misery, and yet
refuse to read and hear and pray and meditate, and use the necessary means of
understanding? Will thou lie in bed and work out thy salvation? Will thou make
use of no ones eyes but thy own, and yet will thou wink or draw the Curtains,
or shut the windows, and cast away thy spectacles, and neither come into the
sunshine, nor use a candle? This is but to say, I will wilfully condemn my
soul, and none shall hinder me.

2. But yet another condition I must propose. If thou will but (as I said
before of others) a while make Trial of a holy life, and try in thy self what
Faith, and Hope, and Charity are, and try what selfdenyal is, I will then
referr the matter to thy self. Go back from God if thou find any Reason for it:
and turn from Christ and Heaven and Holiness if thou do not like them. But if
thou will needs be the judge, and wilt not be persuaded to try the thing, thou
art a partial self-deceiving judge.

3. But it this much cannot be obtained, at least be Considerate in thy
judging. If thou will but take thy self aside from the noise of wordly vanities
and deceits, and commune seriously with thy heart, and bethink thee as before
the Lord, and as one that knows he must shortly dye, Whether Heaven or Earth
should be sought most carefully, and Whether God or thy flesh should be served
most resolvedly and diligently; and if thou will but dwell so long upon these
manlike thoughts till they are digested, and Truth have time to show its face,
I dare then leave the question to thy self. The next time that the Sermon or
any affliction comes near thee and awakeneth thy Conscience, do but withdraw
thy self into secret, and soberly bethink thee of the matter, what hopes thou
have from the world, and what thou (...) have from God: what Time is, and what
Eternity is, and give ^^^ Conscience leave to speak, and then I will venture
the issue upon thy Conscience: For thee I mean, though I must stick to a better
judge my self. Does not Conscience sometime tell thee, that the Holiest persons
are the wisest, and that thy labor is liker at last to be lost and repented
of, than theirs? Does not Conscience sometime make thee wish that thou were but
in as safe a case as they: and that thou might but die the death of the
Righteous, and that thy last end might be as theirs?

4. But if all this will not serve the turn, thou shall be Judge thy self: but
it shall be when thou art more capable of judging. If God by Grace shall Change
thy heart, I will stand to thy Judgment: If he do not, when thy graceless
guilty soul shall pass out of thy pampered dirty flesh, and appear before the
dreadful God, I will then leave the case to thy Conscience to judge of. To all
Eternity it shall be partly left to the judgment of thy Conscience, whether
sin or Holiness be better? and whether Saints or careless sinners were the
wiser? and whether it had not been be ter sor thee to have spent that life in
preparing for thy Endless life, which thou spentst in slighting it, and caring
for the world and flesh. Then thou shall be Judge thy self of these matters:
but under a more severe and righteous judge: And so as shall make thy tearing
heart to wish with many a thousand groans, that thou had judged wiselier in
time.

But because that Judgment will be to desperation, and too late for hope or
any help, let Conscience speak when thou lie sick, and see that thou art a
dying man! Then judge thy self whether a Holy or a worldly life be better? and
whether it had not been thy wiser course to have sowed to the spirit, that so
thou may reap everlasting life, then to have sowed to the flesh, from which
thou now lookst to reap no better then corruption. Be not deceived: God is not
mocked: whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap, Gal. 6. 6, 7.

But because it will be very late to stay till thy own Death draw so near thee,
go but to thy neighbors that lie in sickness, looking for the stroke of death;
Yea to thy companions in sin and folly, and ask them then which way is better?
Ask them then which is the better part? Whether now they had rather be the
Holiest Saints, or such as they have been? Whether now they had not rather they
had spent their time in the most careful seeking for Everlasting life, then in
doing as they have done? Say to thy old companion now, [ Brother, I see you are
near your end! the mortal stroke of death is coming! you are now leaving all
the pleasures of this world: I pray you tell me now your Judgment, whether
mirth, and sport, and feasting, and drinking, and wealth, and honor be more to
be sought then life eternal? and whether Hearing and Reading the word of God,
and Praying, and meditating, and flying from sin, be as bad or as needless a
thing as we have formerly taken it to be? Had you rather appear before the Lord
in the case of those that we derided as Puritans and too precise for making
such a do about salvation, or in the case that you and I have lived in?] Ask
but this Question to thy old companions, and try whether the Consciences of
almost all that approach their end, do not bear witness against ungodliness,
and do not justify the holy diligence of the Saints. It is but two days since
a poor drunkard of a neighbor Parish, being ready to pass out of this world,
did send hither (and to other Parishes) in the terrors of his soul, to desire
our Congregations to take warning by him, and to strive with God if possible,
for some mercy for his soul, that was passing in terrors into another world,
because of the guilt of his odious sin.]

Well sirs, I have gone along with you to all the creatures in this world, that
have any fitness to judge in this case: and if all these will not serve, we
must go to another world for Judgment, or stay till you come there.

11. And really do you think if we could speak with Angels or departed Souls,
that they would not consent with God and all Believers in their Testimony? O
how they would rebuke their madness, that make any doubt of so great, so plain,
so sure a truth, as this of the necessity and the excellency of a Holy life.
None are so fully resolved of this question as they that have tasted the End of
both, and past the righteous judgment of the Lord. They that are feeling the
anguish of their Consciences, and the tormenting displeasure of Almighty God,
are satisfied by this time: whether the Godly or ungodly were the Wiser men,
and whether sanctity or sensuality were the Better course? They that are
rejoicing with Christ in Glory, are sati^fied perfectly of this question, and
are far from repenting of their choice. Luke 16. Christ tells you enough, in
the case of the Rich man and Lazarus, how men judge in the life to come.

12. But if all these witnesses will not serve you, what shall we say to you?
Whom will you choose to be your Cousellor? There is none left that I remember,
unless you will go the Devil for advice. But against this I have told you
enough before. Will he speak for Holiness that is a spirit of uncleanness; and
will he show thee Heaven that labors purposely to hide it from thee, till
thou have lost it? Or will he let thee see the odiousness and danger of thy
sin, when it is the snare and bait by which he hops to undo thee; But yet for
all this, let me tell thee, that thou may learn even from the Tempting Enemy
himself, the Truth of that which I am now asserting. For as the Devil himself
believes it, when he persuades thee not to believe it; so the very nature and
manner of his Temptations, may help thee to perceive that Heaven is attainable,
and Holiness is the only way. Would he make so much ado about it, to keep thee
from the believing it, and seeking it, if there were not a Heaven for thee to
find? why is he so eager to draw thee unto sin, if sin be not hurtful to thee?
Do thou not feel the importunity of his Temptations? Its easy to observe
them. Why is he so much much against a Holy doctrine, and a Holy life, and a
Holy people, if it were not that he knows the Necessity and worth of Holiness
for thy good? The actions of a Knowing Enemy, may do very much to acquaint us
with the truth. Besides this, he has often appeared in bodily shapes (as I am
able to prove by undeniable evidence;) sometime to entice men to sin, and
sometime to be Gods executioner to afflict them for it, and sometime to make a
Covenant with witches and Conjurers for their souls, as many a hundred of them
have confessed at their death. And why should he be so desirous of thy soul, if
thou had none to lose? or so desirous to deceive thee, and deprive thee of
salvation, if there were none for thee to lose? and if this were not the chief
concernment of thy soul, why should thy chief enemy so much regard it? Thou
see that he is not so careful to deprive thee of thy fleshly pleasure: He
cares not how much thou have of this: The more the glutton is pleased with his
cheer, and the more the drunkard delights in his cups, and the more the
fornicator is pleased in his filthiness, and every voluptuous person in his
voluptuousness, the Devil is pleased so much the more. He cares not if thou
have all the Kingdoms of the world, if he can deprive thee of the Everlasting
Kingdom: Nor will he grudge thee the glory and honor of the world, if he can
but keep thee from the heavenly Glory. He will allow thee the Hypocrites
Reward, which is the applause of men, if he can but keep thee from the Saints
Reward, which is the savor of God. He cares not how much of thy Good things
thou have here, if he can deprive thee of the Everlasting Good. It is his
desire that thou have thy Portion in this life, that thou may miss of the
Believers Portion in the next. Certainly the Devil himself by his Temptations,
Apparitions, and Contracts, does plainly tell us of a life to come, and what it
is that conduces most to our Good or Hurt, our Joy or Torment; and
consequently teaches us what to choose, by tempting us so palpably and eagerly
to refuse it.

You see now what a Jury of Witnesses I have brought in, to testify which is
the Better part: The Devil and the wicked are added to the rest, because you
will hear no better witnesses. If you will, here are enough whose testimonies are
unquestionable.

But when all is done, it is the Lord that is and will be Judge. All these are
but witnesses to dispose thee to receive his sentence. Thou art no Believer,
till the Authority of the Word of God, will serve to satisfy and resolve thee.

CHAP. III. Full proof (in twenty Queries) from Reason it self that there is a
Life to come, and Holiness is the way to it; and the Better Part: And that the
Gospel is the certain Word of God (in fifteen Queries more) with Answers to the
Infidels Objections.
ANd by this time I come somewhat nearer to the Infidel, and am ready to answer
his foregoing Question, [ Where shall I find the Judgment or Testimony of the
Lord?] O, says the Unbeliever, if I were but sure that there were a life
hereafter, where the godly and the wicked shall be differently Rewarded, as the
Scripture speaks, then I must confess he were no better then a ^^^ man that
would prefer this world, or wilfully live in sin and Would not seek Heaven with
all his might, and be as earnest i^ Holi^ the strictest Saint! But I am not
sure that this is true, and that there is any such difference after death, to
be expected.

Answ. Alas poor wretch! Art thou at that pass! Have thou so far lost the
Knowledge of God, and of thy self, and of thy end and business here, and of the
word and works of God, as to turn worse then Jew, or Turk, or Heathen, even to
think thy self a beast, that has no life nor happiness but this? If this be
thy case, I cannot now stand to deal with thee according to thy necessity. I am
now dealing with them that confess a Life hereafter: And because we cannot in
all our writings repeat over the same things, I desire thee to peruse what I
have already written for such as thee, in the Second Part of The Saints Rest,
and in a Treatise called The unreasonableness of Infidelity; and at present
take only some brief advertisments for thy conviction.

1. And first, whereas you say you are not sure of a Life hereafter, I demand
of you, Whether you are sure that there is no such life? I am sure you are not.
If you think you are, (which none but a debauched man can think, that has put
out the eye of Natural Light) let us hear your Proof, and you shall soon be
told the vanity of it. But if you are not sure that there is no such life, then
I would know of you, Whether a Possibility of such Everlasting things deserve
not greater care and diligence then is used by the Holiest Saint on earth? You
say, You are not sure that there is a Heaven for Saints. But what if it prove
true, (as nothing more true) will you sit still, and lose it for you know not
what? or for want of a little care in seeking it? You say, You know not whether
there be a Hell for ungodly men, or no: But what if it prove true (as certainly
it will) where are you then? Will you venture your selves upon the Possibility
of such an Endless Loss and Torment, which now you might on reasonable terms
escape? You will confess that a Possibility of a Kingdom should be more
regarded, then a Certainty of a pin or a feather: And a Possibility of some
Tormenting disease but for twenty years, should more carefully be avoided then
the Certain stinging of a Nettle.

Quer. 2. You say, You are not sure that there is a life to come? But are you
sure to continue the life you have? Or is it any great matter that you are
called to lose, for the obtaining of (...) that you are not sure of? You know
the contrary, or easily may do. You are sure that you have not long to be here.
Nothing more sure then that you will shortly die. And your are not sure but it
may be to morrow. And while you are here, it is nothing worth the naming (but
what has reference to another life) that you do possess. What have you to your
flesh, but meat, and drink, and sleep, and lust, and such kind of beastial
delights! Which it is better be without, then have, if we could also be without
the need of them. Can you call these by the name of Happiness, without
renouncing your Reason and Experience? You say, You know not what God will do
for you hereafter: But you know what sin and the world will do for you here:
Even Nothing but hold you in a transitory dream, and then dismiss you into
rottenness and dust. If you were not certain of another life, as long as you
are most certain of the vanity of this, does not Reason tell you, that a
Possible Everlasting Glory, should be preferred before a Certain vanity? If you
were not sure to get any thing by God and a Holy Life, yet as long as you are
sure, even as sure as you live, that you can lose nothing by it, that is worth
the talking of, is not the case then resolved, which way is the Better? If you
say, you shall lose your fleshly pleasures; I answer, They are not worth the
having. The pleasure does not countervail the trouble: no more then the delight
of scratching (as I said before) does countervail the trouble of the itch.
Moderation and temperance is sweeter then excess. If too much be better then
enough, and that which hurts nature better then that which helps it, then
self-destroying and fighting against your bodily welfare, would be best. Is not
a temperate meal more pleasant then a gluttonous surfeit, that is worse to the
feeling of the glutton the next day? Is not common food that costeth not much,
and kindles no troublesome itch in a man's appetite, more pleasant then enticing
costly dainties? Is not so much drink as nature requires, much better then
that which makes the stomach sick, the brain witless, if not the purse
pennyless, and breeds many noysom diseases to the flesh, and hasteneth death,
that hastes of it self? By that time the gaudy apparel, the dainty fare, and
drink is paid for; and by that time the flesh has suffered all that pain and
sickness that are the ordinary followers of excess, me thinks you should say,
that if there were no Hell, your sin were a punishment it self, and that in
this life it brings more pain then pleasure, and that such kind of pleasure is
no^ worth the keeping, to the hazard of the least Possibility of (...)
Everlasting life. Would thou under thy hand and seal give away thy hopes and
possibility of everlasting life, and run the hazard of an everlasting Torment,
for the Pleasures of sin, or to avoid the trouble of a Holy life? Why then thou
may as well even sell it all for pins, or points, or childrens rackets Then
thou art as foolish as the worst of Witches, that sell their souls to a lying
spirit, that, whatever he does promise them, does pay them with nothing but
calamity and deceit. When thou come to know better what it is that the world
can do for thee, thou will then confess there was nothing in it, that should
not have been slighted for the smalest hopes of an Everlasting life. Do^t thou
think the world will be much better to thee, for the time to come than hitherto
it has proved? Deceive not thy self; it will prove the same: yea and worst at
last. Look back now upon all the pleasures of thy life, from thy infancy to
this day, and tell me what the better thou art for them. If this were the hour
of thy death, would all the profits or pleasures of thy life, be any comfort to
thee, or make thy death a whit the easier? Have the dust or bones of the
Carcasses of Voluptuous sinners, any comfort or benefit now, by all the
pleasure of their former sin? Surely I need not all these words to a man of
common understanding, to convinee him that if Heaven were as uncertain as the
Infidel does imagine, a man of Reason should venture all that he has upon the
mere Possibility; because his All indeed is Nothing, and he is sure he can be
no loser by the bargain: it being not so much as the venture of a pin for the
Possibility of a Crown.

Quer. 3. But that's not all. What if I shall prove to thee past all denial,
that even in this life, Holiness is far the most delightful, gainful,
honorable life, and that the ungodly live in a continual misery? Will not this
serve turn to convince thee that a Holy life, should be undertaken for a mere
Possibility of Heaven, if we had no more? Read but the Proofs of this anon, and
if I make it not good to thee, call me a deceiver. But if I prove that Holiness
is the sweetest life on Earth, and Heaven the sure Reward hereafter; and that
sin is a misery it self to the sinner, and Hell the certain punishment
hereafter, then see that thou confess that God is a good Master, and the Devil
a bad one; for at last thou shall be forced to confess it.

Quer. 4. Well* You say You are not sure that there is another life for man.
But have you used the Means to make it s^^ to you, and to be well-resolved? If
you have, then you have impartially searched, and prayed, and meditated on the
Word of God, and heard what can be said by Wiser men, for that which you say
you are not sure of; but if you have trusted to your own understanding, and
neglected Meditation, Prayer, Enquiry, and other needful means, what wonder
then if you be uncertain, Even whether there be a Heaven or Hell? Its no
disgrace to Physic, or Astronomy, or Music, or Languages, or Navigation, but
to you, if you say that you are uncertain of all their conclusions, when you
never studied them, or at least never studied them with that diligence and
patience as those must do that will attain a certain satisfying knowledge.

Quer. 5. Moreover, if you are so uncertain of a Life to come, I would ask you,
Whether in all your search and study, you have behaved your selves as Learners,
or rather as proud self-conceited men, that think themselves wise enough before
they learn, to try and judge their Books and Teachers. If this be your case, no
wonder if you be Infidels. If you come with such a disposition to read a Book
of Astronomy or Physic, you will never learn. If you go to any Schoolmaster,
or to learn any language or science, and think your selves able before you have
learnt them, to try and judge your Teacher and all the Books you read, and so
will reject all that you do not understand, or agrees not with you former
conceits, you will sooner prove doting fools then Scholars, and sooner be the
derision of Rational men, then come to the knowledge ^^^ch you pretend to seek.
Come to Christ's School as little children in meekness and humility and a
willingness to be taught, and patiently continue in the use of means till
Learning can be attained, before you think your selves fit to censure the Truth
of God which you are learning, and then tell me whether God does not resolve
you.

Quer. 6. Moreover, I would know of you that doubt so of the life to come,
Whether you have been true to so much Light as you received, and have lived in
obedience to the Truth which God revealed to you. Or rather whether you have
not wilfully and knowingly lived in some secret or open sin, and striven
against the Light and Spirit of Christ, and abused the truth which you have
known, and used violence with your own conscie^^^^ If so (which its ten to one
is your case) it is no wonder (...) are Infidels, forsaken of God whom you
first forsook, and given up to Pride and Self-deceit.

Quer. 7. If Man have no Life to live but this, and no further End of his
Actions then a Beast, nor any further account to give, then he is indeed but
one of the higher sort of Beasts, differing but gradually from a Dog, as a Dog
does from a Swine. And if this be indeed thy judgment of thy self, I demand,
Whether or no thou be content to be used as a Beast? Will thou not take it ill
to be called or judged a Beast by another? Or would thou have others judge
better of thee then thy self? Would thou have no man regard thy Propriety, or
Life any more then a Beast is to be regarded? A Beast has no Propriety, no not
of that which Nature has given him. You accuse not your selves of doing him
any wrong, when you deprive the sheep of his fleece, nor when you make a
constant drudge of your Horse or Ox. And do you think it lawful before God, for
any one that can but master you, to do the like by you? to strip you naked, and
to make pack-horses of you, and use you as their slaves? We take it to be no
sin to take away the lives of Beasts, if it be but for our own commodity: We
kill Oxen, and calves, and sheep, and swine, and foul and fishes for our daily
food. And is it lawful before God for others to do so by you? Should nothing
restrain them but want of Power to overcome you? If you say that you are
Beasts, as Beasts you should be used.

Quer. 8. Moreover I would know of you, Whether you think that there is any
other world, which spiritual inhabitants do possess? If you say, No, you go
against all Reason and experience. Against Experience: because that many a
hundred Witches, and many Apparitions and haunted houses have put the matter
out of question (for all that many reports of such things have been false.) And
against all Reason; because we see that this inferior world is everywhere
replenished with inhabitants: The earth has men and beasts, the air has
birds, the water has fishes; And can a man of common Reason then think that
the superior Regions which we see and which we see not (which for greatness
and for spendor and excellency are a thousand fold above this earth) should all
be uninhabited and destitute! and that there are not creatures also there for
excellency and Number incomparbly beyond the inhabitants of this lesser lower
world? Certainly nothing is made in vain; nor are the works of God so
monstrously disproportioned and discomposed, as for the Nobler parts to be only
for the baser. The Heavens that are over us, and all the vast and most
excellent parts of the Creation, have a use that is answerable to their
excellency. God makes not cottages to be inhabited, and Palaces and Cities to
lie wast and desert to no use.

But if you grant there is another world proportionaby thus replenished with
creatures, you may easily see from thence a Probability, that man shall be
translated thither. Why not the soul of man, as well as those spirits that in
assumed shapes have made their appearances unto man? As all things ripen to
their perfection, why should it seem any more improbable that the soul shall
pass hence into the world of spirits, then that the chicken shall come out of
the shell, and the infant out of the womb, into so wide and light a world as
this, when before they were shut up in a narrow darkness, and never heard nor
knew any thing of that world, which they enter into?

Quer. 9. Do you know why it is that God has given man that knowledge, and
free will, and capacity to seek another life, which beasts have not, if he be
intended for no other life then beasts? If God be no most Wise, he is not God.
If he be, then he makes not so excellent faculties as these in vain, but
fitteth all his Creatures to their uses. Every workman will do so by his work.
Why is a knife made keen, but to cut with? And what are the wheels of your
watch or clock made for, but to show you the hour of the day? Look now into the
whole frame of the soul of man, and judge by its aptitude what it is made for.

1. Man is capable of Knowing that there is a God, and knowing his Attributes,
which Beasts are not; because they be not made to enjoy him.

2. Man is capable of knowing his Relation to this God, that he is our Creator,
and we his Creatures; he our Lord and we his Own; he our Ruler, and we he
Subjects; he our Benefactor, and we his Benificiaries: And we are capable of
Knowing our Duty in these several Relations. And certainly all this is not in
Vain.

3. Man is capable of Knowing that the Everlasting Love of God is that alone
that can make him Happy: And why would God show him this, if he were not
capable of enjoying it? Reason tells men that nothing here can make us Happy,
and that (...) do it.

4. Man is capable of Knowing that certain Duties are to be performed in order
to the Pleasing of his Lord, and what those Duties are: which would not be, if
we were not capable of Pleasing him, and so of being happy in him.

5. Man is made capable of Desiring after the Everlasting Love of God; and that
above all things in this world. And God has not made such Desires in vain.

6. Man is capable of Loving God as an Object Everlastingly to be enjoyed, and
that above all other things.

7. Man also is capable of referring all the creatures unto God, and using all
things but as Means to this Everlasting end. Thus do believers, And surely all
this is not in vain.

8. Man is a Creature that cannot regularly be moved according to his nature,
to the performance of his Duty to God and Man, unless it be by Motives fetched
from the life to come. Take off that poise, and all his orderly motion will
soon cease. Nothing below such Everlasting things are fit or sufficient Morally
to govern him, and cause him to live as man should live*

9. He is possessed of actual fears of Everlasting Punishment* and shall never
perfectly overcome these fears by his greatest Unbelief.

10. He is capable of fetching his highest Pleasures from the fore-thoughts of
Everlasting. Happiness, and receiving from hence his encouragement in well
doing and foretast of the Reward. Now this being the Natural frame of man, as
is past denial (when Brutes have no such thing at all,) let Reason judge
whether the God of Nature have made this nature of man in vain that we see has
suited every other creature to its use: our horses to carry us, and our Ox to
draw for us, and the earth to bear its several* fruits for them and us: And
has he mistaken only in the making of man, and gone beyond his own Intention,
and fitted him for those uses and enjoyments that he was never meant for? These
are not Imputations to be cast upon the most wise and gracious God.

Quer. 10. Moreover I demand of you, What is the End of man and all these
special faculties, if there be no life for him after this? Either he has an
End which he is to intend, or he has ^one. If none, then he has nothing to do
in the world. For all actions of man are nothing else but the Intending of some
End, and the choice and use of means for the attaining it. Man must lie down
and sleep out his days, if this be true that he has ^^ end. Nay sleep it self
has some. And he cannot choose but Intend some End and seek it, if he would
never so fain, unless he will take some opiate stupifying potion, or run mad.
And he that made him also and placed him here, had some End in it: For if man
had thus no End, he could have no Maker or Efficient cause: For every Rational
efficient intends an end in all his works. (And he that made men Rational, is
Eminently much more Knowing then his Creature) And if we had no Maker, then we
have no Being, and so are no Men.

But if Man unquestionably have an End, it is either something that is Nobler
or Baser then himself, and some state that is Better or Worse then that in
which he seeks his end. Baser it cannot be: for that were Monstrous, that Baser
things should be the End of the more Noble. Beasts are made for Man, and
therefore not Man for Beasts. The Earth is made for Beasts and Men, and
therefore we are not made for the Earth. Our Means is not our End. If you grant
that we are made for God that made us (as nothing more sure) then How is it
that God can be our End if there be no life but this? 1. Here we are but in
seeking him, and still are forced to complain that we fall short. Here we are
but in the use of means. 2. We find that our Knowledge, Desires, and Love, will
here reach no higher then to carry us on toward that perfection that is in our
eye, and not to satisfy the soul. The creature that does attain his End, has
Rest in it, and is better then before. But we have nothing here like Rest, and
should be in a worse condition hereafter, if we had no more. 3. Here we sin
against the Lord, and wrong him more then we serve him: we know but little of
him and his work; and serve and praise him but a little, and not according to
the capacity of our nature. And therefore if he have not a higher end for us,
and we a higher end to seek then any is in this world to be found, our Natures
seem to be in vain. For my part, though it be in weakness, I must needs say it
is my trade, and daily work to serve my God, and seek after an immortal
blessedness: And if I thought that there were no such thing to be had* and no
such use for me, I must needs stand still, and look about me, or in my practice
unman my self by a brutish life, as I had brutified my self in my estimation
and Intention. For what (...) I find to do in the world! What should I do with
my Reason and Knowledge, or any faculty above a beast, if I had no higher a
work and end then beasts? Verily, if I had lost the Hopes of another life, I
knew not what to do with my self in the world! but must become some other
creature, and live some other kind of life, then now I live.

Quer. 11. Moreover, I desire you to consider, Whether it (...) credible to a
man of Reason, that God made his noblest creature in this world with a Nature
that should be a Necessary Misery and Vexation to it self above all the misery
of the baser creatures? and that the wiser any man is, the more miserable he
must needs be?

This is not credible. Yet thus would it be, if there were no life but this.
For 1. the Knowledge that man has of a superior Good (which beasts have not)
would Tantalize him and torment him: To know it, and must not partake of it, is
to be used as a Horse that is tied near his Provender, which he must not reach.

2. The Love, and Desires, and Hopes, that I before described, would all be our
Vexation. To Love and Desire that which we cannot attain, and that with the
chief of our Affections, is but to make us miserable by virtue.

3. To use all those Means, and do the Duties beforementioned in vain, when we
are not capable of the End, is but to roll at Si^iphus stone, and to be made to
wash Blackamores, or to fill a bottomless tub?

4. No creature here but man, has Fears* of any misery after death, and
therefore none would be here so miserable. There is no Infidel but must
confess, that for ought h^ knows there may be a life of punishment for the
wicked. And this [ may be] will breed more fears in a confiderate man, then
Death it self alone could do.

5. Or if there were no Fear of that, yet Man has Reason to think beforehand
of his Death, and to think of his abode in Darkness, which Beasts have not. To
think of being turned to ^^tinking carrion, and to a clod, and so continuing
for ever, without any Hope of a Resurrection, would be matter for continual
horror to a confidering man, which Brutes are not molested with. And wise men
that can foresee, would be tormented more then fools. All this is incredible,
that God should make his nobler creature to be Naturally most miserable; and
give him Knowledge and Affections, and set a Certain Death, and Possible
Torment continually before his eyes, to Torment him, without any Remedy! And
besides the Hoped Life hereafter, there is none.

Quer. 12. Do you think that the Belief of another life, is needful or useful,
to the well governing of this world, or not? If you say no, 1. Why then do
Infidels and Brutists say, that Religion is but the device of men for the
Governing of the world? and that without it subjects would not be Ruled? You
confess by this your frivilous objection, that the world cannot be Ruled well
without the Belief of a life to come.

2. And it is most manifest from the very nature of man, and from the common
experience of the world. 1. If man be wellgoverned, it must be either by Laws
containtng Rewards and penalties, or without. Not without. For, 1. All the
world does find it by experience, that it cannot be; and therefore every
Commonwealth on earth is Governed by Laws, either Written, Customary or Verbal.

2. If the Love of Virtue for it self should prevail with one of a thousand,
that would be nothing to the Government of the world.

3. Nor could any man be effectually induced to love Virtue for it self,
according to the doctrine of the Brutists: For Virtue it self is made no Virtue
by them, but a deformity of the mind, while they overthrow the End, and Object,
and Law that it is measured and informed by (as I shall more fully open to you
anon). It is therefore most certain that no Nation is or can be Governed as
beseems man, without Proposed punishments and Rewards.

And if so, then these must be either temporal punishments and benefits, or
such as are to be had in the Life to come. That Temporal punishments and
benefits cannot be Motives sufficient for any tolerable (much less perfect or
sufficient) Government, is a most evident Truth: For 1. de facto we see by
experience, that no people live like men that be not Governed by the Belief of
another life. The Nations that believe it not, are Savages almost all; living
naked and bestially, and knowing nothing of virtue or vice., but as they feel
the commodity or discommodity to their flesh: They eat the flesh of men, for
the most part, and live as brutishly as they believe. And if you say that in
China it is not so, I answer, one part of them there believe the Immortality o^
the soul, and most of them take it as probable, and so the Nation has the
Government which it has, from everlasting Motives.

And if you say that the ancient Romans had a sufficient Government, I answer,
1. The most of them believed a life to come, and it was but a few that denied
the Immortality of the soul: and therefore it was this that Governed the
Nations. For those that believed another life, had the Government of the few
that did not believe it, or else the Government it self had been more corrupt.
2. And yet the faultiness of their belief appeared in the faultiness of their
Government. Every Tyrant took away men's lives at pleasure. Every Citizen that
had slaves (which was common) at pleasure killed them, and cast them into the
fishponds. The servants secretly poisoned their masters, and that in so great
numbers, that Seneca says, Epist. 4. ad Lucul. that the [ Number of those that
were killed by their servants, through treachery, deceit, or force, was as
great, as of them that were killed by Kings]; which was not a few.

2. It is apparent that the world would be a Wilderness, and men like wild and
ravenous beasts, if they were not Governed by Motives from the Life to come.

1. Because the Nature of man is so corrupt and vicious, that we see how prone
they are to evil, that everlasting Motives themselves are too much uneffectual
with the most.

2. Every man naturally is selfish, and therefore would measure all Good and
Evil with referrence to themselves, as it was commodious and incommodious to
them. And so virtue and vice would not be known, much less regarded.

3. By this means there would be as many Ends, and Laws, or Rules, as Men; and
so the world would be all in a Confusion.

4. If Necessity forced any to combine, it would be but as Robbers, and
strength would be their Law and Justice; and he that could get hold of another
man's estate, would have the best Title.

5. All those that had but strength to do mischief, would be under no Law, nor
have any sufficient Motive to Restrain them. What should restrain the Tyrants
of the world, that rule over many Nations of the earth, if they believe no
Punishment after death, but that their Laws and Practices should be as impious
and bestial, as their lusts can tempt them to desire? What should restrain
Armies from Rapes and Cruelty, that may do it unpunished? Or popular tumults
that are secured by the multitude.

6. And there would be no restraint of any villainy that could but be secretly
committed. And a wicked wit can easily hide the greatest mischiefs. Poisoning,
stabbing, burning houses, defaming, adultery, and abundance the like, are
easily kept secret by a man of wit, unless a special Providence reveal them (as
usually it does).

7. At least, the probability of secrecy would be so great, and also the
probability of sinful advantage, that most would venture.

8. And all those sins would be committed without scruple* which the Law of man
did appoint no punishment for: as Lying, and many odious vices.

9. If one man, or two, or ten should be deterred from poisoning you, or
burning your houses, or killing your cattle, etc. by humane Laws, a thousand
more would be let loose and venture.

10. All the sins of the heart would have full Liberty, and a defiled soul have
neither cure nor restraint. For the Laws and judgments of men extend not to the
heart. All the world then might live in the Hatred of God, and of their
neighbors, and in daily Murder, Theft, Adultery, Blasphemy of the heart. Wit
his they might be as bad as Devils, and fear no punishment; for man can take no
cognizance of it. And it is the heart that is the M^n. You see then what
persons the Infidels and Brutists would have us all be! What hearts and lives
mankind should have according to their Laws! Be Devils within, and murder, and
deceive, and commit adultery as much as you will, so you have wit to escape the
Gallows, and you are Scholars fit for such bestial Masters.

11. Yea let me add this one more mischief: Hereby they would destroy all
Charity and Good works, except the very bestial Love of those that please men's
lusts. For no Laws of men compel men to the Love of God or man: Nor much to
Good works! Who would do any thing comparatively, that believed not a Reward
and Punishment hereafter? If we give all that we have to the poor, we can here
have no Reward, but the breath of ^ ^^^^ mouth, which at death we understand
not. Take down the everlasting Ends and Motives, and all good works, and inward
virtues too that should produce them, are taken down.

And by this time you may see, what a litter of bears, what a pack of ravening
dogs, what Cannibals the world should be turned into, by the doctrine of the
Brutists, that deny the life to come.

Well! but perhaps you will by this time have so much sense, as to confess that
Threatenings and Punishments, Hopes and Fears of the State of another Life are
necessary to the well governing of this world. And if so, I desire no more, to
satisfy any man that believes that there is a God, (and that is any man that
has not drowned his wits in sin.) For 1. This will then show that the Nature
of man, is formed for another life: and God did not make him such in vain. 2.
And certainly if everlasting Motives must be put into the Laws that govern us,
and into our Hopes and Fears, then it is not possible, but such things there
are to be expected. For any man to imagine that God would make a world, which
he cannot Govern but by falsehood and deceit, this is to say that God is no
God. For all lying and falsehood comes either from a want of Power, or Wisdom,
or Goodness, when men either cannot make good their words or otherwise attain
their ends; or when they have not wit to know what is, or was, or will be, or
when they are so bad as to be disposed to deceive. But he that ascribes any of
these to God, does worse then to say that there is no God. If I hate deceit and
Lying my self; the God that gave me all that little Good which I have, must
hate it more. Dream not of any but a worm, or fool, or impious tyrant, that
needs or loves deceit and falsehood to attain their ends. Judge by the frame of
Heaven and Earth, and by that little Good that is in Good men, whether the
living God be one that needs such Hellish Engines to Rule the world.

If therefore in order to the Government of mankind we must needs Believe a
^^fe to come, it is certainly True; And why do not you believe that which
Government requires you to believe.

Quer. 13. Moreover I demand of you, Whether you take God indeed to be the
Governor of this world, or not? By [ Governour] I mean properly, One that
Rules the Rational Creature as such, by Moral Means, even Laws and Executions.
I exclude not his Potential, Efficacious operations, but conclude a Necessity
of Moral Government. I know a self-conceited Popish Infidel has endeavored to
persuade the world, that Gods Sovereignty and Moral Government are Metaphorical
expressions, arising from the misconceivings of weak men; and that Wiser men
like himself do conceive of Gods Government only as of an Artificers disposal
of his works, that Physically accomplisheth all his Will. As if Gods Natural
Causations, and his Moral were inconsistent; Or as if God were not Wise and
Good as well as Almighty! or did not in his Government of man demonstrate his
sapience in his Laws, and his Goodness in Attractive Benefits, as well as his
Power in mere Natural Motion! Or as if man were not a Rational Creature, and a
free-agent, and were not to be governed according to his Nature, by Objects
suited to his Intellect and Will: but must be used and ruled like a stone, or
beast! Or as if God could not infallibly attain his Ends by a Sapiential
Government, and by preserving the liberty of the Will, as well as by a mere
Necessitating causation! This man was so enamoured upon his supposed skill in
Physics and Metaphysics, that he not only lost his Morality, but grew to be
such an Enemy to it, as to blot out all true Morality, Civility, Policy,
Economy at a dash; and stands with the rest of the Proud fraternity, as a
Monument of Gods justice against the Proud, so deplorately forsaken even in the
Reason that he glories of, that children may perceive his folly. He that is
all for Operations of Power, as excluding Sapiential Government by Laws, and
their just executions, does think sure that a horse has more of the Image of
God then a man: For he is much stronger. Brutish force would be more excellent
then the Attraction of Goodness and the Conduct of Wisdom, if the Government
(which is no Government) that these men dream of, were the most excellent. As
he will allow his Artificer to show as much at least of his wit, by making a
Watch or Clock that shall, though by a necessity, move without the finger of
the workman continually moving it; so methinks he should allow the Infinitely
Wise and Gracious God, to be nevertheless Wise or Gracious, if he Rule the
Rational-free-agent, without a forcible Physical Necessitation, by a Gracious
Attraction and Sapiential Conduct, agreeable to the Reason and Liberty of the
Creature, as long as we exclude not the Co-working of Omnipotency, nor deny the
infallibility of Divine Predefinition, which may be secured with the security
of the Creatures Liberty.

In a word, to deny God to be the Sovereign Governor of the world in proper
sense, 1. Is a denying him to be God: it being a term of Relation, comprizing
Government, and not of mere Nature: When it is commanded us that we have no
other Gods, and when we are required in the holy Covenant to take the Lord for
our God, and give up our selves to him as his people, it most plainly
expresses that his Governing Authority, or his Sovereignty is comprehended in
the term God. And indeed having made a Rational-free-creature, whose Nature
requires Moral Government, it followed by necessary resultancy that he that
had sole Authority and sufficiency, must be his Sovereign.

2. These Proud Blasphemers that deny Gods proper Government, do contradict the
very drift of Scripture, that calls him our King and Governor, and requires
our subjection and obedience.

3. They deny the being of Gods Laws, both the Law of Nature, and the Written
Laws, and so blot out the Word of God, and the sense and use of all his works.
Though they allow them a certain Physical operation on us, yet as Laws they do
obliterate them: that is, as they are Norma officii and judicii, our Rule of
duty, and expectation, and Gods resolved way of Judging.

4. They hereby overthrow all Duty as such; and make Good actions to be but as
the motion of the arrow that hits the white, and to have none but a Physical
goodness in them. For there can be no proper obedience, where there is no
proper Government or Law.

5. Hereby also they deny all Inward Virtue: For this also can have but a
Physical Goodness, if Government and Laws be down.

6. Hereby they deny the Being of sin: For where there is no Law and
Government, but mere Physical necessitating motion, there is no Transgression.
And therefore when they make a deal of talk about Purging away sin, it is not
sin indeed, that they mean; but a mere Physical disease to be Physically
expugned.

7. Hereby they deny all the proper Judgment of God by Christ at the last day,
and make his Judgment to be nothing but Execution.

Yea, and 8. All proper Execution is denied, as Vindictive, or Remunerative,
and so all Justice.

9. The Authority of every Prince on earth is overthrown. For there can be no
Authority but from Gods Sovereign Authority, any more then any Being without
derivation from the first being. They may talk to the ignorant of Contracts,
and Peoples Wills being the Original of Governing Authority, and deifie the
multitude and make them give that which they never had; but a mean
understanding may perceive their folly.

10. Hereby they destroy all humane Laws, that must receive their strength from
Gods Laws, or have none: and so they absolve all subjects in the world from
conscientious obligations to obedience. If God have no proper Governing Laws
but Physical motions, then we are no further obliged to obey men, by any Law of
God, then we are effectually moved to it, and then we do obey them. And if so,
then we can owe no more obedience to Parents, Masters, or Princes then they
force us to! If they can make us obey them, well and good: If not, we break no
Law of God by disobedience.

These and many such like are the consequents of that horrid doctrine that
denies God to be the Sovereign Ruler of the world. In a word, it dasheth out
at once all Government, Laws, Justice, Obedience, Good Works, and all Morality,
dissolving the whole frame of the Universal Monarchy of the world, and d^nying
God to be our God, and man to be man and his subject.

But if you yield that God is the Governor of the world, it is then most
evident that there is a life to come. For if he Govern us, it is by Laws, and
Judgment: And if by Laws, which are they? There is nothing known among
Rational men, by the name of a Law of God, which contains not Promises and
Threatenings of Rewards and Punishments hereafter. He has no Laws for the
Governing of this world, that contain no Motives but from Temporal things. And
I showed you before, that he need not, he cannot Govern the world by falsehood
and deceit. And we see here by experience, that there is no such Execution in
this life, of the Laws of God, as are sufficient to the ends of Government. The
wicked prosper, and destroy the just: The best do most deny their flesh, and
are oppressed by others. You see this your selves, and make it an Argument for
your Infidelity. But stay a little till the Assizes come. It follows not that
there is no Government or Justice, because the Thief or Murderer is not hanged
before the Assizes, or as soon as he has done the fact. Eternity is long
enough for their punishment. If God then be the Governor of the world as most
certainly he is, then is there a Reward and Punishment hereafter; and Gods Day
will come, when Man's is past.

Quer. 14. My next Question is, Whether you think that God should be Loved, and
Obeyed, or not? If not, then certainly none should be Loved or Obeyed. For none
deserves it, if he deserve it not, from whom we are, and have all our benefits.
But if he be, then I further Question you.

Whether it be likely or possible, that any man, or at least all the best
people in the world, should be losers by God, and their Love and obedience to
him? And whether it be Credible, that Goodness and Obedience to the Lord,
should be the constant certain way to men's undoing, loss or misery? I think you
will say, if you believe that there a God, that this cannot be. For certainly,
he that sets us a work, will own us in it, and save us harmless. An honest man
will take it for a disgrace to him, that his service should be the shame and
misery of his servants, and he should make them no satisfaction. If God be not
Able to bear us out, he is not God. And his Wisdom and Goodness assure us that
he Will do it. So that there is no Possibility that Goodness should be man's
loss, and any should finally be losers by God. On this assurance I am
encouraged to lay out all my time and labor, and dare boldly venture all that
I have, in the work of God: For I am sure I cannot lose by him.

But be thou judge thy self whether his service would not make us losers, if
there were no life but this (though I confess the loss would be small and
short:) Who are so hated, and persecuted as they that serve God best? How many
thousands of them have been fain to give up their bodies to Tormentors, and
their lives to the devouring flames? The very work of God consists in flesh
displeasing things: To deny our selves and contemn this world, and live
soberly, and righteously and godly in the world, and to be for this the scorn
of men, is the lot of the obedient.

If you say, This is not the Lot of any but those that are overrighteous, I
answer 1. We cannot be over obedient to God. 2. You contradict the experience
of all ages. Even the form of Godliness is hated by the Profane; and temperance
by the drunkard; and he shall be their scorn that runs* not with them to
excesses of riot: Seneca tells us that it was so even at Rome among the
Heathens, that he was their derision that would not be as bad as the rest. If
therefore in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable, 1
Cor. 15. 19. Not but that even here we have the far better life then wicked
men: But that is because it savoureth of the life to come to which it has
relation. Otherwise we should lose onr credit, ease, pleasure, profit in the
world, and have nothing for it. Faithfully Labor for God, O my soul; and never
fear being a loser by his work.

Quer, 15. I further ask, Whether you would be alone of this brutish Opinion,
or would you have all others of your mind? If you would not have others Believe
as you do, it seems you think not well of your own opinion but take it to be
naught for men to hold. And why should not all men hold it if it were true? But
if you would have all of that mind, it were time for you to look about you.
Certainly the Law makers would make other Laws then now they do, and men would
lead other kind of lives: And what security you would have of your goods; or
houses; or lives a week, from the malice or covetousness of others, I cannot
imagine. You would not dare to travel by the way, or look out among men: You
could not trust your servants, nor your wives, or husbands, because there would
be nothing but temporal punishment to restrain them, which cunning might
escape. I do not think but you would rather have servants, or neighbors or
husband, or wife, that believe a Life to come, then those that do not, if you
had tried others but a little while, and seen how little they were to be
trusted, and consequently how bad your opinion is.

Quer. 16. And I would know, Whether you pretend to any honesty and Conscience,
or not? If not, you will give us leave to judge of you, and trust you
accordingly. If you do, then upon what ground is it possible for you to be
honest? If you believe no life to come, you must take your pleasure here on
earth for your chiefest happiness: and you cannot believe any proper Government
of the world by the Laws, Rewards, and punishment, sufficient to restrain men
from their sin. Virtue can be no Virtue, if God no more regard it; and sin is
no sin, if against no Law. Indeed while you live among Believers, where vice is
in disgrace, you may for your credit seem to be virtuous: But your Profession
allows us to judge that you avoid no evil that you dare commit, if it do but
suit with your fleshly interest. He that believes no Life to come, and tells
me so, does bid me, in effect, to suppose him resolved for all the wickedness
imaginable, so far as he dare, and has temptations and opportunity. Are you of
this Brutish judgment! I shall expect from you then no better then a brutish
life: and trust you less then I would do a brute, because you have more
interest and temptation to do evil, and more cunning to perform it. Are you
Brutists in opinion? Then you are already habitually perfidious, cruel,
covetous, malicious, murderers, whoremongers, thieves, liars, and worse, if any
thing be worse! For honest you cannot for shame expect that any should esteem
you. I will not believe a word you say, further then some interest of your own
is concerned in the truth of it.

Qu. 17. If it be not the very Light and Law of Nature that teaches and
obliges a man to believe a life to come, how comes it to pass, that all the
world, except a few Savages and Cannibals, and here and there an Apostate among
us, do universally profess to believe it? The Jews, the Turks, the Heathens of
most Nations, besides the Christians, do all make it an Article of their
Belief. We differ indeed about the way (and yet are all agreed that Godliness
and Honesty; fearing God, and doing Righteousness, are necessary); but that
there is another life, we are in almost all the world agreed. And will you go
against the light of humane Nature it self? Or with what face can you expect
that here and there such a wretch as you, should be though wiser then all the
world, till you give us better evidence of your wisdom? And how justly do they
perish that will follow you?

Quer. 18. Are not those that Believe the Life to come of Holyer lives (for the
generality) then those that do not? And whether is it like that God should
reveal his mind to them, or unto wicked wretches? and is it liker that he
should forsake all the holy persons of all ages, and give them up to deceit in
the greatest matters, who most diligently study and pray for Knowledge, rather
then forsake those sensual wretches that wilfully forsake him?

Quer. 19. Is there not in thy own Conscience, at least sometimes, some fears
yet left of a life to come? I believe there is: and when thou have done thy
worst, thou will hardly perfectly overcome them. Does not conscience say, O but
what if there should be a Hell for the ungodly? Where am I then? Hearken then
to thy Conscience.

Quer. 20. Do thou believe that spirits in borrowed shapes have often appeared
unto men, and in voio^s spoaken to them, to draw them to sin, or to perdition?
If thou do believe it, thou may easily believe that there is a Hell which
they are so busy to persuade us to, and a Heaven of which they would deprive
us. If thou believe not that there have been such Apparitions, I am able to
give thee undeniable testimonies. Read what I have said in my Treatise against
Infidelity of this. Read Remigius, Bodin, Dan^us, Malle^s Maleficorum, etc. of
Witches; and Read a little Book called The Devil of Mascon, where is abundant
testimony of his Vocal conference, for about a quarter of a year together, in
the house of a godly Minister in a populous City, before Papists, Protestants,
and all. Many I could give you that were done here at home.

In these twenty Questions I have but endeavored to prepare you to Believe, by
showing you the very Light of Nature: But it is a lively faith in the word of
God that effectually prevails against Infidelity: and therefore next let us
come to that. I will not so much lose my time as to cite particular Texts of
Scripture, for that which is the very work and drift of the Scripture. But
because thou can have no shift in the world for thy Brutish unbelief, but by
denying the Scripture to be the Word of God, I referr thee to that which I have
written in the Books forementioned to prove it: And at this time shall add to
what is there said, but these few Questions.

Qu. 1. If the Scripture be not the Word of God, How could it tell us of the
making of the world, and such like things, which none but God alone could tell?
I know you will say, I know not whether it tell us true or not; or whether the
world were not, as Aristotle thought, from eternity. But tell me this then (to
pass by the rest now) How comes it to pass that in all the world, there are no
Books or Monuments known of any longer standing then the time that Scripture
assigns to the Creation? It is not six thousand years since the Creatiou. If
the world had lasted thousands and millions of years before, is it possible
that all its Antiquities should be lost, and not one to be seen, nor mentioned
by man in all the world, (For the sabulous tales of some in China, without all
proof, are not worth the mentioning.) Certainly some Book would have been
saved, or some Cities, or lasting piles or stony monuments preserved, or some
sign or tradition kept alive, of some of all those many thousand years.

If you say, that Writing or Printing were not then known; you come to that
which confounds you more. How is it possible that in so many hundred thousand
years, the world grew to no more experience, and Arts and Sciences were ripened
no more, when now they have ripened in a shorter time? How is it that Printing
and Writing were not found out? and that all Sciences and Arts are of so late
invention, and as it were, but in their youth? Certainly Knowledge is the
daughter of Experience, and Experience the daughter of Time; and therefore if
the world had been from eternity, it must needs have been many a hundred
thousand years ago at ^ far higher state of Knowledge then is yet attained in
the world. For every age receives the experiences and writings of the former,
and has opportunity still to make improvement of them. At least the world
could not have been ignorant so long, of Printing, Writing, and a hundred
things that are certainly of late invention. It is therefore an incredible
thing that an Eternal world should lose all the memorials and monuments of its
Antiquity, before the Scripture-time of the Creation. And therefore doubtless
it began but then.

Qu. 2. And if God were not the Author of the Scripture, how come so many clear
and notable Prophesies of it to be fulfilled? How punctually does David, and
Isaiah (53*) describe the sufferings of Christ, and Daniel foretell the very
year? and so of many others?

Qu. 3. And how comes it all to contain but one entire frame, conspiring to
reveal the same doctrine of grace and life, (at first more darkly, and in types
and promises, and afterward more clearly in performance) when* the writers
lived at hundreds and thousands years distance from each other?

Qu. 4. And if thou had not a blinded prejudiced mind, thou would perceive
an unimitable Majesty and spirituality in the Scripture, and would savor the
spirit of God in it as its author: and would know by the image and
superscription, that it is the Word of God. It bears unimitably the Image of
his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness; so that the blessed Author may to a
faithful soul be known by the work.

Qu. 5. If the Scripture came not from the Spirit, it could not give or cause
the spirit; and if it bore not Gods Image it self, how could it print his Image
upon the souls of so many thousands as it does? The Image of God is first
engraven on the seal of his holy Doctrine, and thereby imprinted on the heart.
There is no part of that holy change on man, but what that holy Doctrine
wrought. If therefore the change be of God, the Doctrine that wrought it is of
God: For both of them are the same Image, answering each other, as that on the
seal and on the wax. But it is most certain that the Holy change on the soul,
is of God. The nature of it shows this: For it consists in the destruction
of our sin, and the denial of our selves, and the raising the heart above this
world, and the total Devoting of our selves and all that we have to God, and
conforming our selves to his will, and resting in it, and seeking and serving
him with all our power, against all temptations, and living in the fervent Love
of God, and of our Brethren, and desires after everlasting life; and a taking
Christ for our Lord and Savior, to reconcile us to God, and do all this in us
by his Spirit: And surely such a work as this must needs be of God. If it be
Good, it must needs be Originally from him that is most Good: this is
undeniable. (And he that will say, this is Evil, is so much of the Devils
nature and mind, that it is no wonder if he follow him, and be Brutified). And
you cannot say, that the Work is good, and the Doctrine bad: For the Work is
nothing but the Impress of the Doctrine: And God does not use to appoint or use
a frame of falsehoods and deceits, as his ordinary means to renew men's souls,
and work them to his Will.

Perhaps you will say, that you see no such change made by the Word, nor any
such spirit given by it unto men, but only the effects of their own
Imaginations. But, 1. The Question is, Whether they are True or false
Imaginations? Gods truth causes that Impress on the mind of man, which you
call his Imaginations: For where should Truth be received, but in the mind? and
how should it work, but by cogitation? They are cogitations above and contrary
to those of flesh and blood, that are wrought by this holy Doctrine. It is
nevertheless os the spirit, because it moves man by consideration.

2. And if you see not a work on the hearts of the regenerate appearing in
their lives, which raises them to a far better state then others, it can be no
better then strangeness or malice that can so far blind you.

3. But if it be so with you, give leave yet to the persons that know this holy
change in themselves, to believe the more confidently the Word that wrought it.
We know that we are renewed and passed from our former spiritual death to life:
and therefore that it was the Truth of God that did the Work of God upon us.
Nothing but Truth can sanctify: But the Word does sanctify: therefore the
Word is Truth.

Indeed the Holy Church of Christ throughout all ages of the world, has been
his living Image, and so a living Witness of his Word, as showing by their
lives the transcript of it in their hearts. It is easy for any that know them,
except the maliciously blind, to perceive that the true servants of Christ are
a more purified, refined, honest, conscionable, holy, heavenly people then the
rest of the world. For my part, I am fully convinced of it; I see it; there is
no comparison: for all their imperfections which they and I lament, I am fully
satisfied that there is much more of God on them then on others. And therefore
there is much more of God in the Doctrine that renewed them, then in any other:
The Church is the living Scripture, the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy
3. 15. the Law is written in their hearts, Heb. 8. 10. better then it was in
the Tables of stone, 2 Cor. 3. 3. And by their holy Love and Works, the world
may know that Jesus Christ was sent of the Father, and may be brought to
believe in him, by their Unity, John 17. 21, 22, 23. Matthew. 5. 16. God would
not concur so apparently and powerfully with a false doctrine, to make so
great a change in man; nor so far own it, as to use it for the doing of the
most excellent work in all this world, even the gathering him such a Church,
and sanctifying to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

If you say that some of the Heathens have been as good: I answer, 1. The
Goodness found in them, is but in temperance, fidelity, and such like; and not
a holy spirituality, or heavenliness, no nor a through-conscienciousness in
what they knew.

2. That good was rare in comparison of that which the Gospel works, as well
as small.

3. That good which they had, was wrought only by some ^eraps or parcels of the
same holy Truth that is contained in the Scriptures. And therefore even so much
Truth among the Heathens as proficed them to any Reformation, was the word of
God, and owned by him.

Quer. 6. Do you believe that Jesus Christ did rise again from the dead, or
not? and that he and his Disciples did work those many uncontrolled Miracles,
or not? If you do believe it, then what need you further testimony to prove the
doctrine to be of God? or to prove that there is a Life to come? Shall the
Captain of our Salvation himself Rise from the dead, and conquer death, and
ascend up into Heaven, to show us that there is a Life to come, and yet will
you not believe it? Or would God lend to any man his Power to confirm a false
doctrine to the world? If so, then 1. It would be God himself that should
mislead us: For it is he that works the Miracles, or grants special Power
to the instrument to do it. 2. Man should be unavoidably misled. For if a man
rise from the Dead, and raise others, and give to thousands the gifts of
Languages, healing, and the like, and all this have no greater contrary
evidence from God of some contradiction or controllment, I am unavoidably
deceived; and neither my greatest innocence, or diligence, or any other help
from men, could possibly relieve me. And he that can believe that the
Infinitely Powerful, Wise, and Good, is either necessitated or disposed to
deceive the world, and Rule them by deceit and falsehood, and to lend his power
to confirm a doctrine that he hates, and is against himself, this man indeed
believes not that there is any God. 3. Even the Brutists themselves and all
the Infidels with whom we talk, will confess that if they should see Christ
Rise, or see such Miracles, they would believe: and therefore they do confess
that they are cogent Evidence to those that know of them.

Obj. Did not the sorcerrers in Egypt work Miracles? Ans. 1. Wonders they did,
but not Miracles. 2. They were controlled and shamed and disowned by God, by
Moses his contradictory conqueting Miracles.

Obj. But some might have dyed between the Magicians wonders and Moses
controlment, and so have been unavoidably lost. Answ. 1. The time was near, and
that not likely of those that knew of them. 2. At the first wonder of the
Magicians, Aarons Rod swallowed up their Rods, Exodus 7. 12. and therefore the
conquest obliged them to suspend belief of the other. 3. The Miracles of Moses
were not to reveal a new doctrine of salvation that could not otherwise be
known: but partly to convince Pharaoh that the Lord was God, and partly to
cause him to let go the Israelites. The peoples salvation lay not on the later;
and the former they had abundant means to know by the works and light of Nature
it self. And the Magicians wonders were not to reveal a New false doctrine any
further then to contend againg Moses Miracles; and if they had, yet being
against the doctrine of the whole Creation, that reveals the Creator, no man
could be excusable for believing them, because God has given so full a
testimony before against them, so that this objection is plainly but an
impertinent cavil.

But I doubt not but you will say, that you are not sure that Christ rose
again, and that ever such Miracles were done. I Ask therefore,

Quer. 7. Whether it be possible, that so many and so wise and godly men (as
their writings prove them) should give up their lives and all that they had and
could have hoped for in this world, to persuade the world that they saw Christ
Risen, if it were false; and to draw them to believe a falsehood that tended to
the worldly ruin of them all?

Quer. 8. And is it possible that if they had been so bad and mad, that so many
thousands would have believed them, when their own frequent Miracles, Language,
etc. were the witness of their fidelity to which they openly appealed? and this
in the very age and place where all these things might easily be confuted if
untrue? If I should pretend to convince the world by Languages not learned, and
by other Miracles and gifts which I never had, would countries, or any sober
persons believe me? or should I not be the common scorn? Would the Churches of
the world have been planted by pretended Miracles that never were? would they
all have given up estates and lives upon an evident lie? It was easy for them
all to see and hear whether these things were done or not. And therefore he
that sees those Churches which were the proper effects of Miracles, may know
the Cause; A real effect had a real cause.

Quer. 9. Was it possible that so many hundred or thousand persons, dispersed
about the world on a sudden, could without coming near each other, agree both
upon one and the same false doctrine throughout, and on the same practices to
deceive the world?

Quer. 10. Is it possible that among so many thousands, that torments, or
death, or common ingennity, would not have forced some to have repented, and
opened the deceits of all the rest?

Quer. 11. Is it possible that so many Heretics that did fall from them and
set against the true Aposles, would none of them have disclosed the deceit, if
really the Miracles had not been done?

Quer. 12. Is it possible that none of the Jews, their bitter Enemies, nor any
of the Learned Romans of that age, would have discovered the fraud, and by
writing confuted the matters of fact, being publik, and if false, so easily
confuted? Where are the Books that ever any one of them wrote to disprove any
of these Miracles? If you say, The Christians burnt them; give us the least
proof of it if you can. When did any Jew complain of such a thing? Nay how
could the dispersed persecuted Christians destroy the writings of their
reigning enemies? The writings of Jews and Romans then written remain to this
day, and had fuller humane advantages of preservation, then any that are
against them. No Jews or Romans complained or to do this day complain of such a
thing; nor tell us of any such writings of theirs, that ever were in the world.

Quer. 13. Nay the Jews confessed the Miracles themselves, and had no shift
left for their unbelief, but by Blaspheming the Holy Ghost, and saying that
they were done by the Power of the devil.

Quer. 14. All the dispersed Churches and Christians of the world, have
universally concurred in delivering us down these matters of fact, and the
Writings that contain them; and this as a thing that they grounded all their
hope of Salvation on, and for which they contemned this present world: And the
Enemies that gainsaid their doctrine, did not gainsay these matters of fact.
Could this be feigned?

Quer. 15. Have I not fully manifested in my Book against Infidelity (to which
I must again dismiss you) that there is a full and infallible Evidence, that
this Scripture was written by the Apostles, and Evangelists, and these Miracles
done, as there is that any of the Statutes of this Land are the current
Statutes of those Parliaments that are said to make them? And your Lands and
Lives are held by the credit of these Statutes.

A word or two to the objections of a Masked Infidel of this Country, Clem.
Writer.

Says he, Men be not commanded to believe these Statutes on pain of damnation:
Therefore the case is not like.

Answ. But men are commanded to obey them upon pain of death; and believing is
prerequisite to obeying: therefore the case is like. Death is the utmost
penalty that man can inflict: or if there be greater, it all runs on the same
foundation: And sure that evidence that proves men culpable for breaking man's
Laws, must prove him culpable for breaking Gods. You have no other eyes to read
the Laws of God, then those by which you read man's Laws* And does it follow
that God must not condemn you for breaking his Laws, when men do but hang you
for breaking theirs? Sure Gods Laws and man's may be printed in the same
Character, and read with the same eyes, and both have the same Natural means of
delivery, and yet the sin and punishment differ as the Authority does.

Objection. But ( says he) Can the Miracles confirm the Scripture, when it is
the Scripture that reports the Miracles?

Answ. 1. Cannot a Statute tell you what Parliament made it, and what matters
of fact were the occasion, and also what shall be your duty upon pain of death?
so that the Makers and facts shall give force unto the Law, and yet the Law
reveal the makers and facts? Do not Church Constitutions do the same? The
Scripture has two parts: the History and the Doctrine. May not the History
confirm the doctrine, and that doctrine oblige us to our duty?

2. But you suppose that the Miracles and facts can only be known by a Divine
belief of the History? But that is false. The common Evidence that all
Statutes, Histories, and Actions in the world have to make them certain to
posterity, (as Cicero's or Virgils Writings, or Caesar's Reign, etc.) the same
have the Books and Miracles of Scripture to us. And by these we can know them
de facto to be such, before we believe them by a Divine faith. And as the
Scripture is a History that has the same Evidence as the best of Histories
have, so it may concur with abundance of other Evidence (which I have recited
in my my Determination against Infidelity, and in my Key for Catholics,) to
prove the Facts: and then those Facts will fully prove the Truth of all the
Doctrines which they attest, and consequently, we shall add to our humane Faith
and Knowledge, a Divine faith concerning the History it self.

Object. 3. But ( says Writer) If God had means that the Scripture should be a
Law to all, he would not have writ it in a language which they understand not?]

Answ. Any thing will serve to make an Infidel, when the mind is corrupted and
deplorate. Were they no Laws which the Romans wrote in Latin, for the
Government of all the Nations of the Roman World? It was enough that the Rulers
of the Previnces caused them to be so far understood by the People as was
necessary to a righteous Government. I mean, those Laws that were added to the
proper Laws of that people.

2. Was there any one Language then that all the world understood? And was it
not enough that God appointed the Ministerial Office purposely to preserve and
publish this Gospel to the world from generation to generation? And is not
Translating (whether by Voice or Writing) a part of that preaching or
explication? Did not the Ministers of Christ preach the same doctrine to the
world then, in the several languages of the Nations where they came? And were
not the Scriptures presently translated according to the use of the Churches?
Upon how silly a pretense then would your silly Imperial Majesty impose it on
the God of Heaven, to write his word in as many Languages as are in the world,
if he would be believed?

I Will trouble you with no more such wretched Cavils: These three are the main
strength of three Pamphlets written against the Holy Scriptures and me, by this
Apostate. Their sum is [ Man is man: therefore we are not sure that Scripture
is true, or that God is God:] I mean [ Men cannot understand the minds of
others but by signs: All signs whether words or deeds, have some ambiguity, or
lyableness to misunderstanding; therefore nothing can be known concerning God
or man by signs.] These are not his words; but the true scope and life of all
the Writings of him and all the Infidel Seekers.

If you chide me for troubling the Christian Reader here with so much against
the Infidels and Brutists: I answer, 1. I did it because that sort increase,
and threaten the Land. 2. Because the strengthening of the Belief of the best
Christians, is the removing the Cause of all their weakness and complaints. 3.
And Principally, because when once the certain Truth of another Life is
manifested, he must be a Bedlam or worse that will not be Godly, or that will
open his mouth any more against a Holy Life. What! is it possible for a sober
man to Believe that he is so near an Everlasting Joy or Misery and yet to
neglect it, and oppose them that make it their chiefest care and labor to
prepare for it? The Brutist has drowned his Reason; and the careless Professor
laid it to sleep; the Malicious ungodly Professor of Christianity sights
against it: and only the serious Holy Christian does use it for his Everlasting
good.

CHAP. IV. Holiness is Best for all Societies.
REader, if thou be but a man that have the free use of thy reason, I have
already removed the greatest impediment out of thy way, and said enough by
confuting thy Infidelity, to prove that godliness is the Better part. Thou have
nothing left now to say against it, but what fights against Reason in the
open light, and therefore I shall find an easier task with thy understanding in
all that follows, though with thy corrupted Will and Concupiscence the conflict
yet may be as strong.

Well! if yet thou art not resolved, that Diligent Serious Godliness is that
Good part that all should choose, and better then all thy worldly pleasures, I
shall now discover it to thee in these particulars.

1. I shall show you that Godliness is Best for all Societies. 2. That it is
Best for every Person. And that 1. It is the safest way. 2. It is the Honestest
way. 3. That it is the most gainful way. 4. That it is the most Honorable way:
and 5. That it is the Pleasant and Delightful way. Yea, that there is no other
true Safety, Honesty, Profit, Honor or Delight but what is to be found in this
way. I lay not only all the reputation of my understanding, but all the hopes
and happiness of my soul upon the proof of this point. If I prove it not, I
will confess my self a fool and undone for ever. But if I prove it, let the
ungodly make this sad Confession, and choose the Better part while they may
have it.

1. And first, That Godliness is the Best for all societies, (that are just) I
prove thus.

1. Godliness does Unite or Center all Societies in the Only Head and Center of
Unity; that is, the Blessed God himself. A Commonwealth will never have Peace
in a state of Rebellion against their Sovereign, (unless he be one that they
can overcome:) Nor Soldiers in a state of Mutiny against their General: nor
Scholars in shutting out their Master. God is the only Sovereign of the whole
world. The godly all unite in him. Ungodliness is Rebellion against him. The
Rebels are always in his Power. There is no Peace nor safety therefore, nor
any Unity, but an Agreement in Rebellion for a while, to any that are not by
Holiness united in him, and Loyal subjects to him, Isa. 48. 22. There is no
Peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked.]

Object. But do we not see that the main Divisions of the world are about
Religion? Answ. 1. Its true; but not by the truly Religious. The great quarrel
of the world is against Religion in the life and practice of it. 2. It is
unholy men that cannot abide to be accounted unholy, that are the chief
dividers. 3. Among the truly Godly, there is no division in the main, but only
diffetences about the smaller Branches of Religion, which are Numerous, and
less discernable, and less necessary then the common Truths. They are all
Agreed of Truth enough to bring them to Heaven; and therefore enough to unite
them in dear Affection upon earth. Nay there is not one of them that has not a
special love to all that he discerns to be the servants of the Lord. If any
be without this, he is ungodly. And we are not to answer for the miscarriages
of every Infidel or ungodly man, that will put on the Name of Christianity and
Godliness. If there should be fallings out among the godly, they cannot rest
till they are healed and set in joint again. But you must not then be so unjust
as to conclude, that we can have no Unity, till we are in all things of a mind.
May not men of various complexions be of one Society? Are not the multitudes of
Veins and Arteries in your Bodies, united in the trunks and roots? It not the
Tree one, that has many branches?

Object. But God whom you will needs unite in, is far from us, and his mind
unknown, and so is not the mind of Princes: and therefore we cannot unite in
God.

Answ. In things Necessary to our future Happiness and present unity in special
Love, the mind of God is more plainly and fully opened to us, then the mind of
any Prince unto his subjects. What precepts can be plainer, then to Love God
above all, and our Neighbor as our selves, and first to seek the Kingdom of
God, and to Repent and Believe in Christ? How plain are the Articles of our
Faith and the ten Commandments? Divisions have been about niceties; I hope God
will call back his Churches to the Ancient simplicity and Practical Godliness,
and then the Christian world will be agreed, except the wicked.

2. Godliness propounds and prosecuteth the most Uniting, Excellent, Powerful
End, for all that duty that should advance Societies: and therefore must needs
be Best for all Societies. God and Heaven is the common End of all the Godly.
They are Agreed every man of them in One End; and so are not others. Their End
has that Power in its attractive Excellency, by which it can do the greatest
things that are to be done with the will of man. The Ends of the ungodly are
small and childish toye^* Our End also is as the Sun, sufficient for all; and
therefore (...) matter of contention: All may have God as well as One, without
diminishing the happiness of any.

3. Godliness takes away the Ball of the worlds contention, that sets men
everywhere together by the ears. It teaches men to slight the Honor and
Vainglory that the Gallants will fight and die for: And to contemn that
wealth, that Towns, and Countries, and Kingdoms are divided and destroyed by.
It teaches men to slight that Money, the Love of which is the root of all
evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. It shows men a better Treasure, and not only Verbally,
but Effectually teaches them to trample upon that which the tumultuous world
does so much scramble for, and seek by such rapine, oppression, deceit and
blood. If all the Ambitious climers and State-troublers, were truly godly, they
would quietly seek for higher Honors. If all the covetous Noblemen, Soldiers,
Landlords, and Rich men were truly Godly, they would never set both City and
Country into combustions, and poor oppressed families into complaints, for the
Love of Money. If thieves turned godly, you might travail safely, and spare
your locks, and, keep your purses. If Tradesmen were all truly Godly, deceit
would not so break their peace. What is there for Societies to strive about,
when the bone of contention is taken away, and Godliness has cast down the
Idol of the world, that did disturb them?

4. Godliness takes down the great disturbing and dividing Principle in man's
soul; and that is, Selfishness: And it both commands and works self-denial.
Every ungodly man has a private End, and a private Spirit, and Interest, that
is dearer to him then any other. So many ungodly men as there are, so many Ends
and Interests: And how then can there be a Possibility of Unity? The wisest
Lawgivers could never yet contrive an effectual course for the uniting of all
these. If Selfishness were down, I scarce know what should trouble the peace of
Kingdoms, Cities, Families, or any other Societies. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: Or, [ Thou shall not covet] is the sum and conclusion
of all the Law of God, concerning our carriage one to another. And it is
Godliness and nothing else that perfectly teaches, and truly (though
imperfectly here) effects this Self-denial: (But of this elsewhere.)

5. Godliness has the most perfect Righteous Laws; and therefore is (...) all
Societies. If God can make better Laws then man, then this is past all
question. His Laws require nothing but what is for men's good. They prescribe
nothing that is dishonest or unjust: They promise the greatest Rewards to the
obedient: They drive on the backward by the threatening of the greatest
punishments. Their Authority is highest and most unquestionable. They all
proceed from one absolute Sovereign, and are the same to all the people of the
world: They change not, but are to endure to the worlds end. Whereas all the
Laws of men, are limited to their own Dominions, and endure but while their
power can enforce them. They are subject to error and injustice; and are not
the same in one Country as in another; or in one age as in the former: and
their Rewards and punishments are but temporal: and therefore though under the
Laws of God, they are necessary for the Government of Commonwealths, yet
without Gods Laws they would be utterly insufficient.

6. The way of Holiness is contrary to all Evil whatsoever, and therefore has
nothing to disturb a Commonwealth: It is true, we cannot say so of the
persons, because they are but imperfectly sanctified. Were they in all things
such as their Lord, and Rule, and Religion do require, they would have nothing
that might be injurious to any. But surely as a sick man or a lame, is better
then a dead corpse; and as a man of mean understanding is better then an idiot,
and a mean Scholar better then the illiterate; so a man imperfectly
sanctified, is better in a Commonwealth, then the ungodly. You blame not the
Laws of this Land, because that Thieves and Murderers break them: The Laws are
Good, if they oblige men to nothing but what is Good, though bad men break
them. The Rules of Christian Religion are most perfect, and direct or command
men nothing that is evil. There may be faults in us, but there is none in the
holy Laws which we desire and endeavor to obey. Religion therefore is the way
to the perfecting and securing of all Societies, and the want of it subverteth
them.

7. Holiness does not only tell men of a right way, and show them their duty,
but also effectually Disposes their very minds to the performance of it, and
causes them to walk therein. The nature of it is, to be the very Right
Disposition of the heart, and right ordering of the life. The truly gracious
soul is habitually an enemy to all known sin, and addicted to obey in all known
Duties: And surely persons thus habituated, are liker to live according to
their Dispositions, then others to live well that hate the good in their hearts
which they should practice. Men's Laws can command good, but cannot give men
good hearts to practice it, as God does by his servants. If you cannot tell
whether wicked men that love sin, or godly men that hate it, are better members
of a Commonwealth, you know not what Societies are for.

8. Holiness destroys the root of iniquity, and teaches men to hate even
secret sins, which are in the heart, or which none can see but God alone. The
Laws of men restrain the Subjects but from open injuries: but Holiness
restrains men from doing the most secret wrong to others, or once thinking,
speaking, or contriving any evil against them. It reaches the conscience; it
cleanses the heart, from whence all evil does proceed. 2 Samuel 12. 12. Deuteronomy.
27. 24. Psalm 90. 8. Eccles. 12. 14. A man fearing God, as such, dare not
deceive or wrong another, though he were sure that it would never be known on
earth: For he knows that the Lord is the avenger of such things, 1 These. 4. 6.

9. Holiness cementeth the members of all Societies with the strongest cement
of endeared Love. It binds them together in the bond of Charity. He is not
Godly that Loves not all men, even his enemies, with that common Love that is
due to humanity, and that Loves not all that Fear the Lord with a special
Love. Psalm 15. 4. Joh. 13. 34, 35. and 15. 12, 17. 1 John 3. 14, 23. and 4. 7,
11, 12, 20. Luke 6. 27.

10. Holiness makes Princes and Rulers a double blessing to their people. It
makes them the more Divine, and bear the more excellent Image of God: How
precious is the name of a David, an Hezekiah, a Josiah, a Constantine, a
Theodosius, (though they had all their falls) in comparison of the name of a
Saul, a Jeroboam, an Ahab, a Nero, a Julian* O how sweet is the name of a Godly
King in the Subjects mouths? Even those that are enemies to Godliness as in
themselves, (because they cannot endure to be curbed and troubled with it) do
yet use to admire and honor it in their Kings and Governors. Authority and
Holiness conjunct are two such rays of the Heavenly Majesty and Goodness as
place man in the state of highest excellency on earth, and make him so much to
resemble his Creator, as has given such the highest place in the esteem and
honor of the world, of any mortals: And it is not easy for a people to value
such Holy and Pious Princes and Governors too highly, or to be sufficiently
thankful for them unto God.

1. Holiness effectually teaches Governors to Rule for God: To set him
highest, and make it their work to seek his Glory, and to avoid all selfish
contradictory interests; and to own nothing that stands at enmity with his
honor: but to judge that they have most happily attained the ends of their
Government and lives, if they have promoted the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ,
and the work of Holiness in the world.

2. Holiness will cause Rulers to prefer Gods Laws before their own; and to be
examples to their Subjects of obedience to God; and to desire that all men
should stand in far greater awe of God then of them: It will make them careful
to form all their Laws and Government to the pleasing of God, and promoting
men's obedience to his Laws; and to take heed that there be nothing in them
injurious to Christ, or contrary to his Will. It will teach them with David to
enquire of God, and make him their Counselor: And with Josiah, to search the
Book of the Law, and humble themselves when they have violated it. And with
Joshua, Not to suffer it to depart out of their mouths, but to meditate in i^
day and night, that they may observe to do according to all that is written
therein: And then God has promised to make their way prosperous, and to give
them good success, Josh. 1. 8.

3. Holiness will cause the Rulers of the world to Love those that are Holy,
and to promote the Communion of Saints, and to be Nursing Fathers to the
Church, even that part of the Holy Catholic Church which they are entrusted
with; and to protect them from the violence of men: It will keep them from the
sins of Jeroboam that corrupted Gods worship, and put forth his hand against
the Prophet that spoke against it: Whereby God will be engaged to be their
Protector in Peace and War: When Princes and people that fall out with Holiness
and take part with the flesh, and set themselves against the servants, the
worship, and the ways of Christ, do put themselves from under his protection,
and put themselves under the battering and piercing strokes of his
displeasure: And woe to him that striveth with his Maker, and that kicks against
the pricks of his severity, Isa. 45. 9. Acts 9. 5. and 26. 14. The fatal ruin
of the Kingdoms of the world, or at least the final ruin of the persons, is
from their enmity and rebellion against the Lord, and because they will not be
his Kingdoms, but hate and quarrel with his ways, and persecute his servants:
And Godliness preserves Princes and Magistrates from this sin and ruin.

4. Holiness will cause the Rulers to hate sin in themselves and others, and to
remove the abominable thing from before the eyes of Gods jealousy; and to
drive away the froward; and not to know the wicked and the proud, and to cut
off the slanderer, and the wicked doers; and to set no wicked thing before
their eyes, Psalm 101. In their eyes a vile person will be contemned, but they
will honor them that fear the Lord. By this means their Kingdoms may be Holy,
and God will delight in them, and dwell among them, and it shall be said of
them, as Jer. 31. 23. [ The Lord bless thee, O^habitation of Justice, and
mountain of Holiness.] And when Israel is [ Holiness to the Lord] all that
devour him shall offend, evil shall come upon them, says the Lord.] Jer. 2.
3. The holy examples, and holy Government of Godly Kings and Magistrates, will
draw the hearts of the people to Holiness, and cause it to flourish in the
Lands: Whereas the wicked examples and government of the ungodly, tends to
make all about them wicked: For, as Solomon says, Prove. 29. 12. [ If a Ruler
hearken to li^s, all his servants are wicked] And then they are fuel for the
wrath of God, both as offenders, and as enemies: For they will be still
rebelling and opposing him; and carnal interest and enmity will pervert them to
use the reprovers as Asa, and Amaziah, and Jeroboam, and Jezebel, and Joash
did: and to think with Saul that Doeg was the best subject that would kill the
Priests at his command, and those the worst that would not betray them, or
destroy them: and to say to false accusers as he did to the Ziphites, 1 Samuel
23. 21. Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye have compassion on me.] And says
the Lord, Isa. 27. 4. [ Who would set the briers and thorns against me in
battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.]

5. Holiness will save Princes and Rulers from the great and dangerous
temptations of their Riches, and Honors, and Power, and Pleasures, and will
teach them to mortify the flesh, and live after the spirit ( Romans 8. 1, 6,
13.) and will keep them hereby from those sins that would subject them to the
consuming wrath of the impartial God, and will bring them to Heaven
notwithstanding all the impediments of the world, even as a Camel through a
needles eye, by the power to which all things are possible. And doubtless that
which makes men most acceptable to God, and tends to the everlasting
happiness of the persons, must needs be better for all societies then that
which prepares them for damnation, and keeps them here under the indignation
of the Lord. See 2 Samuel 23 3. Lev. 25. 46, 53, 43. Isa. 32. 1. Romans 3. 4, 5, 6.
and 12. 8.

11. And as Holiness thus makes the most excellent Princes and happy
Governors, so it makes the most Loyal and obedient Subjects, and is the most
powerful preserver of peace in all Societies.

If any shall say, that the people that are accounted Holy have caused as great
contentions and rebellions in the world, as any other, witness the wars in
France, Savoy, Bohemia, Scotland, England, etc.] I shall first prove undenyably
from the nature of the thing, that true Godliness must needs make the best
Subjects, and tend to the happiness of Commonwealths, and then I shall more
nearly answer the Objection.

1. Holiness effectually teaches subjects to know themselves; To know their
weakness and meaness and unworthiness, and to know their places and their
proper work. It kills that pride that makes men think that none are so fit to
Rule as they; and it makes them so humble as to think themselves unworthy of
protection in the meanest station. And also it so takes them up with a higher
ambition, and sets their heart on the greater things, that they are dead to the
Ambition of the world, and can easily leave these things to others: Their
Kingdom is not of this world: They are taught to expect affliction and
persecution, and not to aspire after crowns. No man can deny that this is the
lesson set them by their Lord, and the Covenant which they make with him when
they become his Servants. Whereas the ungodly having their portion in this
life, and relishing and minding most the things of the world, will snatch and
scramble and turn every stone and do any thing within their reach for worldly
honors.

2. Holiness teaches subjects to see God in their Rulers, and honor and obey
them as his officers, even with an honor and obedience participatively Divine;
And no men can give them a higher honor then they that thus honor them on
Gods account: and no men can give them so full and firm and constant obedience,
as they that obey God in their Governors: No man can give them higher titles,
then they that take them to be the Officers of God. Carnal men obey their
Governors merely as men that are able to do them good or hurt. If they were
sure to receive no damage by contemning them, they cared not to trample them
in the dirt. Though that people sinned in desiring a King, yet when they had
chosen that kind of Government, and Saul was set over them, those that went
with him were such [ whose hearts God had touched: but the Children of Belial
said, How shall this man save us? and they despised him and brought him no
presents] 1 Samuel 10. 27.

3. Holiness causes subjects to obey and submit for conscience sake: They do
it because God himself has commanded them to do it. They pay tribute, and give
honor and obedience because it is part of their Obedience to God, required of
them in the fifth Commandment, which is the first with promise: Outward
prosperity is especially promised to them that honor their Parents and
superiors. And the commands and promises of God with the bonds of Conscience
do tie men faster to their duty, and restrain more effectually from
disobedience then the words of men alone can do. Conscience holds strongly
and constantly; and it holds as well in secret as in public; so that if a
man were sure to do a mischief and never be discovered, he would never the less
abhor it, as being not unknown to God and conscience. A man that fears not
God and conscience, will never stick to do a mischief, if he may escape the eye
and revenging hand of man: Faux will set fire to the train to blow up King and
Parliament, if he see but a probability of escape. But he that feels the
bonds of God upon him, dare not rebel.

4. Holiness destroys Self-love which is the Spring of all discontents, and
disobedience: and teaches a man to own no Ends or interests but what stand in
due subodination to the honor of God and the common good; and in due
coordination with the welfare of our neighbors: Whereas the ungodly are every
man of them an Idol to himself: self is the only Lord and Law, set up against
God and King and Country; And if God or King, or Country be served by them,
it is but in subserviency to themselves, as they look to attain some wealth or
dignity or honor by it. The self-seeking man is faithful and trusty to no man
but himself. And the self-denying man has no great temptation to be unfaithful.

5. Holiness does partly consist of charity, and teaches men to do as they
would be done by: And how can it go ill with any societies where Love
prevails, and men are as loath* to wrong as to be wronged, and to do hurt to
others as to themselves!

6. Holiness brings down Gods blessing on each particular subject: and makes a
people the delight of God; and brings them under the promise of his favor.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. What abundance of promises are
there to the obedient? Isa. 1. 19. Deuteronomy. 4. 30. Exodus 23. 22. Deuteronomy. 11. 27. and
13. 4. and 30. 2, 8, 20. Jer. 7. 23. and 11. 4, 7. etc.

7. Holiness makes men meek and patient, and teaches subjects not to make too
great a matter of any injury that is done them; nor to censure unwarrantably
the actions of their superiors: nor to murmur and stir up discontents; but
quietly to bear all in obedience to God, and for the common good.

8. Holiness disposes men to Unity and Concord, and is as much against discord
and division as healthful nature is against wounds and sickness. Whence are
wars, but from the lusts that war in your members? Jam. 4. 1. The servant of
the Lord must not strive: The new Command of special Love to one another, and
the strange forbearance, concession, condescension, forgiving and loving
enemies themselves, required in the Gospel, must needs do much if truly
practiced to preserve the Peace of any nation.

9. Holiness assures us of so great a Reward to those that obey their
superiors in things lawful, and offers us so much better things upon our
patience, and submission, then ever disobedience or rebellion can attain, that
hereby it must needs tend to the quiet and benefit of Societies. He that is
bound to rejoice and be exceeding glad in his persecution, because his reward
in heaven is great, has small reason to contrive, or fight, or sin to escape
the persecution together with the reward, Matthew. 5. 11, 12.

10. Holiness teaches men both to continue obedient and faithful against all
temptations, and also to propagate the same resolutions, and to draw all others
to obedience with us. It was the excellency of Christ's example, that he would
be obedient even when he was falsely accused of treason, and charged as an
usurper of Cesars right. If we should be called seditious, disobedient,
rebellions, when we are most loyal, it must not move us from our loyalty at
all. In all these ten particulars I have showed, that in the nature of the
thing, it is undeniable that Godliness is the strength and beauty and safety of
Kingdoms and of all Societies: in that it engages the subject as well as the
Governors, in all that tends to their peace and welfare.

And now you may see by what is said, that there can be no weight in the
Objection which pretends from the Case of the Waldenses, Albigenses,
Bohemians, French, etc. to produce experience against what I am proving. Health
may as truly be said to be the cause of sicknesses, as Godliness to be the
cause of treachery, rebellion or disloyalty; there being nothing in all the
world except God himself, so contray to these as Godliness is.

But you will ask, Whence is it then that we have the foresaid instunces? I
answer sometime not authority but malice and cruelty drives poor Christians to
a stone, wall, and if they turn again when they can fly no further, accuses
them of Rebellion; As it was with the Waldenses, the Bohemians, etc. Sometime
Princes and States fall out among themselves, and cannot agree about their
Titles, and the Bounds and degrees of their Power: And then whoever the people
are against, they are sure from that side to hear the most opprobrious Titles,
and be used accordingly if it be in their power. Sometime the right of
Government is not easily or generally known: as in the contention between the
houses of York and Lancaster here: And then as one party conquereth one year,
and another the next, so the people must be called Traitors and Rebels by each
party that prevails, if they obeyed and served the other party against them:
And if they refuse to obey and defend either of them, they will be condemned by
both. Sometime the Polity of Empires and Commonwealths is so imperfect and
obscure in the constitution, that the several parties that pretend to interest,
cannot agree about their Rights, nor the Lawyers agree among themselves: And
the people cannot be thought to be wiser then the Lawyers in the affairs of
their profession: If Nero and the Senate of Rome had each of them commanded the
Christians to aid them against the other, it would not have been easy for the
wisest and holiest of the Christians then to know which part they should have
adhered to and assisted: Paul thought not meet to decide any such controversy:
He commanded every soul to be subject to the higher powers, and not resist: but
he tells them not whether Caesar or the Senate was the higher powers in a case
of contest and division. Sometime a Traitor usurpeth the Government, and
Christians think when they see him settled and in possession, that, though they
hate his usurpation, yet they are bound to honor and obey him as being
possessed of the Government: Thus Gregory the great too hastily and
flatteringly owned and applauded Phocas: and the Christian Bishops ordinarily
subjected themselves to the Emperors that came in by blood and violence: Thus
the Bishops of Rome, and of other Churches in Italy and the adjacent parts,
submitted themselves (I think too soon) as soon as they perceived him to be
conqueror, to Theodorious: and so they did to other conquerours. Sometimes, as
the General Councils of Basil, Constance, etc. determined that a Council is
above the Pope, and declared the contrary to be a damnable Heresy, and
commanded the Bishops and people to obey them against the Pope: so Senates and
Parliaments and the Majority of the States men and Lawyers may tell the people
that are unacquainted with such Law-cases, that in this or that they are bound
to obey them, upon highest penalties, and that they shall receive to themselves
condemnation if they resist them; and so may mislead such as intend nothing but
to obey the higher powers for Conscience sake. And though the error and
commands of Councils and Parliaments excuse not a tote an illiterate Laicke
that understands not those matters, yet surely a tanto it is some excuse.

And sometime oppression makes a wise man mad, Eccles. 7. 7. And sometime
impatience prevails with the weak to do things unwarrantable: and humane
passion blinds, Reason: and sometime Temptations prevail in this as in other
cases: And sometimes Hypocrites, that never had any true Religion, do show
their carnal dispositions, and unmortified lusts and passions and pride, by
their rebellion against their lawful Governors: and then Religion must bear
the blame of the actions of those that counterfeit Religion: and of those
crimes which it does most prohibit and condemn.

In a word, Be the accusation against any particular person just or unjust,
nothing is more sure and clear then that he is most unjust that will charge the
Christian Religion as guilty of Countenancing any Rebellions, Conspiracies,
sedition, disobedience, faction or divisions. Christ went before us in his own
example to pay tribute to Casar: and commanded us to give to Caesar the things
that are C^sars: and their false accusing him and condemning him as an offender
against Caesar, did no whit move him from the duty of his state of humiliation.
What can be more against all Treason and perfidiousness, then that holy
doctrine which commands us the exactest performance of every lawful promise,
much more of our Oaths, and duties of Allegiance? what can be more against
Rebellions then that holy doctrine which teaches us a life of patience and
meekness, condemning private revenge, and commanding us rather to turn the
other cheek to him that smites us, and to give our coat to him that takes
away our cloak, and go two miles with him that would compel us to go one, that
is, to suffer yet more, rather then revenge our selves or break peace, or
order, or raise wars, to escape such injuries? It is a crucified Christ that
conquered by suffering, that is your example: And our Religion is but our
Conformity to him in his sufferings and his holiness. He has made it part of
our duty to himself to obey Kings and Rulers, and all Superiors, not only the
good, but the froward, and to take it patiently if we suffer for well-doing,
and not to return so much as a reviling, dishonouring word, or murmuring,
rebellious thought. It is not fighting for our selves, but following him with
the Cross, and forsaking all that we have, that Christ has made the work of
his disciples, and the necessary condition of his promise of salvation, Luke
14. 33. There is no Master in all the world that so strictly commands
Patience and forbearance, and forgiving and Love, and Peace and submission to
one another as Jesus Christ does: He sets the hearts of all his servants on
another Kingdom, and tells them they have greater things to mind then riches or
honors or domination upon earth. He takes the bone of contention from before
them, and bids them leave such things as these to the men of the world, that
have their portion in this life. You may as honestly say that the Sun is the
greatest cause of darkness, as that Christ and holiness are the cause of
seditions, rebellions, treasons, or perfidiousness in the world. All the world
set together has not done so much as he has done against them. If men
threaten hanging and quartering to such offenses, Christ threatens damnation
in hell fire to them: And would you wish him to inflict a sharper punishment,
or more severely to manifest his hatred of the crimes!

I tell you therefore if you should find Rebellion and Sedition among
Christians, it is but as you may find corruption in the bodies of the living,
which is contrary to life and health, and to be found much more among the dead.
I am not here pleading for individual persons, but for Christianity and
Godliness. If any professed Christians forsake the way of Patience and
Subjection, and turn to Rebellion and disloyalty, they do far forsake Religion
and Godliness, and much more wrong and offend their heavenly master, then their
King and Governors. Plead who will for the wickedness of such men; for my part
I will not. I am sure Christ will not plead for their sin which he condemns.
He may justify them from it, upon repentance; but he will never justify them
for it and in it. It is not because they are godly but for want of Godliness,
that any men have ever been guilty of rebellions, or resisting Lawful powers:
As Dr. Ward has fully proved in his Sermon on Romans 13. 2. Nothing more tends
to the ruin of Rulers and people, then to hearken to the Devil and the Enemies
of Holiness, that would persuade the world into a conjunction with them in the
Enmity against the way of Godliness and the faithful servants of the Lord, upon
pretense that they are adversaries to Governors and Government. It is a
weighty truth that the foresaid Doctor begins his Sermon with [ Among all the
stratagems of the Devil, tending to the undermining of Religion, and the
subversion of the souls of men, though there cannot be any more unreasonable,
yet there was never any more unhappily succesful then the creating and
fomenting an Opinion in the world, that Religion is an Enemy to Government, and
the bringing sincerity and zeal in Religion into jealousy and disgrace with
the Civil Powers.] It was by this Jealousy blown into the heads of the High
Priests and the Sanhedrim amongst the Jews, and of Herod and Pontius Pilate,
that Christ himself was accused, condemned and executed on a tree: By this the
Apostles were haled before the Governors of Provinces; forced from one City to
fly to another: for this they endured bonds and sundry kinds of death. It was
through this fancy that the Christians for three hundred years together endured
the rage of Heathen Emperors, being destitute, afflicted and tormented: Our
Lord Christ was traduced as an enemy to Caesar, a man refractory to the Roman
Laws, and a Nonconformist to the Religion and Laws of his Country.] Thus and
more that Author. So that it is no new thing for the most innocent and holy and
excellent persons to suffer as enemies to the Government where they lived; nay
it has been the common case: nor is it strange to hear Religion and Holiness
charged with these crimes which they are most against.

As for the malicious slanders of the Papists against the Reformed Churches, as
if they had promoted all their Reformations by Rebellion, they have been
confuted sufficiently by many. At this time, I shall only desire the Reader
that would be satisfied in this, and understand the Protestant doctrine in
these points, to read Bishop Bilsons [ Difference between Christian subjection,
and unchristian Rebellion:] Especially page 382. and from 494. to 522. Also
Hookers Eccles. Polit. the last Book (lately published.)

And if he would know whether it be an Article of the very Religion of the
Papists, that the Pope may give away the Dominions of Temporal Lords that deny
Transubstantiation, or hold such like points which he calls Heresy, or that
will not exterminate all that hold them out of their Dominions, and that he may
discharge their subjects and vassals from their Allegiance: I only entreat him
with his own eyes to read the Decrees of their approved general Council at the
Laterane under Pope Innocent 3. and set him but believe his eyesight. And for
their case and confutation, let him also read King James his Answer to Perron's
Oration.

Having thus interposed an Answer to their Objection, that say, Religion has
brought forth Rebellions (which I confess that Religion which teaches
Rebellion has done; but the Christian Religion which condemns it, and
engages men against it as aforesaid, does not) I now proceed to some other
proofs, that Godliness is the greatest security and establishment to Kingdoms
and all Societies.

12. Godliness above all things engages men to be true to their Covenants; to
keep all their Oaths and Promises of Obedience to Kings and to other
superiors; and to be faithful and trusty in all their duties to one another:
So horrid is the sin of Perjury and Covenant Breaking, that God has condemned
it, not only in the holy Scriptures, but also in the Law of Nature. He will not
bear with it in the Greatest Princes; how then shall Perfidious subjects escape?
What fair excuses had Saul for his breaking the Vow and Covenant with the
Gibeonites? He might have said, 1. They procured it from Joshua by a mere
cheat. And therefore no benefit belonged to them from their own sin and fraud.
2. That Joshua not knowing who they were, ignordutis non est consensus. 3. That
God had forbid to spare any of those Nations. 4. That it was not Saul that made
this Oath and Covenant, but Joshua. 5. That Saul did it in zeal for the people
of Israel. Yet for all this in David's days there was a famine in the land, for
this sin of Saul, which was not expiated till seven of his sons (or posterity)
were hanged at the Gibeonites request: And though David might well see that he
might be censured as contriving all this himself for the extirpation of the
sine of Saul, yet would be not forbear the execution, 2 Chronicles. 21. And when the
people murmured at Joshua and the Heads of Israel for sparing them at first,
they are answered with the Obligation of the inviolable Oath, Josh. 9.

So though Zedekiah was the King of Babylons Captive, force could not excuse
his perjury and Covenant Breaking, but God severely condemned and avenged it.

So that every Subject that has but bound himself in Allegiance to his
Sovereign, is under such an Obligation as to a true Believer is more dreadful
to violate, then it is to suffer death.

Yea God has written such a Law against Perjury, even in Nature it self, that
he must needs be afraid of it, that is not a flat Atheist, lest his appeal to
God, do bring the vengeance of God upon him: And in this life the perjured
ordinarily meet with that Divine revenge which is the forerunner of eternal
vengeance: The perjured are unfit for humane Society; hated by God, and never
more to be trusted by man, till sound Repentance make a change: Which made
Augustine determine, that he that urges another to forswear himself, is as
much worse then a murderer, as killing the soul is worse then killing the
Body. Seeing then that Religion doubleth these sacred bonds, and casts
Hellfire into the face of the perjured and perfidious, it must needs be a
singular perserver of Kingdoms and all Societies, which fall in pieces where
these bonds are loosed; and fall into the hands of God, who is a consuming
fire, especially to perjured men.

13. Moreover it is only Godliness that obeys with true Loyalty, and carries
on all works methodically for the common Good. As he that will obey every
Justice of Peace in all things that he commands, without respect to the Laws
or will of the Sovereign Power, may be sooner a Traitor then truly obedient;
(for every Justice or Lord may arm him against his Prince) so he that will obey
the Princes of the earth, without respect to the Will or Interest of the
Eternal God, will be but a Traitor to God, under pretense of obeying Princes,
that are but his Officers and Servants. But the godly begin at God in their
obedience; and therefore they proceed methodically, and obey men upon right
grounds and in their proper places. It is not the most absolute obedience to
man that is the best. He that should command men causelessly to fire his
Country, or to destroy the innocent, or to ravish Virgins or men's Wives, were
not to be obeyed, as Doeg obeyed Saul; but God is first to be obeyed. It is he
that begins, proceeds, and ends with God, that is sure to do no wrong, nor be
misled.

14. Holiness possesses men with a public spirit, and makes the ^^se ^^
others to be our own, and teaches us to do as we would be done by; and gives
every man that has it, a compassion to others in their distress, and an
earnest desire after their welfare, and a rejoicing in it; when ungodly men are
all for themselves. Psalm 137. 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26, 27. and 13. Acts 2. 44. Mat.
7. 12* Mark 12. 33.

15. Godliness engages men in Doing good, as the very business of their lives,
which is to be Rewarded with everlasting Happiness: So that besides what is
forced from men by Law, they are to be still in the exercise of Charity, and to
be zealous of good works; and to make it their study to do all the good they
can: And therefore they are certainly the profitablest members in any Society,
that are most truly Godly, Luke 10. 29, 30, etc. Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Luke 6. 38. Gal.
6. 9, 10.

16. Moreover Holiness teaches men to forgive wrongs, and to Love our enemies,
and to let go our right, rather then to break Peace and revenge our wrongs: and
to forbear even going to Law contentiously, and where our putting up injuries
merely to our selves, may suffice for the avoiding of it. Luke 6. 27, 28, 29.
Mat. 6. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 6. 7. And what contention can there be where these Rules
are practiced? except when the interest of God or others is violated; which is
not in our power to remit. If you say, that These things are good if they were
practiced: I answer, 1. You confess then that Holiness is good: For the Rule is
Good, whether it be practiced or not. 2. I answer, that so much as any man is
sanctisied, he does practice it. And therefore if any man live not according to
the Rule which he professes to live by, that is from the remnant of that sin
within him, which the wicked plead for, and for want of more of that Godliness
which you distaste. Make him more holy, and he will do all this.

17. Holiness secureth every Society, and interesteth them in the most
impregnable defense; even in the Love and favor of the Lord; and in his many
sure and precious promises. He has engaged his Almightiness and Fidelity for
such, and renders them as the apple of his eye, and has promised that he will
be their defense, Zech. 2. 8. Psalm 5. 11. and 7. 10. and 59. 9, 16, 17. and
62. 2. whereas the ungodly are under his curse, Psalm 1. 6. and 37. And which
of these Societies is liker to be happy?

18. Godliness is the surest way to furnish every Society with all the
blessings that are truly good for them. For they have the favor and promise of
him that is the giver of them all. Romans 8. 28. Psalm 34. 10. and 84. 11. and
23. Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and 6. 6. Mat. 6. 33. But
wickedness is the certain way to ruin. Even one sinner destroys much good,
Eccl. 9. 18. and one godly man hinders much evil, as the case of Joseph,
Moses, Daniel, and many others tells you.

19 Moreover it is Godliness that is the honor of all Societies: Without this
their wisdom is mere folly, and their Riches are but the ^etters of their
slavery, and canker to gnaw them and testify against them, and their greatest
victories may be but murders which shall damn them: and their splendor in the
world is but the sign of their misery in the eyes of all foreseeing men: Prove.
14. 34 [ Righteousness exalts a Nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.]
What Glory can be equal to the Glory of our interest in God, and of our being
his people, and doing his work, and having his presence?

20. Lastly, How can that be worst on earth, that is so good in Heaven? The
perfection of Holiness hereafter, with the Holy Love, and Praises, and
Enjoyments of the Saints, will be their Glory. If you think this worst in your
Societies on earth, what do you but renounce it? If Heaven be worst for you,
come not thither. If the participation of that which is the felicity of the
glorified, be not the felicity of all Societies, I desire none of their
felicity.

What if Saints from Heaven would come down and dwell among you here on earth?
I beseech you as men of reason, answer me these two Questions.

1. Whether you do not know or verily believe, that they would be more Holy,
and Pure, and Exact, and strict, and more averse to all sin, then any of those
are that now you dislike as too precise?

2. Whether you would therefore call them Puritanes, and hate them, and cast
them out, or imprison them, or take them for the troublers of your Countries,
or rather for the honor and blessing of your Countries? What you would do by
them, that do by those that come nearest to them among you.

CHAP. V. Times of Holiness are the Best Times.
AND now I have given you all this Evidence, I dare leave it to the judgment
of any man that is fit to judge, Whether it be the godly or ungodly that are
the Better Magistrates, or Better Pastors of the Churches, or Better Members of
the Commonwealth, or of any Society? Judge now whether the Places and Times
are not Best that are most Godly? And whether it be the Godly or the Ungodly,
that are the Troublers of the world?

And yet it has ever been the practice of ungodly men, to charge it upon them
that Fear the Lord, that all the troubles of the world are long of them. We
were all quiet, say they, before this Religion and preciseness troubled us; and
this is it, that since it came among us, has set us all together by the ears.]
But if these men be yet reasonable, I desire them to consider,

1. That this has always been the old complaint of the most wicked men, which
God himself has testified against: When Lot did but gently admonish the
abominable Sodomites to forbear a villainy not to be named, Genesis 19. 7, 8, 9. [
I pray you Brethren, do not so wickedly] What said they to him? and how did
they take it? Why [ they said, stand back: and they said again, This One fellow
came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge! Now will we deal worse with
thee then with them.] Is not this the case between us now? How are we
unpeaceable? Because we are against sin? If we would hinder men from wronging
God, and from condemning their own souls, and others, then forsooth, we are
their troublers, and we judge them, and we disturb their Peace? Just like the
Sodomites, [ These precise fellows, say they, will need be our Judges, and we
must be ruled by them; before they came among us we had none of this ado;] But
did not God, think you, decide the controversy aright? He first took Lot and
his family away, that the Sodomites might be troubled with that precise and
busy fellow no more; and then he sent fire from Heaven on Sodom, and consumed
them all, making them an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude
7. Or as it is fully set forth by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. [
Turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, he condemned them with an
overthrow, making them an example to those that after should live ungodly:
(Mark this) And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds) The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust
to the day of Judgment to be punished.]

And now who is it that was troublesome, and the cause of evil? Was it Lot, or
was it Sodom? Take heed lest God take the Lots that trouble you from among you,
and when you are rejoicing that you are rid of them, he serve you worse then he
served Sodom.

In the days of Noah, no question but that Preacher of Righteousness seemed to
the world a singular and a self-conceited fellow: But did not God decide the
controversy whether it were Noah, or they, that were the troublers of the
world? Says Peter 2 Pet. 2, 5. [ God spared not the old world, but saved Noah
the eighth person, a Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the
world of the ungodly.]

When Israel ^ell before the men of Ai, it was a doubt who it was that was the
cause of that calamity; but God proved it to be Achan, who is stoned upon this
sentence of Joshua, Josh. 7. 25. [ Why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall
trouble thee this day.

2. And consider I pray you, What a Quietness it is that you have, before you
are troubled by the Godly? It is a Quietness in the high way to Hell: You had
the privilege of damning your souls without disturbance from these precise
controllers. Has not Christ told us, that the Devil is thus like a strong man
armed, that while he keeps his Palace, his goods are in Peace: but when a
stronger then he shall come upon him and overcome him, he takes from him all
his armor wherein he trusted, and divides the spoils.] Luke 11. 21, 22. The
hearts and the Nations that are not conquered by Christ, are the Devils
Garrisons and possessions: Do you think that it is best that he possess them
still in Peace? Or that the Preachers of Christ, that plant his Ordinance
against them, and batter them, till they are forced to yield, are therefore
busy troublesome fellows? What is it for, but for your deliverance, that are
Satan's captives at his will? 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

3. And might you not on this ground also account Christ himself the troubler
of the world, as much, and a thousand times more then us? For be does more to
disturb men in their sins then any of we: and be does more for Holiness then
all the world besides. And in this sense he confesses and fore-tells us, that,
he came not to send Peace, but division into the world, into Towns, and
Countries, and Families, Luke 12. 51, 52, 53. If we can have no Peace with you,
unless we will disobey our Lord, and serve the Devil and the flesh, and damn
our own souls, and suffer you to do the like, then keep your Peace among your
selves; we will none of that Peace: we have no mind to buy your friendship and
good words at such a rate! If your peace will stand with our peace with God,
and peace of Conscience, we will gladly accept of it: If it will not, we can be
without it. Your souls are like sores that may not be searched, or a broken
bone that must not be set, for fear of hurting you: You are like men that must
have that which would kill them; or like children that will cry if they be but
taken out of their dung, or kept from fire, or from knives. If we do but cross
you in the way to Hell, we trouble you, and we break the peace? Yea, and if we
will not cast away our souls everlastingly for company? And is this the case?
Is this the breaking of your Peace? The Lord will shortly be a Righteous Judge
between you and us, and tell you, who it was that was the Troubler of the Towns
and Countries, and of the world.

You find Ahab and Elijah at this contest. Ahab takes him for the Troubler of
Israel when a heavy famine was among them: Elijah says, No; but it was Ahab
and his Fathers house that had troubled Israel^ by their wickedness, 1 Kings
18. 17, 18. And which think you was in the right, the Prophet or the King?

Why Sirs, What is it that Godliness does, that it should be taken for the
Troubler of the world, when ungodliness is taken for your peace? Is it our
persuading or hindering you from sin that troubles you? And will not the
everlasting fruit of it trouble you more? Then even say, that washing you, or
sweeping your houses, or curing your sores, or sickness, or persuading you not
to kill your selves, is a troubling of you! Or is it, (as the Lord has told us
it will be, Matthew. 5. 10, 11. John 15. 18, 19. 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5.) because we are
not such as you, and will not do as you do, and be of your opinion, and forsake
our Lord to keep you company? Is it not with good reason? When we know you
cannot save us harmless: and will not answer for us before the Lord? We know
that every man must answer for himself, and therefore we durst not trust you,
if you would promise us to bring us off: It is best for you to study better how
to answer for your selves. But if you are resolved on it, that ungodly you will
be, and that you will venture on Hell to escape a holy life, why should not you
give us leave to pity you, and to forbear your folly, and to save our selves?
Will it do you any harm that others should be saved? Or that others should be
Godly? Your own sanctification indeed cannot stand with your lusts and fleshly
pleasures: but another man's may. It will take none of your vainglory, or
wealth, or sensual delights from you, that another man is sanctified, or
devoted unto God. And therefore be not angry with us, if we obey the Holy
Ghost, that calls to us, Acts 2. 40. [ Save your selves from this untoward
generation.]

Object. O but (says the ungodly crew) it was never a good world since there
was so much Religion, and preaching, and preciseness, and so much ado about
serving God! It was a better world, when we had but a short Service read on
Sundaies, and played, and merrily talked together the rest of the day! There was
more Love and good neighborhood then amongst men then there is now: There was
not then so much deceit, and consening, and oppressing, and covetousness in the
world: There was more peace, and plenty, and a better world it was then now.

Matters of peace and plenty change often in the same age. And certainly you
have as little hinderance now, from being as good as you have a mind to be, as
ever your forefathers had. Two things I have to say to your Objection.

1. If this be true that the world is so bad, which part is it of the world
that you mean? Is it all, or some? Not all sure; that were too horrible
censoriousness to say. Then God would presently destroy the world. Sodom had
one Lot, and his family in it Well? it is but some then that are so bad. And
which part is it? Is it the Godly, or the Ungodly? If Godliness be naught, then
Heaven is naught, where there is nothing else; And then take it not ill to be
shut out? If it be the Ungodly that are naught, that's it that I am saying. It
is time then to leave it, and to turn to God. Is it not you your selves that
make the complaint that are the men that make the world so bad? Is is not you
that are so Covetous and worldly that you have nothing for the poor, and no
time to spare for the work that you were made for? nor scarce any room, to
think or speak of the life to come? Is it not you that have so little Charity
that you even hate men for Loving and serving God, and seeking diligently to
save their souls? Its true, that there was never greater wickedness in the
world then since there has been so much Preaching. But What is that
wickedness, and in whom? It is the despising and disobeying the calls of God;
and the hating and neglecting of a holy life. Those that are saved by the
Gospel, may say that it was a happy messageunto them: but those that slight it,
and wilfully sin in the openest light, may well say that it is a bad world
with them: and worse it is, and will be for ever, if they be not converted,
then if they had never heard the Gospel: It is you, and such as you that
despise the mercies of the Lord, that make it a bad world; and then you
impudently complain of it, and charge it on them that will not be as bad as
your selves: and take away the candle and shut the windows, that the light may
not trouble you.

2. Well! but say you the world was better when there was less preaching, and
less ado about the serving of God, and our salvation. I do not believe you, and
I will tell you why, yea, Why I am certain that your words are false.

1. Because you contradict the Lord. God says those times are best when there
is most of the Light of the Gospel, and most helps for our salvation, and when
the people are most Holy. The increase of Light and Holiness is a principal
part of the Glory of the Kingdom of Christ, and of the Promises to the Gospel
Church, as you may see, Isa. 9. 2. and 36. 26. and 42. 6. and 60. 3. Mat. 4.
16. Luke 2. 32. Joh. 3. 19, 20. The word of God is the greatest blessing under
heaven: together with a heart to obey and practice it, Luke 11. 28. Blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it.] Psalm. 106. 3. and 119. 1, 2. and
1. 1, 2. God himself pronounces them blessed that meditate day and night in
his Law, and that make it their whole delight; and because of the increase of
Light and Holiness extolleth the times of the Gospel far above those of the
Law, affirming the least in this Kingdom of God to be greater as to the honor
and privilege of his station, then the Prophets, or John Baptist, Matthew. 11.
11, 12. And would you wish me to believe such ignorant men as you, before the
God of Heaven that contradicts you?

2. I will not believe you, because your objection is nothing but a Blasphemous
accusation of the Living God. If it were true that Preaching is bad, it is
Christ then that is bad that does command it. But I am sure that Christ is not
bad: and that such as Blaspheme him, do it to their cost. It is he that has
laid a Necessity on us, and woe be unto us if we preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9. 16. and that charge us to feed the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Yea the
spirit charge us before God and the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, that we preach the word
and be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine.] If any one be to be blamed for all this preaching and
stir for heaven, it is Christ that charge it so strictly upon us. And if thou
dare lay the blame upon the Lord, speak out, and stand to it at judgment.

3. I know it is false that you say, that the world is the worse for all this
preachig and Godliness, because it is against the very office of Christ, and of
the Holy Ghost. Christ was a diligent preacher himself, and dare you accuse him
for it? He came into the world to bring us the Light of heavenly Truth: and
dare you say that it were better be without it. It is the work of the Holy
Ghost to illuminate and sanctify men, and do you think that he does us hurt?
Christ dyed to wash and purify by the word and Spirit, the Church which is his
Body, that he might present it spotless to the Father, Ephesians. 5. 26. 27. And
dare thou say that Christ came to do us harm? By this thy despising of his
benefits, thou show that thou have yet no part in him or in his saving
benefits, but art in the gall of bitterness and bond of thy iniquities, and thy
heart is not right in the sight of God.

4. Moreover you are not to be belived because you speak against the experience
of all the Prophets and Apostles of Christ. David had rather be a door keeper
in the house of God, then dwell in the tents of wickedness; and judged a day in
his Courts to be better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. and accounted them the
blessed men that might even dwell in the house of God, and be daily taken up in
holy praise and worship, Psalm. 65. 4. and 92. 13. and 23. 6. When he was forced
from the house and public worship of God, it was his daily lamentation, and he
faints, and pants, and longs after the house and worship of God again,
Psalm. 42. and 84. 2, 3, 4, 5. [ How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of
hosts? My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: My beart
aad my flesh cries out for the living God: -- Blessed are they that dwell in
thy house: they will be still praising thee: Blessed is the man whose strength
is in thee, in whose heart are the ways of them] The Prophet Isaiah says [ In
the way of thy judgments O Lord have we waited for thee: the desire of our
soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I
desired thee in the night; yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early.] This was the mind of all the Prophets and Apostles: and God has told
us that it is the practice of all blessed men, to Meditate in Gods word day
night, Psalm. 1. 2. And yet will you say that it was a better world when there
was less of this? O self-condemning Hypocrites! Why do you so much profess to
honor the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, if you think that they
were the troublers of the world, and that their doctrine and practice makes us
worse? Why do you honor them with the name of Saints, and yet despise both
their doctrine and practice in those that do but endeavor seriously to imitate
them! Why keep you Holy days in remembrance of the dead Saints, and say that
the world in the worse for the living Saints? O horrible hypocrisy! to honor
their names, and hate their doctrine and course of life, and say that the world
was never good since it was troubled with such as they! Do we trouble you with
our Preaching, and praying, and our stir for heaven? How would Christ and his
Apostles have troubled you, that went so far beyond us in all these, and made a
greater stir then we, and turned the world (as their enemies charged them) up
side down! Act. 17. 6. so busy was Christ in preaching and doing the work of
God, that he neglected to eat his meat for it, Joh. 4. 34. and his fleshly
kindred would have laid hands on him as if he had been beside himself, Mark. 3.
21. It seems if you had then lived, you would have been among the wicked
enemies of Christ and of his Disciples, and have said [It was never a good
world, since these busy fellows made so much a do with their Religion!

5. Moreover, you speak against the inward feeling and certain experience of
all true Christians in the world. They all have tasted and found that
excellency in the holy ways and Ordinances of the Lord, that they value them
above all the world. With David they esteem them above Gold and Silver, Psalm.
119. 72. With Solomon they say that all the things that we can desire are not
to be compared to them, Prove. 3. 15. and 8. 11. And with Job they value the
word of God above their necessary food, Job. 23. 12. And with Paul they count
all things Loss and dung in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ,
Phil. 3. 7, 8. They know that it is a thousand times better with them, since
God converted them to a holy life then it was before, as well as you know that
you are better in your health, then you were in sickness. Try whether you can
make men that ever were among those where plague and war and famine reigned, to
believe that [it was never a good world, since this plague and war and famine
ceased.] You may as soon make wise men believe this, as make experienced godly
men, to believe that it is worse with them for their turning to the Lord, and
living, holy, heavenly lives. You can never by all your doting and
self-conceited prating, make those believe whom God has sanctified, that they
were in a better case before, when they were the slaves of Satan, and served
sin, and were under the wrath and curse of God. They feel that within them that
will never suffer them to believe you. The health of their recovered souls:
their experience of the Goodness of the ways of God: the comforts they have had
in the pardon of sin and the hopes of Glory, do make them know that you talk
distractedly, when you tell them that they were better before, or that the
world is the worse for the grace of God.

6. And we cannot believe you, when you speak evil of a holy course, because
your words are against all Religion, and common reason; and much more,
destructive of the Christian faith. If God be not to be Loved with all our
hearts, and served with our greatest care, then he is not God: or then there is
no such thing as Religion to be regarded. A God that is worse then the
Creature, is no God. If we must not seek first the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof (Matthew. 6. 33.) as Christ has commanded, then it is in
vain to seek it at all. If there be no Heaven or Hell, let us lay by all
Religion. But if there be, that man that thinks it not worth his greatest care
and diligence to be saved, does forseit the reputation of his reason with his
soul. Will you believe that man that says he believes that there is an
Everlasting Glory to be sought, and made sure of in this life of our pilgrimage
and warfare, and yet thinks it not worth our seeking for above all, and worthy
all our cost and labor? He speaks a gross and blockish contradiction. A Heaven
no better then Earth, is no Heaven. A Heaven that is not worthy the labor of a
holy life, is no Heaven. And a God that is not worthy of all that we can do, is
no God. Either plainly say that you are Pagans and worse, and believe not any
life but this: Or else live as Christians, if you will be called Christians;
say not that you believe there is a Hell, if you think a Holy life too dear to
escape it.

7. Yea this is not all, but your words do tend to Brutishness it self. Pagans
did believe (for the most part) a life after this. And Julian that Apostate
Infidel himself does prescribe to all his Idols Priests a very strict and
Religious life, according to the Religion which he owned; and professes that
all care and temperance and piety should be used to please God, and obtain the
happiness to come. And shall men called Christians take the very Infidels for
Puritanes, and be worse then Heathens? If we have not another life to look
after, then what are we but beasts that perish? If you think that you die like
beasts, call your selves beasts, and never more own the name of men. If you are
not beasts but men, that have you souls to save or lose, to be happy or
miserable for ever. And is it not worth all our care and labor to look after
them?

8. Another reason why I will never believe you, that the world was better when
there was less preaching and Religion, is because you speak against the very
end and nature of preaching and Religion. For the word of God is written and
preached to this very end, to make men better. And is that the way to undo the
world, to persuade them to amend! O Impudent malignant tongues! What does the
word of God speak against but sin! Does it anywhere speak against any thing
that is Good? or does it anywhere command you any thing that is bad? Let the
bitterest enemy of God upon earth, say so, and prove it if he can. I here in
defiance of the Devil, and all his instruments and servants, challenge them in
their bitterest malice, to say the worst they can of the Gospel, or of true
Religion, and prove that ever it encouraged men to sin, or that ever any was a
loser by it! O wonderful! Must the God of heaven indite such Laws against all
evil, condemning it, and threatening damnation for it: and yet will these
wretches have the faces to say that it is long of the Scripture or of Religion
that the world is Evil? What! Will preaching against your wickedness make you
wicked? If it do, be it known to the faces of you, that it is you, and not
preaching that shall be one day found to be the cause, and be condemned for it.
Must Princes and Parliaments make Laws to hang thieves and murderers! and when
they have done, will you say it is long of them and their Laws that men are
robbed and murdered? Why this is not yet so impudently unjust as you deal with
God. For they threaten but hanging, and he threatens everlasting damnation
against sin; and executes it on all the unconverted, as sure as he threatens
it. And would you have him yet do more to testify his dislike of sin? Tell me,
thou that blasphemest the holy commands of thy Creator? Would thou have him
do more then everlastingly to damn unconverted sinners, to prove that he is no
friend or cause of sin? what should he do more? Is there a greater plague then
Hell to threaten? Or would thou have him do more to show how much he loves
Goodness, then to command it, and persuade men daily to it, and to promise
Everlasting Glory for their Reward? Is there any greater Reward to be promised?
I tell thee blasphemer, to the Justifying of my Lord, that all the world has
never done the thousandth part against men's faults, as God has done. Never
were there stricter Laws against them, then his Laws. And never more terrible
executions. And yet will thou say, that its long of God, or Scripture, or
Religion, that the world is naught? If thou stay a little longer impenitently
in thy blasphemy, till death have but given thee the mortal stroke, (and its
hard at hand) thou shall then be answered in another manner, and God will
easily justify himself, and stop all such vile and arrogant months, and
confute thee with an everlasting Vengeance. Remember that thou wast forewarned.

9. Yea furthermore, you are confuted and shamed by your own complaints. What
is it that you quarrel with the Law of God for? is it not because it is so
strict, and forbids sin, and threatens damnation for it? Is it not because
it requires so much goodness, and tells you that none of the unconverted
ungodly shall be saved? And what is it that you quarrel with the godly for? Is
it not for serving God, and because they will not be as bad as others? And yet
the same tongues dare blaspheme the Laws of God, and say, the world is the
worse for them! And the same tongue dares revile the godly as the cause that
the world is so bad! What should one say to such unreasonable men, that will at
the same time murmur at the Holy word and ways of God, because they contradict
the wickedness of the world, and threaten them with Hell fire because they
repent not, and yet say it is long of this very word, and the preaching and
obeying of it in a holy life, that the world grows worse! O impudent mouths!
that at once revile the servants of Christ, because they will not be as bad as
others, and yet say that its they that make the world so bad. God will very
shortly stop such unreasonable mouths.

10. And if your words were true, then it would follow that all Gods greatest
Mercies are worth nothing, yea, that they are a hurt to us, and curses rather
then blessings. What is the Gospel worth, if the reading, and preaching, and
practicing of it, do make the world worse, and only trouble men? What are all
Gods Ordinances worth, if this be the fruit of them? And why has he appointed
Pastors and Teachers for his Church, if this be all the good they do? Nay what
is Christ himself worth to the world, if those are the worst men that most obey
him, and study his word, and diligently seek him! O unworthy souls! is this all
your thanks to God for a Christ when you are lost by sin? and for the Gospel
that offers you everlasting life? and for the Ministry of your Pastors that
would teach you the way of life? May we not take up the Prophets exclamation,
Isa. 1. 2. Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth: I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me: The Ox knows his Owner, and
the Ass his Masters crib: but this people does not know the Lord, nor
Consider.] Your beast does not take his provender to be naught for him, and
rather choose to be without it. And you are worse then beasts in your dealing
with the Lord: and when he has provided you a Christ, a Gospel, Teachers, and
holy Ordinances, even the preciousest things in the world, you unthankfully
refuse them, yea and reproach them; and take them to be naught for you, and say
that it is long of them that the world is so bad! O horrid ingratitude! when
miserable souls are in the captivity of sin and Satan, and within a few steps
of everlasting fire, the God of Mercy sends his Son, his Word, and Ministers,
to help them out, and set them free, and save them from Hell before it be too
late; and what entertainment have they! They are reviled by these wretches as
if they came to make them worse, and do them a mischief, and not to save them!
Righteous is the Lord that condemns such as would not be saved, and as took
salvation for an injury. And just were God, if he should take away the Gospel,
and his Ministers and his people, from so unthankful and unworthy a generation
as this that are weary of them, and say they are the troublers of the world,
and think that they do them more hurt then Good; and as the Gadarens by Christ,
desire him to depart out of their coasts, Matthew. 8. 34. Be content a while,
unworthy souls! You shall not long be troubled with a Christ, or with the
Gospel, or with Preaching, or with Praying, or with the company of these
precise people, that you so much dislike. Sleep on but a few nights more, and
pass on but a few days further, and you shall come to a place before you look
for it, where you shall never have their company more, and where you shall be
out of the reach of Preaching, and Praying, and Holiness, and of Hope. And in
the mean time, were it not for the sakes of those whom God will convert and
save, this troublesome Gospel and Holy people should be taken from you, and
given to a people that will be more thankful and more fruitful, because you put
it from you and have judged your selves unworthy of everlasting life, Acts 13.
46. Matthew. 21. 41. No thanks to you that England is not like the Indians, and
as miserable as you would have it.

11. And why should we believe you when we see that you judge clean contrarily
for your bodies, then you do for your souls? I have never heard any of you say,
[ It was never good world since our land was fruitful, and since so much corn
came to the the market; It was a better world when men had nothing but roots to
feed on.] And yet would you be believed, when you say that it was better when
men had not so much of the Scripture, and of Christ and holiness, the food, the
life, the health of souls?

12. And I the less believe you, because I find that this has been the common
speech of others in all former ages. They that lived in the days of your
fathers, said so of the former times [ It was formerly a better world then
now.] And if you had lived in those days of your fathers forefathers, you
would have heard them say the same. Its common with men to feel the evil that's
present, and to praise the days that are past, whose evil they felt not, or
have forgotten. But hear what God says, Eccles. 7. 10. [ Say not thou, What is
the Cause that the former days were better then these? for thou do not
enquire wisely concerning this.] Eccles. 1. 9. The thing that has been, it is
that which shall be: and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and
there is no new thing under the Sun.]

13. And little cause have we to believe you, when we have present experience
that your words are false. We see that those are the best, that are most Godly.
He is blind that sees not an exceeding difference betwixt them and such as you
that speak against them. Do not we see that they are sober, when some of you
are drunken? and that they are seeking heaven when you are seeking the world?
and that they are providing for their souls and pleasing God, and employed in
the most sweet and heavenly works, while you are pampering the flesh, or making
provision to satisfy its lusts? Do we not hear their speeches are of God, and
their salvation, and things that edify, while you curse or swear, or talk
filthily, or idly and unprofitably like dreaming or distracted men? And yet
would you make us believe that you are as good as they, and that Religion makes
men worse?

But you say, that for all this they are secretly as bad as others. Foolish
malice! If it be secret, how do you know it? If you know it, how is it secret?
and its marvail that you do not make it known! Is it not easy to say so by a
Job, or a Samuel, or by Christ himself, if saying so may serve turn, and a
wicked tongue may pass for proof? You may say that in secret I commit all the
sins imaginable: and how can I disprove you, when I have no witness, but only
by desiring you to prove it if you can? But O happy are the servants of the
Lord, that are even in secret always in the presence of their Judge, who will
bear witness for them, and justify them against malignant tongues!

But you say, that they are as covetous as other men, though they are more
Religious. But this is as shameful a falsehood as the former. Do we not see the
contrary in the open fruits? Covetous men are the forwardest to call others
Covetous, because they would have no body hinder or cross them in their
Covetous desires or designs. And then they are saying, [ O such a professor
used me thus, and such a one did thus]; and usually they partially relate the
case, as their own Covetous hearts incline them passionately to judge it. And
perhaps they may meet with a worldly hypocrite that seems Religious; which is
no more to the disgrace of Religion, then Cham was in the Family of Noah, or
Absalom in the house of David, or Judas in the Family of Christ. Do not you
call your selves Christians your selves? And yet Christianity is never the
worse, because you are wicked that profess it. But sure I am that the servants
of Christ are not comparable to you in Coveteousness. For as I find God
describing them in his Word, to be a people dead to the world, whose
conversation is in heaven, so I see that they can spare time from worldly
business, while they and their households serve the Lord; and so cannot you:
They are seeking Heaven, when you are seeking earth; And we may know, what a
man loves, if we know what he seeks. And again I, must bear witness from my
own experience, that in this place where I live, I have reason to believe, that
where other men of their ability give a penny to the poor for charitable uses,
those that you call precise and think too Religious, do give six, if not twice
six, and some of them much more then I will express. There are few weeks but we
have occasion to try it by voluntary collections for some needy persons, or
charitable uses; and therefore we have much opportunity to know: besides
contributions at Sacraments, and other public occasions.

But you say, that in former times there was more Love among neighbors then is
now: Then there was more familiarity and kindness, and less hatred, and malice,
and contention, then now* I answer, Am I not sure by constant experience, that
there is far more love among the godly then among you? Do I not see how dear
they are to one another? and how sweetly and familiarly they converse together,
and join in prayer and holy exercises, and conferr about their everlasting
state? Do I not see that they are ten times more liberal to relieve each other
in distress, then you are? Many and many a time I have seen them give ten or
twenty* shillings in collections to relieve godly people in distress, when
those of you that are richer give but two pence or a groat to your companions,
in the like Collections? And what makes them be so much together, if there be
not Love among them? I profess to you, I never yet saw any thing that is worthy
the name of Love and Peace among any other sort of men.

But perhaps you will say, that there are contentions and differences among
them about Religion, which the world was never troubled with before. To which I
answer, 1. What differences or contentions do you see among them in this Town
or Parish? Among five hundred people that you count Precise, what one is there
among us that is either Anabaptist, or Separatist, or Antinomian, or Arminian,
or of any other sect? What one that separateth from any Ordinance of public
Worship? What differences do you know among us? Is there here any more Churches
then one? Do you hear any contendings? Do you see any thing like a difference
among us all? For my part, I know of none: Nor but of one in the Parish (that
is turned from us) which is a simple, ignorant, harmless man, that turned
Anabaptist. For as for the Apostate Infidels that join with you that are
ungodly, we have nothing to do with them, but lament their misery.

14. Another thing that hinders our Belief of you, is that we see that it is
only ignorant or wicked men that are of this opinion, and say that the world is
the worse for Godliness, or the Preaching of the Gospel. Not a man says so
that knows what he says, and that ever felt the power and sweetness of the
Gospel upon his soul: But only those that are blinded by the world, and serve
the flesh, and are drowned in lust, and know not what they speak against. And
shall we regard the judgment of such men?

15. And moreover, when you say that the world was better when there was less
Godliness and Teaching, you contradict all history, and therefore are not to be
believed. You know not well what is before you: much less do you know what has
been in your forefathers days. Be it known to you, we have as full advantage
to know that, as you have. Many and many a large Volume have I read, concerning
the state of the world before us, which tell us of far greater wickedness in
our forefathers days, then are in these. If you will not believe me, I will
show it to any of you, that can read and understand, at any time when you will
come to me: I will show you the words of the Chroniclers, and Historians of
those ages, that make more lamentable complaints of the vices of those times,
and tell us of far more evil then, and of a far greater scarcity of good, then
can be truly spoken concerning us. And are you that never saw those days, to
be believed before them that saw them?

16. And I am sure also that you speak falsely*, because you make the most
barbarous Heathens to be most happy, and the worst of men to be the best. If it
be best where there is least Religion, and least Teaching, or meddling with
holy things; then are the naked Indians the best, and the Cannibals that live
on the flesh of men. These be they that are least troubled with Preaching and
Religion. And if you think that these miserable souls are best and happyest, I
pray you go to them, and be happy with them. And by my consent the Magistrate
shall promote your happiness, and send you thither.

17. And would you have us believe you, when you contradict your selves? Out of
your own mouths will we silence or condemn you. It is Christ that teaches us
to be Holy. And do you not pretend your selves to believe in Christ? That which
you dislike as a troublesome or needless thing, is nothing but serious
Christianity it self. And do you not say your selves that you are Christians?
Do not you profess the Articles of the Christian Belief? And what do we but
practice that which you profess? We do but obey that God whom you say you
believe in, as the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and all things.
We do but love the Lord our Savior, whom you say you believe in as your
Savior. We do but obey the Holy Ghost that sanctifies all that God will save,
whom you also profess to believe in your selves. We practice that Communion of
Saints which you deride, and yet profess that you believe. We seek after the
remission of sin, and that life everlasting, which you take on you to believe
your selves. And will you profess to Believe these things, and yet say they are
naught, or that it was never a good world since they were regarded and
practiced? And do you not profess to take the ten Commandments for the Law of
God, which all men should obey? And what do we but endeavor to obey them? All
that which you hate as too much preciseness, is nothing but the obeying of
these ten Commandments. And O that we could do it better! And do you not use in
the saying of the Lords Prayer, to pray that the Name of God may be Hallowed,
and his Kingdom come, and his Will be done, yea even as it is done in Heaven?
And yet (...) you say with the same mouth, that it was never a good world since
Gods name was Hallowed, and since his Kingdom was ^^vanced, and his Laws so
much regarded, and his Will obeyed! O hypocrites! Is this your praying? and do
you look such prayers should be accepted, which you hate and speak against your
selves? You pray that you may not be led into Temptation, but delivered from
evil! and yet you run into temptation, and take that Evil to be Good. How often
have I heard men, when the Commandments have been repeated, which require us to
take the Lord only for our God, and not to take his Name in vain, and to
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, to join to it as their prayer, [ Lord
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law] and when they come
home, revile those people that are willing to keep it, and that will not take
Gods Name in vain, and forbear the keeping holy of his day, as they do
themselves. Either give over professing the Christian Belief, and using the
Lords Prayer, and praying that you may keep the Commandments of God, or else
give over reviling those that do it. Either say plainly that you are Heathens
and no Christians; or else never say, that a Christian Life is hurtful to the
world, nor make it the matter of your reproach.

18. And I must needs say that I am the more assured that your words against
Religion are false, because I know that they please* the Devil, who is the
Father of lies; and are just such as he would have you speak, and would speak
himself if he had but liberty, and his appearance would not mar h^^ cause.
When thou art railing at Godliness, and saying that this Religion is the
trouble of the world, and that the servants of Christ are but a company of
busy hypocrites, just so would the Devil have thee speak. I can prove it fully
from the Scriptures, and from his Nature and designs. You could not speak more
agreeably to his mind. If he had hired you, and written down every word which
he would have you speak, you could not more punctually obey him. Do you plead
against Holiness, and for a careless and ungodly life? Do you despise the
righteous, and justify the wicked? Just so would the Devil have you do. If he
stood by you and prompted you (as indeed he does, though you do not know it)
those are the very words that he would have you say. Indeed when he is
compelled, the Devil himself speaks better then you: as in Acts 16. 17. he
says, [ These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation] These are better words then yours: But when he is left to
himself, and speaks of his own, he speaks just as you do: and shall we
believe you when the Devil sets you on, and you speak the words of the lying
spirit?

19. And I the less believe you, when you say that the world is the worse for
Preaching and Religiousness, because I know from whence this comes. You take
that to be the best, that is the worst; and that to be the worst, that is
indeed the best. You judge after the flesh, and take those for the best times
when you have most prosperity, and may sin with least contradiction and
molestation, and be least troubled in your sensual course. These are your good
days, which wise men know to be your slavery and misery. It is never a good
world with you, when your consciences are troubled, and your sores are lanced,
and Satan cannot keep his garrison in peace; and when you cannot be permitted
to drink, and swear, and game, and revell without control. And if this be your
good world, I had rather have a prison or a pair of stocks with Christ and the
Gospel which you despise, and with the means and hopes of the world to come,
then to have your good world, which is but thee quietest passage to damnation.
You are not yet to be believed: stay till you see the end, and what comes of
it, and then tell us which was the good world.

20. Lastly, if all this will not serve, I will silence you and shame you, if
you have any shame left. If Religion and so much serving of God do make the
world worse, and those be the worst times where there is most of these, then
Heaven would be worse then Earth or Hell, even the worst place in all the
world. For no place has so much Holiness as Heaven. Nowhere is there so much
ado about the Praise and Service of God, as there is in Heaven. There they do
nothing else but that which you revile, and that in highest fervor and
perfection. They Rest not day or night saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 4. 8. Do thou know the man
on earth that is most precise, and holy, and diligent for God? Why the lowest
of the Saints in Heaven go quite beyond him. And in good sadness, do thou
take Heaven to be the worst place? and think that so much Holiness will make it
troublesome? Bear witness then against thy self, Out of thy own mouth art thou
condemned. How can thou expect to be admitted into Heaven, that take it for
so bad a place? Thou teach God to thrust thee back, and say to thee, Be
gone; here is nothing but Holiness, which you could not alive: You shall go to
a place where Religion and Holiness shall not trouble you.

Well Sirs, Consider now as men of Reason, of all these twenty Reasons which I
have given you, and then tell me, whether that be not the better world, and the
better soul, where there is most Faith and Holiness.

CHAP. VI. Holiness is the only way of Safety.
I Have proved to you that Holiness is best for Common wealths, and given you
many General undeniable evidences, to prove that it is Best for all men in
particular: I shall now come to the particular evidences, and show you wherein
it is that it is Best for all men.

There are three sorts of Good that men have to look after. The first is the
security of their Life and Being; the second is their moral well-being; and the
third is, their Natural well-being. This last also is divided into three
branches, and consists in our Profit, our Honor, and our Pleasure.

So that here are five several sorts of Goodness to be considered of; and you
will find that Holiness is Best, beyond all comparison, in each respect. 1. In
respect of Safety. 2. In point of Honesty. 3. In point of Gain. 4. In point of
Honor. And, 5. In point of Pleasure or Delight. If I prove not every one of
these, then tell me, I promised more then I could perform: But if I do prove
them, I look that you that Read it, should promise presently to come in to God,
and a Holy life, and faithfully perform it.

1. And that HOLINESS IS THE SAFEST WAY, I prove thus. 1. That man is in a
safer state that is delivered from the power of Satan, then he that is in his
bondage, and taken captive by him at his will. But all the unsanctified are in
this captivity, and all the sanctified are delivered out of it; as the
Scripture most expressly tells us, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 3 [ And you has be
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; wherein in time past ye walked
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the Power of
the air, the Spirit that now works in the children of disobedience: among
whom we also bad our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, etc.] So 2 Timothy 2. 25,
26. [ In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God eradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.] And Acts 26. 17, 18. [ I send thee to open their eyes, and turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.] And Col. 1.
13. [ Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son.] Satan is the Ruler and the Jailer of the
ungodly, that leads them to sin, and so to destruction, and keeps them for
torments at the day of wrath. And is he safe that is in the Devils power? If he
should appear to thee, and lay hold of thee, thou would not think that thou
were safe. But his possession of thy soul is far more dangerous. Thou do not
believe that thou art in his power: But thy blindness shows it; and thy
enmity to the way of Holiness shows it; and thy ungodly life does fully show
it; and the Scripture affirms it of all such: and what need there any further
proof? But the sanctified are all dilivered from this slavery; and though the
Devil may rage against them, he shall not prevail.

2. Moreover, those that are United to Jesus Christ, and are become the living
Members of his Body, are certainly safer then those that are yet strangers to
him, and have no special interest in him: But all that are sanctified are thus
united to Christ, and made his members: and all the unsanctified have no part
in him. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life, 1 John 5. 12. [John 15. 6, 7, 9, 10. If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the
fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. As the Father has loved
me, so have I loved you; continue in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye
shall abide in my love:] Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you,
v. 14.] Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 29, 30. [ Christ loved the Church and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify and ^^^a^^^ it, with the washing of water, by
the word: that be might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish. No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cheri, ^ath it,
even as the Lord the Church. For we are Members of his Body, of his flesh, and
of his bones.]

Judge by these passages whether the sanctified are not safe. If the Love of
Christ, and his Merits, and his Power cannot keep them safe, then nothing can.
If the Savior cannot save them, none can. Is not the very flesh of Christ
safe? are not the members of his Body safe? are not his friends, his spouse and
beloved safe? If Christ can save us, we are safe. For who can conquer him? Or
who can take us out of his hands? John 10. 28. If he be for us, who shall be
against us? and if he justify us, who shall condemn us? Romans 8. 33, 34, 35.

But is it so with the ungodly? No: they have no part nor let in this matter,
but are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, because their heart is
not right in the sight of God, Act. 8. 21, 23.

3. Moreover, he that has escaped the Curse of the Law, and has his sins
forgiven him, and is justified from all things that could by the Law be charged
on him, is safer then he that is under the Curse, and has all his sins yet
lying on his soul; But the first of these is certainly the case of the
sanctified, and the other of the unsanctified, Gal. 3. 10, 13. As many as are
of the works of the Law are under the Curse: for it is written, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law
to do them. -- -- Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a Curse for us] Romans 3. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God] And Mark 4. 12. shows, that the unconverted have not their sins forgiven
them.] Joh. 3. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that
believes not is condemned already] And Act. 26. 18. To open their eyes, and
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith that is in me.] Romans 8. 1. There is no Condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the spirit]
Abundance more such passages of holy Scripture do assure us that all the
unsanctified are unpardoned, and all the sanctified are Justified, and
delivered from the Curse. And which of these are in the safer state?

Did one of you owe ten thousand pounds more then he were worth, or had you
committed twenty known selonies or murders, would you think your selves safe,
without a pardon? Would you not be looking behind you, and afraid of almost
every man you see, lest he came to apprehend you? O what a case is that man in
that has so many thousands sins to answer for? and has such a load of guilt
upon his soul? and so many terrible threatenings of the Law in force against
him? Do you not fear every hour, lest death arrest you, and bring you to the
prison of the bottomless pit? But the sanctified is delivered from this danger.
A thousand sins indeed were against us; but we have a pardon of them all to
show. In Christ we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
Col. 1. 14. The law has nothing now against us: and therefore we are safe.

4. Those are safer that are dearly beloved of the Lord, and reconciled to him,
and taken for his Children, then those that are his Enemies, and hated by him,
and under his displeasure. But most Certainly the former is the state of all
the sanctified, and the later is the state of the ungodly.

You shall see both in the words of God. Psalm. 5. 4, 5. Thou art not a God that
has pleasure in wickedness; neither shall evil dwell with thee; The foolish
shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all the workers of iniquity.] Psalm.
7. 10, 11. My Defense is of God which saves the upright in heart: God judges
the Righteous; and God is angry with the wicked every day.] Psalm. 45. 7. Thou
love righteousness, and hate wickedness.] Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies
that would not I should reign over them, bring them hither, and stay them
before me.] Ephesians. 2. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath.] A hundred
more such places, show you the state of the unsanctified.

But how different is the case of the renewed upright soul? 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17,
18. [ Ye are the Temple of the living God: as God has said I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people:
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty. Job. 1. 12.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God.]
Romans 8. 16, 17. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God: And if Children then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ] Mal. 3. 17. And they shall be mine says the Lord of hosts in that
day when I make up my Jewels; and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him.] Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.] Col. 1. 21, 22. [
And you that were sometime alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to present
you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight.] Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no
guile.] Zech. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.]

Judge now by these plain expressions form the Lord, who it is that is in the
safer state, the godly or the ungodly. Is he the safer that is hated by the God
of heaven, or he that is most dearly loved by him? He that is under his
displeasure, or he that is his delight? Why man! if God be against thee, thou
art no where safe? not in the strongest Castle! not in the greatest Army! not
in the highest dignity! not in the merryest company! Thou know not but a
Commission is gone out for death to strike thee in thy next recreation, or fit
of mirth? How know thou but death is ready to strike, while thou art eating,
or drinking, or talking, or sleeping? Thou have no security from an angry God.
Till he be reconciled, thou art nowhere safe! This may be thy fatal day or
night for ought thou know. And if once the mortal blow be struck, and thy
soul be taken from thy body unrenewed, O man, where then will thou appear! O
wonderful stupidity! that thou do not eat thy bread in fear, and do thy work
in fear, and sleep in fear, and live in fear, till thou be sanctified!

But to the soul that has God for his security, what can be dangerous? or what
condition (while he keeps close to God) can be unsafe? The Father that gave us
unto Christ, is greater then all, and no man can take us out of his hands, Joh.
10. 28, 29. Conquer Heaven, and conquer the Saints! There is their City, their
garrison, their conversation, Phil. 1. 20. Heb. 11. 10, 16. what enemy, what
policy, what power can endanger him, that God will save and has undertaken
for? We were never safe one day or hour, till we were friends with God. [Deut.
33. 27. The Eternel God is thy refuge and underneath are the everlasting arms.]
Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 5, 7. God is our refuge and strength, a very present hel^ in
trouble: therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea -- God is in the midst of
her, she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early -- The
Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge] Psalm. 91. 1, 2, He
that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my
fortress; my God, in him will I trust.] This is the confidence, and joy and
glory of the Saints, Psalm. 59. 16, 17. I will sing of thy Power, yea I will
sing aloud of thy mercies in the morning, for thou have been my defense and
refuge in the day of my trouble: Unto thee O my strength will I sing: for my
God is my defense, and the God of my mercy.] Psalm. 89. 26. Thou art my Father,
my God, and the Rock of my Salvation.] See Psalm. 27. 5. and 61. 2. and 62. 2,
6, 7. and 94 22. Prove. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower: the
righteous run into it and are safe.] Prove. 21. 31. safety is of the Lord] Psalm.
4. 8. Quietly may we repose our selves to rest, for it is the Lord only that
makes us dwell in safety.] But is it thus with the ungodly man! O no: when
they say Peace and safety to themselves, suddenly destruction comes upon them
as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5. 3. [
For their Rock is not like our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges]
Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Why else do they desire in times of danger that they were in the
case of the Servants of the Lord? If they thought themselves as safe as the
Regenerate, why do they wish at the hour of death, that they might but die the
death of the Righteous, and their later end might be as his? Numb. 23. 10.

5. Moreover, he is certainly more safe, that is an heir of the promises, and
has the word of God engaged for his safety, then he that has no promise from
God at all. nor any such security to show: But all the faithful have interest
in the promises; in which the ungodly have no share. Surely he is safe to whom
the Lord has promised safety. O what a precious treasure might I here open, to
show you the safety of true believers? I will cull out but a few of the
Promises for a taste. Prove. 1. 32, 33. [ The turning away of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of fo^^s shall destroy them. But who so
hearkenneth unto me, shall awell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.]
Prove. 29. 25. Who so puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe.] Prove. 3. 21,
22, 23. My Son, let them not depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and
discretion; so shall they be life unto thy soul and grace unto thy neck: then
shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. When thou
lie down, thou shall not be afraid: yea, thou shall lie down, and thy sleep
shall be sweet: Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the
wicked when it comes. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy
foot from being taken.] Deuteronomy. 33. 12. [ The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in
safety by him, the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell
between his shoulders.] Psalm 55. 22. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.] Psalm 14. 5.
God is in the generation of the righteous.] Psalm 34. 15, 17, 19, 20. The eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
trouble. Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivers him
out of all. He keeps all his bones -- Evil shall slay the wicked, and they
that hate the righteous shall be desolate,] Psalm. 37. 28. For the Lord loves
judgment, and forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever: but the
seed of the wicked shall be cut off.] Ver. 37, 39, 40. [ Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace: But the transgressors
shall be destroyed together: the End of the wicked shall be cut off: But the
salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in the time of
trouble: And the Lord shall help them and deliver them from the wicked, and
save them, because they trust in him.] Psalm 73. 26. [ My flesh and my heart
fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.] Isa.
49. 15. [ Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her womb? Yea, they may forget: yet will not I forget
thee] He has said, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. Matthew.
6. 25. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink. etc.] Matthew. 10. 28, 30, 31. Fear not them which kill the Body, and are
not able to kill the soul -- The very hairs of your head are all numbred] Isa.
41. 10. [ Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God:
I will strengthen thee: Yea, I will help thee: yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness] See ver. 13, 14. Isa. 43. 1, 2. Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name: thou art mine. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they
shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be
burnt, etc.] The Lord preserves the way of his Saints, Prove. 2. 8.] Psalm 31.
23. [ O Love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the faithfull]
Psalm. 97. 10. he preserves the souls of his Saints; he delivers them out of
the hand of the wicked] Psalm 145. 18, 19, 20. The Lord is nigh unto all them
that call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth: He will fulfill the
desires of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them.
The Lord preserves all them that Love him: but all the wicked will he
destroy.] Prove. 20. 22. [ Say not, I will recompense evil: but wait on the
Lord, and he will save thee.] Heb. 10. 23. He is faithful that has promised.]

I hope the believer will not be weary to read over all these precious
promises, which are his security from God, for soul and body. I sum up all in
that one, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.] Judge whether Godliness be
the safest state. Can a man of so many promises be unsafe? But instead of these
the ungodly are threatened with everlasting vengeance.

6. He is safer that has continually a guard of Angels, as certainly all the
faithful have, then he that has none, but is a prisoner of the devil, as the
ungodly are.

Hear the Scriptures, Psalm 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him, and delivers them.] Psalm 91. 11, 12. He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee up
in their hands lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.] Matthew. 18, 10. [ Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you that in
heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven.] Heb. 1. 14. [ Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to
Minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? And have the wicked any such
attendance for their security? No: but a fearful captivity to the Devil.

7 Lastly, that is the safest state where a man is safe from the Greatest Evil.
Everlasting misery is the great evil, which the Godly are initially saved from:
They are liable to afflictions as well as others; but not to Damnation, and
therefore they are safe. They must be sick and die as well as others: but they
shall escape Eternal death. Yea, they are already passed from death to life, 1
John 3. 14. and have Eternal life begun within them, John 17. 3. He that has
the Son has life: 1 John 5. 12. [John 5. 22. Verily, verily I say unto you, he
that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.] ver.
28, 29. Marvail not at this: for the hour is coming in which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good
to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection
of damnation.] Psalm 1. 4, 5, 6. The ungodly are not so; but are like the chaff
which the wind drives away: therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the
Judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous: For the Lord
knows the way of the Righteous; but the way of the ungodly shall perish.]

If yet you are unresolved whether Godliness be the only way of safety, I dare
say it is because you believe not the holy Scriptures. For there the doubt is
as fully decided as any one in all the world. O how blessed is the state of the
poorest most afflicted Saint, that may always say, My soul is safe! If my
health, or wealth, or friends be gone; yet am I safe from everlasting misery.
Other things I shall have as God sees best for his honor and my spiritual
good: but salvation I may be sure of, if I abide in Christ.] What needs he
fear, that has escaped Hell! But O the dreadful case of the ungodly! that are
passing to damnation when they never think of it! Their Bodies may be strong,
their riches great, and they may fare sumptuously every day, Luke 16. 19. But O
what a case are their poor souls in! and where will they be when this mirth is
ended! Luke 16. 25. They are not safe from Hell one hour.

CHAP. VII. Holiness is the only Honest Way.
WE have tried whether the way of Godliness or Ungodliness be the safest. Let
us next try which is the Honestest, of which one would think we should never
meet with a man so shameless as to make a question. But experience tells us
that such there are, yea and that they are very common: Even in their
reproaching of a Holy life, they will join the boastings of their own Honesty;
and say, Though we swear or are drunk now and then, and make not such a stir
about Gods service and our salvation, yet we are as Honest as these, preciser
people, that make more ado, and censure us as ungodly.] As truly and wisely as
if a common whore should say, [I am as Honest as these precise people that will
not play the harlots as I do:] And as wisely as if a Thief should say, Though I
steal for need, I am as honest as these precise people that will not steal.]
But yet we have this advantage by these shameless boasts, that still the Name
of Honesty is in credit, and the worst men honor it, by pretending to it,
while they dishonor themselves by their renouncing the Thing it self and by
the impudency of their pretenses.

Honesty is nothing but true Virtue, or the Moral Goodness of the Mind or
Action: An Honest man and a Good man, is indeed all one: (...) or (...) with
the Greeks; one that is both inwardly virtuous, and manifests it in the
cleaness and integrity of his life, in the sight of men. All men for ought I
can perceive, would be accounted Honest. This reputation Honesty has among its
vilest enemies, that they approve the Name, and would not appear to be its
enemies, till they have put some other Name upon it: While they hate Honesty,
and persecute it, they would be called Honest men themselves. And therefore by
the consent of all the world, friends and foes, that is the Best way which is
the Honestest.

O that you would all but stand to this, in the choosing of your course, and in
your daily practice! Will you all agree upon a Holy life, if I prove it past
all doubt to be the Honestest? O that you would! Yea, if I prove that there is
no man truly Honest in the world, that is not truly Godly? If you would stand
to this, you would soon be changed. Indeed it is nothing but but Dishonesty
that we would have you changed from. And if you will not stand to this, but
will refuse Honesty when you know it, for shame lay by the Name of Honesty, and
wish not men to call you Honest any more. Either be what you would be called;
or give men leave to call you as you are. Let us come then to the trial, and
see who is indeed the Honest man; the Godly or the ungodly.

1. I have already told you, that God who is the most infallible Judge, has
given his sentence on his peoples side. If you will think your selves that it
is not those that Thieves and Harlots call Honest that are so likely to be
Honest, as those that wise men and virtuous men call so: We have then far
greater Reason to conclude, that it is not those that you call Honest, that are
so fit to be judged such, as those that God calls so. How say you? will you not
freely give us leave to take Gods judgments or Word before yours? If not, we
will take leave. And God calls all the ungodly by the name of Evil and Wicked
men! and the godly are they that he calls Upright, Good, and Honest. The
whole Scripture, you know, if you know any thing of it, speaks in this
language. Luke 8. 15. It is they that hear the Word and keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience, that receive it into honest and good hearts. This is
the life that is acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, which is [ in all
Godliness and Honesty.] These are inseparable, Godliness and Honesty. 1 Timothy 2.
2, 3. Indeed the Greek word here is that which signifies gravity and
seemliness of behavior: but that which is frequently translated [ good] is it
which signisieth the truly Honest. And you know none of the ungodly are ever
called Good in Scripture, but clean contrary. Prove. 11. 6. The righteousness of
the upright shall deliver them, but transgress^rs shall be taken in their own
naughtiness.] So verse. 18. 19, 20. [ The wicked works a deceitful work, but
to him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward. As righteousness
tends to life, so he that pursues evil, does it to his own death. They that
are of a froward heart are an abomination to the Lord: but such as are upright
in their way, are his delight.] Everywhere you see how God abhors the
ungodly, and extolleth those that love and fear him. Christ calls the ungodly
[ Evil men, that ^^t of the evil treasure of their hearts do bring forth evil
things] Matthew. 12. 35. All is evil; the life evil, the heart evil, and the man
evil. Prove. 12. 26. [ The Righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, but
the way of the wicked seduceth them.] And Psalm 16. David calls the godly [
The excellent in whom is all his delight.] It is an excellent spirit that is in
them, Dan. 3. 12. 14* and 63. and an excellent way in which they go, 1 Cor. 12.
31. and an excellent knowledge which the spirits illumination causes them to
attain, Phil. 3. 18. Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. You have Gods judgment of the case, if
that will satisfy you, who it is that is the Best and Honestest man, the Holy
or the unholy.

2. Do you think that man is an Honest man, that will deny you your due, and
rob you of all that is your own? Or rather is not the Just man the Honest man,
that will give every man his own? I know you will give your voices for the
latter. O then take heed lest you condemn your selves! If you be not Holy, your
own testimony does condemn you. For it is only the Godly that give God his own,
when the ungodly rob him of it: Have thou not thy Life, and Time, and
Maintenance from God? Have thou not thy Reason, and thy Affections, and all thy
faculties from him? And should not all thou have be employed for him? Thou art
a dishonest man that grudgest, yea denyest him one day in seven, when thou
owe him all. Thou art a dishonest man that give away thy Makers due unto
his vilest enemies. That wastest thy means or strength on sin: that spendest
thy precious time on vanity: that abusest his creatures to the satisfying of
thy lusts! and that live to thy flesh, when thou should live to God. Thou
robbest him of all which thou give to his enemies; and of all which thou do
not use for his service. It is less dishonesty to rob thy Master that trusts
thee with his goods, then to rob the Lord that trusts thee with thy time, and
parts, and all things. O blind unworthy sinners! What makes you think him an
honest man that robs his Maker, or denies him his own, when you call him a
dishonest man that robs but such silly worms as you, that in respect of God
have nothing of your own! Art thou better then God, that it should be called
dishonesty to wrong thee, and no dishonesty to wrong him, or deny him that
which is his own? God has an absolute Title to you, and that on more accounts
then one. You are his own, as you are his creatures. All souls are mine, says
the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 4. And he has Title to thee by Redemption, as well as by
Creation: For to this end Christ dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord of the de^d and of the living, Romans 14. 9. We are not our own; we are
bought with a price; and therefore should glorify God in our bodies and our
spirits which are his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. For if one dyed for all, then were all
dead, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him
that dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. And as you your selves are
Gods own as he is your Creator and Redeemer, so all that you have is his own as
the bestower, or as your Master that trusts it in your hands. Exodus 19. 5. [
Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye
shall be a peculiar treasure to me above all people: for all the earth is
mine.] And says God to Job, Job 41. 11. [ What soever is under the whole
heaven is mine.] Psalm 50. 10, 11, 12. [ Every beast of the Forest is mine:
the wild beasts of the field are mine: the world is mine, and the fullness
thereof.] 1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou which thou did not receive?] Thou have
not a minute of time which thou owe not to God; nor a thought, nor a word,
nor a farthing of thy estate. And is it not the basest injustice and dishonesty
to give these to thy flesh, and deny them to him, and think his service an
unnecessary thing? If thou will give the world and thy lusts any thing, let it
be that which thou can truly call thine own. As God says to the Idolators,
Ezekiel. 16. 18, 19. [ Thou have set mine oil, and mine incense before them* my
meat also which I gave thee, etc.] so may he say ^o thee: It is his Time which
thou have consumed in idleness and in sinful delights; and his Provision by
which thou have ^ed thy lusts. But the sanctified man is devoted to God. His
study is to give him his own. All the business of his life which you account
his overmuch strictness and preciseness, is nothing but his Honesty to God, in
giving him his own. You look your horse should travail for you, and your Ox
should labor for you, and your servant work for you, because they are your
own: And shall not we give up all that we have to God, that are much more his
own? Will you hang them that take your Own from you? and count them Honest that
deal worse with God? Say not, If Christ were here, we would give it him. For he
has told you how you should use all his talents in his Laws; and if you deny
them to the poor, or any holy use that he requires them, you deny them unto
him. Read Mat. 25. and 10. 40, 41, 42.

3. Do you think that an unnatural man is an Honest man? One that will abuse
his Father or Mother, and scorn the bowels from which he sprung. All the world
is agreed on it, that such are dishonest: [ Honor thy Father and Mother] is
called the first Commandment with promise. Exodus 21 17. [ He that curses his
Father or Mother, shall surely be put to death.] See Prove. 20. 20. and 30. 17.
[ The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. To
be [ without natural affections] is the brand of highest wickedness, Romans 1.
31. and 2 Timothy 3. 3.

And do you not know that it is worse to be without holy affections to the God
that made you, and the Christ that bought you? and to despise, forsake or abuse
the Lord? Thou had thy Being more from him then from thy Parents. They knew
not how thy parts were formed! It was he that gave thee thy immortal soul: It
is by him that thou have lived until now; much more then on the food thou
eatest, or the air thou breathest in. And art thou so unnatural as to be
ungodly, and deny him thy love, and care, and service, that has made thee? and
to call a holy, heavenly life, a needless toil? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. [ Do you thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is he not thy Father that has
bought thee? has he not made thee and established thee?] If an unholy man be
an honest man, that is so unnatural as to cross the end of his Creation, and
deny his service to the Lord that made him; then he is honest that spits in his
Fathers face, and despises his Mother that brought him forth.

4. Do you think that he is an honest man that is unthankful? It is agreed on
by all the world, that unthankfulness is a principal point of dishonesty. He is
no honest man that will abuse or despise those by whom he lives, or that have
engaged him by kindness. If you were so used your selves, by one whose lives or
estates you had preserved, would you not say, [ What an unworthy wretch is
this? have I deserved this usage at his hand?] Why all the unthankfulness
against men in the world, is not to be compared to thy unthankfulness against
God. What are the Benefits which man has given thee in comparison of his? Did
ever man do any thing for thee that is comparable to thy Creation, and
Redemption, and offering thee salvation from everlasting misery, and a room
with Angels in everlasting glory? besides every hour^ mercy that ever thou
had here in this world. And is that an honest man that will requite this God
with profaneness and ungodliness, and return him sin for all his mercies, and
refuse to live a holy life? Does thy flesh deserve all thy care and labor, and
is this God unworthy of it, and do thou call his service a needless work? If
ingratitude can make a man dishonest, thou art then a dishonest man. But it is
the business of the godly to give up themselves to him that made them, and to
exercise their thankfulness, in their capacities, for these greatest mercies.

5. Do you think that a cruel unmerciful man, or a loving and merciful man is
the more honest? Surely I shall here have all your voices. He that hates those
that hurt him not, and would kill them, and set their houses on fire, and
carries malice in his face and speeches, will be called an honest man but by
few. And he that is Loving, and studyeth to do Good to all about him, will be
counted Honest: Why try the ungodly and the Saints by this: No more malicious
men in the world then the ungodly. They have an enmity even to the God that
made them, Col. 1. 21. and to the Christ that bought them, Luke 19. 27. and to
the Word of God that offers them salvation, and would lead them to eternal
life, and hate the Knowledge of the way of life, Prove. 1. 22. They are enemies
to the servants of the Lord, and hate the upright that desire their salvation,
and would but draw them from their sins, Prove. 29. 10. and 9. 8. They curse
those that bless them, and persecute those that pray for them, Matthew. 5. 44.
The first wicked man that was born into the world, did kill his brother,
because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1 John 3. 12.

But this is not their greatest cruelty: They are enemies to their own
salvation: They will run into Hell in despite of Christ and all the Preachers
in the world. For there is but one way thither, the way of ungodliness, and
that way they will go. Yea that is not all, but bloody wretches, they would
have all the Country do as they do, and be damned with them. They are angry
with a man if he will not live an ungodly life, and tipple, and swear, and do
as they: They revile him if he will not give over his diligent serving of the
Lord: which is all one as to fall out with men because they will not forseit
heaven, and run from God, and damn their souls, and all for nothing! When they
might more mercifully scorn us because we will not give over eating, or that we
will not cut our own throats. And are these cruel persons honest men? Is that
merciless wretch an honest man, that is not content to cast away his own
everlasting happiness for nothing upon his fond conceits, but must needs have
others do so too? That is not content to wrong the Lord, but would have others
wrong him also? The Devil is Honest if these be Honest.

But for the Godly, it is their desire, their care, their work to save
themselves, and further the salvation of all others. O how they long to hear of
the Conversion of Towns and Countries! and how glad are they when they hear it!
Not for any worldly commodity to themselves, but because they rejoice at the
good of others. And what would they not do to promote it, which they could do?

6. Do you think that a perfidious unfaithful man, or a faithful man that will
not be hired to break his word, is the honester man? Sure this is no hard
question neither. A Knight of the Post, that will say and unsay, swear and
forswear, and will betray his dearest friend for a groat, is taken by few for
an honest man, in comparison of him that will rather die then lie or be
unfaithful. Why nothing is more plain, then that all you that are ungodly, are
treacherous to the Lord himself: You are perfidious Covenant-breakers: You owe
him your selves wholly on the grounds that I before expressed: and yet you are
unfaithful to him. You have all from him, and you serve his enemy with it: You
call him your God, and will not Love, nor honor, nor serve him as your God,
Mal. 1. 6. You bound your selves to him in your Baptism, and many a time since,
by a solemn Vow or Covenant: but you live in the treacherous breach of it
continually. You Covenanted to take the Lord for your God; and yet you will not
seek him, nor be Ruled by him. You Covenanted to take Jesus for your savior,
and yet will not be saved by him from your sins, Matthew. 1. 21. You Covenanted
to take the Holy Ghost for your Sanctifier, to purify your hearts and lives;
and yet you resist his holy motions, and hate his sanctifying word and work,
and some of you will mock at Sanctification and the Spirit. And can the soul of
man be guilty of greater unfaithfulness or treachery? You Covenanted to forsake
the flesh, the world, and the Devil: and now you serve them more then Christ,
and think your time is better bestowed for them, then in the service of the
Lord! And is this your Covenant-keeping? No Traitors, no perjured wretches in
the world are dishonest men, if these be not dishonest.

But now it is the care of godly men to keep the Covenants they have made with
God. All that which you reproach them for as too much preciseness, is but the
performance of their Baptismal Vow. And if you be against the keeping our
Covenants with God, should you not be against the making them? Are you not
ashamed to be so forward to engage your children to God in Baptism, and when
you have done, would have them he ungodly, and break the Vow they make? Will
you by your Profession of Christianity, and coming to the Lords Table, renew
your Covenants with Christ your selves, and yet make no conscience to break
them, and plead against the keeping of them? We promise Holiness, and the
serving of God, and forsaking the world, at every Sacrament, and whenever we
promise but to be Christians: And are you for the making of these promises, and
yet for the breaking of them, and revilers of those that endeavor but to keep
them? O fearful impudency! Is this your Honesty? and would you have us all as
faithless and dishonest, even with God? This was the perfidiousness of the
Jews, Ecek. 16. 8. [ I swear unto thee, and entredinto a Covenant with thee;
and thou be^^^est mine.] We are married in Baptism to Christ; and is Ad^^tery
with the world, and forsaking our Husband, no dishonesty! Why then what is?

7. Moreover, do you think that a Murderer is an honest men* I know you will
say No. Why nothing more sure then that ungodly men are murderers of
themselves, and as I said, would undo others. They hate their own souls, says
God, Prove 29. 24. They destroy themselves, Hos. 13. ^. There is but one way to
Hell, and that they will take, and that when they are plainly told of it. Not a
man in Hell, but brought himself thither. And O how many do their mocks, and
persuasions, and evil examples keep out of Heaven* and bring to the same
misery! And are these Honest?

8. Do you take them to be Honest men that are common cheaters, or deceivers,
and that in matters of greatest value? I think you do not. Why such are the
ungodly: They deceive and are deceived, 2 Tit. 3. 13. They deceive themselves,
Gal. 6. 3. by thinking themselves something when they are nothing. They make
themselves believe that they have Honesty and saving grace when they have none;
and that they are in a state of safety and in the favor of God, when they are
near to everlasting misery, and in Gods displeasure. And thus they will think,
though their souls are at the stake, and the mistake be the greatest hinderance
of their conversion; and though God have plainly told them in his word, whom he
will save, and whom he will not: Yet against all the plain discoveries in the
Scripture, and all the Marks of death upon themselves, and the open ungodliness
of their lives, and all the warnings of their teachers, they will needs believe
that their state is safe, and that they may be saved without conversion; what
wilful self deceivers are these! Their hearts are deceitful above all things,
and they know them not, Jer. 17. 9. And thus they are hardened by the
deceitfulness of their own sin, Heb. 3. 13. sin first deceives them, and so
kills them, Romans 7. 11. If they were not foolish and deceived, they would not
serve their lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. These miserable men did never yet
learn that lesson, 1 Cor. 3. 18. which one would think they should willingly
learn [ Let no man deceive himself*] They will needs think that they are
Christians, and have so much Religion as will save them, when God expressly
tells the curser, swearer, railer, scorner, and all that live in wilful sin,
Jam. 1. 26. that [ If any man seem to be Religious and bridle not his tongue
(and so for other wilful sine) but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion
is in vain,]

And as they Deceive themselves, so they are the common cheaters of the world.
They tell them as smooth a tale as if all were fair and right, when they are
pleading against God, and reasoning men out of their faith and reason. When Eve
had sinned, she tempted Adam. The drunkard will tempt others to be his
companions: and so will the fornicators, and voluptuous senfualists. The
ungodly will persuade those about him to be ungodly; and when he has not a
word of solid reason to speak against the holy diligence of the Saints, a jeer
or scorn shall serve to deceive instead of Reason. And if he dare not stand to
what he says to the face of a minister, or any but the ignorant that cannot
gainsay him, he will take his time, and speak when none are present that can
contradict him* O how many thousand are now in misery that were cheated thither
by the scorn^ and cavils of ungodly men! And how many thousands have lost all
hopes of Heaven by their deceits! Could you but ask many thousands that are now
in misery, [ How came you to choose so unhappy a way?] they would tell you [ We
were deceived by the words of wicked men! The cavils and scorns of ignorant
sinners have cheated us of our Salvation.] The very calling a diligent servant
of Christ by the name of a Puritan or Precisian, has kept many a thousand even
in England, from the fear and diligent serving of the Lord. And surely this is
a silly argument. And are these Honest men that are the factors of Satan the
great deceiver, in cheating themselves and others into Hell?

But the Godly deal plainly with themselves and others. They are willing to
know the truth of their condition, and not to make themselves believe that
which God never made them believe. They promise not salvation to themselves on
any lower terms then God has promised it. They have no hope of being saved
without Holiness. They set not Gods mercy against his Truth, nor the Merits of
Christ against his Covenant. They know that God is better acquainted with the
ways and effects of his own mercies then we are. And therefore though they hope
to be saved by Gods mercy, it is by his sanctifying mercy, and not to be saved
without sanctification, that is, without salvation it self and the necessary
means. They know that it is abundant mercy to be saved in a way of Holiness,
and desire no other saving Mercy. Yea they know that sanctification and
glorification both, are greater mercy then Glorification alone, if it were
possible to be alone. This is the doctrine that the Godly do believe, and this
they practice, and this they teach others, and this they have learnt of God:
and therefore they are no deceivers.

9. Moreover, do you think that he is an Honest man that is an enemy to the
public Good? or rather he that is a common benefactor? The best of the
Heathens thought it one of the highest parts of virtue, to be serviceable to
many, and devote our selves to the common good. But wicked men are the very
plagues of a land. For their sakes it is that judgments come upon us. It is
they that would let in the plague of sin which would undo us. He that sets
fire to the thatch, does do no worse against your towns, then wicked men that
would kindle the fire of the wrath of God by their crying sins. Read the
Scriptures and see who it was that caused Israel to perish in the wilderness,
but unbelieving sinners. Who troubled Israel, and made them fly before their
enemies, but one Achan? Josh. 7. And what but sin was the cause of their
captivity, and present desolation? was it Lot or the Sodomites that brought
down from heaven the fire of vengeance? Was it Noah or the world of the ungodly
that brought down the flood? Are these Honest men that provoke God to forsake
the Land, and are the vermin and destroyers of our peace and happiness? But
you know that God has promised his blessing to the Godly, and to the places
where they live ofttimes for their sakes, as Joseph's case and others tell us.

10. That man can be no Honest man that wants the very principle of Honesty,
and that intends not the End that's necessary to make any action truly Honest:
But such are all ungodly men.

1. The Principle of true Honesty is the high esteem of God and everlasting
life, in our undestandings, and the belief of Gods revelations necessary to the
attaining of that life, and the prevailing Love of God in the heart, and the
Love of man for his sake. Without these Principles of Honesty, no man can be
Honest. How can he be an Honest man that Believes not his maker? He that
takes God for a liar, has no reason to be taken for any better himself. For
would he be thought better then he takes God himself to be? nor can he in
reason be expected to believe any man else: For none can be better then God.
And is that an honest man that professes himself a Liar, and takes all men to
be so too?

And how can that be an Honest man, that Loves not Go^ well as his fleshly
lusts and pleasures? And this is the case of all the wicked. If they did not
Love their Riches and honor and sensual pleasures more then God, they would
not keep them against his command, nor lose his favor rather then lose them,
nor seek them more carefully then they seek him and his Kingdom, and think of
them and speak of them with more delight. And certainly he that Loves his
Riches, or Honors, or filthy sins, better then God and Heaven it self, must
needs be thought to prefer them before his nearest Friends, or the common
good. And is that an Honest man that would rather cast off Father or Mother
then cast off his filthy sins? and that would rather forsake his chiefest
friend, then forsake his vices? and would sell his friend, or the Commonwealth,
for a little gain, or pleasure, even for a whore, or for drunkenness or such
like things? I think you would none of you say that this were an Honest man,
that would not leave so small a matter for the life of his friend, or for the
preservation of the Common wealth: And can you expect that he should prefer any
friend before God and his Salvation? If he will sin against God, and sell his
salvation for his sin, can you think he should more regard any man, how dear
soever? There is no true Honesty in that man where the Love of God does not
command.

2. Moreover if the Honoring and Pleasing of our Lord, and the saving of our
souls be not the End and principal motive of our actions, there can be no true
Honesty. It is essential to Honesty that God be our End. If you would know what
a man is, first know what he Intends, and makes the End and mark of his
life: And so you must do if you would judge of his actions. The End is the
principal ingredient that makes them Good or Bad. If a Thief Love God because
he prospers him in stealing, or because he gives him strength and
opportunity; this is a wicked Love of God. If a drunkard Love God for giving
him his drink, and a Whoremonger Love God for strenthening him in his lust,
will you call this Honesty? Every wicked man does make his sensual present
pleasure his principal End through all his life. If he love his neighbor, it
is but carnally, as a dog loves him that seedeth and stroaketh him. If he seem
to be a good Commonwealths man, it is but for vainglory or carnal
accommodati^: and he fights for his King or Country but as a dog does ^^^
his bone. If he give to the poor, it is but that which he can spare from his
Belly; and it is either in a common pity, or for vain applause, or he thinks
by it to stop the mouth of Justice, that God may let him alone in his sins, or
save him after all his wickedness. This is no more an Honest man, then he that
makes a trade of stealing, and will pay Tithes of all that he steals; or give
some part to the Church or Poor, that God may pardon him, and save him when he
has done. All the Religion, and all the charity of wicked men, is but for
themselves: and that which has no higher End then Carnal self, is truly no
Religi^ Charity: It is only the sanctified man that is Honest: for it (...) he
that is devoted to God, and does the works of his life to (...) and glorify
his maker. There is more Honesty in the very (...) ing and drinking of the
sanctified, then in the prayer and sacrifices and alms deed of the ungodly. Or
else God would never have said as he has done that [ Unto the Pure all things
are pure: but to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but
even their mind and Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1. 15. And that every creature
is sanctified by the word of God and by Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. And that the
prayer and the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, and he
abhoreth and loatheth them, when the prayer of the upright is his delight,
Prove. 15. 8. and 21. 27. Isa. 1. 13. Prove. 28. 9. and 8. 7. and 11. 20. For the
sanctified in their very eating and drinking do make it their end to Glorify
God, and to be fitted for his service, 1 Cor. 10. 31. But the ungodly do all,
even in their duties that seem most Holy, but for a selfish carnal End. So that
it is plain that he that wants the necessary Principles and End, that must
inform an Honest mind and life, can have no Honesty of mind or life. [ Now the
end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned] 1 Timothy 1. 5.

But perhaps you will say, that there has been Honesty found among Heathens:
and therefore this doctrine cannot hold. To which I answer, 1. If this were
true, yet it is proved, that there is no comparison between their Honesty and
the true Christians. 2. But indeed, there was never true Honesty found in any
ungodly man. But something that is like to Honesty they may have. Materially
they may do the same outward acts that Honest men do; and this the world
accounts Honesty, that sees not the inside, and the Ends, and therefore give
the name to the Matter without the Form. And such may be Honest secundum quid,
but not simplicitur. An Analogical Honesty they may have ^ and be less
dishonest then some others. And so as Robbin Whood was called an Honest thief
that would rob none but the rich, and sometimes bring a yoke of Oxen that he
had stolen and give them to a poor that had none; so may a Heathen and ungodly
man be Honest. But men must be Denominated (and so must their actions)
according to what is predominant in them. And therefore we must say, if we will
speak properly, that no ungodly man is Honest.

If you ask, How then it comes to pass that such are accounted Honest men, and
t^neth, not the: Hone^ty ^th in a Holy (...). Because that ^^^ the (...) have
an Enmity to Holiness: And malice blinds men, that they cannot see the Good
that is in those they hare. 2. Because they do not know what Godliness is, and
therefore know not the Honesty of it appearing in its Principles, Ends and
Rule. For it is not effectually known by any but those that have it. 3. Because
all carnal men do judge after the flesh; and as they are to themselves their
highest End, so they do judge of all things else according to that End. He is
an Honest man with them, that is for them, and furthereth their commodity, or
answers their desire. Mark them whether they judge not those to be the
Honestest men, that suit themselves most to their minds and wills, and say and
do as they would have them. And so among Thieves there is none so honest men as
their companions: nor among drunkards none so honest as they that will sit with
them, and waste their time, and prate like idiots over a pot of Ale, forgetting
that death and judgment are posting toward them while they sit there: And
among Harlots their Mates seem Honest. So that dishonest men are no fit Judges
of Honesty. That which is suited to their corrupted mind is best with them. And
this is their Honesty.

By this time you may see, if you are not wilfully blind, that the way of
Godliness is the only Honest way: and therefore you must either be Godly or
Dishonest; and pretend not any longer that you are Honest while you are
ungodly: unless you will increase your shame by your contradictions. The
Scripture description of one that is Honest is, that [ in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, he has his
conversation in the world] 2 Cor. 1. 12. The Honesty which the Gospel teaches,
and which God will own is this, [ that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we live soberly, righteous^^ and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our savior Jesus
Christ] Tit. 2. 12, 13. [ A Godly Seed] is opposed to the fruit of Adultery,
Mal. 2. 15. And when David lamenteth the decay of Honesty in the world, his
language tells you whom he took for Honest men, Psalm. 12. 1. [ Help Lord, for
the Godly ^^^ cease: for the faithful fail from among the Children of (...)
and verse. 8. you may perceive what he thinks of (...) [ The wicked walk on
every fi^^^, when the (...) m^n (...) To [ serve God with reverence and godly
fears, ^^ (...) Honesty, Heb. 12. 28. And now choose you whether you will be
Honest or ungodly: but be sure that it is the Godly that are esteemed Honest
and accepted by the Lord: and how ever the world judges, [ Know that the Lord
has set apart him that is Godly for himself] as he tells you, Psalm. 4. 3.

CHAP. VIII. Holiness is the most Gainful way.
WE have certainly found out already the SAFEST Way, and the HONESEST way: We
are next to enquire which way is most Profitable. And one would think that this
should be as easily resolved as the rest. I am sure if God be wiser then man,
and his holy word to be believed, the question is decided, and beyond dispute.
Says Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 5, 6. Men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
suppose that Gain is godliness,] or that it is better then Godliness, and
therefore their Godliness to be suited to their worldly gain: [ But (it is)
Godliness with contentment which is the great Gain] Yea [ Godliness is
profitable to all things, having Promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.] 1 Timothy 4. 8.

But to what end should I cite more words of Scripture, for a point which all
the Scripture proves? It is not possible that any man can be unresolved in
this, that understands and believes the word of God. But yet because I see
that Commodity is so much looked after in the world, and almost all are for the
Gainful way, as they apprehend it, and therefore its plain that Godliness is
not Practically believed to be the most gainful way (or else men would follow
it as eagerly as they do their worldly gain;) I shall therefore open to you
somewhat of that Gain that Godliness does bring; and if you can say that any
other course will prove as gainful, and make it good, then take that course:
But if you cannot, consider what you have to do, and do not refuse your own
Commodity.

1. The first part of our Gain, which is the sum of all the rest, (...) himself
who is become our God, through Jesus Christ. He is in Covenant with all the
Saints, ( Psalm 50. 5.) and this is the Covenant [ I will be your God, and you
shall be my People.] Jer. 7. 23. Ezekiel. 36. 28. Jer. 11. 4. and 30. 22. Lev. 26.
45. 12. Ezekiel. 11. 20. and 37. 23, 27. 2 Cor. 6. 16. He is a God to others as a
King is a King to Traitors whom he will condemn: But he is a God to his People,
as a King is related to his faithful subjects, and a Father to his dearest
child. When he calls himself [ Our Father] he speaks so much of his
childrens Happiness, as is their admiration as well as their joy. But when he
calls himself [ Our God] he speaks as much as much as can be spoken.

To be [ our God] is to be [ the Infinite, Power, Wisdom and Goodness engaged
to us for our Good, and to be ours according to our necessity and capacity.]

This, O ye worldlings, is the Riches of the Saints! This is the Wealth that we
will boldly boast of. Boast you of your houses and lands and money, and we will
boast of our God. Have you Houses, and Towns and Countries at command? Be it
so: but the Saints have the God of the world, to be their God. Have you
Kingdoms and Dominions? We have the God of all the earth; the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. Set all your Riches in the balance against him, and try
what they will prove. Set all the world, and the Kingdoms, and Glory, and
Wealth of it in the balance, and try whether they are any more to God, then
one dust or feather to all the world; yea they are nothing, and less then
nothing; vanity and lighter then vanity it self. Isa. 40. 16, 17. This one
Jewel contains all our Treasure. He is ours that has all things: What then
can we need? Psalm. 23. 1. He is ours that knows all things: Who then can
overreach us, or undo us by deceit? He is ours that can do all things: What
then should we fear? and what power shall prevail against us? He is ours that
is Goodness and Love it self. How then can we be miserable? or what
imperfection can there be in our Felicity?] They that trust in their wealth,
and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, none of them can by any
means redeem his brother (nor himself) that he should live for ever and not see
corruption.] Psalm 49. 6, 7, 9. [ But God will redeem us from the power of the
grave; for he shall receive us] Ver. 15. Let the workers of iniquity boast
themselves a while! (Psalm 94. 4.) Let the wicked (...) desire, and bless the
cove^^^^ whom the Lord abhors.] Psalm 10. 3. It is the Lord that is King for
ever and ever; that hears the desires of the hamble; that prepares our
hearts, and prepares his ear to hear. Ver. 16, 17. Our souls shall make their
boast in God, Psalm. 34. 2. [ O taste and see that the Lord is good! blessed is
the man that trusts in him.] But you cannot say truly [ Blessed is the man
that has Lands and Lorships: Blessed is the man that has Crowns and
Kingdoms:] Yea, truly may you say, [ Cursed is the man that trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord.] Jer. 17. 5.
[ Fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him.]
Psalm 34. 8, 9, 10. But when you have all the world, you cannot say that you
have no want. Confounded then be the covetous Idolaters, that boast themselves
of their Idols (Psalm 97. 7.) But in God will we boast all the day long, and
praise his name for evermore. Psalm 44. 8. What have you but the gleanings of
our harvest? and the crumbs that fall from the childrens table? Our God is he
that gives you your prosperity: He droppeth you these leavings, from the
redundancy of his Goodness, when he has given himself, his Son and all things
to his own. All that we want, and all that our souls desire, is in God. We have
none in heaven but him, nor any in earth that we desire besides him, Psalm 73.
25. His loving kindness is better to us then life: Psalm 63. 3. [ Our flesh and
our heart fails us (and all the creatures fail us) but God is the strength of
our hearts and our portion for ever.] Psalm 73. 26. Verily the Riches of all
the Princes of the earth is less in comparison of him that is the Treasure and
Portion of the Saints, then a straw is to all the earth, or a little dung to
the shining Sun.

2. Would you yet hear more of the Riches of Believers (though more then God
there cannot be) The Lord Jesus Christ is their Head and Husband; their Savior
and Intercessour at Gods right hand: They are Married to him! His Merits are
th^irs for all those uses to which they need them. It is he that Justifies:
Who then shall condemn them? He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up
for us all, how shall be not with ^i^* also freely give us all things? Romans 8.
32, 34. Christ is the Pearl of infinite valu^, for whom we have willingly sold
all. Matthew. 13. 45, 46. And what are all your Treasures to this Treasure? Ask
^^^l and he will tell you, that had tried both, Phil. 3. 7, 8. His (...) ^e
counts Loss for Christ: yea, all things he accounted but loss and dung, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ.] It is Love incomprehensible,
surpassing knowledge, that is revealed to us in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. The
Riches of Christ are unsearchable Riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. It is Christ that binds
up our broken hearts; that is the Peacemaker and Reconciler of our souls to
God. What he has done for us, and what he will do, I shall tell you anon. But
the ungodly have no part in him, nor have they any such treasure, that will do
for them what Christ will do for us. Their Treasure is the wrath of God, which
they are heaping up against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. All the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid.
in Christ, Col. 2. 3. And he has them for us, according to our measure: as
being our Treasury, our Head, and made of God to us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. They are exceeding Riches of
Grace that are showed in the kindness of God through Jesus Christ, to all that
are sanctified by that grace, Ephesians. 2. 6, 7, 8. Yea, that you may see there is
no comparison, even that which you abhor in a Christians case, and account his
misery and the worst of Christ, is better then the best of your condition, and
then that for which you lose your souls. For the very Reproach of Christ, is
greater riches then the Treasures of the world, Heb. 11. 26. And it is the
reproach that we undergo for Christ, that you most abhor, and the treasures of
the world that you highlyest esteem. It is greater Riches to be one of them
that are scorned and derided for the sake of Christ, then to be one of them
that has the wealth of the world at his dispose. And if the Reproach of Christ
be greater Riches then all yours, What then is his Life, and Love, and
Benefits? his Grace and Glory?

3. Would you have the Riches of the Saints yet further opened to you? Why the
Holy Ghost is in Covenant with them as their Sanctifier and Comforter: And he
is not only theirs himself, by Covenant and Relation, but he also dwells in
them by his gra^^s, and restores the image of God upon them. They are the
^ples of the Holy Ghost which is in them, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And by the Spirit, and
by Faith, Christ dwells in their hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17. Romans 8. 11. 1 Cor. 3.
16. God himself does dwell in them, and converse with them, and write his Law
in their hearts, and teach them himself by this his Spirit. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Heb.
8. 10. and ^^. 1^. [ Hereby we know that he dwells in us by, the Spirit which
^e (...) given us, 1 John 3. 24. Yea he that is joined to the Lord, is One
spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. For [ the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty.] 2 Cor. 3. 17. [ We are an habitation of God
through the Spirit. Ephesians. 2. 22.] [ Because we are sons, God has sent the
spirit of his Son into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6.] By
this Spirit the Saints have access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. and by this
it is that they are quickened to prayer and holy worship, and their infirmities
are helped, Ephesians. 6, 18. Romans 8. 11, 26. By this they fight against the flesh,
and overcome it, Gal. 5. 17, 18. Romans 8. 13. In this they live, and walk, and
work, Romans 8. 1, 5. Gal. 5. 16, 25. This Spirit is the Testimony of their
Adoption. Romans 8. 16. and the seal and earnest of their heavenly inheritance, 2
Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. Ephesians. 4. 30. By this they are new born, John 3. 5, 6.
And put off the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and
being renewed in the spirit of their minds, do put on the new man, which after
God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. By the
illumination of this spirit, they have a new understanding, and are brought out
of darkness into the mavelous Light of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 9. that they may
know what is the hope of the Christian Vocation, and what is the Riches of the
glory of Christ's inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 18. In a word, by this
Spirit their sins are mortified, their souls renewed, and made like to God, and
they become a holy Priesthood, a peculiar people unto Christ, and in this
Spirit have Communion with him, Romans 8. 13. Tit. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Tit. 2. 14.
2 Cor. 13. 14. And what is all the Riches of this world, to this Heavenly
Treasure, the Spirit of the Lord? They that have this Spirit, are taught by it
to set light by all your Riches, and to esteem one days Communion with Christ,
above all the Gold and Glory of this world. And that which sets the soul of man
so far above Riches, is better then those Riches. As your Lands and honors do
set you above the pins and points that children take for their treasure, and
set as much by as you do by yours; so the Spirit of Christ and the Life of
Faith, does set the souls of true Believers a thousand^old more above your
Riches, then you are above your childrens ^oyes.

If yet you see not the Riches of Saints, consider but the wonderful
expression, ^ Pet. 1. 4. that they [ have exceeding great (...) precious
promises given them* that by these they may be partakers of the Divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.] And can there
be more on earth bestowed on man, then to be made partakers of the Divine
nature? As it would be a greater gift to a bruit, to be made a man, and have
manly Riches, then to have store of Provender suited to his brutishness; so is
it greater Riches to the ungodly to be sanctified and made partakers of that
nature that is called Divine by God himself, then to have provision for
unmortified lusts, and to have all the contentments of a fleshly mind. It were
a greater gift to an Idiot, to be made a wise and learned man, then to be
furnished with feathers or sticks to play with. So is it here.

4. Every truly sanctified man, is restored from the misery that he was brought
into by sin. He has all his sins forgiven him, and is freed from the curse of
the Law, by the merits of Christ, and the promise of the Gospel. For in him we
have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1. 14.
And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Acts 13. 39. When we were dead in
our sins, we were quickened with Christ, and had all our trespasses forgiven
us, Col. 2. 13. Ask a wounded Conscience that groaneth under the weight of sin,
and under the sense of Gods indignation, Whether forgiveness of sin be a
Treasure or not? I am sure they that now are past forgiveness, and feel what
sin is in the bitter fruits, would give ten thousand worlds, if they had them,
for the pardon of their sins; and would account forgiveness a greater mercy
then all the Riches and Kingdoms of the world. What a heavy curse did the
Spirit of God pass upon Simon Magus, for thinking that money was a valuable
thing to purchase the Holy Ghost with! Acts 8. 20, 21. Thy money perish with
thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased by money:
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in
the sight of God: repent therefore of this thy wickedness, etc. The name of
Simon Magus is odious to us all; and yet I doubt that most among us exceed him
in the sin for which he is thus cursed. For he thought the gift of the
Holy Ghost to be better then his money, or else he would not have offered his
money for it. But most men take their money to be better then the gift of the
Holy Ghost. If he that would have purchased the Holy Ghost, yea a lower and
less necessary gift of the spirit, was pronounced wicked, and cursed with such
a heavy curse; What are they that set more by their money then by the special
gift of the Holy Ghost, yea that hate and deride it, and plead against its
Sanctifying work? The time is near when your Riches will fail you, and your
prosperity die, and your sins will live; and then there is none of you all but
will say that Pardon and Grace are greater Riches then all the world.

5. Moreover, the godly have Angels to attend them and be their guard, as I
have proved to you before. And are horses, and kine, and oxen, think you,
greater Riches then the Guard and Ministration of the Angels of God? Heb. 1.
14. Psalm 91. 11, 12.

6. And surely the very Communion of Saints and Ordinances of God which in the
Church we here enjoy, are greater Riches then all the world. We are now no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and of the
household of God. Ephesians. 2. 19. We are members of that well-tempered body; where
all the members are obliged and disposed to have the same care one for another,
that if one suffer all suffer, and if one be honored all rejoice, 1 Cor. 12.
25, 26. As weak as Christians are, and as worthless in your eyes, one of their
hearty spiritual prayers, and one word of their holy savoury conference, does
profit us more, then all your Treasures will ever profit you. While the Divine
nature is in them, somewhat Divine will proceed from their mouths, and be seen
in their lives, which is worth more then all the Riches of the world. And O how
fruitful are the holy Ordinances which we partake of, both in the Churches
Communion, and alone in our retirements! A poor Christian can get more in a
Sermon which you sleep under, or deride, then you will get by your trades or
livings while you live. He finds greater Treasures in one Chapter of the
Bible, or in one good Book, then you can get out of all your lands or labors.
The best of your livings will not yield you so much commodity in seven years,
nor in seven thousand years, if you could so long keep them, as a believing
soul can get from God in one hours prayer, even in secret, where he is not by
man observed. You do not believe this, that are ungodly: I know you do not
heartily believe it; for else you would try it, and not continue in your
ungodliness. But they that try it, know it to be true. Or else what makes them
continue in it, and live upon their holy Communion with God and his servants,
more resolvedly then you do on your lands and labors. Somewhat you may
conjecture they find in holy duty, that makes them so instant in it as they are.

7. Another part of our commodity by Holiness, is, the Promise and Assurance of
the Love of God and of our salvation; and the Peace of Conscience that
follows hereupon. All true Believers have objective certainty: that is, the
thing is certain in itself, whether they perceive it or not. And they may have
subjective or Actual certainty in themselves, if they do their parts. And is
not a certain Title to a Lordship or a Kingdom, a greater Treasure then the
possession of a straw? Much more is Gods Promise of Everlasting Glory, a
greater Treasure then all your wealth. As Heaven is infinitely better then
earth, so the Promise of God is the best security. Though we be not with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and do not yet see the face of God, yet have we a
Promise that speedily we shall be there, and shall see that which they see, and
enjoy all that which they enjoy. The poorest Christian has all that in Promise
under the hand of God himself, which Angels and Glorified Saints have in
possession. They can show you a better Title to Heaven, though they are
unworthy in themselves, then any of you can show to your lands or houses, in
your Deeds or Leases. As poor and simple as that Godly man is whom you despise,
he is an Heir of Heaven, and a fellow-Heir with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Gal. 3. 29.
Heb. 1. 14. and 11. 9. When we had the washing of Regeneration, and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, and were justified by grace, we were made the Heirs
of eternal life, according to the hope that is given us by the Gospel, Tit. 3.
5, 7. And God that has given them those [ Better things that accompany
salvation] is not unrighteous to forget their work and labor of love, if they
do but show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, and
be not sloathful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit
the Promises.] Heb. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12. For this cause was Christ the Mediator of
the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
Transgressions under the first Testament, they which are called may receive the
Promise of the eternal inheritance. Heb. 9. 15. And we know that he is faithful
that has promised. And if your Bills, and Bonds, and Deeds, and Leases, be
part of your Riches, we shall much more take the Promise of God, for our
everlasting happiness in Heaven, to be far greater Riches.

8. And yet we may put this among our Riches, or at least as the Overplus
given us by God, that we have better advantage, even for the matters of this
world, then the ungodly have. For we have a Promise that we shall lack nothing
that is good for us, Psalm. 34. 10. and so have not they. We have warrant to
east all our care on God, who by promise is engaged to care for us, 1 Pet. 5.
7. We are commanded to be (anxiously) careful for nothing, but in all things to
make known our requests to God, as little children that care not for
themselves, but go to their father for what they want: Phil. 4. 6. It is enough
for us whatever we want, that our heavenly Father knows that we want it,
Matthew. 6. 32. who has charged us to disburden our minds of these vexatious
cares, and to seek first his Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof, and
promised us that other things shall be added to us, Mat. 6. 33. We have also a
promise that all things shall work together for our good, Romans 8. 28. And
therefore we shall have more from the things of this life, then the ungodly
have: Yea more by the want of them, then they by the possession. For if they do
us good in our graces and communion with God, and in the matter of our
salvation, they help us to that which is of far higher value then themselves.
Poverty to a true Believer, is better then Riches to the ungodly that
destroys himself by them, when the Believer is helped by his poverty.
Imprisonment to Paul and Silas, was better then liberty to their persecutors.
And thus in the fruits and saving benefits, all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
We have the Love of God with what we possess, be it more or less, when the
wicked have his wrath with it. And who would have their Riches on such terms?

9. Another part of the Gain of Godliness is, that it puts us into a Readiness
to die, and a fitness to appear before the Lord. Though all the Godly have not
so great a readiness as to desire to be presently dissolved, yet all of them
are in a safe condition, and are so far ready, that death shall pass them into
a blessed state. For we know that if our earthly house of this Taberna^le were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with h^, eternal in the
heavens. And in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from heaven: And God that has given (...) the earnest of his
Spirit, has wrought in us; to be always confident (or at least given us
cause) knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord (For we walk by faith, and not by sight) we are confident I say and
willing, rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.
1, 2, 8, 9. Though the abode of the godly in the flesh is usually more needful
to those about them, yet to themselves their death is gain, and therefore they
have cause to desire to depart, and be with Christ, as being far better, Phil.
1. 21, 23, 24. For sin which is the sting of death is mortified, and the curse
of the Law which is the strength of it, is relaxed or null fied to us by the
Gospel: so that the Believer may triumph and say. O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. and to give thanks to God that
gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, verse. 57. Verily I would
not exchange my part (though alas too small or dark a part) in this one
privilege of true Believers, for all the wealth and dominions on earth. O the
face of Death will soon make the Glory of all your greatness to vanish, and the
beauty of your flourishing estates to wither; and all that you now glory in, to
appear as nothing. And then how glad would you be to change Portions with the
holy servants of the Lord, whom you now despise! When once you hear, [ Thou
fool, this night shall they require thy soul! and whose then are all those
things that thou have provided?] Luke 12. 20. then in a moment you will change
your minds, and cry out of the world as nothing worth, and wish you had busied
your hearts and hands in laying up a better treasure. This is one difference, O
^ngodly wretch, between a holy servant of God and thee! Death cannot undo him,
but it will undo thee. It cannot take his Riches from him; for his God, his
Christ, his Holiness, the Promises are his Riches: but it will separate thee
and thy wealth for ever. It will put an end to all his troubles, and fears, and
griefs: and it will put an end to all thy prosperity, and to all thy mirth, and
hope, for ever. A godly man dare die; or if he ignorantly fear it, yet shall it
be the end of all his fears: but thou dare not die, and yet thou must: or if
thou ignorantly hope of a happiness after it, yet will it nevertheless end all
thy hopes. O what a mercy is it to be ready to die!

10. But the great unspeakable Riches of the Saints is in the Life to come. We
have here the Hope and the fore-taste; but it is only there that we shall have
our Portion. You see what a poor Christian is according to his outward
appearance. But you see not what he will be to eternity. There is the Kingdom
for which we hope, and for which we run, and wait, and suffer. If God be true,
and his Gospel true, then Heaven shall be the Portion of the sanct^fied. But if
it were otherwise, then we would confess their hopes are vain: Heaven is our
Riches, or we have none. There have we laid up all our Hopes; and in these
Hopes we will live and die, as knowing they will not make us ashamed. Romans 5.
5. and 9. 33. 1 John 2. 28. We believe that we shall live with Christ in glory,
and shine as stars in the Firmament of our Father, and be made like to the
Angels of God, and shall see his face, and praise his name, and live in his
everlasting Love and Joy; For all this he himself has promised us. 1 These. 4.
17. 18. Da^. 12. 3. Mat. 13. 43. Luke 20 36. Rev. 22. 4. Mat. 25. 21.

And now, poor worldling, what is all your Gain and Riches in comparison of the
least of these? Do you think in your judgments that there is any comparison!
Or rather does not sin and the world even brutifie you, and make you lay by the
use of your reason, and live as if you knew not what you know? Your Treasure is
all visible, when ours is unseen, and therefore I may bid you bring it forth,
and let us see it, whether indeed it be better then the Treasure of the Saints:
Let us see what that is that is better then God, and everlasting glory! What!
is a little fleshly ease or mirth? a little meat, and drink, and pleasure? a
little more money, or space of ground to use then your neighbors have; are
these the things that you will change for Heaven, and preser before the Lord
that made you? O poor miserable sinners! Are you not told that you have your
good things here? but what will you have hereafter when this is gone? Luke 16.
25. When your wealth is gone, and your mirth is gone, your souls are immortal,
and therefore your misery and horror will continue, and never be gone. As the
wealth of the godly is within them, and above the reach of their enemies, and
surer then yours, so is it the more durable, even everlasting: When all your
Riches are upon the wing, even ready to be gone, and leave you in sorrow, when
you are most highly valuing them, you have it now, but it is gone to morrow. [
And what is the Hope of the Hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes
away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 27. 8,
9. Let the words of Christ decide the Controversy, if indeed you take him for
your Judge. [ Mat. 16. 2^, 25, 26, 27. If any man will come after we, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: For whosoever will save his
life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it:
For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man
shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, and then he shall reward
every man according to his works.

Well sirs, you that are all for Getting, and for wealth, judge now if you have
not lost your Reason, whether a Holy or unholy, ^ Heavenly or an Earthly life,
be the more Profitable way! I would not draw you to any thing that you should
lose by. If I speak not for your Gain, reject my words as contemptuously as you
please. But if I do, then be not against your own commodity. Will such silly
Gain as the world affords you, do so much with you as it does: and shall not
the Heavenly inheritance do more? shall all this stir be made in the world for
that which you are ready to leave behind you, and will you not lay up a
Treasure in heaven, where rust and moaths corrupt not, and where you may live
for ever? Matthew. 6. 20. What profit now have all those millions of souls, that
are gone from earth, by all the wealth they here possessed! Hear sinners, and
bethink you in the name of God. You are leaving Earth, and stepping into
Eternity, and where then should you lay up your Riches? Would you rather have
your Portion where you must stay but a few days, then where you must dwell for
ever? O Labor not for the meat that perishes, in comparison of that which
endures to everlasting life, which Christ will give you, if you will follow
him, Job. 6. 27. Make you friends of this wealth that the world abuses to
unrighteousness, that when all fails below, you may be received into the
everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. Make not your selves a Treasure of
corruptible riches, and set not your heart on Gold and Silver, lest the rust of
it be a witness against you, and eat your flesh as it were fire; and lest ye
heap up another kind of treasure then you dream of, against the last days. How
many of you have cause to weep and howl, for your approaching miseries, even
then when you are glorying in your prosperity? Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Are you
for Commodity? Refuse not then the best Commodity? Be not enemies to them, or
to those holy motions, that make for your everlasting Profit. Take but the
Gainfullest (...) selves, and we are pleased. If you know (...) then God and
Glory, and any riches that will endure any longer then Eternity, why do you not
show it us, that we may join with you? But if you do not, why will you not
hearken to the servants of the Lord, and joy^ with them? [ Wherefore, says the
Lord, do you spend money for that which is not bread: and your labor for that
which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness: Incline your care, come
unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you,] Isa* 55. 2, 3. If there be not more to be Gotten by Christ, and by
prayer, and by the promises, and a holy life, then there is by sin, or then
there is by all your friends, or lands, or trades, or care, or labor here,
then take your course,, and turn your back on God, and spare not. But if you
are ashamed to say so, be ashamed to think so, or to live so.

Verily sirs, if the Gospel be true, you must be every man of you Saints or
Miserable. Holiness is the only thriving way: Yea the only Saving way. If you
forsake this way, you are (...) while you are Gaining, and Losing by your
Gains. You (...) making Achans bargain, that by his Gold did purchase a ^corm
of stones that dashed out his brains, Josh. 7. You are running after Gehezie's
gains; that thought he had got Riches, and it proved a Leprosy. You are
trading with the Devil, though you see him not, and will not believe it, even
as certainly as the miserable witches, that sell him their souls for a few fair
promises, and when they have done, have the miserablest life of any. You are
laying up but Judas's treasures, which quickly grew too hot to hold, and too
heavy for his conscience to bear: and he would fain rid his hands of it if he
knew how, and because he cannot he hangs himself, and rids himself out of the
ashes into the flames. O covet not such undoing gains, which you all know as
sure as you breath, that you must let go. Believe but your Redeemer and you
shall know, that there are greater and better things before you. Gather not
stones when you may be gathering pearls. Hear me poor sinner! If God and
Heaven, if Grace and Glory seem not better Riches then (...) world, thou
judge thy self to have no part in them.

CHAP. IX. Holiness is the most Honorable Way.
WE are resolved if Scripture and Reason can resolve us, that Godliness is the
Safest, the Honestest, and the Gainfullest course: I shall next show you that
it is the Most Honorable course. I know the world thinks otherwise of it. In
most places it is a matter of reproach to be but serious and diligent in Gods
service. And though in this place and at this time, through the great mercy of
God* it is not so with us, unless it be with here and there a sottish drunkard,
yet there are too few places that are so much freed from this plague. And it is
not yet I fear forgotten of God, since the very practice of a Godly life, was a
matter of greater scorn and derision, then to have been the prophanest swearer
or drunkard. If a man would not have gone to the Ale* house with them, nor
sworn, or spoke profanely as (...) did: and if he made any serious mention of
the Scripture, ^^ ^^ life to come; if he reproved any gross offender, if he
prayed and instructed his family, and spent the Lords Day in holy exercises,
this was enough to brand him with the name of Puritan or Precisian, and make
him the common byword of the town, and (let him be never so conformable to
Bishops and Ceremonies) if once he went under the name of a Puritan, he was
looks upon as Lot in Sodom, by the open enemies of Piety, who insulted over
them, and lived securely in open wickedness. This is the chiefest sin that God
has been scourging this nation for, if I am able to understand his judgments:
I know men are apt to interpret providence according to their own interests
and conceits. But I take the help of the Scripture and the experience of former
ages for my interpretation: and I am verily persuaded (not excluding other
sins) that the great sin for which God has plagued England by a sharp and
bloody war, was the common scorn that was cast upon his service, it being made
the derision of too many in the land. I never came into any place, where me^er
serious diligence for salvation, was not branded with the name of Puritanism
and too much Preciseness; and those that abstained from iniquity were as Owls
among their neighbors, even the very wonder and the reproach of those about
them. When this is made a Principle that all must hold that ever hope to be
accepted with the Lord, in Heb. 11 6. that he is a Rewarder of them that
Diligently seek him. This is the next point in our faith, to the Believing that
there is a God. And yet among us that called our selves Christians, the
Diligent seeking of the Lord was so far from being thus esteemed of, that it
was the surest way to make a man contemptible and odious unto many. The jealous
God did long endure this horrible indignity, but would not still endure it from
us. Must he make a Holy Law for the Government of the world, and shall the
obeying of it be derided? Is he our Sovereign Lord, having by Creation and
Redemption the right of Ruling us, and shall we scorn them that will be Ruled
by him? Those that will not have Christ rule over them, will surely be
destroyed, Luke 19. 27. and shall those escape that scorn his service? Holiness
is the Image of God, and unholiness the Devils image: And when the Image of God
is made a scorn, and the Devils image had in honor, and that by them that call
themselves Christians, was it not time for God to arise to judgment? Was it
not enough that God was slighted by them, and his service turned out of doors,
but it must be made a byword? Is there but one way Pleasing unto God, and but
one way that leads to salvation, and must that one way be the common scorn?
For these things God had a controversy with this land; and he has pleaded his
cause with fire and sword, and spoke by a voice that will not be derided: he
hash entered into judgment with Priests and people: He will not always support
and maintain a people to deride him. Oh England, had thou none to make the
football of thy scorn, but the servants of the most High God? Did he not tell
thee that they were his Jewels, Mal. 3. 1. and that he that touched them did
touch the apple of his eye? Zech. 2 8. Will he give his son for them, and will
he Glorify them with himself, and make them equal to the Angels, Luke 20. 36.
and did thou think he would give thee leave to make them the scorn and
offscouring of the world? Had thou none to make the football of thy
contemptuous sport, but the sons of God, the spouse of Christ, yea his members,
and the heirs of heaven? Oh foolish nation, had thou none to deride and make
thy byword but Christ himself? Yea, it was Christ himself, though thou will
not believe it* In as much as thou did it to one of the lest of these his
Brethren, thou did it unto him, Mat. 25. 40. In all their afflictions he was
afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. and therefore in all their reproaches he was reproached.
All those that were derided for Holiness, were derided upon Christ's account. If
Holiness be vile and to be scorned, then God himself is vile and to be scorned,
and consequently is no God: and what greater Blasphemy could be uttered by the
tongue of man? For God is Holiness it self. In us it is but a beam, from him
the shining glorious Sun. If a little in us imperfect worms be hated by thee,
how would thou hate the perfect Holiness of God? And if we deserve thy scorns
for our obedience, (alas, our too imperfect obedience) it must fall upon him
that made the Law, and gave us these commands. If he be too precise that
imperfectly obeys God, what will you say of God himself that commands more
then any of us all performs? and that charge us on pain of damnation to
obey him. O how much wiselyer would you daily do, if you daily studied, and
diligently obeyed those Laws your selves! If the Rulers of the earth would
remember him that is the King of Kings, and did serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoiced before him with trembling, and kissed the Son to prevent his anger, and
their perishing in the way, Psalm. 2. 11, 12. O England! had thy disobedient
inhabitants never heard, how vain their rage and imaginations would be, when
they set themselves and took counsel against the Lord and his anointed,
saying, let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us?
Did they never hear that the deriders were derided by him that sits in the
heavens, and how he will shortly speak to them in wrath, that speak against his
ways in malice, and will vox them in his sore displeasure, that vexed his
servants for the doing of his pleasure? Will they not believe till Hell have
taught them that in despite of all his Enemies, he will set his son the King
of Saints upon his holy hill of Sion? Psalm. 2. 1. to 9. Had they never heard
how hard at last it will prove for them to kick against the pricks? Act. 9. 5.
And will they not know by any other means but feeling, that he will destroy
those as his enemies that would not have him to reign over them, Luke 19. 27.
and that he will break them with a Rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel? Psalm. 2. 9. O Scorners, did you never read his words, 1. S^^.
2. 30. [ Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed] Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for this word
shall be fulfilled upon you, and the work be wrought which you would not
believe when God foretold it, and will not yet understand and believe, though
it be declared to you, Acts 13. 41. Think not that the infirmities of the Godly
do justify your contempt of Godliness. Think not that a Judas in Christ's
family will Justify you for making a scorn of his family, and persecuting his
disciples? or that a Cham in the Ark, or the sin of Noah will warrant you to
make them as bad as the destroyed world, whom God had done so much to save?
Think not when you have jeered at a Holy life, that God will take it for a good
excuse, to tell him that you had found a fault in his servants, or an hypocrite
crept into his Church. He hates their faults much more then you: but will you
therefore hate their goodness? Condemn the breaches of his Laws and spare not;
but will you therefore condemn the keeping of them? O England! if thou had
had the grace or wit to use Christ better in his ways and servants, he would
have used thee better, and dealt more gently with thy inhabitants, and flames
and calamities might have been prevented. Often wast thou told from 2 Chronicles.
36. 14. what it was that captivated Israel, and made their Priests and people
to be the Heathens slaves [ When the Lord God sent unto them by his Prophets,
because he had compassion on his people and his dwelling place, they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.] But
alas, thou have gone much further then this. Israel mocked the Prophets; but I
remember not that it is ever said of them, that the way of godliness it self
was made a common scorn among them: but still they gloried in the Lord, and in
the Law, and in the Temple, and the Holy Worship. But here, if a man did but
talk of heaven, or of any holy subject, or reprove a swearer, or not join with
them in their impieties, the common cry was [ This is one of the holy Brethren:
here is is one of the Saints: It will never be well till we are rid of these
Puritans and Precisians.] How often have I heard almost the same words from
English men, as Lot did from Sodomites, Genesis 19. 9. [ This one fellow same in
to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge.] when they lived in their
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of drink, revellings, banquettings, and
abominable profanation of holy things, they thought it strange that we ran not
with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of us, but forgetting the
account that their Judge was ready to require of them, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4, 5.

Well! have you yet taken warning by the Judgments of the Lord? God has begun
to take away the reproach of Holiness, and through his great mercy to us, it is
more Honorable in England then formerly it has been. Is it Honored by you?
Or are you hardened to perdition? Fearful is the case of him whoever he be,
that after all the gentle and terrible warnings of the Lord, dare think or
speak reproachfully of a Holy life! Yet hear the calls of the Eternal Wisdom,
Prove. 1. 20, 21, 22, etc. [ How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity,
and the scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my
reproof.] But mercies and judgments are lost on the hard-hearted, Isa. 26. 10,
11. Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in
the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the Majesty
of the Lord. When the hand of the Lord is lifted up, they will not see; but
they shall see and be ashamed for their envy at his people, and the enemies own
fire shall devour them.] And then as they set at naught his counsel, and would
none of his reproof, but mocked them that feared God; so will he also laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear comes. -- For that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord,] Prove. 1. 25, 26, 27, 29.

I will add but this one word of terror. To scorn at Holiness, is to scorn at
the Holy Ghost, whose office or work it is to sanctify us. As the Father has
commanded us to be Holy as he is Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. and made it his Image on
us; and as the Son has come to destroy unholiness, 1 John 3. 8. and give us an
example of perfect holiness, and sanctify to himself a peculiar people, Titus
2. 14. so is it the undertaken work of the Holy Ghost, as sent therefore from
the Father and the Son, to make Holy all that God will save. And though I say
not that it is the unpardonable Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to scorn his
very work and office, yet I say it is a Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost* so
near that which is unpardonable, that the thoughts of it should humble all that
have been guilty, and make men fear so horrible a sin. But [ Bessed is he that
walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, ^or stands in the way of sinners,
nor sits in the seat of the scornful: but his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night.] The curse of the Lord is
in the house of the wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the just: Surely
he scorneth the scorners, but he gives grace unto the lowly, Prove. 3. 33, 34.
These are the true sayings of the Lord.

I thought not meet to pass by this necessary reproof of the contempt of
Holiness, which this Land has been so guilty of, and which has undone so many
souls, and made such desolations in the Land. And now you shall see, that I am
able to make good the grounds of this reproof, and that Holiness is no
Dishonorable thing.

1. The Holy servants of the Lord have the most Honorable Master in all the
world. This only is sufficient to weigh down all the Honors of the world, if
it were ten thousand worlds. When the builders of the Temple were asked their
names, by the Officers of King Darius, Ezra 5. 10, 11. their answer was [ We
are the servants of the God of Heaven and Earth.] No King on Earth, no Angel in
Heaven has a more honorable Master. To be the highest Officer of the greatest
Prince, is a Title as much more base then this, as man is baser then the
Infinite God. If God can not put sufficient Honor on those that are Related to
him, tell us, who can? When Moses went to Pharaoh for the Israelites
deliverance, he was to speak in the name of the Lord; and when Pharaoh spoke
contemptuously of the Lord, as one that he knew not and would not obey, how
wonderously does God vindicate his honor and his people! Let other men be
called Knights, and Lords, and Kings, and Emperors; may I but be truly called
the servant of the God of Heaven, I shall not envy them their honors! Our
relation to so glorious a Majesty does put an unexpressible Honor upon the
poorest person and the lowest works. A servant of the Lord is more Honorable
in rag^, in a smoaky cottage, or the meanest state* then the Emperor of
Constantinople or Tartary is in all their Wealth and Worldly Glory* And if you
think not so your selves, why do you so much honor them when they are dead?
What was Peter and Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, but poor despised men in
the world, that travailed about to preach the Gospel? and what was their honor
but to be the Holy Servants of the Lords? Yet now they are dead, you are
desirous to keep Holy days in an honorable memorial of them: and Kings and
Princes reverence their names. What were the Martyrs whose memories are now so
Honorable with us, but a company of hated persecuted men, that were used by
others as Butchers do their beasts, and worse? But because they were the
servants of the Lord, and suffered for his truth and cause, their names are
honorable, and the names of their greatest persecutors do even stink. Its said
of Constantine the Great (who himself was Greater by his Holiness then his
Victories) that he was wont to reverence the Bishops that had been sufferers
for Christ, and kissed the place where the eye abode that one of them had lost
for the Gospels sake. The Christian Princes that ruled the world, were wont to
Honor the poorest mortified retired servants of Christ, that had cast off the
world; as perceiving that he is more Honorable that contemns it, then he
that enjoys it. The nearest to God undoubtedly are the*most Honorable.

2. Consider, that as it is God that the Saints are thus Related to, so their
Relation is so near, and their Titles so exceeding high, which God himself has
put upon them, that it advances them to the greatest height of Honor, that
men on earth can reasonably expect. Yea, with holy admiration we must say it,
so wonderful is the Honor which the Glorious God has put upon his poor
unworthy servants, thar they durst not have owned it, nor thought such Titles
meet for men, if God himself had not been the Author of them! Nor could they
have believed that God would so advance them, if he had not both revealed it,
and given them faith to believe his revelation. As if it were not enough for us
to be his servants* he calls us his friends! Joh. 15. 13, 14, 15. [ Greater
Love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: Henceforth I call you not
servants: For the servant knows not what his Lord does: but I have called you
friends: for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto
you.] Jam. 2. 23. [Abraham was called the friend of God.]

2. And they are called the Lords Jewels, Mal. ^. 17.

3. They are called his Beloved, and dearly Beloved, Deuteronomy. 33. 12. Psalm 60. 5.
and 127. 2. Cant. 2. 16. and 6. 3. and 7. 10. Holy and Beloved are inseparable.
Romans 4. 7. [ Beloved of God, called to be Saints.] Col. 3. 12. [ the elect of
God, Holy and Beloved.] They are the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7.
For they are accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Even in the Beloved Son in
whom the Father is well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. and 17. 5.

4. They are called children, or adopted sons, Gal. 4 6. John 1. 12. And he
disdaineth not to be called their Father, Heb. 12. 9. Matthew. 23. 9. 2 Cor. 6.
18. [ I will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty.] Mal. 3. 17. He will spare them, as a man spares his son
that serves him.]

5. They are called also the Heirs of Heaven, Romans 8. 17. A more Honorable
heritage then earth affords.

6. They are called a peculiar people to the Lord, Tit. 2. 14. and his peculiar
treasure, Exodus 19. 5. Psalm. 135. 4.

7. They are called Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1. 6. They are a chosen
generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

8. The sanct fied are called the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 4. 8. to 13. Because
of the similitude of the holy Covenant which they make with Christ, to a
marriage Covenant; and because of the dearness of his love to them, and the
nearness and sweetness of his Communion with them, Mat. 21. 2, 4, 9. The Lord
is said to be married to them, Jer. 3. 14. And their Maker calls himself their
Husband, Isa. 54. 5.

9. Yea more, they are called the Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15. and 12. 12.
They are the Body of Christ and members in particular. verse. 27. We are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, loved and cherished by him, as a
man does his own flesh* Ephesians. 5. 25, 28, 29, 30, 32. They are kept by the Lord
as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. And he that touches them touches the
apple of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. What nearness! what dearness do those terms
express!

10. Yea they are said to be one with Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 17. [ ^^ that is joined
to the Lord is one spirit.] John 17. 21, 22, 23. [ That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be One in ^^, that the
world may believe (...) ^^o^ have sent me -- that they may be One, even as we
are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.] Not
that they are One in Godhead, or personality, or office with Christ, but most
nearly conjoined as subjects to their Prince, that make One Body Politic, and
as a wise to a husband, and nearer then these can express, in that they have
the communications of his Spirit.

Judge now by all these wonderful Titles, whether any but an Atheist or Infidel
can deny, that the Godly are the most Honorable people in the world. If it be
not a contemptible thing to be the son of a King, much less to be the sons of
the eternal King. Deny the Honor of those that are so nearly related to him,
and you deny the Honor of God himself, and consequently deny him to be God.
Atheism is the beginning and end of all.

3. Moreover the servants of the Lord have the most Honorable Natures or
Dispositions in the world. And the Honor that arises from a man's intrinsecal
Disposition, is far greater then that which accrueth to him from his parentage,
or wealth, or worldly greatness, or any such extrinsick accidents. Many a proud
and worthless person does boast of the Nobility of their Ancestors, and tell
you what blood does run in their veins; when they have debased souls, and
nothing advanced them of their Ancestors, but their Riches, or the pleasure of
some Prince; and they know that the beggars at their doors did come from Noah
as well as they. The Surgeon finds no purer blood in their veins, then in the
beggars; nor are their carcasses any more sweet or lovely; and therefore if
their manners are worse, they are more base then honest beggars. It is the mind
that bears the true stamp of Nobility. They are the Noblest that have the
Noblest souls. All the Silks and Velvers in the world, will not make an Ape as
Honorable as a Man, nor an Idiot as a wise man. Solomon in all his Royalty was
not clothed like some of the flowers in the field, Mat. 6. 28. 29. and yet he
was more Honorable then they. A Corpse may be most sum^tuously adorned: A
Crown may be set on the head of an image. Such as the mind is, such is the man.
And that the souls of the sanctified are more Nobly qualified then of other
men, is easily demonstrated. For,

1. Christ dwells in them by faith, and by his Spirit, Ephesians. ^. 17. and 2.
22. We are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. The new nature of the
Saints has no meaner an Author then the Lord himself. It is the Divine Power
that gives us all things that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. As
it is the Honorable work of God the Father to be our Creator, and of God the
Son to be our Redeemer, so is it the Honorable work of God the Holy Ghost to
be our Sanctifier. And therefore as it is a Blaspheming of the Creator to
vilify the Creation; and a Blaspheming of the Redeemer to vilify the
Redemption; so is it a Blaspheming of the Sanctifier to vilify Sanctification.
Though ^ I say not that it is the unpardonable Blasphemy, yet a fearful
Blasphemy it is. O that those wretches knew their crime, that mock at the
special work of the Holy Ghost.

2. The new creature is illuminated with a Heavenly light, and cured of its
former mortal blindness, and is brought out of darkness into mavelous light,
Ephesians. 1. 18. Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9. and is taught of God, John 6.
45. 1 These. 4. 9. 1 John 2. 27. And it is more Honorable to see, then to be
blind, and to live in the open Light, then in a dungeon. And it is the highest
matters in the world that the gracious soul is savingly acquainted with. It is
more Honorable to have the Knowledge of profoundest Sciences, then of some low
and poor employment. And it is more Honorable to have the saving Knowledge of
God, and of the life to come, which the poorest sanctified person has, then to
have the most admired fleshly wisdom, or all the common learning in the world.
What high, and excellent, and necessary things does Grace acquaint the
Christian with? He knows him that is the cause of all things else, having
himself no cause: He knows him that is knowledge it self; and that knows
all things: He knows him that is Eternal; that never began, and shall never
end. That is Greater then the whole world: that is more glorious then the Sun:
that can do all things because he is Almighty; and yet can do no evil, because
he is most Good and Holy. He knows him that made the world and all things,
and holds them in the hand of his Omnipotency, and Rules them by his wisdom,
and does all things according to the good pleasure of his will. He knows him
that is man's felicity, to know whom is eternal life. He knows the Redeemer,
and the Riches of his Grace and Promises. He knows the diseases of his own
soul, and their danger and cure. He knows what end he has to aim at, and the
work that he was made and Redeemed for to do: the Temptations which he must
resist; the enemies which he must conquer, the duties which he must perform: He
knows his Redeemers Laws and Covenants. What he commands, promises and
threatens, and to whom. He knows what will be hereafter; and where he shall
live when this life is ended: and what he shall do ten thousand years hence,
yea unto all eternity. He knows what will become of all the Godly and ungodly
(that die such) in the world; and where they shall be for evermore. In a word,
he knows whence he came, whithet he is going, and which way he must go. He
knows God as his Maker, Governor and End: He knows that God that he must
Please, and how to Please him, and how to be saved, and to live with God for
ever. This is the honorable Knowledge of the Sanctified; which no men have but
they alone. The cunning Politicians of the world have none of it, (as such).
The Speculators of nature, the great Mathematicians, the Learned Doctors,
famous for their skill in Languages, Philosophy, and the Theorie of Divinity,
are o^t without it. They have more of the words, and notions, and forms, and
methods, then unlearned Saints have: but they want the Thing that these are
made for. They have the signs, and the Godly have the thing signified. They
have the Body of Theology, and the Godly Christian has the Soul. The ungodly
Doctors have better skill to break the shell, but the Godly Christian only
knows how to eat the kernel. The Learned may be better at the office of a Cook,
to dress the meat; but only the Godly do feed on it, and digest it. Knowledge
is to be valued, (as all creatures are) according to its usefulness. As it is
more Honorable to know how to Govern a Kingdom, Command an Army or Navy, or
save men's lives, then to make a fiddle or an hobby horse; so is it ten
thousand-fold more Honorable, to know how to Order our hearts and lives, and
to walk with God, and obtain the everlasting Glory, then to know how to get the
riches, and pleasures, and vainglory of the present world.

3. The sanctified are made Alive to God, when other men are Dead in sin. Romans
6. 11, 13. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. And the poorest man alive is more Honorable then the
carkase of an Emperor. Eccl. 9. 4. A living dog, is better then a dead Lion.

4. The sanctified are cleansed from the filthyness of their sins* which are
the most odious defilements in the world: and they are purified by the blood
and spirit of Christ. 1 John 1. 7, 9. Ephesians. 5. 26. 2 Cor. 7. 1. The word of
Christ has made them clean* John 15. 3. Their hearts are purified by faith,
Acts 15. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 John 3. 3. And therefore the most odious part of
their dishonor is removed; sin is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14. 34.
Whatever it may seem before ungodly men, it is sin that is your shame before
the Lord: And this reproach the godly are now cleansed from. Though it be a
dishonor to them that they were ungodly once, it is their honor that now they
are not such; and that they are clothed with the righteousness of Christ.

5. The Holy nature of the Saints disposes their hearts, and ^nclineth their
wills to the highest and most Honorable things. As in their Knowledge, so in
their Inclinations, they are above the baseness of the world. The nature of man
is not to feed as beasts and horses, and dogs do: he is above their food; and
above their converse and kind of life: that will not content him that
contenteth them. And the new nature of a sanctified man, is above the delights
and contents of the ungodly. His heart cannot endure to take up with their kind
of life. To mind nothing but this world, and to have no pleasure but to the
flesh, and live as an utter stranger to God, and not to feed on the Heavenly
delights, and riches of the Gospel, but live as if there were no such things;
this sensual life is below his Inclination, ^s feeding on dross, or conversing
only with swine or cattle, is below the nature of a man. The noble soul is that
which is inclined to the noblest objects: even to God, and Holiness, and
everlasting life: and cannot endure the poor, and low, and sordid life of men,
that have their portion here. Psalm 17. 14. Nothing that is corporeal, or
transitory, yea nothing below God, can satisfy a holy soul. It is this Holy
Disposition, that fits men for holy Duties: and that is their fitness for
eternal Happiness. If Angels were not Holyer then Devils, and godly men then
the ungodly, Heaven could not hold them, nor could they any more see or enjoy
the Lord, then they that are cast into outer darkness. And therefore if you
dare say that the Holy are no more Honorable then the unholy, you must say
that the Holy Angels are no more Honorable then the devils: which sure you
will scarce be so desperate as to spe^^*

6. Holiness in the godly is the Image of God, in which we were created: and
according to which we are renewed by the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
Genesis 1. 27. And what can be spoken more Honorable of a creature, then that he
has his Makers Image* unless as to the Degree, that some have more of it then
others. It is the honorable Title of the Son himself, that he [ is the
Brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his person] This is
above the honor of any, or of all the Saints. But to have the Image of God in
Wisdom, and Holiness, as all have that are sanctified, is a wonderful dignity
to be given to a creature, and so low and unworthy creatures as we are. His
commands tell us what are the qualifications of his people. [ As he which has
called you is Holy, so be ye Holy, in all manner of conversation: For it is
written, Be ye Holy, for I am Holy.] 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. And how high a command,
and strait a Rule is that, given us by Christ, Matthew, 5. 48. [ Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect!] Well may it be
called an exceeding Righteousness, surpassing the Scribes and Pharisees, which
all have that enter into the Heavenly Kingdom, Matthew. 5. 20. There is nothing
under Heaven, that is known to man so like to God, as a Holy soul. Remember
this the next time you reproach such. All you that are the Serpents ^eed,
remember when you spit your venom against Holiness, that it is the Image of
God that your enmity is exercised against. O what a strange conjunction of
malignity and hypocrisy appears in the enemies of God among us! A picture of
Christ that is drawn by a Painter, or a forbidden Image of God that is carved
by an Image-maker in stone, that has nothing but the name of an Image of God,
these they will reverence, and honor, (though God has forbidden them to make
such Images of him) The Papists will (...) before them, and the profane among
us are zealous for them: when in the mean time they hate the noblest Images of
God on earth. Forbidden Images of God have been defended, by seeking the blood
of his truest Images. Do you indeed Love and Honor the Image of God? Why then
do you hate them, and seek to destroy them? And why do you make them the scorn
of your continual malice? Can you blow hot and cold? Can you both Love and
Hate, both Honor and Scorn, the Image of God? Search the Scripture, and see
whether it be not the sanctified, heavenly, diligent servants of the Lord that
are the Honorable Image which he owneth, and magnifieth, and gloryeth in
before the world. If this be not true, then go on in your hatred of them and
spare not. These are not Images of stone, but of Spirit: not Images made by a
Carver or a Painter, but by the Holy Ghost himself: Not hanged upon a wall for
men to look on, but living Images, actuated from Heaven, by spiritual influence
from Christ their head, and shining forth in exemplary lives to the honor of
their Father whom they resemble, Matthew. 5. 16. It is not in an outward shape,
but in spiritual wisdom, and Love, and Holiness of heart and life, that they
resemble their Creator. Whether you will believe it now or not, be sure of it,
you malignant enemies of Holiness, that God would shortly make you know it,
that you chose out the most excellent Image of your maker under Heaven, to pour
out your hatred and contempt against. And in as much as you did it to his
noblest Image, you did it unto him.

7. If all this be not enough to show you the Honorable Nature of Holiness, I
will speak the highest word that can be spoken of any created nature under
heaven, and yet no more then God has spoken; even in 2 Pet. 1. 4. where it is
expressly said, that the Godly are [ partakers of the Divine Nature.] I know
that it is not the Essence of God that is here called the Divine Nature that we
partake of: we abhor the thoughts of such blasphemous arrogance, as if that
grace did make men Gods. But its called the Divine nature, in that it is caused
by the Spirit of God, and flows from him, as the Light or sunshine flows
from the sun. You use to say, the sun is in the house, when it shines in the
house, though the sun it self be in the firmament: so the Scripture says that
God dwells in us, and Christ and the spirit dwells in us, when the Heavenly
Light and Love and Life, which streameth from him dwells in us; and this is
called the Divine Nature. Think of this, and tell me whether higher and more
Honorable things can easily be spoken of the sons of men, 1 John 4. 16. [ God
is Love; and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him.] O
wonderful advancement! high expressions of a creatures dignity! Blessed be that
Eternal Love that is thus communicative, and has so enobled our unworthy
souls: with what alacrity and delight should we exalt his name by daily praises
that thus exalts us by his unspeakable mercy? Psalm. 75. 10. and 89. 16, 17.
[ Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk O Lord in
the light of thy countenance: In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and
in thy righteousness shall they be exalted: For thou art the glory of our
strength; and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted: For the Lord is our
defense, and the holy one of Israel is our King.] Psalm. 148. 13, 14. [ Let them
praise the name of the Lord: for his Name alone is excellent: his Glory is
above the Earth and Heavens: He also exalts the horn of his people; the
Praise of all his Saints.] He has first exalted our blessed Head, even highly
exalted him by his own right hand, and given him a name above every name, Act.
2. 33. and 5. 31. Phil. 2. 9. and with him he has wonderfully exalted all his
sanctified ones, Heb. 2. 10. 11. For it became him for whom are all things, and
by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to Glory, to make the captain of
their salvation perfect through sufferings: For both he that sanctifies and
they that are sanctified, are all of One: for which cause he is not ashamed to
call them Brethren.] 1 Cor. 12. 12. [ For as the Body is One, and has many
members, and all the members of that one body, being many are one body: so also
is Christ.] What greater honor can man on earth be advanced to? And the Honor
of the just is communicative to the societies of which they are members. The
Churches are called Holy for their sakes. [Prov. 11. 11. By the blessing of the
upright the City is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked]
Prove. 14. 34. [ Righteousness exalts a nation: but sin is a reproach to any
people] Let therefore both the persons and Congregations of the Saints
continually exalt the name of God: [ O Bless the Lord for ever and ever, and
blessed be his glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.]
Neh. 9. 5. [ The Lord lives: and blessed be our Rock: and exalted be the God
of our Rock of our salvation.] 2 Samuel 22. 47. [Psal. 30. 1. I will extol thee
O Lord, for thou have lifted me up.] Psalm. 27. 6. [ And now shall my head be
lifted up above mine enemies round about me: therefore will I offer in his
tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I will sing, yea I will sing praises unto the
Lrrd.] Psalm. 28. 8, 9. [ The Lord is their strength, the saving strength of his
anointed: He will save his people, and bless his inheritance, and feed them
also, and lift them up for ever.] Psalm. 147. 6. The Lord lifts up the meek,
and casts the wicked down to the ground.] Thus shall it be done to them whom
God does delight to Honor. He will Deliver them and Honor them? Psalm. 91. 15.

4. And as the sanctified have the most Honorable dispositions, so have they
the highest and most Honorable Designs. The End of their lives is incomparably
above other men's. The rest of the world (though they may talk of Heaven, and
wish for it rather then Hell, when they can live no longer) do indeed drive on
no greater trade, then providing for the flesh, and feathering them a nest
which will quickly be pulled down: and like the spider, spinning themselves a
web, which death will shortly sweep away. But the Design and daily business of
the Godly is for everlasting Glory. Heb. 11. 10. They look for a City that has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.] verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. They
confess themselves strangers and pilgrims on earth, thereby declaring that they
seek a Country. And truly if they were mindful of that (deceitful world) which
they came out of (and have forsaken) they may have opportunities (and too many
invitations) to return to it: But now they desire a better Country, that is,
an Heavenly: Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called Their God: for he has
prepared for them a City] This Noble End ennobleth both the persons and
conversations of believers. To Rule a Kingdom is a Nobler design then to play
with children for pins or points. But to seek the Everlasting Kingdom is far
above all the highest designs that are terminated upon earth. If Everlasting
Glory with God in Heaven, be a nobler state then a worldly life, then must the
seeking it be a nobler design. Paul shows you the difference very
pathetically, Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20. [ For many walk (of whom I told you often,
and now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ;
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their
shame, who mind earthly things: But our Conversation is in Heaven] that is, we
live as Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and not as those that are here at
home. It is Heaven that sanctified persons mind; that they study and care for,
and labor and live for in the world. And therefore, though in their Natural
capacity, they are but as other men, yet in their Moral and Relative capacity,
I think I may say without Hyperbole, that they are much more advanced above the
dignity of the great unsanctified Princes upon earth, then Reason, and
learning, and manly designs advance a man above a beast. It is the Nobleness
and baseness of the end that does honor or abase the agent: and therefore none
are truly. Honorable but those that seek the spiritual, the high, eternal
Honor.

5. The Employment as well as the Designs of the Godly, do prove them to be the
most Honorable. Both the End and Matter do show the excellency of their Work.
As the End Honors the person, so does it Honor all the works that are Means
thereto. The first thoughts of a Godly man when he awaketh, and the last when
he lies down (if he observe his Rule) are usually for Heaven. When you are
conversing with worldly men, about these common worldly things, they are in
prayer or holy meditation conversing with God, about the matters of his service
and their salvation. Their hearts are toward him: their thoughts are on him:
They are devoted to him: Their daily business is to serve him. [ When I awake
(says David, Psalm. 139. 28.) I am still with thee.] Psalm. 16. 7. 8. [ I will
bless the Lord who has given me counsel: my reins also instruct me in the
night seasons. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved] The life of the Godly is called in Scripture [ a
walking with God] such was the course of Henock, Noah, and Abraham, Genesis 5. 22,
24. and 6. 9. and 17. 1. and 24. 40. They walked before God, Genesis 48. 15. and
in his ways, Deuteronomy. 28. 9. They love the Lord their God with all their heart and
soul (as to the sincerity of it:) and walk after him, and fear him, and keep
his commandments, and obey his voice, and serve him and cleave unto him, Deuteronomy.
13. 3, 4. And can an inhabitant of this world have a more honorable employment
then to serve the Lord? and a more honorable state then to walk with God?
should we not have thought such words intolerable to be used of the best on
earth, if God had not been himself the author of them, and put them into our
mouths? Hear more of his own expressions concerning the conversations of his
servants [1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful by whom ye were called unto the
fellowship of his son Jesus Christ] 1 John 1. 3. [ And truly our Fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ] By [ fellowship] is not meant
here [ a society of equals.] God forbid we should think so blasphemously: But
it is a Communion of the beloved sanctified Creature with his blessed Creator,
agreeable to his distance. In their secret addresses, his servants have
communion with him: Their Prayer is nothing else but a humble speaking to the
living God, for the supply of all their wants. In their Praises and
Thanksgivings it is God that they deal with: and the words of their mouths and
the meditation of their hearts, are acceptable is the sight of their Redeemer,
Psalm. 19. 14. They pour out their souls before him: and he opens his ears
and his bosom unto them, Psalm. 62. 8. and 10. 17. [ He will feed kis flock
like a shepherd: he will gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.] Isa. 40. 11. And in
the public Worship of God in the holy Assemblies, his servants also have
communion with him: It is him that they hear whoever be the messenger: It is
him that they adore, and praise and magnify [ Come (say they) and let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord: to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths -- Come, and let us walk
in the light of the Lord] Isaiah 2. 3, 5. [ We have thought of thy loving
kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple] Psalm 48. 9. [ In his Temple does
every man speak of his glory.] Psalm 29. 9. Yea, the common employments of the
Godly are sanctified, and thereby advanced above the highest actions of the
wicked. For it is God and Glory that is in all their ultimate End. [ Whether
they eat or drink, or what ever they do, they do it to his glory, 1 Cor. 10.
31. That is, They intend his Glory as their end, and they do it in reverent
obedience to his Will, and in a holy manner behaving themselves as may honor
him whose work they do. And he that has the face to say, that Prayer, Praise,
Thanksgiving, Meditation, holy conference and other works of Holiness and
Righteousness, are not a more Honorable employment then the sordid drudgery of
the world, must say also that the life of a worldling is more Honorable then
the life of the holy Angels and the heavenly host. They are obeying and
praising God, and living in the sense of his dearest love, while you are
sinning and scraping in this Earth. And can you believe that your life is more
Honorable then theirs? If not; you must confess, that the Godly that come
nearest the work of Angels, do live a more Honorable life then you. When
Christ called Peter to leave his fishing and follow him and be his servant, he
tells him that he will make him a fisher of men: as intimating that it was a
more honorable work to catch souls by the Gospel, and win them to God and to
salva^ion, then to catch fishes. To please God and save our souls, and further
others in obeying him to their salvation, is the Highest work that the sons of
men are capable of while they live in flesh.

As the Priests were sanctified to draw nearer unto God, then the common
people, and to be employed in his most Holy service, so are the godly separated
by grace from the ungodly world, and brought nearer God, and used by him in the
noblest works. [ In a great house there are not only vessels of Gold and of
Silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some to honor, and some to
dishonor.] 1 Timothy 2. 20. [ If a man therefore purge himself from sin, he shall
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the masters use, and prepared
unto every* good work.] Ver. 21. The Vessel that Swine are fed in, is not so
Honorable as that which is used at a Princes table. If you would know what use
the Godly are employed in, read 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. [ As lively stones they are
built up a spiritual house: they are a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices unto God, which shall be acceptable by Jesus Christ. They are a
chosen generation, a royal Priesthood an holy Nation, a peculiar people that
they should show forth the praises of him who has called them out of darkness
into his mavelous light:]* The holy Scriptures tell you the work of Saints:
Compare them with the work of the drunkard, the glutton, the gamester, the
fornicator, or the covetous or ambitious worldling, and let your reason tell
you which is the more Honorable, Psalm 34. 9. [ O fear the Lord ye his Saints:
for there is no want to them that fear him.] Psalm. 31. 23. [ O Love the Lord
all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful.] Psalm. 89. 5, 7. [ The
heavens shall praise thy wonders O Lord: thy faithfulness also in the
Congregation of the Saints. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the
Saints: and to he had in reverence of all them that are about him.] These are
the employments of the Saints.

6. Moreover, the Godly have the most Honorable entertainment by the God of
all the world. They are bid welcome when others are rejected. The door is
opened to them that is shut against the wicked. They are familiar with Jesus
Christ, as the children of the family, when others are strangers whom he will
not know. Cant. 5. 1. Matthew. 25. 10. Matthew. 7. 23. [ I will profess unto them,
I never knew you: depart from me ye workers of iniquity.] Psalm 1. 6. [ For the
Lord knows the way of the Righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall
perish.] The faithful are feasted by him, when the rest are examined with a [
Friend, how come thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment! bind him
hand and foot and cast him into outer darkness,] Matthew. 22. 12, 13. They are
called the children that have the bread, and the rest are called the dogs; of
which some are without, and those within do feed but on the crumbs that fall
from the childrens table, Matthew. 15. 26, 27. Revel. 22. 15. Hear the Lords
invitation and his promise: Isa. 55. 2, 3. [ Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good; and let your soul delight it self in fatness;
Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you.] Who is it that is admitted into the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and who shall dwell in his holy hill? He that walks
uprightly and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart. -- In
whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the
Lord, Psalm 15. 1, 2, 4. The upright shall dwell in the presence of the Lord.]
Psalm 140. 13. [ God will save Sion, -- and the seed of his servants shall
inherit it* and they that love his name shall dwell therein.] Psalm. 69. 35, 36.
And [ Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, O Lord, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: he shall be satisfied with the
goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple.] Psalm. 65. 4. Says David [
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.] Yea, Christ entertaineth
faithful souls with a spiritual feast of his own flesh and blood. His flesh to
them is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, John 6. 55. and he that
eats and drinks these, shall live for ever, Verse 54, 56. The returning
Prodigal is met with joy, and quickly embraced in his Fathers arms; the fatted
Calf is killed for him: a ring and new apparel is provided him: and music
must express the Joy for his recovery, Luke 15. O how welcome are converted
sinners to the God of mercy? And as they are welcome at their first return, so
are they in all their attendance on him, and addresses to him, and service of
him, while they continue in his family. They have boldness now to enter into
the Heliest, by the new and living way that is consecrated: and are invited to
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 19, 22. [ In
Christ we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.] Ephesians.
3. 12. And God has made us accepted in the beloved, to the praise of the glory
of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. We are living sacrifices, acceptable unto God, Romans
12. 1. And our services, though weak, are sacrifices acceptable and
well-pleasing to him, Phil. 4. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 3. and 5. 4. when the prayers of
the wicked are abhorred of the Lord; his people serve him acceptably in
reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. He answers their prayers, and often
speaks peace unto them, and signifies his acceptance of them. If they could
bring him a house full of Gold and Silver, they would not be so welcome to him
as they are in bringing him their hearts, their humbled hearts, their broken,
tender, melted hearts, that burn in Love to him, and flame up toward him in
desires and in holy praise. [ To this man will I look, says the Lord, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word] Isa. 66.
2. This is the Honorable entertainment of the Saints.

7. And they are members of the most Honorable Society in the world. The
Church is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Luke 1. 33. Col. 1. 13. The Kingdom of
God, Luke 17. 21. and 18. 17. The Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 3. 2. and 13. 31, 33,
44. It is the School of Christ, or his University, in which Believers are his
Scholars, learning to know him, and serve him, and praise him for ever, and
trained up for everlasting life, Acts 11. 26. Luke 6. 13. Mat. 5. 1, 2, etc. It
is the family or household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 10. 21. 1 Pet.
4. 17. It is the Spouse, yea the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 25. So loved by him,
that he gave himself for it, becoming the price of our Redemption, and thought
not his life too dear a Ransom, nor his blood too precious to cleanse and save
us, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Tit. 2. 14. The Church, which every godly man is a living
member of, is a Society chosen out of the world, to be nearest unto God, and
dearest to him, as the beloved of his soul; to receive the choicest of his
mercies, and be adorned with the righteousness of Christ, and to be employed in
his special service, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 9. John 15. 19. Ephesians. 1. 4. Psalm 132. 13.
and 135. 4. Ephesians. 5. 1. The Lord that Redeemed them is their King and Head, and
dwells in the midst of them, and walks among them, as the people of his
special presence and delight, Psalm 2. 6. and 89. 18. and 149. 2. and 46. 5.
Isa. 12. 6. Jer. 14. 9. Zeph. 3. 5, 15, 17. Rev. 1. 13. and 2. 1. Psalm 95. 2.
The Church is a Heavenly Society, though the militant part yet live on earth:
For the God of Heaven is the Sovereign and the Father of it: The glorified
Redeemer is their Head: The Spirit of Christ does guide and animate them: His
Laws revealed and confirmed from Heaven, direct and govern them: Heaven is
their end; and heavenly are their dispositions, employments and conversations:
There is their portion and treasure, Matthew. 6. 20, 21. and there is their very
heart and hope. They are risen with Christ, and therefore seek the things that
are above: For their life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 2, 3, 4. Their
Root is there: and the noblest part of the Society is there: For the glorified
Saints, and in some sort the Angels, are of the same Society with us; though
they are in heaven and we on earth. The whole family in Heaven and earth is
named from one and the same Head, Ephesians. 3. 15. [Heb. 12. 22, 23. 24. We are come
unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of
the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, etc.] This is the Honorable Society
of Saints: the eye, the pearl of the whole Creation.

8. Moreover, the Godly have the most Horourable Attendance. The creatures are
all theirs: though not in point of Civil propriety, yet as means appointed and
managed by God their Father, for their best advantage. The Angels of God are
ministering spirits for them: not as our servants, but as Gods servants for our
good. As Ministers in the Church are not the servants of men, but the servants
of God for men: And so whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present or to come, all are ours.] 1 Cor. 3. 22. The
Shepherds servant is not the servant of the sheep, but for the sheep. And so
the Angels disdain not to serve God, in the guarding of the weakest Saints. As
I formerly showed from Heb. 1. 14. and Psalm 91. 11, 12. and 34. 7. [The Angel
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. For
he gives his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways: they shall
bear us up in their hands, left we dash our foot against a stone.] Sun and
Moon, and all the creatures, are daily employed in our attendance. O how
wonderful is the Love of God to his unworthy servants, in their advancement!
Remember it, when thou art scorning at the servants of the Lord, or speaking
against them, that those poor, those weak despised Christians, that thou art
vilifying, have their Angels beholding the face of God their Father in the
Heavens: Take heed therefore that you despise not the least of these. It is the
warning of Christ, Matthew. 18. 10. The same blessed spirits that attend the
Lord, and see his face in blissful Glory, do attend and guard the meanest of
the godly here on earth. As the same servants use to wait upon the Father and
the children, in the same family, or the bigger children to help the less.

9. And it is the Honor of the Godly, that they that are themselves most
Honorable, do Honor them. To be magnified by a fool, or wicked flatterer, is
small Honor: but to be magnified by the best and wisest men, this is true
Honor. We say that Honor is in him that gives it, and not in him that
receives. But it is God himself that Honors his Saints: It is he that
speaks all these great and wondrous things of them which I have hitherto
recited. Search the Texts which I have alleged, and try whether it be not he.
And surely to have the God of Heaven to applaud a man, and put Honor upon him,
and so great Honor, is more then if all the world had done it. Yet we may add,
(if any thing could be considerable that is added unto the approbation of God)
that all his servants, the wisest, and the best, even his holy Angels, are of
the same mind, and honor the godly in conformity to their Lord.

And here Christian, I require thee from the Lord, to consider the greatness of
thy sin and folly, when thou art too desirous of the applause of men,
especially of the blind ungodly world; and when thou make a great matter of
their contempt or scorn, or of their slanderous censures. What! is the
approbation of the eternal God so small a matter in thy eyes, that the scorn of
a fool can weigh it down, or move the balance with thee? If a feather were put
into the scales against a mountain, or the whole earth, it should weigh as much
as the esteem or dis-esteem of men, their* honoring thee, or dishonouring
thee, should weigh against the esteem of God, and the honor or dishonor that
he puts upon thee, (as to any regard of the thing it self; though as it
reflecteth on God, thou may regard it.) He is the wise man that God calls
wise: and he is the fool that God calls fool: (and that is every one that
lays up riches for himself, and is not rich toward God, Luke 12. 20, 21.) He
is the Happy man that God calls Happy; and he is a miserable man that God
counts miserable: and who those are, you may see in Psalm 1. and many
Scriptures before-cited. Hear the words (and you that are Believers, lay up the
blessed promise) of Christ himself, John 12. 26. [ If any man serve me, him
will my Father Honor.] And who cares then for the dishonours of all the wicked
of the world? Our tried faith as preciouser then Gold, will be found unto
praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.] 1 Pet. 1. 7.
See 2 Timothy 2. 21. We must learn therefore to imitate our Lord, John 5. 41. and
not to receive our Honor from men; and not to imitate the wicked, verse. 44.
that receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from
God. There is enough for us in Gods approbation. And yet all his servants do
imitate their Lord; and his Judgment is their Judgment; and whom he
honors, them do they honor; Angels, and Saints, and all that enter into the
Tabernacle of the Lord, do contemn the vile, and honor them that fear the
Lord, Psalm 15. 4. And though no man's Judgment or Praise be valuable in
comparison of the Lords; yet the Honor and Praise that is given by the wise
and Godly, is more then a thousand times as much from ignorant ungodly men. If
the Athenian Orator regarded the censure of Socrates more then of all the rest
of his auditors, we have cause to judge he Elogies of experienced holy men a
greater honor then of thousands of the wicked, and greater then all their
contempt or scorn is able to weigh down. The applause of the wicked is ofttimes
a dishonor in wise men's eyes. Was it not Balaams chiefest honor to hear from
Balak, [I thought to promote thee to great Honors, but the Lord has kept thee
back from Honor.] Numb. 24. 11. The Honor that God keeps a man from, is no
Honor: but it is an Honor to be kept from such Honor by the Lord: innocent
poverty is incomparably more Honorable then Riches by iniquity, which is the
greatest shame.

10. Lastly it is unspeakable everlasting Honor that holiness does tend unto,
and which holy men shall enjoy with God. The very Relation of a Godly man to
his everlasting Glory, is an Honor ten thousand times surpassing the Honor of
all the Kingdoms of the world. If you did but know that one of your poor
neighbors should certainly be a King, would you not presently honor him, even
in his rags? You may know that the Saints shall reign with Christ, as sure as
if an Angel from heaven had told you so, and more; and therefore how should a
Saint be honored? If God had but legibly marked out some among you for
salvation, and written in their foreheads, [ This man shall be saved] would
not all the Parish reverence that man? Why a Heavenly* mind, and the Love of
God, and self-denial, and holy obedience, are Heaven-marks infallible, as true
as the Gospel, and written by the same hand as the Gospel was, I mean by the
Spirit of God himself: If a voice from Heaven should speak now of any person in
the Congregation, and say, [ This man shall reign in Heaven for ever] would it
not be an Honor above all your worldly Honors? Why Holiness is Gods Image,
and the Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, and bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the sons of God, and we have the promise, and seals, and
oath of God for our confirmed certainty; yea and the Knowledge of God in Christ
is the beginning of eternal life, John 17. 3. and what would we have more? The
presence of Christ in a little of his Glory upon the Mount, transported the
three Disciples: And the glympse of the Glory of God which Moses saw, did make
his face shine that the Israelites could not behold it. The approaches of the
Saints to God in holy Worship here on earth, are exceeding Honorable, because
they participate of heaven, and it is upward that they look: 1 Chronicles. 16. 27. [
Glory and Honor are in his presence: strength and gladness are in his place.]
The soul that is beholding God by faith, and conversing with the Heavenly
inhabitants, is quite above all earthly things: and as Angels are more
honorable then men, and Heaven then Earth, so are Believers that converse in
Heaven with Angels, yea with Christ himself by faith, more honorable then
terrestrial carnal men.

But the great Honor is behind; yet near at hand; when the promised Crown is
set upon their heads: O mark the Honor that is promised them by the Lord of
truth. The soul it self before the Resurrection of the body, shall be with
Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Even present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 8. John 12. 26. [
If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my
servant be.] And at the Resurrection Christ that has loved the Church and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it -- will present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Will they not be
Honorable even in the eyes of the ungodly world, when they hear the sentence
of their Lord, [ Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34.] and verse. 23. [ Enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord:] [When Christ shall come to be Glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that believe] 2 These. 1. 10. Mark here; that it
is one end of the coming of Christ, to be Glorified and admired in his Saints.
[ Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him] Jud. 14. 15. Our hearts shall be
established unblameable in holiness before God even our father at the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints] 1 These. 3. 12, 13. we shall then
praise him [ that has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
and made us Kings and Priests to God,] Rev. 1. 5, 6. He that overcomes shall
be clothed with white raiment, and confessed by Christ before the Father and
the Angels of heaven, Rev. 3. 5. Yea he shall be a Pillar in the Temple of God,
and go out no more: and Christ will write on him the Name of God, and the name
of the City of God. New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from God,
and his own name, verse. 12. Yea he will grant to him to sit with him in his
throne, as he himself has overcome and is set down with the Father in his
Throne: verse. 21. And he will honor his Saints to be Judges of Angels, and of
the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. And they that overcome and keep his words unto the
end, to them will he give power over the nations, and they shall rule with a
rod of iron, and break them to shivers as the vessels of a potter; even as
Christ received of his Father: and he will give them the morning star, Rev. 2.
26, 27. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear the Glorious things that are
promised to the Saints. The high praises of God shall be in their mouths, and
the two-edged sword in their hands -- to execute on the wicked the Judgment
written, such Honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 6, 9. Then shall we hear
the Praises of the Heavenly society saying [ We give thee thanks O Lord God
Almighty which art and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee
thy great power and have reigned, and the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is
come, and the time of the dead that they should be judged, and that thou
should give reward unto thy servants the Prophets and to the Saints and them
that fear thy name, small and great, and should destroy them that dwell on
the earth.] [ then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of
their Father: Who has ears to hear, let him hear, Matthew. 13. 43.] Yea [ they
shall be equal to the Angels of God, Luke 20. 36.] This is the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light of which God is now making us Meet to be partakers, Col. 1.
12. If [ all that s^^^ in the Council against him, saw Stevens face as it had
been the face of an Angel] Act. 6. 15. what shall be the glory of the Saints
when themselves shall see the face of God, and his name shall be written in
their foreheads, Rev. 22. 4. when the ungodly world shall know, that Holiness
was the most Honorable State?

But perhaps some will say, that [ this language will make (...) Proud: To tell
men that they are the most Honorable person^ in the world, is the way to make
them the Proudest persons.]

To which I give you a manifold answer that your Objection may not have the
least pretense that it is unsatisfied.

1. Worldly Honors are of a more swelling nature then Heavenly Honors: and
yet it would scarcely be taken well, if this conclusion should pass for
current, that the most Honorable are the most Proud. For then it would follow
that none are so vile, so like the Devil, so unlike God: and so the Princes and
nobles of the earth would become the most despicable persons in the world, and
their very Honor it self would be their dishonor, and so no Honor. And if
worldly Honors will not warrant you to conclude the persons to be most Proud,
much less will the Heavenly Honor.

There is the more Need and the less Fear of the Honor of the Godly, because
it is the blessing of an Humbled soul. God casts them down before he lifts them
up: It is only the Humble that he exalts. They feel their sin and misery
before they know their Honor. A Broken heart has need of healing, and a
fainting soul is fittest for a Cordial. You need not fear when you refresh the
sick, lest it should make them wanton as it may do the sound. A comfortable
word to one that is samenting over the dead, and weeping at a grave, is not so
likely to make them Proud, as to others in prosperity. A drooping and
discouraged soul, is hardly raised high enough, and kept from sinking: They
have had the sentence past upon them, and have had the rope as it were about
their neck: they have been at the very gates of Hell: they have seen by faith
what work, what woes there are for sin in the life to come, and therefore these
souls have need to hear of their Felicity.

3. Moreover, they have a great deal of work to do; and their strength and
courage is too small: and the work is such as flesh and blood cannot away with,
much less afford them sufficient strength for. Such laborers must have
encouraging strengthening food. Their work is such as will keep them under. God
does not keep his servants idle: and therefore they are in the less danger of
^^xing Proud and wanton. Isa. 35. 2, 3, 4. [ They shall see the glory of the
Lord, and the excellency of our God.] And why is this foretold them? [
strengthen ye^ the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees: say to them that
are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not; behold your God will come with
vengeance, even God with a recompense; he will come and save you] Heb 12. 1^,
13. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make
strait paths for your feet, lest that which is la^e, be turned out of the way,
but let it rather be healed] we are commanded 1 These. 5. 14. as to warn them
that are unruly, so to comfort the feeble-minded, and support the weak.

4. Moreover, the Godly have the greater need of such encouragements, because
they have much suffering to undergo. They have all your hatred and scorns to
suffer, and all the adversities of the world, with which their Father shall
please to exercise them. And he that lays the burden on them, will give them
strength by strengthening mean^. Gods not has corks as well as leads. If birds
had not feathers as well as flesh, they would be unable to fly. As Christ
himself was encouraged to endure the contradiction of sinners, and to bear the
cross, and despise the shame, by looking at the joy that was set before him,
and so for the suffering of death was ^^owned with Glory and ^^^^] Heb. 12. 2,
3. and 2. 9. so will he have his people ^read in his steps, and take up their
^^oss and follow him* and deny themselves and all the world; yet so as to look
at there compence of reward, and seek for glory, honor, and immortality, and
by these to be animated to the work and patience of the Saints, as ^ing to be
Glorified with him* wh^^ they have suffered with (...) Matthew. 16. 24. (...)
Heb. 1^. 26. ^o^. 2. 7. and 8. 17, 18. As the Angel said to Elijah, 1 King. 19.
7. Arise and eat, because the journey is too great for thee] so God
encourages his servants by his Honors and rewards, because the journey, the
labor, the suffering is too great, without such encouragement to be cheerfully
undergone: And in the strength of these consolations, they bear the cross.

5. The objection is most against the Lord. If it be an error to Honor and
extol the Godly, as tending to make them Proud, it is God himself that is the
owner of it. The words that I have recited to you are his own words. Do we
devise these sayings? Or do we not show them you in the Scripture? And dare you
charge God with error, or encouraging Pride? Do you think he knew not what he
said, when he spoke such Honorable things of his servants. Did he need you to
have taught him to have endited his word, and to have warned him that he make
not his servants proud! As if he hated not pride as much as you!

6. Yea God will do more then this for his servants, he will advance them to
Salvation, and yet he will not make them proud. There is no Pride in Heaven,
though there be the greatest Glory. The Angels are most glorious, and yet least
proud. If you would not wish God to keep men out of Heaven lest it make them
proud, you should not grudge at his Honoring them on earth, with the mention
of their Heavenly titles, upon that account.

7. The Exaltation of the Saints is a spiritual exaltation, which is not so apt
to make men Proud, as carnal exaltation is. Charity puffs not up, as ^ery
knowledge does. It is selfishness that is the Life of Pride, (which consists
in excessive selfesteem, and desire of an excessive esteem with others, and to
be magnified by them) And nothing but Grace can subdue this selfishness, and
therefore nothing else candestroy Pride.

8. Moreover the Honor of the Saints, is the less like to make them Proud,
because Humility is part of the Grace that ^^ bestowed on them. To be Proud and
Holy, is to be sick and Holy, to be Light and Dark: they are plain contraries.
No man is proud but for want of Holiness: and therefore that Holiness should
efficiently make men proud is impossible, any more th^n Health can make men
sick, or Darkness can be caused by Light. And if objectively any be Proud of
his Holiness, (...) but in such a measure as he is noholy. Holiness does ever
(...) Pride, and contain Humility and self-denial, as an essential part: All
Christ's Disciples learn of him in their measure to be meek and lowly.

9. Let experience tell you whether it be not some worldly Honor or parts and
gifts, that are the much commoner object of Pride then Holiness. I have often
heard talk of men's being proud of their Humility and Holiness: but the
Temptations of my own soul, have comparatively layn but little that way; nor
have I observed it the common case of others, in any proportion with other
kinds of Pride. Riches and Honors, and Beauty and Dignity, I see people
ordinarily proud of. And I see many Proud of Counterfeit Graces, that have none
that is sincere (as far as may be perceived by others) to be proud of. And I
see many Proud of their Learning, and Knowledge and nimble t^ngnes, a hundred
fold more then ever I found true Christians, Proud of the Love of God, and a
Heavenly mind. Alas we have much a do for the most part, to discern that we
have any of this at all, and to find so much of it in our selves as is
necessary to our support and thankfulness.

10. Lastly consider, what abundance of Means the Lord has adjoined as
Antidotes with his servants Honors to keep them from being puffed up with
Pride; and then tell me whether you dare charge God with error or want of
wisdom in this thing.

1. The nature and life of Holiness consists in the souls retiring home to
God, and adhering to him, and walking as before him. And there is not a more
powerful means in the world, to keep Humble the soul, then the Knowledge of
God. O when a poor sinner has but any lively apprehensions of the Greatness,
and Glory of the Lord, it amazeth him, and levelleth him with the dust, and
abaseth him in his own esteem, and makes him say with Job 40. 4, 5. [ Behold I
am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.] and 4, 5,
6. [ I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees
thee; wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes] One glympse of
God were enough to humble any soul that truly knows him. A Godly man has
still to do with that Majesty that continually aweth him. His (...) is with
him: His thoughts are on him; his work is with him. (...) his word that he
reads, and hears and discourses of, and therefore a^ his word, with
reverence and Godly fear, as knowing that our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.
28, 29. It is God that he prays to, that he meditateth on, and he praises,
and has still to do with. And therefore no wonder if he walk hambly with so
holy and great a God.

2. The sin and misery that once they were in, while they knew not God, will do
much to keep humble a gracious soul, as long as they live. Though God so forget
our sins as to forgive them, yet we can scarce forgive our selves, or at least
can never forget them. Though he see no fin in his servants, as he sees it in
the world, nor so as to hate and condemn them for it; yet they see that once
they were as bad as the world, and were children of wrath as well as others;
They condemn themselves when God does justify them; and set their sins before
their faces, which God does cast behind his back. O those dark, those
ungrateful, and those perilous days, will never be forgotten by the renewed
soul. The thoughts of them shall ever keep us humble. When we look on the
wicked miserable world, to think that such were many of us, though mercy have
washed, and sanctified, and justified us.

3. Moreover, God has so contrived the way of their salvation, that they shall
have all by a Redeemer, and by freest Grace, and none shall be justified by the
works of the Law, nor by any merit of his own; but Boasting is excluded by the
Law of faith, Romans 3. 19, 27, 28. and we shall have nothing but what we receive
besides and contrary to our desert.

4. And alas too much corruption still remains in us: We have flesh that
fights against the spirit, Romans 7. 24. Gal. 5. 17. We know but in part, and
Love God but in part, and serve him with such constant weakness, that these
things are usually such humbling matters to a gracious soul, that were it not
for the Comforter, they would be unable to look up. O to feel how dark we are!
how far from God! how strange to heaven! how little we believe, and know, and
love! these are humbling thought indeed to a soul that is acquainted withit
self (...) ^^verty, beggary, or the reproach in the world, would be so humbling
to them. To find such remnants of that odious sin, that cost them dear, and had
cost them dearer, if it had not cost their Lord so dear, this is constant
matter of humiliation.

5. And too often do their corruptions get advantage of them, and produce some
actual sin, of thought, word or (...) and this also must be grievous to them.

6. The very Bodily informities of Believers, are a constant help to keep them
humble. They have all this treasure but is earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. Their
souls are here so poorly lodged in corruptible Tabernacles of earth, and so
meanly clothed with frail, diseased, mortal flesh, that it is madness to be
proud.

7. And the many and great afflictions of the godly, are medicines that are
purposely given them by their Physicion to cure Pride, and keep them humble.
Why else must their sufferings be so many? and why must they daily bear the
Cross? but that they may be conformed to the image of Christ.

8. And to the same end it is that God does let loose upon them so many
enemies. All Satan's temptations, and the worlds allurements and vexations, and
all their disappointments here, and all the scorns and mocks of the ungodly,
and the censures and slanders of wicked tongues, and often bitter
persescutions, what are they but the bitter medicines of God (permitted and
ordered by him, though cansed by the Devil and wicked men) to save the servants
of the Lord, from the sin and danger of being lifted up? Do you say that their
Honor will make them proud? Why you that thus oppose them and despise them,
are ^uring them of their pride, and do not know it: as Scullions scour the
rust off the vessels for their Masters use; and as Leeches draw out the blood
that causes the disease; and as the Jews by their sin promoted the Redemption
of the world by the death of Christ. When God sees his servants in danger of
being lifted up above measure, he often sends a messenger of Satan (who may be
an Executioner of Gods chastisements) to buffet them, (2 Cor. 12. 7.) Sometimes
by slanders, sometime by reproaches, sometime by imprisonments or greater
sufferings, and sometimes by horrid troublesome temptations.

9. The very foresight of death it self is a humbling means: and the last enemy
Death, is yet unconquered, and our Bodies must corrupt in dust and darkness,
and be kept in the grave as common earth, till the Resurrection, that the soul
may not grow proud that has such a body.

11. And the Day of Judgment is so described to us in the Scripture, as tends
to keep the soul in awe and in Humility. To think of such a day, and such a
reckoning, before such a God, me (...) should humble us.

11. And our Absolution and Glorification at that day, is promised us now but
conditionally (though God will see that the condition be performed by all that
he will save.) And therefore the poor soul is often so far to seek about the
certain sincerity of his own Faith and Repentance, that most of the godly are
kept in fears and doubtings to the death. Yea and Humility and Selfdenyal are
part of this Condition: And all their Honor and Glory with Christ is promised
to the Humble only: Humility is commanded them in the Precept: Humility is it
that they are exhorted to by the Ministers: And Pride is threatened with
everlasting wrath, and described as the Devils image. So that Holiness has all
the advantages against Pride that can be here expected.

12. To conclude, the Godly know that as they have nothing but from God, so
they have nothing but for God: so that their own Honor is for him, more then
for themselves; and it is essential to their Holiness, to make God their end,
and set him highest, and referr all to his Pleasure and Glory. So that you see
now that we may Honor them that fear the Lord, (Psalm 15. 4.) without being
guilty of making them proud, and that we must not deny them the Honor that God
has given them as their due, for fear of their being proud of it. Though this,
as all things else, must be prudently managed to particular persons, according
to their various states.

And therefore let me here warn all you that profess the fear of God: Take heed
lest you be proud of any thing that God has Honored you with: For if you be,
you see what an Army of Reasons and Means you sin against; and consequently how
great your sin will be. And your consciences and the world shall be forced to
justify God and his Holy ways, and to prove against you, that it was not long
of them that you were proud: and that none in the world was more against it
then God and Holiness: and that it was not because you were so Religious, but
because you were no more Religious. And if Pride of Knowledge, Gifts, or
whatsoever, be unmortified in you, it will certainly prove that you are none of
the sanctified; when your profession of Sanctity will never prove that Sanctity
was a cause or confederate in your sin.

AND now I have showed you the Honor of Godliness, let us briefly, (and but
briefly) consider of your Honor that reject it, and see then whether the godly
or ungodly are more Honorable.

1. Ungodly men have the Basest Master in the world. Would you know who? Let
Christ be Judge, John 8. 44. [ Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts
of your father you will do.] 2 Timothy 2. 26. They are taken captive by the Devil
at his will; that is, to do his will: It is he that stirs you up to filthy
talking, to speak against Godliness, to curse and swear, and you do his will.
His will is, that you should neglect a holy life, and you do his will. His will
is, that you live not after the spirit, but after the flesh, and you do his
will. O poor souls! Do you think it is only Witches that expressly Covenant with
him, that are his miserable servants! Alas, it is you also, if you do his will.
For (if you will believe either God or common reason) [ to whom you yield your
selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey, whether of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.] Romans 6. 16. The godly
themselves were the servants of sin, till they obeyed from the heart the
doctrine of the Lord, v. 17. And are you not come to fair preferment, to be the
Devils drudges! Though he should cloth your Bodies with Purple and fine
linen, and feed you sumptuously every day, yet indeed you are no better, as
the case of that miserable man may tell you, Luke 16. It is the greatest
Baseness to have so Base a Master.

2. And it is but an ignoble Base de sign that the ungodly carry on in the
world. What is it but to provide for, and please their flesh? It aims at
nothing beyond this life. And a beast can eat, and drink, and sleep, and play,
and satisfy his lust, as much as they. A swine can carry a mouth full of straw
to his lodging, and a bird can build a nest for her young ones. And what do
ungodly men more in the world! whether Gentlemen or Beggars, the flattered
Gallants or the poor day-labourers, if they be not such as first seek Heaven,
and live to God, what do they but make a pudder in the world, about a little
dirt or smoke? and find themselves somewhat to do that is next to nothing,
instead of that for which they were created; and busy themselves about nothing
till their time is gone, and the night is come when none can work? If you would
judge of a man's Designs, foresee his Seize. If you can tell what End it
is that they come to, you may know how to judge of their intentions and their
course. Their corpses you know, have no greater a Happiness, (after a few
foolish merry hours) then to lie in the earth as filth or dust. You can see no
Honor attained there. It is a child indeed that thinks a gilded Monument over
a rotten carkase, is any great matter of Honor or Benefit to it. And if you
look after the soul, (by the prospective of the Word of God) alas, it goes to
far greater dishonor. And is this it that worldlings make such a stir for?

3. The work also that they are employed in, is like the Design. Sin, which is
the Basest thing in the world, is their employment. The work of a Scullion, or
the basest honest trade you can imagine, is a thousand times less
dishonorable, then sin: Yet flattered Gallants believe not this, when they can
please their flesh without losing the teputation of worthy Gentlemen! Nor will
our common ungodly people be persuaded of it, that are more ashamed to be found
praying then sinning, and to be called a Puritan then a Good Fellow or a
Swearer: and that think they are as good men as others, when up to the ears in
the drudgery of the Devil: As if the filth of sin were no dishonor to them,
which nothing but the Spirit and blood of Christ is able to wash out. These are
the men that Paul mentions with weeping, Phil. 3. 18. that mind earthly
things, whose God is their belly, and who glory in their shame.

4. Moreover, it is a Base disposition that ungodly men are possessed with.
Though their Natures are essentially noble as being the work of God, and
capable of most glorious things; yet have they made them Dispositively Vile:
They are fleshlyminded, earthly-minded, ignorant of Heavenly things, not
savouring the things of the Spirit, but like the Serpent, crawling on earth,
and feeding on the dust Grass is sweeter to a horse then junkets; and a little
money or vainglory is sweeter to a fleshly mind then God and Glory, and all
the treasures of Saints and Angels. A swine never thinks of God or Heaven, but
of his draffe and stie: Ease, and good cheer, and money, and the flattery of
men, are the God and the Heaven of sensual men. And are not these men of Base
dishonorable spirits? Unworthy men! might you have an Everlasting life, and
will you prefer a few days fleshly pleasure? As surely as you may know the
Basenss of a swine or dog by what they feed upon, so surely may you know the
baseness of a carnal mind, by the baseness of its desires and delights.

5. It is also a Base Society that ungodly men are members of. They are in the
Kingdom of darkness, Col. 1. 13. Acts 26. 18. and are dead in sin, in which
they walk according to the course of the world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now walks in the children of disobedience,
among whom they have their conversations, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. Devils are their
invisible companions, and wicked men their visible: but they have none of the
presence and favor of the Lord, nor any communion with him in the spirit.

6. The greatest Dishonor of the ungodly is, that the God of Heaven refuses
to Honor them: yea he despises them: yea he dishonors them with most
contemptuous titles. And certainly God knows what he says of them; and it is
impossible that he should do them wrong. Yet does he call them the seed of the
Serpent, that stand at enmity with his flock, Genesis 3. 15. he calls them his
enemies, and accordingly will use them, Luke 19. 27. He calls them Dogs and
Swine, and the Children of the Devil, John 8. 44. Matthew. 7. 6. They dishonored
and despised him, and he will dishonor and despise them, and has resolved
that their very names shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.

7. But it is the Everlasting shame that will tell us what was the Honor of
the ungodly. When Christ shall be ashamed of them before his Father and the
Heavenly Angels, Matthew. 8. 38. and shall tell them that he never knew them,
Matthew. 7. 23. When all their former pomp and splendor, will be turned into
perpetual shame and sorrows, then where is the Honor of the ungodly world?
Where then are their flatterers? Who boweth to them, and calls them Right
Honorable and Right Worshipful any more? Where now are their sumptuous houses
and attendance? Now they have other kind of servitours; and other language, and
other usage then they had on earth. And the poor wretches that stormed at a
faithful Minister for foretelling these woeful changes to them, and speaking so
dishonourably of them, as to tell them of their sin, are at last saying an
hundred fold worse of themselves, then ever we did say against them. Then they
shall need none to call them fools, and vile, and wretches, but their own
Consciences, that will speak it out, and speak it again ten thousand times, and
never be bribed to forbear. O how base a despicable Generation will the ungodly
then be (that now speak so stoutly and look so high) when God shall
everlastingly frown them into contempt and misery, and the glorified Saints
shall look down upon them without compassion, even prasing the Justice that for
ever does torment them! Then let the Kings and Nobles of the earth maintain
their ancient Honors if they can: Or let them take comfort in the remembrance
of their former dreams: and try whether this will be to them instead of a drop
of water.

Well, Sirs, I have faithfully told you from the Word of God, of the Honor of
the Godly, and the Baseness of the ungodly, that you may be resolved, which is
the Better part. If yet you will not see, you shall see and be ashamed, Isa.
26. 11. When you have heard your last and dreadful doom, and seen the Lord make
up his Jewels, then shall you discern between the Righteous and the wicked;
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3. 17, 18.

CHAP. X. Holiness the most Pleasant Way.
I Have proved beyond all reasonable contradiction that Holiness is the Safe,
the Honest, the Profitable and the Honorable state and course: But my hardest
task is yet to be done; and that is, to prove it the most Pleasant way. And the
difficulty of this is not at all from the matter, but from the persons with
whom I have to do. For nothing is Pleasant unto men, but what is suitable to
their natures, and apprehended by them to be for their good, or in it self more
excellent then their good. That is Pleasant to one man that is loathsome to
another. As the food and converse is delightful to a beast, that is loathsome
and as ^ad as death to man: So one man's Pleasure is another Pain. Even about
the common matters of this life, variety of complexions, educations, customs,
dispositions, does cause a variety of affections; the difference between the
sanctified and unsanctified, the spiritual and the carnal mind, does cause a
greater contrariety. If therefore the error of wicked minds, or the distemper
of your souls, do make the Best things seem the worst, and the sweetest things
to seem most Bitter, this is no confutation of my Argument, that proves the way
of Godliness most Pleasant. If I would prove that wine is pleasanter then
Vinegar, or Bread then dirt or ashes, I mean not to appeal to the appetites of
the sick; It is the sound and healthful that must be judges. If a man will
suffer his mind to be possessed with prejudice and base thoughts of God
himself, no wonder if he cannot love him, nor take any delight in him*

And if men have a malignant enmity to Godliness, no reason will persuade them
that it is most pleasant, but what persuades them from that enmity. No Reason
will persuade a sloathful person that Labor is better then sleep and idleness;
no Reason will persuade a drunkard, glutton, or voluptuous wretch, that
abstinence and continence are the sweetest life. Could we change their Hearts,
we should change their Pleasures. Such as men are, such are their delights But
the thing that I undertake, is, to manifest to any competent discerner, that
Holiness is the most Pleasant course; and that all the Pleasures of the Earth
are Nothing to the Pleasures which the Godly find in God, and in a Holy life:
and if any be not of this mind, it is because his souls diseases have made him
an incompetent judge. And that Godliness is the Pleasant State of life, will
appear to you, 1. From the Nature of the thing it self. 2. From the
encouragements and helps with which it is attended. 3. From the effects and
fruits.

I. The Nature of Holiness is to be found, 1. In the Understanding, 2. In the
will and affections, and 3. In the Practice of men's lives. And in all these I
shall show you that it is the most Delightful course.

1. Knowledge in it self is a pleasant thing to humane nature. Ignorance is the
blindness of the soul. It is not so pleasant for the eye to behold the sun, as
for the mind of man to discern the truth. To Know Good and Evil, had never been
the matter of so strong a Temptation to Adam, if Knowledge had not been very
desirable to innocent nature. How hard do many even ungodly persons study to
know the mysteries of Nature? And nothing has more strongly tempted some
wretches to witchcraft or contracts with the Devil, then a desire of knowing
unrevealed things, which by his means they have hoped to attain. A studious man
has far more natural valuable Delight, in his reading and succesful studies,
then a voluptuous Epicure has in his sensual Delights.

But it is a special kind of Knowledge that Holiness does (initially) consist
in, which transcendeth in true Pleasure all the common wisdom of the worid: For

1. How Pleasant a thing must it needs be to know things of so high a Nature?
To know the Almighty, Living God: to behold his wisdom, goodness and power, in
his glorious works, to be led to him by all the Creatures, and hear of him by
every Providence, and find his Holy Blessed Name in every leaf of his sacred
word, how sweet and pleasant a thing is this! To know the Divine Nature,
Persons, Attributes, and Will, to know the mystery of the Incarnation, of the
person, natures, undertaking, performance of the blessed Mediator Jesus Christ,
to know his birth, his life, temptations, conquests, his righteousness, his
holy doctrine and example, the Law and promise, the Law of Nature, and the
Covenant of Grace, the sufferings, Resurrection, ascension, glorification and
intercession of our Lord: to know his Kingdom, Laws, and Government, and his
Judgment, with his Rewards and punishments; to know the sanctifying works of
the Holy Ghost, by which we are prepared for everlasting life; and to know that
life (though but by faith) for which we are here prepared, how high and
pleasant a thing is this! If it be pleasant to know the course of nature, in
those higher parts that are above the vulgar reach, what is it to know the God
of Nature, and the true use and End of Nature? What high things does the
poorest Christian know? He knows the things that are invisible.

Think not that faith is so void of Evidence as not to deserve the name of
Knowledge: We Know the things which we do believe. Nicodemus could say from the
Evidence of Miracles, Joh. 3. 2. We know that thou ar^ a Teacher come from God:
for no man could do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him.]
Joh. 9. 29. We know that God spoke to Moses,] say the Jews. We know that the
Scripture testimony is true, Joh. 21. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know (even by
believing) that if this earthly house of our tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens] 1 John
3. 2. We know that when we shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is] Joh. 14. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you] We know that no whoremonger* (...) such like shall
inherit eternal life, Ephesians. 5. 5. We know that ^^^ Labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Many such passages of Scripture tell us, that Faith is a
certain Knowledge, and that Invisible things revealed by God, are certainly
known. We know what Saints and Angels are now doing in the highest heavens: for
God has told us. We know the most high and glorious things revealed by God,
which we never saw. And is not the Pleasure of such knowledge greater then the
Pleasure of all the wealth, the honor and sensual enjoyments in this world! I
durst almost refer the case to one of you that are most befooled by your own
sensuality. If you could go tomorrow and meet with a soul from Heaven, or with
an Angel, that could tell you what becomes of souls, and what is done in
another world, Would you not rather go to such a conference, then go as far to
a drinking, or a bowling, or some such recreation? I think you would, if it
were but to satisfy your curiosity and desire of Knowing. Why then should not
the servants of Christ more Delight, in the reading and hearing the words of
Christ, that came from the bosom of the Father, that has seen God, and is
with God, and is God himself, that tells them more certainly of the Invisible
things then any Saints or Angels can tell them? Why should not this, I say be
sweeter to them, then all the fleshly pleasures in the world? O that I could
know more of God, and more of the mystery of Redemption, even of an obedient,
crucified, glorified Christ; and more of the invisible world, and of the
blessed state of souls, on condition I left all the Pleasures of this world, to
sensual men! O that I had more clear and firm apprehensions of these
transcendent glorious things! How easily could I spare the Pleasures of the
flesh, and leave those husks to swine to feed on? O could my Soul get nearer
God, and be more irradiated with his heavenly beams, my mind would need no
other recreation, and I should as little relish carnal Pleasures, as carnal
minds do relish the heavenly delights. As earthly things are poor and low, so
is the knowledge of them. As things spiritual and heavenly are High and
Glorious, mysterious and profound, the knowledge of them is accordingly
Delighful [ And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness; God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Faith
is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. It is far pleasanter by faith
to see the Lord, the to see any Creature by the eye of flesh: and sweeter ^y
faith to see Heaven opened, and there behold our Glorified Lord, then to see a
horse-race, or stage play, or any of the folleries of the world.

2. The knowledge of things to Come is specially desired, and Godliness
contains that Faith which knows things to come. How glad would men be to be
told what shall besall them to the last hour of their lives? The woman of
Samaria Joh. 4. called out her neighbors with admiration to see Christ, as one
that had told her all that she had done: But if he had told her all that ever
she would do, for the time to come, and all that ever should befall her, it
might have astonished her much more. Believers know what has been even before
the world was made, and how it was made, and what has been since then, and
they know what will be to all eternity. A true Believer knows from Scripture,
whither men's Souls go after death, and how their Bodies shall be raised again,
and how Christ will come to Judge the world, and who shall then be justified,
and who shall be condemned: and what shall be the case of the godly and the
ungodly to all eternity. And is it not more pleasant to know these things, then
to possess all the vain delights of the earth? Can the flesh afford you any
thing so delightful?

3. Especially, it is desirable and Pleasant to Know those things that most
concern us: Needless speculations and curiosities we can spare: There is a
Knowledge that brings more pain then pleasure; Yea there is a Knowledge that
will torment. But to know our own affairs, our greatest and most necessary
affairs; to know our threatened misery to prevent it, and to know our offered
Happiness to obtain it; to know our Portion, our Honor, our God, what can be
more Pleasant to the mind of man! Other men's matters we can pass by: But to
Know such things concerning our own souls, as what we must be and do for ever,
and what course we must take to be everlastingly happy, must needs be a feast
to the mind of a wise man. Ask but a soul that is haunted with temptations to
unbelif, whether any thing would be more welcome to him, then the clear and
satisfying apprehensions of a lively faith? Ask one that lies in tears or
groans, through the feeling of their sin, and the fears of the wrath of God,
and doubtings of his love, whether the satisfying Knowledge of pardon, and
reconciliation, and divine acceptance, would not be more pleasant to them, then
any of your merriments can be to you? Ask that poor soul that has lost the
apprehension of his Evidences of grace, and walks in darkness, and has no
light, that seeks, and cries, and perceives no hearing, whether the discovery
of his Evidences, the assurance that his Prayers are accepted, and the light of
Gods countenance shining on him, would not be Better to him then any
Recreation, or any Pleasure the earth affords. Ask any man at the hour of
death, that is not a block, Whether now the Knowledge of his salvation would
not be Better and more Pleasnt to him, then all the lust, or sport, or honors
of the world.

4. The Knowledge of the Best and Joyfullest matters, must be the Best and
Pleasantest Knowledge. And nothing can be Better then God and Glory. Nothing
can be sweeter then salvation; and therefore this must be the sweetest
Knowledge. I had rather have the pleasure of one hours clear and lively
Knowledge of my salvation, and of the special Love of God, then to be exalted
above the greatest Prince, and to have all the Pleasures that my senses can
desire. The Delights of the flesh are base and brutish, and nothing to the
spiritual Heavenly Delights of the renewed mind.

5. The manner of our Holy Knowledge, makes it more Delightful. 1: It is a
Certain and Infallible Knowledge. It is not a [ may be], or bare possibility:
It is not, It is possible there may be a Heaven and Happiness hereafter: But it
is as true as the Word of God is true: We have his own hand, and seal, and
earnest for it: Even his precious promises, and oath, confirmed by miracles,
and fulfilled-prophecy, and bearing his own image and superscription, and
shining to us by its own light: We have in our hearts the spirit which is Gods
earnest, by which we are sealed up to the day of our final full redemption. And
if the soul yet stagger at the promise of God through the remnants of unbelief,
that shall not make the promise of God of none effect; but his foundation shall
still stand sure: His word shall not pass till all be fulfilled, though heaven
and earth shall pass away. A message by one that were sent to us from the dead,
were not more credible then the Word of God. And this Certainty of Holy Faith
and Knowledge is a very great contentment to the soul. When the Glory of the
Saints is a thing as sure as if we saw it with our eyes, and as sure as these
things which we daily see; it is a great pleasure to the soul, when it can but
apprehend this joyful Certainty.

2. And that there is a certain easiness and plainness in the great and
necessary points of faith, as to the manner of Revelation, does add much to
Faith's, Satisfaction and Delight. The points that life and death lie on, are
not left so obscure as might perplex us, lest we did not know the meaning of
them. But they are so plain, that he that runs may read them; and the simple,
that are but honest-hearted, may certainly understand them: Which quiets, and
pleases, and satisfies the mind.

3. And yet there is an exciting Difficulty in many things that are offered to
our Knowledge, which does but make our holy studies the more delightful. If the
Word of God were so plain and obvious to all, that it might be all understood
at the first reading, the plainness would bring our Sacred Knowledge into
contempt, as being an easy common thing. Things common and easily got, are
little set by: But when the plainness is such as may prevent our despair and
dissatisfaction, and yet the Difficulty such, that it may hold us in study, and
prevent our contempt, it makes the most delightful Knowledge. It is Pleasant to
find some daily addition to our Light, and to be on the gaining and thriving
hand, and this upon our diligent search: Successes are as pleasant as a present
fullness of supplies: The daily blessing of God upon our studies, and humble
learning, adds to our delight. So that all this set together, may show you
how pleasant a thing it is to have the Knowledge of a Saint.

Especially if you add that he has an Exporimental, and so a sweeter
Knowledge, then the most learned men have that are ungodly. He has tasted that
the Lord is gracious, and he has tasted the sweetness of his Love, and of all
the Riches of his Grace in Christ, and of his full and precious promises, and
of the inward powerful workings of his spirit. His experimental Knowledge is
the most Delightful Knowledge.

The Pleasure of Natural Knowledge is great, but the Pleasure of saving
Knowledge is much greater. I do not believe that ever any of the Ambitious
troublers of the world, that let go Heaven that they may Rule on Earth, have
half the Pleasure in their Greatness and usurped Dignities, as an honest
Student has in his Books, and studious exercises and successes: But if you
compare the Pleasures of their Greatness and Commands, with the Pleasure of a
true Believing soul, in his life of Faith, and sweet forethoughts of his
Heavenly Inheritance, I must plainly tell you that we disdain the comparison.
Again I say, that if you will compare the Drunkards, the Fornicators, or the
Ambitious or Covetous man's delight, with the solace that I find in my retired
studies, even about natural common things, I disdain the comparison: But if you
compare their Pleasure, with that little, alas too little, pleasure that I find
in the believing thoughts of Life Eternal, I do not only disdain your
comparison, but detest it.

Were I minded to be long, I would show you from these twelve particular
Instances, the abundant Pleasure of Holy Knowledge.

1. What a Pleasant thing is it to know the Lord, the Eternal God, in his
blessed Attributes! The dimmest glimmering Knowledge of God, is better then the
clearest Knowledge of all the mysteries of nature.

2. How Pleasant is it to know the works of his Creation? How, and why, and
when he made the world, and all that is therein?

3. How Pleasant is it to know the blessed Son of God, and to behold the face
of his Fathers Love that is revealed in him as his fullest Image?

4. How Pleasant is it to know the Law and Gospel: the Matter and the Method:
the litteral and spiritual sense: to see there the mind and will of God: and to
see our Charter for the Heavenly Inheritance; and read the Precepts, and the
Promises, and the Examples of the faith and patience of the Saints?

5. How Pleasant is it to know the Heavenly operations of the Holy Ghost, and
the nature and action of his several Graces, and the uses of every one of them
to our souls; and especially to find them in our selves, and to be skilled in
using them?

6. How Pleasant is it to know the nature and frame of the Church of Christ
which is his Body, and to know the difference and use of the several members?
To understand the office of the Ministry, and why Christ has set them in the
Church, and how much love he has manifested therein: that they should preach
to us, and offer us Reconciliation in his name and stead, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and
marry us unto Christ in Baptism, receiving us in his name into the Church and
holy Covenant: and that in his name and stead they should deliver us his body
and blood, and absolve the penitent sinner from his sins, and deliver him a
sealed pardon, and receive the returning humbled soul into the Church of Christ
and Communion of the Saints!

7. How Pleasant is it to know the nature and use of all Christ's Ordinances:
The excellencies of his Holy Word: the use of Baptism, and the refreshing,
strengthening use of the Supper of the Lord: the use and benefit of Holy
prayer, and praises, and thanksgiving, and Church Order, and all parts of the
Communion of the Saints!

8. Yea there is a holy Pleasure in knowing our very sin and folly. When God
brings a sinner to himself, though his sin be odious to him, yet to know the
sin is Pleasant; and therefore he prays that God would show him the bottom of
his heart, and the most secret or odious of his sins.

9. And it is Pleasant to a Christian to know his Duty. It very much quieteth
and delights his mind, when he can but know what is the will of God: When the
way of Duty is plain before him, how cheerfully can he go on, whatever meet
him? and how easy does it make his labor and his suffering?

10. Yea it is Pleasant to a Believer to understand his very danger: Though the
Danger it self be dreadful to him, yet to know it, that he may avoid it, is his
desire and his delight.

11. And how Pleasant is it to understand all the Helps, Encouragements and
Comforts that God has provided for us in our way? and how many more are for
us, then against us?

12. But above all, how Pleasant is it to know by faith, the life that we must
live with God for ever? and what he will do for us to all eternity, in the
performance of his holy Covenant.

I do but briefly name these Instances of Delightful Knowledge, which are
sweeter to the holy soul then all the Pleasures of sin to the ungodly. Do you
think that any of you has such solid Pleasure in your sins, as David had in
the Law of God, when he meditated in it with such delight, and says, How sweet
is it to my mouth? even sweeter then the honey and the honeycomb. Surely you
dare not compare with him in Pleasures.

2. Another part of Holiness that is Pleasant in the Nature of it, is that
which is subjected in the heart or affections. And here is the chiefest of its
sweetness and delights.

1. The very compliance of the Will with the Will of God, and its Conformity to
his Law, does carry a quieting Pleasure in it. That soul is happyest that is
nearest God, and likest to him; and that soul may well be fullest of Delight,
that is most Happy: And that soul is nearest and likest unto God, whose Will is
most conformed to his Will: The trouble of the Heart is its unsettledness, when
it is not bottomed on the Will of God: When we feel that Gods Will does Rule
and satisfy us, and that we would fain be what he would have us be, and rest
in his Disposing Will, as well as obey his Commanding Will, this gives abundant
Pleasure and quietness to the soul.

2. The holy workings of Charity in the soul, are exceeding Pleasant. All the
acts of Love to God and man are very sweet. This is the holy work, that is its
own wages.

1. The ^^^^ of God is so sweet an exercise, that verily my soul had rather be
employed in it with sense and vigor, then to be Lord of all the earth. O could
I but be taken up with the Love of God, how easily could I spare the Pleasure
of the flesh? Might I but see the Loveliness of my dear Creator, with a clearer
view; and see his glory in his noble works; Might I but see and feel that
saving Love which he has manifested in the Redeemer, till my soul were
ravished and filled with his Love, how little should I care who had the
Pleasures of this deceitful world! Had I more of that blessed spirit of
Adoption, and more of those filial affections to my heavenly Father, which his
unutterable Love bespeaks; and were I more sensible of his abundant mercy, and
did my soul but breath and long after him more earnestly, I would pity the
miserable Tyrants of the world, that are worse then Beggars while they
domineer, and taste not of that Kingdom of Love and Pleasure that dwells in my
breast. All the Pleasures of the world, are the laughing of a mad man, or the
sports of a child, or the dreams of a sick man, in comparison of the Pleasures
of the Love of God.

2. And the Love of Holiness, the Image of God has, its degree of Pleasure.
And so has the Love of the Holy servants of the Lord. There is a sweetness in
the soul in its goings out after any Holy object, in spiritual Love. Yea more,
our very common Love of men, and our Love of Enemies, has its proportion of
pleasure, far better then the sensual Pleasure of the ungodly. To feel so much
of the operations of grace, and to answer our holy pattern, in Loving them that
hate us, does give much ease and pleasure to the mind. The exercises of Love to
God and man, and that for his sake, are the exceeding Pleasure of a gracious
soul.

And here by the way, you may take notice of one reason why Hypocrites and
ungodly men find no such sweetness in the exercises of Religion; Because they
let alone the inward Pleasant work of Love, which is the soul and life of
Outward duty* This inward work is the Pleasant work: while they are strangers
unto this, their outward duties will be but a toll, (...) seem a drudgery or a
wearysome employment.

There is a Pleasure even in Holy Desires: When a Christian feels his heart
enlarged, in longing after the welfare of the Church and the good of others.
Though the absence of the thing desired be a^e, yet the exercise of holy desire
(which is an act of Love) is pleasant to us. If the Lustfu have a pleasure in
their vile Desires, and the Ambitious and the Covetous have a pleasure in their
vain and delusory desires, the wise well-guided desires of a true believer must
needs be pleasant.

4. Especially when Desire is accompanied with Hope. All the Pleasures of this
world, are far short of affording that Rest and quiet to the soul, as the Hope
of Glory does to the believer. O happy soul that is acquainted by experience,
with the lively Hopes of the everlasting Happiness! It is not the Hope of
corruptible Riches, nor of a fading inheritance, but of the Crown that sadeth
not, and of the precious, certain, durable treasure! It is not a Hope in the
promise of a deceitful man, but in the word of the everliving God! The soul
that has this Anchor, needs not be tossed with those fears and cares and
anxieties of mind, that worldly men are subject to. This Hope will never make
them ashamed. If a man were in a consumption, or sentenced to Death, would not
the Hopes of Life, upon certain Grounds, be pleasanter to him, then sport, or
mirth, or lustful objects, or any such present sensitive delights? Much more if
with the hopes of Life, he had the hopes of all the felicities of Life, and of
the perpetuity of all these? O may I but be enabled by faith to lift up the eye
of my soul to God, and view the everlasting mansions and by hope to take
possession of them, and say, All this is mine in Title, even upon the Promise
of the faithful God! what greater Pleasure can my soul possess, till it enter
on the full Possession of those eternal Pleasures! O poor deluded worldly men!
What is the Pleasure of your wealth to this? O brutish sinners! what is the
Pleasure of your mirth and jollity, your meat and drink, your pride and
bravery, your lust and filthiness in comparison of this! O poor Ambitious
dreaming men, that make such a stir for the Honor and Greatness of this world!
What is the Pleasure of your Idol-honour, and short vainglory in comparison of
this! while you have it, you have no Hope of Keeping it: you are troubled with
the thought of leaving it: Had we no higher Hopes then yours, how miserable
should we be?

5. The Trust and repose of the soul on God, which is another part of the life
of grace, is exceeding Pleasant and quieting to the soul. To find that we stand
upon a Rock, and that under us are the everlasting arms, and that we have so
full security for our salvation, as the promise and Oath of the immutable God,
what a stay, what a Pleasure is this to the Believer? The troubles of the godly
are most from the remnants of their unbelief: The more they believe, the more
they are comforted and established: The life of faith is a Pleasant life. Faith
could not conquer so many enemies, and carry us through so much suffering and
distress, as you find in that cloud of testimonies, Heb. 11. if it were not a
very comfortable work. Even we that see not the salvation ready to be revealed,
may yet greatly rejoice, for all the manifold temptations, that for a season
make us subject to some heavyness, 1 Pet. 1. 5, 6. And we that see not Jesus
Christ, yet Believing can love him and rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory, v. 8. The God of Hope does sometimes fill his servants with all Joy and
peace in believing, and makes them even abound in Hope through the Power of the
Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13.

6. Yea Joy is it self a part of the Holy qualification of the Saints, and of
the renewed state that grace has brought them into. For the Kingdom of God
consists as in Righteousness, so in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17. Believers receive not the spirit of bondage again to fear, that is, they
are not under the bondage of the Law, nor have the spirit or state of mind
which is suited to those Legal impositions and terrible comminations: but they
have received the spirit of Adoption by which they cry Abba father, that is, As
they are brought under a more gracious dispensation, and a better Covenant and
promises, and God is revealed to them in the Gospel as a Reconciled Father
through his son, so does he treat them more gently as reconciled children, and
the spirit which answers this gracious Covenant, and is given us thereupon,
does qualify us with a child-like disposition, and cause us with boldness,
Love and confidence, to call God Father, and fly to him for succor and supply,
in all ou^ dangers and necessities. And how Pleasant it must be to a believing
soul, to have this spirit of Adoption, this childlike Love and confidence, and
freedom with the Lord, methinks you might conjecture, though its sensibly known
by them only that enjoy it, Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace* etc.] when the word is first received by Believers, though it may be in
much affliction, through the persecutions and cross that attend the Gospel, yet
is it ordinarily in the Joy of the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1. 6. The Holy Ghost is
the Comforter of true Believers: And if he have taken it upon him as his work,
he will surely do it, in the degree and season fittest for them. And if Joy it
self be part of the state of Grace and Holiness, you may see that it is the
most delightful Pleasant course.

7. Yea that we may have a Pleasant and comfortable life, the Lord has
forbidden our distracting cares and fears and doubts, and our inordinate
sorrows; and commanded us to cast our care on him, and promised to care for us,
1 Pet. 5. 7. and he has bid us be careful for nothing, but in all things make
our wants known to him, Phil. 4. 6. And can there be a course of life more
Pleasant then that which do consist in faith, and Love, and hope, and Joy,
that's built on God, and animated by him, and that excludes inordinate cares
and sorrows, as health does sickness? where it is unlawful to be miserable and
to grieve our selves, and no sorrow is allowed us, but that which tends to
our joy; where it is made our work to Rejoice in the Lord, yea always to
Rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. A servant or tradesman will judge of the pleasure of his
life by his work. If his work be a drudgery, his life is tedious and filled
with grief: If his work be Pleasant, his life is Pleasant. Judge then by this
of a Holy life. Is it care, and fear, and anguish of mind that God commands
you? no: it is these that he forbids. [ Care not: Fear not] are his
injunctions, Isa. 35. 4. and 41. 10. Do you fear Reproach? Why, you do it
contrary to the will of God, who bids you, [ Fear not the reproach of men,
Isa. 51. 7.] Do you fear the power and rage of enemies? Why it is contrary to
your Religion so to do: God bids you, Fear them not, Isa. 43. 5, 13, 14. and
44. 2, 8. Do you fear persecution or death from the hands of cruel violence?
why it is contrary to the will of God that you do so, Matthew. 10. 26, 28, 31.
Fear not them which kill the body, etc.] O blessed life! where all that is
against us is forbidden: and all that is truly Joyous and delightful, and
necessary to make us happy, is commanded us, and made our duty: which is
contrary to misery, as life to death, and as light to darkness. Come hither
poor deluded sinners that fly from care, and fear and sorrow: If you will but
give up your selves to Christ, you shall be exempted from all these, except
such as is necessary to your joy. You may do any thing, if you will be the
servants of the Lord, except that which tends to your own and other men's
calamity. Come hither all you that call for pleasure, and love no life but a
life of mirth. Let God be your master, and Holiness your work, and Pleasure
then shall be your business: and holy Mirth shall be your employment; While you
serve the flesh, your pleasure is small, and your trouble great: vexation is
your work, and unspeakable vexation is your wages. But if you will be the
hearty servants of the Lord, Rejoicing shall be your work and wages: If you
understand not this, peruse your lesson, Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord O ye
Righteous, for Praise is comely for the upright.] Psalm. 97. 11, 12. Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart: Rejoice in the
Lord ye Righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.] Phil.
3. 1. Psalm. 5. 11. [ Let all those that trust in thee rejoice: let them ever
shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that Love thy name,
be joyful in thee.] Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye
righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.] Psalm. 132. 9.
16. [ Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness, and let thy Saints shout
for joy: 16. I will also cloth her Priests with salvation, and his Saints
shall shout aloud for joy] such precepts and promises abound in Scripture,
which tell you if you will be Saints indeed, that Joy and gladness must be your
life and work. I know objections will be stirring in your minds: But forbear
them but a while, and I shall fully answer them anon.

2. I have told you wherein the Inward part of Holiness is Delightful; I shall
briefly show you that the Outward part also is very Pleasant, and fit to feed
these inward joys. And 1. let us view the Duties that are more directly to be
performed unto God: and 2. The works of charity and righteousness unto men.

1. How sweet is it to be exercised in the word of God? In hearing or reading
it with serious meditation? For the man that has been revived by it, renewed,
sanctified, saved by it, to hear that powerful heavenly truth, by which his
soul was thus made new! For the soul that is in Love with God, to hear or see
his blessed name, on every leaf! to read his will, and find the expressions of
his Love, his great, eternal, wondrous love, how sweet this is, experience
tells the Saints that feel it: If you that feel no sweetness in it, believe not
them that say they feel it, at lea^^ believe the word of God, and the
professions of his ancient Saints, Psalm. 119. 97. [ O how I love thy Law! it is
my meditation all the day] v. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea
sweeter then the honey, and the hony-comb] v. 14. 16. I have rejoiced in the
way of thy testimonies as in all riches. I will delight my self in thy
statutes: I will not forget thy word] 24. [ Thy testimonies are my delight and
my counsellors] 47. [ I will delight my self in thy Commandments which I have
loved, and I will meditate in thy statutes.] 72. [ The Law of thy mouth is
better to me then thousands of Gold and Silver.] 92. [ Unless thy Law had been
my delight, I had perished in my affliction] 93. I will never forget thy
precepts for with them thou have quickened me.] 111. [ Thy testimonies have I
taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart] 117. I
love thy commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold:] 162. I rejoice at thy
word as one that finds great spoile] 165. Great peace have they that love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them.]

I should but weary you to recite one quarter of the expressions of holy men in
Scripture concerning the sweetness and Pleasures which they found, in the Law
of God. In a word, it is the work and mark of the Blessed man, that His
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and
night, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Do you think that an unpleasant tedious life that does
consist in such employment?

2. Another Holy Duty is Prayer, both secret, and with others, in family, and
public Assemblies. And do you think it is a grievous tedious work, for a needy
soul to beg of God, that is so ready to relieve him? For a guilty soul to pray
to God that is so ready to forgive him? for a sinful soul to return to God,
(and confess his sins, and beg for mercy,) that is so ready to meet him and
entertain him! for a Loving soul to converse with God, when there is a mutual
complacency between them? Is it grievous for a child to speak to his Father??
or are you weary of the presence of your dearest friend? What is there in holy
prayer that should grieve or weary us? sure it is not his company that we speak
to: For it is his presence that makes Heaven^ And sure it is not the
employment. For it is but Asking, and asking for the best and choicest thing,
and asking in our necessities for that which we must have or we are undone for
ever. And is it unpleasant to pray to a bounteous God, in our necessity, and
that for the best and pleasantest things? Perhaps there may be some of you that
think it is but labor lost, and that you could better spend those hours, and
that God regards not our prayers, and that indeed we speed never the better
for them, and therefore you have no pleasure in them.] And no wonder! If you
are Atheists and believe not that there is a God, you cannot love him, or
rejoice in him. If you believe not his Promises, how should they give you any
comfort! If you believe not that he regards Prayers, no wonder if you have no
heart to pray: They that say It is in vain to serve the Lord, and it is no
profit to us to keep his ordinances, Mal. 3. 14. Will also say, what a
weariness is it! Mal. 1. 13. and will give him but a lame and lifeless service.
If you did believe your friend to be your enemy, you would have small pleasure
in him: Mis-conceits may easily make you loath the things that are most
delightful. The thoughts of Heaven it self yield little Pleasure to them that
believe not that there is a Heaven, or what it is. The Light is not pleasant to
the blind: nor any object of our taste or smell to those that have lost these
senses. Is music unpleasant, because it delights not the deaf? For shame do
not charge the sweet and blessed ways of God with that which is the fruit of
your own corruption. If your lungs be rotten, you may be out of breath with
speaking the most delightful words, or walking in the most pleasant fields or
gardens; But the cause of the weariness is within you. If you have the hearts
of Infidels, or graceless stupid worldly sinners, you are so unfit to approach
the most Holy God in holy prayer, that I marvail not if you go to it as a Bear
to the stake, as an Ox to the yoke, or as an offender to the stocks; For the
God that you pray to, is a bater of all the workers of iniquity, and a
consuming fire; and therefore no wonder if his terrors should meet you and
leave you but little delight in prayer (Though its wonder that they do not
follow you, and meet you in all your ways, and leave you less delight in the
omission of it) But if you had the hearts of believing holy men, and had tasted
in prayer what they have tasted, and had their experience of the success, you
would then be easily persuaded that prayer is neither a Vain nor an unpleasnt
work. Surely it is not unpleasant to a burdened soul to dis-burden it self
before the Lord: nor to a sinner that has felt the weight, the smart, the
sting of sin, to cry for mercy, and healing to him that is able and willing to
show mercy; nor i^ it unpleasant for him that knows the worth of grace and
glory, to lie upon his knees in begging them of the Lord. All those that have
felt how good it is to draw near to God, had rather have leave to pray in hope,
then to please their senses with any delights that earth affords. There is
force in Prayer (through the grace that has appointed and does accompany it)
to procure comfort to the distressed mind, and safety to them that are in
danger, relief to them that are in want, and strength to them that are in
weakness. Prayer is good for all things that are good; and good against all
things that are evil. It is good against temptations, dangers, enemies and sin:
It is good against sorrows, fears, and cares: yea against povery, shame and
sickness. For the God that Prayer goes to, and makes use of, is sufficient
against all, and our only help. Turn away now from God if you dare, and cast
off earnest constant Prayer, as if it were a tedious unpleasant thing! but be
sure the time is coming when thou, even thou that thus despisest it, wilt
betake thy self to Prayer, and cry Lord, Lord, when it is too late, or when
anguish and terror seize upon thee. Sickness, and death, and the terrors of
the Lord will teach thee to pray, as useless and tedious as now you think it:
Yea and teach you to do it earnestly, that now put off all with a few frozen
heartless words. But O it is seasonable believing prayer that is comfortable:
It is the prayer of Faith, and Love, and Hope that is pleasant: but the prayer
of too late repentance in Hell, and the prayer of despair and horror, that
cannot procure a drop of water, afford no pleasure, as they procure no relief.

3. Another duty that Holiness consists in, is Thanksgiving and Praise to the
God of our salvation. He that knows not that this work is Pleasant, is
unacquainted with it. If there be any thing Pleasant in this world, it is the
praises of God, that flow from a believing, loving soul, that is full of the
sense of the mercies, and goodness, and excellencies of the Lord; Especially,
the ^^animous conjunction of such souls, in the high praises of God in the holy
Assemblies. Is it not pleasant, even to Name the Lord! to mention his
Attributes! to remember his great and wondrous works! to magnify him that
rides on the Heavens, that dwells in the light that cannot be approached,
that is clothed with Majesty and Glory, that infinitely surpasses the Sun in
its ^rightness; that has his Throne in the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him; and yet he delights in the humble soul, and has respect
to the contrite, yea dwells with them that tremble at his Word. Is any thing so
pleasant as the Praises of the Lord! How sweet is it to see and praise him as
the Creator, in the various wonderful creatures which he has made! How
pleasant to observe his works of providence, to them that read them by the
light of the Sanctuary, and in Faith and Patience learn the interpretation,
from him that only can interpret them. But O how unspeakably Pleasant is it to
see the Father in the Son; and the Godhead in the manhood of our Lord, and
the Riches of Grace in the glass of the holy Gospel, and the manifold wisdom of
God in the Church, where the Angels themselves disdain not to behold it! Ephesians.
3. 10, 11. The praising of God for the incarnation of his Son, was a work that
a chore of Angels were employed in as the instructors of the Church, Luke 2.
13, 14. There is not a promise in the book of God, nor one passage of the Life
and Miracles of Christ, and the rest of the History of the Gospel, nor one of
the holy works of the spirit upon the soul, nor one of those thousand mercies
to the Church, or to our selves, or friends, that infinite Goodness does
bestow, but contain such matter of Praise to God, as might fill believing
hearts with Pleasure, and find them most delightful work: Much more when all
these are at once before us, what a feast is there for a gracious Soul!

O you befooled fleshly minds, that find no pleasure in the things of God, but
had rather be drinking, or gaming, or scraping in the world, awaken your souls
and see what you are doing! With what eyes do you see, with what hearts do you
think of the Works, and Word, and Ways of God, and of the Holy employments
that you are so much against! For my own part, I freely and truly here profess
to you, that I would not exchange the Pleasure that my soul enjoys in this
one piece of the holy Work of God, for all your mirth, and sport, and gain, and
whatever the world and sin affords you: I would not change the delights which I
enjoy, in one of these holy days and duties, in the mentioning of the eternal
God, and celebrating his praise, and magnifying his Name, and thinking, and
speaking of the riches of his Love, and the glory of his Kingdom, no not for
all the pleasure of your lives. O that your souls were cured of those dangerous
diseases, that make you loath the sweetest things! You would then know what it
is that you have set light by, and would marvail at your selves, that you could
taste no sweetness in the sweetest things! Can you think that your work or your
play, your profits or your sports, are comparable for pleasure to the Praises
of the Lord! If Grace had made you competent Judges, I am sure you would say,
There is no comparison. Hear but the testimony of a holy soul, yea of the
Spirit of God by him. [ Psalm. 147. 1. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to
sing Praises to our God: for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. Psalm 149.
1, 2. Praise ye the Lord: sing unto the Lord a new song: and his Praise in the
Congregation of Saints. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the
children of Zion be joyful in their King. For the Lord takes pleasure in his
people: he will beautify the meek with salvation. Let the Saints be joyful in
Glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high Praises of God be in
their mouth, etc.] Psalm. 95. 1, 2, 3. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us
make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation: Let us come before his
presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise to him with Psalms. For the
Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods.] Psalm 96. 1, 2, 3, 4. O
sing unto the Lord a new song: Sing unto the Lord all the earth. Sing unto the
Lord: bless his Name: show forth his salvation from day to day. Declare his
glory among the Heathen; his wonders among all people: For the Lord is great,
and greatly to be praised -- Honor and Majesty are before him, strength and
beauty are in his Sanctuary.] Did not this holy Prophet find it a Pleasant work
to Praise the Lord? Yea all that Love the Name of God should be Joyful in him,
Psalm 5. 11. Every one of his upright ones may say with the Prophet, Isa. 61.
10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord: My soul shall be joyful in my God: For
he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the
robes of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as
a Bride adorneth her self with her Jewels. For as the earth springs forth her
bud, and as the Garden causes the things sown in it to spring forth: so the
Lord will cause Righteousness and Praise to spring forth before all the
Nations.] It is a promise of Joy that is made in Isa. 56. 6, 7, 8. To the sons
of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the
Name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant: Even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer.] What a joyful thing is
it to a gracious soul, when he may see the reconciled face of God, and feel his
Fatherly reviving Love, and among his Saints may speak his Praise, and proclaim
his great and blessed name, even in his Temple, where every man speaks of his
Glory! Psalm 29. 9. If the Proud are delighted in their own praise, how much
more will the humble holy soul, be delighted in the Praise of God! When the
Love of God is shed abroad in the heart, and Faith does set us as before his
Throne, or at least does somewhat withdraw the veil, and show us him that lives
for ever, and when the force of Love does open our lips, that our mouths may
show forth his praise, it is pleasant both to God and us. The Lord himself does
put on joy, as delighting in his peoples praise; and when they join obedience
with holy worship, they are pleasant in his eyes, Jer. 9. 24. Isa. 62. 4. and
42. 1. Zeph. 3. 17. He meets him that Rejoices and works righteousness,
and that remembers him in his ways, Isa. 64. 5. Would you taste of the
sweetest life on earth? Learn then to Delight your selves in God. Do you want
recreation? Be acquainted with his Praise. Is there not a better cure for
Melancholy here among the servants of the Lord, then in an Alehouse, or in the
company of transgressors? Their carnal pleasures are unwholsom for you, like
luscious fruits that will make you sick: But the delights of Faith are safe and
healthful. Fleshly pleasure is windy and deceitful, and weakeneth and befools
the soul: But the Joy of the Lord is our strength, Neb. 8. 10. A little may be
too much of fleshly pleasures; and it is of very hard digestion, and leaves
that behind that spoils the sport: But the further you go in the Delights of
Faith, the better they are, and the sweeter you will find them. You may quickly
catch a dangerous surfeit of your fleshly pleasures; but of spiritual Delights,
the more, the better: For they are curing, reviving, and much confirm and exalt
the soul. Our spiritual pleasures are so heavenly, and have so much of God and
Glory in them, that they must needs prepare the soul for heaven, and be
excellent helps to our salvation.

O therefore if you would live a Pleasant life, draw near to God, and by Faith
behold him, and by Love adhere to him, and take a view of his infinite Goodness
and all his perfections; and behold him in his wondrous works, and then break
forth into his cheerful praises, and you shall taste such pleasures as the
earth affords not. Lanch forth into the boundless Ocean of Eternity, and let
your hearts and tongues expatiate in the Praise of the Heavenly Majesty, and
use this work and ply it close, and be not too seldom, or customary, or
careless in it, and you shall find the difference between the Pleasures of
Faith and of the flesh, of a Holy and of a sensual life, Psalm 135. 2, 3. Ye
that stand in the House of the Lord, in the Courts of the House of our God:
Praise the Lord, for the Lord is Good: sing praises to his Name, for it is
pleasant.] Psalm. 71. 8. Let my mouth be filled with thy Praise, and with thy
honor all the day.] Psalm. 96. 2. 6. Sing unto the Lord; bless his name; show
forth his salvation from day to day. Honor and Majesty are before him:
strength and beauty are in his Sanctuary.]

O that the Lord will but shine upon my soul with the Light of his countenance,
and open my heart to the entertainment of his Love, and hold a gracious
Communion with my soul, by his holy Spirit, and keep open these doors to me,
and continue this liberty of his House and Ordinances which we enjoy this day,
that I may join with a faithful humble people, in holy Communion, and in his
Praise and Worship, and that with a heart that is suitable to these works! I
shall then say with David, Psalm. 16. 6. The lines ^^faln to me in pleasant
places; I have a goodly heritage. I will ^^ for no greater pleasures, or
honors, or advancement in this world! Let who will surfeit on the pleasures of
the flesh! Here does my soul delight to dwell! Psalm 27. 4, 5, 6. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the
House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord,
and to enquire in his holy Temple: For in the time of trouble he will hide me
in his pavilion* and in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me: he shall
set me up upon a Rock: And then shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies
round about me: therefore will I offer in his Tabernatle sacrifices of Joy, I
will sing, yea I will sing Praises to the Lord.] Till I come to the promised
Ever^ Pleasures, I shall ask of God no greater Pleasures. These would be as
much as my soul in the prison of flesh can bear. Till (...) to the Land of
Promise, may I but have these clusters of (...) in my present Wilderness, I
shall not repine* My heart (...) shall be glad, and my glory shall rejoice, and
at death, my flesh (...) in hope. For as the Lord now shows me the path of
(...) so in his presence is (...) of Joy; and at his right hand are (...) for
(...) P^

4. Another Pleasant Holy Duty, is, Our holy Communion with Christ and his
Church in the Lords Supper.

This is a holy Feast that is purposely provided by the King of Saints, for the
entertainment of his family; for the refreshing of the weary, and the making
glad the mournful soul. The night before his bitter Death, he instituted this
Sacramental Feast! He caused his Disciples to sit down with him, and when they
had partaked of the Passover, the Sacrament of Promise, and had their taste of
the old wine, he gives them the New, even the Sacrament of the better
Covenant, and of the fuller Gospel Grace: He teaches them that his Death is
Life to them: and that which is his bitterest suffering, is their Feast: and
his Sorrows are their Joys; as our sinful pleasures were his sorrows. The
slain Lamb of God our Passover that was sacrificed for us, that takes away the
sins of the world, was the pleasant food; which Sacramentally he himself then
delivered to them, and substantially the next day offered for them. The bread
of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world,
John 6. 33. He is the Living Bread which came down from Heaven: If any man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that he gives is his
flesh, which he has given for the life of the world. ver. 50, 51. Except we
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, we have no life in us:
Whosoever eats his flesh and drinks his blood, has Eternal life, and he will
raise him up at the last day: For his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed: He that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, dwells in
Christ, and Christ in him: As the Living Father has sent the Son, and he
lives by the Father, so he that eats him, shall live by him. This is that
bread that came down from Heaven: not as the Fathers did eat Ma^^^ and are
dead: he that eats this bread shall live for ever.]

I know that to an unbelieving carnal wretch, the Sacrament is but a common
thing. For Christ himself and his Gospel is ^o better in his eyes. He
discerns not the Lords body: He only quieteth and deludeth his conscience
with the outward form. He has not faith to feed on Christ: But to a lively
faith, what sweet^ ness does such a Feast afford?

We have here Communion with the blessed Trinity, in the three parts of this
Eucharistical Sacrament! As the Father (...) both our Creator and the offended
Majesty, and yet he has (...) his Son to be our Redeemer; so in the first
part, which (...) the CONSECRATION, we present to our Creator the creatures of
Bread and Wine, acknowledging that from him we receive them and all, and we
desire that upon our Dedication, by his Acceptance, they may be made
Sacramentally and Representatively the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

In the second part of the Eucharist, which is the COMMEMORATION of the
sacrifice offered on the Cross, we break the bread and pour forth the wine, to
Represent the breaking of Christ's Body, and shedding of his Blood for the sin
of man; and we beseech the Father to be Reconciled to us on his Sons account,
and to accept us in his Beloved, and to accept all our sacrifices through him.
So that as Christ now in Heaven, is Representing his sacrifice to the Father,
which he once offered on the Cross for sin, so must the Minister of Christ
Represent and plead to the Father the same sacrifice by way of Commemoration,
and such Intercession as belongs to his Office.

The third part of the Eucharist is the OFFER and PARTICIPATION: in which the
Minister Representing Christ, does by Commission deliver his Bedy and Blood to
the penitent, hungry, believing soul! and with Christ is delivered a sealed
^^^don of all sin, and a sealed gift of life Eternal. All which are received by
the true Believer.

An unbeliever knows not what transactions there are between the Lord and a
holy soul in this Ordinance, where the appearances are so small. A bit of bread
and a sup of wine are indeed small matters: But so is not this Communion with
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. What a comfort is it that the offended
Majesty will accept a sacrifice at our hands, and enter a treaty of Peace with
the offenders? Yea that he will provide the sacrifice himself, and the
preciousest in the whole world: that he will signify this his acceptance of
the sacrifice, and how he is pleased in his well-beloved Son! and that he
accepts his Sons Intercession in the Heavens, and his Ministers intercession,
and his Churches prayers on earth through Christ! Seeing Christ (...) be
glorified with his Father, and not continue visible among (...) what could we
desire more from him, then the three fold Re^^^sentative which he has left
behind him, to supply the room ^^ his Bodily presence! Even the Representation
of himself by (...), by his Ministers, and by the Holy Ghost, which is (...)
substitute within for the efficacy of all. O what unspeakable mysteries and
treasures of mercy are here-presented to us in a Sacrament! Here we have
Communion with a Reconciled God, and are brought into his presence by the great
Reconciler. Here we have Communion with our blessed Redeemer, as Crucified, and
Glorified, and offered to us, as our quickening, preserving, strengthening Head:
Here we have Communion with the Holy Ghost, applying to our souls the benefits
of Redemption, drawing us to the Son, and communicating light, and life, and
strength from him unto us: increasing and actuating his graces in us. Here we
have Communion with the Body of Christ, his sanctified people, the heris of
life: When the Minister of Christ by his Commission Represents a Crucified
Christ to our eyes, by the Bread and Wine appointed to this use, we see Christ
Crucified as it were before us; and our Faith lays hold on him, and we
perceive the Truth of the Remedy; and build our souls upon this Rock. When the
same Minister by Christ's Commission, does offer us his Body, and Blood, and
Benefits, it is as firm and valid to us, as if the mouth of Christ himself had
offered them: And when our souls Receive him, by that Faith which the Holy
Ghost exciteth in us, the participation is as true as that of our bodies
receiving the Bread and Wine which represent him. O do but ask a drooping soul,
that mourns under the fears of Gods displeasure, how he would value a voice
from Heaven, to tell him that all his sins are pardoned, and that he is dear to
God, and judge by his answer, what is contained and offered in a Sacrament! Ask
him how he would take it, if Christ should speak those words himself to him,
which he has given his Minister Commission in his name to speak! [ Take, eat,
this is my Body, which is broken for you] It is the same Christ, the same
pardon, and salvation, that is offered us by the Messengers of Christ, and
which he personally offered himself to his Disciples. When you must all appear
at the Bar of God, O what would you not give for a sealed pardon, which in a
Sacrament is given freely now, to the believing soul! Judge now by this,
whether it be a Joyous Ordinance! When the poorest Christian this day
receives, that which the greatest Prince that is ungodly, would then give all
the world for it he had it. For want of that pardon, Christian, which thou must
now receive, many thousands will tremble at the bar^ of God, and be overwhelmed
with his wrath for ever! Ask a soul that groaneth under the languishings of his
grace, and the burden of any strong corruption, how he would value the
mortifying and quickening grace of the Holy Ghost, that would break his bonds,
and give him light and life and strength; and by his answer judge of the value
of a Sacrament. We have here the greatest mercies in the world, brought down to
us in sensible Representations, that they might be very near us, and the means
might be suited to the frailty and infirmity of our present state.

If the sealed message of Gods Reconciliation with us, and a sealed pardon of
all our sins, and a sealed grant of Everlasting life, be not more pleasant and
desirable to your thoughts, then all that earth and flesh can yield you, it is
because your are alive to sin, and dead to God, and want that spiritual sense
and appetite, by which you might be competent judges. If God, if Christ, if
grace, if the foretasts of glory can afford no pleasure to the soul, then
Heaven it self would not be pleasant. But if these are sweet, the Sacrament is
sweet that does convey them.

Well, poor stubborn carnal sinners! you have been invited to this feast as
well as others! we are sent to call you, and even compel you to come in (though
upon the terms and in the way of Christ!) but you have no great list; but
somewhat else does please you better! And will it prove better indeed to you at
the end? Well, take your own choice! If an Alehouse be better then the Table of
the Lord; if your merry companions do please you better then the Communion of
the Saints, or if you cannot submit to the order and discipline of the family
of Christ, that you may partake of his provision, you may follow your own
corrupt desires, and see whither they will lead you! But here it is that I
shall choose my pleasures till I reach the everlasting pleasures. And though in
this low communion of imperfect Saints, we see but in a glass, and have but
some small imperfect Sasts of the glorious things which Hope expects; yet
this is more then all that earth and flesh can yield: and it is most perfect
Pleasure that by these is revealed, sealed, and Represented. Sacraments can
assure us of perfect joys, though they give us but little joy in hand.

Obj. But if Sacraments be so pleasant, why then (says a disconsolate soul,)
have I found no more pleasure or comfort in them? Answ. Even in the soul that's
made alive by Grace, diseases may much corrupt the appetite, and make the
sweetest thing seem bitter. Are not Sacraments sweet to you? and do you not
delight in the communion of God and of his Saints? I will not say much to you,
lest it seem degrestive, but briefly ask you these few Questions.

1. Are the thoughts of God, of Christ, of Heaven sweet to you? If they be, me
thinks the Ordinances should be sweet! If they be not, its no wonder that you
set light by Sacraments, if you can set light by Christ and heaven it self.

Quest. 2. Is not sin grown sweet to you? If it be, the ordinances will not be
sweet: no nor unless your sins grow bitter.

Quest. 3. Does not the world grow sweet to you, and your condition or
expectations, and your thriving state, more pleasant to you then heretofore? If
so, no wonder if Sacraments and all spiritual things, do lose their sweetness.

Quest. 4. Have you been faithful in your preparation, by free confession, true
humiliation, strong resolution, hungring and thristing after Christ, and all
this furthered by diligent self-examination? An unprepared soul must blame it
self, if it find not the sweetness of the Ordinance. The holy appetite and
relish, that is necessary to your Delight, must be stirred up much in your
Preparations.

Quest. 5. Are you careful and conscionable, humble and holy in your lives? If
you neglect God in your ordinary conversations, and walk not with him on other
days, you are unlike to meet him comfortably here. And if you are slight and
careless in your ordinary duties, you will find here that God took notice of it.

Quest. 6. Do you faithfully endeavor to exercise Faith, Repentance, Love and
all Sacramental Graces in the use of the ordinances? You come not to a mere
receiving but to a Work Have your souls been adorned with the wedding garment?
and do you come hither for a meeting with the Lord Jesus Christ? Do you see him
by faith, and take all that is here Represented to you, as if you had seen the
things themselves! Do you remember that your Lord is coming, and do you lift up
your heads in the expectation of your Redemption, and do this in remembrance of
him till he come? An idle loytering in Gods work is not the way to find the
sweetness of it.

Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. l. 1. init. gives it as a Reason why every one
took his own part of the Bread of the Sacrament in those times, because man
being a free agent must be the chooser or refuser of his own happiness: The
Papists on the contrary do but gape, and the Priest does pop the bread into
their mouths (having first persuaded them that it is not bread.) Do you not
expect to receive the spiritual benefits, just as the Papists do receive the
Bread? as if you had nothing to do but gape? As if your presence here were as
much as is to be expected from you for your edification! How can you taste the
sweetness that is offered, when you do not exercise your spiritual senses.

Quest. 7. Do you exercise faith, as well as feeling, in judging of the benefit
of Sacraments? Pardon, and Justification, and Title to Salvation are benefits
which in themselves you cannot feel. It is by Believing the promise that you
must know them. If God have promised a blessing on his Ordinance, it is sure to
the faithful soul as if we felt it, though perhaps we may seem long without it.
Heaven it self which is the principal end of Ordinances, will not be attained
in this life: and yet the Ordinace is not in vain.

Quest. 8. Have you the true understanding of the use of Sacraments? of the
abundant Love that is here set forth? and the freeness and fullness of the
Promise here sealed? If not, no wonder if you taste not the sweetness, when you
know not how to break the shell, that you may feed on the kernel of the
Ordinances.

Quest. 9. Have you not troubled your own souls, and muddyed your comforts by
causeless doubts and ignorant scruples, about the gestures, or manner, or
persons that you joined with, or some such circumstances as these? If so, no
marvel if you lose the comfort.

Quest. 10. Or at least, have you not been negligent in the review and after
improving of the Ordinances? and have you not thought that all was done when
you had received? Any one of these miscarriages may make this pleasant duty
bitter, or at least deprive you of the most of the delight. But if your hearts
be suited to the work, and you deprive not your selves of the offered
consolation, you shall find that God deals bountifully, with you, and will
feast you even with Angels food.

5. The public worship being all thus sweet, how sweet are the Lords days,
these holy seasons that are wholly consecrated to this work? How light is the
Christian, that has this day cast off his worldly cares and business and
cogitations, and has set himself apart for God, as if there were to world to
mind? On the week days he does walk with Goa: But so that his necessary worldly
business does frequently divert and distract his mind. But what a sweet and
happy day is this, when he may strip himself of these distractions, as he does
of his work-day courser clothes, and may wholly apply himself to God? As the
Be goes from flower to flower, laboring at all, but with a Pleasant labor,
to gather Honey, and prepare for winter; so does the Christian, especially on
the Lords day, employ himself in labor and delight; and the more he labors,
the more is his delight: From Prayer he goes to Reading; and to the
instructing his family, if he be a superior; or learning if he be an inferior
and have helps: From private worship to public; and from public to private
again; and gathering Honey ( food and sweetness) to his soul from all.

Tell me you childish brutish wantons; Do you think in your heart, that you
have as much solid joy and pleasure, in a play day, or in your idle games, or
in spending the Lords day in idleness or sports, as we have in the holy works
of God? Do you think our Delight is not more then yours? To our shame, but to
the praise of God, we must say, that we have tried both ways. We know what it
is to play away much of the Lords day, and what it is to employ it in waiting
on the Lord. But since we knew the later, we wish we had never known the
former. That's our recreation which is your toil: and that would be our prison,
and stocks, and toil, which is your sport and recreation.

6. Another Delightful portion of our work, is Holy Conference with the
experienced servant of the Lord. There are many things considerable in holy
conference that makes it delightful.

1. It is the conference of dearest friends: the special Love that all the
Godly have to one another, does exceedingly sweeten their communion. The very
presence of those that we most dearly love, is a pleasure to us: Much more
their sweetest edifying discourse.

2. Their conference proceeds from the spirit of grace, and therefore is
gracious, savouring of that spirit: and all the breathings and manifestations
of that blessed spirit, are very acceptable to those that have the spirit
themselves, and so can savor spiritual things.

3 Their conference is about the highest, the most necessary, the most
excellent things: About the most Blessed God and his several Attributes; his
will, and works, of Creation, and disposing-Providence, of nature and Grace;
about the wonderful mysteries of Redemption, the person, life and sufferings of
the Redeemer, his Offices and the performance of them, on earth, and in Heaven,
in his Humiliation and his Exaltation; and of the sweet Relations that we and
all his Church do stand in, to Christ our Head, our Savior and Redeemer; as
also about the gracious workings of the Holy Ghost, in first begetting and
increase of holiness; To open to each other the powerful workings of that Grace
that has raised them above all the creatures, and brought them to a contempt
of earthly glory, and set their hearts on the invisible God, and on eternal
things, that has renewed them in the inner man, and made them hate the things
they loved, and mortified their oldest strongest sins, and quickened them in the
exercise of every grace; all this is edifying sweet discourse to gracious souls.

4. And the rather because it is about the most pertinent affairs: They are
things that do so nearly concern us, that we are glad to speak with those that
understand them. It is our own case, which we hear our brethren open: They
speak our very hearts, as if they had seen them; because it is the same work of
the same spirit that they describe. Yea when they complain of their
Infirmities, it is with our complaints, and they tell us of that which we are
troubled with our selves; and we perceive that we are not singular in our
troubles, but that our case is the case of other servants of the Lord.

5. And it is the more pleasant to converse with the Godly, because they speak
not by hearsay only, but by experience: They tell us of the discoveries that
illuminating grace has made to their own souls; and of the many evils they
have been saved from; and the communion they have had with God, and the prayers
which he has heard, and the many and great deliverances he has granted them;
They relate their conflicts with temptations, and their conquests; their
strivings against their ancient lusts, and how they have overcome them; and the
sweet refreshings which their souls have had in the exercise of Love, and
faith, and hope! They can dive into the Ocean of mercy, and speak of the
abundant kindness of the Lord, and earnestly awaken and invite each other to
praise him for his Goodness, and to declare his wondrous works for the
children of men; They can direct each other in their difficulties, and
encourage each other in holy ways, and strengthen one another in holy
resolutions, and comfort one another with the same comforts that they
themselves have been comforted with by the Lord! And may not our hearts rejoice
and burn within us, while we discourse of such important things as these, in
such a serious, experimental, edifying manner? They can discourse together of
their meeting before the throne of Christ, and of the blessed converse which
they shall have in Heaven, with the Lord himself, and with the holy Angels, and
where they shall be, and what they shall do, to all eternity, in the presence
of God where is fullness of joy, and before him where are the eternal pleasures.

O Christians, did not your graces languish by your own neglects, and your
souls grow out of relish with these spiritual and most excellent things, your
speeches of them would be more savoury; you would be more frequent, lively, and
cheerful in your discourse of holy things; and then your converse would be more
edifying and delightful to each other. We show so little of Grace in our
conference, that makes it to be but little different from other men's; And
(which is the commonest case, and very doleful) we most of us remain so
ignorant and imprudent, that we mar holy conference by our mixtures of unwise
expressions, and disgrace it to others by our injudicious weakness: This is the
bane of Christian discourse; even the want of holy skill and wisdom, and of
understanding to speak of the things of God, according to their transcendent
worth and weight, as much (and more) then the want of zeal. But if we could
discourse of these holy matters aright, with wisdom and with seriousness, how
sweet, how fruitful would the company of holy persons be! We should be still
among them, as in the family of God, and should hear that which our souls do
most defire to hear; and we should preach to one another the riches of grace in
our familiar discourse; and souls might be converted by the conference of
Believers, and not all left to the public ministry: Every man would be a
helper to his neighbor. For the tongue of the just is as choice silver, though
the heart of the wicked is little worth: the lips of the righteous feed many,
but fools die for want of wisdom, Prove. 10. 20, 21. The lips of the wise
disperse knowledge, Prove. 15. 7. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, Prove.
16. 13. and the sweetness of the lips increases learning, v. 21. The lips of
Knowledge are a precious Jewel, Prove. 20. 15. A man's belly shall be satisfied
with the fruit of his mouth, and with the increase of his lips shall he be
filled, Prove. 18. 20. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his
tongue talks of judgment; the Law of his God is in his heart, Psalm. 37. 30,
31.

Tell me I beseech you, you that can be so merry in an Alehouse, or in any vain
and idle company, why should you think that it is not to us a far sweeter thing
to talk of holy edifying matters, then it is to you to talk of vanity? Is the
subject of your discourse more fit to delight a man of wisdom! Do you talk of
better things then God, or of higher things then Heaven? or of things that
nearlyer concern you, then the matters of everlasting consequence?

When I have heard such people talking and laughing, as if they had been the
merryest people in the world, I have sometimes hearkened to their discourse, to
hear what talk it was that made them so merry; and it has been nothing but
impertinency and folly, like a man's talking in his sleep; enough to make a man's
head ache to hear them: I should be quickly tired with their delights: The
blowing of the wind, or the falling of the rain, or as Solomon says, the
crackling of thorns in the fire, has as much in it to please my ear, and much
less to displease it, then such men's discourse.

Go to a company of merry fellows, as you take them, and to a company of
serious, godly, prudent people, and secretly write down all the words that you
hear from both companies; and read them over together when you come home, and
tell me which is the pleasanter discourse. What a hodg-podge of nonsense,
impertinency, levity, immodesty, worldliness, pride, and folly shall you find
in one; and what savoury, necessary, edifying, encouraging and comforting
speeches will you find you have gathered from the other!

It is far pleasanter to be among the singing birds, the bleating sheep, yea
the chattering daws, then these idle, prating, foolish companions. For with the
former you shall have some natural good, without any mixture of sinful evil:
But in foolsh, prating company, what shall you perceive, but how Nature is
depraved, how sinners are beside themselves, how Satan does befool them, and
how God is forgotten while he is present with them, and they are laughing in
the Devils chains, and at the very brink of death and hell! And can a man be
merry to hear such mirth as this? It is a sad spectacle to see men laugh in
Bedlam: but much more to see them merry in the fetters of their sin, and under
the threatenings and wrath of God. Were you but men of right composed minds, I
durst refer it to your selves, whether holy company and discourse be not like
to be be much pleasanter then yours.

Do you think that the discourse of Learned men, about Arts and Sciences,
History and the like, is not more pleasant then your idle talk? Much more is
the holy discourse of Saints about the things of their salvation. Whether do
you think the company and discourse of Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles,
or of your merry companions, should be the more delightful? Can you for shame
say, that the later were the best? Why, you know that Christ, and his Prophets
and Apostles, had no such idle talk as yours. It was holy things that they
discoursed of.

Can you for shame say that you Love God above all, and yet have more pleasure
in prating over a pot of Ale, then in speaking reverently of God? Or would you
be believed when you say, that your hearts are set on Heaven, when you have
more delight in talking of any earthly trifle? Well! I shall leave it to your
consciences, and to the judgment of any that will speak with Reason, whether
the holy converse and conference of the godly, be not in it self a more
Delightful thing, then all the merriments, the dotages and fooleries of the
ungodly. If you think not so, it is because your relish and appetite is
depraved, the Devil has deluded you, and sin bereaved you of your wits.

2. I have told you of the Pleasantness of the Duties of Holiness, which are to
be performed more directly toward God? Let us now consider of the rest of a
Christian life: Which consists in our duties to be performed toward men: And
these are all comprehended in the works of Charity and of Justice.

1. And certainly the works of Charity are Delightful. There is not a
pleasanter work in the world then to do good. Even proud men find a great
delight in the Reputation or Name of doing good: that they may be accounted the
great Benefactors of the world, that is, to be as earthly gods among their
neighbors, and as the Sun is to the lower world, that all may be below them,
and live by their influence. This is the top of that prosperiity that sinful
ambition does aspire to. And if the Name of Well-doing be so pleasant to the
Proud, the Conscience of the thing it self should be more pleasant to the
upright. Open bounty is the hypocrites glory: But to do good in secret is the
believers pleasure; for their Father which sees in secret, shall reward them
openly: Yea the very delight of doing good, and especially a great or public
good, a spiritual and everlasting good, is a reward unto it self. It is the
speech of Christ recited by Paul, Acts 20. 35. that it is more blessed to give
then to receive.

There are many things concurring that make it very Pleasant to do good. It
proceeds from the power of Love: and the exercise of Love is pleasant. And Love
makes our Brethren to be to us as our selves, and consequently their welfare is
as our own, and rejoices us as if our selves received, all that they receive.
And what abundant pleasure then has a Believer? When so many thousand of his
brethren, do receive so many thousand benefits daily from God himself: and all
these are to the Christian, through the union and power of Love, as if he had
received them all himself. But especially when he himself is the instrument of
conveyance. The poor have comfort in receiving of relief; but nothing in
comparison of his that gives it, if it be done for the sake of Christ, in
uprightness of heart. A poor man receives from the giver perhaps but an
outward small commodity: But the upright giver receives from God, the sense of
his acceptance, and peace of conscience, with the promise of an everlasting
recompense: A mite, or a cup of cold water, given to a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, or to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall certainly be
rewarded, Matthew. 10. 40, 41, 42.

A true Believer is Covetous to do good, as others are to receive it: and
studyeth for opportunities of laying out his gifts and wealth for God, as
others study to gather it for themselves. As a worldling studyeth for a good
bargain, that he may grow rich; a true Believer studyeth for opportunities to
lay out that he has for God, and to improve his Masters stock to the best
advantage. The Covetous does not more long to get more, then Believers do to be
rid of that they have, in the way and on the terms, as may do most good, and be
best accepted: And they are even afraid lest opportunities of doing good should
over-slip them, and the seed-time should pass by: A Believer knows that, as his
life and soul, so his worldly riches, are nowhere sure but in the hand of God:
And therefore if they can procure his security, and get him to receive it, and
return it them in Heaven with the promised advantage, they have then secured it
indeed: All is lost that God has not, in one way or other: and all is secured
that he has, and for which we have his promise. This is laying it up in
heaven, Matthew. 6. 21. While we keep it, we cannot secure it from thieves: When
we have disposed of it according to the Will of God, upon the warrant of his
promise, it is then in his Custody, and then it is safe: Neither rust or moath
can then corrupt it, nor the strongest thieves break through and steal. To be
Good, and do Good, is to be likest unto God; and therefore must needs be the
sweetest life.

2. Works of Justice also have their pleasure: For they demonstrate the Justice
of God himself, from whom they do proceed. That which is most Pleasant to God,
should be most Pleasant unto us. And as he has bid us, not forget to do good
and to communicate, because with such sacrifice he is well pleased, Heb. 13.
16. so he has told us that he delights in the exercise of loving kindness,
judgment, and righteousness in the earth, Jer. 9. 24. He has showed us, what
is good: and what does he require of us, but to do justly, and love mercy, and
walk humbly with our God? Mich. 6. 8. And therefore he commands Israel, Hos.
12. 6. [ Turn thou to thy God: Keep Mercy and Judgment: and wait on thy God
continually.] Private justice between man and man, and familyjustice between
parents and children, masters and servants, and Political justice between the
Magistrates and the people, do all maintain the order of the world, and procure
both public and private peace. It is selfishness and injustice, tyranny,
oppression, disobedience and rebellion, that procure the miseries of the world:
But Righteousness is safe and sweet.

2. You have heard of the Pleasure of Holy Actions, both Internal and External:
The truth is evident also from the Objects of these Acts, and the matter from
which a believer may derive his Pleasures. And O what an Ocean of delight is
here before us! Were our powers, capacities and acts but answerable to the
Objects, we should presently have the Joys of heaven.

1. A Believer has the ever blessed God himself to derive his comforts from.
He has his Nature and Attributes to be his comfort: He has his near Relations
to afford him comfort; and this is more then to have all the world. It is a God
of Infinite Power, and Wosdom, and Goodness, that we believe in, that we Love,
and Worship, and Obey. It is also a Father Reconciled to us, that has taken us
in Covenant to him as his people, through Jesus Christ. And where shall we find
comfort if not in God? It is in vain to look for that from any creature, that
is not to be found in him. Poor worldlings! you have nothing that is worth the
having, but the crumms that fall from the childrens table. God is our Portion,
and the world is yours: and yet you have less even in this world then we. You
have the shadow, and we have the substance: You have the shell, and we the
kernel: You have the straw and chaff, and true believers have the corn: Your
comforts are shaken with every storm; and tossed up and down by the Justice of
God, or the Pride of man: But God that is our Portion is unchangeable:
Yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: We have a Kingdom that cannot be
moved, Heb. 12. 28. Persecutors cannot take our God from us, nor can any thing
separate us from his Love, Romans 8. 36. They may separate us from our houses,
from our Countries, from our friends, from our riches, our liberties, our
lives, from our Books, our company and Ordinances, but not from God, who is our
great Delight. In poverty, in persecution, in sickness, and at death, we have
still our interest in God: A Christian is never in so low a state, but he has
a God to whom he may go for comfort, who is more to him then your sweetest
pleasures. Is it not a pleasure to have such a God as can cure all diseases,
supply all wants, overcome all enemies, deliver in all dangers, and has
promised that he will do it so far as is for our good! If he want water that
has the Sea, or he want land that has all the earth, or he want light that
has the Sun, yet does he not need to want delight that has the Lord to be his
God, if ^e do but keep in the paths of grace. And are you yet unresolved,
whether Godliness be the most Pleasant Life? Take all your pleasures, and make
your best of them, may I but have the Lord to be my God, and I hope I shall
never desire to change with you.

2. A Holy life is therefore Pleasant, because we have a full sufficient
Savior, from whom we may daily fetch delight. The E^ernal Son of God is become
the Healer of our wounds, our Peacemaker with the Father, the Conqueror of
our enemies, the Ransom for our sins, the Captain of our salvation, the Head of
his Church, and the Treasure of all our Hopes and Joys! Sin and misery are the
works of Satan, which Christ came into the world to destroy. If Hypocrites can
steal a little Peace to their Consciences, from a false conceit that they have
a part in Christ, what comfort may it be to the true Believer, that has a sure
and real interest in him! That is the sad and miserable life, when you are out
of Christ, and strangers to his Covenant, and cannot say his benefits are
yours, but you are yet in your sins, without his righteousness: But when we
have a special interest in him, the foundation of our everlasting joy is laid,
and the heart of sin and misery is broken: What fear or sorrow can you name,
that I may not fetch a sufficient remedy against from Christ? What can the
Prince of darkness say to our discomfort, which we may not answer by Arguments
from Christ? By this judge of the Comfort of a Holy life. If the Godly
overlook the Grounds of Joy, that are laid in Christ, and live in a mistaken
sorrow, that is not for want of Reasons and warrant to rejoice, but for want of
a right discerning of those Reasons. But what have you that are ungodly, to
answer against all the terrors of the Law? or to answer against all the
accusations of your consciences? or to comfort you against the remembrance of
your approaching misery? While you have no part in Christ, you have no right to
comfort. One thought of Christ to a believing soul, may afford more Delight
then ever you will find in a sinful life.

3. Moreover, we have the Holy spirit of Christ, that is purposely given us to
be our Comforter: And if that be not a pleasant life that is managed by such a
Guide, and that be not likest to be a joyful soul, that is possessed by the
Spirit of joy it self, there is no joy then on earth to be expected. Has God
promised his Spirit to comfort you that are wicked in your sin? No, it is the
malicious deceiving spirit that is your Comforter: that by his comforts he
might keep you from solid, spiritual, everlasting comforts: But the Repenting,
Believing soul that is united unto Christ, and has already had the spirit for
his conversion, it is he that has the promise of the spirit for his
consolation. And if that be not the most comfortable life, where the God of
Heaven becomes the comforter, we cannot then know the effect by the cause. If
Life it self will quicken; if light it self will illuminate; the comforting
spirit will certainly comfort, in the degree and season as God sees meet, and
the soul is fitted to receive it.

4. Moreover, we have the whole treasury of the Gospel to go to for our
Delight. And little does the sensual unbelieving soul know what sweetness, what
supporting pleasures may be from thence derived. I had rather have the holy
word of God to go to for contents, then the treasures of the rich, or the
pleasures of the sensual, or the flatteries and vain glory of the ambitious
man: All that the world does make such a pudder about, which they ride and run
for, which they so much glory in, will never afford them so much Content, as
one Scripture promise will do to a truly faithful soul. I must profess before
Angels and men, that I had rather have one Promise of the Love of God, and the
life to come, which is contained in the holy Scriptures, then to have all the
riches, pleasures, and honors of this world. My God, this was my Covenant with
thee, and to this I stand. O blessed be the Lord, that has provided us such a
Magazine of Delight as is this heavenly sacred Book! The Precepts appoint us a
pleasant work: The strictest prohibitions do but restrain us from our own
calamities, and keep out of our hands the knife by which we would cut our
fingers: The severest threatenings do but deter us from running into the
consuming fire; and hedge about the devouring gulf, lest we should foolishly
cast our selves therein. And these are the bitterest parts of that holy word.
But when we read the promises of a Savior, and the wonderful history of his
Incarnation, and of his holy self-denying life, his conquests, miracles, death,
resurrection, ascension, intercession, and his promise to return; when we read
of the foundation which he has laid, and the building which he intends to
finish, of his rich abundant promises to his chosen, what provision do we find
for our abundant joys! No strait can be so great, no pressure so grievous, no
enemies so strong, but we have full consolation offered us in the promises,
against them all. We have promises of the pardon of all our sins, and promises
of heaven it self; and what can we have more! we have promises suited to every
state, both prosperity and adversity. What do we need which we have not a
promise of? And the word of God is no deceit. What but a promise can comfort
them that are short of the possession? May I not have more joy in sickness with
a promise, then the ungodly without a promise in their health? A promise in
prison sets a man as at liberty! A promise in Poverty is more then riches. A
promise at death is better then life* What I have a promise of, I may be sure
of: but what you possess without a promise, you may lose (and your souls and
hopes with it) this night. There is no condition on earth so hard to a man that
has interest in the promises, in which he may not have plentiful relief. We
live by faith, and not by sense; And we reckon more on that as ours, which we
hope for, then which we do possess. We are sure that there is no true felicity
on earth; It then we have a promise of Heaven, when Infidels lie down in the
dust with desperation, have we not a more comfortable life then they?

5. Moreover we have Heaven it self to fetch our comfort from. Not Heaven in
sight, or in Possession; but Heaven in Promise, and seen by faith. And if
Heaven will not afford us pleasure, whence shall we expect it? Even sensual men
can rejoice as well in what they see not, if they are assured it is theirs, as
in what they see: And why then may not Believers do so much more? A worldling
when he sees not his money in his chest, or at use, or his lands and cattle
that are far from him, can yet rejoice in them, as if he saw them: And should
not we rejoice in the certain Hopes of Heaven though yet we see it not? when I
am pained in sickness, and role in restless weariness of my flesh, if then I
can say [ I shall be in Heaven,] may it not be the inward rejoicing of my soul?
You know where you are, but you know not where you shall be. The Believer
knows where he shall be, as truly as he knows where he is (unless it be one
that by his frailty has not reached unto assurance; who yet has reached unto
Hope.) What great matter is it if I lay in greatest pain, if I can say [ I
shall have everlasting ease in Heaven] Or if I lay in prison, or in sordid
poverty, and can say [ I shall shortly be with Christ.] Or if I had lost the
love of all men, and could say [ that I shall everlastingly enjoy the Love of
God?]

Most of your comforts do come in by the way of your thoughts. And what
Thoughts should so rejoice the soul as the thoughts of our abode with Christ
for ever? If a day in the Courts of God be so delightful, what is ten thousand
millions of ages in the Court of Glory? and all then as fresh as at the first
day? There it is that our sin will be put off: Our carnal enmity laid by: our
temptations will be over: our enemies will all have done: our fears and sorrows
will be at an end; Our desires will be accomplished: Our differences be
reconciled: Our charity perfected, and our expectations fully satisfied, and
Hope turned into full fruition. O may I but be able with stronger faith, and
fuller confidence to say [ that Heaven is mine, and when this tabernacle is
dissolved, I shall be with Christ,] my life and my death will be delightful,
and I need not complain for want of pleasure. Let who will take the pleasures
of the flesh, may I but have this. In prayer, in meditation, in holy
conference, in every duty, it is the expectation of approaching blessedness
that drops in sweetness into all. No wonder if it can sweeten a course of duty,
when it can make light the greatest sufferings, and turn pain into pleasure,
and death into life, as being unworthy to be compared to the glory which shall
be revealed.

But the wicked have none of these delights, unless they steal a little by
self-deceit: They may make their best of their present pleasures, and of the
cup while it is at their mouths, and of their wealth and honor while it is in
their hands: but its little pleasure that they can fetch from Heaven! The
thought of it may rather feed their terrors. What pleasure they can pick out
of the dirt, let them make their best of: But heavenly pleasures are above
their reach.

So much for the Objects of a Holy life, from whence a Believer may fetch his
pleasure.

Object. But you tell us only of the Pleasant part; but the troublesome and
bitter part you say nothing of.

Answ. Come on, and say your worst of a Holy life, and tell us which is that
bitter part.

Object. 1. The scripture requires us to mortify the flesh, to renounce the
world, to forbear our Pleasures, to deny our selves, and to take up our Cross
and follow Christ; and will you call this a pleasant life?

Answ. And do you indeed think this so sad a business? Here are three things
contained in this objection, as the matter that seems so displeasing to you.
1. The parting with your sins. 2. The sufferings that are principally for sin.
3. The sufferings that are principally for the cause of Christ.

1. And do you think that sin is so lovely a thing that a man cannot live
merrily without it? sin is the breach of the Laws of God, and the injury of the
Heavenly Majesty, and the provocation of his hot displeasure, and the poison
and sickness of the soul. And is it your sport to abuse the Lord? Is your
pleasure gone, if you may not injure the God that made you? What natures, what
sinful hearts have you, that must have such pleasures? Cannot a man live
merrily unless he may provoke the God of Heaven, and trample upon mercy and
despise salvation! Can you not live in pleasure, unless you may drink poison,
or keep your sickness, or tumble in the dirt! One would think that mischief to
our selves or others should be small pleasure to an honest mind. Its no
pleasure to you to spit in the face of your dearest friends, or to abuse your
parents, or to provoke your neighbors; and is it such pleasure as you cannot
forsake, to abuse the Lord, and wrong your souls! The pleasures of sin do tend
to pain: some pain does usually attend it here, and much more hereafter: God
would prevent your pain and misery, by preventing or destroying your sin: And
do you accuse his word because it would keep you from so costly, so bitter, so
dangerous delights! It is for your Pleasure, that this pleasure is forbidden
you. The sweeeness of the poison of sin* will be soon gone, when the gripings
of the tormented Conscience do remain. You will forbear the most delightful
fruits or drinks, if your Physicion tell you they will hazard your life, or
torment you afterward. You are short-sighted, and short-witted, and look but to
the present relish of things, and choose them if you taste them sweet; but God
looks to your everlasting pleasures. So that you may well reckon it among the
pleasures of a holy life, that you have such preservatives against the greatest
sorrows: and that you are kept from the pleasures that will be bitterness in
the latter end.

Yea at the present has not drunkenness more trouble attending it then
sobriety! Reckon up the consuming of men's estates, the troubles of their
families, the sicknesses of their bodies, the shame and contempt that it
brings on them here, and the wounds of their consciences, and tell me whether
it were not more pleasure to forbear those cups then to drink them. And has
not Gluttony more trouble attending it then temperance! By that time the charge
be paid, the sickness that fullness breeds be endured, the physicion paid, and
all the effects of gluttony overcome, you will find that the pleasure was
little to the pain. The like I may say of Uncleanness, worldliness, passion,
pride, and all other sins that usually bring a punishment with them.

2. And then for Castigatory sufferings, it is not Godliness that is the cause
of them (as sufferings.) Sin less, and suffer less. Provoke not God, and he
will spare the rod. Do you hurt your selves like careless children, and then
blame God for bidding you, [ Take heed?] God does not punish men for Holiness,
and well doing. It is for want of Holiness that you are punished. I think
therefore that it is part of the Pleasure of a Holy life, that it keeps men out
of the way of punishment. You must have pain, and unpleasant physic, when once
you have taken a surfeit of sensual delight, and made your selves sick with too
much of the creature. Holiness would have prevented this: And when that's too
late, it would cure it by the cheapest means that your health will bear. Is it
not then unreasonable when you have troubled your selves, to blame your
physicion for troubling you in order to a cure?

3. And for those sufferings that are principally for Christ, con^ider, 1. That
they are also originally from sin, and therefore you may know what to blame for
the bitter part. Though the Time, and place, and manner and measure of your
sufferings may proceed from the gracious providence of your Lord; yet that
supposes that sin had brought you into a state of suffering in general before;
which Christ did not presently and plenarily remit and take off, but disposes
of them by his wisdom, as may make most for his Glory and your good. 2. And
will you grudge at a little transitory pain, that is usually requited with
comforts in this life, and rewarded with pleasures unspeakable hereafter! You
grudge not to cast away your seed in hope of an increase at harvest; nor do you
murmur at your daily labor if it be but blessed with success. And will you
grudge to pass through sufferings to glory, and to fow in tears that you may
reap in joy? It is but few that suffer Martyrdom, or any great matter for the
cause of Christ, especially in our days: And those few have usually more joy
then sorrow. If you knew the joys of Martyrs, you would never so shrink at the
sufferings of Martyrs. And for a few mocks and scorns of foolish men, it is
scarcely worth the name of a suffering: Nor is it so much as wicked men suffer
in their sin. As Godliness is a shame among the foolish wicked men; so
wickedness is a shame among all that are pious, wise and sober. And why should
not the shame of sin be more loathed then the undeserved shame of honesty?
Alas, all this is nothing to the sorrows of the ungodly. A little of the
vinegar of affliction will make us relish our prosperity the better, and
through our frailty is become a necessary sauce to that luscious state that we
are so apt to surfeit on! Do you not see what lamentable work prosperity,
victories, honor, and worldly wealth and power have made in the world? and
shall we grudge at that necessary moderate affliction that saves us from the
like overthrows? O how few are able to withstand the temptations of great or
long prosperity! Experience of the frequent, woeful falls of prospering men,
that seemed once as firm as any, has made me fear when I hear of the
exaltation of my friends, and the less to grieve for their adversity or my own.
Holiness therefore is the most pleasant way, notwithstanding the afflictions
that do attend it: And if God will give me an increase of Holiness, (of Faith,
and Love, and a Heavenly mind) though it be with an increase of my Afflictions,
I hope I shall take it as an incerease of my pleasure, and give him the praise
of so merciful a dispensation. And thus I have proved to you from the Nature of
Holiness, that it is the most Pleasant way.

II. I Should next show you the Delights of Holiness, from the Helps and
Concomitants that promote our pleasure. But because I am afraid of lengthening
my discourse too much, I shall only name a few things of many.

1. God being our God in Covenant, his Love is to the holy soul, as the Sun is
to our bodies, to illuminate, warm, revive, and comfort them; and did not sin
cause some ecclipses, or raise some clouds, or shut the windows, we should
rejoice continually, and find how sweet a thing it is, being justified by
faith, to have peace with God.

2. We are in Covenant with Jesus Christ, who intercedeth for our peace with
God. And the Father always hears his intercession, John 11. 42. And
therefore that measure of comfort which he sees suitable to our present state,
we shall be sure of. Who shall condemn us? when it is Christ that dyed, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. We have a great High Priest that is
passed into the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God; one that is touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, and was in all points tempted like as we are,
but without sin; and therefore through him we may come boldly to the throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.] Heb.
4. 14, 15, 16. What comforting words has he spoken to us in the Gospel? and
what comfortable relations has he put us into? He calls us his friends, if
we do his Commandments, as if servanes were too low a title, John 15. 14, 15.
Peace he leaves with us: his Peace he gives to us; not as the world gives:
commanding us that we let not our hearts be troubled or afraid, Joh. 14. 27. To
those that Love him, he has promised his Fathers Love, and that they will come
to him, and make their abode with him. John 14. 23. If any man serve him, let
him follow him; and where Christ is, there shall his servant be; if any man
serve Christ, him will the Father honor, John 12. 26.

3. That we might have sure Consolation, the Spirit of Christ is given to be
our Comforter: and we are in Covenant with him also, who surely will perform
his Covenants.

4. The servants of Christ have his holy image, the mark of his children, which
is the in-dwelling Evidence of his Love, to assure them of their happiness.

5. They have manifold experience of the kindness of their Father, in hearing
their prayers, and helping them in their straits, and delivering them in their
distresses.

6. They have also the help of the Experience of others, even of all the godly
with whom they do converse, who can comfort them with their comforts, and tell
them how good they have found the Lord.

7. They have the Ministers of Christ appointed by office to be the helpers of
their Faith and Jey: to be the messengers of glad tidings to them, and to tell
them from God of the pardon of their sins, and of his favor to them in Christ:
and to heal the brokenhearted, and preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, etc.
Luke 4. 18. To have a deputed Officer of Christ to absolve the penitent, and
deliver them pardon in the name of Christ, and to pray for them, and direct
them, and resolve their doubts, and show them the promises that may support
them, and help to profligate their temptations, must needs be much to the
comfort of believers: As the care of a father is the comfort of the child; and
the care of the Physicion is a comfort to the sick.

8. They have all the Ordinances suited to their comfort: the Word read,
preached and meditated on: the Sacraments and the public praises of God, and
Communion of the Saints (of which before.)

9. They have multitudes of Mercies still about them, and every day renewed on
them, to feed their comforts.

10. They have a promise that all things shall work together for their good;
and so that all their afflictions themselves shall be their commodities, and
death it self shall be their gain, Romans 8. 28. Phil. 1. 21. and all their
enemies shall be subdued by Christ the Prince of their salvation.

So that from this much you may see, that for Joy and Pleasure, there is no
life that has the advantages that a holy life has. As for the ungodly, they
are not so; but are like the chaff which the wind drives away, Psalm 1. 4.
These pleasures grow not in their wicked way, nor do such strangers know
Believers joys.

III. LAstly, I should also have showed you the Pleasure of Holiness by the
Effects: But here also to avoid prolixity, I will but name a few.

1. Holiness is Pleasing to God himself; and therefore it must needs be
pleasant to the Saints that have it: For it is their end and chiefest Pleasure
to please God. They know that this is the end for which they were Created,
Redeemed, and renewed: and therefore that is the most Pleasant life to them, in
which they find that God is best Pleased. And therefore they labor, that
whether present or absent, they may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5. 9. They are
an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

2. Holiness must needs be Pleasant to the soul, because it is the spiritual
health of the soul, and the means and certain evidence of its safety. And
Health is a constant sensible delight: And to know that our souls have escaped
the danger of the wrath of God, and everlasting misery, must needs be a greater
Pleasure then any the matters of this world can afford. One serious thought of
the salvation, which Holiness is the earnest of, may give that true contentment
to the soul, that all the wealth and glory of the world can never give.

3. Holiness removes fears and troubles, and therefore must needs be a
Pleasant state. It removes the fears of the wrath of God, and of damnation:
and the fears of all destructive evils: It tends to heal the wounded soul, and
pacific the clamorous conscience, and abate all worldly and groundless sorrows;
for which the wicked have no true cure.

4. Holiness is the destruction of sin: and sin is the cause of all calamities:
and therefore Holiness must needs be Pleasant.

5. Holiness does consist in rejoicing Graces, that are exceeding pleasant in
the exercise; as Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, etc. yea it consists in Joy it
self, Romans 14. 17.

6. It fits the soul for Communion with God, who is the fountain of Delights;
and it brings us near him, and acquaints us with him as a God of Love: and
therefore must needs be a Pleasant state.

7. You see by experience, that when once men have tried a Holy life, they
think they can never have enough of it: The more Holy they are, the more Holy
they would be. He that has most, would fain have more: And the weakest
desires no less then to be perfect. And do you think men that have tried it,
would so long after more and more, if it were not pleasant?

Judge also by the labor and diligence of the godly, who seek first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and make it the principal business of
their lives: Would they make all this ado for nothing? Or for that which is a
matter of no delight?

Judge also by the delights which they voluntarily forsake, when they let go
all their sinful pleasures, and renounce all the glory of the world; would they
make this exchange, if they had not found a more pleasant course, and that
which tends to everlasting pleasure?

8. You see also that the truly Godly, when once they have tried a holy life,
will never go back again to their former pleasures, but loath the very
remembrance of them: It is not all the honors, and riches, and pleasures in
the world, that can hire them to forsake a holy life. Sure therefore they find
it the most pleasant course; if not in sensible delights, yet at least in
easing their consciences, and securing their minds from the terrors that
sinful pleasures would produce. If they found that Godliness answered not their
expectation, they have leisure enough, and temptations too many, to turn back
into the state from whence they came. But how would they abhor such a motion
as this?

9. If Holiness were not a Pleasant thing, it could not help us to bear up
under all afflictions, nor make us rejoice in tribulation, as it does. That
which can sweeten gall and wormwood, must needs be very sweet it self. That
which can make reproach, and scorn, and poverty, and imprisonment, either sweet
or tolerable, is sure it self a pleasant thing.

10. Lastly, if Holiness were not pleasant, it could not make Death it self so
easy, nor take off its terrors, nor cause the Martyrs to suffer so joyfully
for Christ: Death is the King of terrors, and so bitter a cup, that it must
needs be a pleasant thing indeed, that can sweeten it.

BEsides all this that has been said, let me briefly have some general
aggravations, of the Delights of Holiness. And compare it as we go with the
Delights of the ungodly.

1. The Delights of Holiness are the most Great, and Glorious, and Sublime
delights. They are fetched from the most Great and Glorious things. It is God,
and his Grace, and everlasting glory that feed our pleasures. Whereas the
Delights of sensual men, are fed with trifles: What do they rejoice in but the
fooleries of sin, and the filthyness of their own transgressions! What is it
that contenteth them, but a dream of honor, or the good will and word of
mortal men, or a brutish sportfulness, or the pleasing of the itch of lust, or
the provision that they have laid up for the flesh? The treasures of a Kingdom
excel not the treasure of a child's pin-box the thousandth part so much as
Heaven excells the treasure of the ungodly. Judge therefore by the matter that
feeds their pleasure, which of the two is the more pleasant life: to sport in
their own shame, and laugh at the brink of misery, with the ungodly; or to
delight our selves in the Love of God, and rejoice in the assured hope of Glory
with the true believer?

2. The Delights of Holiness are the most rational, well-grounded, sure
delights. They are not delusory, nor grounded on mistakes or fancies. They are
warranted by the truth and All Sufficiency of God, and the certainty of his
promise, and the immutability of his counsels, and the sure Reward prepared for
his Saints. None but a lying malicious Devil, or his instruments that
participate of his nature, or a blind, corrupted, partial flesh, will ever go
about to question the foundations of our faith and comforts. The hopes and
comforts that are built upon this Rock, will never fall, nor make us ashamed.

But the ungodly rejoice in their own delusions: It is ignorance and error
that they are beholden to for their mirth. They laugh in their sleep, or as mad
men in their distraction. Did they know that Satan rejoices in their joys;
and that an offended God is always present, and how poor a matter it is that
they rejoice in, it would mar their mirth. If they saw the Hell that they are
near, or well-considered where they stand, and what a case their souls are in,
they would have little list to play or laugh. If they knew aright the shortness
of their pleasures, and the length of their sorrows, and in what a doleful case
their wealth and fleshly delights will leave them, it would turn their laughter
into mourning and lamentation. So that they rejoice but (as a sick man in a
frenzy, or as a fool upon some good news to him that is false;) upon mere
mistake.

3. The Delights of Holiness are the most pure Delights, and most entire and
complete. There is no Evil in it, mixed with the Good, and therefore nothing to
interrupt the joy. Our joys indeed are too much interrupted: but that is not
from any hurt that is in a holy life; but by the contrary sin, which Holiness
must work out. If men take poison, let them not blame nature that strives
against it, if they are sick; but let them blame themselves, and the poison,
that puts nature to expel it. In Holiness it self there is nothing but Good,
and therefore nothing that should grieve us.

But it is far otherwise with sensual delights: As they are sinful, they are
wholly evil: As they are natural, feeding upon the creature alone, they are as
it is, a mixture of Vanity and Vexation. Every creature has its unsuitableness
and imperfection, by which it disturbeth even where it pleases, and troubles
where it comfort, and frustrateth and disappointeth more then it satisfies.
The more we Love it, usually the more we suffer by it. That thing which we most
excessively love, is ordinarily our sharpest scourge. That friend whom we most
excessively love, is usually our greatest sorrow: either by their failing our
expectations, or by our failing theirs, or our insufficiency to accomplish the
good which we desire of them. If they prove unkind, it is more grievous then
the unkindness of many others: If they prove faithful, how deeply do we suffer
with them in all their sufferings? Their wants do pinch us as our own: Their
reproaches are our shame: Their losses take as much from us: Their sickness
paineth us: Their death half kills us: And he that is so happy as to have
many such friends, is so unhappy as to have more burdens, fears and griefs to
suffer, and more deaths to die then other men. But especially to ungodly men,
these earthly comforts are uncomfortable, because they have none of the Divine
delights that are the kernel and the spirits, but take up with the shell or
husk: And because their mirth is mixed with their own misery, which conscience
sometime gripes them for with such deep remorse as cools their comforts: And
some thoughts of the shortness of their pleasures will be stepping in, and
ending them before their time: So that the bitterness of worldly things
surpasses the delight.

4. The Delights of Holiness are Deep and Solid, and therefore do stablish and
corroborate the Hearts. But sensual delights are like childrens laughter: they
are slight, and outside, and flitting and vain: As children laugh in one
breath, and cry in the next; so worldly joys are followed at the heels by
sorrows; For they lie not deep, and fortify not the heart against distresses,
as the delights of faith and holiness do.

5. The Pleasures of the Saints are the gift of God, and allowed of by him;
commanded by his word, and promoted by his promises and mercies, and are but
the fruits of his Everlasting Love: And being so Divine, they must needs be
excellent.

But the Pleasures of ungodly worldly men are partly forbidden and condemned by
God, and partly contradicted and confounded, by his terrible threatenings, and
the discovery of his wrath. There is no Peace says the Lord, to the wicked,
Isa. 48. 22. and 57. 21. God does disown and protest against their peace. If
they will keep it, and make it good, it must be against his will. He forbids
joy to a rebellious people, Hos. 9. 1. Rejoice not O Israel for joy as other
people: for thou have gone a whoring from thy God. He calls them to weeping
and mourning, and renting of the heart, Joel. 2. 12, 13. Hear what God says to
them in their greatest pleasures, Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Go to now ye rich men,
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you: Your riches are
corrupted and your garments moath-eaten: Your gold and silver is cankred, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as
it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the last days: -- Ye have
lived in pleasure on earth, and been wanton: Ye have nourished your hearts as
in a day of slaughter -- ] A man would think it should either Turn them, or
Torment them, and fill their hearts with continual horror, to sind God thus
solemnly protesting against their peace, and sentencing them to woe and sorrows.

6. The Pleasures of the Godly are clean and noble, and honest and honorable.
They delight in things of greatest worth, for which they had their Natures,
their Time and all. But the Pleasures of sinners are base and filthy: They
Delight as swine in wallowing in the mire: and as the dog to eat his own Vomit,
2. Pet 2. 22. They delight to wrong the God that made them, and by whom they
live, and to cross the ends of their lives and mercies; and to drive away all
true delights, and to undo themselves. This is the matter of their delight.

7. The Devil is a great enemy to the Delights of Holiness; which is a sign
that they are excellent. He does what he can to keep men from the Holy State,
lest they should meet with the Happiness that attends it. And if he prevail not
in this his chief design, he does what he can to fill up the lives of believers
with calamities. All the enemies that he can raise up against them, shall by
temptations, scorns or injuries, assault their comforts; All the storms that he
can raise shall be sure to fall upon them. How busy is he to fill them with
fears and doubtings? and to cast perplexing thoughts into their minds? or to
mis^ead them into some perplexing ways? and fasten on them entangling
doctrines, or disquieting principles? How cunningly and diligently will he
argue against their peace and comforts? and seek to hide the Love of God, and
dishonor the blood and grace and covenant of Christ? and cross the comforting
workings of the spirit? How subtly will he question all our Evidences? and
extenuate all Gods comforting mercies? and do all that he can, that the godly
may have a Hell on Earth, though they shall have none hereafter. It is sure an
excellent Joy and Pleasure, which Satan is so great an enemy to.

8. The Delights of Holiness do make us better; They are so far from
disordering the mind, and leading us to sin, that they compose and purify the
mind, and make sin much more odious to us, then before. No man hates sin so
much as he that has seen the pleased face of God, and tasted most the
sweetness of his grace, and tried the pleasant paths of life. And therefore it
is, that when a believer comes from fervent prayers, or from heavenly
conference or meditation, or from hearing the blessed word of life, laid open
plainly, and applied powerfully to his soul, he would then abhor a temptation
to sensual delights, if they were set before him. Till we lose the relish of
Holy things, and suffer our Delight in God to fade, we are seldom taken in the
snares of any fleshly vanities. Money is dirt to us, and honor a smoke, and
lust does stink, as long as we maintain our delight in God. He is the best and
highest Christian, that has most of these spiritual delights.

But fleshly Pleasures make men worse; They intoxicate the mind, and fill it
with vanity and folly; They are the snares to entrap us; and the harlots that
do bewitch us, and defile the soul that should be chaste for God; The noise of
this sensual foolish mirth, does drown the voice of God and Reason, so that in
the needfullest matters they cannot be heard. In their hunting and hawking,
di^ing and carding, drinking and revelling, feasting and dancing how little of
God or heaven is on the sinners mind? seldom is the soul so unfit for duty, so
incapable of instruction, so hardened against the word and warnings of the
Lord, as in the depth of sensual delights. Then it is that they are [ foolish,
disobedient, and deceived,] when they are [ serving diverse lusts and pleasules]
as Paul that had tried both ways, confesses, Tit. 3. 3. None so unlike to be
the servants of Christ, as they that are clothed in purple and fine linen,
and that fare sumptuously or deliciously every day, Luke 16. To live in rioting
and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in strife and envying, and to
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof] is the description of
one that walks not honestly, and is far from a Christians life and hopes, Romans
13. 13, 14. It is those voluptuous sensual sinners, that most obstinately shut
out all reproofs, and refuse him that speaks to them from heaven, and will
not so much as soberly consider of the things that concern their everlasting
peace; and therefore are often so forsaken of grace, that they grow to be
scorners of the means of their salvation, and [ being past feeling do give
themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness]
Ephesians. 4. 19. Which then is most desirable? the healing or the wounding
pleasures? the quickening or the killing mirth? the wholesome or the poisonous
sweet? the delights that mend us and further our salvation, or corrupting
pleasures that drown men in perdidition?

9. The Delights of Holiness are kin to Heaven: They are of the same nature
with those that Saints and Angels have with God (though we must acknowledge an
unconceivable difference). It is the same God, and the same Glory that now
delights us as seen by faith, which shall then delight us, when seen by
intuition with open face. We are solacing our selves in Love and Praise, with
the same employment that we must have in Heaven. And therefore if Heaven be the
state of Greatest joy and pleasure, the state of Grace, and work of Holiness,
that is likest to it, must needs be next it.

But sensual pleasures are beastial and sordid, and so far unlike the Joys of
Heaven, that nothing more withdraws the mind, or makes it unmeet for Heaven.

10. Lastly, the delights of Holiness are durable, even everlasting. The
further we go, the greater cause we have of joy. It is not a mutable good that
we rejoice in, but in the immutable God, the ancient of days, and in that
Christ that loves his spouse with an everlasting love; and in the sure and
faithful promises; and in the hopes of the Kingdom that cannot be moved. The
spring of our pleasures is in Heaven: and our rejoicing is but the beginning of
that which must there be perpetuated. Death cannot kill the joys of a believer:
the grave shall not bury them: millions of ages shall not end them Here they
may be interrupted, because the pleased face of God may be ecclipsed, and sin
and Satan may cast malicious doubt into our minds; and the neighborhood of the
flesh will force the mind to participate of its sufferings. But still God will
keep their comforts alive, at least in the root; and help them in the act, as
we have need of them and are fit for them: And in the world of Joy for which he
is preparing us, our Joy shall be perfected, and never have interruption or
end. Holy-Festivals, and Ordinances, and sweetest Communion of Saints, and
dearest Love of truest friends, and perfect health and prosperity in the world,
and all other comforts set together, that this world affords, are but short
emblems and small fore-tastes of the Joys which the face of God will afford
us, and we shall have with Christ, his Saints and Angels, to all eternity.

But sensual Pleasures are of so short continuance, that they are gone before
we feel well that we have them. The drunkard, the glutton, the fornicator, the
gamester are drinking but a sugered cup of poison: and merrily sowing the seeds
of everlasting sorrow: Satan is but scratching them (as the butcher shaves the
throat of the swine) before he kill them: One quarter of an hour ends the
pleasure and leaves a damp of sadness in its room: He that has had 40. or 50.
years pleasures, has no relish of it when it is past; but it is as if it had
never been: and much worse. He that has spent a day, or month, or year in
Pleasure, has no more at night, or at the years end, when it is gone, then he
that spent that time in sorrow. The bones and dust of thousands lie now in the
Church yard, that have tasted many a sweet cup and morsel, and have had many a
merry wanton day: And are they now any better for it, then if they had never
known it? And are not the poor and sorrowful there their equals? And doubtless
their souls have as little of those pleasures as their dust. In Heaven they are
abhorred: In Hell they are turned into tormenting flames, and remembered as fuel
for the devouring fire. There are Gluttons, but no more good cheer: There are
Drunkards, but no more drink: There are Fornicators, but no more lustful
pleasures: There are the playful wasters of their time, but no more sport and
recreation: There are the vainglorious, proud, ambitious souls, but not in
glory, honor and renown; but their aspiring has cast them into the gulf of
misery, and their pride has covered them with utter confusion, and their glory
is turned to their endless shame. Those that are now overwhelmed with the wrath
of God, and shut up under desperation, are the souls that lately wallowed here
in the delights of the flesh, and enjoyed for a season the pleasures of sin;
and now what fruit have they of all their former seeming happiness? He that is
feasted and gallantly adorned and attended to day, is crying for a drop of
water in vain tomorrow, Luke 16. 23, 24, 25, 26. Christ tells you the gain of
earthly riches, and the duration of earthly pleasures, to the ungodly, Luke 6.
24, 25. [ Woe to you that are rich, for you have received your consolation: Woe
to you that are full, for you shall hunger: woe to you that laugh now, for you
shall mourn and weep.] that is, You that live a sensual life, and take up your
pleasure and felicity here, shall find that all will end in sorrow. But [
blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled: blessed are ye that
weep now; for ye shall laugh, v. 21. that is, You that are contented to pass
through sorrows and tribulation on earth, to the Kingdom where you have placed
your happiness and hopes, shall find that your sorrows will end in joy; and
therefore you are blessed while you seem miserable to the world, Joh. 16. 20. [
Ye shall weep and lament; but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.] v. 22. [ Now you have
sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no
man takes from you] We have a constant interest in the Foutain of all Joy; and
if our sun be clouded, it is but for a moment. [ Our maker is our Husband: the
Lord of hosts is his name: and our Redeemer the holy one of Israel; the God of
the whole earth: -- For a small moment may he forsake us, but with great mercy
will he gather us: In a little wrath he may hide his face from us for a moment;
but with everlasting kindness will he have mercy on us, says the Lord our
Redeemer. As he swore that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth, so has he sworn that he will not be wroth with his people, nor rebuke
them. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed; but his
kindness shall not depart from us, nor the covenant of his peace be removed,
says the Lord, that has mercy on us] Isa. 54. 5, to 19. [ For his anger
endures but for a moment: in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning.] Psalm. 30. 5. Storms may arise that may
affright us: but how quickly will they all be over? [ Come my people (says the
Lord, Isa. 26. 20.) enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee:
hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be
overpast.]

And as the momentany sorrow of the Godly is forgotten in everlasting Joy, so
the Joy of the wicked is but for a moment, and is drowned in everlasting
sorrows. Job 20. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. [ Know thou not this of old, since man
was placed upon earth, That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the Joy
of the hypocrite is but for a moment? Though his excellency mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall perish for ever like
his own dung: They which have seen him shall say, Where is he? He shall fly
away as a dream, and shall not be found: Yea he shall be chased away as a
vision of the night: the eye also which saw him, shall see him no more; neither
shall his place any more behold him.] Job 21. 12, 13. [ They take the Timbrell
and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organs: they spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.]

It would grieve a considerate believer to look on a worldly sensual gallant,
in the midst of his vainglory, or any unsanctified man in his mirth and
pleasure, and to think where that man will shortly be, and how the case will be
altered with him, and where his sport and mirth will leave him. As it would
sadden our hearts to see one of them struck dead in the place, or to see the
Devil fetch them away, and spoil the game; so should it grieve us to foresee
the stroke of death, and the condemnation of their souls to everlasting misery.
And can that man much value the pleasure of ungodly men, that does foresee
this end? Would you not laugh at him that were a Prince but for a day, and must
be the scorn of the world to morrow? or that would choose one day of mirth and
pleasure, though he knew it would fill the rest of his life with pain and
misery? If folly and stupidity were any wonder, it were a wonder that ungodly
men can be merry, when their consciences tell them that they are not sure to
stay one hour out of Hell; nor to hold on their mirth till the end of the game:
But while they are saying, [ Soul, take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry:]
they may suddenly be told from God, [ Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee] and then whose is thy wealth? and then where is thy sport and
mirth? Luke 12. 19, 20. As the tender flowers and Roses of the Spring, do fall
before the nipping Frosts, and will not live in Winter storms; no more will
your fading mirth endure the frowns of God, the face of death, nor scarce a
serious forethought of the day that you are near. And such matter of horror
is continually before you, while you are under the wrath and curse of God, in a
carnal unregenerate state, that you are beholden to folly, security and
stupidity for that ease which hinders your everlasting ease.

So that all things considered, I must seriously profess, that (however the
ungodly have some pleasant dreams, and may live a while in carelessness and
stupidity, or fleere in the face, while the beginning of hell is in their
consciences, yet) I must judge, that a life of Faith and Holiness are
unspeakably sweet, if it were but for this, that they save the Conscience from
the gripes, and fears, and terrible thoughts, that either sometime feed on the
ungodly, or are ready to devour their mirth and them. So sad and frightful a
thing it is, to be unsanctified, and in a state of sin, that it is an high
commendation of the delights of Holiness, that they so much deliver us from
those grievous terrors, and are so powerful an Antidote to preserve the heart
from the wickeds pangs and desperation. Believe it, when conscience, death, and
judgment, are the messengers to declare your endless sorrows, you will then
wish, and ten thousand times wish, that you had some of the Faith and Holiness
of the Saints, to be a Cordial to your sinking hearts; and then you would take
it as a matter of unspeakable joy, to be found in such a state as you now count
sad and melancholy. Ask but a dying man, whether fleshly pleasure or Godliness
be the sweeter thing? Now when the delusions of prosperity are gone, which do
men most relish? and which is it that they would own? By the consent of all the
wise men in the world, I may well conclude, that a Holy life is incomparably
the most pleasant.

BUT I know there are many things that seem to cross all this that I have
spoken, which will be the matter of the Objections of ungodly men, and
therefore must have an answer, before we pass any further. And the principal
Objection is from the too common case of those that fear God, who walk so
sadly, and doubt, and complain, and mourn so frequently, and show so little
cheerfulness and joy, when many of the ungodly live in mirth, that you will
think I speak against experience, when I say that a life of Holiness is so
pleasant, and therefore that it is not to be believed. You will say, [ Do we
not see the contrary in the sadness of their faces, and hear it in their sad
lamenting words?]

To this I must give many particulars in answer, which when you have laid
together, you may see, that all this makes nothing against the Pleasantness of
the ways of God.

And, 1. You must difference between the Entrance into holiness, and the
Progress: and between a new beginner, that is but lately turned from his
ungodliness, and one that has had time to try and understand the ways of God.
Those that are entering, or but newly come in, must needs have sorrow. But what
is the cause of it? Not their Godliness, but their ungodliness. I mean, It is
their ungodliness which they lament, though it be godliness that causes them
to lament it: Can you expect that an ingenuous man should see his sin, and look
back on so many years transgressions, and not be grieved? To see that he has
so long abused God, and lost his time, and neglected his salvation, and that he
has lain so long in so miserable a state, must needs cause remorse in the
conscience that has any feeling. And will you say that Godliness is
unpleasant, because it makes a man sorrow for his ungodliness? If a man that
has killed his dearest friend, or his own Father, be grieved for the fact when
he comes to repentance, will you blame his Repentance or his Murder for his
grief? Will you say, [ What a hurtful thing is this Repentance?] or rather [
What an odious crime was it that must be so repented of?] Would you wish a man
that has lived so long in sin and misery, to have no sorrow for it at his
return? Especially when it is but a healing sorrow, preparing for remission,
and not a sorrow joined with despair, as theirs will be that die impenitently?
Observe the complaints of penitent souls, whether it be their present Godliness
or their former ungodliness, which they lament? Will you hear a man lament his
former sinful careless life, and yet will you lay the blame on the contrary
course of duty, which now he has undertaken? You may as wisely accuse a man
for landing in a safe harbor, because he there lamenteth his loss by shipwreck
while he was at Sea. Or as wisely may you blame a man for rising, that
complains how he hurt himself by his fall. And as honestly may you accuse the
chastity of your wife, because she lamenteth her former adultery; or the
fidelity of your friend or servant, because he lamenteth his former
unfaithfulness.

But though the pangs of the New birth be somewhat grievous, and we come not
into the world of Grace without some lamentation, yet this is not the state of
the Holy life, into which we enter; nor are those pangs to continue all our
days.

2. You must distinguish between the weaker and the stronger sort of
Christians: and consider, that children are apt to cry; but it is not therefore
better to be unborn: Sickness is querulous, and the weak are froward; but it is
not therefore better to be dead. The godly are not perfectly godly: They are
sinners while they are Saints: They have Holiness; but they have corruption
with it: Their sin is conquered, but yet not totally rooted out. The relics do
remain, though it do not reign. And it is the remnant of their unholiness that
they lament, and not their holiness: They grieve not that they are godly, but
that they are no more godly. It troubles them not that they are come home to
Christ, but that they have brought so much of their corruption with them.
Hearken whether they complain of their Humility or their Pride? of their Faith,
or their unbelief? their confidence or their distrust? their repentance or
their hardness of heart? It is not their heavenly mindedness that troubles
them, but their earthly-mindedness. Nor is it their spirituality, but their
carnality: Nor is it the D^ties, but the weakness and faultiness of their souls
in duty: Not that they do it: but that they do it no better. It is more
holiness that they beg for, and lament the want of. And will you say that
Holiness is unpleasant, because men would so fain have more of it? You would
reason with more wisdom in another case. If a man that has tasted meat or
drink, complain because he has no more, you would not blame his food for that;
nor gather from thence, that it is unpleasant, or that famine is more
delightful.

3. You must distinguish between those Christians that have saln since their
conversion, into any great and wounding sin, or ^^uris^ some vexatious
distempers; and those that walk more uprightly with God, and maintain their
integrity and peace. No wonder if David after his sin, complain of the breaking
of his bones and heart: and if Peter go out and weep bitterly. The servants of
Christ do know so much of the evil of sin, that they cannot make so light of
it, as the blind and obdurate world that are past feeling. That sin which has
cost them formerly so dear, and has cost Christ so much dearer on their
behalf, must needs cause some sm^rt in the penitent soul. Sickness is felt,
because it supposes the subject to be alive: but the dead feel not that they
are dead and rotten: And it does not follow that therefore death is more
desirable then sickness. It is because they are so like to the ungodly, that
the servants of Christ do grieve and complain. But so far as they feel the
healthfulness of their souls, and are conscious of their sincerity and upright
conversations, they have greater comfort then the world can afford them.

4. You must distinguish between those Christians that by misapprehensions are
unacquainted with their own felicity, and those that better understand their
state. If a man be never so holy, and know it not, but by temptations is
brought to doubt, whether he be not yet in his unsanctified state, no wonder if
this man be grieved with these fears. But his grief is not because he is
sanctified, but because he is afraid lest he be unsanctified. And this shows
that Holiness is most lovely in his eyes: or else why should he be so much
troubled, when he does but doubt whether he be Holy or not? If a Rich man by a
false report should believe that he is robbed of his goods and treasure, or that
his houses are burnt, when it is not so, he will mourn or be troubled till he
know the truth. And will any be so foolish as to conclude from thence, that
Riches are more uncomfortable then beggary? Had you not rather be rich, though
for a time you know it not, then to live in certain continual want? If a man
that is in health, be persuaded by mistake that he is in a Consumption, he will
be troubled by his mistake: But will you thence conclude that sickness is more
comfortable then health? Is it not better to have health with those mistaken
fears, then to live in sickness? Methinks you should rather argue on the
contrary side, [How sweet is Health, when the fear of losing it is so
troublesome? and how bitter is sickness and death, when the very fear of them is
so grievous?] And so you should say, [How sweet is Holiness, when it is so
troublesome to those that have it, so much as to fear lest they have it not?
and How miserable a life is it to be ungodly, when it is so grievous to the
servants of Christ, even once to fear lest they are ungodly?]

But go to those Christians that know themselves, and are truly acquainted with
their sincerity and their privileges, and see whether they walk so
uncomfortably as those mistaken doubting souls; You will find them in another
case, and hear other kind of language from their mouths; even the joyful
praises of their Redeemer, and the thankful acknowledgements of his abundant
love. How sweet unto their souls is the remembrance of kindness? and how
delightful a work is it from day to day to magnify his name?

5. You must also distinguish between those weak mistaken Christians, that
understand not the extent of the Covenant of grace, and those that do
understand it. If a believer by mistake should think that the grace of the
Gospel extends not to such as he, because he is unworthy, and his sins are
great, no wonder if he be troubled: As you would be if you should conceive that
your lease were not made to you, but to another: or as a malefactor would be if
he thought his pardon belonged not to him, but to another man. But hence you
should rather observe the riches and excellencies of the Gospel, and the
happiness of the heirs of promise, then dream that its better be strangers to
the holy Covenant still. They are better that have a promise of life and
understand it not, then they that have none. But those that know the freeness
and fullness of the promise, and study with all Saints to comprehend what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, ( Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.) do use to walk more comfortably
according to the riches of that grace which they do possess.

6. Consider also, that most of these complaining Christians are glad that they
are in any measure got out of their former state, and therefore apprehend their
cause to be better then it was before: Or else they would turn back to the
state that they were in; which they would not do for all the world. And
therefore they take a godly life to be far more pleasant to them that do attain
it.

7. Moreover, the sorrow of believers is such as may consist with Joy. At the
same time while they are grieved that they are no better, they are gladder of
that measure of grace which they have received, then they would be to be made
the rulers of the world. While they are mourning for the remnant of their sins,
they are glad that it is but a remnant that they have to mourn for. Yea while
they are troubled because they doubt of their sincerity and salvation, they are
more sustained and comforted with that little discerning which they have of
their evidences, and with their hopes of the everlasting love of God, then they
could by all your sinful pleasures. Try the most dejected mournful Christian,
whether he would change states and comforts with the best and greatest of the
ungodly. The soul of man is so active and comprehensive, that it can at once
both rejoice and mourn. While they mourn for sin, and feel affliction,
believers can have some rejoicing taste of Everlasting Life.

8. Yea the godly sorrow of a believer is the matter of his joy. He is gladder
when his heart will melt for sin, then he would be to be your partner in your
carnal pleasures. He would not change the comfort that he finds in his
penitent tears for all your laughter.

9. The Joy of a believer is intimate and solid, as I said before, according to
the object of it, and not like the fleering of a fool, or the laughter of a
child, or the sensual mirth that Solomon called Madness. And therefore it is
not so discernable to others as carnal mirth is. And therefore you think that
the servants of Christ are void of pleasure when they have much more then you.
It is little ridiculous accidents and toys that make men laugh; but great
things give us an inward sweet content and joy, which scorns to show it self by
laughter. And what can be a fitter object of such great content, then to be a
member of Christ, and an heir of heaven?

10. Moreover, this sorrow of the Godly is but medicinal, and a preparative to
their after-Joys: It does but work out the poison of sin, which would mar
their comforts, and drive them to Christ, and fit them to value him, and taste
the sweetness of his love and grace.

11. And as it is not the state and life of a Christian, but his fasting days,
or time of Physic, so the comforts of the godly ordinarily do far exceed their
sorrows, at least in weight, if not in passionate sense. They have their hours
of sweet access to God, and of heavenly meditation, and delightful remembrance
of the experiences of his love, and perusal of his promises, and communion with
his people; and of the exercise of faith, and hope, and love. And with those
Christians that have attained stability and strength, these comforting graces
are predominant: and their life is more in Love and Praise, then in vexatious
fears and sorrows: And it should be so with all believers: Love is the Heart of
the new creature. It is a life of Love and Joy and praise that Christ calls all
his people to; and forbids them all unnecessary doubts and sorrows; and keeps
them up so strictly from sin, that he may prevent their sorrows. And if you
will judge whether Holiness be a pleasant course, you must go to the
prescript, and consider the nature and use of Holiness, and look at those that
live according to the mercies of the Gospel; and not look at the dejections and
sorrows of those that grieve themselves by swerving from the way of Holiness:
as if you would judge that Health is unpleasant, because you hear a sick man
groan. And yet even these weak and mournful Christians usually have more joy
then you. The very preservation of their souls from that despair which sin
would cast them into if they had not a Christ to fly to, and the little tastes
of mercy which they have felt, and the revivings that they find between their
sorrows, and the hopes they have of better days, are enough to weigh down all
your pleasures and all their own sorrows.

12. Lastly, consider that this is not the life of perfect Joy, and therefore
some sorrows will be intermixed. Comfort will not be perfect till Holiness be
perfect; and till we arrive at the place of perfect joy. What Is wanting now
while we live in a troublesome malignant world, shall shortly be made up in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, when we have admittance into our Masters joy. And then all
the world shall be easily convinced, whether sin or duty, a fleshly or or Holy
life, has the greater Pleasures and contents.

Object. But it is not only the weakness of professors, but the very way that
is prescribed them, that must bear the blame: For they are commanded to fast,
and weep, and mourn.

Answ. 1. That is but with a medicinal necessary sorrrw, for preventing of a
greater sorrow; as bitter medicines and bloodletting, and strict diet, are for
the prevention of death. God first commands them to take heed of sin, the
cause of sorrow: But if they will fall and break their bones, they must endure
the pain of setting them again.

2. And does not Christ command his servants also to Rejoice? and again
Rejoice, and always to rejoice? Phil. 3. 1. and 4. 4. 1 These. 5. 16. Does he
not command them to live in the most delightful works of Love and Joy and
thankful mention of his mercies? I tell you, if Christians did but live as God
requires them, and by his plenteous mercies does encourage them to live, they
would be the wonder of the world for their exceeding joy; they would triumph as
men that are entering into rest, and make the miserable ungodly Princes and
great ones of the world observe their low contemptible condition, and see by
the comforts of believers, that there are far higher joys then theirs to be
attained. Did Christians live as God would have them, according to their
dignity and selicity, they would make the world admire the spirit, and hopes
and comforts that do so transport them; They would be so taken up in the Love
and praise of their Redeemer, that they would scarce have leisure to observe
whether they be rich or poor, or to regard the honors or dishonours of the
world. These little things would scarce find room in their affection, they
would be taken up so much with God. If they were sore with scourging, and their
feet were in the stocks, they would there sing forth the praise of him that
has assured them of deliverance and everlasting joy, as Paul and Silas did,
Act. 16. They would rejoice in poverty, in disgrace, in pain, and nothing would
be able to overcome their joy. They would pity the tyrants and sensual
Epicures that have no sweeter pleasures then those that the flesh and this
deceitful world affords. O the joy that believers would have in their secret
prayers! in their heavenly meditations! in their holy conference! in their
reading of the promises! and much more in their public praises and Communion,
if they did but follow more fully the conduct of that spirit that has
undertaken to be their Comforter! What makes believers slight this world, and
take all your pleasures to be unworthy of their entertainment or regard, but
that they have had a taste of sweeter things, and by faith are overgrown these
childish vanities? If God and his favor be better then such worms as we; and
the heavenly Glory be better then these transitory toys, you may well conceive
that the believers joy, that is fed by these, must be greater, (at least in
worth and weight) then all the pleasures of this sublunary world. If therefore
you love a life of pleasure, come over to Christ, and live a holy heavenly
life; and believe one that has made some trial, yea believe the Lord himself,
that Holiness is the only Pleasant life.

ANd now as we have seen it plainly proved, that the life of Holiness is the
most Pleasant life, so from hence we may see two sorts reproved, that (in
different measures) are found to be trangressors.

The first is, Those blind ungodly wretches, that can find no pleasure in a
holy life, when they can find pleasure in their worldly drudgery, and in their
sensual uncleanness, and their childish vanities. They have the God of infinite
Goodness to delight in; but to their impious hearts he seems not delightful.
They have his Power, and wisdom, and holiness, and truth to love, and admire,
and trust upon, and his excellent works to behold him in, and his holy laws,
and gracious promises to meditate on; but they have small delight in any such
employment. They have leave as well as any others to open their hearts to God
in secret, and in prayer and praise to recreate their souls, and to hold
communion with the Saints of God, and to be exercised both in public and
private in his worship, and to order their families in his fear, and to manage
their affairs according to his word: but they find no pleasure in such a life
as this, but are as backward to it as if it were a toilesome and unprofitable
business, and are weary of that little outside worship which they do perform.
They have Heaven set before them to seek after, and to make their portion and
delight, but they have small delight to think or speak of it. Their hearts are
unsuitable to these high holy and spiritual things. They are matters that they
are strange to, and have no firm and confident belief of, but an uncertain
wavering weak opinion: and therefore they are too far off, to be their delight
[ They say to God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy way;
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we pray unto him? Job 21. 14, 15.] If they do come to the public
Assemblies, and join there in the outward part of worship, they find little
life and pleasure in it, because they are strangers to the reward and spiritual
part which is the kernel. They look more at the Preachers gifts, and the manner
of his doctrine and delivery, then at the spiritual necessary matter that is
delivered. They have some pleasure in a neat composed speech, that seems not
to accuse them any more then others, and grateth not on their tender ears with
plain and necessary truth; but suffers them to go home as quietly as they came
thither. But if the Preacher touch them to the quick, and endeavors
faithfully to acquaint them with themselves, or if he have no eloquence or
accurateness of speech to please them with, but be guilty of any unhansomness
of expression, or m^d^^^ imperfections, they are weary of hearing him, and
think it long till the glass be run, and perhaps instead of tasting the
sweetness of wholesome truth, they make it the matter of their dension and
contempt.

But let them be at Cards or Dice, at Hawking or Hunting, at any idle sports
and vanities, and they can hold out longer with delight. At drinking, or
feasting, or idle talking, they are not so weary. Yea in the labors of their
calling, when their bodies are weary, their minds are more unwearyed; and in
their fields and shops they have more delight, then in the spiritual holy
service of the Lord. They are never so merry as when there is least of God upon
their hearts and in their ways. And it is one of the reasons that hinders
their Conversion, lest it should deprive them of their mirth, and cause them to
spend the remainder of their days in uncomfortable heavyness. If sin were not
sweet to them, conversion would be more easy: The Pleasure which they find in
creatures by their sin, is the prison and fetters of their souls captivity. If
this be thy case that read these lines, I beseech thee lay to heart these
following aggravations of thy sin.

1. How blind and wicked is the heart that can find more pleasure in sin than
holiness? Is the creature pleasant to thee, and God unpleasant? What a shame is
this to thy Understanding and thy Will? It proclaims thy pernicious Folly and
Impiety. If thou had no more wit then to be Pleased more with stones then
gold, with dung then meat, with shameful nakedness then clothing, thou would
not be judged wise enough to be left to thy own dispose and government. But the
folly which thou do manifest, is unspeakably greater. Darkness is not so much
worse then Light, and Death is not so much worse then Life; as sin is worse
than Holiness, and the world than God. And is the Worst more Pleasant to thee
then the Best? It is a fool indeed, to whom it is a sport to do mischief, Prove.
10. 23. and so great a mischief as sin is: and yet has no delight in
understanding, Prove. 18. 2. Delight is not seemly for such fools, Prove. 19. 10.

And how wicked is that Heart as well as Blind, that is so averse to God and
Holiness? Does not this show thee, 1. The absence of Gods holy image, 2. And
the presence of Satan's image upon thy soul?

Nothing does more certainly prove what a man is, then the complacency and
displacency of his Heart. If you know what it is in your selves or others, that
pleases and displeases most, you may certainly know whether you have the
spirit and grace of Christ or not. This is the durable infallible Evidence,
which Satan shall never be able to invalidate, and which the weakest Christians
can scarce tell how to deny in themselves: Could they be more Holy, it would
please them better then to be more rich: Could they believe more, and Love God
more, and trust him more, and obey him better, it would please them more then
if you gave them all the honors of the world: They are never so well pleased
with their own hearts, as when they find them nearest Heaven, and have most of
the Knowledge of God, and impress of his attributes, and sense of his presence.
They are never so well pleased with their lives, as when they are most holy and
fruitful, and may fullyest be called A walking with God. They are never so much
displeased with themselves, as when they find least of God upon their hearts,
and are most dark, and dull, and undisposed to holy Communion with him. They
are never so much weary of themselves, as when their lives are least fruitful,
holy and exact. And this is a certain Evidence of their sincerty: For it shows
what they Love, and what it is that has their Hearts or Wills. And it is the
Heart or Will that is the man, in Gods account. God takes a man to be what he
sincerely would be. As he is, so he Loves and Wills: and as he Loves and
Wills, such he is. His complacency or displacency are the immediate sure
discoveries of his bent or inclination: This certain Evidence poor doubting
souls should have often recourse to, and improve.

And on the contrary, it is as sure an Evidence of your misery, when you savor
not the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7. and when it pleases you more to
be great, then to be good; to be rich, then to be religious and righteous; to
serve your lusts, then to serve the Lord: When you set more by the applause of
men, then by the approbations of God: and had rather be far from God then near
him, and be excused from a holy life then used to it, and constant in it: When
you take the world and sin for your recreation or delight, and a godly life for
a melancholy, wearisom, and unpleasant course: This certainly shows that you
have yet the old corrupted nature, and Serpentine enmity against the Spirit and
Life of Christ, and are yet in the flesh, and therefore can no more please the
Lord, then his holy ways are pleasing unto you, Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. and it
proves that you are yet in the gall of bitterness, and the bonds of your
iniquity, and that your hearts are not right in the sight of God, and that you
are the slaves of Satan, whose nature you partake of, by which you are thus
alienated from the Lord.

Did thou know God as Faith does know him, his Loving kindness would be
better to thee then life it self, Psalm 63. 3. If thou did Love him (as it is
like thou will pretend thou do) it would be meat and drink to thee, to enjoy
his Love, and do his Will. And if thou know him not by Faith, nor cleavest to
him by unfeigned Love, how can thou pretend to have his Image?

How would you judge of that man's heart, that were no better affected to his
friend, to his parents, or children, or other relations, then you manifest your
selves to be to God? If he can take no pleasure in the company of his wife or
children, but is glad when he is far from them, in the company of strangers, or
harlots, or prodigals, would you not say this man had a base unmanly
disposition? Express but such an inclination in plain words, and try how honest
sober men will judge of them. Much more would it be odious to Christian ears,
if you should tell God plainly, [We can find no pleasure in thee, or in thy
holy ways; thy Word and Service are unsavory and wearisom unto us: We had
rather be talking or busied about the matters of the world: We have far more
pleasure in recreations and sensual accommodations, then in remembering thee and
thy Kingdom, and then we find in the life that is called holy.] Would not such
words as these be called impious, by every Christian that should hear them? And
is not that an impious heart then, which speaks thus, or is thus affected,
and that an impious life that manifests it? though dissembling lips are
ashamed to profess it?

If God be not most to be loved and delighted in, then any thing or all things
else, he is not God. If Heaven and Holiness be not sweeter then all the
pleasures of earth and sin, let them have no more such honorable names. Let
sin and earth then be called Heaven; but woe to them that have no better.

2. What monstrous ingratitude is that man guilty of, that when God has
provided, and Christ has purchased such high delights, and freely tendered them
to unworthy sinners, will say, I find no pleasure in them, and take them for no
delights at all? When the Lord beheld thee wallowing in thy filth, and laughing
in thy misery, and making a sport of thine own perdition, he pitied thee, and
provided and offered to thee the most noble and excellent delights, that thy
nature is capable of enjoying: And will thou cast them back unthankfully in his
face, and say, They are unpleasant tedious things? If your child did so by his
meat or clothes, yea or a beggar at your door did so by his alms, you would
think it proved his great unworthyness: If he throw away the best you can give
him, and say, [It is naught, there is no sweetness in it] would you not think
it fit that want should help to mend his relish, and cure his ingratitude? And
will you do so your selves by Christ and Holiness, and say as those, Mal. 1.
13. What a weariness is it? Take heed lest you provoke the Lord to cast you
into a state in which you shall have more cause to be aweary. If you are weary
of reading, and praying, and hearing, and other holy exercises, and weary of
heart-searching, penitent meditations, will you not be wearyer of Hellfire,
and of the dolorous reviews of this your folly, and of the endless, easeless,
remediless sense of the wrath of God, and gripes of your own self-tormenting
consciences! How just is it with God to give those men somewhat that they have
cause to be aweary of, that will be thus aweary of his sweetest service, and
reject the greatest mercies he can offer them, as if they were some burdensome
worthless things!

3. Will you have any pleasure at all, or will you have none? If any, in what
then will you place it, and whence will you expect it, if not from God in a
holy life? If God be thy trouble, what then is fit to be thy delight? Dare
thou say in thy heart or with thy tongue, that sin and sensuality is better?
Dare thou say that a good bargain, or other worldly gain, or cards, or dice,
or other sports, or ease, or good cheer, or an Alehouse, or a Whore, are
pleasanter things then walking with thy God in faith and holiness, and
expectation of the everlasting joys? Heaven and earth shall bear witness
against thee, and common Reason shall bear witness against thee, for this
inhumane, impious folly and ingratitude, if ever thou appear at the bar of
God, with the guilt of such unreasonable sin. What! is God no better in thine
eyes, then a filthy brutish sinful pleasure? and is the Love of God no sweeter
a work, then the Love of sensual delights! Says blessed Augustine, He that
will sell or exchange his soul for transitory commodities, does censure Christ
to be a foolish Merchant, that knew no better what he a^^, when he gave his
Life for those souls, that you will not lose a sin for. So I may say here: Has
Christ bought for you Holy and Everlasting pleasures, at the price of his own
most bitter pains, and precious blood, and do you now think them no better then
your fleshly beastial delights? Is it Christ or you, think you, that is
mistaken in the value of them? Did he shed his blood to purchase you that which
is not worth the parting with a cup of drink for, or the parting with your
pleasure, or unjust commodity for? Sure he that judges thus of Christ, is far
from believing in him, with any true Christian saving Faith.

4. If you can find no pleasure in God and in a holy life, you may be sure that
he will have no pleasure in you. Wonder not if you find in your greatest need,
that you are abhorred and loathed by the Lord, when you loathed the very
thoughts and mention of him, in the day of your visitation. Marvail not if the
most Holy God do take no pleasure in a leathsem sinner, when the sinner is so
ungodly, that he takes more pleasure in the most sordid fading trifles then in
God. You may offer the sacrifice of your heartless hypocritical prayers and
praises unto God, and he will count them abomination, and cast them back as
dung into your faces, and tell you that he has no pleasure in the sacrifice of
such fools: Read it in his own words, Prove 15. 8. and 21. 27. Isa. 1. 13.
Eccles. 5. 4. As you are weary of serving him, so he is ^^^ary of your
services, and it is a trouble to him (...) them, and when you spread forth your
hands, he will hide his eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers he will
not hear, Isa. 1. 14, 15. When the Jews offered their lame deceitful
sacrifices, and said, [ Behold what a weariness is it?] God sends them word,
that he has ^o pleasure in them, nor would regard their persons, nor accept a
sacrifice at their hands, Mal. 1. 8, 9, 10. and their solemn feasts he counts
[ dung]: And dung would be no acceptable present or seast to your selves, if it
were offered you instead of meat, Mal. 2. 3. [ My soul (says the Lord) loathed
them, and their soul abhorred me] Zech 11. 8. As he that despises him, shall
be lightly esteemed by him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. So he that loatheth him, shall be
loathed by him. [ If any man draw back, says the Lord, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him.] Heb. 10. 38. For he is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him: the foolish shall not stand in
his sight: he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm 5. 4, 5. And little do
you now imagine what a horror it will be to you in the day of your extremity
for God to tell you that he has no pleasure in you: When you look before you
into an eternity of woe, which you have no hope to escape but by the mercy of
the Lord, and he shall dash that hope by telling you that he has no pleasure
in you, it will give your souls the deadly wound that never shall be healed. In
vain then shall you wish that you had chosen in time the durable delights, and
not the pleasures of filthy sin for so short a season: and to your torment you
shall know, whether God or the world was more worthy of your sweetest
affections and delights: and how deservedly they are [ all damned that obeyed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 12. Who knowing
the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death,
not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1. 32. If
you will count it your pleasure to riot in the daytime, rather then to walk
and work by the light, you must look to receive the due reward of such
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 13. If it be your sport to sin and to do mischief, (
Prove. 10. 23.) you shall have small sport in suffering the punishment of your
willful folly.

5. If God and Holiness seem not pleasant to you, then Heaven it self cannot
seem pleasant to you, if you consider it truly as it is. For the Heavenly
felicity consists in the perfection of our Holiness, and the perfect fruition
of God himself, by Sight, and Love, and Joy for ever. If the little Holiness be
unpleasant and irksom to you, which appears in the imperfect Saints on earth,
what pleasure could you take in that supereminent Holiness which is the state
and work of the celestial inhabitants? If the thoughts and mention of God be
unpleasant to you, and *his holy praises do seem to you as matters of no
delight, What then would you do in heaven where this must be your everlasting
work? And if Heaven seem a place of toil and trouble to you, how just will it
be that you are everlastingly shut out? How can you for shame beg of God to
glorify you, when you take the Glory that he has promised for a misery? If
you think that there is a Heaven of such sensual pleasures as you desire, or
that any shall be saved that only choose Heaven as a less and more tolerable
misery then Hell, you will shortly find your expectations deceived.

Lay all these five considerations together, and you may perceive what
miserable souls those are, that can find pleasure in perishing trifles of the
world, and none in a Holy and Heavenly life. Be assured of this, whosoever thou
art, that if God and Heaven and a Holy life, be not a thousand times sweeter
and more delightful to thee, then any thing that this world can afford to thy
contentment, it is not for want of matter of superabundant delight to be found
in God and in his holy ways; but it is for want of reason, or faith, or
consideration, or a suitable Heart in thee, which may make thee fit to know and
taste the pleasures which now thou art unacquainted with. And is it not pity
that such infinite delights should be set before men, and they should lose them
all for want of a Heart and appetite to them? and should perish by choosing the
lowest vanities before them?

I do therefore earnestly beseech thee that read these words, if thou be one
of these unhappy souls, that can find no pleasure in God and Holiness, that
thou would speedily observe and lament that blindness and wickedness of thy
heart, that is the cause of this infatuation and corruption of thine
apprehension and rational appetite: and that thou would presently apply thy
self to Christ for the cure of it; To which end I advise thee to these
following means.

Direct. 1. IF you would taste the pleasure of a holy life, bethink you better
of the necessity and excellency of it; and cast away your prejudice and false
conceits, which have deceived you, and turned your minds against it: A child
may be deluded to take his own Father for his enemy, if he see him in an
enemies garb, or be persuaded by false suggestions that he hates him. A man
may be persuaded to hate his meat, if you can but make him believe that it is
poison: or to hate his clothes, if you can make him believe they are infected
with the plague. If you will suffer your understandings to be deluded, so far
as to overlook the amiable nature of holiness, and to think the image of God is
but a fancy, or that a heavenly life is nothing but hypocrisy, and that it is
but pride that makes men seek to be holyer then others, and that makes them
they cannot go quietly to Hell in despite of the commands and mercies of the
Lord, as others do; I say, if the Devil the great deceiver, can possess you
with such frantic thoughts as these, what wonder if you hate the very name of
Holiness? How can you find pleasure in the greatest good, while you take it for
an evil? If you will believe all that the Devil and his foolish malicious
instruments say of God and of a holy life, you shall never love God, nor see
any loveliness, or taste any sweetness in his service.

Dir. 2. Come near and search into the inwards of a holy life, and try it a
little while your selves, if you would taste the pleasure of it: and do not
stand looking on it at a distance, where you see nothing but the out side: nor
judge by bare hearsay, which gives you no taste or relish of it. The sweetness
of honey, or wine, o^ meat is not known by looking on it, but by tasting it.
Come near and try what it is to live in the Love of God, and in the belief and
hope of life eternal, and in universal obedience to the laws of Christ; and
then tell us how these things do relish with you. You will never know the
sweetness of them effectually, as long as you are but lookers on. It was the
similitude which Peter Martyr used in a Sermon, which converted the Noble
Neopolitane Marquess of Uicum, Galeacius Caracciolus, (who forsook wife, and
children, and honors, and lands, and country, and all for the liberty of the
Reformed Religion at Geneva:) says he, [If you see the motion of dancers a far
off, and hear not the Music, you will think they are frantic: but when you
come near and hear the music, and observe their harmonical orderly motion, you
will take delight in it, and desire to join with them.] So men that judge at a
distance of the truth and holy ways of God, by the slanderous reports of
malignant men, will think of the godly as Festus of Paul that they are beside
themselves. But if they come among them, and search more impartially into the
reasons of their course, and specially if they join with them in the inwards
and vital actions of religion, they will then be quickly of another mind, and
not go back for all the pleasures or profits of the world. In the works of
Nature, (and sometimes of Art) the outside is so far from showing you the
excellencies, that it is but a comely veil to hide them. Though you would have
a handsome cover for your watch, yet does it but hide the well ordered frame,
and useful motions that are within: You must open it, and there observe the
parts and motions, if you would pass a right judgment of the work. You would
have a comely cover for your Books: but it is but to hide the well composed
letters from your sight, in which the sense and use and excellency does
confist. You must open it, if you will read it and know the worth of it. A
common spectator when he sees a Rose or other flower or fruit-tree, thinks
he has seen all, or the chiefest part: But it is the secret unsearcheable
motions and operations of the vegetative life and juice within, by which the
beauteous flowers and sweet fruits are produced, and wonderfully differenced
from each other that are the excellent part, and mysteries in these natural
works of God. Could you but see these secret inward causes and operations, it
would incomparably more content you. He that passes by and looks on a
Bee-hive, and sees but the Cover, and the laborious creatures going in and
out, does see nothing of the admirable operations within, which God has taught
them: Did you there see how they make their wax and honey, and compose their
combs, and by what laws, and in what order their Commonwealth is governed, and
their work carried on, you would know more then the out side of the ^ive can
show you. So it is about the life of Godliness: If you saw the inward motions
of the quickening spirit upon the soul, and the order and exercise of every
grace, and by what laws the thoughts and affections are governed, and to whom
they tend, you would then see more of the beauty of Religion, then you can see
by the outward behavior of our assemblies. The shell is not sweet; but serves
to hide the sweeter part, from those that will not storm those walls, that they
may possess it as their prize. The kernel of Religion is covered with a shell
so hard that flesh and blood cannot break it; Hard sayings, and hard
providence to the Church, and to particular believers, are such as many cannot
break through, and therefore never taste the sweetness. The most admired
feature and beauty of any of your bodies, (which fools think to be the most
excellent part of the body) is indeed but the handsome well-adorned case, that
God by nature does cover his more excellent inward works with. Were you but
able to see within that skin, and (...) once to observe the wonderful motions
of Heart and Brain, and the course of the blood in the veins and arteries, and
the several fermentations, and the causes and nature of chylifications, and
sanguifications, and the spirits and senses and all their works: and if you saw
the reason of every part and vessel in this wondrous frame; and the causes and
nature of every disease; much more if you saw the excellent nature and
operations of that rational soul, that is the glory of all; you would then say
that you had seen a more excellent sight, then the smooth and beauteous skin
that covers it: The invisible soul is of greater excellency then all the
visible beauties in the world. So also if you would know the excellencies of
Religion, you must not stand without the doors, or judge of it by the skin and
shell, but you must come near, and look into the inward Reasons of it, and
think of the difference between the high employments of a Saint, and the poor
and for did drungery of the ungodly; between walking with God, in desire, and
love, and in the spiritual use of his Ordinances and creatures, and conversing
only with sinful men, and transitory vanities: between the life of faith and
hope, which is daily maintained by the foresight of Everlasting Glory, and a
life of mere nature and worldliness and sensuality, and idle complement and
pomp, which are but the progenitors of sorrow, and end in endless desperation.
Come near, and try the power of Gods Laws, and of the workings of his spirit;
and think in good sadness of the place where you must live forever, and the
glory you shall see; and the sweet enjoyment and employment you shall have in
the presence of the eternal Majesty, and think well of all the sweet
contrivances and discoveries of his love in Christ; and how freely all these
are offered to you; and how certainly they may be your own; peruse the promises
and sweet expressions of Love and Grace; and exercise your souls in serious
meditation, prayer, thanksgiving, and praise; and withal remember, that none
but these will be durable delights; and then tell me, whether a life of sport
and pride, and worldliness, and flesh-pleasing, or a life of faith and
Holiness, be the better, the sweeter, and more pleasant life.

Direct. 3. If you would taste the Pleasures of a Holy life, you must apply
your self to Christ in the use of his appointed means, for the renewing of your
natures: that his Spirit may give you a new understanding and a new heart, to
discern and relish spiritual things: For your old corrupted minds and hearts
will never do it. They are unsuitable to the things of God, and therefore
cannot Receive them, nor savor them, nor be subject to the holy laws, 1 Cor.
2. 14, 15. Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. The appetite and relish of every living
creature is agreeable to its nature. A fish has small pleasure in the dry
land; nor a bird in the deeps of water; grass and water is sweeter to an Ox
then our most delicate meats and drinks* Corruption and Custom have made you so
vicious, that your natures are not such as God made them at the first, when he
himself was man's desire and delight: but they are now inclined to sensual
things, being captivated by the fleshly part, and have contracted a strangeness
and enmity to God. And therefore those Hearts will never relish the
sweetnesses of a life of Faith, and Holiness, till Faith and Holiness be
planted in them, and they be born again by regenerating grace: For that which
is born of the flesh is flesh, (and but flesh; and therefore does reach no
higher then a fleshly inclination can move it); and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit; and therefore will relish and love things Spiritual.

Direct. 4. Lastly, if you would taste the pleasures of a Holy life, you must
forbear those sinful fleshly pleasures, which now you are so taken up with. For
these are they that infatuate your understandings, and corrupt your appetites,
and make the sweetest things seem loathsome to you. As the using of vain sports,
and filthy lust, abroad, does make such persons a weary of their own relations,
and families, and business at home; so also the glutting of the mind with
vanity, and using your selves to sinful pleasures, is it that turns your hearts
from God, and makes his Word and Ways unsavory to you. You must first with
the Prodigal, Luke 15. be brought into a famine of your former pleasures, and
be denied the very husk, and then you will remember that the meanest servant in
your Fathers house is in a far better case then you, having bread enough, while
you perish through hunger. And hence it is that God does so often promote the
work of Conversion by Affliction; and by the same means carries on the work of
Grace in most that he will save. Cannot you tell how to leave your sensual
pleasures? What will you do when sickness makes you weary of them? Weary of
your meat, and drink, and bed; weary to hear talk of that which now does seem
so sweet? and to say, I have no pleasure in them? Cannot you spare your
friends, your sports, your bravery, your wealth and other carnal
accommodations? What will you say of them, when pain disgraceth them, and
convinces you of their insufficiency to stand you in any stead? These things
that you are now so loath to leave, may shortly become such a load to your
souls, as undigested meat to the stomach that is sick, that you can have no
ease till you have cast them off.

Away therefore with these luscious Vanities betime, which vitiate your
appetites, and put them out of relish with the things that are truly pleasant.
O what a shame it is to hear a man say [I shall never endure so godly, and
spiritual, and strict a life;] when he can endure and take pleasure in a life
of sin! You may wiselyer lie down in the dunghill or the ditch and say, [I
shall never endure a cleaner place;] or feed on carrion, and say, [I shall
never endure a cleaner diet;] or accompany only with enemies and wild beasts,
and say [I shall never endure the company of my friends.] What! is God worse
then the creature, and Heaven then earth? and so much worse, as not to be
endured in your thoughts and affections in comparison of them? You will never
know your friends till you forsake these deceivers! Nor ever know the Pleasures
of a Holy life, till you will let go the poisonous pleasures of sin: And then
you may find that Sanctification destroys not, but changes and recovereth
your Delights: and gives you safety for the greatest peril, health for
sickness, friends for enemies, gold for dross, life for death, and the
fore-tasts of Rest for tiring vexation.

2. THE second sort that are hence to be Reproved, are, Those weak and troubled
servants of the Lord, that live as sadly as if they found more grief then
pleasure in the ways of God.

Indeed it is to be lamented that few of the heirs of life do live according to
the happiness and dignity of their Calling; nor are the great things that God
has done for them so apparent in the cheerfulness and comforts of their lives
as they should be: But some that are addicted to dejectedness, do in a greater
measure wrong Christ and themselves, being always feeding upon secret griefs,
and torturing themselves with doubts and fears, and acquainted with almost no
other language but lamentations, self-accusations and complaints. These poor
souls usually discover honest hearts, that are weary of sin, and low in their
own eyes, and long to be better, and do not dis-regard the matters of their
salvation as dead-hearted ungodly sinners do. Their complaints show what they
would be: and what they would be sincerely, that they are in Gods account. But
yet they live so far below the sweet delights which they might partake of, and
so far below the provisions of their Fathers house, and the riches of the
Gospel, that they have cause to lament their excessive lamentations, and more
cause to reform this sad distemper, and no cause to indulge it, as usually such
do. And though with the most of them some natural passions and weaknesses, and
some melancholy distempers are so much the cause, as may much excuse them, yet
because it is an evil which must be disowned, and Reason must be the means,
where people have the free use of Reason, I shall lay down some of the great
inconveniences of this sad distemper, and beseech those that tender the honor
of God, and would do that which is most pleasing to him, and love not their own
calamity, that they will soberly consider of what I say, and labor to regulate
their minds accordingly.

1. I desire the dejected Christian to consider, that by his heavy and
uncomfortable life, he seems to the world to accuse God and his service, as
if he openly called him a rigorous, hard, unacceptable master, and his work a
sad unpleasant thing. I know this is not your thoughts: I know it is your
selves and not God and his service that offends you; and that you walk not
heavily because you are holy, but because you fear you are not holy, and
because you are no more holy: I know it is not of grace, but for grace that you
complain. But do you not give too great occasion to ignorant spectators to
judge otherwise? If you see a servant always sad, that was wont to be merry
while he served another master, will you not think that he has a master that
displeases him? If you see a woman live in continual heavyness ever since she
was married, that lived merrily before, will you not think that she has met
with an unpleasing match? You are born and new born for Gods honor: and will
you thus dishonor him before the world? What do you (in their eyes) but
dispraise him by your very countenance and carriage, while you walk before him
in so much heaviness! The child that still cries when you put on his shoes,
does signify that they pinch him: and he dispraiseth his meat that makes a
sower face at it: And he dispraiseth his friend, that is always sad and troubled
in his company! He that should say of God [ Thou art bad, or cruel and
unmerciful] should blaspheme. And so would he that says of Holiness [ It is a
bad, unpleasant, hurtful state.] How then dare you do that which is so like to
such blaspheming? when you should abstain from all appearance of evil? 1 These.
5. 22. Can thou find in thy heart thus to dishonor and wrong the God whom
thou so much esteemest, and the grace which thou so much desire? For a wicked
man that is far from God, to go heavily or roar in the horror of his soul, is
a shame to his sin, but no dishonor to God and Holiness. But for you that are
near him, in relation, engagement, and attendance, to walk so heavily, reflects
on him to whom you are Related, and from whom you look for your Reward.

2. Consider also, What a lamentable hinderance you are hereby to the
conversion and salvation of souls? Your countenances and sad complainings do
affright men from the service of the Lord, and as it were call to them, to keep
off and fly from the way that you find so grievous. You gratify Satan, the
enemy of Christ, and Holiness, and souls, and become his instruments (though
against your wills) to affright men from the way of life. As the Papists keep
their deluded Proselytes abroad from Truth and Reformation, by giving them
odious descriptions of the Protestants, as if they were Heretics, proud,
frantic, mad, and scarcely men, and when they burn them, they adorn them with
pictures of the Devil; even so does Satan keep poor souls from entertaining
Christ and Truth, and entering the holy paths, by making them believe that the
servants of Christ are a company of distempered melancholy souls, and that
Godliness is the way to make men mad; and that he that will set his heart on
Heaven, must never look more for a merry comfortable life on earth. Hence comes
the proverb of the Malignant Formalists and Profane, that A Puritan is a
Protestant frightened out of his wits. And will you confirm this slander of the
Devil and his instruments? Will you entice men to believe him? Will you make
your selves such pictures of unhappiness? and wear such a Vizor of calamity and
misery, as shall frighten all that look on you and observe you, and discourage
them from the way which they see accompanied with so much sorrow? As you hang
up dead crows in your field to frighten the rest from the Corn, and as
murderers are hanged in irons to terrify all that see them from that crime, or
as the heads of Traitors are set up to the same end, as proclaiming to all
passengers, [ Thus must you be used if you will do as they:] Just so would
Satan fill you with terrors, and overwhelm you with grief, and distract you
with causeless doubts and fears, that you may appear to the world a miserable
sort of people; and then all that look on you will be afraid of Godliness, and
think they see it as it were written in your foreheads, [ Such drooping
pitiful creatures must all be, that will lead so precise and heavenly a life.]
Do you think your carnal neighbors and acquaintance will not be deterred from
a holy life, when they see that since you turned to it, you do nothing but
complain, and droop, and mourn, as if you were worse then you were before? And
was it not enough that you hindered their conversion before, when you were in
your ignorance and sin, by your wicked examples and encouragements, but you
must hinder it still by your dejected discouraging countenances and
conversations? Yea perhaps your later excessive troubles may do more to hinder
their conversion, then your persuasions and examples did before. And can you
find in your hearts to lay such a stombling block as this in the way of your
miserable acquaintance, to keep them from salvation? Will it not grieve you to
think that you should have so great a hand in men's damnation, even since you
are returned to God your selves? I know by your sorrows and complaints, that
the perdition of a soul is no small matter in your eyes: O therefore take heed
of that which may procure it. The use that Satan would have you make of these
very words is, to go away with more dejection, and to say, [ What a wretch am
I? even unmeet to live, that by my griefs am not only miserable my self, but
also hinder the salvation of others:] And thus he would draw thee to grieve
over all thy griefs again, and because thou have exceeded in thy sorrows, to be
more excessive: and so to add one sin unto another; and to do more, because you
have done too much: ^o that grief is all that he can allow thee; and one grief
shall be made the reason of another, that thou may run thus in a round of
misery, and stop in grieving, and go no further: Whereas thou should so
grieve for such grief as may call thee off, and stay thy grieving: and thy
repenting should be the cure and forsaking of thy sin, and not the renewal of
it.

But on the other side, if thou could live a heavenly joyful life, that the
glory of thy hopes might appear in thy countenance, thy conference and
conversation, how many might hereby be drawn to Christ, and caused to think
well of the ways of God? Did the Godly but exceed the rest of the world, in
holy joy and cheerfulness of mind, as much as they exceed them in happiness and
in the causes of true joy, what an honor would it be to Christ and holiness?
and what an attractive to win the ignorant to embrace the motions of salvation?
How easily would they let go their sinful pleasures, their gluttony, and
drunkenness, and filthiness, and gaming, if they did but see by the carriage of
believers, that they were like to exchange them for much greater joys? You
cannot expect that ignorant men, that never tried a holy life, and have a
natural enmity against it, should see the excellency of it immediately in it
self; But they will judge of Religion by the persons that profess it: That
shall seem to them the best Religion, that has the best and happiest
professors: And those seem to them the happiest and best, that have the
greatest comforts, and conquer most the troubles of their minds. You can expect
no other, but that country people, that know not the nature of medicines
themselves, should judge of them by the success, and think that he follows
the best advice, who is most healthful, and of longest life. And so will the
ignorant judge of the holy doctrine and commands of God, by the lives of those
that seem to follow them. O therefore behave your selves in the Church of God,
as those that remember, that they live in the presence of a world of men, whose
happiness or misery has much dependence on your lives. If you were debating
the case with a sensual wretch, would you not tell him that Holiness is a state
of greater pleasure then his sin? Tell him so then by your example as well as
by your words: Let him see as well as hear of the confidence and comforts of
true believers. Were Christianity exemplified in the lives of Christians, how
excellent a state would it appear? were we but such as the holy doctrine and
Christian pattern requires us to be, even the blind malicious world would be
forced to admire the seize of the Saints: Though they might hate them,
yet they would admire them. Were we such as Stephen, that was full of faith and
of the Holy Ghost, and could steadfastly look up to heaven by faith, and see
there the Glory of the living God, and Jesus standing at his right hand, till
we were raised to his boldness in defense of the truth, and his quiet
submission to the greatest sufferings, the world would not then be able to
resist the wisdom and spirit by which we speak, but the faces of believers
would sometime appear to the terror of their persecutors, as the faces of
Angels; as Act. 6. 5, 10, 15. and 7. 51, 55, 56, 60. They are high and glorious
things that are assured to us in the promises of the Gospel. Did but these
things appear, in the steadfast faith, the confident hopes, desires, and joys of
us that do expect them, believers then would be the wonder of the world; and
our joys would so shame their dreaming, childish, brutish pleasures, that
doubtless multitudes would flock in, to see what it is that so delights us,
that they might be made partakers of our joys. Even as Simon Magus himself when
he saw the Miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, would fain have bought that
gift with money; so men that are yet carnal, in the gall of bitterness and
bond of their iniquities, will yet see a desirable excellency in the Joy of the
Holy Ghost, and wish they were partakers of such joys, though yet they are
unacquainted with the way to attain it.

I do therefore entreat you all that believe and hope for an everlasting Crown,
that you will show the poor deceived world the preciousness of your faith and
hopes, and the high prerogative of the Saints, in your ^^answerable
cheerfulness and joy, and live not with as dead and uncomfortable hearts as
those that have nothing but a vexatious transitory world to comfort them: much
less to be more dejected then these wretched souls. Do you not desire the
conversion of your carnal friends, and all about you? would you not be glad if
you could further it? O that you could try this pleasant way! and show them
that you have found the unvaluable treasure! And as the Rich live in greater
pomp, and at higher rates then the poor, so you that speak of the Riches of
Grace, and live in the family of the Lord, O show the world the dignity of your
state, by your holy courage and comfortable behavior, and by your living above
the pleasures and griefs of unbelievers! When they glory in their prosperity,
do you Glory in the Lord: When they boast themselves in their riches or
reputation, do you imitate holy David who professes, Psalm. 34. 1, 2, 3. [ I
will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in thy mouth.
My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof and be
glad: O magnify the Lord with me, and let ^lt his name together.] And Psalm.
44. 8. [ In God will we boast (...) the day long, and praise thy Name for
ever.] By such spiritual joyfulness your lives would be a continued Sermon; and
you might thus preach home more souls to Christ, then the most excellent
preacher by bare persuasions. Poor sinners would begin to pity themselves that
live so far below the Saints; and they would think with themselves [It is not
for nothing that these men rejoice, and are comfortable even in the loss of all
those things that we take all our comfort in!] For the honor of your dearest
Lord, and for your own felicity, and for the sake of the miserable souls about
you, I beseech you Christians do your best to reach this sweet and joyfullest
life, and to avoid those inordinate troubles and despondencies which are like
to cross these blessed ends. And pray for me and the rest of his servants, that
the Lord will forgive us our dishonouring of his name, our wronging our own
souls, and our discouraging the world from living unto God, by our living so
far below his mercies, and so unanswerable to the unspeakable treasures of his
Saints: and that for the time to come, we may lay this duty more to heart, and
by the comforting spirit may be elevated to the performance of it.

But I suppose some will say [ T^^ tell me how I should live for the
encouragement of others is but to draw me to an hypocritical affectation and
counterfeiting of joy and courage; as long as I am unable inwardly to rejoice,
and can see no sufficient cause of my rejoicing in my self.]

Answ 1. I shall by and by show you that you have sufficient, yea unspeakable
cause of joy. 2. And now I shall only say that you are not to suspend and
forbear your comfort, till you have full assurance of your own sincerity: your
probabilities, and weakest faith, and hope, will warrant a more comfortable
life then you can live. And it is not hypocrisy, but a necessary duty to do
the outward actions that are here commanded us, though we cannot reach to that
degree of inward comfort that we desire: For we do not hereby affirm our selves
to have the joy which we have not: (I am not persuading any man to lie:) but
only we express as fully as we are able that little which we have: And a little
indeed, a very little of such a high and heavenly nature, grounded on the
smallest hopes of everlasting life, will allow you in the expression of it, to
transcend the greatest delights of the ungodly: And also we do perform the
external part, both as a commanded duty, and as a means to further the inward
rejoicing of the soul. So outward solemnity and feasting in days of
Thanksgiving, are as well to further inward Joy, as to express it: Even as mean
attire, and fasting, and humblest pro^trations before the Lord, on days of
Humiliation, are as much to further inward Humiliation as to express it. The
behavior of the body has an operative reflection on the mind: and therefore
should be used not only for the discovery, but for the cure of the soul. If you
cannot restrain your anger as you desire, it is no hypocrisy, but your duty to
hide it, and to refrain from the sinful effects. And if you can but use your
selves some time to behave your selves in your anger, as if you had no anger,
in meekness of speech and quietness of deportment, anger it self will be the
quicklyer subdued, and in time will be the easier kept out. If you cannot
restrain your inordinate eppetite to meat or drink, for quality or quantity; it
is yet no hypocrisy, but your duty, to hold your hands and shut your mouths
and refrain the things to which you have an appetite. And if you will but use
your selves a convenient time to forbear the thing, you will subdue the
appetite. If the drunkard will forbear the drink, and the glutton his too much
desired dish, and the sportful gamesters their needless and sinful recreations,
they will find that the fire of sensuality will go out, for want of fuel. As
the too wanton Poet says concerning wanton Love,

Intrat amor mentes usu: dediscitur usu:
Qui poterit sanum fingere, sanus erit.
Use kindles it: and use quenches it: He that can but live as a sound man,
shall at last become a sound man. If you cannot overcome your inward Pride as
you desire, you must not therefore speak big, and look high, and swagger it out
in bravery, and accompany with gallants, to avoid Hypocrisy: But you must
speak humbly, and be clothed soberly, and accompany with the humble; And 1.
this is the performance of one part of your duty; 2. and it is the expression
of your Desires to be more humble, and consequently of some humility contained
in these desires; 3. and it is the way to work your hearts to that humility
which you want; or the way in which you must wait on God for the receiving of
it: So if you cannot overcome the Love of the world as you desire, do not
therefore forbear giving to the poor, for fear of Hypocrisy: But give the
more, that you may perform so much of your duty as you can, and may the sooner
overcome your worldly love. Some trees will be killed with often cropping: But
if they will not, it is better that a poisonous plant should live only in the
root, then sprout forth and be fruitful.

Even so, if you cannot overcome your inward doubts, and fears, and sorrows, as
you desire, yet let them not be fruitful, nor cause you to walk so dejectedly
before the world, as to dishonor God and your holy profession: And if you have
not the inward comfort you desire, express your desires, and the hopes and
smallest comforts that you have, to the best advantage for your Masters honor:
And you will find that a holy cheerfulness of countenance, expression and
deportment, will at last much overcome your inordinate disquietments, and much
promote the joys which you desire. But yet that you may see cause for the
cheerfulness to which I now exhort you, I next add.

3. If thou have but one spark of saving grace, it is not possible for thee now
to conceive or express the happiness of thy state, and the cause thou have to
live a thankful jeyous life. If thou have no grace, thou art not the person
that I am now speaking to. If thou have no grace, whence is it that thou so
much desire it? What is it that causes thee to lament the want of it, and
walk so heavily, but because thou art so much in doubt of it? If thou truly
Love it, thou have it, (for it is only grace that causes an unfeigned Love of
grace). And if thou love it not, why can not thou more quietly be without it?
Why do thou make so much ado for it? But if thou have it in the least degree,
and so art born again of the spirit, thou have with it an unspeakable treasure
of delights: The God of Life and Love is thine: The Lord Jesus Christ is thine:
The Spirit is thine: The promises are thine: and Heaven it self is thine in
title, and shall be thine in full perpetual possession. The God that made and
rules all things, is Reconciled to thee, and is thy Father, having by grace in
Christ adopted thee to be his Son; Romans 5. 1, 2, 10, 11. and 8. 1, 16, 17. Gal.
4. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 18. The Son of God is become thy Head, and thou art become a
member of his body, as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, (which no man
ever yet has hated) Ephesians. 5. 23, 27, 29, 30. Thou art become the Temple and
residence of the Holy Ghost. Thy title to Heaven is incomparably more sure,
then any man's humane title to his possessions or inheritance on earth: And what
rejoicing can be too great for a man in thy condition? O what a Life should
that man live? with what sweet delight should he be transported, that has the
Spirit of Christ now living in him, to prepare him and seal him up for an
endless life with Christ? He that shall be shortly so full of joy, should not
be empty now when he remembers what he must shortly be. Does it beseem him now
to dwell in grief, and refuse consolation, that must in a few days be
swallowed up with Joy? If thou that fittest here in heaviness, were assured
that shortly thou should be with Christ, and made a blessed companion of
Angels, and possessed of thy Masters joy, a joy that has no bounds or end,
would not thy Conscience then tell thee, that thou greatly wrongest such
abundant mercy, in that thou art no more affected with it? and that thy want of
joy does express thy too much want of thankfulness. Do thou sit there like a
child of God, and like an heir of Heaven, and a co-heire with Christ? ( Romans 8.
16, 17.) Does that sorrowful heart, and that dejected countenance become one
that must live with Christ for ever, in such resplendent glory as thou must do?
and that has but a few more days to live, till thou take possession of these
endless joys? The Lord pardon and heal our unbelief. Did Faith more
effectually play its part, as it is the evidence of things not seen, and
withdraw the veil, and show us, though but in a glass, the glory which we must
see with open face, it would be wine to our hearts, and oil to our
countenances, and make our poverty, sickness and death, more comfortable then
the wealth, and health, and life of the ungodly.

I know you will say still, that you could rejoice if you were sure all this
were yours: but when you rather think you have no part in it, it can be but
small comfort to you.

Answ. 1. But who is it long of that you have still such fears? Have you not in
your souls that Love to Holiness, that desire after it, that hatred and
weariness of sin, that Love to the searching discovering use of the Word of
God, that Love to the Brethren, which are the evidences of your title, and to
which God has plainly promised salvation? If then you have your Title in the
Promise, and your Evidences in your hearts, and yet will be still questioning
whether you have them or no, and whether the Kingdom shall be yours, your
weakness and inconsiderateness causes your own sorrows: And when you have
sinfully bred your doubts, will you insist on them to excuse your following
sins?

2. Are you not sure that Christ and his benefits are yours? I am sure they are
yours, or may be if you will: and nothing but your continued refusal can
deprive you of them. For this is the very tenor of the promise: And if you will
not have Christ and his offered benefits, why do you so dissemble as to take on
you to mourn because you have them not? But if you are willing, they are yours.

Object. But ( you will say) if we had nothing but cause of comfort, we could
rejoice: but we have cause of sorrow also: How can we live comfortably under so
much sin and suffering?

Answ. By this account you will never rejoice till you come to Heaven; for you
will never be free from sin and suffering till then. Nay it seems you would
have no man else rejoice, and so would banish all comfort from the world: For
there is no man without sin and suffering.

But what can there be of any weight to prohibit a sincere Believer from
seasonable spiritual rejoicing? Have you sin? It is not gross and reigning sin:
And sinful infirmities, the best of the Saints on earth have had. As your sin
must be your moderate sorrow; so the pardon of it, and the degree of
mortification which you have attained, and the promise you have of full
deliverance, should be the matter of your greater joy. Are your Graces weak? Be
humbled in the sense of that your weakness; but rejoice more that they are
sincere and will be perfect. Are your afflictions great? Be humbled under them:
But rejoice more that they are but Fatherly chastisements, proceeding from
Love, and tending to your greater good; and that you are saved from the
consuming fire, and shall live in everlasting rest, where affliction shall be
known no more. Is it possible for that man that has the love of God, and shall
have heaven for ever, to have any sufferings that should weigh down these, and
be matter to him of greater sorrow then this of joy? Can you imagine that there
is more evil in your infirmities and sufferings, then there is good in God, and
happiness in Heaven? Is it reason and equity that you should look at sin only,
and not at grace? and at what you want only, and not at what you have received?
Seeing you have more cause of joy then sorrow, should you not distribute your
affections proportionably as there is cause? I dissuade you not from seasonable
moderate sorrows: But should not your joy be much greater, as long as the cause
of it is much greater?

4. And here I would entreat you to consider well of the tenor of Gods
commands concerning this matter in the Gospel, and of the examples of the
Saints there left on record: And then tell me, which course it is that God is
best pleased with. Your cheerful or your dejected course of life: I find that
though I pity the sad and miserable, yet I had rather my self have a cheerful,
then a drooping, grieving, troubled companion and friend: Because I desire one
suitable to my self in the state I would be in; and I delight in the welfare,
and not in the distress and misery of my friend. And surely God that is Love it
self, and has created Joy in man to be his Happiness, and has placed so much
of misery in sorrow, can never be so delighted in our distress and trouble, as
in our content and joy. As he has sworn that he takes no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but rather that they repent and live; so we may boldly conclude
that he takes no pleasure in the anguish and dejectedness of his children, but
rather that they walk in Love and cheerful Obedience before him. But his Word
will fully and plainly tell you, what temper it is that is most pleasing to
him. It is a light and easy burden that Christ does call us to bear; and it is
his office to ease us and give us rest that labor and are heavy laden with
burdens of our own. Mat. 11. 28, 29. He was anointed to preach the Gospel, or
glad tidings of salvation to the poor; and sent to heal the brokenhearted; to
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and
to set at liberty them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord, Luke 4. 18, 19. When he was to leave the world, how carefully did he
provide for the comfort of his Disciples? Commanding them not to let their
hearts be troubled, Joh. 14. 1. and promising to send the comforter to them,
and that he would come to them, and not leave them Comfortless, verse. 16, 18,
26. Repeating it again, v. 27, 28. [ Peace I leave with you: my peace I give
unto you: not as the world gives give I unto you: Let not your heart be
troubled, neither be afraid] Nay, he engages them as they Love him to rejoice,
even because he went unto the Father: He engages them in the decrest Love to
one another that their lives might be the more comfortable, He foretells them
of his sufferings and of their own, lest being surprised, their sorrow should
be the more. He promises them that their sorrow shall be turned into joy, Joh.
16. 20. and that in him they shall have peace, when in the world they have
tribulation, v. 33. directing them to prayer, and promising to hear them that
their joy may be full, v. 24. and promises that none shall take it from them,
v. 22. telling them of the mansions that he prepares for them, and that it is
his will, that they be with him, and behold his glory, that nothing might be
wanting to their joy, Joh. 14. 2, 3. and 17. 23, 24. When he appears to them
after his Resurrection, his salutation is, [ Peace be unto you] Joh. 20. 19,
21, 26. The abounding and multiplying of this holy Peace, is the desire and
salutation of Paul to the Churches in all his epistles, Gal. 6. 16. Ephesians. 6.
23. Romans 15. 33. 1 Cor. 1. 3. Romans 1. 7. Gal. 1. 3. Phil. 1. 2. Col. 1. 2. 2
These. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 2. Tit. 1. 4. Philem. 3. So Peter 1 Pet. 1. 2. and 2. 1,
2. and 2 John 3. and 3 John 14. The Gospel it self is a message of glad tidings
Luke 8. 1. Act. 13. 32. And it is the work of the ministers of Christ, to
preach Peace to the sinful world through him, Act. 10. 36. and to beseech them
to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. and to bring Peace to the houses
where any of the sons of Peace abide, Matthew. 10. 12, 13. Luke 10. 6. Triumphing
joys and proclamations of Peace were the entrance of Christ's Kingdom: This
Angels proclaim, Luke 2. 14. [ Glory be to God in the highest: on Earth Peace:
Good will toward men] This the new inspired Disciples proclaim, Luke 19. 37,
38. [ The whole multitude of the Disciples began to rejoice, and praise God
with a loud voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen, saying, Blessed
be the King that comes in the name of the Lord: Peace in heaven, and Glory in
the Highest] what abundance of commands for Rejoicing are in the Scripture?
Psalm. 31. 1. [ Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the
upright. Psalm. 97. 11, 12. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for
the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness] 1 These. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore. Phil. 3. 1.
Finally my Brethren, Rejoice in the Lord; Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice. 6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing
by prayer and supplication with thanks giving, let your requests be made known
unto God] And thus are the godly ordinarily described, even in their deepest
sufferings and distress, Romans 5. 1, 2. Being justified by faith we have peace
with God -- and rejoice in hope of the glory of God: And not only so, but we
glory in tribulation -- ] Phil. 3. 3. It is the description of a regenerate man
[ to worship God in spirit: to rejoice in Christ Jesus: to have no confidence
in the flesh] 1 Pet. 1. 6, 8. It is the description of believers [ to Rejoice
greatly in a Christ not seen, even with joy unspeakable and full of glory:
though for a season if need be, they may be in heaviness through manifold
temptations, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13. 14. even in the fiery trial we must rejoice, as
being partakers of the sufferings of Christ, that when his glory shall be
revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy] when all manner of evil is
spoken of us falsely, for the sake of Christ, and when we are hated of all men
and reproached, we must rejoice and be exceeding glad, and leap for joy, as
knowing that our reward in heaven is great, Luke 6. 22, 23. Matthew. 5. 11, 12.
The Apostles were [ as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as having nothing, and
yet possessing all things] 2 Cor. 6. 10. rejoicing in their suffering for
believers, Col. 1. 24. even when they were beaten, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, Act. 5. 39, 40. The rich must
Rejoice in that he is made low, as well as the brother of low degree in that he
is exalted, Jam. 1. 9, 10. The Eunuch when he was but newly converted, [ went
on his way rejoycing] Act. 8. 39. There was great joy in Samaria when they had
received the word of God, Act. 8. 8. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in
the tabernacles of the righteous. The statutes of God are the rojoycing of
their heart, Psalm. 119. 111. and 19. 8. All those that trust in God should
rejoice, and shout for joy, and all that love his name should be joyful in him,
Psalm. 5. 11. and 33. 21. [ Let the righteous be glad: let them rejoice before
God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice, Psalm. 68. 3. Let us therefore desire [
to see the good of his chosen, and rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and
glory with his inheritance, Psalm. 106. 5. [ Sing unto the Lord: sing Psalms
unto him: talk of all his wondrous works:] Glory ye in his holy name: let the
heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord] Psalm. 105. 1, 2, 3. The Saints shall
shout aloud for joy, Psalm 132. 9, 16. [ Be glad in the Lord, O ye righteous,
and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart] Psalm. 32. 11. [ Behold my
servants shall rejoice; but ye shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall sing
for joy of heart: but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for
vexation of spirit, Isa. 65. 13, 14.]

Abundance such passages tell you what manner of persons it is that God
delights in, and what he would have you be and do. These I have recited to
shame the godly out of their undecent troubles and dejectedness, as you would
show a child his face in a glass when he cries, that he may see how he
deformeth it. The very Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, and Peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. If you would live as is most pleasixg unto God, and
as beseems those that are indeed believers, let the joy of believers be (as
far as is possible) your ordinary frame: And if by sin you wound your souls,
and bring smart upon your selves, dwell not in that wounded smarting state; but
go to your Physicions, and beg of God that he will restore to you the joy of
his salvation, and make you to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that your
broken heart and bones may rejoice, Psa. 51. 8, 12.

And take notice throughout all the Scripture, whether you find the servants of
God so much complaining of their want of assurance, and of their frequent
doubtings of their own sincerity and his love. I think you will find this a
very rare thing in the ancient Saints. They were sensible of sin as well as we;
and they were as sensible of Gods afflicting hand, and often (as Job, David,
Hezekiah, etc.) complained under it, perhaps with some excess, and too much
questioning Gods favor to them as if he had forsaken them. But (besides and
without any such affliction) to live in ordinary trouble of mind through the
doubting of their sincerity, and of Gods special love, and to be exercised in
the complaining and disconsolate way as now abundance of Christians are, this I
find little of the Scripture Saints. The reason was not because they had more
holiness and less sin than many that now are thus cast down: For the Gospel
time excels theirs in degrees of grace; and I think the greater care that
Christians have of their hearts, and of inward rectitude, and communion with
God, and their fuller apprehensions of the life to come, and so of their
greatest hopes and dangers, is one great cause. But yet there are worse
concurring causes. The Love of God, and his readiness to show mercy, should not
be more questioned now, when it is so abundantly revealed by Christ, then it
was in times of darker revelation. The servants of God did formerly conceive,
that nothing but sin could make man miserable; and therefore when they had
sinned, they repented; and instead of continuing doubts and fears, they bent
their resolutions against their sins; and having cast away their gross and
wilful sins, and continuing the conflict against their unavoidable infirmities,
which they hated, they knew that the door of mercy was still open to them; and
that if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, who is the
propitiation. The time that is now spent in doubting and complaining, and
asking How shall I know that I sincerely repent, was then spent in Repenting,
and reforming, and using the means that God has appointed for the conquering
of sin; and then trusting to his grace and Covenant in the blood of Christ for
pardon. And it would be better with us if we did thus. Judge now by all these
Scriptures, and by the course of former Saints, how God would have you behave
your selves. Do you not read an hundred times of their joy, and thanks, and
praising God, and calling upon others to praise him, for once that they
perplexedly question their sincerity?

But perhaps you^le say, that your strength is so weak, and your sins and
enemies so strong, and all your duty so imperfect and unworthy, that having
such continual cause of trouble, you cannot choose but walk in heaviness, and
in fears.

I answer you, 1. But why do you not tell what you have, as well as what you
want? Have you not greater cause to say [My sins being mortified at the root,
and all forgiven, and my soul renewed, and reconciled unto God, and I being
made an heir of Heaven, how can I choose but live in joy?]

2. Are you heartily willing to forsake your sins, and overcome the things of
which you so complain? or are you not? If you are not, why do you complain of
them? and why will you not consent to let them go? and use Gods means to
overcome them? If you are willing, then they are but your pardoned infirmities;
For that's the difference between infirmities and reigning sins: [ Whatsoever
sin consists with a greater Habitual willingness to avoid that and all other
sin, then to keep them, is but an Infirmity] for it stands with present saving
grace, and is always Habitually or virtually repented of, and actually, when
grace, by knowledge and consideration, has opportunity and advantage to
produce the act.

3. And when once you are truly ingraffed into Christ, he is your worthiness,
and your righteousness, and the treasury of your souls; and what you want in
your own possession, you have in his hands; and as what you have is but his
gift, so what you want he is able and ready to supply. Look not too much to
your selves, as if your safety and happiness were principally in your own hand.
God has given us eternal life, I. C. Scaliger Epidorp. 1. 7. p. 296. Hoc quod
Valeo; Non queo quod debeo: Quid (...) Mensura mea^es, tu Domine, immensa
potestas: Non ego tua: Quodque habe^, tu mihi dedisti: Quodque do, non do, sed
accipis; hoc enim dedisti. Tu solus tibi satis es: tu mihi, tibique Nec te
laudo, ubi laudo: sed ipse te ipse laudas Me persiciens, non tua, sic laudibus
ornans: Queis me ad te trahis: haud ego te traho super me: Me praeveniens hic
ades: ut mihi superfis.
and this life is in his son. He that has the son, has life, 1 John 5. 10,
11. It is through him that we can do all things, so far as he strenghteneth us:
and without him we can do nothing. Make use of him therefore as the Lord of
life, and joyfully acknowledge all that you receive, and stand not dejectedly
lamenting that you need him. If you would have the waters of life, go to the
fountain, and do not sit down and fruitlesly vex your selves with complaining
of your wants, instead of seeking for supplies. Is there not an all sufficient
Physicion of souls at hand? Does he not freely offer you his help? what though
you are not suddenly cured? wounds may be caused in an hour, but they use not
to be cured in an hour. Stay his time, and use his remedies, and cheerfully
trust him, and you shall find the cure successfully; go on, though it will not
be finished till death.

5. Consider also, that it must needs be the best and most desirable life,
which is likest to our life in Heaven. And therefore as Heaven is a state of
Joy, so Joy is the highest and best condition on earth. He is the best and
happyest man, that is likest to the glorified Saints and Angels; And judge your
selves whether a dejected or a rejoicing Christian be liker to these
inhabitants of Heaven?

Object. But (you will say) by that rule we should not mourn at all; (for they
do not;) Whereas God delights in the contrite soul, Christ blesses mourners
and weepers.

Answ. 1. Your resemblance of the Saints in Heaven, must be propertionable in
all the parts. You must labor first to be as like them as you can in Holiness,
and then in Joy. If you could be as far from sin as they, you need not mourn at
all. But because you cannot, you must have moderate, regular sorrows and
humiliation, while you have sin. But yet withal you must endeavor to imitate
the heavenly Joys, according to the measure of your Grace received.

2. And it is such a regular contrition, consisting in humble thoughts of our
selves, and tending to restore us from our falls and sorrows, unto our
integrity and joy, which God delights in: And it is such mourners as these,
and such as suffer for righteousness sake from men, that Christ pronounces
blessed: But the inordinate troubles of the soul, that exclude a holy delight
in God, though he pardon, yet he never does encourage.

6. Consider also, that a great part of your Religion, yea and the most high
and excellent part, does consist in the causes, form and effects of this holy
joy and cheerfulness. 1. As to the causes of it, they are such as in themselves
are requisite to the very being of the new creature. Faith and Love, which are
the Head and Heart of sanctifying grace, are the causes of our spiritual joy.
An unwilling, heavy, forced obedience, may proceed from mee^ Fears, and this
will not prove an upright heart. But when once we Believe Everlasting Glory,
and Love Christ as our Savior, and the Father as our Father and felicity, and
Love a holy frame of heart and life, as the image of God and that which
pleases him, then our obedience will be cheerful and delightful, unless
accidentally we trouble our selves by our own mistakes. If you can truly make
God and his will and service your Delight, you may be sure you Love him, and
are beloved by him, as being past the state of slavish fear.

2. And I have showed you that Joy in the Holy Ghost is it self one part of
that grace in which Gods Kingdom does consist; Though not such a part as a
Christian cannot possibly be without, yet such as is exceeding suitable to his
state, and necessary to his more happy being.

3. And without this holy Delight and Joy, you will deny God a principal part
of his service. How can you be thankful for the great mercies of your
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption* and all the special graces you have
received, or for your hopes of Heaven it self, as long as you are still
doubting whether any of these mercies are yours or not, and almost ready to say
that you never received them? Nay you will be less thankful for your health,
and life, and food, and wealth, and all common mercies, as doubting le^t they
will prove but aggravations of your sin and misery. And for the great and
excellent work of Praise which should be your daily sacrifice, but specially
the work of each Lords day, how unfit is a doubting, drooping, distressed soul
for the performance of it? You stiffle holy Love within you, and stop your
mouths when they should be speaking and singing the praises of the Lord, and
disable your selves from the most high, and sweet, and acceptable part of all
Gods service, by your unwarrantable doubts and self-vexations. And when all
these are laid aside, how poor and lean a service is it, that is left you to
perform to him? Even a few tears, and complaints, and prayers? which I know God
will mercifully accept, because even in your desires after him there is Love;
but yet it is far short of the service which you might perform. Nay your
Heavenly-mindedness will be much suppressed, as long as you are sadly questioning
whether ever you shall come thither, and it will be yours or not.

7. Are you not ashamed to see the servants of the Devil and the world so
jocund, and your selves so sad that serve the Lord? Will you go mourning so
inordinately to Heaven, when others go so merrily to Hell? Will you credit
Satan and Sin so much, as to persuade men by your practice, that sin affords
more pleasure and content then Holiness?

8. You could live merrily your selves before your Conversion, while you served
sin: And will you walk so dejectedly now you have repented of it? As if you had
changed for the worse, or would make men think so? I know you would not for all
the world be what you were before your change. Why then do you live as if you
were more miserable then before?

9. You would be loath so long to resist the sanctifying work of the Spirit: And
why should you not be loath to resist its comforting work? It is the same Holy
Ghost that you resist in both: Nay you dare not so open your mouths for
wickedness, and plead against Sanctification it self, as you open them on the
behalf of your sinful doubtings, and plead for your immoderate dejections. If
you should, how vile would you appear?

10. Lastly consider, that God will lay sufferings enough upon you for your sins,
and suffer wicked men to lay enough on you for well doing, and you need not lay
more upon your selves. You have need to use all means for strength to bear the
burdens that you must undergo: and it is the joy of the Lord, and the hopes of
Glory that are your strength. And will you cast away the only supports of your
soul, and sink when the day of suffering comes? How will you bear poverty, or
reproach, or injuries? how will you meet approaching death, if you feed your
doubts of your salvation and of the Love of God in Christ, which must
corroborate you? O weaken not your souls that are too weak already: Weaken not
your souls that have so much to do and suffer: and that of so great necessity
and importance. While you complain of your weakness, increase it not by
unbelieving uncomfortable complaints. Gratify not the Devil and wicked
malicious men so far, as to inflict on your selves a greater calamity then all
their malice and power could inflict. It is a madness in them that will please
the Devil, to the displeasing of God, though the pleasing of their own flesh be
it that moves them to it. But for a man to please the Devil, and displease
God, even when he displeases his own flesh by it also, and brings nothing
but sorrow to himself by it, this is in some respects more unreasonable then
madness it self. Many cast away their souls for Riches, and Honors, and carnal
accommodations; but who would do it for poverty, sickness, or disgrace? So
though many undo their souls for fleshly pleasures and delights; yet he is a
strange man indeed that will offend God even for self-tormenting grief and
trouble. O therefore dear Christians, as you have let go all your sensual
pleasures for the pleasing of your Lord, do not let go the pleasures of his
love, for which you have let go all. The Lord takes pleasure in his people,
even in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, and the meek he
will beautify with salvation, Psalm 147. 11. It is meet therefore that his
people take pleasure in the Lord: that the Saints be joyful in glory; that they
sing aloud upon their beds, and that the high praises of God be in their
mouths, Psalm 149. 4, 5, 6.

O let not the Spirit of God be thought to be like the evil spirit that vexed
Saul, that filled his mind with melancholy anguish and confusion: It is the
evil spirit that renteth and tormenteth those that it possesses; though the
spirit of God does humble, and by ordinate sorrow prepare for joy: But its
proper work is to sanctify, and to comfort, and to establish the Believer with
Peace that passes understanding. As it is a greater sign of the operation of
the Spirit of Christ, to restore the lapsed by a spirit of meekness, and to
bear one another burdens, and exercise tenderness, compassion and charity,
then to censure and envy, and call for fire from heaven: So even at home
(though there we are allowed to be more rigid and censorious) it is a more sure
and satisfactory discovery of the Spirit of Grace within us, if we are raised
to a sweet delight in God, and quieted in his Love, and carried out in cheerful
obedience, thankfully acknowledging the grace that we have received, and
waiting in the use of means for more, then if we are only turmoiled and
troubled in our minds, and tossed up and down with unprofitable griefs and
fears, that abate our Love to God, and our holy joys. It is the still voice
that does most fully acquaint us that it is Christ the Prince of Peace that
speaks to us: Though at first when he finds a sinner in a state of enmity
and rebellion, he often uses to thunder and lighten, and call to him as to
Saul, [Why persecutest thou me?] Will thou kick against the pricks? Will thou
fight against heaven? Or can thou bear the wrath of God Almighty? Yet to the
humbled penitent soul, there is none in all the world so tender as Jesus
Christ, the Lamb of God, the Churches husband, that cherishes them as his own
flesh. O that you did but know the greatness and tenderness of his love to you,
while you lie trembling under the unjust apprehensions of his wrath! It would
then so transport you with ravishing delights, that the world would see that
the Saints of the most High have higher Pleasures then the world affords.

BUt I know you will say, [ Alas, what need you exhort us to spiritual
pleasures and consolations? Do you think there is any man in love with sorrows?
or unwilling to live a joyful life? O that you could tell us how we might
attain it; and you should quickly see that we are willing.]

Answ. And if you are so willing to attain it, as to be also willing to use the
means, you shall quicklyer see that I shall certainly inform you how you may
attain it; and how you may come to find a life of Holiness to be the most sweet
and pleasant life. I therefore desire and require you to practice these
Directions following.

Direct. 1. Make it your first and principal business to attain the fullest
fixed knowledge of God in his Attributes, and Covenant-Relations to you.]

1. Study him in his Attributes. If infinite Goodness take not up the soul with
Love and with Delight, it is because it is not known. Where there is all things
that the soul of man desires to its highest felicity and content, and yet
contentment and delight is wanting, it must needs be ignorance and distance
that is the cause. If the Sun seem not light to you, it is because you have not
eyesight, or look not on the light. If you find no pleasure in the most
pleasant food, it is because your appetites are diseased, or you do not taste
it. If your most suitable and most affectionate friend seem not amiable to you,
it is because you know not his suitableness and love. So if the eternal God,
that is infinitely powerful, wise and good, most perfect and most suitable to
your highest affections, do not possess you with abundant Pleasures and
Delights of Love, it is because you are unacquainted with him. Study then his
infinite perfections: and be much with him in secret prayer and meditation,
where the retired soul having fewest avocations, is fittest for the most near
familiar converse. And still remember that it is Love it self that you have to
do with. For God is Love. It is the fountain of all delights and pleasures that
you draw near to. It is a cold heart indeed that fire it self cannot warm: and
a dead heart indeed that life it self cannot revive: Conceive of God as God,
and you will delight in him: Abhort all unworthy diminutive thoughts of him:
Set up his Love and Goodness in your estimation, as infinitely above all the
creatures. Believe it, the Love of your dearest friends, is an inconsiderable
drop to the Ocean of his Love. Think not of him as cruel, or an enemy, if you
would love him, or delight in him. Love and Delight are never forced by bare
commands and threatenings, but drawn forth magnetically by attractive Goodness.
Were not God most amiable, and friendly, and desirable to us, it is not saying,
[ Love me, or I will damn thee,] that would ever have caused man to love him;
but rather to fear, and hate, and fly from him. Think but of Gods Love, and
Goodness, and Fidelity, as you do of his Power, and then you will find that
there are rivers of pleasure in his presence, and fullness of joy at his right
hand, the fore-tastes whereof are the only delights that can quiet the troubled
thirsty soul.

2. And if you say, [ What is all this to me, any more then to the ungodly
world, on whom the wrath of God abides?] I answer, Thou art in Covenant with
him, and he is thine in the Covenant Relations, even thy Reconciled Father, thy
Savior and thy Sanctifier. No husband is so inviolably bound to a wife, nor
will so faithfully answer his Relation, as the blessed Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier unto thee. Did thou well know and consider, what it is to have God
himself to be thine in Covenant, to all these uses, and to all the ends that
thou can reasonably desire, it would fill up thy soul with satisfying
delights.

There is nothing that thou want, but what belongs to God to give thee, in
one of these three great relations. And sooner shall the day be turned into
night, and the frame of nature be dissolved, then God will violate his Covenant
of Grace. Jer. 33. 20, 21. [ Thus says the Lord, If you can break my Covenant
of the day, and my Covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and
night in their season: then may also my Covenant be broken, etc.] Isa. 54. 4.
5, etc. [ Fear not; for thou shall not be ashamed, etc. For thy Maker is thy
Husband: (the Lord of Hosts is his name) and thy Redeemer, the Holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called: For the Lord has called
thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when when
thou wast refused, says thy God: For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but
with great mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: For as
I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth: So have
I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee: For the mountains
shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that
has mercy on thee.] And though yet we have our troublesome imperfections, it
belongs to our God, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, to make us
perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, that to him may be the glory
for ever, Heb. 13. 20, 21. It is his work [ to comfort all that mourn; to
appoint to them that mourn in Zion, and to give them beauty for ashes, the oil
of joy for mourning, the garment of praise, for the spirit of heaviness, that
they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
might be glorified -- They shall be named The Priests of the Lord; men shall
call them The ministers of our God -- Everlasting joy shall be unto them -- For
the Lord will direct their work in truth, and make an everlasting Covenant with
them -- All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed whom
the Lord has blessed: Therefore should we greatly rejoice in the Lord; and our
souls should be joyful in our God: For he has clothed us with the garments of
salvation; he has covered us with the robes of righteousness, as a Bridegroom
decketh himself with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her
Jewels.] Isa. 61. [ A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put into you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I
will give you an heart of flesh: and I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them -- and
I will save you from all your uncleanness, etc.] Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 29. [
And they shall be my people, and I will be their God: And I will give them one
heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of
their children after them; and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: Yea I will rejoice over them
to do them good, etc. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40, 41. [ Happy are the people that are
in such a case: yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15.

Nature does not give you such security that the Sun shall shine, and that the
streams shall run, that the earth shall be fruitful, as the covenant of the
Lord does give you of all that is necessary to you Happiness. Study therefore
the mercies and riches of the Covenant.

Dir. 2. Understand and remember that it is your Covenant consent, that it is
the condition of your title to all the following blessings of the Covenant.]

I add this as supposing you will say [ What are all these benefits to me,
unless I were sure that I were indeed in the Covenant?] It is not your merit,
but your consent that is required: God offers himself to be your Reconciled
Father, and Christ to be your savior, and the Holy Spirit to be your
sanctifier. Do you consent to this, or not? All the question is whether you are
willing? and whether your sin be not so sweet to you, that you will rather
venture your souls on the wrath of God, then you will be saved from it. If you
heartily consent, assuredly you are in the Covenant, and the benefits are
yours; and therefore the Joy and comfort should be yours. If you do not
consent; instead of despairing, presently consent; and refuse not your
happiness while you lament your misery.

Object. But it is not only Covenant-making, but Covenantkeeping that must save
us: and I have broak my Covenant, and therefore have no title to the benefits.
Answ. What Covenant have you broken? This Covenant in question that engages
you to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? If you have broken this, you have
withdrawn your Consent: For while you heartily consent, you break it not in any
essential part. As it is not every breach of the Laws, that makes a man a
traitor or rebel, nor every fault or falling out between husband and wife that
dissolveth their relation; so is it not every sin, nor any that is consistent
with true consent to the terms of the Covenant, that is a Covenant Breaking
forfeiture of the benefits. If you would not have God to be your Portion, your
Father, your Savior, and your Sanctifier, you are then Covenant-breakers; And
if you be so, Consent yet, and return to your fideli^y, and the comforts of the
Covenant may yet be yours, for all your former violation.

Dir. 3. Moreover, if you would find the Pleasure of a Holy life, see that the
flesh be fool you not into an over high estimation of any worldly thing: that
so your appetites may not be corrupted with such contrary unwholesome Pleasures,
nor your hearts be overwhelmed with worldly cares, or griefs or troubles. If
you will glut your selves with other kind of pleasures, you cannot expect that
Holiness should be your pleasure. You cannot find your delight in God, when you
turn from him to seek it in the creature. If you ^ought for less in friends,
and health, and prosperity in the world, you might have more in God. How should
you find content in God, when you set so light by him, that the promise of
beholding him in endless glory, will not please you, unless you may also have
your fleshly desires, or selfish inclinations pleased here? This is it that
perverteth your judgments and affections, and causes you to injure God and
your selves. You first fancy that it is an excellent thing to be Rich and
Renowned and to rule over others, or to have plenty of all accommodations for
your flesh: and then because God satisfies not these carnal fancies, you think
he neglects you, o^ deals hardly with you! As if every person in the Town
should murmur because they are not B^yliffs or Justices; when if they had the
wit to know it, they are but kept from a double encumberance, and from a burden
which perhaps would break their backs. When the people are thus befooled by the
flesh into brutish conceits of the nature of felicity, and into an over-valuing
of these worldly things, they are then always eitheir tickled by deluding
pleasures, or troubled for the crossing of their carnal wills, so that they
grow out of relish and liking with the true and durable delights. Take heed
therefore of this carnality.

Dir. 4. Study the greatness of the mercy which you have received: You abound
with mercies; and yet undervalue them, and over look them, and sweeten not your
souls with the serious observation and remembrance of them: you study
principally your afflictions and your wants: And thus when you live in a land
that flows with milk and honey, you will not feed on the prepared feast, but
keep still the gall and wormwood in your mouths; and how then should you be
acquainted with the pleasures of a holy life.

Yea you must use to look more to the spiritual part of all your mercies; and
see the love of God that appears in them; and taste the blood of Christ in
them; and lose not the kernel: and take not up with the common carnal part,
which every wicked man can value and enjoy. Consider in all your mercies, what
there is in them for the benefit of your souls, much rather then how they
accommodate your flesh. Could you do thus, you would find the benefit of
afflictions; and that the denial of what you have accounted your necessary
mercies, is not the smallest of your mercies. And thus judging truly by the
spirit, and not by the flesh, there is no condition (except that of sin) in
which you might not find cause of joy.

Dir. 5. Take heed of sinning: Keep still upon your watch against temptation;
sin is the cause of all your sufferings; when it promises you delight, it is
preparing for your sorrow; when it flattereth you into presumption, it is
preparing for despair; when it promises you secrecy and security, it
prepares for your shame: and be sure your sin will find you out, Numb. 32. 23.
If therefore you have offended, delay not your Repentance; and spare not the
flesh in your return; but (unless the honor of God forbid it) take shame to
your selves by free confession, and make the fullest reparation of the injury
that you can to God and man. If you would thus get out the thorn that vexes
you, the ways of God would be more pleasant.

Dir. 6. Daily live in the exercise of faith, upon the everlasting pleasures:
Dwell as at the gates of Heaven; as men that are waiting every hour when they
are called in, and when death will draw aside the veil, and show them the
blessed face of God. And take heed that the enmity of interposing Death,
prevail not against the Joys of faith. But look to Christ that has conquered
it, and will conquer it for you; And if thus you could live as strangers here,
and as the Citizens of Heaven, that are ready to step into the immortal
pleasures, you would then taste the Pleasures of a holy life, in the first
fruits and foretasts thereof. It is your Treasure that must Delight you; As
your Heart must be there, so your pleasure must be derived thence. Strangers to
Heaven will be strangers to the Believers Joys; As the pleasure of the Carnal
world, consists in the sense of what they have in hand; so the pleasure of
Believers consists in the foreapprehensions of what they shall enjoy with God
for ever. If therefore you exercise not those apprehensions; if you look not
frequently, seriously, and believingly into the world that you must live in for
ever, how can the comforts of that world illustrate and refresh you in this
present world? The Light and Heat, which is the Beauty and Life of this lower
world, proceeds not from any thing in this world, but from the Sun which is
so far above us, and sends down hither its quickening influence and rays. They
are not the genuine comforts of Christianity, which are not fetched from the
world above.

Dir. 7. If you would have the experience of the Pleasures of a life of Faith
and Holiness, neither desire nor cherish any fears or sorrows, but such as as
are subservient to Faith, and Hope, and Love, and preparatory to Thankfulness
and Joy. Think not Religion consists in any other kind of sorrows. Nay if any
other should assault you, be so far from taking them for your duty or religion,
as to resist them, and lament them as your sin. That is true and saving
Humiliation, 1. which makes you vile in your own eyes, and loath your selves
for sin. 2. And makes you more desirous to be delivered and cleansed from your
sin, than to live in it, how sweet or gainful soever it may seem, and 3. which
makes you set more by a Savior to deliver you, than by all the pleasures,
riches, and honors of the world. What ever want of Grief or tears you find, if
you have these signs, your Repentance and humiliation is sincere. Do not
therefore refuse your Peace because you have not greater sorrows; nor disturb
your souls by struggling for excessive sorrow: Take not part with them, but do
your best to cast them out, if they are such as would destroy your Love and
Joy, and drive you from Christ, and hinder your Thansgivings. Know that the
Life of your Religion consists in the Holy Love of God and of his Image and
servants and holy ways. Love is your duty and your felicity and reward:
Therefore let all tend to the exercise of Love, and value most those means
which most promote it; and think your selves best when you abound most in Love;
and not when you are overwhelmed with those Fears and Griefs which hinder Love.
Study therefore above all, the Love of God revealed in Christ, which is the
best attractive of your Love to him: and hate all suggestions which would
represent God unlovely and undesirable to you.

Dir. 8. Use cheerful company: Not carnal, but holy; not such as waste their
time in unprofitable frothy speeches, or filthy, or profane or scornful
jeastings: But such as have most of the sense of Love and mercy on their
hearts; and are best acquainted with a Life of Faith, and whose speeches and
cheerful conversations, do most lively manifest their sense of the Love of God,
and of the Grace of Christ, and the eternal happiness of the Saints. There is a
delightful and encouraging virtue in the converse of joyful, thankful, heavenly
believers: Use it therefore if you can have it.

Dir. 9. In your addresses to God in holy worship, be sure that Praise and
Thansgiving have its due proportion. They are the chief and most excellent and
acceptable part, and therefore let them not have the smallest room. Though your
sins and wants be as great as you imagine in your complaints, it is yet your
duty to Praise the Excellencies and Attributes and works of your Creator, and
to be Thankful for the preparations made by Christ, and freely offered you, so
that they shall certainly be yours, if you accept them. But much more Thankful
should you be that have but the evidence of Desire and Consent to prove your
Interest in Christ and in his Covenant.

I would entreat poor troubled fearful souls to Resolve upon this one thing,
which is reasonable, necessary and in their power, that when they are upon
their knees with God, they will spend as much of their Time and words in
confessing mercies and Praising God, as in confessing sin, and condemning
themselves and lamenting their wants, and weaknesses, and distress. Though they
cannot do it cheerfully as they should, let them do it as they can. And at last
while they keep in the right way of duty, and use themselves to the
commemoration of that which is sweet and grateful to the soul, Religion it self
will become sweet and grateful; and cheerfulness of heart will be promoted by
our own considerations and expressions.

The same I desire of them as to their Thoughts; that they will do their best
to spend as many thoughts and as much time upon Mercy as upon sin and misery;
and upon the Goodness, and Love of God in Christ, as upon his threatenings and
terrous.

Dir. 10. If you would taste the comforts of a holy life, be sure that you give
up your selves to Christ without reserve, and follow him fully, and place all
your hopes and confidence in his promised rewards: Serve him with your best,
yea with your all; and not with some cheap and heartless service. Comforts are
the Rewards of faithfulness: They that do God the most sincere and costly
service, and save nothing from him which he calls them to lose, are likest to
be encouraged by his sweetest comforts. It is sluggish neglects, and
unfruitfulness, doing no good in the world, but thinking to be saved by a dull
profession* that makes so many uncomfortable professors as there be: Though I
know that on the other extreme, too many live in pining sadness, by not
understanding the Covenant of Grace, which accepts of sincerity, and secureth
the weak and infants in the family of Christ. But yet the barren unprofitable.
Christians (I mean that comparatively are such, though they be sincere) shall
find that God will not encourage any in sloathfulness by his smiles and
consolations.

Direct. 11. If you would know the Rest and Comfort of Believers, see that you
Rest in the Will of God in all Conditions, as the Center and only bottom for
your souls. His will is not to be reduced to yours: strive therefore to bring
yours most fully and quietly to his. Gods Will is the Universal Original and
End of all things, and there is no Felicity or Rest for man, but in the
fulfilling, and pleasing and disposals of his will. Be not too desirous of the
fulfilling of your own wills, and murmr not against the disposals of the Will
of God. It cannot but be Good which proceeds from that will which is the
Spring of good. The accomplishment of Gods Will, is the perfection of all
created beings, being that End for which they are all created. If you Rest in
your own wills, your Rest will be imperfect, disturbed and short of duration;
For your wills are the wills of weak and vicious men: They are frequently
misguided by an ignorant mind, and perverted by a corrupt and biased heart:
But Gods will is never misguided; nor ever determined of any thing but for the
best. If you Rest here, you Rest in safety; you may be sure you shall never be
deceived by him: You may Rest in constant peace and quietness; for God is
unchangeable, and will not be off and on with us, as we are with him, and with
our selves. As you pray that his Will may be done, acquiesce in the doing of
his Will; and whatever befall you, repose and satisfy your hearts in this.

Direct. 12. Lastly, let me add, that when you have all the Directions that can
be given, you trust not too much to your own understanding and skill for the
application of them to your selves, in any weighty difficult cases. But as you
will not think it enough for the health of your bodies, to have Physic Books
and Physic Lectures, unless you have also a Physicion who knows more then
you, to direct you in the application; so think it not enough that you have the
best Books and Sermons, unless you have also a faithful and judicious Pastor,
whose advice you may crave in particular difficulties, and who may direct you
in the discovery of your own diseases, and applying the fittest remedies in
their seasons and measures, with such Rules and Cautions as are necessary to
the success. If God had not known that there would still be many children and
weak ones in his family, that would stand in need of the instruction, support
and encouragement of the strong, he would never have settled Pastors in his
Church to watch over all the flocks, and to be always ready at hand, for the
confirmation and encouragement of such as need their help. There had been no
Physicions, if there had been no diseases. Tire not your Physicions with
needless consultations, for easy and ordinary cases: but be not without them
in your greater straits, and wants, and doubts. And [ blessed be God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God: For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for
your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same
sufferings, which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your
consolation and salvation.] 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5, 6. While you are sick or infants,
the stronger must support you. You cannot stand, or go, or suffer of your
selves: And God is so tender of his weak and little ones, that he has not only
given strength to others for their sakes, and commanded the strong to bear the
burdens and infirmities of the weak, Gal. 6. 1, 2. Romans 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. but
also established the Ministerial office much for this end. Mal. 2. 7. For the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth;
for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Not that we should disclose our
Consciences, and depend for guidance on every ignorant or ungodly man, that
has the name and place of a Priest; Even among the Papists, men have leave to
choose such Confessors as are fittest for them. If the Priests [ depart ou^ of
the way, and cause many to stumble at the Law, and corrupt the Covenant of
Levi, the Lord will make them contemptible and base before all the people,
according as they have not kept his ways, but been partial in the Law.] Mal.
2. 8, 9. But use those that are qualified and sent by the Spirit of God; who [
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, have had their conversation in the world, especially to youwards.] 2 Cor.
1. 12. Such as [ you have acknowledged in part, that they are your rejoicing,
as you also are theirs in the day of the Lord Jesus. verse. 14.] Not using them
as such as have dominion over your faith, but as those that by office,
qualification, and willingness and disposition are Helpers of your Joy. verse.
24.

In the saithful practice of these Directions, you will find that Holiness is
the most Pleasant way; and that the Godly choose the better part; and that the
ungodly sensualists do live as BRUTES, while they unreasonably refuse to live
as SAINTS.

FINIS.

