A Second Admonition TO Mr. EDWARD BAGSHAW;

Written to call him to Repentance for many false Doctrines, Crimes, and
specially fourscore palpable untruths in matter of fact, deliberately published
by him in two small Libels; In which he exemplieth the Love-killing and
depraving Principles of Church-dividers: and tells the World to what men are
hasting* when they sinfully avoid Communion with true Churches and Christians,
for tolerable faults.

With a Confutation of his Reasons for Separation: Written to preserve the
weak, to resist the Dividing Temptations of the Imperious unskilful Clergy, to
revive our dying hopes of Concord, and to vindicate the Non-conformable
Ministers from the unjust imputation of Schismatical Principles.

By Richard Baxter, a long-maligned and re^sted Endeavourer of the Churches
Unity and Peace.

LONDON, Printed for Nevill Simmons, at the Three Crowns near Holborn-Conduit.
1671.

THE Contents.
A Preface to those that are inclined to Principles of Church Division and
Separation; containing twenty causes of that sin, and some Notices of Mr.
Bagshaw's two Libells. To Mr. E. B. the grounds on which I go in dealing with
him. Why I answer him contrary to my former purpose. Sect. 1. Of calling him
Brother: of a middle way. Sect. 2. Whether every untruth be a lie? Sect. 3. Of
Scripture perfection. Sect. 4. Of the design of my Book. Sect. 6, 7. Whether
calling Dividers to Repent, etc. be to make them odious? Sect. 8. Whether all
they whose sin brings Judgments, must be hated of all and killed? Sect. 9, 10.
Whether I disclaimed any Activeness in the first War? Sect. 15. Whether I
approved of setting up Cromwell to be Protector? and such like? Sect. 20. My
Repentance published at Mr. E. B. his invitation, in four parts. Of Mr. E. B.
his former defense of me against the then Bishop of Worcester. Sect. 21, 22. Of
Christ's Temporal Reign, and my judgment of it. Sect. 24. Whether I meant it,
because I dare not own any persecuted truth. Sect. 25. Whether I inveigh
against sufferings* -- Of sufferers temptations. Sect. 26, etc. His sinful
excuse of Vavasor Powells three public false Prophecies. Sect. 29, etc. His
(wholesome) accusation of me as proud, 1. For saying that I publicly
communicated: 2. For saying that many have written against me, that expect
clean contraries from me. 3. For writing many Books. Sect. 31. Of his
accusation in general about Justification. Sect. 33. Of the stating of the
Question about separating principles. Sect. 34, etc. Many of his misreports
about my stating it. Sect. 38. His first Reason for separation examined, viz.
because every Parish Church is part of a Diocesane Church. How far that is true
or not. Sect. 39. His second Reason, that a Parish Minister is but a servant to
the Diocesan. Sect. 40. His third Reason: Because Parish Ministers consent to
silencing and persecution, by open consent or pernicious silence? Whether there
be little difference between persecuting, and not sharply reproving it? Sect.
41. His fourth Reason; that Parish Ministers enter sinfully, and by a solemn
Oath renounce their Christian liberty. All sinners, or sinful enterers not to
be separated from. Sect. 42. May not a true Church be called Defective and
faulty. Sect. 43. His further Reasons. 1. That we know not how else to preserve
our Christian liberty. Whether all Christian liberty must be maintained? and
how? Sect. 44. 2. Whether to be present where things are used in Gods Worship
which he commanded not, be a sin? Sect. 45. 3. Whether if we separate not we
sell the truth about Christ's Sovereignty? Sect. 46. His reason from Acts 15.
retorted. Sect. 47. He takes not Corruption and Error as such without
Imposition to be a sufficient ground of separation. How he is himself an
Imposer. Sect. 48. The charge of Hypocrisy for joining in what we approve not?
Sect. 49. That Christ called and designed not his Church to be impure and mixed,
considered. Sect. 50. How far a Church is to be separated from, for abetting
sin. Sect. 51. His grand answer to the example of Church-pollutions in
Scripture, that they were settled as to Officers and Ordinances rightly, and so
had a power to keep themselves clean, etc. considered. What Power Ministers
have now. Whether the Ages following the first, did fall into an Universal
Innovation, and degeneration in the Essentials of Order and Doctrine, and
Antichristianism? and so Christ had no Church, and was no Christ? Whether Mr.
E. B. be a Seeker, and separate from all Churches, as well as from all
Parochial? Sect. 52. Whether the necessity of separation because of the said
Universal degeneration in Essentials continue still, because we are reformed
from Antichristianism but in some points? Sect. 53. He grants that neither
Corruption barely, nor Imposition barely is a ground for just separation. But
Imposing Error with a strong hand, etc. Sect. 54. His vain answer, intimating
that he is wiser herein than the Old Non-conformists. Sect. 55. Of
Arminianisme, whether so pernicious as to exclude from communion -- Sect. 56.
Of Free will and its power to receive -- Sect. 57. His ignorant calumny against
me about Scripture perfection. Sect. 58. Twenty Questions to him about various
Readings and Copies, etc. Sect. 59. Of the Possibility of salvation for some
called Papist? Sect. 61. His former untruth that by [Flesh] I affirmed was only
meant the sensitive Appetite, defended by him by reciting my words which
expressly confute his calumny. Sect. 62. The Reason rendered by Mr. E. B. why he
cast away my Book of Rest, and refused to read it, and yet is the Judge of it;
And my account of my dissent long ago from his Latin slender Discourse against
Monarchy. Sect. 63. His report of Mr. Herles, and Mr. Cawdrys words against my
Saints Rest. Sect. 67, etc. Many more of his Untruths. Sect. 74. More of his
ignorant Calumny about Scripture perfection. Sect. 75, 76, etc. More of the
Nature of his Defenses and Accusations. Sect. 80. Five Untruths delivered by
the Letter published by him, as written by a woman of Worcester; with my sense
of her case. Sect. 81, etc. Seven Untruths published by him in his Brother
Brownes Letter; and the Confutation of their Calumnies. Sect. 94. Mr. E. B. his
new sort of Dishonesty charged on me, because (he says) I have access to the
Licensers and Press. Sect. 95. Whether it be culpable Vanity to write on the
Sabbath after Dr. Owen (as he thought.) Sect. 97. His calumny of my Atheistical
arguing against the Divine and self-evidencing authority of the Scriptures --
and as one of the worst sort of Heretics, that under the notion of being a
Christian and a Protestant do with my utmost industry and cunning labor to
overthrow the Foundation, and therefore am to be Rejected of all -- The case
opened, and the weak warned to take heed of them that would ignorantly draw
them to be Infidels, by subverting Christianity, while they think themselves
the chief or true defenders of it.
To those Readers who are most inclined to the Principles of Church-division,
and censorious unwarrantable Separation.
I Know there is in Holiness a contrariety to sin; and Heaven and Hell must
finally show the difference for ever: And to reconcile them is as unpossible,
as to reconcile Light and Darkness. I know that it is the endeavor of every
faithful Minister of Christ, to make this difference plainly known, and in
Doctrine and Discipline to separate the precious from the vile; and to make
ungodly men know that they are ungodly, and to give to each their proper
portion, and to keep the Churches as clean as they can by lawful means. I know
that the ruin of this purging and differencing Discipline, is a great part of
the lamentable ruin of the Churches, and occasioneth that scandal to the
Mahometans and Heathens, because of the wicked lives of Christians, which is
one of the greatest hindrances of their conversion: And that all Christians
should use their utmost skill and power, to recover Religion to its primitive
Purity and Splendor, and Discipline to the most effectual regular exercise.
And I know that in men's private converse there must be a great care what
company we converse with, and especially whom we make our familiars. And that
to be indifferent, and to intimate an equality or likeness of the godly and the
wicked, in doctrine, communion, and familiarity, is a notable sign of an
ungodly person. And upon these accounts, I know that when persons are newly
recovered from ungodliness themselves, they are very much inclined to fly from
the company of such, as far as their safety does require: And by this
inclination and their ignorance, they are frequently tempted to go further from
them in Church communion, than God allows them to do, and instead of
separating from them in their sin, to separate from them in their duty; and to
separate from the Churches of Christ in his true worship, because of the
mixture and presence of the bad.

And this they are drawn to, 1. By forgetting the Scripture pattern, and state
of the Churches even in the purest age, and thinking only what they desire,
rather than what is to be expected or done.

2. By forgetting the difference between the Church visible, which is always
mixed with Hypocrites and offenders, and the Church invisible which shall all be
saved.

3. By forgetting the difference between their private familiarity, where they
are choosers of their company themselves; and their Church communion, where the
Pastors are the Rulers and Judges of the fitness of the members. Or else not
understanding that this use of the Keys, and judging of the fitness of the
members, is indeed the Pastors Office, and not theirs.

4. By not considering that nothing must be done by Discipline upon Offenders,
but in a course of Church-Justice, upon due Accusations, Summons, Audience,
Proof and patient Admonition: And not by casting out any irregularly upon the
expectation of every one that will say that they are ungodly and scandalous.

5. By forgetting the great difference between joining with men in sinful
actions, and joining with them in their duty in which they should be encouraged.

6. By forgetting the great difference of keeping in our own place and duty,
though bad men are present, and going out of our place and duty to join with
them in sin.

7. By forgetting that God will have all men's own wills, by Choosing, or
Refusing, to have more hand in their Welfare or Misery, than other men's: And if
they mischoose, the sin will be their own.

8. By forgetting that God has not left the Church at arbitrary liberty to
judge any Godly or Ungodly at their pleasure; But has given us a set Test or
Rule to judge them by; which is [their sober Profession of Consent to the
Baptismal Covenant; upon which the Adult and their Infants have right to
Baptism; And being Baptized have Right to Church Communion in all the Acts
which their Age and Understanding makes them capable of: And it is
Church-tyranny to refuse such as show this Title, till they are openly proved
to forfeit it, by Impenitency in gross sin after public admonition, and due
means. This is the truth, and the method of Christ's discipline, and the Rule of
our Communion.

9. By superstitious placing their Religion in indifferent and undertermined
things, and laying a greater stress on the words of prayer, than there is
cause. Overvaluing their several outward forms, expressions and orders, in the
worshipping of God: when instead of provoking each other to faith and fervency
to Love and to good works, they place more of Godliness in words and
circumstances (which God has certainly left free to every man's conscience)
than God does place in them: And one thinks that he is irregular, that prays
without a set form, and another that he is ungodly, that prays not by the
Spirit, who uses a set form; when both do but speak their own superstition,
and make Laws and Rules which God never made. Superstition and our own
additions in Religion (even in those that cry out much against it) is the
occasion of most of our Church-divisions. One side supposes every disorder or
unfit expression in free prayer to be a greater fault than indeed it is: And
that its unlawful therefore to join with a Church that has no set forms:
Another party supposes the forms in the Church Lyturgy to be worse than they
are; and that it is unlawful to join in them, or to receive the Lords Supper
when they are used. When as God has neither tied us to set forms, nor from
them; save only as unsuitableness to any particular persons may make one less
edifying than the other: And both free prayers, and set forms, studied prayers,
and sudden prayers, are all the work of man, (as to man's part): and therefore
they must needs be imperfect and faulty as man is: And yet in both we may pray
by the Spirit, even with the holy and fervent desires which the Spirit exciteth
in us: And the Spirit may ordinarily be a Spirit of supplication in us, and
help our infirmities, in the one way and in the other: And therefore, though I
will not equal them (For I prefer some men's free praying before any forms, and
I prefer the Common prayers before some men's free prayers) yet I may say, that
I will neither Assent and Consent to every word in the one, nor in the other,
no not of any man that ever I heard: And yet I will not take it for unlawful to
join with Church, or Family, or person in the one, or in the other: yea, upon
long experience, if I had fully my own choice and liberty, I would use free
prayer one part of the day (or one day) and a well composed form another part,
because I see commodities by both, and such inconveniences of either way alone,
as are, if possible to be avoided. But when the Mind has received a prejudice
against either way, by Education, Custom, or former distastes, no reason how
clear soever will overcome it, till age and experience do mellow green and
sour Spirits, and teach them to judge of things soberly and impartially, not
as others judge of them, but as indeed they are.

10. And men are much furthered in the way of separation, by forgetting what
good even hypocrites themselves, may receive by their station in the visible
Church: And that it is not for nothing that the Great Master of the Church,
has so ordered the terms of admission (upon mere Profession of Consent to the
Baptismal Covenant) and of Exclusion (upon proved Impenitency in gross sin
after sufficient admonition and patience) as that multitudes of bad men ever
have been and will be in the visible Church: Though the regular station that
such persons should choose, till they come up to sincere consent, is the place
of Catechumens, if they were not baptized in Infancy, and the place of
Penitents if they were, yet supposing that they intrude further by a false
profession, yet God has provided great advantages, in Church communion for
their good, and secured the innocent from imputation of sin, by reason of their
presence.

11. And men are induced to separation by forgetting, how tender Christ is of
the weakest of his members, that are sincere, and that he had rather many
hypocrites were received, than one true Christian shut out: For he has a day
at hand, in which he will separate the Tares from the Wheat, and will take out
of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that work iniquity. And they
consider not how impossible it is, to shut out all hypocrites, and not to shut
out many weak ones that are sincere.

12. And it much wrongeth them that they forget what a Mercy it is, that Christ
has not made the power of the Pastors or Church to be arbitrary, in admissions
or exclusions; but has tied them up to certain terms, and prescribed to them
whom to Receive or Reject: And that they consider not, what confusions
otherwise would be brought into the Church, and what Church-tyranny men would
exercise; And how the difference of men's Judgments, Interests, Temptations and
Passions, would make almost as many sorts of Churches, as there are individual
Governors and Churches. And one would make one measure, and another another
measure of their communion.

13. And it greatly wrongeth such men that they never had right apprehensions
of the Nature and great Necessity of Vanity among believers, and the Churches
of Christ. They cry out Truth must not be sold for Peace, when they neither
know aright what is Truth or Peace. But by Truth they mean their own doubtful
opinions, and by Peace they mean their own quietness with men. We easily
confess, that as Peace signifies our freedom from persecution or sufferings,
or from the reproach of men, the least holy truth is to be preferred before it,
and more tenaciously held than it: But if by Peace, they mean the Unity and
Concord of believers, or of the Church of God, they speak dangerously, and
suppose a pernicious falsehood, that Gods Truth, and such Peace or Concord, may
at any time be separated: And it is no wiselier spoken, than if they had said,
A man's eyesight or health is to be preferred before the Union of his soul and
body, or before the Concord of Head and Heart, or before the conjunction of his
members. When as non cutis nulla est affectio. Destroy the Subject, and you
destroy the Accidents. Without union of parts, the Church is no Church;
Dividing it, is destroying it. A House or Kingdom divided, cannot stand. And
when it is no Church, it has no Truth as a Church, n^r any thing that dividers
did contend for. An Integral member may rather be cut off, than the whole
should perish: But what member will separate it self from the b^dy? Or who but
a murderer will on pretense of curing, be a divider and dissolver?

14. And it wrongeth these Christians much that they look on the narrow space
of the Churches about them, and forget the state of almost all Christ's Churches
in the whole world, which are in a (...) worse condition than our Parish
Churches are: which though it should draw no man to like the least imperfection
in them or in himself, nor to neglect any true reforming duty, yet would it
make a tender Christian rather tremblingly to return to Universal due
Communion, than to dare to separate from almost all Christ's visible body upon
earth.

15. And gazing all upon one side, does make men forget, how heinous an injury
it is to Christ, to rob him of the greatest part of his Churches, and to say,
that they are none of his: when they could easily perceive that it would not be
well taken by the King, if they should say, that he is King of no more, but
three or four Villages in the Land: And he that can take four parts, yea,
nineteen parts of Christ's Church from him to day, may take away the fifth or
the twentieth to morrow, and so may turn Infidels, and deny Christ to be
Christ: For no Kingdom, no King.

16. And they forget that as the Body must have its due magnitude, as well as
its comely site of parts; so we must be zealous for the Greatness, as well as
the Purity, the Extensive as well as the Intensive growth of the Church. And if
Christ's flock be little, they dishonor it that would make it tenfold less than
indeed it is; Jer. 30. 19. And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving, and the
voice of them that make merry: And I will multiply them, and they shall not be
few, and I will glorify them, and they shall not be small.

17. And the Passion that is kindled in men by their sufferings, is very strong
in conquering their judgments; so that too few in the whole world are found so
sober, as not to go too far from those they suffer by; unless it be timorous or
temporizing complyers, that yield to escape their further suffering.

18. And men are strangely forgetful of the experiences of themselves and
others: And when God has let loose the Spirit of division to the confusions
both of State and Churches, and to the ruining of true Reformation, and to the
woeful and scandalous dissolution of many particular Churches, where it has
come, yet will not men understand or remember, but see as if they did not see.
Holland, England, New England give them loud and lamentable warnings, and yet
they will not hear.

19. And they that know what man is indeed, will not deny, but that in very
many, there is something of that Pride (which some call spiritual, but is too
carnal) in men's inclination to separation. He that knows how excellent a
thing it is to be Wise, and Holy, and Happy, is often tempted to be desirous that
his own excellency should appear, and not be hid by his joining with such as
are taken for ignorant common men; and so would stand further from the common
sort of visible Christians, than God would have him. And also some persons, who
should find the Evidences of Gods favor and acceptance in the life of Faith,
and Love, and Holiness, do lamentably quiet themselves instead of these, with
being members of such strict societies, as profess even a separating
conspicuous holiness.

20. Lastly, But one of the greatest snares of all is, that men cannot bear the
Censures of those that are inclined to Separation. And therefore rather than be
accounted and called by them Formalists, Temporizers, Carnal, or such like,
they will do as they do, and turn their zeal into partial and unjust censures,
of the persons, words, and outward Modes and Circumstances of Worship, of those
that they dissent from.

These and such other causes of Dividing inclinations, I did (upon the special
necessities of the Churches, and some of my own acquaintance) lay open in a
Book called the Cure of Church Divisions; which made a great noise, (as water
powered upon the flames); But though some upon misunderstanding, and some by
guilt and interest muttered much against it, I never had a word against it
privately or publicly in writing, by way of Confutation of any thing in it,
save only a Libell of one that now calls himself Edward Bagshaw, a man that I
am not acquainted with, though I have seen and spoken with him, and though to
my trouble, when his fancy led him that way, he unskilfully wrote for me
against the Bishop then of Worcester. I greatly rejoice that in these times of
trial, so few of the Non-conformable Ministers are by sufferings and passions
hurried into the dividing extreme. If injuries or interest would excuse any
sin, I think there are few Ministers in England, who have more inducements to
the angry separating way than I have. But shall I therefore wrong the Truth and
Church of God, and my own and others souls! God forbid.

Brethren, it is none of my meaning to disoblige you from your ancient faithful
Ministers. Nor yet to persuade you to hear any insufficient or intolerable man;
much less to commit your souls to the Pastoral care of such a person: nor yet
to prefer a worse before a better, who may upon lawful terms be enjoyed. But
the things that I persuade you to, are these: 1. Not to entertain false
uncharitable dividing principles in your minds, which will break the peace of
all societies.

2. If you differ about Infant Baptism, Indepencie, Common prayer or such like,
that yet you will not think your differences oblige you to deny Communion to
all you differ from.

3. That if you are so sinfully partial, that you cannot join in the same
Churches, you would yet live charitably and peaceably in several Churches.

4. That you would not say any Church of Christ is No Church, because it is not
of your form or mode.

5. That you would not say, that Communion with any Church is unlawful, because
their external worshipping form, is not of your fashion, or before you have
proved what you say. My advice is calculated to the Union and peace of all true
Churches, and not those of one form or mode alone.

And I note it as a considerable providence of God, that I am drawn in to
defend the Principles of Love and Concord in these trying times, against such
an adversary as Mr. Bagshaw is. It has of late been Gods way to let us know
the evil of Principles by their effects on the men that we have had to do with:
As Malignant principles would not have been sufficiently distasted by us, if
they had not showed themselves in malignant practices; So Dividing principles
had never been sufficiently known in England, if they had not ruined a
Reformation, silenced so many hundred Ministers, and laid us in the dirt, as
they have done. And if the Cause of Dividers must be judged of by the
defenders, I advise you to consider of these things following.

1. How many notorious false doctrines he has delivered?

2. How many other notorious Crimes in two Libells he has committed? In
special let every sober person judge, whether Ignorance, Temerity, Pride and
high self-conceitedness with malignant unconcealed calumny do not only defile,
but even constitute or make up his Books?

3. What bitter enmity is here expressed against the Principles of Love, and
Unity, and Concord, and Peace, and Sobriety it self?

4. How many score notorious untruths he shamelesly publishes in these two
Libells?

5. How much he fights against Repentance, and so with gross Impenitency
aggravateth all his crimes?

6. How like his own Spirit is to that which he accounts the Spirit of
imposition and persecution? And how vehement he is against the same persons as
such are, and as impudently slandereth them, and as bitterly and professedly
designeth to make them odious (But he that professes to make another odious,
thereby disableth himself from doing it.)

7. Whether ever in all your lives, you saw two Libells written against
another, which do not only perform, but even attempt so little, and next to
nothing at all, to give any answer to the Books he writes against. Read mine
and read his, and I defy any thing but madness it self, or blind partiality or
wickedness, to make any man think that he has confuted what I have written. I
confess I admire at the man's insensibility, that does not perceive, how much he
has done, by pretending an Answer, and giving none, or worse than none, to
make his cause or himself contemptible. Can any man in his wits think, that he
has confuted the Principles of Concord which I laid down in my Directions.

8. Whether such a man as this do show himself wiser than Dod, Hildersham,
Ames, Baine, and all the old Non-conformists according to the importance of his
boast? or whether he give us cause to believe that God has revealed more to
him than to them, while he himself can no better reveal it unto others?

9. When I had set down at least thirty three Untruths which he deliberately
dared to write and publish, did you ever read such a pitiful vindication? He
has not spoken to any considerable number of them: And of those few that he
speaks to, try if you can find any one of which he clears himself? And yet
he professes not repentance for any one of them? Nay, to open his Impenitency,
he professes falsely that I cannot justly charge him with any of them; and
adds in the last Libell forty eight palpable Untruths more? Just like one
that being accused of swearing, should forty eight times swear that he never
swear.

10. How far he proceeds in his separation, and how far he would draw poor
unstable souls? It is not only from the Conformists and the Parish Churches
that he would have you separate, and all in the whole world that are worse than
they; but also from all the Non-conformists in England, that are not better
than I: as his concluding Advertisement fully tells you. All of my mind and
measure are unworthy of the communion of this humble, tender, credible man.

11. What means is there left in the world to exempt a man from the malignant
calumnies of this Judge of the Churches? When in one sentence he tells you,
how much I have written against the Bishops, and in another that I am in the
same condemnation with him, and yet in another, that I dare look no truth in
the face, that brings suffering; when he talks of one point that all
Christians are agreed in, and directly brings none. And when he charge me
with Atheistical arguing against the divine and self-evidencing authority of
the Scripture, and therefore to be Rejected of all, as one of the worst sort of
Heretics, that under the notion of being a Christian and a Protestant, does
with his utmost industry and cunning, labor to overthrow our foundation.] When
I know of no one man living in this Age, that has written so much (I say not,
so well) for the things in question (Scripture and Christianity) as I have
done. May not this man as modestly charge Bishop Downame to be a Papist, that
has written so much to prove the Pope to be Antichrist? or say any thing else
that he has list to say?

12. Does he not fix upon you by such Libells as these, an odious reproach? As
if he would persuade the world, that you that he writes to, are so partial, so
blind, so false to truth, and to your own souls, and such pernicious enemies to
peace, as that you will receive that which is thus falsely said to you, without
ever reading what is said on the other side, or against all the evidence that
contradicts it, and will believe all these visible untruths of his, without
any proof, upon the bare report of so rash a man.

13. Whether following such men and ways as this, is not the likeliest way in
the world, not only to increase the reproach of the Non-conformists, and make
them all thought of, as we do of the Quakers, and so to continue severities
against them as a company of furious unsociable persons; but also to harden men
into a contempt of Religion it self.

14. Does not God permit such a Champion of the Cause of Division, thus
criminally to miscarry, that you may see that you are not better than those you
separate from? You blame them for subscribing erroneously or falsely; And which
of them has put thirty three, and forty eight visible untruths deliberatly in
print, and Impenitently stands in them as your Champion has done? Does not
this show you, that you are not so good, but that the Churches of godly Pastors
are as worthy of your Communion, as you are of theirs? If one should admonish
one of your Church Members of one single deliberate avowed lie, would you not
call him to Repentance? And will you believe this man and follow him upon his
bare word, who has published eighty such falsehoods? Yet I am not one that
think he loves a lie, because it is a lie; but one that is thus guilty through
proud overvaluing his own unfurnished understanding, and through an
extraordinary Rashness and want of tenderness of Conscience.

You have heretofore had better Guides, and you have better still: (I never met
with two Ministers that approve his Libell, nor any but Mr. Brown alone) you
have a more peaceable Rule; And if you are Christians indeed, you have a
Peaceable Spirit, and a Savior, who is the Prince of peace (who has prayed
that all his Disciples may be one, John 17. 21.) and a God who is the God of
peace. Follow therefore the Wisdom that is both Pure and Peaceable, and not
that from beneath, which is earthly, sensual and devilish, and works by
envious zeal and strife, unto confusion and every evil work, Jam. 3. 14, 15,
16, 17.

To Mr. EDWARD BAGSHAW.
BROTHER, it is not a little troublesome to me, and will be troublesome to many
peaceable Readers, both that these Writings should pass between us, and that I
should mention your faults so plainly as I do. But as I began not with you, so
I know not how to let you talk on, without betraying the peace of the Church,
the credit of the Non-conformists (who are by your self obliged to disown you)
and the souls of the weak brethren, for whom Christ dyed. And I am constrained
plainly to name your faults; 1. Because truth consists in speaking of things
as they are. 2. And because my business is now to summon you to Repentance, to
which end the opening of your sin is necessary. 3. And because these following
Scriptures are my ground, and your own word seem to me to charge it on me as my
necessary duty, upon dreadful penalties.

The Scriptures that I set before me are Lev. 19. 17. after mentioned, Romans 16,
17. Mark them which cause Divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned and avoid them. Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. But if ye have bitter
envying ( or zeal) and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against
the truth: This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where envying, ( zeal) and strife is, there is confusion and
every evil work, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. and 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. John 17. 21,
22. Romans 14. and 15. John 8. 44. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own; for he is a liar and the Father of it. Rev. 21. 8. All liars shall have
their part, etc. and 22. 15. Whosoever loves and makes a lie. Psalm. 15. 2, 3.
That speaks the truth, in his heart, backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does
evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor. 3 John
9, 10. I wrote unto the Church: but Diotrephes who loves to have the
pre-eminence among them, receives us not: wherefore if I come, I will remember
his deeds which he does, prating against us with malicious words: And not
content therewith, neither does he himself receive the brethren, and forbids
them that would, and casts them out of the Church: Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. I
withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For -- he withdrew and
separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision; and the other
Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away
with their dissimulation. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, etc.
-- Tit. 3. 10, 11. A man that is an Heretic after the first and second
admonition, reject --

Your own doctrine is as follows: page 1. It will be a favor if you look
upon me as one that neither desires, (nor if you believe what your self have
writ) deserves such expressions of your familiarity. Page 2. I hope you are not
to learn, that every untruth is a lie -- Page 11, 12. There being little
difference in the sight of God, between the persecuting of brethren our selves,
and by not sharply reproving it, seeming to approve of it in others. And I hope
you will say as much against approveing your own sin as other men's. Page 14.
All are commanded to turn aside from them -- A Church which after admonition
and discovery of offenders, will not use her authority in casting them out,
does partake of their sins, and becomes as guilty as they, and therein as
unworthy of communion.

I cite Gods word as my Rule of speaking, and yours as that which I may suppose
shows what you expect to hear.

All that I now desire of you is, to bring your self to some impartiality in
reviewing the two Libells which you have written; And if you cannot, yet
condescend to hear the judgment of some understanding impartial persons who
have seriously perused your writings and mine: And hate not repentance, and set
not your self against it, and justify not all the Crimes, false Doctrines, and
eighty untruths, which your two Libells do contain. And beg of God more
Judgment, Humility, Meekness, Considerateness and tenderness of Conscience:
And abuse no longer the souls of weak Christians, with such false Doctrine,
which you defend no better than I have done. I rest

A desirer of your Repentance and Sobriety, Richard Baxter.
M. 4. (Jun.) d. 9. 1671.
A second Admonition to Mr. Edward Bagshaw written in some hope of curing his
IMPENITENCE; or at least of saving some of those in London, Northamptonshire,
and other Counties, whom he has labored to pervert, by FALSE DOCTRINE and
FALSE-REPORTS; which tend to destroy, 1. The Soundness of their Judgments by
dangerous Error, 2. Their Christian Love, and Unity, by Love-killing Principles
and Divisions: 3. And their Christian Practice, by sinful Censures of, and
Separations from the far greatest part of the Universal Visible Church of
Christ, and Communion of Saints, and the public Worship of God; and
consequently to the destruction of their own souls, and of the Churches.
To Mr. Edward Bagshaw.
HAving told you in my first Admonition p. 145. that if you write any more at
the rates you did, I should give you the last word, as not intending to confute
you, etc. I found my self in a straight when I read your second -- about my
duty: Though you trampled admonition under your feet, and turn again and all to
rend me, I ought not to take you for a Swine or Dog, and give you up as wholly
hopeless, till there is no remedy: being under the command, Lev. 19. 17. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor and not suffer sin upon him! And Charity forbids me to desert all
those souls whom you endeavor to seduce, by denying them necessary
information, and silently to suffer them to live in all the sins in which you
would ensnare them. And yet I have been chidden by so many for answering your
last Writing, as containing such palpable scurrility, impertinency and error,
that I am afraid of wasting my time, which I might better employ; and
preferring a lesser matter before a greater: And I expect you should charge me
as a breaker of my promise: But of that you have your self discharged me, it
being conditional [If you write at the rates you did, etc.] and but the
expression of my [Intentions] which I may well alter, when your alteration
calls for it: For though you neither express Repentance, nor Amend the
faults, of which I did admonish you, yet you here attempt such a Plea for
separation, as you did not in your former writing, where you seemed to expect
that your bare assertions should be believed; but now you pretend to more
argumentation: which therefore I shall take into consideration.

But still I perceive the unavoidable streights into which you cast me in the
performance: If I mention your Error and Sin, you will think that I make you
odious, and trample upon your honor, and cause your persecution, and
strengthen your adversaries: And if I silence them all, I shall leave you under
sin, which is worse than persecution, and I shall neglect the souls of others,
and I shall betray the honor of Religion, as if its followers were but such as
you, and as if our Cause were guilty of all the Error and sin which you
maintain. And if you are to be believed if I do not reprove you, I shall but
little differ from you: For you say of another case, page 11, 12. [There being
but little difference in the sight of God, etc.] And what should I do with you,
when you cast me into such a straight?

Why this I take to be my duty 1. Impartially first to consider of all the evil
which you charge upon my self, that I may not be guilty of the sin of the
times, which I am constrained to lament in others, that is, An obstinate Enmity
to Repentance; nor yet unthankfully neglect any help that God shall any way
vouchsafe me, for the discovery of my sin. 2. And then so to acquaint you with
your errors and miscarriages, as may tend, 1. To your repentance; 2. And to
other men's preservation; 3. And to vindicate Religion, and the faithful
afflicted Servants of Christ, against the unjust accusation of those, who would
make the world believe that your Case is theirs, and that their principles and
practices are such as yours. 4. And in all to preserve that just esteem and
love which I owe you, as one that I think yet upright in the main. I love your
zeal for that which you take to be the Truth: I greatly love your Fortitude of
mind, and undaumedness under sufferings, as such; and being so much above the
fear of man: And I think it a thousand pitties that you have not 1. A better
Cause, 2. A humbler mind, and better acquaintance with your self, 3. A sounder
and clearer judgment; 4. More universal Charity; 5. More sense of the
mischiefs of sinful divisions: 6. And especially more Sobriety and Caution, and
less teme^^ty and heedlesness of what you read, and what you write; and more
tenderness of Conscience to avoid untruths; 7. And more impartiality, to see
that evil in your self, and those of your opinion, which you can aggravate in
those by whom you suffer; and 8. Lastly, That you have not less Enmity to
Repentance, and that you take an invitation to Repentance to be a malicious
reproach, and will not understand why God records his servants sins, nor will
consider how much better it is that the reproach of sin, do fall upon us, than
upon our Religion, or the Church of God; and that we our selves confess our
sins, than that our adversaries upbraid us with Impenitent justifying them. And
while you are so notoriously wanting in all these things, the greater noise
your sufferings make, the more injurious you will be to the Truth, and to your
brethren, and the greater hardening to others: And Satan will not only use you
to the corrupting of well-meaning peoples minds, and to the suppression of
Truth, and Love, and Concord, but also to the reproach of suffering it self:
And while you cry out of persecution, you will prove a notable cause of all our
defamations and afflictions, and a great temptation to the actors to justify
what they do.

And now, on these terms, I shall consider of your words, and help you better
to understand your self.

Sect. 1. E. B. It will be a favor if I look on you as one that desires not
any such expressions of familiarity, ( as to be called) Brother.]

Reply. You may suppress your own Charity, but not mine: you may call me what
you please; but I will call you what I think my duty requires me to do: (As
Optatus initio tells the Donatist.) My warrant is ubi supra, Lev. 19. 17. and 1
Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is called a Brother be -- a Railer -- And 2 Thessalonians.
3. 14, 15. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed: yet count him not as an
enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. But it is the Spirit or tendency of your
Doctrine and principles, to renounce fraternity with all of Christ's Church,
that are not liker to your self than I am.

Page 2. You tell me, that I show how much I am for a middle way, neither hot
nor cold, for a luke warm and neutral indifferency.]

Reply. I take your warming in good part: I daily beg of God, that the decays
of my natural spirits and fervor by frigid age and weakness, may not abate the
true fervor of my soul; much less any abatement of the estimation of holy
Truth, the search of which has been the unwearied business, the (almost)
uninterrupted pleasure of my life. And specially that my love to God, and
Heaven, and Holiness may not decay, which alas, was woefully cold, and little at
the best. But I confess to you, that I am for a middle way between fury and
stupidity, pride and baseness, superstition and profaness, the love of Anarchy
and Tyranny, and many such like pernicious extremes.: And you remember me of
the folly of my youthful ignorance, in which I presently suspected any man of
tepidity and carnal indifferency, who wrote for reconciliation of Contenders,
and for a middle Conciliatory way, (such as about Arminianism, Pet. Molinaeus,
Usher, Vossius, Davenant, Hall, Preston, Fenner, Crocius, Martinius, Camero,
etc. and so in other points. O Lord forgive the sins of my ignorant
unexperienced age.

Sect. 2. E B. I hope you are not to learn that every untruth is a lie.

R. E. I suppose your citation of John 1. 62. 2. 21. 1st. False Doctrine.
is mis-printed for 1 John 1. 6. and 2 21. The first of which says -- If we
say that we have no fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do
not the truth. The other says, that [No lie is of the truth.] But do either of
these say, that every untruth is a lie. Is it not enough to hold 1. That every
designed untruth which is positively voluntary is a lie: 2. And that every rash
and carelessly uttered untruth, which is privatively voluntary (that is, where
the will omitteth its Office) is a lie? Sure, brother, these many will be heavy
enough upon you: you need not contend by false doctrine, for any more. And
supposing that you are not to learn how singular you are in this assertion, is
it any sign of your humility, to think that so few Divines before you (who so
little avoid it) did know what a Lie is? If I had called you a wise, a calm, a
sober and charitable man, when I had no evidence of the contrary, how can you
prove that this had been a lie? You tell us anon that Prophets, Nathan, Samuel,
and good men have been mistaken? And did those Prophets lie? You deny not that
your Brother Powel was mistaken? And yet you would not have it said that he
lied? Let this go therefore for your first false doctrine, when you say that
every untruth is a lie.

Sect. 3. E. B: p. 2. You are not afraid to dethrone the Scripture from being a
perfect Rule Par. 1. p. 99. 100, 101.

R. B. Though all untruth be not a lie, 1st. Falsehood (in fact.)
I cannot say, that this is none. I have no such word or sense. I maintain the
Scripture to be a perfect Rule, so far as it is a Rule: But so far as it is no
Rule, it is no perfect Rule. I do there maintain that it is not a particular
Rule, for a Watchmaker, a Carpenter, a Physicion, a Mathematician, a Musicion,
etc. to do their work by: nor what Meter or Tune to sing a Psalm in, and such
like; but only a General Rule for these. And because you charge this on me as
my error, if I can understand you, this is your second false doctrine employed,
Second false Doctrine.
that Scripture is a particular Rule, for the things which I there exclude; And
a third false doctrine employed, that if it were not so, Third false Doctrine.
it were not a perfect Rule. For your words have no sense which I can discern,
if this be not the sense of them [Whosoever denies the Scripture to be a
particular Rule for the things instanced by R. B. p. 99, 100, 101. does
dethrone the Scripture from being a perfect Rule. But so does R. B. Ergo your
Major includes the two forementioned false doctrines.

Sect. 4. E. B. The whole design of your Book was to make your Brethren, that
have not your latitude, and cannot reach the subtilty of your distinctions,
odi^us, etc.

R. B. Here is a former falsehood justified, Second Falsehood.
and doubled or increased; 1. It is false that this was any design of my Book.
2. But that it was [the whole design] what man of Sobriety that ever read it
could imagine. 3. Yea, and that these brethren that I designed to make odious,
were such as have not my latitude and cannot reach the subtilty of my
distinctions.

Sect. 5. E. B. Many hundreds of sober, impartial, and unbyassed persons have
carefully read your Book as well as my self, and they all make the same
judgment of it.

R. B. I will not number this with your bare falsehoods: 1. Crime. A slander of
many hundreds.
Whether many hundreds have told you their judgment of it, who have read it, I
know not: But contradictories cannot be true on both parts. It is a slander
therefore of so many hundred such persons which you utter: For if they were
indeed sober, impartial, unbyassed persons, and carefully read the Book, it is
scarce, or not at all possible, but indeed a contradiction, that they should
judge it [the whole design to make my brethren odious that -- cannot reach the
subtilty of my distinctions.]

Sect. 6. E. B. p. 3. You call separation a crying sin, nay the crying sin: and
you scruple not to insinuate that all the judgments, which in this Nation we
do either feel or fear, were to be charged on separation, as the principal
procuring cause.]

R. B. Here is your third falsehood in matter of fact: 3. Falsehood.
There is not a word in the places (nor any where else in all my Writings, if I
know what I have written) that charge all this on separation, as the
principal procuring cause: But the contrary in the comparison is often and
plainly asserted, and greater Causes often assigned: Nay, that which (without the
comparison) I did charge on separation, was in these words conjunct [Our
uncharitable Divisions, Alienations, and Separations are a crying sin] and not
of separation by it self, or alone.

2. And by your opposition thereto, 2. Crime: Justifying or excusing sin under
Judgments.
you seem plainly to deny the sinfulness of the said [Vncharitable Divisions,
Alienations, and Separations:] Which is a crime of heinous aggravation, to be
committed and impenitently stood in, at that very time, when uncharitable
divisions have broken us so much in pieces, and brought us all so low, and
silenced so many Ministers, and done that which our eyes have seen? O dreadful
obdurateness! that after twenty years such doleful experience, we will not
confess the sinfulness of our divisions? But will suffer, and be silenced, and
ruined, and die, and yet not acknowledge that so unnatural and pernicious a
thing is a sin? When the world rings of it? When we lie weltring in its sad
effects, that yet we are justifying the Cause. Let not any presume to go on in
sin, with a purpose to Repent hereafter, when it is so hard a thing, to make
men that think us unworthy of their communion, to Repent of the very sin which
they suffer by, and that in the very heat and continuance of their sufferings.

Sect. 7. E. B. p. 3. What can make your brethren more odious, and more expose
them to the peoples fury, and to the Rulers Revenge, than thus to make them the
Causes of the Na^ions Calamity?

R. B. 1. And is there not sin among us, 3. Crime Taking a Call to Repentance
for a heinous wrong.
even among us also? And are the sins of such as we, no Causes of our public
calamities? And would you thus leave us all desperate in Impenitency? May not
we Repent? and must we not Repent, if we will be forgiven? When we are freed
from the Condition of the Law of Works, is Repentance become so intolerable
and hard a Condition? If we Repent not, shall we not all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5.
Do Angels rejoice at a sinners Repentance; and shall we take him for their
enemy, that calls them to it? 2. Is not Impenitency a greater Reproach to us,
in the eyes of those by whom we suffer, than our Repentance would be? And does
it not exasparate them to see men justify unquestionable sin? 3. What if God
Record even good men's sins, and tell a David what evil they should bring upon
his house? and what a plague his numbering the people brought on his Kingdom;
and so of others? Does he hereby expose them to be odious? No, but by
Repentance, would make them amiable. 4. Is not sin odious wherever it is
found? And God is no respecter of persons? Must we not loath our selves for it?
It is he that sins, that makes himself odious; and he that calls him to
Repentance, would take away his odiousness (Though the sin of a penitent
Manasseh may cause the Captivity.) And he that justifies it, and fathereth it
on Christ, and the Spirit, and Religion, would make Christ, and the Spirit, and
Religion, and the Church odious, lest he should be known to be so himself. 5.
And do not most good Ministers and people publicly confess to God, that our
own sins have been the Causes of our Calamities? Read Mr. Pool's Vox clamantis,
and Mr. Stukeley's Book, and judge accordingly of others? And do you think that
they thereby expose good people to the Magistrates hatred or revenge? Or dare
you charge them with hypocrisy, as if they spoke not as they thought? Alas
man, what days of Humiliation do you use to keep, for the sins and miseries of
the Land? Do you only confess your adversaries sins? How easily can some men
Repent, if it were other men's only that they were to Repent of, (if the
confessing of such might be called Repenting.) Adeo familiare est omnia sibi
remittere, nihil aliis, inquit Patercul.

Sect. 8. E. B. p. 3. If in separating -- our sin is so great, that the place
where we live cannot be held innocent, but must suffer from the hand of God for
our sakes, we are certainly a people who deserve to be hated of all, and the
Confiscations, Imprisonments and Deaths, which some of us have already felt,
are no longer to be bewailed and grieved for as persecutions of the innocent,
but rather to be rejoiced and gloried in as due punishments --

R. B. Such stuff may go down with those that will swallow all that seems to
lift them up. But 1. It was not separation from forms of Worship only or
chiefly that I spoke of. 2. None of us are absolutely Innocent, but only
comparatively, and secundum quid. 3. Here are two false Doctrines more employed.
4th. False Doctrine.
The first is, that they that so sin as is here described, deserve to be hated
of all: For though secundum quid so far as we are sinners we are loathsome, and
deserve to be hated, yet the same person being in Christ and pardoned, and
having the Spirit and Image of God, is amiable: And therefore the Phrase must
follow that which is predominant in them: And according either to fitness or
custom of Speech, you cannot without falsehood say, that they deserve to be
hated of all; whom all are commanded specially to Love. Did David deserve to be
hated of all, because his numbering the people brought the plague? Yea, or Aaron
that made the Golden Calf? Do you consider what you write? How that thus you
make all or most, or very many of Gods Servants, such as deserve to be hated of
all? For how few are they who do not so sin, as that [the place where they live
cannot be held innocent, but must suffer from the hand of God for their sakes.]
For Chastisements are threatened to them, and to the societies that they defile?
And they are chastned of God, that they may not be condemned with the world.
And how few can say, the place where I live is not the less innocent for me,
nor suffers ever the more for me?

2. And it is false doctrine that Imprisonments and Death are due to all such:
5th. False Doctrine.
What kind of Politics would you write? Must every man be imprisoned and put
to death (who makes the place not innocent where he lives, and has a hand in
bringing down judgments on the Land? God afflicts for what sin he please:
But Judges must not Hang men, for all that God afflicts the Land for. But,
alas, that you should reason for Impenitency!

Sect. 9. E. B. p. 3. [Your next attempt is to free your self from being looked
upon as an earnest and active instrument in the late Wars.] 4th. Visible
Falsehood.


R. B. This is another visible falsehood in matter of fact: Alas Brother, that
you should no more heed what you read or write? The question that I spoke to
was only [Whether I was as guilty in stirring up and fomenting that War as any
one whatsoever?] And is this comparative question any kin to that which you now
falsely father on me?

Sect. 10. E. B. p. 4. 5th. Visible Falsehood.
I must confess your bold and resolute disclaiming any Activeness in that War,
did so much stagger me --

R. B. This is yet more than the former: Alas, have you cast off all heed what
you say, and all common modesty in your reports? Where did I ever deny any
Activeness? I argued thus: [He that never meddled with the War till long after
it was raised; that never shot, struck or hurt any man; that never was Officer
or Common-Soldier, that never took Commission to be Chaplain of the Garrison
where two years of the War I did continue, but preached a Lecture to them
without any Commission; that never went into the Field Army, till after Naisby
Fight, and then went thither by the solemn Advice of an Assembly of Divines,
(many yet living) twice assembled, and that upon an open profession to the
Committee, that my Reason and Business was in the apprehension of our Common
danger from the Army, to discharge my own Conscience in dissuading as many of
the Soldiers as I could, from overturning the Government of the State and
Church, which I was fully satisfied they intended, and that spent his time
among them under their displeasure in such work; I say, that he that did thus,
was not so guilty of stirring up, and fomenting the War, as were those that
first raised it, and those that were Generals, Commanders or Soldiers, and as
those that preached for it to the Parliament, or as those that went on in the
many following Wars to the end. And is there any thing in all this, that says,
I was no way Active in it? My Activity was principally in the City of Coventry,
which never saw an Enemy while I was there: And it was in telling my opinion to
others; and twice going out with their Soldiers to the Siege of neighbor
Garrisons; The rest I intimated to you before. And this is it that I meant in
the words of the Book which you recite. I asked you, whether the Parliament, nor
the chief Speakers in it, nor the Earl of Essex, nor Cromwell did no more? with
more to that purpose, which you give no answer to; but defend your falsehood
with the addition of more such -- falsehoods, as if your design in writing, were
practically to tell men, to what boldness in sinning man's vitiated nature will
proceed, if it be not seasonably restrained. Yea, as if you had quite forgotten
what you were to prove, you say,

Sect. 11. E. B. p. 4. 4th Crime. Impudent Calumny.
[Nor do I delight to expose you to the scorn of your enemies, and to the pity
of your friends, but I cannot help it.]

R. B. Reader, because I have met with so strange a Judge, I freely appeal to
thee, if thou be but sober, who it is that by this man's Writings, is here
exposed to scorn and pity? Whether I that so fully disproved his Calumny [that
I was as guilty of stirring up and fomenting the War as any whatsoever,] as
that he has not a word of sense to say in confirmation of it; or he, that with
such strange audaciousness adds such falsehoods as have not one syllable in
all my Writings to countenance them, and takes up another charge against me,
that I boldly and resolutely disclaim any Activity, etc.] Did he trust that his
Readers would so far believe him, as rather to venture upon the scorn and pity
which he would move them to, than once to examine my Book, whether I wrote such
a word or not? I confess too many of his own Spirit are like to do so; and to
believe what such a man as this reports, and think that he cannot be so
impudent, as thus insultingly to say, that I say thus and thus, when I never
wrote or spoke such a word. But what if he attain this end, and be believed?
Will it add to his innocence or felicity to have his many hundreds live in the
sin of lying and calumny, and have no excuse for it, but Mr. E. B. confidently
wrote it. Its a wonder that corrupted nature should be so eager to have
companions in sin, when it does but tend to its own confusion?

Sect. 12. E. B. p. 4. You -- will not be beholding to an Act of Indemnity,
but stand upon your Innocence?

R. B. These are two more gross falsehoods in matter of fact: 6th and 7th
falsehoods.
1. I am and will be beholden to the Act of Indemnity, and write all this as
under the protection of that Act. 2. I did not, I do not stand upon my
Innocence, nor speak a word of such importance.

Sect. 13. E. B. Nothing but your hopes that all is forgotten as well as
pardoned, 8th Falsehood.
which is past, could ever embolden you to so peremptory denial.

R. B. This is another gross falsehood: 1. It is spoken of my heart, which he
knows not. 2. It is twice contradicted by his own Pen. 1. He even now said,
that I will not be beholden to an Act of Indemnity, and yet now he makes the
hope of Pardon received to embolden me. 2. He rebukes me for the less
seasonable Retractation, of that which now he says, not only that I hoped it
was forgotten, but that nothing but that hope could embolden me, etc. Why did I
Retract that which I thought forgotten? Could I think that Book forgotten which
remains visible? which so many Books accuse me of? and one which he
mentions and wrote against himself? and which so many have publicly preached
against, both formerly and of late? Could I think that part of my life
forgotten, which all in the City of Coventry, who thirty years ago were at
years of discretion, may remember?

Sect. 14. E. B. p. 4. You -- ask me many malicious and ensnaring questions.
9th Falsehood.


R. B. That Is another Falsehood: They were not malicious: And another crime, to
take him for malicious, who calls sinners to necessary repentance, in a time
of Judgments, with words of love.

Sect. 15. E. B. In your Writings you do highly approve of that which was the
worst part of the change, the setting up of Cromwell to he Protector?

R. B. This also is notoriously false, 10th Notorious Falsehood and a Calumny.
as my Writings which have no such word, and as those that I converst with
know. Indeed Oliver Cromwells first Troop did under their Officers hands invite
me to be their Pastor, which I refused as dissenting from the way into which I
saw them entering, and not willing to leave my peaceable habitation at Coventry,
where I had the society of very many worthy Ministers, and leisure for my
Studies, and was out of the heats of War: And after he expostulated with me
himself for refusing his desires: But the very first hour that I went to his
Army, which was after Naseby fight, he having notice of my words and
intentions, from a friend of his of the Coventry Committee, I was entertained
by the jeers of his most intimate friends, as one that came forsooth to Reclaim
the Army, and save the Kingdom, etc. And in a year and halfs time while I
stayed among them, he would never once speak to me; nor was I ever at his
Quarters, but kept at a distance as one of their adversaries, and those that I
had interest in were discountenanced for my sake. And had not a sudden bleeding
brought me very near to death, and separated me from the Army, about the very
day that they had their first open Consultation, for the following Treasonable
Changes which they made, I had hazarded my life upon their displeasure, in the
contradicting them, and drawing off as many from them as I could, at the time
when many did desert them: For by the advice of a second meeting of the
Ministers at Coventry, I stayed with them for that very end, when I had
peaceable opportunity to have returned to my former auditors; And I did openly
and boldly from that day until Cromwells death, declare to those that I
converst with, that I took him and his Army to be guilty of most perfidious
Treason and Rebeilion, and himself for an unquestionable Usurper. And I never
spoke one word to the contrary. And being once before his death (being at
London) invited to speak with him, I expostulated with him, by what Right our
Government was changed, and how he could prove that all the people of England
had lost their own Right to their ancient Government, and labored to convince
him that this change of his, and Instrument of Government (which you charge me
to approve) was an unjust depriving the Kingdom of their ancient and never
forfeited right; till I made him so angry, that it was time to say no more. But
let us hear the proof of your accusation.

Sect. 16. E. B. p. 5. You -- hugg and embrace the Traitor. 11th and 12th
Falsehood and Calumny.
For you greatly commend that absurd tool, The humble Petition and Advice which
was Cromwells Instruments of Government; And you say of it, A more excellent
Law has not been made, for the happiness of England concerning Parliaments, at
least since the Reformation.]

R. B. Here is no proof at all of your false accusation, but the addition of
two more falsehoods, one expressed, and the other intimated. 1. That I hugged and
embraced the Traitor. Let the Reader judge by what I have truly said. 2. That I
greatly commend the Instrument of Government, as making the change and setting
up of Cromwell to be Protector, when you could not easily choose but know, that
he that will but open my Book where the words are which you cite, may presently
perceive your fraud and falsehood, and that I say not a word to commend or
approve of that Instrument as such, or as making the change, or as setting up
Cromwell, or a Protector, but only for this one thing, that it excluded
Atheists, Blasphemers, Anti-Scripturists, Cursers, Swearers, Drunkards, Denyers
of Sacraments, Prayer, Magistracy and Ministry, etc. from being Parliament men.
And is not this fallacy a dicto secundum quod ad dictum simpliciter, a
notorious cheat, and falsehood? Is this to approve the setting up of Cromwell to
be Protector? Do you think by such a rate of Reasoning as this is, to be
accounted a wise and faithful Teacher?

Sect. 17. E. B. And of Cromwell himself (though he dyed in his sinful
Usurpation, 5th Crime, Calumniating insinuation.
without manifesting any Repentance) you give this Saint-like Character in your
Preface to the Army, The late Protector did prudently, etc.

R. B. 1. In that very Preface against the Army, this man might see such words
as these, reprehending the Armies rebellions and changes [The fabrication of an
Instrument of Laws without a Parliament, and many other actions of these times,
we doubt not but you will ere long repent of] ( having instanced in their other
changes before) and many Texts cited to them, in which their actions are
condemned as heinous crimes. And [The best Governors in all the world that
have the Supremacy, have been resisted or deposed in England] ( It was not then
safe or necessary to Name all.) And [A Heathen persecuting Nero must be obeyed,
not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.] And among the changes which I
reprehended, are -- [Next this we had the Minor part of the House of Commons in
the exercise of Sovereign Power, the Corrupt Majority, as you call them, being
left out: And by them we had the Government changed, Regality (It was then
death to say, The King) and House of Lords being cast off. My word to the Army
heretofore.
Next this we had nothing visible but a General and an Army: Next this we had
all the whole Constitution and Liberties of the Commonwealth at once subverted;
Certain men being called by the Name of a Parliament, and the Sovereign power
pretended to be given them, that never were chosen by the people, but by we
know not whom, (such a fact as I never heard or read, that any King of England
was guilty of, since Parliaments were known.) Next this we had a Protector
governing according to an Instrument made by -- God knows who. After this we
had a Protector governing according to the Humble Petition and Advice, (and
sworn to both): And now we are wheeled about again.]

Reader, did this man read all this, and all the rest that in that Book,
especially the Preface and Conclusion, I then wrote (in the bitterness of my
soul) against the Army? and did he believe himself, or could he possibly
believe himself, that I approved of the setting up of Cromwell to be Protector?
If he do really believe himself, How unfit a man is this (who understands not
humane language) to be the great refiner of the Church, and to pretend to be
wiser than the Old Non-conformists, etc. -- If he do not believe himself, how
unfit is he to separate from us for our sinfulness, or to be believed by the
people whom he seduceth.

2. The words which he cites, are only in a Parenthesis, concerning which take
this true information. 1. Men used to distinguish between a Tyrant quoad jus,
and a Tyrant quoad exercitium: And I ordinarily declared Cromwell a Tyrant
quoad jus, that is, an Usurper. 2. I never thought it laudable to belie any man
whomsoever, nor to make his actions worse than they are. I did not dislike any
good, because Cromwell did it: I will not renounce God, or Christ, or Piety,
because that Cromwell professedly owned them. All that was good in him, was not
made bad (as to the nature of the thing) because he did it. I never censured
Sulpitius Severus, Beda, or any other Historians, for extolling the Christian
Piety of Maximus, while they call him a Tyrant, as to Title. I will not fall
out with God, or Scripture, or Honesty, because that Cromwell did speak well of
them all. 3. Note, that I spoke only of his Exercise of Government, and not of
his Right, which I still declared to be Null. -- 4. And I instanced what his
Prudence was, (before) [His prudent shunning of Engagements,] that he put not
upon us any Oaths or Promises of Allegiance to himself; For he knew that we
would refuse them, and thereby disturb his peace. It is known unquestionably
that Cromwell did many things that were (in their nature) very laudable. 5. And
I mentioned this (not as a praise of him, but) as a Conviction of the
Rebellious Army, who thought they might take down all Government, to set up
themselves, whom they could easilier believe to be good and godly, than any
others: And whereas they pretended, that it was for ungodliness, that they
pulled down their Superiors, I showed them, that if they could not believe
that the King was godly, nor the Parliament godly, nor the Minor part of the
Parliament (called the Rump) godly, nor their Little Mock-Parliament godly, yet
they should not have so accused Cromwell, whom they cried up, and set him up
themselves, and magnified so highly as they did. 6. And I meant this
Commendation of some of his actions, as comparative only, and better than
theirs that pulled down that which themselves set up. 7. And yet, I thank you
for calling me to review those words, and do hereby declare, that I do take
them to be unmeet (as spoken to the Army that then had greatly provoked me to
grief) and that I unfeignedly Repent of them; that you may see I love not
Impenitence in my self, any more than in you: And I wish that they had not been
written, being so liable to ill effects; and it being unmeet too much to praise
even the good that a Usurper does, lest it take off the odium of his Usurpation.

Sect. 18. E. B. Sir could you say all this of him then, 13th and 14th falsehood.
and do you think your partial friends can justify you now, when you compare
him to the Tyrant Maximus, and make him in effect to be nothing else, but a
Murderous and a bloody Usurper?

R. B. Here is two Falsehoods, one expressed, and the other employed. 1. That
expressed is, that I make him in effect to be nothing else but a Murderous,
etc. when I never denied any thing that was good in him; but have publicly,
and in Print warned our Lawful Governors, that they tempt not the people to
dislike them, by undoing any good which he did. 2. The employed falsehood, that I
speak worse of him now, than I did heretofore. Whereas the truth is, that I
spoke in the time of his own Usurpation I am confident twenty times against
him, for once that I have spoken since his death: Not that I changed my opinion
of him; but that it is so cross to humane nature, to insult over even
malefactors in their sufferings, especially when we suffer with them (though by
them) and when their adversaries need no instigation, that I have not been able
to judge it my duty, to speak of that very evil, which I and others suffer by:
But have been hardly put to it these eleven years, between the thoughts of open
disowning those sins of self-exalting Usurpers that have confounded us, and a
lothness to increase the sufferings of those that are underfoot. And this last
prevailing, I have greatly by it displeased my Superiors: And yet lest I
should harden men in impenitency, having gently mentioned these Crimes, it
displeases such as are most obliged to repent. And how strangely does this man
despise his Readers, while he again makes it such a thing in me, 6th Rash
Calumny.
to compare Cromwell to Maximus, whom still he loadeth with odious Titles? When
in my first Book I told him, p. 374. that Maximus by the Bishops was accounted
a very religious Christian, and pretended that the Soldiers in England made
him Emperor against his will, and took part with the Orthodox, and greatly
honored the Bishops, and promoted Religion, and got a great deal of love and
honor: And in my Defense I told him, that Maximus is by Historians made so
good a man, of himself, that I more feared lest many would have made me a
praiser of Cromwell by the comparison. And I cited p. 142. the words of
Sulpitius Severus of him, Vir omni vitae merito praedicandus, si ei diadema non
legitime, tumultuante milite impositum, repudiare, vel armis civilibus
abstinere licuisset, etc. And the words of Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 9.
Maximus vir strenuus and probus atque Augusto dignus nisi contra fidem per
tyrannidem emersisset, etc. Invitus propemodum ab exercitis creatus Imperator,
etc. But all this is not worthy the observation of this temerarious man, who
still puts this among my unbecoming usage of Cromwell, when if he had weighed
what I wrote, I should have rather expected that he would have accused me again
for overpraising him.

Sect. 19. E. B. As for your flattery to his Son, 15th Falsehood.
which I also charged you with, and you (with a strange, but not to your self
unusual boldness) do deny, etc.

R. B. I gave a full answer to this, which no reply is given to: As if you were
resolved to say what your list, and hear nothing that is said against it. As I
told you that I never saw him, nor ever had to do with him, save that when I
saw him take part against the turbulent sort of men, I took it to be seasonable
by that Dedication to persuade him to do good and not hurt. So I told you, that
your words of [Dedicating a flattering Book to him] in common sense do
distinguish between the Book and the Dedication: Whether the Dedication were
flattery, I left to the Reader of it to judge, and neither affirmed, nor denied
it: But only affirmed [that there is not one syllable of his Son in all the
Books, but only in the Dedications.] Yet this man goes on, and falsely charge
me to deny that which I denied not, and recites my words in the Dedication to
prove that the Book as distinct from the Dedication was flattery.

Sect. 20. E. B. Deny if you can the consequence, 7th Self-condemning calumny.
that it became not you to blame the effects, who gave such rise and
encouragement to the Cause: I mean, unless you repent of the Cause; which it is
evident you have not yet done: And if I may not be believed in this opinion of
you, I doubt not but the Bishop of Worcester will; who for this very thing did
formerly accuse you of rebellion: From which charge, he that defended you then,
leaves you to acquit your self now as well as you can.

R. B. 1. Your [I mean, unless you repent] were none of your former words: When
you say one thing, you think to solve and avoid the charge of falsehood, by
saying that you Meant another. 2. What you say is evident, must needs be a
Calumny in you, 1. Because you have no Evidence of the Negative being about my
heart, which is to you unknown. 2. Because your self did before twit me with
Retraction, etc. 3. And did you believe your self that the Bishop of Worcesters
words so many years ago, are a proof that I repent not now? 4. And are you yet
insensible of your own partiality; that then you blamed that in the Bishop
which now you can freely do your self? Let your followers mark what Spirit you
are of, if you are resolved not to know your self? Do you not see now that the
man who took it for so great a crime in the Bishop, can speak himself, 1.
Against the same man, 2. With the same accusation, 3. In the same manner. And
is the same thing bad in the Bishop, and good in you? The matter is, it seems
now to be your concernment to speak it: Its like you would then have separated
from the Bishop for it: And yet now it is no fault in you? O what a blinding
thing is selfish partiality? And what reason has any man to doubt, but if it
were in your power, you would silence me as much as any Bishop would? And will
you not yet see that which you are so angry with me for telling you; viz. How
much of the very same Spirit is in Church-dividers, with that which they most
condemn in others: Why then do you not separate from your selves?

5. But, though you may think its like that you have me here in your snares, I
shall make this benefit of it, that you may see I am not so great an enemy to
Repenting, as you declare your self to be.

I do hereby freely profess, that I Repent 1. Of all that ever I thought, said,
wrote, or did since I was born, against the Peace of Church or State; Against
the King, his Person, or Authority, as Supreme in himself, or as Derivative in
any of his Officers, Magistrates, or any Commissioned by him.

2. That I Repent that I no more discouraged the Spirit of pievish quarrelling
with Superiors and Church-orders, and (though I ever disliked and opposed it,
yet) that I sometimes did too much encourage such, as were of this temper, by
speaking too sharply against those things which I thought to be
Church-corruptions; and was too loath to displease the contentious, for fear of
being incapable of doing them good (knowing the profane to be much worse than
they) and meeting with too few Religious persons, that were not too much
pleased with such invectives.

3. And I do Repent that I had not more impartially and diligently consulted
with the best Lawyers that were against the Parliaments Cause (For I knew of no
Controversy in Divinity about it, but in Politics and Law;) and that I did
not use all possible means of full acquaintance with the Case. And that for a
little while the Authority of such Writers as Mr. Rich. Hooker lib. 1. Eccles.
Polit. and Bishop Bilson, and other Episcopal Divines did too much sway my
judgment toward the Principles of Popular Power; And seeing the Parliament,
Episcopal, and Erastian, and not hearing when the Wars began of two
Presbyterians among them all, nor among all their Lord Lieutenants, Generals,
Major Generals, or Colonells, till long after, I was the easilyer drawn to
think that Hookers Political Principles had been commonly received by all;
which I discerned soon after upon stricter enquiry, to be unsound, and have my
self written a Confutation of them, ready for the Press many years ago.

4. And all the rest of my sin in this business, which I know not of
particularly, I do Implicitly and Generally Repent of; and daily beg of God (as
I have done these twenty four years and more) to give me a particular
Conviction of them, and not to suffer me to live or dye in any impenitence, but
so far to acquaint me with all my great and public sins, that I may openly
confess them, and give others warning to avoid the like. This is the
Repentance, which upon your invitation I profess.

If you quarrel with it as not instancing in particulars enough, I answer you,
that as in the Revocation of the Book which you accuse, I thought it best to
Revoke the whole, (though not as Retracting all the doctrine of it,) because if
I had named the particular passages, some would have said I had mentioned too
few, and some too many, and few would have been satisfied; so is it in the
present Case.

6. As to your Defense of me heretofore, 1. You know I never desired it of you,
nor gave you thanks for it. For though you took my part, you understood not my
Cause, and therefore in the main deserted it. 2. I am not at all ambitious of
such an Advocate, 1. Whose Defense was then judged by all that I heard speak of
it, to be commendable only for boldness, and a handsome Epistolary Style,
having little of Judgment or argumentative strength: 2. Whose errors and
faults will disgrace the Cause which he defends: 3. Who can blow hot and
cold, and when his passion and erroneous interest requires it, can change
hands, and take up his adversaries work, and do the same thing in the main,
which he accused. Threaten me not with so desirable a desertion.

As for the following insultations on supposition of the sufficiency of your
snare, you see now that it is to glory in your shame.

Sect. 21. E. B. Your mentioning with so much scorn the doctrine of the
temporal Reign of Christ, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th visible falsehoods.
which you in derision call the fifth Monarchy way, and your endeavor to
expose all that you think favor that opinion, is another evidence that you
dare not look any truth in the face, which brings present danger with it: no
though formerly you were as earnest and open an asserter of it as any --

R. B. I see but five express falsehoods in matter of fact in these few words:
1. One is, that it is Christ's Temporal Reign, which I call the fifth Monarchy
way; when as I have no such words, nor meaning, but do my self believe Christ's
Temporal Reign, even that now he is Head over all things to his Church, Ephesians.
1. 21, 22. and that all Power in Heaven and Earth is given him, Mat. 28. 19.
and all things are delivered into his hands, John 1^. 3. and 17. 2. that he
has power given him over all flesh; and that to this end he dyed, rose and
revived, that he might be Lord of the dead and living: Romans 14. 9. and that he
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But whether he will Reign a thousand years
in corporal visible presence on earth, I am not wise enough to know: But I am
afraid of those opinions which draw down men's minds from looking for a treasure
and reward in Heaven, and tempt them to expect great things on Earth. But in
this Age custom has taught men to distinguish between those called Fifth
Monarchy men, and mere Millenaries. And by the former name, I mean such as they
that assumed that name have been, whom I will not describe, lest I seem to
imitate you, or offend you more than needs.

2. The second falsehood is, that I mention the Doctrine of Christ's Temporal
Reign with scorn and derision; when I only mentioned the way by which many of
my acquaintance came to hold it, and the arguments which they used to defend
it, with pity and dissent, but not with scorn or derision; much less that
doctrine which he names.

3. The third falsehood is, that I endeavor to expose all that I think favor
that opinion; when as some of my most intimate and honored friends favor the
Millenary Opinion: and I know how commonly it was owned by many of the
Ancients, and who does not honor the name of Mr. Jos. Mead, Dr. Twisse, Mr.
Baily, Mr. Porter, etc. that did more than favor it? And when did I ever
endeavor to expose such men? (its like you mean, unto scorn, or some evil.)

4. The fourth and notorious falsehood is, that I dare not look any truth in the
face, that brings present danger with it: when himself says, that I am in the
same condemnation with them; which has more truth in it in a full sense, than
I will here open, lest I seem to dishnour my Governors. And though I confess
that my Imprisonment was not so long and sharp as his, yet he can scarce be so
ignorant as to imagine, that he loses by his judgment, so much as I do by
mine, quoad lucrum cessans, and damnum emergens. But his own Pen does publish
him temerariously false: while he publishes me to have been formerly as
earnest and open an asserter as any of this Opinion; and does not cite one
syllable whereby I ever did revoke it: And I here as openly declare to him and
all the world, that I am still of the same mind that I was in that point, and I
am still ready to express my mind in the same words of mine which he recites.
And while I openly own the same words which he accounts so dangerous, and
pretends that they assert as much as any; judge whether he be a man to be
believed, that says I dare not look that truth in the face, which I openly
own, or any other that brings present danger.

5. The next notorious falsehood is, that formerly I was as earnest an asserter
of it as any; that is, of the Fifth Monarchy way. As any? Have I written for
the Millenary Opinion, as earnestly and openly as Mr. Mead has done? Have I --
I will pass over late practices. Nay did I ever write or speak one word for it?
But you shall presently see how he confuteth himself. But before I leave this,
I must name two or three employed falsehoods in these words, besides the five
expressed.

6. The one is, 21st Falsehood employed.
that the Doctrine of the Temporal Reign of Christ, brings present danger: when
as all Christians that I know of, do believe or hold his Temporal Reign: And as
for his Personai Corporal Visible Reign, I never heard of any Law against any
that held it, nor any danger that any man incurred, much less any suffering for
holding it. I am persuaded, if Christ came personally and visibly to demand it,
the King himself would yield up his Crown to him. But I must confess to you,
that if any man will call himself a believer of the Fifth M^narchy, and
thereupon will either deny the Authority of Rulers that are bad, (even if they
were Infidels or Persecutors) or that they judge bad, or will deny to swear
Allegiance to the King, or will maintain that good men may seize upon the
Government because they are good (or think themselves so) and that because the
Saints shall judge the world, therefore they may depose bad Governors, and
take their places, and set up themselves under pretense of setting up Christ; I
deny not but such as these may be in danger: And I am none of them that will
own such opinions* as knowing them to be no truths, but pernicious errors.

7. The other employed falsehood is, 22d. Falsehood employed.
that I have changed my opinion, or the profession of it in this point in
question.

Sect. 22. E. B. [(...) not many years ago you told us, 8 Self confutation and
Calumny.
that you were perfectly neutral, as to the point of Christ's visible and
personal Reign upon earth, and you did not know which way your judgment did
most incline. But the Theocratical Policy, or Divine Commonwealth (which is
the unquestionable Reign of Christ upon Earth) this, all Christians are agreed
may justly be sought, and the temporal dignity of the Saints which would
undoubtedly much bless the world.]

R. B. 1. You misprint [the temporal] for [that temporal,] and so turn the
predicate into the subject. 2. For [as merely neutral as in almost any point of
so great moment, etc.] you put [perfectly neutral.] 3. For [I scarce can
perceive which way, etc.] you put [you did not know.] Yet I number not these
with your falsehoods, but show you, that you are so habituated to Rashness, that
you seldom seem to heed what you report.

2. And can you wink so hard, 23d Falsehood.
as not to see how here you openly declare your falsehood? Do you prove me as
earnest and open an ^ss^rter as any, by citing words in which I profess to be
ignorant, neutral and uncertain? Will your followers still believe such an open
self-contradicting false accuser? Is Neutrality and Uncertainty the most
earnest and open asserting of a doctrine? If you say that you meant it of
Theocracy; I answer, review your words; you speak of Christ's Temporal Reign,
and of the Fifth Monarchy way, and say [as earnest and open as any.] Was Mr.
Mead, and Dr. Twisse but Neutral? Was Mr. Archer but Neutral?

3. I still approve of all the words of mine which you recite? What mean you
then to tell me of a change?

4. And is it like that I take that to be dangerous, which I say that [all
Christians are agreed of.]

5. And do you not grossly wrong those Rulers, from whom you think any danger or
hurt will come to us for such doctrine as this? Who is there that will deny
that A holy and Righteous Government in the hands of holy and righteous men,
would be a blessing to the world? and is to be vehemently desired, and sought
by just and lawful means? Will any Christian charge this doctrine to be
erroneous? When it is much of the sense of the three first and greatest
Petitions in the Lords prayer? and when all Christians know, that Tyranny,
Ignorance, and Ungodliness are the three constituting materials of the Devils
Kingdom in the world, and that Tyranny is the grand maintainer of Ignorance and
Ungodliness, while the Heathen, and Infidel, and Popish Princes of the Earth,
do keep away the clear and powerful preaching and publication of the truth; and
Turks, Persians, Indians, and other Mahometans, and all the Heathens, do
maintain Deceivers, and cast out the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Sect. 23. E. B. p. 7. Sir I have been very curious to enquire into the
doctrine of the Fifth Monarchy, 24th Self-d^clared falsehood.
and most of my Converse is with those that do in Faith expect, and in Patience
wait for such a time; and I never knew any of them, (however they are
misrepresented) carry the notion further than you have already done.

R. B. 1. And are you a man then that is fit to make such a stir to divide the
Churches, and to account your self wiser than all the Old Non-conformists in
those matters, when all your curious Enquiry into an open matter of fact (what
so many persons hold) could do no more to save you from mistaking it? If you
never read what lrenaeus, Lactantius and others of old held? If you never read
what is written by Mr. Mead, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Archer, etc. Did you never read
any Pamphlets within these thirty years that say more? Did you, that converse
so much among such, never hear, what I that so seldom converse with them have
heard so often, and seen offered me in Writings, that I might have procured the
Printing of them? Do you believe that none of the Levellers, or those whom
Oliver Cromwell suppressed under the name of Fifth Monarchy men, held no more?
Did Venner and his company think you hold no more?

2. But so strange is your forgetfulness or your self-contradicting faculty,
that you need none to tell your Readers that you write untruths, but your self.
Do you take no notice, that all that is my words is, that such a Holy and
Righteous Government is desirable, and may justly be sought as all Christians
agree: But your profession is that [most of your converse is with those that do
in faith expect it. And could you see no difference between seeking it, and in
faith expecting it? I desire the conversion and salvation of all the men I
know, and I seek it of God in prayer, and of as many of them, as I have fit
opportunity, (or ought so to do at least;) I desire the Conversion of all the
Kingdoms, and people of the world; but whether I may in faith expect it, I am
so ignorant that I cannot tell. I desire and seek by prayer of God, that all
the world may have holy and just Governors: but I cannot boast of so much
faith or hope in this, as those that you converse with. As proud as I am, I
freely confess my Ignorance to you. But certainly they that take it for an
Article of their faith, do carry the Notion further than I can do, who profess
that I am ignorant of it, whether it be a promised thing, or not?

Sect. 24. E. B. p. 7. -- [Because you dare not own any hazardous and
persecuted truth; 24th Falsehood, and a calumny repeated.
and you find it far easier in your Notional Divinity to recant all that
formerly you were convinced of, than to bring your heart to a willingness for
Martyrdom.]

R. B. 1. You spoke of danger before; you now add Persecution and Martyrdom,
intimating that this is such a persecuted point; which as far as ever I heard
(who live in the same Land, and have as hard thoughts of persecution as many
others have) there is not any thing true in your intimation. Name the Law that
is against the Opinion of the desirableness of a holy Government of all the
world? Name the person that ever suffered for that Opinion? Though those that
will resist or pull down Governors, because they take them (justly or
unjustly) to be ungodly, may suffer for it. Again therefore to imply danger of
Martyrdom, for that which no man (that ever I heard of) suffered for, and to
feign the avoiding of that danger, to be the Chief Cause of my recanting or
changing my mind or words, which I never recanted or changed, is a monstrous
course of fiction and temerity.

2. Your talk of Recanting all that formerly I was convinced of] implies more
temerity and falsehood. Any man of humane modesty would have thought [All] too
bigg a word, when the instances produced by him prove nothing. If you refer to
the Revocation of my Book, you should have opened your eyes, and seen that I
profess not to Recant all the doctrine of it, though I revoke all the Book, and
wish men to take it as non-scriptum: And sure that passage had no peculiar
recantation.

3. But if Recantation be so easy to me, remember that I pretend not to
Infallibility, nor am altogether unwilling to Repent. As for Martyrdom, I take
it to be every Christians duty, yea, necessary to salvation, to prepare for it;
that is, to deny his life, and to forsake all in true resolution, for the sake
of Christ, and hopes of Heaven: But how far my heart is brought to a
willingness of it, though I am sure you know not, and therefore venture to
speak what you know not: yet I have no reason to boast, nor to be
self-consident, nor to be high-minded, but to fear.

Sect. 25. E. B. And this alone, 25th and 26th Falsehoods.
I take to be the true cause, why so weakly, and so unlike a Minister of the
Gospel you inveigh against sufferings. For you have never yet experienced
either the comfort or the cleansing of them, and therefore venture rashly to
speak evil of what you know not; and which I fear you have neither courage nor
affection to venture the tyral of: I speak it to your shame.

R. B. 1. Thus sin uses like a River to run on, the longer the greater!
Wonderful! that you can believe the people that fear God to be so sottishly
credulous of all the falsehoods that you shall tell them, as not so much as to
open the Book which you accuse, and to see that you deceive them. If you will
prove that true which you say, it must be by this argumentation: He that
tells men that sufferings have their temptations as well as prosperity, and
warns men to fear and avoid those temptations, does weakly and unlike a
Minister of the Gospel inveigh against sufferings: But so does R. B. Ergo --

But the Major is false, and therefore insufficient to support your false
Conclusion. Let the Reader but peruse my words, and if he find one syllable of
inveighing against sufferings, let him believe you the next time, and take you
for a man that has not quite forfeited his credit.

2. And what friendship to sin, 9th Crime, rejecting and slandering readful
warning.
and continued enmity to vigilance and repentance do you express, when you were
told an unquestionable truth, and but warned of an unquestionable danger and
duty, to reject all so senslesly, and that with such false retortions. Tell
your followers, 1. Is it false or true, that sufferings have their temptations
as well as Prosperity; and in particular to drive us into uncharitableness and
extremes from them that we suffer by? 2. Are not you and others that suffer in
danger of such temptations, and sin in sufferings? 3. Should not such
temptation and sin be carefully watched against? Is there any falsehood in all
this? 4. And is he fit to glory in the cleansing fruit of sufferings, that
shall falsely say, that such a necessary warning is an inveighing against
sufferings? etc. 5. Do you believe that they that turned Quakers in Prison are
gainers by their sufferings? or they that lose more of their Love, than of
their Liberties?

3. If I never experienced the comfort or cleansing of sufferings, I have cause
of great lamentation, as having suffered very much in vain. I will not with
Paul here glory in my infirmities, but I shall confess, that they greatly
aggravate my sin, if your words be true: For I have born the yoke from my
youth: since fourteen years of age I have not been a year free from suffering,
and since twenty two but few days, and since 1646. (which is about twenty five
years, I have had but few hours free from pain, (though through Gods mercy, not
intolerable.) I have had sufferings in Peace, and sufferings four years in War:
The first year I preached the Gospel, my life was sought by malice for my
Ministerial work, and dissent from others: The next place I came to (where I
was after more blessed, and spent my labors) the first year I was hooted at in
the Streets, but for preaching the Original sin and misery of mankind (which
this man feigneth me to extenuate, if not deny.) The next year my life was
sought by an armed Tumult, and strangely preserved, while others were knocked
down in the Streets, but for looking after my safety. The same year my life was
sought more publicly, and I was forced into a Garrison from my habitation,
through the fury that still sought my life. And since then, O what wholesome and
constant sufferings have been measured out unto me, almost continually night
and day. I will say no more, but that above all the external disposals of my
most wise and gracious God, I humbly, and heartily, and daily thank him for my
sufferings. But surely this man is not (...) or permitted to write this in
vain. Alas, my God, it calls my sin, my unfruitfulness to my remembrance! My
cleansing, nor my comfort have not been answerable to the sharp but gracious
helps and warnings which thou have so long vouchsafed me: It is true, too true,
that I have sinned so much under sufferings, and been so unfruitful after
sufferings, that I have little cause to boast of cleansing, and less experience
of comfort, than otherwise I might have had. But yet I have so much experience
as obliges me to thankfulness, and assuredly to number this saying with his
Untruths that he utters; 10th Crime Self-denying.
even the twenty sixth in number; And I think the Crime of usurping the
prerogative of God, of knowing the heart, should be repented of. Can any of
your followers themselves believe, that you that never saw me till of late
years, and never thrice spoke with me (that I know of) and that lived at so
great a distance from me, and that were unborn when my sufferings began, and
were a Child when I was in the greatest of my sufferings many years, I say that
you, should be able peremptorily, without any exception to conclude, that [I
never yet have experienced either the comfort or the cleansing of them] When
you know how much cleansing Peter acknowledges the very Apostates sometimes
had, and even they that are most terribly cautioned, Heb. 6. had tasted of the
powers of the world to come. Some cleansing and comfort even a miserable man
may have.

4. As for your fear that I have not courage or integrity enough to venture the
trial, I thank you for your warning, and shall beg integrity and courage of
God; But to add that you speak it to my shame, is but to show that you could
hardly speak with any caution many sentences together: For your fear does but
speak your uncertainty: (and to have pretended to a certainty were to pretend
to be a God.) And why should you think that I must be ashamed of that which you
are uncertain of? I doubt you speak it more to your own shame.

Sect. 26. E. B. p. 8. You should have spared the dead, 11th Crime Excusing
false prophesying to the dishonor of Gods Spirit.
and not disturbed the dust of my fellow prisoner Mr. Powel, by reproaching his
memory with so abusive and disgraceful a mention of him, as if he were a false
Prophet, and acted by a deluding Spirit: For you lay to his charge, that many
years ago, he prophesied of some things which we do not yet see fulfilled.

R. B. 1. Though it was printed since his death, it was written before ever I
heard of his death, and I think many Weeks before he dyed. 2. You made it in a
manner necessary to me to convince you by some instance that was near enough
for your observation; and do you blame me when you have done? 3. I named not
Mr. Vavasor Powell; but only your Companion and fellow Prisoner; and its like
you had more than one, and few could know that it was he: But you have
disgraced him by naming him. 4. I called him not a false Prophet; but warned
you not thus to abuse Gods people, and bring reproach upon Religion, by
fathering rashnesses and deceits on the Spirit of God? And have you so little
sense of the honor of God and Religion, as to be angry at that! Alas Sir, what
would you have said if I had told you how common this was in the Army? To set
up and pull down, do and undo, own and disown, as by the Spirit of God? If I
should have told you of the sad Instances of Mr. Erbury, Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr.
Dell, Mr. William Sedgwick, (who as from God wrote one Week to the Army against
their putting the King to death, and the next or same Week wrote to them quite
on the other side; and that set London by a Prophecy or Vision on looking for
the day of judgment on a set day,) to say nothing of abundance such; besides
Mrs. Hutchinson in New England, and the Ranters and Quakers in our days. Can
you have any love to souls, and any zeal for God and for Religion, and not be
grieved to think that Gods Spirit should be thus reproached, and Infidels
hardened in a contempt of the Spirit, as if it were but a fancy! O woe to the
world because of offenses!

5. You show more of the relicts of modesty here, than in most that I have yet
met with, in that you do not deny the truth of what I said of him. But yet your
intimations are deceitful, as if his Prophecies had not been absolute, but
conditional, or else not for the present, but the future. But the case was
this, as learned and understanding hearers will yet testify; that at Clifton
upon Them in Worcestershire, quickly after Worcester Fight, in his Sermon he
said, that He would tell them these things as from God, that they should have
no more King, nor pay any more Taxes, nor pay any more Tithes, and laying his
hand upon his Bible, he added [And this I have otherwise than from hence] which
showed that the Scripture was not his Rule, for all you accuse others of making
it an imperfect Rule.

6. And do you not yet perceive your partiality and respect of persons? It
seems your duty to open the faults of the Prelates and Conformists, and to
calumniate us Non-conformists that dissent from you, and to feign that which
you think will serve you for reproach. But if your companions public false
prophesying be but mentioned upon your own instigation, you cry out of abuse
and disgrace to his memory. Sir, Was it true or false? If it be true, that thus
he did (which is mentioned as no rarity) should you not rather take part with
God than him? And if an Aaron will make the people naked to their shame, will
not God record it to his shame? Is not the honor of the Spirit of God more
tenderly to be preserved than his, or yours, or mine, or any man's? O do not
injure God, for Man.

Sect. 27. E. B. p. 8. But 1. May not a good man, 12th Crime Paralleling false
Prophecies with the Prophets words in Scripture.
yea, a true Prophet, be sometime mistaken? Was not Samuel so, when he took
Eliab to be the Lords anointed? Was not Nathan deceived, when he encouraged
David to build the Temple? --

R. B. 1. Yes, they may be deceived when they speak in their own names, and
judge by their own Spirit or reason: But do you think they may be deceived when
they prophecy as from God. If so, then what certainty can we have of the truth
of any of their Prophecies, if they may speak falsely to us in the name of God?
2. Will not your followers think you yet see your partiality, who in one Page
reproach others as denying Scripture to be a perfect Rule, and in another can
thus seek to parallel Gods Prophets, with one that rashly in the Pulpit
prophesies three falsehoods together in the name of God? Is it not Gods
direction to us, to take him for a false Prophet who prophesies that which
comes not to pass? Every one that foretells that which does come to pass is
not a true Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13. 23. But every one that absolutely prophesies
that which does not come to pass, is a false Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22. But
the Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not
commanded him to speak -- even that Prophet shall dye. (Mark whether God do
judge as you do.) And if thou say in thy heart, how shall we know the word
which the Lord has spoken, when a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if
the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has
not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou shall not be
afraid of him.

Sect. 28. E. B. 2. May not many Prophets truly foretell things to come, 13.
Crime, Scrip^ures eluded.
and yet those things be a long time suspended and delayed because of the sins
of the people? Is not this condition to be understood in most Scripture
Prophecies, expressed, Zach. 6. 15. And this shall come to pass, if you will
diligently obey, etc.

R. B. 1. A Conditional promise or prediction may be not only delayed, but
never fulfilled (so as that the thing shall not come to pass) if the condition
never come to pass, 2. Promises are oftener to be expounded as Conditional, than
peremptory Prophecies, when no condition is expressed. But what words can more
exclude both Conditions and Delays, than [I tell you from God, that you shall
never more, etc. When 1. They never ceased paying Tithes from that day to this:
2. And their Taxes were then upon them, and I think they believe not that they
never paid more. 3. And that we have a King his Subjects all acknowledge.
Indeed the Jews say that the promise of the Messiah is delayed because of their
sins; and by such pretenses what true Prophecy may not be perverted, and false
excused?

As for what you say of Mr. Powels Religiousness, diligence, and worthiness, I
never said a word against it: And I desire to promote, and not to cloud the
true honor of his name: And your calling that an unchristian calumny which you
cannot deny to be a proved truth, is but an unmanly calumny of your own. And
for your Prophecy of my memory dying before me, I am not solicitous of the
matter; let God do with my memory what he please: nor am I regardful of your
Prophecy, who defend false prophesying, being commanded not to fear such, Deuteronomy.
18. 22.

Sect. 29. E. B. The pride of your heart, 14 Crime, Duty reproached, and
scandal made a duty.
discovered by your writings is so apparent, that it cannot but be known and
read of all men: to go no further for instances than your last Books, what
needed you have told the world in print, that you chase once on Easter day to
communicate in a very populous Church, purposely that it might be the further
known. Is not this like the Hypocrites to blow a Trumpet before, and to do your
actions that they may be seen of men? What other end could you have in doing
that so publicly then, or in declaring it now, but a vain glorious hope, that
doubting and unsatisfied Christians might look upon your example, as their
Pole Star, and accordingly direct their course?

R. B. 1. As to the Pride of my heart, Of Pride.
I shall first say this in general; that I am past doubt I have too much of it:
As no man is wholly cured of that odious vice, so I am one that have no cause
to say that I am perfect. But these things I can confidently say, 1. That so
far as I am proud, I sin as much against my own judgment, I imagine, as most
men alive do; there being sew that ever I was acquainted with, that have said
and written more against it than I have done: I have had these thirty years and
more, more odious conceptions of that sin, and a deeper sense of its commonness
and prevalency in the world, and the woeful ruins which it makes in the Church
and State and souls; and how frequently it shows it self even in men of great
piety and worth, than of almost any other sin. I have had so many thousand
thoughts and words against it, as make me much more culpable, if I be proud. 2.
And I shall sin as much against my Conscience in being proud as most men in the
world. As my Judgment is so much against the sin, so my Conscience commands
me a very Low and Constant self-abasement: It tells me, that whether I look
to a corruptible painful flesh, or to an Ignorant understanding, or to a
sinful will, or to a sinful and unprofitable life, I have so little to be proud
of, as will render my pride exceeding odious. 3. I do evidently see the
odiousness of this sin in others: Were it not for seeming to retort your
charge, I should say, that though I cannot as you do conclude of the heart, yet
the usual Ensigns of Pride (with Temerity and Injudiciousness, Boldness and
Blindness) do appear to me so monstrous in your Writings, above the size that
ordinary sinners ever fall to, as makes me the more apprehend, how dreadful it
is to give way to pride in the beginnings; And methinks I see as written on the
front of your Writings, Be not high-minded, but fear. Therefore I am still the
more culpable, if I abound with that which is so terrible a warning to me, in
your self, and other such as you. 4. And as I every day watch and pray against
it (and if ever I knew any thing of my self in the world, I am certain that I
live in an habituate and ordinary apprehension of my baseness and unworthiness,
and of the utter vanity of humane applause) so I find my self partly glad that
you tell me of my Pride, that (whatever you mean) I may have one more check to
keep it under; and if it be a messenger of Satan to buffet me, I hope it will
not be in vain. 5. And I can assure you, that these Writings which so
exasperate you, had never come from me, if I had not first so far conquered the
esteem of man, and love of reputation, as to be willing to cast my self upon
reproach, and to be much indifferent as to the opinion of man? For I was not so
ignorant as not to foresee that such as you would take the detection and
reproof of their errors for a heinous injury, and be angry at him that called
them to repent, and would furiously scatter the fetide excrements of their
gall, in revilings of such as contradict them. Methinks then you should see,
that I laid by some Pride, when I cared so little for your good word, and
exposed my self so readily to your Calumnies.

2. And I must tell you that though you do as much to cure my pride, as almost
any mortal man that ever I had to do with, by the way of open demonstration of
the Ensigns of it by your self (as the sight of a Leprosy would cure one that
were in love with it;) yet you are too blame for Tempting me so much to pride
as you do on the other side, while you decry it: For what is it else but an
inviting and tempting a man to be proud, to tell the world, that you have
nothing to charge him with to prove it, but such silly Calumnies as these of
yours?

3. And yet I will say, that I see now that a man's enemies may be more useful
to him than his friends: For I can hear that of my Pride from you, which never
friend by Word or Letter to my remembrance told me in my life. The more too
blame they, if you be not mistaken.

2. But next let us see your evidence or proof: The Reasons of my public
Communicating.
Your first is, [What need I have told the world, etc.] would you have an
answer to your question or not? If not, why do you ask it? If you would, why
did you not take an answer when I gave it you; nor so much as mention it, as if
you read it not, when you call for another? Is it because that you remembered,
that many that read your Papers, will never read mine, and so will not know
what I have said, nor how deceivingly you use them? It may be so: But will that
do your work, and hold at last? If I repeat my answer, I shall offend my
Readers, for writing the same thing twice, because you take no notice of the
first. But this much I will return you now: 1. My avoiding public communion
for fear of bringing more suffering on those that scrupled it, (and that so
many years together,) was a scandal and temptation to others, and tended to
make them think, that I held it to be unlawful; as Peter's Separation was a
scandal to Barnabas and others: And do you think every man that avoideth
scandalizing, is therefore proud: Are not humble men bound to avoid scandal as
well as others? If a man by many years forbearing all public Prayer or
Sacrament, should tempt others to think that he is against them, or accounts
them needless, how should he cure that scandal, but by doing that openly, and
open pleading for it, which he is supposed to be against? Does Paul make
scandal to be the destroying of another soul, and a thing to be avoided on
such hard terms as he mentions, and do you think that the open avoiding it,
is to be charged with Pride? How directly do you set your self against the way
of the Spirit of God?

2. I had for the same reason become a scandal also to our Governors, and to
many sober Conformable men, who were tempted by my omission, to think the
Non-conformists to be pievish Dividers, who follow Parties and Passion, more
than their own Consciences? And would any thing cure this scandal also, that
had not been notified? Or is the scandal of so many such persons no evil to be
avoided; nor their mis-judging of the Non-conformists to be cured by such as
did occasion it?

3. Is not every Minister of Christ a public person? Should they not be the
Lights of the world, that cannot and should not be hid? Is every man Proud,
that is not Mad? Whether my Actions be noted, is a matter of fact? The question
is not, whether I be so regardable, as to be worthy notice? but whether de
facto any do note what I do? And do you doubt of it? Why then do you write two
invectives to cure their esteem of me? Do you not perceive here how your work
contradicts your self? And must I needs as my duty, be so mad, as not to know
that any observe me, or regard what I do, for fear of being proud? You might as
well make it a duty to go naked in the Streets, lest I be proud if I think that
any one will observe me. 4. And are not Ministers bound to teach the people by
Example, as well as by Doctrine? You dare not deny it. And is that example,
which is unknown? Will you teach men to say against Gods command, I must not be
so Proud as to think that my example will be observed or regarded? God says, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Be thou an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, in Spirit, in faith, in purity: Must none that think meanly of
themselves obey this? O but, you will reply, Is not this like Hypocrites, to do
your actions to be seen of men? Christ will have us all to let our light so
shine before men (not with the Hypocrite to get their applause to our selves,
but for their own good and Gods glory) that they may see our good works, and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. O but says Mr. Bagshaw, What other end
can you have in doing this, but a vainglorious hope, that doubting Christians
may look on your example as their Pole Star, etc And indeed will such a scorn
of E. B. disoblige all Christ's Ministers from obeying their Lord, and allow
them to live in open scandal, for fear of thinking it lawful to be Exemplary?

5. Do you think indeed that you are not noted your self? Do you neither in
Life nor in your sufferings, intend to be publicly exemplary? Do you not
forbear the public Assemblies, the rather that your example may move others?
Thus still a perverse Spirit condemns it self.

6. If Doctrine and Example be the two means commanded, by which Ministers must
edify the Church, is it not Pride as well to expect that our words should be
heeded, as our Examples? And could an Atheist deal more impudently and
profanely, than to tell all Ministers, you are notoriously proud in expecting
that all the Congregation should take heed of what you say? Do you not preach
or talk to your own auditors, and expect observation? What if another E. B.
were among them and should say, How proud are you to expect that we should all
regard your words, as if you were our Polestar? These are not meet Lessons for
a sufferer to teach the people.

Sect. 30. E. B. I look upon it also as a strange piece of boasting, 27, 28.
and 29. Visible untruths.
when you tell us, that men of all judgments have written against you: -- Is
it indeed true that you offend all, and please none, and can you glory that you
are accounted the Ishmael of the age?

R. B. Alas, poor man! Is this Conscience scrupulous of Communion with us
Publicans and sinners? Here are no less than three more visible Untruths thrast
together. 1. That I say, [That men of all judgments have written against me]
when my words are these [Whereas our differences in Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline have engaged men of several minds in such Writings against me.]
Where did I say, that men of the judgment of Peter or Paul, of Augustine or
Prosper, wrote against me? Are those Infidels, Quakers, with the etc. [All]? 2.
That I glory that I am accounted the Ishmael of the age (which is intimated in
the question) or boast of men's contradiction? Which is so notorious a falsehood,
that I mention it only as other men's contradiction of each other (who blame me
for contrary things) and as my own trouble. I only told you, how impossible it
is for me to please all men, while men expect so many contrary things of me:
The Anabaptists are quite displeased with me for writing for Infants Baptism:
The Conformists are angry, because I will not subscribe that [It is certain by
Gods Word, that Children which are baptized, dying before they commit actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved] without excepting those that are wrongfully
baptized, Turks, Heathens, etc. The Antinomians are offended with me for
opposing their subversion of the Gospel under pretense of extolling free grace:
And others are angry that I come so near them, as to the cessation of Moses
Law. And so it is with all the rest. How vain therefore is it to turn a
Man-pleaser, when the task is as impossible as unprofitable. But O, says E. B.
what a strange boast is this, to tell us that men of all judgments have
written against you! That which I recite as my trial and trouble, he falsely
tells the world, I boast of.

3. The third known falsehood is (intimated) that [I offend all and please
none.] As if he did believe that those whom I mentioned (even with an etc.)
were [all] and there were no others in the world?

2. But besides these falsehoods, he again condemns himself for his
accusation. For 1. If it be a matter of Pride to declare that I am written
against, why will this man write himself against me, and tempt me to be more
proud, when he accuses me of pride? Is not his Writing published by himself?
Why then will he publish that which himself supposes to be my glorying? and so
advance my reputation? (which few adversaries ever did more effectually) 2. And
if I offend all and please none, what need he be at all this labor to save men
from being pleased by me? But it is fatal or natural to men of his vice, to
have bad memories.

The former untruth he again implies, [You would be grieved for grieving them,
and not put it in among your triumphs, that you had provoked so many able
worthy men.] He that has once ventured upon an untruth, may do it boldlier the
second time, and may come at last to believe himself.

As for the worthy Opponents whom he names, 1. I can honor and love them as
much as he, without thinking them infallible: And I can. differ from them
without disaffection. 2. Which of them is it that the man would have me grieve
for grieving? Doubtless those that are in the points controverted of his mind!
So kind is he to them or himself. It cannot be all, unless he would have me,
either say nothing of the matter, or write contrary things to please contrary
parties. 3. And does he not differ from most whom he names himself, by his
Separation? And yet he sticks not thus to grieve many more than them.

Sect. 31. E. B. p. 9. [When I said in one of my exceptions, 15. Crime,
Impudency in calumniating.
that I feared you were not sound in the doctrine of Justification by faith
alone without works, instead of answering directly, and satisfying my scruple
(which you might have done in few words) you refer me to five or more
Treatises, which you say you have written on that subject. --

R. B. 1. Did you believe when you wrote this, that this reference was a proof
of my Pride? Of Justification.
2. Why would you no more regard your reputation, than to recite such a passage
as this? Will your Reader doubt whether you should repent of such things as
words of Impudency unbeseeming a man of understanding?

For 1. Was it modesty in you to divulge such an accusation as this [I am
afraid you are not sound in the doctrine of Justification] without reciting one
word of mine which you accuse, or telling the Reader or me any reason of your
fears? 2. And could you expect that he that had written so many Books to
declare his judgment in that point, must write part of another, to tell you
what he holds, and consequently write as many, or as often as men shall so by
their Fears invite him? 3. And do you not at that very time prove me proud for
writing so many Books, when by this and other passages you call for an answer,
that is, for more? 4. Could you think that [a few words] would open a man's mind
so plainly, as many Books can do? 5. Could humane ingenuity expect more from
one thus slightly questioned, than to be referred to those Books, which were
purposely written both to stand as a full Confession of my faith in that point
after other men's suspicions, and also to give the reasons of it, and to defend
it against all that's said against it? And could I expect, that he that will
disdain to read these Books, will read another that repeateth the same things?
And shall I write more to remove his Fears, who will rather blindly vent them
by calumny, than read for his satisfaction what I have said? If you have read
them, why would you say you Fear, which signifies uncertainty? When you might
have come to a certain knowledge? If you read them not, why would you not use a
visible means to discuss your fears, before you divulged them? And if this way
be right in the eyes of others, what made Dr. Owen, and other Congregational
Brethren, admonish your Brother Mr. Powell for preaching openly (almost as soon
as he came out of Prison) particularly against me and another (then thought to
have been Mr. Nie, but he said he meant Mr. Tombs) by description; and the
description of me was [He that is not sound in the Doctrine of Justification]
or to that sense. And what made them threaten to disown him if he would not
cease such ways? Did ever sober men go about with such general accusations,
and expect that men answer to they know not what? 6. But what are the few words
that would satisfy you? A yea, or a nay? What if I say, Sir I think I am sound
in the doctrine of Justification, and I think you speak evil of the things you
know not] Would that have satisfied you?

Sect. 32. E. B. 16 Crime, Resisting and reproaching other men's labors for the
service of God, and the good of souls, with confidence in notorious falsehood.
And in another place you tell me that you have written the better part of
above fifty Books against the profane, the Jews and the Mahumetans: (I will
not enquire to what purpose; for I am very confident none of those did ever
read what you have written against them:) But add to these your several other
Treatises -- your Books will in all amount to as many Volumes as Tostatus writ,
concerning whom, and all such kind of Writers, you once gave this true
Character, though since you have most unhappily forgotten it [I cannot but
account all those Tostatus's as impudently proud, who think the world should
read no bodies works but theirs. Pray Sir read this passage again, and compare
it with what you have already written, and what as I hear you do yet further
intend to write, and then tell me in earnest what you think of your self --

R. B. 1. Seeing our debates about Church-dividing must needs be turned to
this, Whether I am proud, I grant you the conclusion that I am proud, and what
would you have more? 2. Your ductile followers that never saw Tostatus know not
how you cheat them by these words; and that you measure by Number, and not by
bulk; and twenty of some of my Books, will not make one of Tostatus's for
bigness: If you go to number, how many more wrote Origin? But a Sheet is not so
big as a large Volume in folio. Of much writing.
3. I never accused Augustine, Chrysostom, Calvin, Zanchy, etc. as imitating
Tostatus; And I have not wrote so much as they. 4. The best way to cure one
that writes too much, is to persuade men not to buy and read it, and then the
Booksellers will not print it. And till you can do that, you see that all men
are not of your mind: And by what obligation am I bound to be of your mind
alone, rather than of many thousands that are of another, and those that still
importune me to write more? Is it pride only to differ from you, and to write
against your judgment? Or were not the Fathers and Divines forementioned,
(with Rivet, Chamier, Beza, Luther, etc. yea, and Dr. Owen too, proud, if large
Writings be a sign of Pride. 5. When you question to what purpose it is to
write Books against the Profane, and Jews, and Mahumetans, that is, against
Infidelity, and to defend the Christian faith, you show what a Guide you are to
the Church. 6. When you are confident that none of the Profane, etc. did ever
read what I wrote against them, either you believe your self, or not. If you
do, how unfit are you to be believed of any that know no better what is
credible in a matter of fact? Could you think for instance, that my Call to the
Unconverted has been printed so often, I think some scores of thousands, and
translated into French by Mr. Eliots (as he said he was doing) into the Indian
Tongue, and no profane person ever read it? You will take this very instance
its like for my pride, which you make necessary to show your temerity and
deceit. But if you do not believe your self, how much less should others
believe you? 7. Will no sober Readers think that you set your self to do the
Devils work, against the service of the Church of God, by seeking to silence us
from writing by your contumely and scorns, (even from writing against the
Profane and Infidels) at a time when we are by others silenced from public
preaching? Let your conscience tell you, if I had obeyed you from the first,
and never written, whether the Devil or most that have made use of what I
wrote, would have thankt you more? 8. Did not the Primitive Teachers, Apostles
and others leave us their Examples for Writing, as well as for Vocal Teaching?
And are they not two ways of predicating or publishing the same Gospel? And if
so, would he serve God or the Devil, that would scorn us all as Proud for
preaching so much, as the best men do? 9. And do you not yet see how much you
have of the same silencing Spirit which you profess to separate from? 10. But
your warning for a review has brought me to Repent of, and Retract that
passage against Tostatus, as being too rashly uttered: Because 1. He wrote when
good Writers were more scarce than now. 2. Because he might be willing that
other men's works should be preferred before his, and that his own should not be
wholly read, but partly perused on particulas occasions. 3. And it is unseemly
to reprove industry.

Now we come to the Question after all this.
Sect. 33. IN stating of this Question, You do E. B p. 10. your self grant so
much, that you scarce leave any thing to be either disputed or denied --

R. B. Remember Reader, The Case, of separation!
that my Professed design (on the Title page) is, 1. To invite all sound and
sober Christians, by what names soever called, to receive each other to
Communion in the same Churches. 2. And where that (which is first desirable)
cannot be attained, to bear with each other in their distinct Assemblies, and
to manage them all in Christian Love. 3. And that under the first head, I
particularly prove, that It is lawful to hold Communion with such Christian
Churches, as have worthy or tolerable Pastors, notwithstanding the Parochial
order of them, and the Ministers Conformity and use of the Common Prayer Book.

This last is the true state of the Question which I affirm; with these two
limitations or explications. That is, 1. That it is lawful statedly to
communicate as a member, with such a Parish Church, where we cannot
consideratis considerandis have Communion with a better upon lawful terms.

2. That those that can have stated Communion with a better, may yet lawfully
communicate sometimes with such a Parish Church, as we may do on just occasion
with a Church of Neighbors or Strangers where we live or come. Yea that we
ought to do so when some special reasons ( as from Authority Scandal, etc.) do
require it.

These are the sum of my Assertions. Though my main cause oblige me as much to
prove to a Conformist that he may have Communion with a Church of
Non-conformists, yet I had no call to prosecute that particularly, as I had to
the other, for the reasons which I rendered at large.

And this being the Case, judge now of this man's Dissent and furious
opposition, whether sober people have reason to regard it, when he himself
begins with this Confession, that I scarce leave any thing to be disputed or
denied. Self-condemnation.
What honesty then is there in his denyals and disputes.

Sect. 34. E. B. 1. You grant that we are not to have Communion with a
Diocesane Church as such, 30th and 31st visible Untruths.
and that we are not to own Diocesane Bishops?

R. B. Here are two more Untruths! I only said, that these are no part of our
Question; they are things that I assert not; and that I meddled not with: And
you feign me to grant the Negative, when I only say, I meddle not with it. I
only say, that I hold no Communion my self with a Diocesane Church as such, in
that form, etc. and that I persuade no others to it.

Sect 35. E. B. 2. You allow that we are not to have Communion with
Persecutors, 32d and 33d Untru^hs.
nor with such as have consented to our silencing.

R. B. I never wrote such a word, but only told you it was none of our
question, and that I did not affirm it, and that it is none of the thing that I
am persuading men to. And yet with this intimation page 9. that neither your
selves nor I do avoid. Communion with all persecutors; seeing most Parties have
been guilty of it. The Commonwealths men persecuted me and others, so far as
to make Orders to Sequester us, for not taking the Engagement, and for not
keeping their Fasts and Thanksgivings for the Wars against Scotland; And yet I
am not so rigid as to refuse communion with all that did it, or consented to
it. My old special friend did persecute Mr. Sam. Fisher and Mr. Blake, when he
turned them both out of Shrewsbury, from their Churches, labor, dwellings and
maintenance, even when the Plague was begun and the people doubly sensible of
their loss. And yet I refused not all Communion with such as did it. Its like
you know who persecuted Mr. Caughton, Dr. Drake, Mr. Nalton, Mr. Arthur
Jackson, Mr. Watson, Mr. Jenkins, etc. and Mr. Love and Gibbons; And yet who
scrupleth Communion with them? Again I tell you, I mention not these for
reproach, but only to set us in the impartial sense of the question.

Sect. 36. E. B. p. 11. All this and more -- being granted, I scarce see what
it is that you contend for --

R. B. What eyes then have you that cannot see that which I copiously and
expressly speak?

Sect. 37. E. B. From these grounds separation at this day may be easily
justified.

R. B. Blind sophistry and palpable fallacy.
This is the undertaking by which you have drawn me to renew this debate, and
therefore I shall try your proof.

Sect. 38. E. B. Every Parish Church is part of the Diocesane: And if a
Diocesane Church as such is not to be Communicated with, then a Parish Church
as such is to be separated from; since there is the same reason of the parts as
of the whole: And you must find out a new Logic before you can prove, that if
the whole be corrupt, any of the parts are clean, and fit for our Communion.

R. B. The name of Logic is incongruously used in such an Argument, as is so
palpably fallacious. A Parish Church stands before us in three respects. 1. As
it is a true Church of Christians, having all things Essential in Pastors and
People. 2. As these Christians live in the bounds of a Parish. 3. As this
Parish Church by the Laws of the Land is subject to the Diocesane, and so a
part of his Diocese. How a Parish Church is or is not part of a Diocesane
Church.
Both the latter are merely Accidental, and it has all that is essential to a
Church without them. As Mr. Jacob instanceth in Ordination, and so in Marriage;
He that is married truly, is truly a Husband, though a Priest or Ring or some
unnecessary accident was adjoined.

Your reason is, 1. Ridiculously fallacious, 2. And if all were granted,
reaches not the Case.

1. It is Ridiculous, to argue, If a Diocesane Church as such is not to be
communicated with, then a Parish Church as such is to be separated from. For
the [as such] in the Antecedent and Consequent denotes two several things: You
should only have inferred [Then a Parish Church as part of a Diocesane is not
to be Communicated with] Which is nothing to the question. And when you say
that there is the same reason of the Parts and whole; I answer, that must be
only as they are parts; but not in all other alien respects. If a Parish Church
be to be disclaimed or not owned only as it is a part of a Diocesane Church,
yet it may be owned, 1. As a true Church of Christians, in its constitution. 2.
And as a Parish Church, limited by those bounds, without respect to the
Diocesane.

2. And if it were to be disowned as a Parish Church, that also is nothing to
the Question; For it may yet be owned for its Constitutive parts as a Christian
Church.

I will show you your Argument in another case. Suppose that Usurpers should
alter the form of Kingly Government, and set up themselves in another form, and
should allow all the Independent Churches in the Land, but set over them Civil
officers in every County of their own; and should make a Law, that none shall
be a member of a Church that lives not within five miles of the Meeting place.
In this case, the Church is a Church in its own Constitution; and that it is
confirmed to a Parochial circuit, or that it is under usurping Magistrates is
an accidental thing, which does not nullify it. And if you argue [If the
Usurpers Commonwealth as such, be not to be communicated with or owned, then
the Church which is part of it is not to be owned. Yes, as a Church, but not as
a part of the Commonwealth.

If Independent Churches were under the Turks Government, they may be parts of
an Infidel and perhaps usurped Kingdom, and yet be true Churches and to be
owned.

If Presbyterian Classical Churches be supposed sinful, and the Law said that
all the Independent or particular Churches shall be under the several Classes,
and be part of those Churches, the Churches will be true Churches nevertheless.
For, 1. Perhaps most of them consent not to the Laws determination, but only
forbear an open contradiction. 2. And in others of them the people may not
consent though the Pastor do. 3. And if they do consent, and it be their sin,
it will not nullify the particular Church; being but an unwarrantable Accident.

If Universities were as unlawful as many Separatists judge them, yet Dr.
Goodwins Church, e. g. in Oxford might have been part of the University, and
yet a true Church, and to be disowned as part of the University, and yet not as
a Church.

If you were a member of an unlawful Society, Army, Church, etc. You may be
disowned as a member of that Society, and yet not as a Christian, or as a Man.

Now would not the Boys laugh at you if you should reason thus: An usurped
Heathenish Kingdom or Commonwealth, as such is unlawful, and not to be
communicated with; A Classical Church as such is not to be communicated with;
An University as such is not to be communicated with: Therefore such or such a
particular Church as such is not to be communicated with, which is a part of
that Kingdom, that Classis, that University! E. B. a Christian is a member of a
Society which is not to be owned: Ergo E. B. a Christian as such is not to be
owned. What more apparent than that the consequent should be but this?
Therefore such a Church should not be owned, as it is a Part of such a Kingdom,
Classis, University, etc. which is all accidental to the Church.

So that here is a double Equivocation, and more than four terms: 1. [As such]
speaks (as I said) one essence in the Antecedent, and another in the
Consequent. 2. The word [Communicating] speaks several things in the
Antecedent and in the Consequent. For to Communicate with a Diocesane Church,
is not to Assemble with it in public Worship: For a Diocese (in our sense)
cannot so assemble: but it is to own the Diocesane Relation, and Prelates. But
to Communicate with a particular Church in a Parish, is to have personal
Communion in the Worship of the Assembly. So that this is your Argument if put
in plain words: [If it be unlawful to Communicate with a Diocesane Church as
such, by owning the Diocesanes and the relation to them, then it is unlawful to
communicate with a true particular Church in a Parish, (or bounded Parochially)
in the Assembly Worship as it is such a particular Church, which is part of
that Diocesane Church: But, etc.] Answ. Yes, It may be unlawful to communicate
with it as a Part, and that by Diocesane Communion; but not as a true Church of
Christians by assembly communion.

Or thus [It is unlawful, e. g. to have communion with the Army of Maximus,
Cromwell, etc. as such: But many Christians are parts of the Army of Maximus,
Cromwell, etc. Therefore it is unlawful to have communion with those Christians:
Because there is the same reason of the parts as of the whole. Ans. 1.
Christians are not parts of the Army as Christians, but as those Soldiers. 2.
It is unlawful to have Military Communion with them as parts of that Army; but
not to have Christian Communion with them as Christians.

May not even the simple now easily see (if you will not) by what ignorant
erroneous reasons you zealously labor to deceive the people of God, to divide
the Churches?

Sect. 39. E. B. 2. A Parish Minister is (in that station and office) but a
servant of the Diocesane Bishop; The same fallacy with an untruth.
and therefore rightly called a Curate, and if we may not own (as you grant)
the Bishop, I think it will necessarily follow, that his substitute and curate
has no reason to expect any respect from us --

R. B. The same fallacy is so palpable that a small measure of reason may
discern it. 1. It is false that he is in that Office [But a Servant] The truth
is, Whether a Parish Minister be but a servant to the Diocesane.
the Law makes him not a servant at all, but only an Ecclesiastical Subject.
But if you had said, He is but a subject, it had not been true, if [But] be
exclusive of his other Pastoral Relation. For he is by the Law, the Priest, the
Teacher, the Rector of that Parish Church in subordination to the Bishop.

2. But whatever he be by the Law of the Land, or by the Bishops will, the
faithful Ministers in Parish Churches are by Christ's own Commission, the true
Pastors of the flocks; having all things essential to that Relation.

3. But deceive not your Reader by intimating, that I speak of a Parochial
Minister as Parochial, (not qua but qui:) For Parish Bounds are but Accidents
of the Churches: It is Christian Churches as such, though Parochial or so
bounded, that I speak of. A Christian Pastor with his Christian flock ( e. g.
Mr. Gataker, Mr. Marshall, Dr. Stoughtion, Dr. Seaman, Mr. Sedgwicke, Dr. Gouge
and such like) do constitute a true Christian Church, though in Parish bounds.
And as such Pastors they are the Ministers of Christ, and not servants to
Diocesanes: And their subordination to Diocesans by the Law is but accidental
to their Pastoral office.

How many volumes of the old Non-conformists give you this Answer? And if you
have read them, why would you dissemble it, and give no Reply to it? If you
never read them, is it modesty to despise them?

Sect. 40. E. B. p. 11. [If Persecutors are not to be communicated with, nor
such as have consented to our silencing (which you also allow) (though I could
wish you had proved it better than by the obscure and disputable example of
Martin) then I think very few, if any of the Parish-Ministers, but must even
upon that account also be separated from; since either by open consent, or else
by an Undoing and Pernicious silence they have all made themselves guilty of
that grievous sin: There being but little difference in the sight of God,
between the persecuting Brethren our selves, and (by not sharply reproving it)
seeming to approve of it in others.

R. B. 1. Your repeated mistake of my [allowing] that which I only meddle not
with, Whether all the Parish Ministers consent to persecution.
but exclude from the question; or oppose not, I pass by. 2. Every one that is
by remote consequence guilty of our silencing does not consent to it. Otherwise
You, and I, and all the silenced Ministers in England do consent to it. For he
is blindly impenitent that will deny that we are any way guilty of it.

3. You do but cover one open sin with another; Slander.
even separation with uncharitable slander of many hundred godly Conformable
Ministers, whom you accuse of this consent. I know scarce any one of my
acquaintance whom I take for a faithful diligent Pastor, and whom I persuade
men to hear, but they are grieved at the heart for the silencing of so many and
such. I hear some complain of it privately, and some lament it publicly, and
earnestly pray that God would restore them; But I never heard one of them own
it.

4. I plead not for Undoing, Pernicious silence: I think too many are deeply
guilty by it: My testimony in this case is visible among the Writings whose
number you prove me proud by. But if you make this a proof of the duty of
separation, you will make mad work of it. For, 1. You know not men's
opportunities to speak: And where there is no opportunity, there its no duty.
2. You know not who has spoken their dissent plainly and who not. It may he
some have done it in the Convocation: It may be some have done it privately, Of
reproving sharply the sins of others.
and some publicly already in due season. And we are not to expect an account
from them of all that they say. 3. To whom is it that you would have all the
Country Ministers speak against our silencing? To those that did it they have
no access; and they are out of hearing. And must they needs talk to the people
of their superiors actions, and speak against them behind their backs? 4. If
we know that one, two, twenty have spoken or written plainly in reproof of a
sin, are all the Ministers in the Land bound to do the same over again? Must
they all leave their flocks to come up to London to do it? Or must they every
one publish his reproof in Print? 5. All silence, or not-reproving is not a
seeming consent: much less in Gods sight little different from persecution.
Were all the Churches in the Empire Persecutors, or to be separated from, which
did not reprove the Emperors for banishing Athanasius, and Chrysostom and such
others? Of all the silenced Ministers in London or England, how small a number
is there that have [sharply reproved] the silencers? And perhaps they that have
done it most sharply may have been more sharp than did beseem them.

To conclude Readers, Narrow Communion.
mark here by this reason how few you must hold communion with in the Land or
in the world, if you will be the Disciples of Mr. Bagshaw; Away from
Conformists and Non-conformists that have [sharply reproved] persecutors. This
is the way to be able to guess at the names and numbers of those that by his
rule you must Communicate with.

5. But what if they have sharply reproved this one sin? you cannot prove that
they themselves have done so by all other sins: Even you your self have left
some unreproved: And will not the want of the sharp reproving of other sins as
well as of persecution, make your communion with such unlawful?

6. But at the worst; not reproving can be but a particular sin? And it is not
every particular sin that makes Communion unlawful.

7. And have you first admonished them of that sin, and tried all these
Ministers whether they be penitent? Yea or ever heard them speak for
themselves? Or do you reject Matthew. 18. 15. and make to your self and followers
a new Law, that whomsoever you shall suspect or accuse of sin, you must also
separate from?

8. But by this rule of yours, methinks few if any should be liker to be
accepted in your communion than my self, if reproving persecution would serve
turn. And yet even I also am rejected by you, as being not wise or good enough
to communicate with such as you, but as one of the worst of Heretics to be
rejected of all.

9. But I beseech you give your Readers leave here to remember, Mr. Bagshaw
obliges me to reprove him sharply, left I be guilty of his sin.
if you will not, that your own doctrine imposes it on me as my duty, to
Reprove you sharply as I have done; while you teach the world, that it is but
little different in the sight of God, to persecute, and not sharply to reprove
it, and so disown it. For if it make the sins of my superiors mine, if I do
not sharply reprove them, and make me almost as guilty as they, I shall not be
innocent if I reprove not you sharply, when it is to me that you direct your
words. And I had rather be thought too sharp, than be guilty of all the crimes
and falsehoods of this your Script, especially when you are the accuser of my
silence your self.

Sect. 41. E. B. Lastly, admitting there are some worthy and able men, among
the Parish Ministers (which for my own part I believe never a whit the more
because you affirm it) yet this we must say, that their sin is great in
submitting to so undue a way of entering into the Ministry; and therefore we
both forbear our selves, and warn all others not to hear them; because we
cannot think our Lord Christ ever sent such to Preach in his name, who directly
and by a solemn Oath have renounced their Christian liberty under pretense of
Preaching Christ; and are indeed nothing else (as to the whole discharge and
exercise of their office) but servants of men -- in consistent with being
servants of Christ.

R. B. 1. Either you think there are some worthy able men among them, or you do
not. If you do, why should you be so malignant as to question the assertion of
it, and so loath to grant it? If you do not, how unfit is so false and malignant
an accuser of the brethren, All sinners are not to be separated from.
to be the conducter of souls, or the Historian of the age, that will not know
a thing so public and notorious.

2. As for your not believing me, no men are so hardly brought to believe the
truth from others, as they that are conscious of ordinary falsehood from
themselves.

3. I think I could prove their sin as effectually as you can: But must we
separate from all sinners? or from all that sin in their entrance into the
Ministry? And why not as well from all other sins of equal greatness? Do you
warn all others not to hear your self? Or do you yet take your self to be no
sinner? or no great sinner? What if the Presbyterians think the Independents
way of entrance to be undue? And the Independents think so of the
Presbyterians? And both of the Anabaptists? and the Anabaptists of them both,
etc. Must they all therefore warm all men not to hear each other? Mr. Nigh
thought not so, when he wrote for such hearing public Ministers. Is it fit for
the Author of two Books of Calumnies and bold Untruths, besides false Doctrines
and other Crimes, to say [Their sin is great, etc. and therefore we both
forbear our selves, and warn all others not to hear them?]

4. Most that I speak of did enter into the Ministry in the Presbyterian or
Independent way heretofore, and do but continue on the terms which I dissent
from as well as you. How then can you say they unduely enter into the Ministry?

5. Did you know before you wrote this, that all such as we persuade men to
hear, have by Oath renounced their Christian Liberty? what Oath is it that you
mean? If you mean the Oath of Supremacy or Allegiance, unless Popery be
Christian Liberty, we know of none such which these renounce. And I know of no
other Oath, except that of Canonical obedience in licitis and honestis. And for
that, 1. I find not that the Act, or Canons do impose it on those that come for
Ordination; (nor am so well skilled in the Law as to know by what Law it is
done;) 2. I know that men have been ordinarily ordained without it. And to such
your reason for separation is vain. 3. Mr. Bradshaw and other old
Non-conformists were wont to say that they obeyed the Diocesanes, and so did
promise them obedience, only as they are the Kings Officers, deputed for the
exercise of that Civil or Coercive power which Magistrates have in Causes
called Ecclesiastical. And what Liberty does that give away?

4. But suppose that you are the wiser man, and that those that are more
ignorant do mistakingly think that Canonical obedience, 6th False doctrine.
and the Oath (with that of Supremacy) to be their duty, and no renouncing of
their Christian liberty* Is it not false doctrine to conclude, that Christ
never sent out any that had as great a sin as this? what none? when he sent out
Judas himself, who was first a Thief and after a Traitor? Do you think then
that Christ ever sent out Liars, Railers, furious Church-dividers, false
accusers, etc?

5. That indeed they are nothing else, 34th Falsehood and slander.
as to the whole discharge and exercise of their office, but the servants of
men, is another slander and untruth. He that is a servant of Christ, and a true
Pastor of a Christian Church, and a sound Preacher of the Gospel, and an helper
of believers faith, and a lover of the peoples souls, and a diligent upright
labourer for men's salvation, is something else than a servant of man (even in
the discharge of their Ministerial office.) But such are many of the
Conformable Ministers: Ergo --

Prove if you can that Dr. Preston, Sibbes, Stoughton, Whittaker, Mr. Bolton,
Whateley, Gataker, Fenner, and all the late Assembly save eight or nine at most
(being all Conformists) were nothing else but the servants of men, and not at
all the servants of Christ. Your Father thought otherwise of Mr. Bolton, and
perhaps they were both as wise as you. Prove now that Mr. Gurnal, Mr. Trap, Dr.
Lightfoot, Dr. Walker, Mr. Langley, and many others that I can name that are
worthy men in London and round about it, are nothing else but the servants of
men? And will it not be as hard to prove one to be a servant of Christ who
serves Satan by falsehood and malice, and calumniating Christ's Churches and
Servants, as those that are thus the servants of men.

Sect. 42. E. B. 35th Falsehood.
For the question is not (as you weakly and insignificantly word it) whether a
Defective, faulty, true Church may ordinarily (or at least sometimes be joined
with] But whether a defective, faulty, imposing Church is not to be separated
from.]

R. B. 1. You begin here with another untruth: I was the stater of the
Question, and did not referr it to you to state it: I chose that question to
dispute which I thought fittest: Therefore to tell me that it not the question,
which is the question, is untrue.

2. We have here another taste of your insolency: To call them Magisterially
[weak and insignificant] words, which you design not to examine, nor once
notify to the Reader, wherein the Weakness or Insignificancy is, nay which we
suppose you in the next sentence use your self, expressly in all the words save
one, and implicitly as to that: For Defective and faulty are words that you
condescend to use: And when you say [a Church] you must mean a Church that has
Truth of Essence* or else you speak equivocally or contradiction. And may not a
True Church be faulty and Defective? where then is the insignificancy of these
words?

3. And as to the Predicate, Is there a difference between the Questions,
whether such a Church may be joined with? and whether it must be separated
from? If there be, I will put the question as has least ambiguity. I mean
[such separation, as consists, 1. In holding that such a Church may not be
joined with. 2. And as consists in a privative not-joyning, or refusing
Communion as unlawful.] If you mean any thing else, you talk not to me, and to
my question.

4. But is all the stress of separation laid upon the word [Imposing?] I
undertook to prove that the Parish Ministers that I speak of, do not Impose
upon the people; unless officiating be imposing: As Separatists themselves
impose their own Words of Prayer, upon the people that are to join with them;
It being the Ministers office to word his Prayers and praises, he imposes them
on the people: And all other circumstances in which the Pastor does and must
guide the flock (as what Chapter shall be read, what Psalm, Meeter, Tune, Time,
etc.) I think the Separatists impose. And I know not that the Minister whom I
hear does impose any more on me: Therefore by your own rule* I am not bound to
separate from this Parish Church, because it is no Imposing Church. It is
Imposed on, but it does not Impose that I know of.

Sect. 43. E. B. 7. False doctrines at lest employed.
This we affirm, 1. Because we know not how else to preserve our Christian
Liberty (which it is an indispensible duty to maintain) but by separating from
those that would unduly take it from us.

R. B. These universal terms not limited nor expounded are to be taken
universally; And so here are two false doctrines; one that it is indispensible
duty to maintain all our Christian liberty, and the other that we know not how
else to maintain it* But if by this Liberty, you mean but some sort of liberty,
and not all, you should have distinguished, if you would not deceive. And if by
[we know not] you intend only a Confession of your own ignorance, that would be
no proof of the point in hand, because that may be true, which you know not.

1. There is a Liberty called Christian, Q. 1. Whether it is an indispensible
duty to maintain all our Christ^an liberty, or what?
because it is essential to Christianity; (as to be freed from the Covenant of
Works, and from the Guilt and Reign of sin, and from the power of Satan, and
the state of enmity against God, etc.) 2. There is a Liberty called Christian,
because it is procured and given us by Christ, though not essential to
Christianity; (as to eat of this meat or that, flesh or herbs, to be free from
the observation of certain days, and Customs, and Ceremonies, not sinful in
themselves.) 3. There is a Liberty called Christian, because Christians have it
in common with all other men, or with many: (as to marry or not marry; to live
in this Country, or that; to be free from oppression, injuries, slanders,
persecution, when they can.)

And we must distinguish of the word [Our] that is, we must show how far this
Liberty is Ours indeed. 1. It is one thing to be Ours Necessarily, or as you
say Indispensibly, and another thing to be ours when we can get it, keep it, or
use it, without a greater loss than it will compensate, or a greater hurt to
others. It is one thing to be ours in fundamental right, to be used at fit
times, and another thing to be ours, to be always used.

Prop. 1. Luke 14. 18.
The Liberty which is essential to our Christianity or Godliness, is
indispensibly to be maintained and exercised, Isa. 61. 1.
Gal. 5. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21.


Prop. 2. Act. 18. 26.
All degrees of the same liberty must be maintained, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
as well as the essentials; that is, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
we must labor to be as free as we can from all the degrees of sin, and
misery: But we cannot here have what we would. Heb. 2. 14, 15.


Prop. 3. There is a Liberty to use certain things as statedly or ordinarily
Indifferent, Gal. 4* 3, 9.
which is none of Ours (to use them) in several Cases, Romans 8. 15, 2.
which take away the Indifferency, John 8* 31, 36.
(as in case of scandal, or greater hurt to others or our selves, Romans 6. 16,
18, 22.
or of the restraint of just authority.)

Prop. 4. The same must be said of forbearing things indifferent.

Prop. 5. Our Liberty from persecution, oppression, injuries, slanders, must be
patiently let go, as being none of ours, when it cannot be kept by lawful
means, or without a greater hurt, Acts 22. 28, etc.

Prop. 6. But our Liberty in either of these three last mentioned Cases, ought
not causelessly to be taken from us by others, nor must be causelessly cast away
by our selves; nor should we yield to false Teachers, who would deceive the
Churches, by telling them that they are under Divine Obligations, when they are
not; and make them believe that things lawful are unlawful, and things
indifferent are necessary, Gal. 2. 4, 5. Col. 2. 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23. Acts
15. 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22.

The third Proposition is it that I am to prove. And Paul's becoming all things
to all men, to save some, a Jew to the Jews, his shaving his head, his
circumcising Timothy, with the reasons of it, his resolution to forbear the
eating of flesh, rather than offend the weak, and his persuading others to do
the like, do fully prove it. He maintains the Christians Right of Liberty
against false Teachers; but he maintains not the Exercise of it, when he had
reason to let it go: For Liberty is not necessity, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Am I not free?
4, 5. Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have we not power to lead about a
Sister, a Wife, as well as other Apostles? 12. If others be partakers of this
power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power,
but suffered all things lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. -- 15. But
I have used none of these things -- 19* For though I be free from all men, yet
have I made my self servant to all, that I might gain the more: And unto the
Jews I became a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; To them that are under the
Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them
that are without the Law, as without Law, that I might gain them that are
without Law. To the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am
made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. And this I do
for the Gospels sake -- See 1 Cor. 8. 13. Romans 14. 21. It is good neither to
eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or
is offended, or is made weak.

Christ himself says, Matthew. 17. 26. Then are the children free:
notwithstanding lest we should offend, go thou, etc. and give them for me and
thee.

1 Pet. 2. 16. As free, (that is, as such as by Christ are freed from true
bondage, but not from order and subjection, and therefore [not having or using
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. No man has
liberty to be unruly or hurtful.

Romans 7. 3. If her husband be dead, she is free from that Law, and yet may give
away that freedom.

Yea, of the very liberty from the Jewish Law, the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 13.
For ye have been called unto liberty (q. d. therefore let not false Teachers
persuade you that you are bound to that which you are freed from) only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by Love serve one another] q. d. in
the exercise of this Liberty you must do or not do the things you are at
liberty in, as may do most good, according as the Law of Love requires, and
not as your own carnal interest and lust inclines you: For all the Law is
fulfilled in one word, in this, Thou shall Love thy neighbor as thy self.

1 Cor. 16. 25, 28, 29, 30, 31. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles eat, asking
no question for conscience sake -- But if any man say unto you, This is offered
in sacrifice to Idols, eat not, for his sake that showed it, and for conscience
sake (Thus our liberty is not to be exercised against Love: for we have no
liberty to hurt our brethren) 29. Conscience I say, not thine own, but of the
others: Thus others by weakness, and consequently Rulers by authority may
restrain the exercise of our liberty) For why is my liberty judged of another
man's Conscience? that is, Not that his Conscience is the Rule of my Right, or
his judgment takes away my title to liberty; but his interest and the Law of
Love, do take away my Right of using my liberty to another hurt. 3. For if I
by grace be a partaker (that is, lawfully according to my Christian liberty)
why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks, (that is, it is a
fault in those that accuse me of sin, when I do that which is lawful, in it
self, abstracted from the Consequents or scandal): Whether therefore ye eat or
drink, (which are things indifferent as to the kind of food) or whatsoever ye
do (how lawful in it self soever) do all to the glory of God (For the interest
of the End must guide and restrain you in the use even of things in themselves
indifferent: For no man has liberty to dishonor God, nor to hurt another,
(nor to disobey just power.)

I beseech you therefore while you promise men liberty, be not your self, and
make not them the servants of sin, 2 Pet. 2. 19. And take notice that Liberty
must be distinguished as to Right, and as to Use, And that the use must often
be denied, and not maintained.

2. Let us next see Whether there be no way but separation in our Case, Q. 2.
Whether there be no way but separation, to preserve our Christian liberty?
to preserve our liberty? Paul has here showed you another way: 1. By
doctrinal defense to defend it against false Teachers, that would doctrinally
brings us into bondage. To maintain against such as you who add to Gods Laws,
that we are not bound to do that which is not commanded, or to forbear that
which is not by God forbidden, though you say we are. 2. To use our Liberty as
it tends to Gods glory and man's good, and disuse it when it crosses these,
(but not deny our right.) This is the Scripture way of preserving it: and not
to think that we have no way to preserve it, but by doing hurt, or crossing
Love by Church-divisions.

3. No falsehood is a just defense of our Christian liberty: But to say, that a
true Church is no true Church, or true Worship is no true Worship, or that it
is not Lawful to communicate where it is lawful, is a falsehood. Therefore it is
no just defense of our Liberty.

Sect. 44. E. B. p. 12. 2. Being present where those things are used in the
Worship of God, which God has not commanded, this would involve us in the
guilt and contagion of them: nor do we believe (however we have your word for
the contrary) the Lord will otherwise interpret it; since he has so strictly
charged us, to keep far from a false matter, and not to partake in other men's
sins.

R. B. Here are two more false doctrines intimated: 8. False doctrine.
1. That to use things in the Worship of God which he has not commanded
(without exception) is a sin. 2. That being present where they are used, 9.
False doctrine.
involveth us in the guilt.

Where note, 1. That it is not Part of the Worship, but things used in the
Worship, that he speaks of. 2. That I proved the contrary to both these at
large, and the man says only that he has my word for the contrary, and gives
not a syllable of answer to my twenty instances, and many undeniable reasons to
the contrary. Does he not either highly esteem his own reason and authority,
that thinks it should be received, if he do but say the word, without
attempting to answer what is said against him: or else does he not greatly
despise his own Readers and followers, in taking them for such credulous
ductile souls, as will take his bare word without expecting any reason from him
to confute what is said on the other side? Or is all this on presumption, that
his Reader will not know what I have said? Sermon Notes, Meeters, Tunes,
printed Bibles (as printed) and divided into Chapters and Verses, the words of
a Sermon or Prayer, the particular Method, Cups, Tables, etc. are used in the
Worship of God without any particular command, or any command for this, rather
than that, in cases of indifferency: And yet all these are not therefore
unlawful.

And I proved that all Ministers, and Families sin in Gods Worship, and yet
that it is not therefore lawful to separate from them all. If you your self say
that you say nothing in preaching or praying but what is commanded you, and
that your Worship has no sin, you deceive your self, and the truth is not in
you. But if you think it a sin for any to hear you, or have communion with you,
why do you not plainly tell your hearers so? To keep far from a false matter,
(as from writing falsehoods by the dozens) and not to partake of other men's
sins, is one thing; and for Children to tell their Fathers, or People their
Pastors, we must not worship God with you, because in Forms, Words, Method, you
do something not commanded, yea, because through error you do somewhat sinful,
is another thing.

Sect. 45. E. B. Lastly, Whatever pretenses may be used, for the keeping of
Peace, yet (to speak strictly so as to satisfy Conscience) Peace is but ill
bought, if we must purchase it at so dear a rate as the loss of truth: And this
Truth concerning the sole Sovereign Power of our Lord Christ in appointing all
matters of his Worship -- is a point so necessary to be maintained, and so
utterly inconsistent with the supposing that any thing is to be obtruded which
he has not commanded, that we dare not allow our selves in the practice of any
thing which may prejudice that fundamental.

R. B. 1. How often have I answered that saying about selling Truth for Peace,
Whether not separating be prejudicial to a fundamental, viz Christ's Sovereignty?
and must hear it again in the old confusion without any notice of what has
been said. See my Treatise of Infant Baptism on that point particularly. Do I
fell thirty three Truths, when I read thirty three untruths in your Writings?
Do I sell Truth, if I should hear you preach or pray erroneously, and impose
your confused prayers on the people? or impose this or that Meter or Tune on
them in singing of Psalms?

2. Here you say [Matters of Worship] before it was [in Worship.] And even the
word. [Worship] is taken so variously, as calls for explication, before we
determine whether man may appoint matters of Worship: For if you will call
[putting off the Hat] and reverent gestures, in particular, and Metres, and
Tunes, and the Method and words of the particular Prayer or Sermon, by the name
of Worship, then man may appoint it.

3. It is an untrue supposition, and but a begging of the question, that our
presence with any thing obtruded unlawfully, is a prejudice to that fundamental
of the Sovereignty of Christ. All men that sin do sin against his Sovereignty:
And all that obtrude any thing unlawfully, sin against it by that obtrusion.
But if you obtrude a rash and passionate prayer on the people, or an erroneous
or disorderly prayer, or an ill-composed Hymn or Psalm, their presence is no
approbation of your error, nor denying of Christ's Sovereignty.

Do you, or can you believe and make all your followers believe, that the
Synagogue-Worship, and the Temple-Worship were kept so pure, by the Priests,
Levites, and Pharisees in Christ's days, as that there was nothing of humane
Tradition obtruded? Or nothing but what God commanded? Can you believe this? Or
can you believe that Christ was not usually or often present there? See Luke 4.
16. At Nazareth where he had been brought up, as his custom was, he went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day -- And of Paul its said, Acts 17. 2. As his
manner was, he went in to them, and three Sabbath days reasoned -- Or do you
believe, that Christ was a sinner? and that he contradicted his own
Sovereignty? What! and yet be a perfect Savior? Who is it now that prejudiceth
fundamentalls?

Sect. 46. E. B. And we judge we have sufficient warrant from what the Apostles
did in a like case, Acts 15. 24. For if they reproved such as preached up
Circumcision and other Legal Ceremonies, at that day, when as the Apostles had
given them no such Commandment, saying of them, that they subverted or spoiled
the souls of the Disciples, then may we affirm the like of those men now, who
in things equally indispensible, do act with every whit as little authority,
from whom on that very account we think it our duty to separate.

R. B. 1. The authority of the King and lawful Magistrates is more about the
Circumstantials of Worship (as whether Abiathar shall be High Priest, etc.)
than the false Teachers was about that doctrine.

2. The Apostles do indeed declare that they sent them not to preach, The Case
Acts 15.
or not such doctrine: But that's not the thing on which they lay the great
accusation, but on the false and dividing doctrine which they preached. Christ
says of one that cast out Devils in his Name, and followed him not, Let him
alone; he that is not against us, is for us: And Moses wished all the Lords
people were Prophets: But these false Teachers would have made the keeping of
Moses Law to be necessary to salvation: And can you prove that the Minister
does so, whom I use to hear? Do all the Parish Ministers do so? Can you see no
difference between one that says, The Law or Cannons command me to use this
Surplice or Form as an indifferent thing:] and one that says [Except you do
this or that, you break Gods Law and cannot be saved: Except you separate from
all Parish Churches, you sin against God, and prejudice a fundamental? Sure it
is one thing to say, God says this, or binds you to this, or forbids you this?
and its another thing to say, The King, or the Bishop says it.

3. And what is it that keeps you from seeing how strongly you confute your
self? Acts 15. against the Sparatists.
Is there a word in Acts 15. to forbid all Church communion with those that
taught even this subverting false doctrine? How many Texts be there that
intimate that the Churches long (without a prohibition) held communion with the
erroneous judaizing Christians? Till they grew obstinate, and grew up to a
Heresy, and were the Separaters themselves, and did subvert the Gospel and
faith of Christ. But yet prove that such doctrine is held by our Parish
Churches, and I will leave them: Do not the Independents offer to subscribe the
Doctrine of the Church of England? Sure then they think its Doctrinals to be
sound.

Sect. 47. E. B. By two Arguments you labor to defend your irregular way of
Communion: 1. That in the Primitive Churches there were many corruptions, which
the Apostle writes against, but does not advise any because of them to
separate. But I answer -- It is not corruption or error barely considered as
such, that we account to be a sufficient ground of separation: But the Imposing
of that error with on high hand, and making a submission to it (at least in our
practice and outward observance) the very condition of Communion: This we say,
is a thing which necessitates us to make a separation.

R. B. Mark that you distinguish not of Corruption or Error, Mr. Bagshaw's too
loose communion with all Heretics that impose not.
nor except any, but what is Imposed. And when I had answered all this so
fully, why will you deign to confute a Book, while you disdain to take notice
what it says?

1. Who would have thought that you are so much looser in your communion than
we are? I will separate from that Church which in the essential matter (
Pastor, or all the flock) after admonition retains such Corruption and Error,
as is directly contrary to any essential point of Christianity, though they
impose it not on others: But by these words it seems, as scrupulous as you are,
you would not separate from Heretics or Ungodly ones, if they do not Impose
their Heresy and Impiety!

2. How often have I urged you to prove, that our public Parish Ministers whom I
advise men to hear, do Impose any more than you your self do? His own Imposing.
By choosing what Chapter to read, you impose on the people to hear that
Chapter then or none? By choosing what Place, Hour, Method, Words, ye^, Matter,
and Meter, Tune, etc. you impose upon the people to join in all these, or not
to have communion with you therein. And so our Teacher does by reading
Common Prayer and wearing the Surplice, impose on us to hear him so reading, or
to stay away. But he makes no Laws: he commands us no Ceremony: They are
commanded by others, and not by him: And it is not in your own practice of any
thing forbidden of God, that I advise men to have communion with such; but only
in Gods true Worship, though in the circumstances or manner the Minister
himself, say or do something that is forbidden; as every Teacher in the world
does, though not in the same degree. It is one thing to submit to be present at
the Worship, which the Pastor performs in some faulty manner: And another
thing wilfully to do evil your self, or to approve of his failings or your own.

Sect. 48. E. B. To which I add only this, that however the presenting our
bodies at a Worship which we do not inwardly approve of, may render us
excusable, and justiste us among men, yet we are sure it will not in the sight
of God who hates hypocrisy --

R. B. Though you confound, Of approving what we join in.
I must distinguish the essentials of the Worship from the circumstances, and
outward imperfections in the manner. I do inwardly approve of the matter or
substance of the Worship which I join in, in the main; and labor to pray with
my heart when I join in the Common Prayer; though I consent not to the whole
Method, nor to the defects. And when I hear a man in free prayer use confusion,
disorder, unseemly words, Whether he be an Hypocrite, who joyneth with any
manner of Worship which he approves not?
and when I hear one man drop the error of an Arminian, or a Lutheran, another
of an Antinomian, another of an Anabaptist, another of a Separatist, etc. in
his prayer, I do not inwardly approve of that error or disorder, any more than
of the defects of forms: And yet if it were hypocrisy to be present, I would
join with no man living. Can all your hearers inwardly approve of all that you
say, if you preach and pray but as you write? If they can, its time to pity
them. And are they Hypocrites else for joining with you?

Sect. 49 E. B. p. 14. 1. This is clear in Scripture, Self-contradiction.
that our Lord Christ (who was himself holy and separated from sinners) did
never call or design his Church to be an impure mixed body of holy and unholy
without any distinction, blended and hudled up together, but -- to be an holy
separate people -- and to depart from unrighteousness.

R. B. 1. Remember Reader, (for he will not remember) that but even now he told
us, that it is not Corruption and Error barely as such, that is a sufficient
ground of separation, without Imposition: And now here is nothing but Mixture
of Holy and Unholy. Reconcile these if you can.

2. Christ that was perfectly separated from sinners, had yet ordinary
communion with sinners in a sinful or culpable manner of performance (unless
the Jews were all perfect) Therefore our separation must be such as Christ's
was, in our measure.

3. Impurity, and unholiness, and sin is not the Matter of Gods Call, or
designment either in the Church or out; but of his Permission: But Communion
with those Churches which by permission have sin and impurity in them, is a
commanded thing. And they that must depart from iniquity, Whether no Church may
be communicated with that is not such as Christ called and designed it to be?
must not always depart from the worshipping Assembly where some unrighteous
persons are. Your argument, if it be any, must run this: Christ did never call
or design his Church to be an impure mixed body of holy and unholy. The Parish
Churches which you persuade us to communion with, are impure mixed bodies:
Therefore the Parish Churches are such as Christ never called or designed them
to be. Suppose we grant you the Conclusion: Whoever is a sinner is such as
Christ never called or designed him to be. But your Question intimates that
you would argue thus. [Whatever Church is such as Christ did not call it or
design it to be, is not to be communicated with: But all the Parish Churches
are such as Christ did not call or design them to be; Ergo -- The Minor you
prove, Whatever Church is an impure mixed body of holy and unholy, etc. is such
as Christ did not call or design them to be: But the Parish Churches are such
--

But I answer you; 1. A Church is no Church that wants the Essentials required
by Christ: But he that will not communicate with Church or person that wants
the Perfection which Christ calls them to, shall communicate with no Church
or person on Earth.

2. The word [mixt] is ambiguous; and implies a double act; one of the Impure
part, and that Christ designeth not, but forbids: the other of the holy, who
join with some that are unholy; and that in some Cases Christ commands, and
did practice himself.

3. Without distinction indeed it should not be: for Discipline is appointed to
distinguish regularly.

4. Take home the argument, and try it on your self. [Whatever Church is such
as Christ did not call and design it to be, is not to be communicated with: But
a Church that has an erroneous Preacher, or an erroneous sinful people is such
as Christ did not call or design it to be: Ergo -- And will you then
communicate with any in the world, or any with you?

Sect. 50. E. B. p. 14. Though through the Corruption of men and negligence of
Church Officers, many ungodly profane Formalists and hypocrites did (and daily
do) creep in; yet there is a strict command given to put such out of the
Church, and turn aside from them -- If such are to be withdrawn from, then if
any Church which is admonished concerning them shall still maintain, abett and
countenance them, that Church is defiled, and unfit to be communicated with, 1
Cor. 5. 7. Eccles. 9. 18. Heb. 12. 15.

R. B. 1. It is only gross sinners, after just Admonition upon proof, that are
to be put out. The Officers ought not to do it without proof. 2. Have you or
others rightly Admonished every Parish Minister that you call us to separate
from, and convicted them upon proof, when you have heard them speak for
themselves? When a Church is to be separated from for approving sin?
3. And who gave you authority so to examine other Pastors, being but a single
person? 4. We easily grant (and earnestly desire) that true Church-Justice
should make a difference: But in case the Officers do not their duty, it is
none of the peoples duty to separate therefore, having done their own part,
except in these cases: 1. That the Error or Crime be so great, as to be
inconsistent with Christianity, or Church communion. 2. That the Church do not
only neglect it, but deliberately Own that Error or Crime in its aggravated
state, as it is so inconsistent with Christianity or Communion; Not only being
consequentially guilty of it, (as the best man may be of the most heinous sin
of another, by some omission of his duty to cure it) but making it their
profession or Practice. 3. That this be done, not by some particular members
only, but by an essential part of the Church, that is, either by the Pastor, or
by the main body of the people. 4. That this be fully proved, or so notorious
as to need no proof. 5. That they be impenitent herein after due admonition:
When these five things concur, it is a duty to separate from a Church as unfit
for Christian Communion. (And in lower cases it is a duty to prefer a Better,
when we can have it.)

But its much higher (or lower rather) that you go: 10. F. doctrine
You say [A Church which after admonition and discovery of offenders, will not
use her authority to cast them out.] This may be by misinformation on the
sinners side, or by mere negligence, as in Eli's case, and may be a great sin,
and yet not the same in kind, as that which should be censured; nor such as
will unchurch that Church, nor make its communion unlawful to the innocent.

As to your proofs, the Texts you* cite are all written to the whole Churches
as Churches, who are bid put them away, etc. save that to Timothy, and Rev. 2.
which is to the Church-Rulers. And it follows not, that if a Church, or
Church-Rulers who have the power of the Keys, are bid to reject or cast out,
or not suffer an Heretic or wicked person, and to have no fellowship with
them, therefore every member is forbidden to have Communion with that Church in
Gods Worship, unless they cast such a one out. I did by many Scripture
instances, Rev. 2. and 3. and 1 Cor. 11. and 15, etc. prove the contrary, to
which you give no answer.

5. Let all sober Readers note how few in the world we shall have communion
with on your terms. How certainly you will turn all Churches into strife and
bitter envyings, confusion, and every evil work. For Railers and Covetous among
the rest, are those that must be avoided: And if any member of the Church shall
think that one Railer, or one Covetous person is kept in unjustly, away they
must go, and condemn the Church as unworthy of Communion. And who will not
think that read your Book, that you would be one of the first accused of
Railing? Yea, how few even of the strictest separating Churches are they, that
neglect not Discipline upon some one person? It may be it may be a rich or
powerful man, that will persecute or divide the Church if he be cast out? Is
there no Gathered Churches (as they are called) that have one Railing woman in,
or one Covetous person?

6. But Sir, our question is not only of the Communion of Members, but also of
strangers occasionally and rarely: And what call has a stranger to try the
Discipline of another Church? Or what opportunity has he to know all their
members crimes, and to admonish them? Why may not I in my travail communicate
with a Church whose members and Discipline I know not? At least all Parish
Churches have not been thus admonished by you.

Sect. 51. E. B. p. 14. Lastly, Which will fully answer the scruple, It is to
be considered, that the Primitive Churches were settled by the Apostles, and
constituted according to the Divine pattern, having all the Ordinances of
Christ, and true Officers rightly established among them; so that though many
scandalous sins did break out, and were visible among some of the members, yet
a power was still retained in each Church for the keeping themselves pure by
casting out offenders; whereby they were kept to the institution and orders of
Christ, without any universal innovation or degenerating in those Essentials of
Order as well as Doctrine, which they fell into in the ages after; and when
Antichristianism (which was then working) did manifestly show it self, not only
in rejecting truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. but in imposing error, Rev. 13. 16, 17. then
was separation made necessary.

R. B. Reader, this confused huddle of words it seems is the thing he trusts
to as a full answer to the scruple. But 1. If such Churches are to be
communicated with, as yet retain all the Essentials of Office, Order and
Doctrine, then those are to be communicated with, that are now in question: But
the former seems here intimated by himself, That our said Churches have all
such essentials, is thus proved. Wherever there are true Pastors and a
Christian flock related mutually as such, receiving the holy Scriptures as
such, there are all things essential to a true Church, for Office, Order and
Doctrine. But it is so (...) the Parish Churches in question: To stay here to
write a particular proof of the validity of the Ministers Calling, any further
than to put the accuser if he can to prove, that any essential part is wanting
(whether in Qualification, Ordination, or Consent) would be vain, it being done
so largely by the old Non-conformists.

2. But is there a Power retained in such Churches to cast out offenders? Answ.
Yes; A Power divine, or given by Christ. Remember that (as I have proved Disp.
of Ordinat.) men are not the Makers of the Office of the Sacred Ministry, nor
the Measurers or Givers of the Power; but only the Choosers of the person that
shall receive what Christ by Institution gives, and the Ministerial Investers
of the person in that power. Therefore,

Whoever receives the Office of a Pastor receives the power of the Keys, to
take in and cast out (Though not arbitrarily nor ungoverned by himself) But the
Parish Ministers (or very many of them) now in question do receive the Office
of Pastors: Therefore they receive the power of the Keys to take in and cast
out.

If you say that the Bishops intend it not in ordaining them: I answer, 1. It
suffices that Christ intends it, who is the only maker and giver of the
power: The Book of Ordination makes them solemnly Covenant to give faithful
diligence always so to Minister the Doctrine, and Sacraments, and the
Discipline of Christ as the Lord has ^^^manded, etc. And to teach nothing as
required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that which they are persuaded
may be concluded and proved by the Scripture, as containing all such necessary
doctrine: And to be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away
all erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to Gods word: And to use both
public and private monitions and exhortations as well to the sick, as the
whole: And to be diligent in prayers and reading the holy Scriptures, and in
such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of
the world and the flesh. And that they will be diligent to frame and fashion
themselves and their families, according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make
both themselves and them, as much as they can, wholesome examples to the flock,
etc. And till lately the said Book recited Acts 20. 28. to the Presbyters at
their Ordination.

And the Canon 26. says [No Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving
of the holy Communion any of his Cure or flock, which be openly known to live
in sin notorious without repentance; Besides what the Rubric says to that
purpose.

And now (though I think this one of the greatest sores which you have touched)
yet judge whether even the Laws and Canons concede no Power to the Ministers.

3. But if they did not, the Power of Office is one thing, and the Liberty of
exercising it is another: We have Power from Christ to preach: and if we be
silenced and our liberty restrained by men, that proves us not to be no true
Ministers. If you mean that no Church is to be communicated with where the
Pastor is hindered by men from the full discharge of his Office, you mistake,
and can never prove it.

4. They that voluntarily neglect their Office (without hinderance by the force
of men) are more to be blamed than those that are so forced. But in the
Primitive Churches Discipline was lamentably neglected voluntarily; as
appears in the Case of most of the seven Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. for which
they are threatened by Christ, and in the Corinthians case: yea, corrupted by
such as Diotrophes. And do you think that the Church that has Power to do
well, and will not, is therefore to be communicated with because it can? that
is, because it sins not through disability, but negligence or wilfulness?

5. But the Core of your erroneous reasoning is behind; you say, they were --
without any Universal innovation or degenerating in those Essentials of Order
as well as doctrine which they fell into in the ages after, etc. An Universal
degenerating in the Essentials even of Doctrine and Order too, is a big and a
sad word: And the time pointed at by you being so early, if I can understand
you, you do (as the Seekers) unchurch the universal Church of Christ. For if it
Degenerated Universally in the Essentials of doctrine, it Universally
apostatized from Christianity: For where any Essential part is lost, the
Essence and just Name is lost. 11. Dreadful false doctrine. Read and fear the
tendency of separation.
And I beseech you, let not rashness or passion blind you to over-overlook the
dreadfulness of this Doctrine.

1. If Christ had then no Church (as he had not, if the Essential degeneration
was Universal) then he was no King of the Church on Earth, Mr. William's
doctrine.
no Lord, no Teacher, no Savior of the Church; no Intercessor for it in the
Heavens? And do you not then dethrone him, and deny him indeed to be the
Christ? What, a Head without a Body? A King without a Kingdom?

2. So you will make all Gods Promises of his Churches perpetuity, as built on
the Rock, against which Hell Gates should not prevail, and of being with them
to the end of the world, etc. to be false and fail. And if the whole Church
failed, and the Promises made to it, what particular soul can trust Gods
Promises.

3. If all the Church apostatized, how shall we know that Apostates did not
corrupt all the Copies of Scripture that are come down to us?

4. And then the Article [I believe the holy Catholic Church] would have been
a falsehood or error.

5. And then there could be no Baptism, no Sacrament of the Lords Supper, etc.

6. And then there must be New Apostles with Miracles to make a new Church. And
thus we have Mr. Williams doctrine, whose Story I recited in my last Book.

Sect. 52. E. B. p. 15. [This necessity of separation which began then
continues still, since our Churches, though reformed from Popery (that is,
from Antichristianism) in some points, yet are not restored to the primitive
pattern and purity.]

R. B. 1. Whether by [our Churches] you mean only the Parish Churches of godly
Ministers, or also All the Protestant Churches, and all other Universally
through the world, I am not sure: But as far as I can conjecture by your words
you mean; All. Because you speak of them as in a Continuance in part in the
Universal degeneration in Essentials; And you speak of them as avoiding Popery
but in part, and call them [our Churches,] and mention no Church in the world
here that you own as a true Church (and whether any where in all your writings
I remember not.) I confess I pretend not to know the mind of so careless a
Writer by any words, but very plain ones: But if this be your mind as it
seems to be, you would do well (being so bold a man) to tell the world your
mind more plainly: And you that think that no Truth is to be sold (as you call
it) for Peace, let Independents, Presbyterians, Separatists, Anabaptists, etc.
know it, if indeed you think that all their Churches are to be separated from,
as well as the Parish Churches. If this be your mind, I suppose you are but a
Preacher to Auditors your self, and not a Pastor to any Church. He that thinks
no Truth should be concealed for fear of suffering, should not carry it in
darkness and dissimulation to the Pastors and Churches about him, if really he
believe them to be no Pastors or Churches, or not to be communicated with. But
I think that you better deserve to be disowned by them, than they by you.

Certainly few or no Protestant Church, that I have known, will say that it is
restored to the primitive pattern and Purity in degree. If that therefore be
your meaning, you do separate from all the Churches in the world. But if you
mean not, in Degree, but in Essence, I still challenge you to prove that the
Churches in question want any thing Essential; or need a Restoration to that
which they never lost?

Sect. 52. E. B. p. 15. [So that more may be said for separation now (when
whole Churches are out of order and corrupt) than could be at that time when
corruption had infected only particular members.]

R. B. 1. Is it now come to that? Is it the number corrupted that must decide
the case? Who can tell where to find this Proteus? sometime it is the mixture
of holy and unholy: sometime it is not bare corruption without Imposition: And
now it is the numbers corrupted, (whole Churches:) And in the next sentence --
you shall see what? 2. Is the whole Church any thing besides the particular
members? Is there any other matter? or any form besides the Relation of the
particular members? 3. I challenge you if you can to prove any corruption in
the Churches in question, which is not consistent with the essence? I know not
so much error or harm, in the people of the Church that I now join with, where
I live, as Paul charge on the Corinthians or Galathians: (Though I suppose
the primitive Ministry and gifts more excellent than any of ours.)

Sect. 53. E. B. More of the Causes of separation.
[For it is not, as I said before, Corruption barely, no nor Imposition barely,
that is a sufficient ground for any to separate (For where some lesser errors
are held but not Imposed; or, where only necessary things are imposed, we shall
not forbear Communion.) But when error is once imposed, and by a strong hand
forcibly maintained (notwithstanding all admonitions and endeavors of
reformation,) here we must separate or consent to sin. --

R. B. Better and better: Here it is granted that neither Corruption barely,
nor Imposition barely, will justify separation. But by Corruption and
Imposition barely seems to be meant such formaliter quoad actum, without
including the degree of the matter. For it is expounded of [Lesser errours]
held and not Imposed; or of necessary things Imposed. So that if it be Imposed
on us to Worship God, it will not prove us no Christians: we are beholden to
you for this clemency. And if we should mistake a point of Genealogy or
Chronology it will not un-church us. This is something.

2. Well, but what is the crime that makes our Communion unlawful? [when
error is once imposed, etc.] so then (if you can speak sense) any error
Imposed will do it. What if it be Imposed on the Church, to use a Translation
of the Bible that has some error in (And is there any without?) Must that
Church needs be separated from? And yet the Church that used the same
Voluntarily (and therefore more sinfully) is not to be separated from? What if
erroneously it be imposed on the Church to meet at an inconvenient time or
place? What if some flaw or error in Chronology on smaller-matters, were in
their imposed Confession, which the Pastor erroneously subscribeth to? It
seems an Infallible Imposing Church may be communicated with, and no other. But
do you not know that there is a Ministerial as well as a Magistratical forcing
Imposition? Every Pastor that speaks as by Commission from Christ, Imposes
somewhat on the people! He Imposes doctrine, and Method, and words in prayer,
and times, places, utensils, orders, metres, tunes, as aforesaid. Must all
these be separated from (that is almost all the Pastors in the World;) And is
there no remedy?

3. But perhaps you lay all the stress [on a strong hand and force!] If so,
prove that your Ministerial Imposition of error in your Prayer or Conduct,
does not make Communion unlawful; and yet that forcible imposition does? As if
Voluntary reception made less the sin! Prove that the Church of the Jews was
nullified whenever any error was imposed by authority! Or when the Pharisees
then in power had corrupted it in Christ's time by force. If this were your
meaning, then separation could scarce be Lawful, till there was a Constantine,
a Christian Emperor, who (being not infallible) might force or impose
something amiss, whereas you before talk of an early universal failing,
necessitating separation. It seems then that no Countries are so unhappy as
those that have Christian Magistrates, who being fallible, impose some error:
And that in all the Ages and Countries that have Heathen or Infidel Rulers,
(notwithstanding Church Corruptions not forced) Separation is a sin.

4. But I would fain know, whether it be the Imposition, that nullifieth the
Church, or makes Communion unlawful, or only the obeying that Imposition? If it
be the Imposition, then a Heathen Prince may nullify the Church at pleasure.
If it be only the obedience, then, 1. Must it be once obeying or continual?
What if Aurelian or Dioclesian forbid Church Assemblies: will once obeying them
nullify all the Churches, or make their Communion unlawful? 2. Why will not
obeying a Minister or de^^ver make it as unlawful as obeying a King? 3. Why
does not the doing it without constraint (as is said) make it as unlawful as
obedience?

5. Is it the King and Parliament, or the Bishops whose Impositions have this
sad effect? If the former, then (as is said) it was 300 years after Christ,
before separation was lawful. If the latter, then it is not force only that
does it; And Independent, or Anabaptist or Presbyterian Pastors may Impose as
well as Bishops. For the Bishops disclaim all coercive power in the Church, (as
I have showed to Dr. Moulin.)

Sect. 54. E. B. The second Argument is the example of the former
Non-conformists, who you say were all against separation, etc.

R. B. Here you cite a passage of Mr. Hildershams, that the authority of man is
not to be set against Gods, and that we may know more than those that went
before us, etc. And did not) I tell you so my self? who dissenteth from you in
this? Bring your proof from Scripture against them and us, and we will hear
you. Or give us but good proof that you are a wiser and better man than they,
and are better taught of God, and we will yield this by-reason from authority.
But to bring Mr. Hildershams acknowledgement of Gods authority above man's,
against Mr. Hildershams arguments against separation, and his persuasions to
come to the beginning of the Churches prayers, and to imply that you know more
than those worthy men, when you give the world so little evidence of it, does
prove the goodness of your cause as much as it proves your humility or
self-acquaintance.

Sect. 55. E. B. p. 17, 18. Boasting Ignorance.
[The former non-conformists held Arminianisme so fundamental and dangerous an
error, etc. But you do not only speak favorably of it, but also Proudly tell
us that you are confident, not one of many hundreds, who speak against
Communion with Arminians, do understand what Arminianisme is -- As if -- plain
Christians could not easily come to know it.

R. B. 1. As under Church-tyrants all is Schism, which contradicts their
Schism, so with some men all is Proudly spoken which contradicts their
Pride, and supposes them to be but half as ignorant as they are.

2. Were all the Non-conformists of one mind about Arminianisme? Was not
Arminius himself against Prelacy and Ceremonies? and many of his followers? Who
were the great Antiadiaphorists in Germany, but Iliricus, Amsdorsius, Gallus
and other Lutherans? Is not Mr. Dury a Nonconformist who has forty years
labored to bring the Lutherans (who are as far from us as Arminius) and the
Calvinists to Communion?

3. Who would be at the labor to read over the many Volumes that are written
about Pre-determination, Free Will, Concurse, and Grace, by which such Ignorant
souls as I, cannot to this day tell what they mean, nor in many or most points
wherein they differ, when this man, and his plain followers (Women and Boys)
so easily know it! But like the Pope that can Infallibly expound the
Scriptures, but is so wise that he will not do it. Le Blank, and many more
might have spared their pains of right stating the Controversies, if they had
this man's Key. I never yet met with the man that could but make me well
understand, what it is that is meant by Free Will, nor what by the Power which
they dispute of, to do good, much less open all their meanings de scientia
media, de Concursu prae-determinations, etc. But here is one can easily tell us
all. But I warrant him he will not. Some men (alas, and some Treachers) will be
wise, and humble, in despite of Wisdom and Humility; and Christians in
despite of Love, Unity and Peace.

Sect. 56. E. B. p. 18. His own Free Will has not the least power to receive
the things of God.

R. B. 1. What not sanctified Free Will? 2. What! not a Receiving obediential
power? A receiving power is a passive power (as it is strictly taken.) Has a
free-agent less Power to receive Grace, than a marble to receive the engraving
of the workman? Does no man ever receive Grace? Or do they receive what they
cannot receive? Has a man no more Receptive Power than a block or stone? I
know its said [The natural man Receives not, etc.] that is, Understands not,
believes not, and loves not in sensu Composito: But its never said, that [Our
free will has not the least power to receive.] But I have said so much of
this, and the next point (the badness of nature) to which he gives not any
answer at all, that I wonder that the man thinks that one that is all tongue
and no ears or eyes, is fit for credit or humane converse.

Sect. 57. E. B. You, 12. False doctrine and pernicious.
Jesuit like, are not afraid to say, The Scipture tells us not sufficiently
and particularly which Books in it self are Canonical, nor that the various
Readings are the right, nor whether every Text be brought to us uncorrupted.]

R. B. 1. And by implying your assertion of the contrary, you become a false
Teacher of pernicious doctrine; As if you designed to make men Jesuits or
Infidels, by renouncing the Scriptures, as soon as they find, that these things
are not sufficiently there done and thence to be proved, without subordinate
testimonies.

2. Why do not you save such as Dr. J. Reignolds, Chamier, and others their
great labor, and prove out of Scripture it self, which of all the various
readings mentioned by Beza, Capelus, and others, and found in various Copies,
is the right? and so of the rest?

Sect. 58. E. B. So that in effect you do resolve the Credit of the Holy
Scriptures into the truth of Church History -- which words are so contrary to
the true Protestant doctrine -- so fully agreeing with the doctrine of the
Jesuits, etc.

R. B. 1. As to agreeing with the Jesuits fully, 36th Untruth.
etc. all that know their Writings, know it is an untruth. 2. True Protestants
usually say the same things that I do. Though you may meet with some few like
your self that do not. 3. I have fully opened in the Preface to the 2d. Edit.
etc. of my Saints Rest, how ambiguous that word [Resolving into] is, and how
far your saying is true or false. He that enquireth what Laws are in force in
England, must distinguish of these two Questions, 1. Which are the Laws? which
are the Statutes in force? what words are false Printed, and what right? what
Copies most perfect? And, 2. What Authority are these statutes of?

The Authority of them is all resolved into the Authority of the King and
Parliament. But we that are not so wise as you, Whether the true Reading and
uncorruptness of particular Texts be sufficiently known by the light of the
Scripture alone?
must be beholden to various Copies, Records, Printers, Lawyers, to know which
are the Statutes in force? and whether any words be falsely Printed; And if we
find so many hundred various Readings as be in the Bible, we cannot know in
every one which is right* and which is wrong, by the bare inspection of the
Book it self.

And, if you have any considering faculty left, and your free will has the
least power to receive any truth, or stop you in your error, methinks these
questions should force you into your wits.

Qu. 1. Shall he that by the Book alone can resolve all these doubts, see it in
the Original, or only in Translations? If in the Original,

2. Shall he see the Autographs or only the Transcripts? or Impressions?

3. If the Autographs be not to be seen, but only Transcripts, has God
promised unerring infallibility to all the Scribes and Printers in the world,
or to some only, or to none?

4. If to all; where is the promise? If to some, how shall we know them? If to
none, may they not all err?

5. When many Copies so much differ as they do, is it not certain that some of
them erred?

6. Can all Women and Unlearned persons or Ministers, judge by the Original
Transcripts who understand not the Original tongues?

7. Must he that shall be certain see all the various Copies, or will it serve
turn to see some one only?

8. If he must see all, who is he or she in the world that can be certain? If
they must see many, who knows how many and which?

9. If they must see but one Copy, how shall he know that it is the Truest Copy
that falls into his hands, and that all that differ from that are false? Do
not corrupt Copies come to other men's hands? Why then might they not do so to
his?

10. How can he judge of the various Readings of all the rest of the Copies,
which he never saw?

11. If a Translation will serve him to judge of the various readings in the
Original, are they not in the Translation fore-judged of to his hand?

12. Is any man Infallible in Translating? Is there a promise of Infallibility
to them?

13. Do not the Translations differ?

14. How shall men know which Translation is truest; (when none is perfect?)

15. Must he see all Translations that shall judge? or will one serve (as
aforesaid) And how shall he judge of those he sees not?

16. Is it by Inspiration from Heaven, such as the Prophets had, that the true
Reading must be known? or to ordinary (at least sanctified) Reason by evidence
in the Text it self? If the former, none but Prophets can know it. If the
later, you can prove it to a Rational or sanctified man, from some intrinsic
evidence. For instance suppose a man never saw but two Printed English Bibles,
and was never told which is right by others, and in one is Printed, Heb. 12. 2.
he [despised the same] viz. the Cross, and in the other [he despised the shame]
(for so two of them do differ:) how shall he prove which Printer erred?

17. Do all the Men and Women that are Godly actually know the true and
incorrupt copies and readings, by the Book it self without man's testimony? Or
what is the name of that one Man or Woman in the World that you know, who
without ever hearing it from man, could tell all the true readings from the
false, or could tell that the Canticles or Ecclesiastes or the Book of Jonas
were Canonical, and that the Book of Baruck, Wisdom, and Paul's Epistle to the
Laodiceans, and Clemens to the Corinthians, were not. Do you know his name,
that ever knew this by Reading the Bible only, without being ever told it by
any? If not, and if it be sine qua non to men's receiving of the Bible it self,
that some one brings it to their hands; judge how wisely and fairly you deal
with poor souls to talk at such a confident and yet confused rate.

And, 18. Let me ask you one question more; Is it necessary to Salvation that
men be able to read? Has God promised it to all or most that shall be saved?
Faith comes by hearing, as the most ordinary way of old: And he that will
Preach the Gospel to most Nations under Heaven, must Convert more than can
read, or but a few. And if you Preach the Gospel to a Congregation that cannot
read, do you recite all the various readings in the Hebrew and Greek to them?
If not, can they judge of that they never heard? If you do, are they ever the
wiser as to know of themselves which of them is the right?

19. But if you say that you suppose not only Grace but great Learning and
Study to discern these things, how comes it to pass that the most Learned,
Studious and Godly men do still so much differ about the various Readings? (as
Lud. Capellus, Usher, Heinsius, Bootius, De Dieu, and others.) And how come the
Churches in the Ages next the Apostles to leave out so many Books of the Canon
as many of them did, while others received them? And Luther, Althamar and
others, to set no more by James's Epistle than they did? And so many Godly men
long, and yet, to receive much of the Apocrypha?

20. How durst you that speak so hardly of the Jesuits, honor them so much as
to make your silly ones believe, that their doctrine in this is no worse than
mine, when in so many Books, I have left that at large which may confute you?

And you (wisely) ask me to tell you whether I will take the Jesuits into my
Communion, because they hold the same with the Arminians with whom I will
communicate! so they hold the same with all Christians, that there is a God,
and a Christ and the Scripture true? But it is not for this that I renounce
their Communion, but for some things else. Will you communicate with none that
holds any thing (yea any error) which the Jesuits hold? Or did you dream
that the Arminians hold all that the Jesuits hold? Or did you dream that the
Arminians hold all that the Jesuits hold? Sir, I am ashamed to spend time-upon
such triflings?

Sect. 59. E. B. The former Non-conformists thought there was no possibility of
salvation for a Papist -- But you tell us that you affect not the honor of
this Orthodoxness. A lame deceitful recital, and 17. Crime, Cruel judging
millions unknown without a Call.


R. B. It is confutation enough of such an accuser to recite the words which he
accuses; which are [Vnless you do (as Mr. Perkins does to make it good) be so
charitable to all the millions else among them, as not to call them Papists,
except they practically hold the most pernicious opinions of their Councils and
Divines. I confess I affect none of the honor of that Orthodoxness which
consists in sentencing Millions and Kingdoms to Hell whom I am unacquainted
with.] So that I distinguish of Papists properly so called who practically hold
all the Popish errors, and Nominal Papists that call themselves such or are
called so by others, who know not or practically hold not the pernicious part
of their errors: These latter I refused to undertake to judge to Hell, and
consequently to damn all in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, etc. who are called
Papists. And if this accuser be more valiant, and dare damn them all, I do not
wonder that he dare damn me for not damning them: For he that can eat and
digest an Ox, will never stick at one crumme more. But he should not be also
so cruel to the Reader as to put him to read my words twice over, because he
dismembers them, to make them seem to have some loathed sense.

Sect. 60. E. B. p. 19. The former Non-formists said, The filth of nature
cannot be sufficiently spoken of? -- But you, etc.

R. B. 1. When you tell us in what common Confession of theirs they say so, I
shall try whether you say any truer than in the rest. 2. Reader, I answered him
on this point before, by no less than twenty instances, proving that Nature may
be too ill spoken of, And he says nothing to any of them, but sings over his
old song again. Is not this a fine man to dispute with?

Sect. 61. E. B. I shall conclude with mentioning one thing more: 18. Crime
Justifying a falsehood, while you openly your self detect it.
I affirmed that by Flesh you had told us [war only meant, the sensitive
appetite] This you reply is an untruth and a mere fiction, for you never said
so. Sir, you had need have a good memory, for you have writ many Books; 37.
Untruth employed.
in which as containing many words, there cannot want much sin and vanity. And
indeed had you meditated strictly upon a quarter of what you have writ, you
could not be guilty of so strange forgetfulness. For in your Premonition to the
Saints Rest you have these very words, [Many think that by Flesh is meant only
Indwelling sin; when, alas, it is the sensitive appetite that it charge us to
subdue;] For which you quote, Romans 8. 3, 4, 5, etc.

R. B. You begin comfortably, with a promise to Conclude; but you proceed
sadly. 1. Is not the inference as strong against many words in your Preaching
as in mine and other men's writings, that in many words there cannot want much
sin?

2. You proclaim the aggravation of your sin, when you speak for meditating
strictly on what we write. Can you heap up untruths in Book after Book, and
commit all these Crimes, even when you have strictly meditated what you write?
Do you sin so studyedly and deliberately, and yet will you not Repent?

3. Reader, if ever thou will pity a poor self-conceited troubler of the
Church, pity this poor man, who here openly tells thee, that either he
understands not common sense, or else takes no heed what he says, but brings
a new untruth to justify a former, even into the open light, and triumphs in
his act. He tells you the charge which he undertaketh to prove; viz. that I
have written, that [by Flesh is only meant the sensitive appetite.] He now
undertaketh to prove that I said so, in the Premon. to the Saints Rest (which
is another Untruth) because I said [Many think that by Flesh the Scripture
means only our Indwelling sin, when, alas, it is the inordinate sensitive
appetite which it charge us to subdue.] Here he first leaves out several
words, especially the word [inordinate] because he read not the later Editions;
And yet he put in the word [only] which the Printer in the last Editions has
left out, and which openly shows the falsehood of his charge. Is it all one to
say, that [by Flesh is meant not only Indwelling sin, and to say It is not
meant at all?] Do you think he took any heed of the word [only] when he wrote
it? My business (not in the Premonition as he mis-reports, but in the Epistle)
was to prove the sinfulness of flesh-pleasing, and that when the Scripture bids
us subdue the flesh, and make no provision for it, etc. It does not only mean,
subdue the habits of Indwelling sin in the understanding and will, and make no
Provision for them, but also that we must prevent actual sin by subduing the
sensitive appetite unto reason, and ruling it by faith, and that even Original
and habitual sin it self consists partly in the Inordinateness of that
Appetite; And here I employed this proof from the Notation of the Name; q. d.
[If the sin to be subdued be called Flesh, then the Fleshly appetite is not
wholly to be excluded; For there is some reason why sin is called Flesh, rather
than Spirit. And what can the reason be, but that 1. The sensitive appetite it
self is Inordinate, and so part of the seat of sin; and 2. The understanding
and will are enslaved to the sense or flesh, and are vitiated with a sinful
inclination to serve the flesh or sense it self: And therefore he that reads
in Scripture such passages as require us to subdue the flesh, he must not
deceive himself by thinking that it is only Indwelling sin (that is in the
superior faculties) that is meant by flesh, and that the sensitive appetite is
not here meant at all, When as 1. Original sin it self is partly in the
sensitive appetite; And, 2. Actual sin is to be resisted by subduing the
sensitive appetite to reason, and bringing the body into subjection as well as
Indwelling sin. to be extirpated. And if the Name of Flesh be put upon
Indwelling sin, from the Fleshly interest and Inordinate appetite, then surely
this it self is not wholly to be excluded, as no part of the sense of the word
Flesh in Scripture. And when my words plainly express this sense, with what
face could this man, not only put other words upon me, which were none of my
own, but also another sense, and a sense clean contrary to the words? And this
to justify a former falsehood; And this after that in diverse Writings I have
fully, and plainly disputed of Original sin as it] is the corruption of the
superior faculties; and in diverse Books about Conversion showed the necessity
of the cleansing and renewing of those faculties! And here the word [only] was
before his eyes, a confutation of his calumny?

Sect. 62. E. B. And indeed Sir, that I may confess a secret to you, this very
passage of yours I looked on as so conceited and singular, and many years ago
it gave me so great offense, that I threw away your Book upon it, and never
would read it over, as not thinking it possible that one who erred in the very
entrance in so plain a truth, was able to instruct me in any thing that was
worth my knowing. --

R. B. 1. The Book was written about twenty one or twenty two years ago, and
you are a Young man yet: You surely begun very early to be past possibility of
being taught any thing by such as I. Is this only to declare your humility? or
that you speak evil of the Books which you never read? and that you are the
fittest man to be the accuser of them?

2. It may be there was some early antipathy between our judgments. For I will
confess such another secret to you, That about twelve years ago a Latin small
discourse came to my hand as famed to be yours, against the Species of
Monarchical Government, and the arguments against Monarchy in it seemed to me
such poor injudicious slender stuff, that (though I did not as you cast away
the Book till I came to the end) it was one occasion of my writing the twenty
Arguments against Democrasie, which I put into the Book which I have revoked
(my Polit. Aph. --)

3. Do you not tell the world how fit a Champion you are for any truth or
reformation, who when you read [not only indwelling sin] expound it [not at all
Indwelling sin,] and then glory that you cast away the Book as that which could
not possibly teach you --. And are you not by this time an excellent Scholar
and a very wise man, if you did so by all your other Books?

Sect. 63. E. B. p. 26. I am much confirmed in that judgment of your Book,
since a person yet living, and one worthy of credit, accuainted me, that when
the learned and judicious Mr. Herle had read that cryed-up Book of yours, he
told him, It had been happy for the Church of God if your friends had never
sent you to School. Mr. Cawdry had the same opinion of it; And another person
as knowing in the Mystery of Godliness as either of them told a friend of
mine, that notwithstanding the noise about you, you would end in flesh and
blood.

R. B. 1. A worthy question! What a Book is which you never read! I will help
you out, and mend your cause. You dispraise it that never read it; and you name
some that read it and dispraised it; And I that wrote it am far from praising
it. Therefore I hope you are gratified* and who will now contradict you?
(Though I confess for my own part, I think I shall not think my self fit to
tell the world in Print what any man's Book is, at the same time when I confess
that I never read it: But you may possibly avoid that way because it is mine.)

2. But he that employeth you shall miss of his design, of engaging me against
the names of Mr. Herle and Mr. Cawdrey, and against your unnamed person: It is
sufficient to me that I honor their names, and abhort all motions contrary to
the Laws of Christian Love; But I was not bound that they should love or honor
me, and if they did not, that is not my sin: But if my sin deserve it, I have
far greater accounts on which to be displeased with that sin. And I do with
hearty willingness hear the Prophecy of him that told your friend, I would end
in flesh and blood, to awaken me the more to the necessary fear and vigilance,
lest his Prophecy should prove true. But whether these stories be true or not,
it little concerns me to enquire. If they be not, I pray name not the
reporters or witnesses.

Sect. 64. E. B. You have promised me that you will make no Reply --

R. B. It was but conditionally [if you write at the former rates.] And your
alterations (by venturing to dispute for separation) have declared me not
obliged. And because I fear you were by those words encouraged the more to all
your untruths, I will promise you silence no more, though I purpose it. I have
done this that you might have a second Admonition to Repent, and the simple may
not believe your multiplied falsehoods: But now, he that will be hereafter
deceived by you, let him be deceived.

Sect. 65. E. B. 20. When you write next I entreat -- 1. That you will be
short, 2. And significant.

R. B. Your Counsel is Prudent Sir, but all men cannot attain to your exactness
and significancy! Nor will I follow your Rule till I see better effects of it.
Nor pretend Brevity for leaving a Book almost wholly unanswered, which I
pretend to answer as you do: And I will better show that I understand common
English, before I call to others for significancy.

Sect. 66. E. B. 1. That you will not mistake the thing you write about, but
labor clearly to understand the question.

R. B. But I will not undertake to make you understand it.

Sect. 67. E. B. Do not ramble and talk of Nature as it is Pure, 38. and 39.
Untruths employed.
when you should write about nature corrupted.

R. B. 1. Remember that it is not you but I that am the Respondent, and had the
stateing of the Question. Here therefore are two more falsehoods intimated, 1.
That the question was only about Nature as corrupted. 2. That I spoke of Nature
as pure, and not as corrupted. For the question put by me was about Nature as
Nature; and that men should not so speak against the corruption, as to
dishonor Gods part, Nature as Nature, nor yet as it is corrupted, to make it
worse than it is. So that I spoke not of it as Pure; but I spoke of it both
abstractedly as Nature, and also as corrupt.

Sect. 68. E. B. Do not discourse about Free Will at large, when you should
only handle free will in the things of God.

R. B. This implies another Untruth, 40. Untruth employed.
that I did not speak of Free Will in the things of God. To forbear the
breaking of some of Gods Laws, and to do somewhat commanded are the things of
God: I show that men have some free will to forbear Murder, Adultery, Theft,
Treason, Perjury, Perfecution, yea, and writing falsehoods. If not, why do you
cry out of Persecution, Silencing, Atheism, when men have not the least
free will to forbear them! Why do you refuse the imputation of your own
Untruths, if you have not the least free will to forbear them? Your words were
[Now we see one firm reason to deny the least allowance of free will in the
things of God, since those that hold it in any degree -- ]* The Synod of Dort
taught other Doctrine: And so does Mr. Fenner in his Book of wilful
Impenitence. And in the second Sheet of Mr. Dods sayings, when one had been
restrained from swearing at Dinner by his presence contrary to his use, he took
occasion to show, that men can do more than they do, and can forbear more evil
than they forbear.

Sect. 69. E. B. And because many Professors of Christianity are ignorant and
injudicious, do not think that therefore you do well to call Christians, 41.
Untruth, notorious.
considered as Christians so. These are evident and apparent Sophisms which
abound in your last Treatise.

R. B. These are deliberate written words: And if all this be the mere fiction
of your brain; If I have not one syllable that has any such importance; Nor
one word in my Books have the least show of such a thing; Nay, if the clean
contrary be most openly and plainly expressed in them, and yet rather than
confess your former falsehood, you fear not before God and man to second it with
this most immodest additional forgery, which has no Cloak, let your Reader
judge, and let your Conscience judge at last, whether Repentance was your duty.
He that says Christians considered as Christians are ignorant, injudicious,
etc. lays his charge on Christianity, more than on the men: Had you no way to
hide your former falsehood, but by this impudent forgery that I speak against
Christianity it self? Had not Repentance been a better reparation of your
prostituted honor, than this.

Sect. 70. E. B. Do not love to jumble absurd and insignificant Phrases
together: as to say [A defective, faulty, true Church.]

R. B. Reader, if thou expect that he should tell thee, the absurdity or
insignificancy of any one of all these words, thou must not put him to so much
condescension, but take it on his word, or rest unsatisfied. Whether Defective,
or faulty, be insignificant words, or whether no True Church be defective and
faulty, if you believe him, perhaps you may hear in his time.

Sect. 71. E. B. To mention a Political, Spiritual, Constitutive Head.

R. B. More wisdom still! which of these is the nonsense? Wisdom and humility
in the dark.
Is it that the Pope pretends to be a Political Head? Consult. D. Lud.
Moulins Jugulum Causae, and all Goldastus his three Volumes, with Chamier,
Rivet, Whitaker, Blondel, and all that write against him. Or is it that he
claims to be a Spiritual Head or Governor? Then all his own defenders and
all our opposers of him wrong him, till Mr. Bagshaw came to reform this
language: Or is it because he claims not to be the Constitutive Head of the
Church? Ask all those Papists that say it is Essential to a member of the
Church to be subject to the Pope. Reader, Is not this man uncharitable, that
will neither give us his leave to use our old words, nor teach us better; but
intimate that we speak nonsense, and he can speak better if he would! We have
hitherto been used to call a Governed Church a Political Society, as distinct
from a mere concourse or community of Christians. And why not? if (...) come
from (...): And if God has prepared for them a City, whose God he is not
ashamed to be called, Heb. 11. 16. And if it be well said, Phil. 1. 27. (...):
And if our Political conversations (...), Phil. ^^ 26.
be in Heaven, why may not a Church, at least such a one as the Pope does
claim, be called a Political body or society! Or at least, why may not the Pope
be said to lay such a claim? We have been used to call that Government
Spiritual, which is done by the Word and Church Keys, and consequently the
Governors Spiritual? And why must this be nonsense now? We have been used to
call that Governor a Constitutive Head, without whom the society is not
essentiated in specie, as a King in a Kingdom. O unkind Teacher, that will
leave us all in this ignorance, and not vouchsafe one word to help us out.

Sect. 72. E. B. And do not think to excuse your self from writing Nonsense,
by saying you meant a thing objectively, and not subjectively.

R. B. Nay then I despair of scaping nonsense! If the Object and the Subject
must needs be all one, and if sense in the Book or argument, and sense or
reason in the Reader be all one, I am not the first that was deceived: No nor
if it be all one to say You understand not the sense or reason of my argument,
and [you have no sense or reason.] But new Lords new Laws.

Sect. 73. E. B. And do not make Philosophy ridiculous as you do when you tell
us, That our acts of knowing exterior things are as Philosophers affirm,
objectively organicall, though not efficiently and formally. Sir I am sure no
wise man talks thus; and if Philosophers do, its time we left them, etc.

R. B. When you once begin to say you are sure, and no wise man is against you,
I begin to think you talk more ignorantly than when you seem to doubt; I will
not profane a point so little understood by you, and so much scorned, as to
dispute it with you. Enjoy your ignorance and scorn.

Sect. 74. E. B. Lastly, When truth is to be examined, and the nature of a
thing strictly to be considered, do not argue against it from some ill
consequence -- as what you desperately urge against the Scriptures being a
perfect Rule, 42. Untruth
which foundation of faith and practice you labor to overthrow, by tragically
infisting on the consequences that will follow -- Sir this in the end will be
found perfect folly and madness; therefore leave it in time, lest the Lord
reprove you, and you be found a liar.

R. B. 1. Alas, That your Pen could write the last word without the more
prevalent rebuke of your Conscience? After so many Untruths? yea, and when in
the same paragraph you are renewing the same sin? in saying I deny the
Scripture to be a perfect Rule, when I still say, [It is a perfect Rule so far
as it is a Rule!

2. If you intend sense and truth, your argument must run thus [He that says
the Scripture is not a particular Rule, commanding the thing in particular, but
only a General Rule, for the Meter and Tunes of Psalms, for the dividing of it
self into Chapters and Verses, for the hour and place of meetings, for the
choice of a Text to preach on, and words and method of Sermon and Prayer, for
the naming or determining the Person that shall be a Pastor, for the form of
Pulpits, Tables, Cups, etc. yea, for the making of a Clock, or Watch, or
Hourglass, to measure the time by, or for building the House to preach in,
etc. He that says these are not determined of particularly in Scripture, but
only under the General Rule of doing all things to Gods Glory, to Edification,
decently and in order, etc. this man does deny Scripture to be a perfect Rule,
and labors to overthrow the foundation of faith and practice, and proveing
what he says by the ill consequences that else will follow, will in the end be
found in perfect folly and madness, reproved by God, and found a liar: But such
a one is R. B. Therefore, etc.] Reader, if this be sound doctrine, if after all
Gods warnings of the danger of Levity and Ignorant pride, thou can yet
receive such errors and revilings, as a defense of the foundation, thy case
also is to be lamented.

3. When Def. par. 1. page 98, etc. I had fully described the opinion which I
rejected, and had given in fifteen reasons against it, what does this easy
confident Disputer, but instead of offering an answer to any one of them, calls
it perfect folly and madness so to confute it by ill consequences? Does this
disputing satisfy any sober enquirer after truth? Does he not reproach his
followers in the eye of the world about him, while he thus openly seems to
expect, that they will rest in such reasonings or replies as these? And really
if we prove against the Papists, that though they directly deny not Christ and
his Office, yet that such Consequents will follow upon diverse of their errors,
will this man that talks so much of Antichristianism, say that it is perfect
folly and madness to charge such consequents upon them? If I prove that any
opinion does consequentially deny God, or the souls immortality, or subvert all
our faith, do I deserve no better an answer than that? this is my perfect folly
and madness, and I shall be proved a liar. What need is there of learning
reason, sobriety or modesty to enable any man to dispute and seem Orthodox at
this rate?

Sect. 75. E. B. You may see by this brief taste, how easy it is for me to
defend my self --

R. B. O wonderful blinding power of self-conceit!

Sect. 76. E. B. p. 21. It is not a lessening of your Reputation that I mainly
aim at: much less at the advancing of my own upon the ruin of yours. But I
thought the truth of Christ worth my vindicating: And when I saw that your name
did stand in the way of it -- The whole design of this Letter is ( as to
others) to persuade all to look upon you, not only as a fallible, but a
mistaken man --

R. B. I have long ago done wondering that such men as you can deliberately
choose and use such means, when once they have dared to entitle God and his
Glory to their false doctrines: For what is it that they will not think lawful
to do for God and Truth? If some serve him by killing his servants, no wonder
if others do it by slandering them, and persuading all to separate from them:
And if they say [Rom. 3. 7. If the Truth of God has more abounded through my
Lie unto his Glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner?] But God and Truth
may be better served by Truth. But falsehood must by falsehood be upheld. But Sir
my Reputation is at your service for an honester use; but seeing it was but for
the destruction of Christian Love and Peace that you designed to make a
stepping-stone of it, try whether you be not slipped beside it into the dirt.

Sect. 77. E. B. I thought it my duty to reprove you, and to see your sin ( and
error herein) in order before you --

R. B. I have much more sin than you are aware of, which all such invitations
do call me to renew my sorrow for, and vigilance against: But when I once take
the Principles of Christian Love and Unity for sin, and the principles and
practice of Enmity and Division for my duty, I shall then avoid sin as sinfully
and lamentably as many in this age have done.

Sect. 78. E. B. If you will still go on, and under pretense of writing for
Love, do what you can to keep up a mixed, disorderly, persecuting and imperfect
Church State, leaveing us no hope nor possibility of reformation --

R. B. 1. 43. Untruth
This is another employed Untruth, that I keep up a persecuting Church State,
when I have written so much more than you against it: yea, that I do what I can
to do it; as if you thought that we can do no more evil than we do, and our
power were as small to sin as you make it to be to good. But you will find at
last that separating from Churches for mixture, and imperfection, and such
disorder as we have now in question, and to cloak this with slandering the
honest Conforming Ministers with Persecution, who lament it in others, and
never practice it (though I am not one that take them to be blameless) this
will prove a greater hinderance to Reformation than a sober peaceable Christian
conversation will be.

2. And thus unskilful builders do pull down! Did our Separations and
Church-divisions these six and twenty years last past promote our Reformation?
Wonderful! That men can yet take that for the reforming way, which has
destroyed Reformation, and brought us into all the confusions we are in? Will
all this experience teach us nothing? I will cease wondering at the words, Luke
16. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead.] And do you not know how your
erroneous reasonings and practices do occasion men even to scorn at your talk
of Reformation? and if we did not disown you and renounce your errors, and
mis-doings, the Non-conformists were like to be exposed to common derision for
your sake, and accounted a sort of men at enmity with sobriety and peace; and
multitudes were like to be hardened by you into greater evils and enmities than
I will name. And can any ignorant Mountebanks more mortally and perniciously
practice Physic, than you thus practice the Reformation of the Churches? Which
are wounded and torn by such Reformers?

Sect. 79. E. B. My miscalling you Learned, Judicious, 44 Untruth*
Mortified -- is indeed the only ( untruth) which you can justly charge me with
--

R. B. Alas Sir, is that sin such a jesting matter? Will you end as you begun?
When you said you had done, will you not have done writing untruths? When you
have no other matter for Untruths, will you make this another, to say that no
one of thirty three which I named to you, can be justly charged on you? -- Ask
any sober impartial man who has read your Book and mine, whether you have
cleared your self of any one of them, or spoken any thing that is considerable
and probable to such a purpose?

Sect. 80. R. B. 23. Mr. Bagshaw having done, begins again to call me to recant
unseemly abuses of Mr. Brown, and one that a Book prefaced by him is written
of: And he recites both their Letters. As to Mrs. -- Letter, I give her this
account of my thoughts of her and the Book that's written of her: 1. That I make
no doubt but all the holy truth which she has learned, all the mortification
of sin, and reformation of life, all the faith in Christ, and Love to God and
holiness, which is in her, are the true fruits of the Spirit of God, and he is
a wretched person that will ascribe these to Melancholy: 2. And I doubt not but
in a Melancholy distemper, as Satan finds his advantage for some special
temptations, so God can make his advantage to further the sanctification of
such a soul.

3. But he that gives me that Book to read, and would have me ignorant that
Melancholy had a great hand in her fastings, temptations and several conceits,
there mentioned, and this after my experience of multitudes in the like
condition, yea, when I am still wearied out with the Cases of such, from time
to time, does put an utter impossibility upon me: For if my Ignorance herein
would gratify such, it is not in my power to be ignorant when I will: But I
can bear with it in others.

Therefore her words [If this be the effect of Melancholy] go on an untrue
supposition. 1. Untruth of Mrs. --
I have told you what were the effects. And her sorrow that [I am found
deriding] the effects she mentions, is the effect of worse than Melancholy,
as being founded in her untruth.

Next this Woman accuses me with all these following untruths.

1. That Brother Brown was the Author of that Book. 2. Untruth.


Answ. Not a true word: I only said that it was published by him, as
uncontrolled fame affirmed;] but not that he was the Author: I can find no such
word in my writings: If you can, tell me where. And does not his Epistle before
it show that he was one of the Publishers?

2. That I was suddenly moved to go hear Mr. Baxter. 3d Untruth.


Answ. False again: I only said [was suddenly moved to go into the Church;]
that is, As she was passing by in the street, not knowing who Preached.

3. That ought of his Sermon had any impression upon me (which I could not
attend to, because I was so terrified with the words of the Text, 4th Untruth.
Romans 6. 21.)

Answ. False again: I have no such words that ought of my Sermon had any
impression on her? but only of the Time, that before the Sermon was done she
oould hardly forbear crying out.

4. That I went away resolved upon a holy life.

Answ. Another mistake: I said only, [she went home a changed person; Resolved,
(that is, did resolve) for a holy life. That she went home changed she denies
not, for her terrors were some change: That she Resolved for a holy life, her
self and her Book profess; But whether as soon as she went home, or how many
days after, I never undertook to tell! But how could she be Converted without
resolving of a holy life?

5. That Brother Brown instructed me in the fifth Monarchy principle, whereas
he then opposed it.

Answ. I said [Mr. Brown and others were her Instructers, who were very
zealous for the way called the fifth Monarchy, and having instructed her in
those opinions, etc. If I did mistake here I recant my error; But I will tell
you my grounds. 1. That the others were of that opinion as they deny not, so I
have heard no others deny. 2. At the publishing of that Book, same spoke the
same of Mr. Brown and of his companion. 3. The Book does plead for that
opinion. 4. His Epistle is before the Book as a Publishing applause of it. 5.
He professes that opinion to this day. And all these appearances might induce
such a judgment of him. But if he took it up between the Action, and the
publication of the Book, on what day or week, it is none of my business to
declare: He better knows those himself.

[6. That I imposed abstinence upon my self as to meat (when I would gladly
have eaten but durst not, 5th Untruth.
because I apprehended I had no right to the Creature being out of Christ) This
is all false and untrue; and I am astonished that Mr. Baxter should with so
much confidence affirm these things.]

Answ. 1. The good Woman understands not that she contradicts her self: She
did not impose abstinence on her self; but she durst not eat for the reason
here given: that is, She did not impose abstinence on her self, but she did
impose it for fear upon this reason. These untruths and nonsense in a Woman are
more excusable than in her Teachers: Why does She render a Reason why She durst
not eat, if by that fear and for that reason she did not impose abstinence on
her self? Did any other impose it, or shut her mouth? Is not that our own doing
which we give a reason of, and say that we did it through fear? Does not he
that gives a Thief his Purse, consent himself to it, and make it his own act
to save his life? If she knew not what she did, why is she angry for being
thought Melancholy, (which is many a Godly persons case?) If she did know, why
does she falsely call it an untruth, that she imposed it on her self? By this
taste you may see that even in well-meaning people the same principles will often
have the same practices, when here are five untruths in this short Letter, and
four at least of her accusation of my words are visible untruths.

But I would know of Mr. E. B. or her, whether it be true doctrine, that one
out of Christ should not eat, because they have no right, and whether almost to
consume her self with Famine was well done? If so, must all wicked men do so?
If it be false doctrine (as undoubtedly it is) I further ask, whether it was
the spirit of God, or Satan that was the Author of it? I hope she dare not
father sin and falsehood on Gods Spirit: And if it was a Temptation of Satan (as
it was) I ask whether to yield so far to a Temptation so much against the light
of Scripture, nature, and self-preservation, in a case so plain that common
people know the error of it, and to proceed so long almost to famishment in
that error and sin, I say, whether this showed not some flaw at that time in
natural understanding and reasoning as well as in grace? If it did (as sure it
did) what could it be less than Melancholy? And I hope it was never the mind of
Mr. Jordan, or Mr. Brown in that Book, to father this opinion or practice on
Gods spirit. I doubt not but God thus often tries his own; but it is as little
doubt but that he often leaves them under Melancholy as the Tempters opportunity
and advantage. And its pity that poor souls should be angry with those that
know their case, better than they themselves, and truly pity them.

Sect. 81. R. B. I come now to Mr. Brownes Letter; wherein I will not reckon it
(as it is) with his untruths, that my [two last Treatises give great occasion
to the Adversaries of Truth and Purity to reproach and Blaspheme God and his
people] For the man speaks as his ill cause and principles have made him
think. And that this is no more than some of my Disciples have suggested to
him, whether it be true or false I know not. What men that I have been eleven
years driven from, may be drawn to by cruelties on the one hand, and seducers
on the other, I can give no account of at this distance: Let them answer for
themselves.

The first untruth I charge him with is that I have uttered many falsehoods of
himself and others. 1st. Untruth.
The case is anon to be tried.

Sect. 82. Mr. Brown. P. 27. [How the present Conformists can be excused from
some degree of Idolatry remains to be better proved --

R. B. An answer to what I said had been more congruous than this putoff. And
that you take it for no Railing to call almost all Christ's Churches on Earth
(even the Reformed) Idolatrous, and yet take it for railing to be told that you
so accuse them ignorantly, rashly and self-conceitedly, does but show the
blinding power of selfishness and dividing principles, when there is so vast a
disparity, 1. In the matter of the charge. 2. And in the persons charged.

That your Brother Bagshaw liath as you call it, now deceived your expectation
and wronged his cause, that is, has been fain to leave his untruths
unjustified, I suppose you cannot deny in consistence with your own expressions.

Sect. 83. Mr. Brown. p. 28. 2d Untruth.
[Indeed sir, in two lines there are no less than two Untruths published to the
world concerning me: The first is that I am the Author and Publisher of that
Book, which is affirmed by him against the most notorious evidence in the World
to the contrary: The Author Mr. Timothy Jordain -- and all that I did was,
being desired to write an Epistle wherein I acquaint the Reader that I am not
the Author of it, but only did join in Testimony to signify what was recorded
in the ensuing Treatise was true.

R. B. Reader, would thou think it possible for a man that voluminously
accuses the Churches, and charge them with Idolatry, and had read my
detection of his Brothers Untruths, to face men down with such words as these
that I say that which I never said! I have many times over read my own words,
and I can find no syllable of what he says, that I affirm him to be the Author
of that Book. I only said [the Publisher] and he adds [the Author] as may
presently by the Readers eyesight be convicted. I say, [Published by Mr.
Brown as is uncountroledly affirmed.] And is not this also a rash and careless
man, that no better heedeth what he reads and what he writes? And does he
not here declare himself a Publisher of it, when he confesses he put an
Epistle to it, to join in Testimony, that what was recorded was true. And is
this Printed Epistle and Testimony no Publication?

Sect. 84. Mr. Bowne. The second untruth is, 3d Untruth.
that I am uncontrolledly affirmed so to be, when I believe he had never a
second in the world that either will or can affirm it.

R. B. Here are two more falsehoods, 1. That it is an Untruth that I said of
him. 2. That I said it was uncontrolledly affirmed that he was the Author. But
that he was a Publisher you have now his own Confession of his Epistle, which I
had read, and Mr. Joseph Baker gave me the Book, and told me it was published
by Mr. Jordain, and Mr. Brown, and this report I often after heard, and it never
was controlled to me; which is all that I can reasonably mean my
[uncontrolled.] For how is it possible for me to know what is said of him to
all others, in every distant place and corner?

Sect. 85. Mr. Brown. As for the Book it self and the matter of fact contained
in it, I never yet met with any judicious sober Christian that had seriously
perused it, who durst adventure to pronounce either of the whole or any
considerable part of it, that it was an effect of Melancholy.

R. B. Who talked of the whole? But what part you will call considerable who
knows? Is not this a concession that some part is so judged of? And must your
Ignorance of such matters as Melancholy have so great influence into your
Divinity? But you may say true, For most now adays converse with few but those
of their own mind. And the Book is not to be got in any shop that I can hear of.

Sect. 86. Mr. Brown. Whether this decrying of experiences, this slighting the
work of Gods spirit in the soul, the crying out that these things are but the
effects of Melancholy, be not the ready way to make all supernatural Conversion
derided, and the whole mystery of Godliness contemned -- consider --.

R. B. 1. Here is employed a fourth Untruth, 4th Untruth.
that I decry experiences, and the rest here mentioned. 2. Alas, must the poor
Church of Christ have such miserable Guides, that build hay and stubble, and
think if it be burnt the Church must fall! I tell you sir, such rash and
Ignorant Teachers, as your Writings show you to be, are the men that do so much
toward the very same effects which you seem to fear, even to tempt men to
deride all supernatural conversion, as that I scarce know a more powerful way.

If you heard one man say [Satan as an Angel of Light stirred up the Quakers to
pretend Miracles, Prophesies and spiritual raptures, purposely to tempt the
World to Infidelity, by persuading them that the Spirit in the Prophets and
Apostles was but the like] And if you heard James Naylor say, [Your calling the
Spirit in us a vain Imagination or deceit, is the way to persuade men that the
spirit in the Prophets and Apostles was but imagination and deceit;] Which of
these two sayings would you believe? I take the case which I spoke of to be the
like.

I tell you still, that all the Truth and Goodness that your Book mentions
truly, was wrought by the spirit of God. But if men will make the world believe
that any false doctrine, or any sin, or any false exposition of Scripture is of
the spirit, or that their unproved Impulses which are not agreeable to the
word, but are against it or besides it, must be believed to be of God, and will
describe these as Experiences and Gods way of Converting souls, their Ignorance
will as effectually serve the Devil to bring true Conversion and the spirit
into scorn, as the derisions of a Drunkard will do, if not more. It is no new
thing for Satan to deceive as an Angel of light, and his Ministers as Ministers
of Righteousness. And if you know not his wiles, expect not that we should all
concur with you in exposing spirituality and holiness to the scorn of such as
now abhor it, or as of late have taken such advantages against those that are
better than themselves.

Sect. 87. R. B. Whether you instructed her in those principles you know best:
If you deny it, I retract it. That you were very zealous in them is past doubt;
but just the day when you began, whether before that Book was begun, or before
it was finished, or when, I leave to your own report.

Sect. 88. Mr. Brown. Indeed it is now my Opinion that there is a glorious
state of the Church yet to come, before the last end of all things, when all
Oppression and Oppressors shall cease, and every thing of man shall be laid
down in subserviency to the Interest of Christ, and the Kingdom of the World
shall become his.

R. B. Amen! It is my earnest Desire as well as yours; See Jer. 28. 6.
But Desire and Belief are not all one. The Prophesies that you suppose
foretell all this, I thought I almost understood thirty two years ago; but
since I perceive I did not: But I contradict not that which I do not
understand, nor never did. Who will plead for Oppression? And what Christian
desires not the greatest Holiness and Righteousness in the World? I freely
confess my Ignorance in the point, whether on this side the general
Resurrection, there shall be so perfect and universal Righteousness as you
describe, as that All Oppression shall cease. My greatest Hope is in the three
Petitions of the Lords Prayer, Thy Name be Hallowed, Thy Kingdom Come, Thy will
be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: And I am sure this will warrant my
desires. And I the better like those Opinions of a perfect age, because Hope
will set men upon praying for it. But as I detest all Rebellions against just
Authority on pretense that they are not truly Godly, and all setting up men's
selves on pretense of setting up Christ, and using unlawful means on pretense
of good ends, so I am afraid of being tempted down from the Heavenly Hopes and
Comforts, by looking for more on earth than is indeed to be expected.

Sect. 89. Mr. Brown. p. 29. [He tells us first that she was suddenly moved to
come to hear him Preach --

R. B. A mere untruth: 5th Untruth.
as I have before showed. I said not so.

Sect. 90. Mr. Brown. That she had such convictions from his Sermon ( for so
he seems to intimate,) etc.

R. B. Untrue again: 6th Untruth.
as is before showed: Nor will your seeming salve it.

Sect. 91. Mr. Brown. That she desired to speak with him is another untruth.

R. B. Of that I shall speak anon.

Sect. 92. Mr. Brown. That she did impose on her self abstinence from meat --

R. R. Here he contradicts himself as she did, 7th Untruth.
and says she durst not eat, and yet falsely charge me with untruth for
saying the same sense.

Sect. 93. Mr. Brown. Lastly, She never fell in so among the Quakers as to be
one of them; though it is true that through the power of Temptations she was
somewhat inclined to them.

R. B. Here he untruly intimated that I said more, who never said so much; but
only that she thought they lived strictlyer than we, and fell in among them.
And now Reader I shall again tell thee my reasons for all that I said of her.

Mr. Joseph Baker then Preacher in Worcester (a man of unquestionable Prudence
and Credit, now with Christ) told me all that I have said of this Woman, and
that she had not been at Church of a long time before, and was passing along
the Streets, and was suddenly moved to go in to the Church at Lecture time; and
that she was struck as aforesaid at the hearing of the Text, and before Sermon
was done could hardly forbear crying out in Church; and that she had on the
conceit of their strictness fallen in among the Quakers; and been often at their
meetings; but hearing them speak against Scriptures and Ministers was troubled,
and thought that they spoke that which her experience would not suffer her to
consent to: and that she was like in these perplexities to fall into great
Melancholy, and her body also to be weakened by the troubles of her mind, and
that through his motion or persuasion she was desirous to speak with me: I had
no reason to deny belief to him: When I came next to his house the Gentlewoman
came to me, and he and she together repeated the substance of all this again,
and she spoke not a syllable against it: And speaking a few words to dissuade
her from the Quakers in haste, I never saw her more: The said Mr. Baker told me
after of all her sad and Melancholy abstinence and weakness, and of Mr. Brown
and Mr. Jordanes frequency with her; And shortly after showed me the Book, with
Mr. Brownes Epistle to it, and told me that which they now thus quarrel with,
that Mr. Brown was one of the publishers of it, and was for the doctrine in
it. Though I discerned by the Book that she her self was taken with that point.
These things I long heard affirmed and confirmed, and never contradicted till
this day, and now you hear that the Timeing of Mr. Brownes Opinion and
endeavors, is all that they can say any thing against themselves. And thus
much I thought meet to say against their rash occasions on this by-occasion.

Sect. 94. R. B. p. 30. I have not yet done with Mr. Bagshaw: He comes on again
in a Postscript with more Untruths; And first he tells you how little
commendation it is to my honesty to have yet such easy access now to the
Licensers and Press that he can Print two Books before another man can Publish
a few sheets --

Answ. 1. I never spoke with the Licensor, 45th Untruth by E. B.
nor saw him; And if neither of those two Books were Licensed (when he wrote
this at least) is not this still a fearless heedless man?

2. Is not Honesty among these men become a word of a new signification? A new
sort of Honesty.
And is it any wonder if our dishonesty make us unworthy of their Communion,
when our honesty is questionable for the Licensing of our Books? If it be a
sign of dishonesty to do any thing which our Rulers will but allow of, it may
next be dishonesty to speak any thing that they think worthy to be believed,
and to Preach the Gospel if they do but allow it. And may not your honesty be
as reasonably questioned because you are suffered to Preach? Sure the Licensers
are not so bad men, as to prove all dishonest whose Books they License?

Sect. 95. E. B. His last Book about the Sabbath -- might have been wholly
spared, Dr. Owen having judiciously and accurately handled that Question before
him.]

R. B. 1. The Wisdom from above is without partiality and without hypocrisy.
Envy and partiality.
Was it a blot on Dr. Owens honesty that his Books are Licensed? O forgetful
man! 2. Who made the Law, that no man must write on a subject after Dr. Owen?
was Dr. Owen to be blamed for needless work, because he wrote on the Sabbath
after Dr. Bound, Dr. Young, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Eaton, Mr. Bifield, Mr. Shephard,
and many more? 3. Mine was Written and in the Press before Dr. Owens was
abroad: (Though I had before seen Mr. Hughes his accurate Treatise that then
came out.)

Sect. 96. E. B. His last Book about the Sabbath -- does make so full a
discovery of Mr. Baxters spirit in pleading for Saints days, ( that is, for
will worship.)

R. B. 1. Remember, Superstition.
Reader, that it is my own Book, and not his, that discovers my spirit. Fetch
thy judgment of it thence and spare not. 2. And if thou find cause to put down
the Commemoration of the Powder Plot or such other days for fear of
willworship, do not therefore renounce all see hours for secret and
family prayer and Lectures; it being equally will worship to appoint a set hour
as a set day, which God in Scripture has not appointed.

Sect. 97. E. B. [And in Atheistically arguing against the* 46th Untruth.
Divine and self-evidencing authority of the holy Scriptures (which he does for
many pages together) that henceforth I hope he will no longer be a Snare, but
justly he Rejected of all as one of the worst sort of Heretics; since under
the notion of being a Christian and a Protestant, 47th Untruth.
be does with his utmost* industry and cunning labor to overthrow our
foundation, in that he puts the credit of Scripture on the Truth of History,
and 48th Untruth.
denies any certainty but what may be gathered from that: which dangerous
doctrine I could not but warn thee, Christian Reader, as thou love thy peace
and comfort, as well as the truth of Christ, that thou will diligently beware
of. And I must leave it to thee to judge, whether that Conformity which such a
person pleads for, is not justly to be suspected.

R. B. Here are three more visible untruths in point of fact, 1. That I argue
against the Divine Authority of the Scripture; yea or the self-evidencing
either; which I have written for at large in three several Treatises. 1. In the
2d Part of my Saints Rest. 2. In a Book called the Unreasonableness of
Infidelity. 3. In my Reasons of the Christian Religion, most fully: but never
wrote a word against it. 2. That I do with my industry and cunning labor to
overthrow our foundation: Has this man written more for the foundation than
those three Books? 3. That I deny any certainty but what may be gathered from
the truth of History: For which he cites not one word in which I ever said so,
nor can: But the contrary is legible in the forecited Volumes, at large.

As to the matter of his Accusation I will not here write another Book, to tell
men what I have written in the former: Read my own words, even those he
accuses, and my Treatise for the Christian Religion, and judge as you see
Cause; But for them that will believe him to save them the labor of reading it
in my own Books, as if another man were liker to tell rightly what I have
written than the Books themselves, I leave them to judge, and do as they are,
and as such men lead them.

And how far Tradition or History, or Humane aid and Testimony is necessary to
our Reception of the Scripture, I have long ago opened at large in the Preface
to the second Part of my Saints Rest, and showed you that Dr. Whitaker,
Chemnitius, Davenant, Rob. Baronius and other Protestants usually say the same
that I do, and that otherwise by casting away such subordinate means,
Proud-ignorance and pievish wrangling will cut the throat of faith it self, and
undermine the Church of God.

Reader, I will conclude also with an Admonition as my Accuser does; As thou
love Christianity, Scripture and thy soul, take heed of those Ignorant
destroying-defenders of the Scripture, who would tell the Infidel world, that
they may continue Infidels till we can prove, that the Scripture alone by its
own light, without humane Testimony, History or Tradition, will bring it self
to all men's hands without man's bringing it, and will translate it self, without
man's translating it, or in the original tongues will make all English men, and
all that cannot read at all, to understand it; or being translated will tell
you sufficiently which is the true translation; and where the Translater
failed; or will tell you among many hundred diverse Readings which is the right,
and which Copy is the truest, and which particular text is uncorrupted, or
rightly translated? For instance, whether it should be in Luke 17. 37. (...) or
(...), when it is (...) in Matthew. 24. 18. and Beza says, In uno exemplari and
apud Theophilactum Scriptum est, (...), id est Cadaver; sicut etiam in
nonnullis codicibus testatur selegisse Erasmus; Videturque haec lectio magis
accomodata, etc. Hundreds of such may be named.

And believe not these men till they can name you one man that ever knew before
some man told him, by the Book alone whether Esther and the Canticles were
Canonical, and the Book of Wisdom and Paul's Epistle to the Laodioaeans
Apocryphal; and knew what was the sense of the Original Text, and what Copies,
and Readings, and Translations were true, and what false? Yea or that knew
these particular Books were the same that the Apostles wrote, without
alteration, till some one told it them?

Would not that man reduce the Church into less than one single person, who
would have no man believe the Scripture, nor take it for Gods word, till he can
do it without any help of man, or humane History, or Testimony or Tradition?
But of this I put him twenty Questions before.

It shall now suffice to tell you this much of the plain truth, that such
furious false Teachers as shall take the foresaid course may not utterly
subvert your faith.

The Scripture and Christian Religion taken together as one frame or Body, The
self-evidencing light of Scripture, what it is.
has that in it self which may prove that frame, and all the essential parts
of our Religion to be of God; And the true proof of the Divine Authority of the
Scripture, is by the evidence of the spirit; not a new Revelation of the
spirit; But by a double Impression of Gods own Image made by the Holy Ghost,
one upon the Scripture it self, The other by the Scripture in its continued
efficacy on Belivers souls: And both these Images are the Impresses of the
Trinity of Divine Principles, even of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God;
which are unimitably done in both. This is the true proof that Scripture is the
word of God.

But this proof excludes not but supposes the Ministry and Testimony of man
as a subservient help and means; even to bring it to us, to translate it, to
teach us how to know both the sense and verity of it, and to testify which is
the true Canon, Copies, Reading, Translation, etc. And they are ignorant
subverting deceivers and destroyers of your souls, who would separate the Word,
the Spirit and the Ministry which Christ has conjoined as necessary together
for your faith: and that would cast out subservient helps as unnecessary under
pretense of the sufficiency of the Scripture. As if Printing it were needless,
because Scripture is sufficient of it self.

And the foresaid self-evidencing Light is not sufficient without humane help
and Testimony to make you know every Canonical Book from the Apocryphal, nor to
know the truest Copies in the Original, nor the rightest readings, nor this or
that particular verse, to be uncorrupted; nor the translation to be true, nor
this or that to be the true meaning of the Greek or Hebrew word; nor that the
Minister reads truly to the unlearned that cannot try it by his own skill,
nor read himself. And he that would make the contrary supposition to be the
foundation of your faith, would destroy your faith, the Church and you.

Postscript.
REader, since the Writing of this, two things have fallen out which make it a
more displeasing work to me than it was before; And I am sorry that Mr. Bagshaw
made it necessary. The one is, that (as the current report says) he is again
in Prison, for Refusing the Oath of Allegiance: And I naturally abhor to
trample upon a suffering person (which has caused me to say so little against
the Armies and Sectarian miscarriages since their dissolution and dejection in
comparison of what I did before in the time of their prosperity.) The other is,
The Printing of the Life of Mr. Vavasor Powel, which has so many good things
in it, that I fear lest the mention of his false Prophecies (extorted by Mr.
Bagshaw, who first published also his name as the Author of them) should abate
their exemplary use.

But yet I must give this notice to foreigners and posterity, that they must
not judge either of the JUDGMENT or the SUFFERINGS of the Non-conformists by
these men's: It is not for refusing the Oath of Allegiance that they are
silenced, and suffer as they do: nor do they consent to the words which
conclude the life of Mr. Powel, That since such a time he has learnt that we
must pray for our present Rulers as sinners, but not as Magistrates. No man can
truly say that such Doctrines as these have been proved against any
considerable part of the Ministers that are now cast out, or that they were
deposed and silenced for such things, seeing they commonly take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

And how far the ejected Ministers of Scotland are from the Principles of
Separation, Mr. Brown a Learned Scottish Divine has showed in the Preface of
a Learned Treatise Newly Published in Latin against Wolzogius and Velthusius,
(even while he says most against receding from a Reformation;) overthrowing
the Tenants maintained by our two or three English Brownes, which formerly were
called Brownisme. (Though the same man's numerous reasonings against the
derivation of the Magistrates Office from the Power of the Mediator, I wait
for leisure to refell.)

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Contents, Page. 2. Sect. 24. for meant, r. recant. Sect. 5. p. 5. after
and, add into. Epist. p. 4. l. 27. for that, r. and. p. 41. l. 2. r. writings
show. p. 43. l. 22. for quod, r. quid. p. 86. l. 15. r. and by Mr. Eliot. p.
93. l. 12. for confirmed, r. confined. p. 100. l. 1. r. have not. p. 105. l.
21. for design, r. deigne. p. 120. l. 9. for your, r. their. p. 146. blot out
the two first lines (repeated) p. 181. l. 16. for occasions, r. accusations.
less litteral errors are past by.

BUT I have one thing more to Advertise the Reader of, that I was too blame to
believe Mr. Bagshaw in his recitation of my own words, in his page 5. where he
says that [of Cromwell himself, though he dyed in his sinful Usurpation
without manifesting any repentance, I give this Saint-like Character in my
Pref. to the Army, The late Protector did prudently, piously, etc. exercise the
Government.] Having noted that I spoke against Oliver a few leaves distant, I
too rashly believed Mr. Bagshaw that this passage was spoken of him too. But
upon perusal I find it is most notorious that I spoke it of his Son, when the
Army had brought him to a resignation, which any man may see that will peruse
the place. Hereafter therefore I will not so hastily believe so common a -- in
what he writes of the most visible subject, of my self or others.


