A SEARCH FOR THE English Schismatic: By the CASE and CHARACTERS, I. Of the
Diocesan Canoneers. II. Of the Present Mere Nonconformists. Not as an
Accusation of the former, but a Necessary Defense of the later, so far as they
are wrongfully Accused and Persecuted by them.

By Richard Baxter, One of the Accused.

LONDON: Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Sign of the Three Golden Cocks at
the West End of St. Pau ls Churchyard. 1681.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE strivings of Parliaments since Archbishop Laud's Government, against
Innovations, Popery and Arbitrary overtopping Law, and their jealousies of the
designs and progress, while they themselves were of the Old Church of England,
do call us to think what the difference was between the Old and New.

HE that would know what the Old Church of England is, let him read,

I. The 39 Articles. II. The Homilies. III. The Apology, with Jewels defense.
IV. Nowell's Catechism. V. Deus and Rex ( all owned by the Church). VI. Hookers
Ecclesiastical Polity, in 8 Books. VII. Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection.
VIII. Bishop Downham de Antichristo. IX. The great Writers against Popery, as
Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Willet, Dr. Sutliff, Dr. White, Dr. Airy, Dr.
Humphrey, Dr. Fulk, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. R. Abbot, Dr. Crakenthorp, Dr. Challoner,
Dr. Hall, Bishop Usher, Dr. Davenant, Bishop Carlton, Chillingworth, Bishop
Morton, etc. X. The Writings against Bishop Laud, viz. Bishop Hall' s Epistle
to D. L. Archbishop G. Abbots, and Bishop R. Abbot' s judgment of him, and his
Trial, with what was there charged against him. XI. The Harmony of Confessions,
and the Synod of Dort. XII. King James' s Works.
HE that would know what is the New Church of England, since Bishop Laud
differs from the Old, let him read,

I. Dr. Heylin' s Writings, Dr. Pocklingtons, Mr. Dows, Sybthorps and
Mainwarings. II. Heylin' s Life of B. Laud, particularly his description of the
designed reconciliation with the Papists. III. Mr. Thorndike's Just weights and
measures, and forbearance of Penalties. IV. Archbishop Bramhall' s book against
me, explaining the new way in these particulars, 1. To abhor Popery. 2. That we
all come under a Foreign Jurisdiction, obeying the Pope as the Western
Patriarch, and also as the Principium unitatis to the universal Church,
Governing by the Canons. 3. That Dissenters from this be accounted
Schismatics. 4. That we yield to what the Greeks have yielded, and be of their
Religion. 5. That Grotius was a Protestant for the Church of England. V. Dr.
Parkers Preface to that book, and Dr. Pierce's defense of Grotius. VI. Grotius
his Volume and Notes on Cassander, specially his Discussio Apologetici
Riveliani; in which he professes, 1. That Rome is the Mistris-Church. 2. Sound
in faith. 3. That he finds Protestants can never unite, but by uniting with
Rome. 4. He owns the Doctrine of the Councils, even that of Trent. 5. The Pope
to govern by the Canons of the Councils, and not arbitrarily. 6. Nor must
invade the rights of Kings or Bishops. 7. That if the curiosities of the
Schoolmen, and the ill lives of the Clergy be disowned and amended, this much
is enough to sober men. 8. And he says that the English Bishops were many of
his mind, though the Separatists were not. VII. The Earl of Clarendon' s Defense
of Dr. Stillingfleet, laying the nature of Popery in their injury to Princes.
VIII. Guil. Forbes, Bishop of Edenborough his Irenicon. IX. Mr. Dodwell' s book
against Schism, and the same doctrine maintained by others who nullify
Ministry and Churches, whose Episcopal Ordination has not come down from the
Apostles uninterrupted. X. The Bishops endeavors since 1660, to silence, fine,
imprison, banish, and drive five miles from all Corporations, etc. all such as
receive not the Impositions. Together with the rest of the true History of
these last Twenty years. The particulars are not now to be recited.
A SEARCH FOR THE ENGLISH SCHISMATIC: OR, The True Characters of the several
Accused Parties, by which they may be discerned.
CHAP. I. The Parties Accused.
The Parties questioned are, I. The Papists. II. The Diocesan-Militants, or
Canoneers. III. The Passive peaceable Conformists. IV. The Mere Nonconformists.
V. The Sectarian Church-Appropriators, and Causeless Separatists and Dividers.

I. THERE is no Sect of Christians which makes so great use of their pretense
to Unity, and crying down Heresy, Schism and Separation, as the Papists do;
and yet are the greatest Schismatics and Dividers, as thus appears.

1. They have a self-made humane universal Church, feigning the Pope to be the
rightful Head of all the Christian World.

2. They exclude all from Christ's Chuch, who are not the Popes Subjects, though
at the Antipodes, where he never came nor sent.

3. They presume to make universal Laws for all the World.

4. They Curse men from Christ by Excommunications, who refuse such subjection
and obedience to these Laws.

5. They have introduced many new Articles of Faith, on pretense of declaring
and expounding Faith.

6. They have multiplied corrupting additions in the Christian Worship.

7. Their regular objective Religion now consists in so great a number of the
Decrees of Councils, as no Christians can well understand, while they accuse
Gods Laws as unintelligible.

8. They can give us no certainty which of these Councils are obligatory to us,
while they contradict each other.

9. They agree not of the Essence of Christianity, or necessary truths; but
resolve all into the uncertainty of [ sufficient Proposals].

10. They damn men as Heretics that deny not all humane sense, believing there
is no Bread and Wine, when they see and taste them.

11. They burn such as Heretics, and are for tormenting Inquisitions to
destroy them.

12. They bind Temporal Lords to exterminate all such, and to swear to do it;
and this on pain of Excommunication, Deposition and Damnation: So that a
Protestant Kingdom under a true Papist King, has a King that is thus bound to
exterminate his Subjects, if he be able; and professes to do it on these three
penalties, his Salvation lying on it.

13. They decree the giving of his Dominions to another, and absolving his
Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, if he obey not.

14. They decree, that it is Heresy to hold that a King has the power of
Investing Bishops, and that he is not thus subject to the Pope.

15. They tolerate their chief Doctors to write, that a Heretic is no King, at
least if Excommunicate, and may lawfully be killed.

16. Their Canons exempt the Clergy from being Governed and Taxed by Kings.

17. They forbid the reading of the Scriptures translated, without a License.

18. They say that we cannot well believe the Gospel, but on the credit of
their Church: As if we must first know that the Pope and Council are authorized
by Christ, before we believe in Christ himself.

19. They renounce Repentance by pretending to Infallibility.

20. They cherish a numerous Clergy and Sects, to carry on all this in the
World, and persuade high and low, that to promote their Church and Cause, is
meritorious of Salvation.

II. By the Passive Conformist, I mean both such as go on the grounds of Mr.
Sprint, and think a Reformation very desirable, but Conformity lawful to escape
silencing and ruin; and such as like Conformity for it self, and wish all
others did Conform, but like not uncharitable censures, or silencings, or
violence against conscionable Dissenters, nor the compulsions which have caused
our Church-convulsions. Though the Nonconformists must needs judge these to
partake in Schism, so far as they own the Schismatical dividing terms of
Communion, which are the greatest hinderance of our Concord, and will be still
inconsistent with it; yet as they reproach not Dissenters as Schismatics, so
neither are they accounted Schismatics by the Dissenters, because they are
sound and peaceable brethren, and desire to live as such with others, and
Schism is not their disposition nor predominant. We would live in greater Love
and Concord with such as these, than the differing Conformists have with one
another.

III. The names of Sectaries and Separatists are of no fixed signification, but
vary according to the mind of the speaker. But I now use them for those, 1. Who
appropriate the Church to some narrow Sect or Party, which denies all others
to be true Churches, or to have true Ministers and Sacraments. 2. And next to
those, that though they own others as true Churches or Ministers, yet hold
their Communion unlawful, when it is not so, and renounce Communion with them
on these grounds.

Such besides Papists, are too many Prelatists, that deny the Ministry,
Sacraments and Communion of the Reformed Churches, which are not such as they;
yea of all Churches that have not an Episcopacy by uninterrupted Succession of
Episcopal Ordination from the Apostles, and that excommunicate all that do but
say that there are any true Churches in England but their own. And such are
some Anabaptists, some called Brownists, or Separatists heretofore, etc. And
the Seekers are much worse, that deny all Churches; and the Quakers and
Ranters, who revile the soundest; and all true Heretics, who separate by
denying some Essential of Christianity. All these are Schismatics in the
judgment of all sound and sober Christians.

IV. By Active Canonical Conformists, I mean those that are for the present
frame of Ecclesiastical Government, with the Liturgy and Canons, and the Laws
which enforce them (who call usually for the Execution of those Laws).

V. By the mere present Nonconformists, I mean such as are guilty of no other
punishable errors or sins, but such as the Act of Uniformity does eject and
silence us for; and who declared openly their judgments about Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline, in 1660, after a Common meeting at Sion-Colledge, and another
at the Savoy, which is published in Print; That is, the Reconcilers, or
Peacemakers, who then labored and begged for Peace and Unity in vain; who tie
themselves to the judgment of none called Nonconformists heretofore,
Presbyterians, Independents, etc. but to the Word of God, and the example of
the true Primitive Churches, and are not for Concord only with a Sect, or a
dividing-party, High or Low, but for that Catholic Church and Communion of
Saints, which are in our Creed.

Schism being a culpable rending of Christians from each other, has a great
number of degrees (as it is by Apostasy from the Universal Church totally, or
by denying a fundamental, by Heresy; or as it is but by denying Integrals, or
but Accidents; as it is but from a particular Church, a Church of Gods forming,
or of man's; As it is from a Church, as if it were no Church, or a corrupt
Church falsely said, or only a less desirable; as it is from a Parish Church, a
Diocesan, a National, etc. As it is total or partial, or but in some accidents
from that particular Church, holding Communion in all the rest; As it is
mental, or but causeless local; As it is from a Church, or only from some
persons in a Church-Pastor, or others; As it is by driving men by sinful
Impositions from a Church, or too easy departing; with many the like
differences elsewhere opened.) So that as all men have some degree of
ignorance, pride, hypocrisy, etc. and yet are not to be denominated ignorant,
proud hypocrites, where it is not predominant; so all are defective in Love and
Union, and few Churches on earth are no way guilty of Schism, and yet are not
to be called Schismatics, where it is not predominant.

Almost all Churches on earth accuse each other of Schism; the Papists so
accuse the Greeks, Protestants, and all others; the Greeks so accuse the
Papists and Protestants (as the Patriarch Jeremiah shows us), and both the
Abassines, Jacobins, Nestorians, etc. The Lutherans so call the Calvinists, and
they many Lutherans; the Episcopal, Presbyterians, and Independents so accuse
each other: Sober and peaceable men must confess that most are guilty of some
degree.

Laying by the rest, our Question now is of Two Parties here, the Canoneer
Diocesan Conformists, and the Present mere Conformists, which are the ENGLISH
SCHISMATICS.

CHAP. II. The Case of the Diocesan-Canoneers, or Zealots for Imposition of
Conformity.
1. THey agree not of the Essentiating Head of their own National Church;
whether it be Lay, or Clergy, King or Bishops (and so are indeed of diverse
Churches), no nor whether it have any constitutive Head, or none.

2. Some hold Bishops necessary to the Being of a Church, and some only to the
well-being of it; and so agree not neither what a particular Church is.

3. The former unchurch the Parish-Churches, and make them only parts of a
proper Church, the Diocesan being the lowest in a politic sense.

4. They make the Parish Priests, but half Priests or Pastors, denying them the
Power of the Keys over their flock, save in a little part.

5. These deny the Reformed Churches, which have no Bishops, to be true proper
Churches, and their Ministration and Sacraments to be valid: But others of them
hold the contrary, and so differ in their Communion with the Protestant
Churches.

6. Some of them say, that none are true Ministers of Christ that have not
Episcopal Ordination by uninterrupted succession from the Apostles: And that
their flocks have no title to Salvation, because they have it not by Gods
Covenant sealed by such a Ministry of the Sacraments.

7. They hold twice Ordination sinful; and yet Reordain those who were ordained
by mere Presbyters, or Rectors of Parish (City) Churches.

8. Some Leaders grant that there were no Subject-Presbyters in Scripture
times, nor Bishops that had more than one stated Assembly and Altar, which
others are against.

9. They agree not of the sense of the words [ Presbyter and Bishops] in the
Scripture.

10. Some of them reproach the Reformation of other Churches, as the Papists
do, as the effect of fury and rebellion; and seek to render it odious as a
crime.

11. Yea and the Reformation of England by K. H. 8. as the product of his
filthy lust and cruelty: And reckon the death of K. Edw. 6. for a mercy.
Insomuch, that out of Dr. Heylin, and some others, a Papist has gathered in
terminis, the most odious description of our Reformation, called Historical
Collections.

12. They disagree about the points called Arminian. Whitgift the Mawl of the
Nonconformists, with others, drawing up the high Lambeth-Articles for absolute
Reprobation, etc. and others, with Laud, as hot against them.

13. These censure K. James for being against Arminianism, and sending men to
that end to the Synod of Dort, though they were all moderating-men.

14. Though we had there six excellent Divines, some think we are not obliged
by that Synod, and some that we are (when we had not so many in most General
Councils).

15. Those that followed Laud, being few, durst not long commit their Cause to
a Convocation: And Heylin tells us, that the Convocations of England and
Ireland were against them: and the Convocations are called The
Representative-Church.

16. These divided from the rest, strove who should prevail in Power: A. B.
Grindall first, and A. B. Abbot next being cast out, and both reproached by Dr.
Heylin ( Laud's Penman) as the Heads of one Party in England, and B. Usher in
Ireland: and Bishop Laud is praised as the Leader of the other side, Reforming
the spoiled Reformation, which the Universities and Bishops had spoiled by
Calvinism.

17. These two Parties differed in their Zeal against the Nonconformists:
Grindall being for Love and Lenity, and Lecture-Exercises to breed up
Preachers, and Abbot by Heylin made a Mischief to the Church for being popular:
but Laud's Party being for more severity against them, which was exercised
accordingly.

18. These two Parties also differed in their way and designs toward the
Papists. A. B. G. Abbot, B. Rob. Abbot, Hall and others suspecting Laud as
Popish, and being themselves against Toleration of Popery: But B. Laud (says
Dr. Heylin) attempting by alterations and abatements, and reconciling means to
open our Church-door so wide, that we might again all join together, as in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

19. These two Parties differed about Prerogative, Laws and Property; A. B.
Abbot writes, that he was cast down for denying to License Sybthrop's Book for
the Kings Power to raise money, and the peoples obligation to pay it. And his
Narrative (which you may read in Rushworth) intimates that B. Laud was the
chief means of this Imposition on him, to License Sybthrop's Book, and so of
his Sufferings: The two greatest Writers for Prelacy and Conformity are Bishop
Bilson and Hooker (to the reading of whom B. Morley referred me for
instruction, when he forbid me Preaching in Worcester Diocese, and) whom we are
usually challenged to answer. Bishop Bilson says ( Chris. Subject, page 520.

[If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or
change the form of the Common Wealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the
Laws established by common consent of Prince and People, to execute his own
pleasure; In these and other such cases which might be named, if the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment
and Laws, they may not well be counted Rebels.] See more page 381, 382. Grotius
de jure Belli goes much farther. Ri. Hooker says [That it is no better than
Tyranny for any Prince or Potentate of what kind soever to exercise Law-making
of himself, and not either by express Commission received immediately and
personally from God, or else by authority derived at first from their consent,
upon whose persons they impose it, Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10. p. 21. And that in
Kingdoms of this quality (as ours) the Highest Governor has indeed universal
Dominion, but with dependancy on that whole entire body over the several parts
whereof he has dominion: So that it stands for an axiom in this case, The
King is Singulis Major, universis Minor, Lib. 8. p. 193. and p. 194. [Neither
can any man with Reason think, but that the first institution of Kings (a
sufficient consideration, wherefore their power should always depend on the
from which it did always flow) by original influence of power from the body
into the King, is the cause of Kings dependency in power on the body: By
dependancy we mean Subordination and Subjection.] The Axioms of our Regal
Government are these: Lex facit Regem -- Rex nihil potest nisi quod jure potest
-- Page 218, 221, 223, 224. Against all equity it were that a man should suffer
detriment at the hands of men for not observing that which he never did either
by himself or others mediately or immediately agree to -- What Power the King
has, he has it by Law; the bounds and limits of it are known. The entire
Community gives order, etc. as for them that exercise power altogether against
order, though the kind of power which they have may be of God, yet is their
exercise thereof against God, and therefore not of God, otherwise than by
permission, as all injustice is. Page 224. Usurpers of Power, (whereby we do
not mean them that by violence have aspired to places of highest authority, but
them that use more authority than ever they did receive in form and manner
above mentioned) such Usurpers thereof as in the exercise of their power, do
more than they have been authorized to do, cannot in conscience bind any to
obedience]: Thus Hooker.

Hollingshead (a Minister) makes Parliaments so mighty, as to take down the
greatest Kings.

Bishop Jewel defends the defensive arms of the French Protestants, as Bilson
and others do.

On the other side some held, that [ it is unlawful on any pretense what soever
to take Arms against the King, or any Commissioned by him in pursuance of that
Commission.] And thus the Clergy were then divided about such things, which
prognosticated much that followed.

20. The Laity, Lords and Commons were divided after these two Parties: And the
Parliaments still adhered to the (then) major part against Laud's Party, and
insisted on Grievances, viz. 1. Increase and favor of Popery. 2. Arminianism.
3. About their Property and Liberty, Taxing and Imprisoning, etc. as Rushworth
and Heylin show at large of diverse Parliaments.

21. By this unhappy breach Parliaments still harping on the same, and the King
dissolving them, and Abbot, and Richard Hooker, and the most being for the one
side, and Bishop Laud, Neale, Howson, Corbet, Buckeridge and Montague for the
other; the Court and Parliaments came to the unhappy jealousies and distrusts,
which at last broke out into a miserable War. In which the A. B. of Canterbury
(Laud) was on one side, and was put to death (the History and Articles are
known) and the other A. B. ( Williams of York) was on the other side, and
became a Commander in North Wales for the Parliament; and their Clergy were
accordingly divided: one part of the Conformists adhering to the King, and the
other to the Parliament; many of which made up the Westminster-Synod.

22. This War thus begun between the two Parties of the Episcopal Laity and
Clergy (in England), after drew in the Scots to help the Parliament, and many
Papists to help the King, neither of them being the first Parties, but
Auxiliaries, (though in Scotland and Ireland it was otherwise begun).

23. These Auxiliaries of the Parliament would not help them, but on the terms
of the Covenant, and so Church-alterations came on; and the Parliament thought
it was better have no Bishops, than such as did prevail against them.

24. When Wars and Misery had tired both sides, and made them long for
reconciliation, and this endeavor had called home the King, and many Bishops
and Doctors had promised to be for Concord upon necessary healing-terms, and
the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen had printed many Protestations for Peace, and
against Revenge; and the King had Commissioned us to treat with the Bishops for
Concord, and told us, They should meet us, if we would come as near as we could
to them; When the Kings Declaration seemed to have almost healed us, the
Commissioned Bishops stood to it, that no abatements were necessary; and though
we foretold them the impossibility of Common concord, without abating some
things which did them no good, but harm, and the advantage which Schism,
Contention and Popery would unavoidably get, which they might easily and
cheaply prevent; we pleaded; we begged by a long Petition; but all in vain:
nothing would move them, but when we only foretold them of the Divisions that
must needs follow, when Thousands were forced against their Consciences, they
took it as if we threatened Sedition, and turned our Petitions and Arguments for
the common peace and concord (as if it had been a crime) against both it and us.

25. And the Convocation cast away the Kings Declaration, and drew up the
changes in the Liturgy, which added to our burden, and drew the Parliament to
confirm it all; and in the Act of Uniformity much more unpracticable by us, is
imposed, which made our breach what since it is.

26. No man now must be in Trust and Office in any City or Corporation, who
will not declare, that [ there is no obligation on him, or any other person
from the Covenant] not excepting [ against Popery, Schism or Prophaneness],
though he would confess it unlawfully imposed and taken, and renounce all
obligation to rebellion, or any evil.

27. No adult person or Infant must be admitted to Christendom by baptism,
without the transient Image of a Cross, as a dedicating, engaging
Covenanting-sign and symbol, or badg of Christianity.

28. No Infant must be Christened, without Godfathers, who are his
Covenant-sureties, and undertake his pious education, though the Parents can
get none that will seriously tell them they intend to perform it: The Parents
being not allowed to speak one offering or Covenanting-word; nor must be urged
to be present.

29. No person must be admitted to Sacramental Communion, who thinks it a sin
to receive it kneeling, lest it should be seeming compliance with Popish
adoration.

30. No persons must be admitted to Communion, who have not Confirmation by
Episcopal Imposition of hands, or are desirous of it; though they fear it is
made a Popish Sacrament, by the addition [ Upon whom, after the example of the
holy Apostles, we have now laid our hands, to certify them BY THIS SIGN of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them.]

31. Though they will not tell us what the Church of England is, that is, Its
Essentiating form and Head, Lay or Clergy, vet every man must be ipso facto,
excommunicate who faith, It is not an Apostolical Church as established by Law.

32. Every one is excommunicate ipso facto, who says, that [ the form of
Worship established by Law, contained in the Book of Common Prayer, is corrupt,
or unlawful, or contains ANY THING in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures.

33. All are excommunicate ipso facto, who say, That any of the 39 Articles are
in any part, such as he may not with a good conscience subscribe to; though it
be but that of the Churches power to impose Ceremonies: And yet diverse
Conformists are against the Doctrine about Free-well, Heathens damnation, etc.

34. All are ipso facto excommunicate, who say that [ the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England are superstitious, or such as godly men may not with a
good conscience approve, use, and on occasion subscribe.] See Can. 3, 4, 5, 6.
So that not only Ministers, but all men and women that differ but of the
Lawfulness of any one of their Ceremonies, and say so, are excommunicate
already ipso facto.

35. All are ipso facto excommunicate that say, that the Government of the
Church of England under his Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, and THE REST that bear Office in the same, is repugnant to the
word of God.] So that if one were for Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests, and
Deacons, and thought but Deans or Archdeacons unscriptural and sinful, he is
excommunicate; yea or Lay-Chancellours decretive power of the Keys; for [ the
rest that bear Office] must needs include them: And yet many Bishops themselves
are against them.

36. All are excommunicate ipso facto, who say that the form and manner of
making and Consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons, has any thing repugnant
to the word of God, C. 8.

37. They are to be excommunicate that say, Ministers refusing to subscribe,
may truly take the name of another Church not established by Law, etc. And yet
the Church of Rome is said to be a true, though faulty Church, by many; and a
faulty Church may be a Church: And (they say that) the Dutch and French
Churches here, stand but by the Act of King and Council.

38. All are to be excommunicated that say, that there are within this Realm
other Congregations of the Kings born Subjects, than such as are allowed by
Law, who may rightly take the name of true and lawful Churches.] E. g. If
Gloucester, that had a Papist Bishop, Goodman, had chosen themselves a Bishop,
and called themselves a true Church, etc.

39. They Command all to keep the Lords day, and other Holy Days, accordsng to
Gods holy Will in hearing the Word of God read and taught, in private and
public prayer], and yet suspended and ruined many Conformable Ministers for
not reading a book for dancing and playing on that day.

40. And where many thousands in a Parish cannot come within their
Church-doors, nor have any Conformist elsewhere in the Parish to teach them,
they forbid them on great penalties to hear Nonconformists; and call them
Separatists and Schismatics, unless they forbear like Savages all public
Learning and Worship of God, rather than hear and join with Nonconformists.

41. Yet they Swear the Churchwardens to present all that come not to Church,
and punish them for not coming, when some Parishes have 40000, some 30000, some
10000 that can have no room, and the Churchwardens cannot know them.

42. Yet if they go to other Parishes often for Communion, they must not be
admitted, but forbidden and sent home.

43. No Minister in regard of Preaching, or any other respect may diminish
Orders, Rites, Ceremonies or Prayers, nor add any thing in the matter or form,
C. 14.

44. Though many melancholy persons dare not communicate in the Sacrament, and
many other are secretly conscious of Atheism, Infidelity, or wickedness, they
must be compelled to receive thrice a year.

45. The Minister is to be suspended who gives the Sacrament to any that kneel
not, or that speak against the book of Common Prayer, Ceremonies, etc.

46. No one may be made a Minister, or permitted to exercise that Office, who
will not subscribe, that the book of Common Prayer and Ordination contains in
it nothing contrary to the word of God, and that he will use that form and no
other. And that will not declare publicly in the Church his [ unfeigned Assent
and Consent to All and every thing contained and prescribed in and by that book.

47. He must be cast out and silenced that does not Assent that [ It is certain
by Gods Word, that children which are baptized, dying before they commit actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved]; not excepting those whose Parents are Jews,
Infidels, Heathens, or Atheists, and whose Godfathers are Atheists, Hobbists or
Impious.

48. They must Assent, Consent to, and Practice, signing Infants at Baptism
with the Cross, to dedicate them by that badg to his service, whose benefits
bestowed on them in baptism, the name of the Cross does represent, in token
that he shall not be ashamed to profess the faith of Christ crucified, and
manfully to fight under his banner, etc. which seems to us to be thus made a
Sacrament.

49. They must deny to Christen all that refuse this.

50. They must consent to deny baptism to all that have not such undertaking
Godfathers, as aforesaid, though the Parents would enter them into the
Covenant, who are forbidden to be Godfathers, or speak a Covenanting-word.

51. They must profess Consent to deny the Sacrament to all that dare not take
it kneeling: I speak all this as imposed on Ministers, and before as on the
people.

52. They must profess, consent and practice to pronounce all that they bury to
be taken to God in mercy, where we hope to come, etc. (except only the
excommunicate, unbaptized and self murderers) were they Atheists or profane.

53. They must declare Assent to a false rule for finding Easter Day, and
consent to keep two Easters often, yea though it be confessed false.

54. They must consent to read [the first Lesson] out of Tobit, Judith, Bell and
the Dragon, and other Apocryphal-books for most of two months.

55. None must be suffered to Preach, that will not subscribe [ That it is not
lawful on any pretense what soever to take Arms against those that are
Commissionated by the King] while we understand not, whether the Law be not
above his Commission, and in some cases allow not the Sheriff to resist it, and
whether that be his Commission which is contrary to Law, if it have his Seal;
and so the keeper of the Seal may Commission men to seize on his strength and
treasure, and to let in an enemy, or consequently depose the King: No words can
more exclude exceptions, than the exclusion of [ any pretense whatsoever.]

56. None must preach that subscribeth not, that [ There lies no obligation
from the Oath, called the Covenant, on him or ANY OTHER person to endeavor any
change or alteration of Church Government: Though many Hundred thousands took
that Oath, whom we know not, nor their sense; and many Parliament Men that
imposed it: And so all Reformation of Church Government is made unlawful and
impossible, though vowed.

57. This Church Government by Decretive Excommunication and Absolution is
exercised by Lay-Chancellors; and all must subscribe against all endeavors,
though vowed to amend it, though some Bishops confess it to be evil.

58. The Parishes, as is aforesaid, are made by many no true Churches, but
parts of the lowest Church: And Parish-discipline is excluded: The Priest has
no Power of the exterior Keys, but to execute the decrees of the Bishop or
Chancellor.

59. Some Diocesses have above 1000 Parishes, some many hundreds; by which
Christ's true Discipline described, Mat. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13. Heb. 13. 7, 24. 1 Timothy 5. 25, 26. Tit. 3. 10, etc. is as impossible as for
one Schoolmaster to be the sole Governor of many score or hundreds of Schools,
having Teachers only under him. And none that Vowed it may endeavor to mend
this, and render true Church Discipline again a possible thing.

60. The Souls of men have great need of Pastors near them, and able to resolve
their Cases of Conscience, and comfort them and help them in manifold straits:
And many Parishes are so great, that the Priests cannot do such Offices for one
of many hundred* nor do they do it; nor know the people: And other Parishes
(too many) have Priests that are raw unskilful men, utterly unfit for such
Pastoral helps: And the Bishop is far off, and must have hundreds with him at
once, should he do that work: so that it is mostly undone. And yet those are
punished that choose Pastors to do it in such need.

61. If a Parish have a Priest so drunken, that his own family can scarce live
with him; or so insufficient, that he never preaches, because he cannot, or
will not, and the people scruple encouraging such a one in his ill undertaking
of the Ministry, and dare not take him for their Pastoral Guide, they are
forbidden to go from him, and to communicate in the next Parish; and the
Minister that receives them, or baptizeth their Children, though conformable,
is suspended, C. 57.

62. No Minister must Preach in a private house, save in times of necessity,
through sickness; nor may they on any occasion of sickness, or the like, keep
any Fasts in their Churches, or in any private house, nor be present at them,
which are not appointed by Authority, C. 61, 62. Nor may they hold meetings for
Sermons or Exercises.

63. Ordination enableth no man to preach without farther license.

64. They Excommunicate all Ministers that voluntarily relinquish their
callings, and use themselves as Laymen. And yet thousands must do both, if the
Bishops silence them.

65 He that preaches to more than four, not of his family, if he conform not,
must be fined 40 l. a Sermon (and he that owneth the ground 20 l.) and the
Preacher Imprisoned Six months in the Common Jayl: and the Hearers fined. And
if he swears not never to endeavor any alteration (or amendment) of their
Government, he must be banished Five miles from Cities, Corporations, and all
places where he lately preached; or lie Six months in Jayl if he come nearer;
though the Law say that the Parish must keep him in his want.

66. The Parish Priest must publish Excommunications, though against his
conscience, against godly men for not Conforming, etc. while thousands that
never come to Church or Sacraments, and Swearers and Atheists, Hobbists and
wicked men are members of their Church, from year to year continued.

67. The Canon 139 excommunicateth all that say, that the Synod of this Nation,
in the name of Christ, and by the Kings authority assembled, is not the true
Church of England by representation. By which they seem to make the King no
part of the Church, nor any of the Laity, or else that they represent King and
Laity: and they intimate that all the Clergy is the Church-real, and the Synod
the Representative.

68. They brought in new Canons, and the et coetera Oath in 1640, without the
Parliament, which were condemned.

69. From the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, till now, they have prosecuted and
silenced Protestants that durst not conform: even their fellow Exiles in Queen
Mary's days were silenced, and multitudes after in King James's days, and even
Conformists suspended about the Dancing-book, and troubled about Altars,
Bowing, Afternoon-Sermons and Lectures, which were forbidden; and about 2000
ejected and silenced at once 1662: And multitudes of Families driven to Holland
and New England. Though we offer them our Oaths, that we will gladly conform,
if by any study we can but see that it will not involve us in the guilt of
Lying, owing the Perjury of maltitudes unknown to us, corrupting the Church and
Gods Worship, Covenanting deliberately against needful Reformation of the
Church Government by Lay Chancellours and incapable Diocesans, and many other
crimes, with dreadful aggravations recited in our first Plea for Peace.

70. They separate from us and our Congregations as unlawful to be joined with.

71. Though it was the judgment of the ancient Churches, expressed in many
Canons, that he was no Bishop that had not the peoples election or consent,
they make it Schism not to obey such, and allow the people no such power.

72. They suppose that God has entrusted the King to choose for all his
Subjects whom they shall commit the conduct of their Souls to as their Pastors
and Bishops; though he be not trusted to choose our Physicians, our Wives, our
Diet, etc. And so they would make the King answerable for all ill-chosen
Pastors. And if a Papist, Heretic, or a hater of Pastoral holiness should ever
be King, in how sad a case are the peoples souls.

73. Yea, they hold that Patrons, be they never so ignorant or ungodly, must
choose all that shall have the Parochial trust of Souls (As to the possession of
Temples and Tithes, we yield it); they say, The people must have no other, than
what the Patrons choose and impose on them.

74. Excommunication of Dissenters seems little to them, but they by the writ
de Excommunicato Capiendo, lay them in Jayl till death, unless they change
their Judgment, which it is not in their power to do.

75. Though we publish our abhorrence of all Doctrines of Rebellion, and disown
even so much popularity, as their Richard Hooker, and most Politics own, many
of them go on to charge Nonconformists with suspicions of Rebellion, and to
provoke the King against them, as disloyal.

76. They print and preach to provoke Magistrates to execute the foresaid
severe Laws, to silence and ruin them, and accuse them for not doing it.

77. They stir up the people to take them for intolerable seditious
Schismatics, to the destruction of Christian Love, and causing men to hate
each other.

78. By these means families are distracted; Husbands against Wives, Parents
against Children; some casting them out, if they do but hear a Nonconformist
Preacher, while sensuality corrupts youth, and needs more restraint.

79. When the Kings Clemency Licensed our Meetings, they grudged at it, and
neverthelss separated from us, though they describe Separation to be Meetings
held against authority; and thereby showed that it is somewhat else than the
Kings authority that they contend for, and something more than our want of
License which causes their fervent opposition.

80. Though we beg of them in vain to prevent the Papists advantage by our
divisions; and though they seem resolved to let Popery it self come in, rather
than either restore us or tolerate us, and abate what we count sin, and they
call Indifferent; yet do they persuade people that we are bringing in Popery,
if we obey not all their Impositions; and talk as if either no Dissenters were
tolerable (when all men differ, and they among themselves in as great matters
as from us) or All were tolerable: both which are abominable: And as if he that
were unwilling to be destroyed by Prelatists, were introducing Popery; Should a
man choose rather to be saved by a Papist, than hanged by a Prelatist, who were
more to be suspected of Popery, He that made that choice, or he that put it
upon him.

81. Besides the reconciling treaty with the Papists, asserted by Dr. Heylin;
some chief Doctors profess that they would have the Church in the same state,
as when the Greeks and Latin did divide, and grant what the Greeks grant; not
denying the Pope to be Principium unitatis, and pleading for Grotius as a
Protestant of our Churches mind, who was for the Council of Trent, and all the
rest; desiring no more for our Concord with the Church of Rome, but that as by
the Mistress Church they may rule ^y the Canons, and not absolutely, securing
the Rights of Kings and Bishops, and reforming Scholastic curiositics, and the
Clergies lives.

82. Under all the new Impositions, we were never allowed to speak for our
selves, nor durst once Petition the Parliament that ejected us, or any since,
for relief or audience, lest such boldness should more incense our afflicters.

83. There is no surer way to destroy their own Churchpomp and grandeur, and
root out Episcopacy more than we desire, than to use it for Satan against
faithful Ministers; and against the Souls of men, and against the honor and
innocence of Princes, and against the property and liberty of Subjects, even
against God and man, and so to make it odious to mankind, by making it
intolerable: Till they that cannot tolerate a differing-word do weary the
world by their intolerable pride, and cast down themselves, and then blame
others.

84. To this day, while they accuse those of Schism that dare not subscribe,
declare, swear, and do the things aforesaid, and plead against the enduring of
them, to preach or solemnly worship God, they disagree in Doctrines, and many
great matters among themselves, and take not themselves for Schismatics: Of
which see our 2d Plea, page 158, 159.

85. Some of them are for Original sin, according to the subscribed Articles:
Bishop Jer. Tailor and others were against it; and Bishop Warner has writ
against him.

86. Some of them preach for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: Mr.
Thorndike, Mr. Sherlock and others differ; and many of them sharply accuse and
preach against each other thereabout; yea with high accusations, as heretical.

87. Some of them preach up Gods Eternal Decrees of Election and Derelection,
or Reprobation, in that sort, as others of them preach against as blasphemy
against God, and destructive to the piety and peace of man.

88. Some of them preach for universal Redemption as a necessary point of
faith, which others cry down as Arminianism.

89. Some of them make Justifying faith to contain Obedience, and others cry it
down as Popery and Socinianism.

90. Some of them say that God has given to all men sufficient grace to
salvation (yea say some, and efficient), which others call Arminianism.

91. Some of them say that it is Gods Grace that makes the faithful to differ
from others, and others say it is their own Wills: And about the parts of Grace
and Free Will they preach and write against each other.

92. Some of them preach that all the justified persevere. And others preach it
down as a dangerous error. I have tried to reconcile all these, but they go on.

93. Some of them are only for Bidding prayer in the Pulpit, as if all other
were forbidden by the Canon (as Heylin): others use prayer there.

94. Some there pray in their own words, and some only in the words of the
Liturgy: some use the same words, and others vary them.

95. Their Cathedral Worship much differs from the Parochial, and some
Churches use Organs, and others have none.

96. One writes for the Religious use of Lent (as Bishop Guning), others as
Bishop Tailor (and Dr. More), etc. are against their principles and use: yea
and against many other things of Church Government and significant Ceremonies
which the other party hold. See Tailor cited 2d Plea for Peace.

97. Some of them are for the Divine right of the Lords Day, and the Morality
of the fourth Commandment: which Heylin and many others vehemently deny.

98. One is for Altars, and Rails, and others against them, and others for
indifferency.

99. In preaching they use very different Methods: And some Churches of them
begin to use new Versions of the singing Psalms.

100. Some following Grotius de Jure Belli: and Dr. Tailors Ductor Dubitantium
are for useful lying, which injureth not others (and therefore no doubt for
doubtful Conformity). But others are against it.

101. But they nowhere more differ, than in their Conformity it self, one
taking the words in one sense, and another in another; so that their Conformity
is not the same thing, though the Letters and sound of voice be the same. One
by his Assent and Consent to all things in the three books means plainly; and
another means, but that he may and will use so much as concerns him: One by
[ Not resisting by Arms any Commissioned by the King] means as he speaks.
Another limiteth it to [ Lawfully Commissioned]; One by [ on any pretense
whatsoever] means as he says: Another excepteth as Bilson aforesaid, and
such cases as King John's, who gave up his Kingdom to the Pope, and would have
done to the Morocco-Mahometan; and many other such instances (as Killing the
Parliaments, City, etc.) One that subscribeth never to endeavor any Alteration
of Church Government, means as he speaks: Another excepteth
Lay-Chancellours use of the Keys, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, etc. if the
King would change them. One by [ any endeavour] means as he says: Another
means only [ unlawful endeavour], one by [ nothing contrary to Gods word] in
Can. 36. means plainly: Another means [ nothing which makes Communion
unlawful]: One takes all the imposed subscriptions to be but a promise of
submission and peace, which others abhor, and are for the Truth of all that
they subscribe assent to. In a word, some are for the common Rule of taking all
the words in the usual sense, except the Imposers declare a different sense:
And others are for necessary supposing, that the Imposers meant well, whatever
they said, and therefore our Charity and honoring them binds us to put no
sense on their words which is contrary to Gods Law, the Law of the Land, or
Common Right; and supposing them true and good, whatever they are, who can
doubt but they may be sworn or subscribed.

102. Dr. Hammond and his party thought that it does not appear that there were
any subject Presbyters in Scripturetimes, and so that every single Congregation
had a Bishop present in worshipping God. But Dr. Stillingfleet says p. 269.
While the Apostles lived, it is probable there were no fixed Bishops, or but
few. And so the world had but 12 or 13 indefinite Bishops, who are not proved
to have any peculiar determinate Diocesses.

103. Mr. Dodwell, and I think most of them, take the Church of England to be a
Political society, and many think we overthrow Church and Order, if we deny
Churches to be formed by a Constitutive Government. But Dr. Stillingfleet not
only holds that the Church of England is but the Pastors and people
consenting by Parliaments to live under the same Laws about Religion, without
any Constitutive Church-Head (one or many); but also peremptorily concludes,
that to maintain such a Constitutive Supreme Church Power will necessarily
infer Popery; and so makes all the Conformists necessarily to lead in Popery,
who are for such Political Churches, and Constitutive Governors.

104. Mr. Cheny says, That to make Churches by Covenants, confederacies or
consent, besides baptism, is to be guilty of blasphemy, impiety,
irreligiousness, infidelity; and one should rather die than yield to it. But
Dr. Stillingfleet says the Church of England is one Church, made by such
consent.

But such Schisms among themselves are too many to be here numbered. And no
wonder when they differ so much as they do with their own Sentiments, in one
and the same book, saying and unsaying, as the argument in hand requires. E.
g. Dr. Stillingfleet thinks that the seven Churches of Asia, being
Metropolitan, prove Diocesan or Metropolitan-Bishops, then in being: And yet,
that while the Apostles lived, it is probable there were no fixed Bishops, or
but few. And so either seven Apostles were the Angels of the seven Churches of
Asia, reproved so much for their sin and backsliding, or the Angels signified
not the Bishops.

While we are all Schismatics for disobeying, say some, and holding
Nonconforming Assemblies, say others, from the Church of England; yet this
Church is no proper Political Church, and has no Constitutive chief
Government, says Dr. St. and therefore has no authority to make Canons to
command us.

He no less than threatens us with damnation (not in the retracted Irenicum,
but in his late book against Popish Idolatry) if we choose not the purest
Church: and the Papist grants it, and says as he; And yet it is the
substance of his unreasonable books to prove us Schismatics, if we depart from
their Church, or so much as preach to other Assemblies, on the account of purer
worship, and greater edification, etc. And he had the wit to pass by this
citation in the Epistle of a book against him.

As for Mr. Cheny, and diverse other such, another book opens their
Contradictions.

They often tell us of the Nullity of the Ministry, or Power which is not
received from Episcopal Superiors; Especially Bishop Gunning and Mr. Dodwell,
hence draw dismal degrading and unchurching Consequences. And yet thus they
condemn both the English, and Roman, and Universal Church. If Church Power be
given by Inferiors, the Independents are not to be confuted: If from equals, as
Generation is, as men generate men, and Physicians make Physicians, etc. then
Presbyters may make Presbyters. If it must be by Superior Power, then who
makes Archbishops in England, or Popes at Rome, who have no Superiors, and so
(by them) no authority? So much for the Historical Characters of the Canonical
Conformists.

But after all this, we grant, that there is some tie and union among them;
They all own Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, with an Et
caetera; the rest as the Canon speaks: They all agree to declare and
subscribe the words imposed, and promise or Covenant accordingly, and swear
Obedience to their Ordinaries. E. g. Though such as Mr. Bull and Dr. Tully
write against each other, of Justification as by Faith or Works; though many
are very much against the Doctrine of Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Parker, Mr. Sherlock,
and such other; yet they all subscribe the same Articles about Justification,
Free Will, Predestination. And I doubt not but there are very many not only
Learned, but Pious men among them, who yet by strong prejudice and passion,
through education, converse, cross interests, and unacquaintedness with
Dissenters, and the many scandals that have risen, and the extremes which many
have run into, are possessed with a conceit, that the ruin, imprisonment,
banishment or silencing of Nonconformists, is necessary to the prosperity of
their party, called by them The Church.

And to do the Papists right, they agree to be members of one Church, and to be
for the Dignities, Wealth and Power of their Clergy, and take the same Oaths,
and are under the same Canons, etc. though they differ about the Supremacy it
self, as between the Pope and the Prelates in General Councils; and about
swearing, forswearing, lying, murder, deposing and killing Kings, fornication,
and many such as the Jansenists have opened at large: All these differences
they can bear with, and the many different Sects of Friars, fitted to the
several humors of men, as long as they are for one Common society and
interest: And doubtless many of strict lives do think it a service to the
Church, and so to God, to kill, burn and destroy others that are against them,
as they do.

There is some one (with what mind I know not) that has written a book called
The Catholic Hierarchy, pleading like an Independent against humane
Impositions: But in a Digression so diligently laboring to prove, that the
Diocesans Subordination of Churches will unavoidably infer a Pope or Universal
Head, that I take it to be a dangerous book; while it stalleth the said
Diocesans, whether imprudently or fraudulently as a Prevaricator, I know not;
he says more for a Pope, without any antidote, than is ordinarily to be
elsewhere found, and then most heads are able to answer; though the main
conclusion is fully confuted in my last book against Johnson, alias Terret, the
Papist.

CHAP. III. The Mere Nonconformist.
1. BY the present Mere Nonconformists, we mean those that 1660, by the Kings
Concession made their proposals for Reformation and Concord, and as are of the
Judgment then by them professed. I meddle not with others unknown.

2. Their professed Religion is Mere Christianity, essentially contained in the
Sacramental Covenant, explained in the Creed, Lords-prayer and Decalogue, and
integrally in the sacred Scripture.

3. Yet as Christians are accidentally called Protestants, because they
renounce Popery; so we are Catholics, as renouncing all Schismatical Sects;
and Nonconformists, because we dare not Conform to all that is imposed on us.

4. We hold that all Christians should Love each other as themselves, and do
them all the good they can, and no hurt.

5. We hold that all baptized in Infancy should solemnly at age renew and own
that Covenant, as adult members.

6. And that all that do so, not nullifying their profession by inconsistent
heresy or sin, should be received in Communion.

7. That such as renew it not, or are proved to forsake it, or heinously sin
against it, should be reproved, and after sufficient admonition, if impenitent,
be declared unfit for Church Communion, and accordingly avoided.

8. That God has appointed that there be stated Assemblies of Christians,
especially on the Lords-days, where he shall be worshipped, Men instructed, and
Communion exercised.

9. That these Congregations should have known stated Pastors, to be their
Teachers and Guides in worship and holy living.

10. That these Pastors by Office have the power of the Church-keys, to judge
whom to take in by Baptism, and whom to admonish as Criminal, to reject as
impenitent, and to absolve and receive again as penitent in their proper charge.

11. That Baptism and the Eucharist being a Gift of a sealed pardon, and of
Christ, and life, no unbelieving nor unwilling person is capable of them:
Therefore none but believing Consenters, or Volunteers and their Infants,
should be baptized, and Volunteers only admitted to the Lord's Supper.

12. And though Magistrates should promote the sacred Work, and Rule the
Churches, and keep peace and order by the Sword, and see that all have
competent Teachers, and hinder the intolerable; yet may they not invade the
Pastors office, or peoples right, nor force men to trust their Souls to the
Pastoral Care of unable or untrusty men, nor hinder them from choosing better
for themselves, any more than they may confine them to untrusty Physicians,
Servants or Wives.

13. That because the Pastoral Office cannot be exercised either by, or on the
unwilling; mutual consent is necessary to the Relation of Pastor and Flock.

14. That it is part of the Pastors Office to word his own Sermons and Prayers:
But yet if to avoid discord or error some common forms be agreed on, not
overthrowing the Pastors office, they may be fitly used, till by accident they
do more hurt than good.

15. The Laws of Magistrates Circa Sacra, and the consent and custom of
Churches should not in lawful things be crossed by humorous dividing
Singularity.

16. No one Liturgy was imposed on any National Church, or any Patriarchate for
many hundred years after the Apostles days (yea and after Constantine): But
every Bishop or Pastor was the chuser of his Words and Practice.

17. Christians should all live in Love, and walk peaceably by the Divine
Scripture-Rule, so far as they have attained, so waiting for increase of grace.

18. We must receive the weak in the faith, and such as differ tolerably from
us, even as Christ receives us; and no Christian should be excommunicated, but
for impenitency in sins, subverting faith, or holy living.

19. Nor must Christ's Ministers be forbid to preach the Gospel, because of
tolerable differences.

20. And those that through differences and scruples cannot comfortably worship
God under one Pastor, or in the Words or Ceremonies of one Church, should have
leave to do it in another, keeping sound Doctrine, Love and Peace.

21. The number and need of the people must determine whether a particular
Church shall have one Pastor or more.

22. If one for Concord be President to the rest, and the Senior Pastors be
guides to the younger, we are not against it.

23. Nor yet if the Magistrate or Churches by consent appoint some of the
Graver to be visitors of many Churches, and to instruct and keep the younger in
peace.

24. Nor will we quarrel against the Names of Bishops, or Archbishops, or their
Wealth and Honor, while Faith, Worship, Discipline and Love are preserved.

25. If by a National Church, they mean either a Christian Kingdom] or [ all
the Churches of a Nation as under one Prince] or [ as associated for Concord]
we deny none such.

26. For we hold that all Christians should live in as much Concord as they
can, and that Synods are useful to that end.

27. We must honor our Rulers, though they afflict us.

28. We hold that we must separate from no Church or Christian farther than
they separate from Christ, though we must not sin against God for communion
with any. We take it for a great sin for any party to appropriate the Church
only to themselves: We own no Church but as part of the Catholic (or
universal) Church, and we hold all our Assemblies as in union and communion
with All the true Churches on earth, and put up our prayers and praises as in
conjunction with theirs, not owning their failings (or our own) but their
duties: And we will be members of no particular Church, which allows us not
occasional Communion with others; but take such for Sectaries.

29. The welfare of Souls is of so great concernment, that we cannot think any
Christian should be indifferent to whom as a Pastor he commits the care and
conduct of his Soul, any more than what Physician he chooses for his body. And
the difference between the ignorant and the wise, and wicked and the godly, the
negligent and the faithful, is of grand importance.

30. We think that all Christians should prefer a faithful Pastor, before an
unfaithful or insufficient one; and a purer Church before a more corrupt, as
far as they are free, without doing more hurt than good. But we will hold
occasional communion with more faulty Churches, so they compel us not to sin.

31. We take not all the faults of the Pastor, flock or service, to be made
ours merely by our presence: Nor do we think that all faults (or many and great
ones consistent with the necessaries to communion) will allow us to separate,
that is, either from a true Church, as none, or from lawful communion as
unlawful: For Natural distance is not Moral Separation.

32. We take the Magisterial imposing of unnecessary Oaths, Professions,
Subscriptions, Practices, much more sinful ones, as necessary terms of
communion, and silencing and casting out Christ's faithful Servants that obey
them not, to be the grand and common causes of Schism, which have, through the
pride of a Domineering-Clergy, broken most of the Churches on Earth for above
1000 years.

33. We hate the spirit of pride and envy in Preachers, who cannot endure to
see others, at least that differ from them, preferred before them; and if any
do but go from them, to others, or worship God in another place, or in other
words or circumstances, do frighten the people by their loud allarm and cry of
Schism; as if all were of a different Religion or species of Communion, that
differ from their book in Word or Ceremonies; And by that blinding name of
Different Communions, alienate the hearts of the ignorant, and make them think
of the Dutch, French, and others that only differ from them in accidents, as
the Papists do of us that are called by them Heretics.

34. We take him not to have the Wisdom and Love of a sound Christian, who
cannot love and bear with his fellow Christians, who differ but in such
tolerable things.

35. Yet we think not that all should preach and gather Churches that will, and
that the intolerable must be tolerated, and that it must be All or none: And
the Magistrate is Judge whom he will tolerate: but he must judge aright.

36. We hold the Parish-Divisions to be of great convenience; Not taking all in
the Parish for the Church, but confining Ministers to their proper bounds.

37. And whatever differing Churches the Magistrate tolerateth, he must force
them to live peaceably, and modestly toward others.

38. Were every Church reduced to such a number, as that all might in season
have local, personal communion, like great Parishes that have Chapels; and E.
g. every Church of 6000 Souls have six Pastors conjunct, or every Corporation
or Market Town (of old called Cities) with the Neighbor-villages, be one
Church; and one among these Pastors to be a President Bishop, we should think
it most like the ancient Government. But we can live in peace, where we cannot
have all which we justly wish for.

39. Though some preach not Christ sincerely, but in envy and strife to add to
our affliction, we rejoice that Christ is preached.

40. We hold all, that for the power of Kings, the obedience of the Subjects,
and against rebellion, which the Scripture speaks, and which the Christian
Churches, Politics, Lawyers, as far as we know them, commonly hold; and more
than diverse chief Conformists: (Bishop Bilsons book of Subjection, and Grotius
de Imperio Sum. Pat. fulliest speak my thoughts in the greatest part.)

41. As these are the mere Nonconformists principles, so their practice is
accordingly: They pray for the King, and all in authority; not for preserment,
but that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty:
And they pray and seek for the public safety, and live peaceably toward
others.

42. They sought reconciliation with the Diocesans before the Kings return, and
associating upon uniting terms.

43. What the Nonconformists in City, Country, Monks Army, and the next
Parliament did for the Kings restoration, is known.

44. They offered but Bishop Ushers form of Primitive Government (or
Episcopacy) for reconciliation and concord with the Bishops.

45. They gave public thanks for the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical
affairs, which had healed us, had it not been cast away: In which he declares
their moderation.

46. They never made one motion for Presbytery, Lay Elders, Independency: Nor
against Parish-Churches, nor against the Bishops Lordships, or place in
Parliament, or Wealth; Though, I confess, they desired better than they saw fit
to ask.

47. They did as much with the Bishops, as if it had been for their lives, by
Condescension, Reason and Petition, to have prevented the foreseen divisions,
and were the seekers of Peace.

48. The Liturgy which they offered, had not one word of exception returned by
the Bishops; nor were their Reply or Petition answered by them to this day.

49. They offered their solemnest Protestation or Oaths, that it was to avoid
sin that they refused Conformity; and yet many reported that we held all for
indifferent, except renouncing the Covenant.

50. The New Liturgy came out of the Press so near the penal Bartholomew-day,
that in almost all Counties of England, they were turned out for not declaring
Assent to a book which they never saw, or could see; and the Conformers there
owned it before they saw it.

51. The Nonconformists knowing that the Magistrate has the power of the
Temples and Tithes, never pretended any right to them when they were cast out:
But knowing that they were justly possessed of their Pastoral relation to their
flocks, they believed not that the mere will of the Magistrate disobligeth
them. Yet they believe that when the continuance will do more hurt than good,
they and the flock should part by consent.

52. We never heard that any of the 2000 ejected Ministers were cast out for
any crime or false doctrine, but merely for not Conforming by Declaration,
Subscription and Practice.

53. Nor have we heard that any, or many in all these times of trial have been
convicted of heresy or drunkenness, swearing, cursing, deceiving, fornication,
or any such immorality.

54. I am sure they have often requested that Laws may be made to Constrain them
to live peaceably, to abuse none, and to punish them as much as others, if any
of them be found guilty of any such crime; and that such Laws may bring it to
the trial, who they be that are of scandalous lives.

55. They have been thankful for bare connivence and opportunity to preach for
nothing, save what they receive from the hearers charity, these 18 years: Some
that could live without it have preached freely; and the rest, could they have
lived and their families without bread, had rather have been no burden to any;
They are naturally no more in love with a beggarly sordid life than others: The
Conformists would be loath to live on Charity: Many hundreds have long had
nothing, or next to nothing of their own, and Wives and many Children to
maintain, House-rent to pay, Meat, Drink, Clothes, etc. to buy: and nothing but
men's Charity to defray all this. And in the Countries Money is scarce, Charity
too cold, and most of the Rich are taught by the Clergy to condemn them: And if
they come to great Towns, the Clergy reproach them.

56. Many have dyed in prison, many caught their death there; many had their
goods and books taken away; and many endured long imprisonments, and the
prosecution goes on.

57. The Magistrates of London, and other places, have been vexed, and sued by
Informers for not prosecuting them.

58. They preached mostly privately to few about London, for fear of giving
offense, till the people in the dreadful Plague, which killed about 100000 were
left as sheep without shepherds, crouding into another world, and the
Nonconformists durst not forbear to teach them: And God so greatly blessed their
labors, that the People and Preachers, who had been thus awakened by devouring
death, resolved no more for fear of man to neglect the care and interest of
Souls. O who could be silent when thousands that looked for speedy death did
crowd for help in their necessary preparation. This first drew the London
Nonconformists into more open exercise of their office, which encouraged those
in the Country to imitation. And it is not their judgment that they are bound
to preach, when by opposing violence, or the offending of Rulers it is like to
do more hurt than good, and once preaching to deprive them of all the
usefulness of their lives: The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets (to Reason and Prudence in the use of gifts, as Dr. Hammond expounds
it): But whatever it cost them, when there is true Necessity and Opportunity,
making the good like to be greater than the hurt, they judge that they must use
the Ministry which they are vowed and ordained to.

59. When the Plague was over, some thought once again to retire; and the fire
burning down the Churches, and the people being destitute, constrained them
(though forbidden) to go on. O what is man! What were the Clergy that took upon
them the Charge of Souls, that they durst be against such men's Preaching of the
Gospel in such a City, when such a Plague, and such flames had declared the
necessity.

60. Even when the Plague was raging, and the Court and Parliament fled from it
to Oxford, they there were making the Oxford-Oath, and Act of Confinement, to
banish the Nonconformists from the desolate City, and all Corporations, etc.
And they that before purposed to come to the Parish-Churches, durst not come,
lest the Congregation being witness of their being in the City, etc. they
should be sent to the Jayl.

61. Most that we hear of in the Countries, and some about London, preach not
at the time of public worship, but go themselves to the public Churches, when
they have honest tolerable men: I and others here, do ordinary hear and
communicate in our Parish-Churches (when even the last Whitsunday I do not
think there were above 100 Communicants in a Parish, that its thought has
20000 Souls, and yet all the rest are not hunted as Schismatics). And so our
Schism is not for withdrawing from the Parish-Churches, but for communicating
also with others (which we avow): As if it were greater Schism to separate from
none, than to separate from all save the Diocesan Conformists, who appropriate
the Church to themselves.

62. We take it to be our duty to do our best to keep up the reputation of
honest peaceable Conformists, lest our Concord and the peoples edification be
hindered.

63. When we thought it a service to the Conformists, to help them in teaching
some of their Parishes, which are exceedingly too great to hear them, and to
enjoy all their Pastoral helps, and we preach, as they confess, the same
doctrine as they, yet we never asked or expected the least part of their
maintenance (much less Preferments, Prebends, Deaneries or Bishoprics), but
would have been thankful to have leave to be their helpers for nothing; but
cannot have their consent.

64. Those of us that preach at the hours of public worship, do it for the
most part, where their hearers knowing that they cannot have the just benefit
of the Parish-Pastors office in public and private, find it necessary statedly
to choose other helps; and other hours would greatly disorder their
family duties: Besides the Independents that have long had their gathered
Churches.

65. Though our judgment be against Pluralities and Nonresidences, we say
little against it, lest we should be thought to desire part of the prey, or to
envy their riches.

66. Though we feared, that if we conformed to the Professions, Subscriptions,
Oaths, Covenants and Practices beforenamed; and this deliberately, and on
pretense of keeping our Liberty to preach against the sins of others, we should
be guilty of all the sin and its aggravations, which we named in the first Plea
for Peace; yet knowing how various representations make men's judgments to
differ, we became not herein Accusers of the Conformists, but disavowed it,
leaving them to their proper judge, and meddling with no men's mattters but our
own.

67. And lest it should seem to reflect on them as guilty, or exasperate our
afflicters, we have mostly forborne these 17 or 18 years, so much as to open the
matters and reasons of our Nonconformity, and silently undergone reproach.

68. Yea when great Bishops have told our Superiors, that we judged nothing but
renouncing the Covenant unlawful, and have called to us, and set Parliament Men
to call out, [ What it is that we would have], and never would give us leave to
tell them; we have patiently been silent: And when great Bishops have told me
that our Rulers took us as not sincere, for not giving our reasons, and that
they would Petition that we might no longer be suffered to keep up a Schism,
and give no reason for it: I have offered them to beg it on my knees, if there
were any hope to obtain liberty but once to render our reasons of not
conforming.

69. And when the Act ceased which restrained the Press, we still forbore till
they gave out, [ That now it was clear, that for our baffled cause we had no
defense, but went on to sin against our consciences], which constrained me at
last to open somewhat of our case, at which yet they are displeased.

70. Though multitudes of Books have been written against us, charging us with
Schism, and calling for execution of the Law against us, yea persuading King
and People, as the Plotters do, that we are cherishing principles of rebellion;
we thought it best to imitate Christ, and silently to bear all, and let our
Lives and Works, rather than our Apologies, answer for us; till constrained, I
published a full account of our Principles of Government and Obedience, lest
continued silence pass for guilt.

71. Their constant last accusation is about the late Wars: When As 1. not one
of very many of the present Nonconformists ever meddled with them. 2. And we
offer them thanks to silence only the guilty. 3. And many Conformists (and one
Archbishop) were in Arms for the Parliament. 4. And we have not requited them
till of late, with telling them that it was the Conformists here that began the
War.

72. When some say that they requite us for casting out the Conformists
heretofore; we offer them a thousand thanks if they will cast out none but
those that cast out them. I confess I took it for a great mercy to have grossly
ignorant, drunken Readers and Priests cast out, of what opinion soever, and
better put in: But I and others wrote against putting out any worthy and
tolerable man for being against the Parliament, or for Prelacy.

73. Whereas some cheat the ignorant, by telling them, that [ We would have
every Minister be a Pope in his own Parish]. 1. A Pope is one that arrogateth
the Government over all other Pastors, even of the whole world: Whereas we
would govern no Pastors at all, nor any people, but our particular flocks. 2.
And these we would have only to be Volunteers: And is not he liker to a Tyrant,
that will be a Pastor to thousands against their wills, than he that will take
charge of none but Consenters? 3. Specially the Independents, who are accused
as giving the power to the people, and depending on their charity, do not like
tyrants compel any to obey them.

74. Some are taught to make the Presbyterians odious, by the rigor of their
Discipline, and the stool of Repentance, which the licentious fear. But 1. our
judgment is, that none but willing Consenters should be Church Members, and as
such come under Discipline. 2. And that none be excommunicate for any sins
(ordinarily) unless after due warning and patience he refuse to repent. 3. And
God has made Repentance necessary to comforting-absolution, pardon and
salvation. 4. And it is a thousand pities that any should be so mad in sin, as
to think Repentance too dear for pardon.

75. Some say that we are for Excommunicating Kings: What other men have been,
is nothing to us: We take not our judgments on trust from any party; but the
Scripture is our Rule, and the Primitive Church our pattern. Some of us have
written against the lawfulness of dishonouring Princes and Rulers by proper
excommunications, as being against the fifth Command; and Rituals give place to
Morals* And some of the greatest Churchmen that have cast us ou^ ^^ve been for
Rulers Excommunication: We are not insensible what Treasons and Domination not
only the Pope but the Councils of Bishops (even without the Pope as in the case
of Ludovicus Pius, and others) have exercised over Princes and Kingdoms by
excommunications, and cursed cursing men from Christ.

76. We find that when in the contentions between the Popes and the Emperors,
the Clergy familiarly swore on both sides as interest moved them; and as Abbas
Urspergensus says, Perjury was the common brand of Priest and people; it was
far from proving a cure of Schism, though it was pretended for that use.

77. As the Law forbids us, so we profess to intend nothing here written as
an accusation of the Government, Laws, Liturgy, or Conformists, but only as a
description of the reasons of our own Nonconformity. But if it should prove
true that Cities, Corporations, Bishops and Priests are guilty but of half the
evil against God, Truth, Conscience, the Gospel, the Church, the souls of men,
the good of the King and Subjects, which we fear we should be guilty of if we
did conform, I had rather be a slave than that Clergyman that should encourage
them in it.

78. And if it should prove that any of them are under such guilt, in the end
it will prove but an uneffectual defense, to accuse the innocent and reprove*
and so to divert them, by keeping them on the defensive part; while they are
accused of odious sin for not sinning, and called intolerable for refusing to
concur in wickedness.

79. Ever since we were cast out and silenced, we have thankfully accepted all
motions and overtures for concord. We have been several times since the first
Treaty, called to new Treaties, in one Dr. Manton and others offered thankfully
to accept leave to preach for nothing in the Parish Churches where the
Ministers desire it, and when the Common Prayer is used. Another time being
called by the Lord Keeper Bridgman we agreed with Bishop Wilkins and Dr.
Burton, and it was dra^^ up in an Act of Concord by Judge Hale, but voted by the
Commons not to be brought in. Since then we were invited to treat with Dr.
Tillotson and Dr. Stillingfleet, who seemed to consent to the terms of the form
of an healing Act which we offered them; but they found that the Bishops would
not consent. By all which we have still showed, that we have never ceased to
seek for peace.

80. We have never shunned to read or hear all that can be said, to prove that
we need not fear all the guilt of Lying, Perjury, false Covenanting against
duty, and all the other sins, with their many and heinous aggravations, which
we fear being guilty of, if we should conform: Nor did we ever refuse to give
the reason of our fears, to the Learned man that does accuse us.

81. As is aforesaid, we never to this day put up our Petition to any
Parliament, since we were silenced for relief, compassion, or to be heard;
which may seem strange to those that know our long accusations and sufferings.

82. So far are we from loving Schism, that we take Unity to be essential to
the universal and particular Churches; and that division is destruction, though
every difference is not such division. And the chief of my studies and labors
in the world is, How to reconcile and unite divided Christians. And having
fully proved in a Treatise of the only terms of common concord, (...) (...)
will never be attained but on the terms of Primitive simplicity, prescribed by
Christ, and practiced by the first Churches; it is because our Conformity is
inconsistent with such terms of common concord, and such as we think but
Sectarian schism, that we are Nonconformists. Let him that is for dividing the
child, be taken for no true mother of it.

83. We are not against all Litanies; our Litany has not less but more than
theirs: We heartily say, From Atheism, Infidelity and Popery, from
profaneness, persecution and oppression, from all sedition, privy conspiracy,
and rebellion, from false doctrine, heresy and schism; from an ignorant,
proud, and worldly domineering Clergy, from malignant hatred of Gods holy Image
and servants, and serious worship, and from contempt of his word and
commandments, Good Lord deliver us.

Jam. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge
among you, let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts (much more
silencing persecution) glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where envying
and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. But the wisdom that is
from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And
the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace. 1 These. 2.
15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us. And they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sin
always. For the wrath is come upon them to the utmost.

I determine not in all this, Who is the Schismatic, but make a pair of
Spectacles for the purblind to discern it.

But, Reader, I must earnestly entreat thee, as thou love thy Soul, to
remember, that as toys, and plays, and lust, and pride, and drunkenness, and
gluttony, and ambition, and covetousness, are the Devils nets by which he
takes the most of the world; so he has a second sort for those that are above
these things, and that is, the delights of wit in the vain unprofitable part of
Learning: And for those that yet are above this, one of his last snares is
Religious wrangling; turning faith and godliness into opinions, sidings,
formalities and perverse disputings, especially with men of corrupt minds, that
take gain for Godliness, and think that Reputation and Money will coin any
thing that is for them, into Truth and Goodness.

I conclude therefore, That if thou would escape that Schism and Dangerous
sin, which Contenders charge on one another, the way is short and plain.

I. Understand, and stand to thy Baptismal-Vow, and see that thy Belief, Love
and Practice of known Christianity, according to our Creed, Lords-Prayer and
Decalogue, in Love to God, thy Soul and thy Neighbor, in Godliness, Charity,
Justice and Sobriety, be serious and sincere; and then thou art certainly of
that Catholic Church, which Christ is the Head of, and will save.

II. Love all Christians as such, according to the measures of their goodness;
and remembering thy own weakness, pity and bear with the infirmities of the
weak; and when others wrangle against them, and abuse them, study thou to do
them good.

III. Look on all particular Churches as members of the universal before
described; and choose the best thou can for thy ordinary communion and good,
so it be not to a greater hurt by accident: But deny not occasional communion
with any (though accused by others) further than they force thee to sin, or
than they separate from Christ: Thy presence makes thee not guilty of the
tolerable faults which thou can not amend. Take them for Sectaries and
Separatists, who forbid thee communion with all that are not of their mind and
way in tolerable differences.

IV. Take heed of neglecting any truth or duty, or living in any sin, which all
good Christians, even the Contenders are agreed about: And in these thou will
find enough for peace of Conscience and Salvation.

V. Be sure that thou approve thy self to God, and take his Law for thy Rule,
and his Love and the heavenly Glory for thy portion, hope and All; and let not
the flesh, nor worldly interest cheat thee into justly suspected sin; nor the
Threats, or Flatteries, or Bribes of men, either Drive, Allure or Hire thee to
be false to thy Conscience, thy Savior and God; nor profanely with Esau, to
sell thy Birthright for a morsel, or hazard thy part in Heaven for a transitory
befooling dream and shadow of profit, honor or delight.

FINIS.

