THREE TREATISES Tending to awaken Secure Sinners. viz. 1. The terror of the
day of Judgment, 2 COR. 5. 10. 2. The danger of slighting Christ and his
Gospel, MATT. 22. 5. 3. True Christianity, or Christ's absolute Dominion, 1 COR.
6. 19, 20. And Man's necessary Self-Resignation and Subjection unto Christ, PSA.
2. 10, 11, 12.


By Richard Baxter.

To be sold by John Rothwell at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in Cheapside,
1656.

TRUE Christianity; OR, Christ's absolute Dominion, and Man's necessary
Self-resignation and subjection.

In two Assize Sermons preached at WORCESTER.

By RICH. BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons bookseller in Kidderminster. 1656.

A Sermon OF The absolute Dominion of God-Redeemer, and the necessity of being
devoted and living to him.

Preached before the Honorable Judge of Assize at Worcester, Aug. 2. 1654.

By Rich. Baxter.

Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and Living.

London, Printed for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kidderminster, 1656.

To the Right Honorable Sergeant Glyn, Now Judge of Assise in this Circuit.
My Lord,
COuld my excuse have satisfied you, this Sermon had been confined to the
Auditory it was prepared for: I cannot expect that is should find that Candor
and favor with every Reader, as it did with the Hearers. When it must speak to
All, the guilty will hear, and then it will gall. Innocence is patient in
hearing a reproof, and charitable in the interpretation; but Guilt will smart
and quarrel, and usually make a fault in him that finds one in them. Yet I
confessed this is but a poor justification of his silence, that has a Call to
speak. Both my Calling and this Sermon would condemn me, if on such grounds I
should draw back: But my Backwardness was caused by the reason which I then
tendered your Lord-ship as my excuse, viz. Because here is nothing but what is
common, and that it is in as common and homely a dress. And I hope we need not
fear that our labors are dead, unless the Press shall give them life. We bring
not Sermons to Church, as we do a Corpse for a burial: If there be life in them,
and life in the Hearers, the connaturality will cause such an amicable closure,
that through the Reception, Retention, and operation of the soul, they will be
the immortal seed of a life everlasting. But yet seeing the press has a louder
voice then mine, and the matter in hand is of such exceeding necessity, I shall
not refuse upon such an invitation, to be a rememberancer to the the world, of
a Doctrine and duty of such high concernment: thongh they have heard it never
so often before. Seeing therefore I must present that now to your eyes, which I
lately presented to your ears, I shall take the boldness to add one word of
Application in this Epistle, which I thought not seasonable to mention in the
first delivery; and that shall be to your Lordship and all others in your
present case, that are elected members of this expected Parliament. Be sure to
remember the interest of your sovereign, the great Lord Protector of Heaven and
Earth: And as ever you will make him a comfortable account of your Power,
Abilities, and Opportunities of serving him, see that you prefer his interest
before your own, or any man's on earth. If you go not thither as sent by Him,
with a firm resolution to serve him first, you were better sit at home: forget
not that he has laid claim to you, and to all that you have, and all that you
can have, and all that you can do I am bold with all possible earnestness, to
entreat you, yea as Christ's Minister to require you, in his Name, to study and
remember his business and interest; and see that it have the chief place in all
your consultations: Watch against the encroachments of your own carnal
interests, consult not with flesh and blood, nor give it the hearing when it
shall offer you its advice. How subtly will it insinuate, how importunately
will it urge you, how certainly will it mar all, if you do not constantly and
resolvedly watch! O how hard, but now happy is it to conquer this carnal self:
Remember still that you are not your own, that you have an unseen Master that
must be pleased, whoever be displeased; and an unseen Kingdom to be obtained,
and an invisible soul that must be saved, though all the world be lost. Fix
your eye still on him that made and redeemed you, and upon the ultimate end of
your Christian race; and do nothing wilfully, unworthy such a Master, and such
an end. Often renew your self-resignation, and devote your self to him; sit
close at his work, and be sure that it be His, both in the Matter, and in your
Intent. If Conscience should at any time ask, (Whose work are you now doing?)
or a man should pluck you by the sleeve, and say, (Sir, Whose Cause are you now
pleading?) See that you have the answer of a Christian at hand; delay not Gods
work till you have done your own, or any ones else: You Will best secure the
Commonwealth and your own interest, by looking first to His. By neglecting
this, and being carnally wise, we have wheeled about so long in the Wilderness,
and lost those advantages against the Powers of Darkness, which we know not
whether we shall ever recover again. It is the great astonishment of sober men,
and not the least reproach that ever was cast on our holy Profession, to think
with what a zeal for the work of Christ, men seemed to be animated in the
beginning of our disagreements; and how deeply they did engage themselves to
him in solemn Vows, Protestations, and Covenants; and what advantages carnal
self has since got, and turned the stream another way! so that the same men
have since been the instruments of our calamity, in breaking in pieces, and
dishonouring the Churches of Christ; yea and gone so near to the taking down
(as much as in them lay) the whole Ministry that stand approved in the Land: O
do not by trifling, give advantage to the Temper to destroy your work and you
together. Take warning by the sad experiences of what is past; bestir you
speedily and vigoruosly for Christ, as knowing your opposition and the
shortness of your time: Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing. If you ask me wherein his interest of Christ does consist?
I shall tell you but in a few unquestionable particulars. 1. In the main, that
truth, godliness, and honesty, be countenanced and encouraged, and their
contraries by all fit means suppressed. 2. In order to this, that unworthy men
be removed from Magistracy and Ministry, and the places supplied with the
fittest that can be had. 3. That a competent maintenance may be procured where
it is wanting, especially for Cities and great Towns, where more Teachers are
so necessary in some proportion to the number of souls, and on which the
Country does so much depend. Shall an age of such high pretenses to
Reformation, and zeal for the Churches, alienate so much, and then leave them
destitute and say, It cannot be had? 4. That right means be used with speed and
diligence, for the healing of our divisions, and the uniting of all the true
Churches of Christ (at least in these Nations; and O that your endeavors might
be extended much further) to which end I shall mention but these two means of
most evident necessity. 1. That there be one scripture-Creed, or confession of
Faith, agreed on by a general assembly of able Ministers duly and freely chosen
hereunto, which shall contain nothing but matter of evident Necessity and
Verity. This will serve 1. For a Test to the Churches, to discern the sound
Professors from the unsound (as to their doctrine) and to know them with whom
they may close as Brethren, and whom they must reject. 2. For a Test to the
Magistrate, of the Orthodox to be encouraged, and of the intoller ably
Heterodox, which it seems is intended in the 37. Article of the late formed
Government, where all that will have liberty, must profess (faith in God by
Jesus Christ) which in a Christian sense must comprehend every true
fundamental, or Article of our faith: And, no doubt, it is not the bare
speaking of those words, in an unchristian sense that is intended. (As if a
Ranter should say, that himself is God, and his mate is Jesus Christ.)

2. That there be a public establishment of the necessary liberty of the
Churches, to meet by their Officers and Delegates on all just occasions, in
assemblies smaller or greater, (even National when it is necessary) Seeing
without such associations and communion in assemblies, the unity and concord of
the Churches is not like to be maintained. I exclude not the Magistrates
interest or oversight, to see that they do not transgress their bounds. As you
love Christ, and his Church and Gospel, and men's souls, neglect not these
unquestionable points of his interest, and make them your first and chiefest
business, and let none be preferred before him, till you know them to be of
more authority over you, and better friends to you then Christ is. Should there
by any among you that cherish a secret Root of Infidelity, after such pretenses
to the purest Christianity, and are zealous of Christ lest he should overtop
them, and do set up an interest inconsistent with his sovereignty, and
thereupon grow jealous of the liberties and power of his Ministers, and of the
unity and strength of his Church; and think it their best policy to keep under
his Ministers, by hindering them from the exercise of their office, and to
foment divisions, and hinder our union, that they may have parties ready to
serve their ends: I would not be in the Case of such men, when God arises to
judge them, for all the Crowns and Kingdoms on earth! If they stumble on this
stone, it will break them in pieces: but if it fall upon them, it will grind
them to powder. They may seem to prevail against him a while when their
supposed success is but a prosperous self-destroying: but mark the end, when
his wrath is kindled, yea, but a little: and when these his enemies that would
not he should reign over them, are brought forth and destroyed before him, then
they will be convineed of the folly of their Rebellon: in the mean time let
wisdom be justified of her Children.

My Lord, I had not troubled, you with so many words, had I not judged it
probable that many more whom they concern may peruse them. I remain,

August 5. 1654. Your Lordships Servant in the Work of Christ, Rich. Baxter.

A Sermon of the Absolute Dominion of God-Redeemer; And the necessity of being
Devoted and Living to him.
1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. -- And ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.
FUndamentals in Religion are the life of the superstructure. Like the Vitals
and Naturals in the body, which are first necessary for themselves, and then
also for the quickening and nourishing of the rest: there being no life or
growth of the inferior parts, but what they do receive from the powers of
these; its but a dead discourse which is not animated by these greater Truths,
what ever the bulk of its materials may consist of. The frequent repetition
therefore of these, is an excusable as frequent preaching. And they that
nauseate it as loathsome battologie, do love Novelty better then Verity, and
playing with words to please the fancy, rather then closing with Christ to save
the soul. And as it is the chief part of the cure in most external maladies to
corroborate the vital and natural powers, which then will do the work
themselves; so is it the most effectual course, for the cure of particular
miscarriages in men's lives, to further the main work of grace upon their
hearts: could we make men better Christians, it would do much to make them
better Magistrates, Counselors, Jurers, Witnesses, Subjects, Neighbors, etc.
And this must be done by the deeper impress of those vital Truths, and the
Good in them exhibited, which are adaequate objects of our vital graces. Could
we help you to wind up the spring of faith, and so move the first wheel of
Christian Love, we should find it the readiest and surest means to move the
inferior wheels of duty. The flaws and irregular motions without, do show that
something is amiss within; which if we could rectify, we might the easier mend
the rest: I shall suppose therefore that I need no more apology for choosing
such a subject at such a season as this, then for bringing bread to a feast.
And if I medicate the brain and heart, for the curing of senseless Paralytick
members, or the inordinate Convulsive motions of any hearers, I have the
warrant of the Apostles example in my Text. Among other great enormities in the
Church of Corinth, he had these three to reprehend and heal: First their
sidings and divisions occasioned by some factious self-seeking teachers.
Secondly, their personal contentions by Lawsuites, and that before unbelieving
Judges. Thirdly, the foul sin of fornication, which some among them had fallen
into; the great cure which he uses to all these and more especially to the
last, is the urging of these great foundation Truths; whereof one is in the
words before my text; viz. the Right of the Holy Ghost; the other in the words
of my Text; which contains first A denial of any Right of propriety in
themselves. Secondly, An asserting of Christ's propriety in them. Thirdly, the
proof of this from his purchase, which is the Title. Fourthly, their duty
concluded from the former premises; which is to glorfie God, and that with the
whole man; with the spirit, because God is a spirit, and loathes hypocrisy;
with the body, which is particularly mentioned, because it seems they were
encouraged to fornication by such conceits, that it was but an act of the flesh
and not of the mind, and therefore as they thought the smaler sin. The
Apostles words from last to First, according to the order of Intention, do
express, first man's duty, to glorify God with soul and body, and not to serve
our lusts! Secondly, the great fundamental obligation to this duty, Gods
dominion or propriety. 3ly. The foundation of that Dominion, Christ's purchase;
according to the order of execution from first to last, these three great
fundamentals of our religion, lie thus. First Christ's purchase. Secondly, Gods
propriety thence arising. Thirdly, man's duty, wholly to glorify God, arising
from both The argument lies thus. They that are not their own, but wholly Gods,
should wholly glorify God, and not serve their lusts: but you are not your
own, but wholly Gods: therefore you should wholly glorify God and not serve
your lusts. The major is clear by the common light of nature. Every one should
have the use of their own. The Minor is proved thus. They that are bought with
a price are not their own, but his that bought them; but you are bought with a
price: therefore, etc. For the meaning of the terms briefly: [(...)] vestri, as
the vulgar; vestri juris, as Beza and others; is most fitly expressed by our
English-[your own] [ye are bought:] a Synecdoche generis, says Piscator; for
[ye are redeemed] [with a price] There is no buying without a price: This
therefore is an Emphaticall Pleonasmus, as Beza, Piscator, and others: as to
see with the eyes, to hear with the ears: Or else [a price] is put for [a great
price] as Calvin, Peter Martyr, and Piscator rather thinks: And therefore the
Vulgar adds the Epithet [ magno] and the Arabic [ pretioso] as Beza notes; as
agreeing to that of 1 Pet. 1. 18. I see not but we may supose the Apostle to
respect both the purchase and the greatness of the price; as Grotius and some
others do, [Glorifie God] that is, by using your bodies and souls wholly for
him, and abstaining from those lusts which do dishonor him. The Vulgar adds [
and portate] q. d. bear God about in your hearts, and let his spirit dwell
with you instead of lust. But this addition is contrary to all our Greek
Copies. Grotius thinks that some Copies had [(...)] and thence some unskillful
scribe did put [(...)] however it seems that reading was very ancient, when not
only Austin. but Cyprian and Tertullian followed it, as Beza notes. The last
words [and in your spirit, which are Gods] are out of all the old Latin
Traslations, and therefore its like out of the Greek, which they used: But they
are in all the present Greek Copies, except our M. S. as also in the Syriack
and Arabic version.

The rest of the explication shall follow the Doctrines, which are these.

Doct. 1. We are bought with a price.

Doct. 2. Because we are bought to, we are not our own, but his that bought us.

Doct. 3. Because we are not our own, but wholly Gods, therefore we must not
serve our lusts, but glorify him in the Body and Spirit. In these three
conclusions is the substance of the Text; which I shall first explain, and then
make application of them in that order as the Apostle here does.

The Points that need explication are these.

First, in what sense we are said to be bought with a price? who bought us? and
of whom? and from what? and with what price?

Secondly, How we are Gods own upon the Title of this purchase.

Thirdly, How we are not our own.

Fourthly, What it is to glorify God in Body and in Spirit on this account.

Fifthly, Who they be that on this ground are or may be urged to this duty.

First, For the first of these, whether buying, here be taken properly or
Metaphorically, I will not now, enquire.

First, mankind by sin became guilty of death, liable to Gods wrath, and a
slave to Satan, and his own lusts. The sentence in part was past and execution
begun, the rest would have followed, if not prevented. This is the bondage from
which we are redeemed.

Secondly, he that redeemed us, is the Son of God; himself God and man; and the
Father by the Son. Acts 20. 28. He purchased us with his own blood.

Thirdly, the price was the whole humiliation of Christ; in the first act
whereof (his incarnation) the Godhead was alone, which by humbling it self, did
suffer reputatively, which could not really: In the rest the whole person was
the sufferer, but still the humane nature Really, and the Divine but
Reputatively. And why we may not add as part of the price the merit of that
obedience wherein his suffering did not consist, I yet see not. But from whom
were we redeemed?

Answ. From Satan by rescue against his will: From Gods wrath or Vindictive
justice by his own procurement and consent. He substituted for us such a
sacrifice, by which he could as fully attain the ends of his righteous
Government, in the Demonstration of his justice and hatred of sin, as if the
sinner had suffered himself. And in this sound sense it is far from being an
absurdity, as the Socinian dreameth, for God to satisfy his own Justice, or to
buy us of himself: or redeem us from himself,

2. Next let us consider, how we are Gods upon the Title of this purchase. By
[God] here is meant both the Son, who being God, has procured a right in us by
his Redemption; and also the Father, who sent his Son, and redeemed us by him,
and to whom it was that the Son redeemed us Rev. 5. 9. Thou have redeemed us to
God by thy Blood. In one word, it is God as Redeemer, the manhood also of the
second person included, that has purchased this right. Here you must observe
that God as Creator had a plenary Right of propriety and Government, on which
he founded the Law of works that then was. This right he has not lost: Our
fall did lose our Right in him, but could not destroy his right in us. Because
it destroyed our right, therefore the promissory part of that Law was
immediately thereupon dissolved, or ceased through our incapacity (and
therefore Divines say, that as a Covenant it ceased) but because it destroyed
not Gods Right, therefore the prec^ptive, and penal parts of that Law do still
remain. But how remain? In their being: but not alone, or without remedy. For
the Son of God became a sacrifice in our stead; not that we might absolutely,
immediately, or ipso facto, be fully delivered, or that any man should ab ipsa
hostia from the very sacrifice as made, have a right to the great benefits of
personal plenary Reconciliation and Remission, and everlasting life; but that
the necessity of perishing through the unsatisfiedness of justice for the alone
offenses against the Law of works being removed from mankind they might all be
delivered up to him as Proprietary and Rector, that he might rule them as his
redeemed ones, and make for them such new Laws of grace, for the conveyances of
his benefits, as might demonstrate the wisdom and mercy of our Redeemer, and be
most suitable to his ends. The world is now moral* dead in sin, though
naturally alive. Christ has redeemed them, but will cure them by the actual
conveyance of the benefits of Redemption, or no at all He has undertaken to
this end, himself to be their Physician, to cure all that will come to him, and
take him so to be, and trust him, and obey him in the Application of his
Medicines. He has erected an Hospital. his Church to this end; and commanded
all to come into this Ark. Those that are far distant, he first commands to
come nearer; and those that are near, he inviteth to come in. Too many do
refuse and perish in their refusal. He will not suffer all to do so, but
mercifully boweth the wills of his Elect, and by an insuperable powerful
drawing, compells them to come in. You may see then that here is a Novum us and
Dominii and Imperii, a new right of Propriety and rule, founded on the new
bottom of Redemption: But that this does not destroy the old which was founded
on Creation; but is in the very nature and use of it, an emendative addition.
Redemption is to mend the Creature, not of any defect that was left in the
Creation, but from the ruin which came by our defacing transgression. The Law
of grace upon this Redemption, is superadded to the Law of nature given on the
Creation: not to amend any imperfections in that Law, but to save the sinner
from its unsufferable penalty, by dissolving its obligation of him thereto And
thus in its nature and use it is a remedying Law. And so you may see that
Christ is now the Owner, and by right the Governor of the whole world, on the
Title of redemption, as God before was, and still is on the Title of Creation.

3. By this you may also percive in whit sense, we are not our own. In the
strictest sense there is no proprietary, or absolute Lord in the world but God.
No man can say this is fully and strictly mine. God gives us indeed whatever we
enjoy; but his giving is not as man's: we part with out Propriety in that which
which we give: but God gives nothing so. His giving to us makes it not the less
his own. As a man gives his goods to his steward to dispose of for his use, or
instruments to his servant to do his work with, so God gives his benefits to
us. Or at the utmost, as you give clothes to your child, which are more yours
still then his, and you may take them away at your pleasure. I confess when God
has told us that he will not take them away, he is as it were obliged in
fidelity to continue them, but yet does not hereby let go his propriety. And so
Christ bids us call no man on Earth Father, that is, our absolute Lord or
Ruler, because we have but one such master, who is in Heaven. Mat. 23. 7, 8, 9,
10. So that you may see by this, what Propriety is left us, and what right we
have to our selves, and our Possessions: Even such as a steward in his Masters
goods; or a servant in his tools, or a child in his coat, which is a propriety
improper, subordinate and secundum quid, and will secure us against the
usurpation of another: One servant may not take his fellows instrument from
him, nor one child his brothers coat from him, without the Parents or Masters
consent. They have them for their use, though not the full propriety: It may be
called a propriety in respect to our fellow servant, though it be not properly
so as we stand in respect to God. We have right enough to consute the Leveller:
but not to exempt either us or ours from the claim and use of our absolute Lord.

4. For the fourth Question, What it is to glorify God in body, and spirit, I
answer in a word: It is, when upon true believing apprehensions of his right to
us, and of our great obligations to him as our Redeemer, we heartily and
unfeignedly devote our selves to him, and live as a people so devoted; so
bending the chiefest of our care and study, how to please him in exactest
obedience, that the glory of his mercy and holiness, and of his wise and
righteous Laws, may be seen in our conversations; and that the holy conformity
of our lives to these Laws, may show that there is the like conformity in our
minds, and that they are written in our hearts; when the exellency of the
Christian Religion is so appareut in the excellency of our lives, causing us to
do that which no others can imitate, that the luster of our good works may
shine before men, and cause them to glorify our Father in Heaven. To conclude,
when we still respect God as our only Soveragin, and Christ as our Redeemer,
and his Spirit as our Sanctifier, and his Law as our Rule; that the doing of
his will, and the denying, of our own, is the daily work of our lives, and the
promoting of his blessed ends is our end* this is the glorifying of God that
has Redeemed us.

5. The last question is, who they be that are and may be urged to glorify God
on this ground, that the has bought them? Doubtless, only those whom he has
bought: but who are those? It discourageth me to tell you, because among the
godly, it is a controversy; but if they will controvert points of such great
moment, they cannot disoblige or excuse us from preaching them. Among the
variety of men's opinions, it is safe to speak in the Language of the holy
Ghost, and accordingly to believe, viz that [as by the offense of one,
Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men to Justification of life, Romans 5. 8.] And
that he gave himself a ran^ome for all, and is the only Mediator between God
and man. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. That he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2. 2. That God is
the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. 1 Timothy 4. 10. That he
is the Savior of the world. John 4. 42. 1 John 4. 14. 15. That he tastes
death for every man. Heb. 2. 9. with many the like. It is very sad to consider,
how men's unskilfulness to reconcile Gods general grace with his special, and to
assign to each its proper part, has made the Pelagians and their Successors to
deny the special grace, and too many of late, no less dangerously to deny the
general grace; and what contentions these two errroneous parties have
maintained, and still maintain in the Church, and how few observe or follow
that true and sober mean which Austin the Maul of the Pelagians; and his
scholars Prosper and Fulgentius walked in! If when our dark confused heads are
unable to assign each truth its place, and rightly to order each wheel, and pin
in the admirable fabric of Gods Revelations, we shall therefore fall a
wrangling against them, and reject them, we may then be drawn to blaspheme the
Trinity, to reject either Christ's humane nature or his Divine; and what truth
shall we not be in danger to lose? so think this general grace to be
inconsistent with the special, is no wiser then to think the foundation
inconsistent with the Fabric that is built thereupon; and that the builders
themselves should have such thoughts, is a matter of compassionate
consideration to the friends of the Church. Doubtless Christ dyed not for all
alike, nor with equal intentions of saving them; and yet he has born the sins
of all men on the Cross, and was a sacrifice, propitiation and ransom for all.
Even they that bring in damnable heresies, deny the Lord that bought them, and
bring on themselves swift destruction. 2 Pet. 2. 1. God sent not his Son into
the world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
He that believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begootten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.
John 3. 17, 18, 19. I doubt not but my Text does warrant me to tell you all,
that you are not your own, but are bought with a price, and therefore must
glorify him that bought you: And I am very confident, that if any one at
judgment will be the advocate of an unbeliever, and say he deserves not a
sorer punishment for sinning against the Lord that bought him, his plea will
not be taken: Or, if any such would comfort the consciences in Hell or go about
to cure them of so much of their torment, by telling them, that they never
sinned against one that redeemed them, nor ever rejected the blood of Christ
shed for them, and therefore need not accuse themselves of any such sin, those
poor sinners would not be able to believe them. If it be only the Elect with
whom we must thus argue [you are not your own. you are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God] then can we truly plead thus with none till we know
them to be Elect; which will not be in this world. I do not think Paul knew
them all to be Elect that he wrote to; I mean, absolutely chosen to salvation;
nor do I think he would so peremptorily affirm them to be bought with a price,
who were fornicators, defrauders, contentious, drunk at the Lords supper, etc.
and from hence have argued against their sins, if he had taken this for a
Privilege proper to the elect. I had rather say to scandalous sinners [you are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God] then [you are absolutely elect to
salvation, therefore glorify God.] And I believe, that as it is the sin of
Apostates to [Crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh] Heb. 6. 5, 6. So is
it their misery that [ there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall
devour the adversaries, because they have trodden under foot the Son of God,
and counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy
thing. Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28. Lastly, I judge it also a good argument to draw us
from offending others, and occasioning their sin, that [through us, our weak
Brother shall perish for whom Christ dyed. 1 Cor. 8. 3.] So much for
explication.

I would next proceed to the confirmation of the Doctrines here contained, but
that they are so clear in the Text, and in many other, that I think it next to
needless; and we have now no time for needless work; and therefore shall only
cite these two or three Texts, which confirm almost all that I have said
together. Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed and rose, and revived,
that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. We thus
judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead; and that he dyed for all,
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which dyed for them and rose again. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. All power is given me
in Heven and in Earth. Go ye therefore, Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them,
etc. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. 1
Pet. 1. 17, 18. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges every man according to his works, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear; forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation -- but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot. These
Texts speak to the same purpose with that which I have in hand.

Use. In applying these very useful truths, would time permit, I should begin
at the Intellect, with a confutation of diverse contrary errors, and a
collection of many observable Consectaries. It would go better with all
Commonwealths and Princes on Earth, if they well considered, that the absolute
Propriety and Sovereignty of God-Redeemer, is the Basis of all lawful
Societies and Governments: and that no man has any absolute Propriety, but
only the use of the Talents that God does entrust him with: that the
sovereignty of the Creature is but Analogical, secundum quid; improper, and
subordinate to God the proper Sovereign; that it belongs to him to appoint his
inferior Officers; that there is no power but from God; and that he gives none
against himself; that a Theocracy is the Government that must be desired and
submitted to, whether the subordinate part be Monarchical, Arristocratical, or
Democratical: and the rejecting of this was the Israelites sin, in choosing
them a King; that it is still possible and necessary to live under this
Theocracy, though the Administration be not by such extraordinary means as
among the Israelites; that all humane Laws are but Bylaws subordinate to God.
How far his Laws must take place in all Governments: How far those Laws of men
are ipso facto Null, that are unquestionably destructive of the Laws of God:
How far they that are not their own, may give Authority to others; and what
aspect these Principles have upon Liberty in that latitude as it is taken by
some, and upon the Authority of the multitude, especially in Church Government;
should I stand on these and other the like Consequents, which these
Fundamentals in hand might lead us to discuss, I should prevent that more
seasonable application which I in tend, and perhaps be thought in some of them
to meddle beyond my bounds. I Will only say, That God is the first and the last,
in our Ethics and Politics, as well as in our Physics; that as there is ho
Creature which he made not, so it is no good right of Property or Government
which he some way gives not; that all Commonwealths not built on this
foundation are as Castles in the air, or as childrens tottering structures,
which in the very framing are prepared for their ruin, and strictly are no
Commonwealths at all; and those Governors that rule no more for God then for
themselves, shall be dealt with as Traitors to the Universal Sovereign. Thus
far at least must our Politics be Divine, unless we will be meet confederate
Rebels.

But it is yet a closer application which I intend. Though we are, not our own,
yet every man's welfare should he so dear to himself, that methinks every man of
you should presently enquire how far you are concerned, in the business which
we have in hand. I Will tell you how far. The Case here described is all our own.
We are bought with a price, and therefore not our own, and therefore must live
to him that bought us. We must do it, or else we violate our Allegiance, and
are Traitors to our Redeemer. We must do it, or else we shall perish as
despisers of his blood. It is no matter of indifferency, nor a duty which may
be dispensed with. That God who is our Owner by Creation and Redemption,, and
who does hitherto keep our souls in these bodies by whose mere will and power
you are all here alive before him this day, will shortly call you before his
bar, where these matters will be more seriously and searchingly enquired after.
The great, Question of the day will then be this, Whether you have bin heartily
devoted to your Redeemer, and lived to him? or to your carnal selves? Upon the
resolution of this Question, your everlasting Salvation or Damnation will
depend. What think you then? Should not this Question be now put home, by every
rational Hearer to his own heart? But I suppose some will say, There is no man
that wholly lives to God, for all are sinners: how then can our Salvation
depend so much on this? I answer in a word: Though no man pay God all that he
owes him, yet no man shall be saved, that gives him not the pre-eminence. He
will own none as true Subjects, that do not cordially own him in his
Sovereignty. Be it known to you all, there shall not a man of you enter into
his kingdom, nor ever see his face in peace, that gives him not the chiefest
room in your hearts, and makes not his work your chiefest business. He will be
no underling or servant to your flesh. He will be served with the Best, if he
cannot have All And in this sense it is that I say the Question will be put, in
that great day, by the Judge of all, Whether God or our carnal selves were
preferred? and whether we lived to him that bought us, or to our flesh? Beloved
Hearers! I will not ask you whether you indeed believe that there will be such
a day, I will take it for granted, while you call your selves Ch^istians, much
less will I question whether you would then be saved or condemned. Nature will
not suffer you to be willing of such a misery, though corruption make you too
willing of the cause. But the Common stupidity of the world does persuade me to
ask you this, Whether you think it meet that men who must be so solemnly
examined upon this Point, and whose life or death depends on the decision,
should not examine themselves on it beforehand, and well consider what answer
they must then make? and whether any pains can be too great in so needful a
work? and whether he that miscarrieth to save a labor, do not madly betray his
soul unto perdition? as if such rational diligence were worse then Hell, or his
present carnal ease were more desirable then his Salvation. Let us then rouse
up our selves Brethren, in the fear of God, and make this a day of judgment to
our selves. Let us know whether we are Children of Life or of Death. O how can
a man that is well in his wits, enjoy with any comfort the things of this
world, before he know, at least in probability, what he shall enjoy in the
next! How can men go cheerfully up and down about the business of this life,
before they have faithfully labored to make sure, that it shall go well with
them in the life to come! That we may now know this without deceit, let us all
as in the presence of the Living God, lay bare our hearts, examine them, and
judge them, by this portion of his word according to the evidence.

7. Whoever he be that takes not himself for his own, but lives to his
Redeemer, he is one that has found himself really undone, and has unfeignedly
confessed the forfeiture of his Salvation; and finding that Redemption has
been made by Christ, and that there is hope and life to be had in him, and none
but in him, as he gladly receives the tidings, so he carefully acknowledges
the right of his Redeemer, and in a sober, deliberate and voluntary Covetant
renounceth the world, the flesh and the Devil, and resigneth up himself to
Christ as his due. He says [ Lord, I have too long served thine Enemies and
mine own; by cleaving to my self, and forsaking God, I have lost both my self
and God. Will thou be my Savior and the Physician of my soul, and wash me with
thy blood, and repair the ruins of my soul by thy spirit, and I am willing to
be thine; I yield up myself to the conduct of thy grace, to be saved in thy
way, and fitted for thy service, and live to God from whom I have revolted.]
This is the Case of all that are sincere.

By many Scriptures we might quickly confirm this, if it were liable to
question. Luke 14. 25, 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and
Mother, and Wife And Children, and Brethren and Sisters and his own life also,
he cannot be my Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple; So ver. 33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes
not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple; which is expounded, Mat. 10.
37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. Mat. 16.
24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross,
and follow me; for whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake shall find it. Psalm. 73. 25, 26, 27. Whom have
I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee,
Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the Portion of mine Inheritance, etc. Heb. 11. 24, 25,
26. Moses refused honor, chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproacb of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the
recompense of the reward. I forbear citing more, the case being so evident,
that God is set highest in the heart of every sound Believer, they being in
Covenant resigned to him as his Own. On the contrary, most of the unsanctified
are Christians but in name, because they were educated to this profession, and
it is the common Religion of the Country where they live, and they hear none
make question of it; or if they do, it is to their own disgrace, the name of
Christ having got this advantage to be everywhere among us well spoken of even
by those that shall perish for neglecting him and his Laws. These men have
resigned their names to Christ, but reserved their hearts to flesh pleasing
vanities. Or if under Conviction and terror of Conscience, they do make any
resignation of their souls to Christ, it comes short of the true resignation of
the sanctfied in these particulars.

1. It is a firm and rooted belief of the Gospel which is the cause of sincere
resignation to Christ. ^ney are so fully persuaded of the truth of those things
which Christ has done, and promised to do hereafter, that they will venture
all that they have in this world, and their everlasting state upon it: Whereas
the belief of self-d^ceivers is only superficial, staggering, not rooted and
will not carry them to such adventures. Mat. 13. 2l, 22, 23.

2. Sincere self-resignation is accompanied with such a love to him that we are
devoted to, which over-toppeth (as to the rational part) all other love. The
soul has a prevailing complacency in God, and closes with him as its chiefest
good; Psalm. 73. 25. and 63. 3. But the unsanctified have no such complacency in
him; they would fain please him by their flatteries, left he should do them any
hurt; but might they enjoy but the pleasures of this world, they could be well
content to live without him.

3. Sincere self-resignation is a departing from our carnal selves and all
Creatures as they stand in competition with Christ for our hearts; and so it
contains a Crncifying of the flesh, and mortification of all its lusts. Gal.
5. 24. Romans 8 1. to 14. There is a hearty renouncing of former contrad ctory
Interests and delights, that Christ may be set highest and chiefly delighted
in. But self deceivers are never truly mortified, when they seem to devote
themselves most seriously to Christ: there is a contrary prevailing Interest in
their minds; their fleshly felicity is nearer to their hearts, and this world
is never unfeignedly renounced.

4. Sincere self-resignation is resolved upon deliberation, and not a rash
inconsiderate promise, which is afterward reverst. The illuminated see that
perfection in God, that vanity in the Creature,, that desirable sufficiency in
Christ, and emptiness in themselves, that they firmly resolve to cast
themselves on him, and be his alone; And though they cannot please him as they
would, they will dye before they will change their Master; but with self-deceivers it
is not thus.

5. Sincere resignation is absolute and unreserved. Such do not Capitulate and
condition with Christ [I will be thine so far, and no further; so thou will but
save my estate, or credit, or lise.] But self-deceivers have ever such Reserves
in their hearts, though they do not express them, nor perhaps themselves
discern them. They have secret Limitations, Exceptions and Conditions: they
have ever a salve for their worldly safety or felicity, and will rather venture
upon a threatened Misery which they see not, though everlasting, then upon a
certain Temporary misery which they see. These deep Reserves are the soul of
Hypocrisy.

6. Sincere self-resignation is fixed and habituate; it is not forced by a
moving Sermon, or a dangerous sickness, and then forgotten and laid aside; but
it is become a fixed habit in the soul; it is otherwise with self-deceivers;
Though they will oblige themselves to Christ with vows in a time of fear and
danger, yet so loose is the knot, that when the danger seems over, their bonds
fall off. Its one thing to be affrighted, and another to have the heart quite
changed and renewed. Its one thing to hire our selves with a Master in our
necessities, and then serve our selves, or run away; and another thing to nail
our ears to his door, and say, I love thee, and therefore will uot depart.

So much for the first mark of one that lives not as his own, but as Gods, to
wit, sincere self-resignation.

The second is this.

2. As the heart is thus devoted to God, so also is the life, where men do
truly take themselves for his: And that will appear in these three particulars.

1. The principal study and care of such men, is how to please God, and promote
his interest, and do his work: this is it that they most seriously mind and
contrive. Their own felicity they seek in this way, 1 Cor. 7. 32. 33. Romans 6.
11. 13, 16. Col. 1. 10. and 3, 1, 2, 3. Phil. 1. 20. 21, 24. It is not so* with
the unsanctified, they drive on another design. Their own work is principally
minded, and their carnal interest preferred to Christ's. They live to the flesh
and make provision for it, to satisfy its desires, Romans 13. 14.

2. It is the chiefest delight of a man devoted to God, to see Christ's interest
prosper and prevail. It does him more good to see the Church flourish, the
Gospel succeed, the souls of men brought in to God, and all things fitted to
his blessed pleasure then it would do him to prosper himself in the world; to
do good to men's bodies, much more to their souls, is more pleasing to him, then
to be honorable or rich. To give is sweeter to him, then to receive. His own
matters he respects as lower things, that come not so near his heart as Gods.
But with the unsanctified it is not so their prosperity and honors are most of
their delight, and the absence of them their greatest trouble.

3. With a man that is truly devoted to God, the interest of Christ does bear
down all contradicting interest in the ordinary course of his life: As his own
unrighteous righteousness, so his own renounced carnal interest, is loss and
dung to him in comparison of Christ's, Phil. 3. 8. 9. He cannot take himself to
be a loser by that which is gain to the souls of men, and tends to promote
the interest of his Lord. He serves God with the first and best, and lets his
own work stand by till Christ's be done, or rather owneth none but Christ's: His
own dishonor being lighter to him then Christ's, and a ruined estate less
grievous then a ruined Church; therefore does he first seek Gods Kingdom, and
its righteousness, Mat. 6. 33. and chooses rather to neglect his flesh, his
gain, his friends, his life; then the cause and work of Christ it is far
otherwise with the umsanctified; they will contentedly give Christ the most
glorious titles, and full-mouthed commendations, Luke 6. 46 But they have one
that is nearer their hearts then he, their carnal self must sway the Scepter,
God shall have all that the flesh can spare; if he will be content to be served
with its leavings, they will serve him if not, they must be excused; they can
allow him no more. The crying time, is the parting time; when God or the world
must needs be neglected. In such a strait, the righteous are still righteous*
Rev. 22. 11. But the unsted fast in the Covenant, do manifest their
unstedfastness; and though they will not part wlth Christ professedly, nor
without some witty distinctions and evasions, nor without great sorrow, and
pretense of continued fidelity, yet part they will, and shift for themselves
and hold that they have as long as they can, Luke. 18. 23. In a word, the
sanctified are heartily devoted to God, and live to him, and were they
incapable of serviug or enjoying him, the^r lives would afford them little
content, what ever else they did possess: But the unsanctified are more
strongly addicted to their flesh, and live to their carnal selves; and might
they securely enjoy the pleasures of this world, they could easily spare the
fruit on of God, and could be as willing to be dispensed with for his
spiritual service, as to persorme it. And thus I have given you the true
description of those that live to their Redeemer, as being not their own; and
those that live to themselves, as if they were not his that bought them.

Having thus told you what the Word says, it follows, that we next enquire
what your hearts say, you hear what you must be; will you now consider what you
are? Are all the people that hear me this day, devoted in heart and life to
their Redeemer? Do you all live as Christ's, and not your own? If so, I must
needs say, it is an extraordinary Assembly, and such as I had never the
happiness to know. O that it were so indeed, that we might rejoice together,
and magnify our deliverer, in stead of reprehending you, or lamenting your
unhappiness. But alas, we are not such strangers in the World, as to be guilty
of such a groundless judgment. Let us enquire more particularly into the case.

1. Are those so sincerely devoted to Christ? and do they so deny themselves,
whose daily thoughts and care, and labor, is how they may live in more
reputation and content, and may be better provided for the satisfying of their
flesh? If they be low and poor, and their condition is displeasing to them,
their greatest care is to repair it to their minds; if they be higher and more
wealthy, their business is to keep it or increase it; that hunt after honor,
and thirst after a thriving and more plenteous state; that can stretch their
consciences to the size of all times, and humor those that they think may
advance them, and be most humble servants to those above them, and
contemptuously neglect whosoever is below them; that will put their hands to the
feet of those that they hope to rise by, and put their feet on the necks of
their subdued adversaries, and trample upon all that stand in their way; that
applaud not men for their honesty, but their worldly honors, and will magnify
that man while he is capable of advancing them, whom they would have scorned if
providence had laid him in the dust: that are friends to all that befriend
their interest and designs, and enemies to the most upright that cross them in
their course; that love not men so much, because they love God, as because they
love them; Are these devoted to God, or to themselves? Is it for God or
themselves, that men so industriously scramble for Honors and places of
Government, or of Gain, Will they use their offices or honors for God, that
hunt after them as a prey, as if they had not burden enough already, nor
Talents enough to answer for neglecting! Are those men devoted to God, that can
tread down his most unquestionable interest on earth, when it seems to be
inconsistent with their own! Let the Gospel go down, let the Church be broken
in pieces* let sound doctrine be despised, let Ministers be hindered or tired
with vexations, let the souls of people sink or swim rather then they should be
hindered in the way of their ambition. I shall leave it to the trial of another
day, whether all the public actions of this Age, with their effects, have been
for God, or for self? This does not belong to my examination, but to his that
will thoroughly perform it ere long, and search these matters to the quick, and
open them to the world. There were never higher pretenses for God in an Age,
then have been in this; had there been but answerable intentions and
performances, his affairs and our own, had been in much better case then they
are; but enough of this. Should we descend to men's particular families and
conversations, we should find the matter little better with the most. Are they
all for God that follow the world so eagerly, that they cannot spare him a
serious thought? an hours time for his worship in their families, or in secret?
that will see that their own work be done; but for the souls of those that are
committed to their charge, they regard them not. Let them be never so ignorant,
they will not instruct them, nor cause them to read the Word, or learn a
Catechism nor will spend the Lords peculiar day in such exercises; and its much
if they hinder not those that would. Is it for God that men give up their
hearts to this World, so that they cannot have while once a day, or week to
think soberly what they must do in the next? or how they may be ready for their
great approaching change? Is it for God, that men despise his Ministers, reject
his Word, abhor reformation, scor^ at Church, Government, and deride the
persons that are addicted to his fear, and the families that call upon his
Name? These men will shortly understand a little better then now they will do,
whether indeed they lived to God, or to themselves.

2. If you are devoted to God, what do you for him? Is it his business that you
mind? How much of your time do you spend for him? How much of your speech is
for him? How much of your Estates yearly is serviceable to his interest? Let
Conscience speak whether he have your studies and affections; let you familiars
be witnesses, whether he have your speeches and best endeavors; let the Church
witness, what you have done for it; and the Poor witness, what you have done
for them; and the souls of ignorant and ungodly men, what you have done for
them; show by the work you have done, who you have lived to; God or your carnal
selves; If indeed you have lied to God, something will be seen that you have
done for him; nay it is not a something that will serve the trun. It must be
the Best. Remember that it is by your Works that you shall be judged, and not
by your pretenses, professions or complements; your Judge already knows your
Case, he needs no witnesses, he will not be mocked with saying you are for him;
show it, or saying it will not serve.

Methinks now the consciences of some of you should prevent me, and preach over
the sharper part the Sermon to your selves, and say, [ I am the man that have
lived to my self] and so consider of the consequents of such a life: But I will
leave this to your Meditation when you come home, and next proceed to the
exhortative part of Application.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers, the business that I come hither upon, is to
proclaim ^^ods right to you, and all that is yours, even his new right of
Redemption, supposing that of Creation; and to let you know, that you are all
bought with a price, and therefore are not your own, but his that bought you,
and must accordingly be dedicated and live to him. Honorable and Worshipful,
and all men of what degree soever; I do here on the behalf, and in the name of
Christ, lay claim to you all, to your souls and bodies, to all your faculties,
abilities, and interests on the title of Redemption; all is Gods, Do you
acknowledge his Title, and consent unto his claim? what say you? are you his,
or are you not? D^re you deny it? If any man dare be so bold, I am here ready
to make good the claim of Christ. If you dare not deny it, we must take it as
confessed. Bear witness all, that God laid claim to you and yours, and no
man durst deny his Title I do next therefore require you, and command you in
his Name, Give him his own: Render to God the things that are Gods. Will you
this day renounce your carnal selves, and freely confess you are not your own,
and cheerfully and unreservedly resign your selves to God, and say, as Jos 24.
51. As for me and my household, we will serve the Lord. Do not ask what God will
do with you? or how he will use you or dispose of you? trust him for that and
obey his will. Fear not evil from the chiefest good, unless it be in
neglecting or resising him. Be sure of it, God will use you better then Satan
would, or then this world would, or better then you have used, or would use
your seles. He will not employ you in dishonorable drudgeries, and then dash
you in pieces. He will not seduce you with swinish sensualities, and keep you
in play with childish vanities, till you drop into damnation before you are
aware. Nor will he full you asleep in presumptuous security, ti^l you
unexpectedly awake in unquenchable fire. You need not fear such dealing as
this from him; His Commandments are not grievous, I Joh. 5 3. His Yoke is
easy, his burden is light, and tends to the perfect rest of the soul, Mat,
11 28, 29, 30. What say you? will you hereafter be His? unfeignedly His?
resolvedly, unreservedly, and constantly His? Or will you not? Take heed, that
you refuse not him that speaks, Heb. 12. 25. Reject not, neglect not this
offer, lest you have never have another on the like terms again: He is willing
to pardon all that is past, and put up all the wrongs that you have done him,
so you will but repent of them, and now at last be heartily and entirely his,
not only in tongue, but in deed and life: Well, I have proclaimed Gods right
to you; I have offered you his gracious acceptance if yet you demur, or
sleepily neglect it, or obstinatly resist him, take that you get by it;
remember you perish not without warning. The confession of Christ's Right, which
this day you have been forced to, shall remame as on recore, to the confusion
of your faces; and you shall then be forced to remember though you had rather
forget it, what now you were forced to confess, though you had rather you could
deny it. But I am loath to leave you to this Prognostic or to part on terms so
sad to your souls and sad to me: I will add therefore some Reasons to persuade
you, to submit: and though it be not in my power to follow them so to your
hearts as to make them effectual; yet I shall do my part in propounding them,
and leave them to God to set them home, beseeching him that makes, new makes,
opens, and softneth hearts at his pleasure to do these blessed works on
yours, and to persuade you within, while I am persuading you without, that I
may not lose my labor and my hopes, nor you your souls, nor God his due.

1. Consider the fullness of Gods Right to you: no creature is capable of the
like. He made you of nothing, and therefore you have nothing which is not his.
He Redeemed you when you were fallen to worse then nothing: Had not Christ
ransomed you by being a sacrifice for your sins, you had been hopelesly left to
everlasting perdition give him therefore his own which he has so dearly
bought, 1 Pet: 1. 18.

2. Consider that you have no right of propriety to your selves; if you have,
how came you by it? Did you make your selves? did you Redeem your selves? do
you maintain and preserve your selves? If you are your own, tell God you will
not be beholden to him for his preservation: Why cannot you preserve your
selves in health, if you are your own? Why cannot you recover your selves from
sickness? Is it your selves that gives power to your food to nourish you? to
the Earth to bear you, and furnish you with necessar^es? to the Air, to cool
and recreate your spirits? If you are your own, save your selves from sickness,
and death; keep back your age, deliver your souls from the wrath of God; answer
his pure justice for your own sins; never plead the blood of a Redeemer, if you
are your own. If you can do these things, I will yield that you are your own.
But no man can ransom his foul from death, it cost a dearer price then so,
Acts 20. 28. You are not debtors therefore to the fles^ to live after it, Rom
8. 12. but to him that dyed, to subdue the flesh, Rom 6. 11.

3. None else can calim any Title to you, further then under God upon his gift.
Men did not Create you or redeem you; be not therefore servatns of men, 1 Cor.
7. 23. unless it be under Christ, and for him. Certainly Satan did not create
you, or redeem you; what right then has he to you, that he should be served?

4. Seeing then that you are Gods, and his alone, is it not the most heinous
theevery to rob him of his Right? If they must be hanged that ro^ men of so
small a thing as earthly necessaries, wherein they have but an improper derived
propriety; what torments do those deserve that rob God of so precious a
Creature, that cost him so dear, and might be so useful, and wherein he has so
full and unpuestionable propriety? The greatest, the richest, the wisest men
that are trusted with most are the greatest Robbers on earth, if they live not
to God, and shall have the greatest punishment.

5. Is it not incomparably more honorable to be Gods, then to be your own? and
to live to him, then to your selves: the object and end does nobilitate the
act, and thereby the Agent. It is more honourabe to serve a Prince, then a
Plowman. Th^^ man that least seeks his own honor or carnal interest, but most
freely denies it, and most entirely seeks the honor of God, is most highly
honored with God and good men; when selfe-seekers defraud themselves of their
hopes. Most men think vilely, or at least suspitiously, of that man that seeks
for honor to himself: they think if the matter were combustible, he need not
to blow the fire so hard: if he were worthy of honor, his worth would attract
it by a sweet magnetic power; so much industry they think is the most probable
mark of indignity, and of some consciousness of it in the seekers breast. If he
attain some of his ends, men are ready to look on his honor but as Alms,
which he was fain to beg for before he got it: and could he make shift to
ascend the Throne, so much in the eyes of the wisest men would be detracted
from his honor, as they did believe himself to have a hand in contriving it.
Quod sequitur fugio, etc. They honor him more that refuses a Crown when it is
offered then him that ambitiously aspireth after it, or rapaciously
apprehends it. If they see a men much desire their applause, they think he
needs it. Solomon says, To scarch their own glory. Pro. 25. 27.

6. You can never have a better Master then God, nor yet a sweeter employment
then his service. There is nothing in him that may be the least discouragement
to you, nor in his works that shall be distastefull. The reason why the world
thinks otherwise, is because of the distempered averseness of their souls. A
sick stomach is no fit Judge of the pleasantness of meats. To live to God is
to live to the truest and highest delights. His Kingdom is not meats and
drinks, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. His servants
indeed are often troubled; but ask them the reason, and they I quickly tell
you, that it is not for being his sevatns, or for serving him too much: but for
fear lest they are not his servatns, or for serving him no better. It is not in
his ways, or at least not for them, that they meet with their perplexities,
but in stepping out of them, and wandering in their own. Many besides the
servants of God, do seek felicity and satisfaction to their minds, and some
discover where it lies; but only they attain it and enjoy it.

But on the contrray, he has an ill Master that is ruled by himself. A Master
that is blind and proud and passionate, that will lead you to precipices, and
thence deject you; that will most effectually ruin you, when he thinks he is
doing you the greatest good: whose work is bad, and his wages no better; that
feeds his servants in plenty but as swine, and in the day of famine denies
them the husks; what ever you may now imagine while you are distracted with
sensuality; I dare say, if ever God bring you to your selves, you will consider
that it is better be in your Fathers house, where the poorest servant has
bread enough, then to be fed with dreams and pictures, and to perish with
hunger; Reject not God till you have found a better Master.

7. If you will needs be your own, and seek your selves, you disengage: God
from dealing with you as His in a gracious sense. If you will not trust him,
nor venture your selves upon his promise and conduct, but still shift for your
selves, then look to your selves as well as you can, save your selves in danger
cure your own diseases, quiet your own Consciences, grapple with death in your
own strength, plead your own Cause in judgment, and save your selves from Hell
if you can; and when you have done, go and boast of your own sufficiency and
achievements, and tell men how little you are beholden to Christ. Woe to you,
if upon these provocations, God should give you over to provide for your
selves, and leave you without any other salvation then your own power if able
to effect; mark the connection of this sin and punishment in Deuteronomy 32. 18, 19,
20. Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that
formed thee. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters; And he said I will hide my face
from them: I will see what their end shall be: As if he should say, I will see
how well they can save themselves, and make them know by experience their own
insufficiency.

8. Those men that seek themselves, and live to themselves, and not to God, are
unfaithful and treacherous both to God and man. As they neglect God in
prosperity, so they do but flatter him in adversity, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37.
And ^e that will be false to God, whose interest to him is so absolute, is
unlikely to be true to men, whose interest in him is infinitely less; He that
can shake off the great obligations of Creation, Redemption Preservation and
provision, which God lays on him, is unlikely be held by such slender
obligations as he receives from men. I Will never trust that man far, if I know
him that is false to his Redeemer; He that will sell his God, his Savior, his
Soul and Heaven for a little sensuality, vainglory or worldly wealth; I shall
not wonder if he sell his best friend for a Groat: Self-seeking men, will take
you for their friend no longer then you can serve their turns; but if once you
need them, or stand in their way you shall find what they esteemed you for. He
that is in haste to be rich, and thereupon respects persons, for a piece of
bread that man will transgress, says Solomon, Prove. 28. 20, 21.

9. Sanctification consists in your hearty resignation and living to God; and
therefore you are unsanctified if you are destitute of this: Without holiness
none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. And what is holiness, but our sincere
dedication, and devotedness to God? Being no longer common and unclean, but
separated in resolution, affection and conversation from the world, and our
carnal selves to him. It is the Office of the holy Ghost, to work you to this;
and if you resist and refuse it, you do not soundly believe in the Holy Ghost,
but instead of believing in him, you fight against him.

10. You are verbally devoted to Christ in solemn Covenant, entered into
Baptism, and frequently renewed in the Lords Supper* and at other seasons. Did
you not there solemnly by your parents, resign your self to Christ as his? and
renounce the flesh, the world and the Devil* and promise to fight under Christ's
banner against them to your lives end: O happy person that performs this
Covenant* and everlastingly miserable are they that do not. Fides non recepta,
sed custodita viv^^^cat, says Cyprian. It is not Covenant making, without
Covenant keeping, that is like to save you. Do you stand to the Covenant that
you made by your parents? or do you disclaim it? If you disclaim it, you
renounce your part in Christ* and his benefits in that Covenant made over to
you. If you stand to it, you must perform your promise, and live to God to whom
you were resigned. To take Gods oath of Allegiance so solemnly, and afterward
to turn to his Enemies which we renounced, is a rebllion that shall not be
always unrevenged.

11. Gods absolute dominion and sovereignty over us, is the very foundation of
all Religion, even of that little that is found left among Infidels and Pagans,
much more evidently of the saving Religion of Christians: He that dare say he
believes not this, will never sure have the face to call himself a Christian.
Is it not a matter of most sad consideration, that ever so many millions should
think to be saved by a Doctrine which they believe not, or by a Religion that
never went deeper then the brain, and is openly contradicted by the tenor of
their lives! Is a true Religion enough to save you, if you be not true to that
Religion? How do men make shift to quiet their Consciences in such gross
hypocrisy? Is there a man to be found in this Congregation, that will not
confess that he is rightfully his Redeemers? But has he indeed their hearts?
their time, their strength, and their interest? follow some of them from
morning to night, you shall not hear one serious word for Christ, nor see any
serious endeavors for his interest. And yet these men will profess that they
are his; How sad a case is it, that men's own Confessions should condemn them,
and that which they called their Religion, should judge them to that
everlasting misery, which they thought it would have saved them from! And how
glorious would the Christian Religion appear, if men were true to it, if
Christ's Doctrine had its full impression on their hearts, and were expressed in
their lives! Is he not an exellent person that denies himself, and does all
for God? that goes on no business but Gods, that searches out Gods interest
in every part of his calling and employment, and intends that, that whether
he eat or drink, or whatever he does, does all to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10.
31. that can say as Paul, Gal. 2, 20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; And Phil, 3. 7, 8. What things were
gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless, and I count all
things, but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung,
that I may win Christ. And Phil. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to dye
is gain. Perhaps you think that the degree of these examples is unimitable by
us: but I am sure all that will be saved, must imitate them in the truth.

12. Self-seeking is self-losing; and delivering up your self and all you have
to God, is the only way to save your selves, and to secure all. The more you
are His, the more you are your own indeed: and the more you deliver to him, and
expend for him, the greater is your gain. These Paradoxes are familiar tried
truths to the true Believer; these are his daily food and exercise, which seem
to others such Scorpions as they dare not touch, or such stones as they are not
able to digest. He knows that self-humbling is the true self-exalting; and
self-exalting is the infallible way to be brought low. Luke 14 11. and 18. 14.
Mat* 23. 12. He believes that there is a losing of life which saves it, and a
saving of it which certainly loses it. Mat. 10. 39. and 16. 25. O that I could
reach the hearts of Self-seekers, that spend their care and time for their
bodies, and live not unto God! That I were but able to make them see the issue
of their Course, and what it will profit them to win all the world, and lose
their souls! O all you busy men of this world* hearken to the proclamation of
him that bought you, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters! buy wine and milk without money or price: wherefore do you spend
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies
not? hearken diligently to me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatness; incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your
soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you. O sirs, what
a deal of care and labor do you lose? how much more gainfully might your lives
be improved? Godliness with contentment, is the great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. That
which you now think you make your own, will shortly prove to be least your own;
and that is most lost which you so carefully labor for: you that are now so
idly busy in gathering together the Treasury of an Ant-hillock, and
building Childrens tottering piles; you forget that the foot of death is coming
to spurn it all abroad, and tread down you and it together. You spend the day
of life and visitation, in painting your fantasies with the images of
felicity, and in dressing your selves, and feathering your nest with that which
you impiously steal from God; and you do forget, that the night of blackness is
at hand, when God will undress you of your temporary contents, and deplume you
of your borrowed bravery: How easily! how speedily ^ how certainly will he do
it? Read over your case in Luke 12. from 16. to 22. How can you make shift to
read such Texts, and not perceive that they speak to you? When you are a
pulling down and building up and contriving what to do with your fruits, and
saying to your selves, I have so much now as will serve me so many years, I
will take mine ease, eat, drink and be merry; remember then the conclusion,
[But God said unto him, Thou fool this night thy soul shall be required of
thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?] So is he that
lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God] Are these things
Yours or Mine, says God! whose are they? if they are yours, keep them now if
you can: either stay with them, or take them with you. But God will make you
know that they are his, and disrobe such men as thieves, that are adorned with
that which is none of their own; this honor ^aith God, is mine, thou stolest
it from me: This wealth is mine, this life, and all is mine. Only thy self he
will not own: They shall require thy soul, that have conquered and ruled it;
Though it was his by right of Creation and Redemption, yet seeing it was not
his by a free Dedication, he will not own it as to everlasting salvation; but
say, Depart from me, I know you not ye workers of iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. O with
what hearts then, will self-seeking Gentlemen part with their honors and
estates! and the earthly minded with their beloved possessions: when he that
resigned all to God, and devoted himself and all to his service, shall find his
consumed estate to be increased his neglected honor abundantly repaired, and
in this life he shall receive an hundred fold, and in the world to come,
eternal life, Mat. 10. 30. Joh. 4, 56. 1 Timothy 6. 12. 19.

13. Lastly consider, When judgment comes, enquiry will be made, whether you
have lived as your own, or as his that bought you: then he will require his own
with improvement, Luke 19. 23. The great business of that day will be, not so
much to search after particular sins, or duties, which were contrary to the
scope of heart and life; but to know whether you lived to God, or to your
flesh; whether your time, and care, and wealth, were expended for Christ in his
members and interest? or for your carnal selves, Mat. 25. In as much as you did
it not to these, you did it not to him. You that Christ has given Authority
to, shall then be accomptable, whether you improved it to his advantage? You
that he has given honor to, must then give account, whether you improved it to
his honor? In the fear of God, Sirs, cast up your accounts in time, and bethink
you what answer will then stand good: It will be a doleful hearing to a guilty
soul, when Christ shall say, I gave thee thirty or forty years time: thy flesh
had so much in eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and laboring, in idleness
and vain talking, and recreations, and other vanities; but where was my part?
how much was laid out for the promoting of my glory? I lent you so much of the
wealth of the world; so much was spent on your backs, and so much on your
bellies, so much on costly toys, or superfluities, so much in revengeful suits
and contentions, and so much was left for your posterity; but where was my
part? how much was laid out to further the Gospel, and to relieve the souls or
the bodies of your brethren? I gave thee a family, and committed them to thy
care to govern them for me, and fit them for my service: but how did thou
perform it? O Brethren, bethink you in time what answer to make to such
Interrogatories; your judge has told you, that your doom must then pass
according as you have improved your talents for him; and that he that hides
his Talent, though he give God his own, shall be cast into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25* 30. How easily will Christ
then evince his right in you, and convince you that it was your duty to have
lived unto him? Do you think sirs, that you shall then have the face to say, I
thought Lord, that I had been made and redeemed for my self? I thought I had
nothing to do on earth, but live in as much plenty as I could, and pleasure to
my flesh, and serve thee on the by, that thou might continue my prosperity,
and save me when I could keep the world no longer; I knew not that I was thine,
and should have lived to thy glory. If any of you plead thus, what store of
Arguments has Christ to silence you! He will then convince you, that his Title
to you was not questionable: He will prove that thou wast his by thy very
Being, and fetch unanswerable Arguments from every part and faculty: He will
prove it from his Incarnation, his life of humiliation, his bloody sweat* his
crown of Thorns, his Cross, his Grave; He that had wounds to show after his
Resurrection, for the convincing of a doubting Disciple, will have such Scars
to show then, as shall suffice to convince a self excusing Rebel: All these
shall witness that he was thy rightful Lord: He will prove it also from the
discoveries of his Word, from the warnings of his Ministers, from the mercies
which thou receivedst from him, that thou wast not ignorant of his Right, and
of thy duty; or at least, not ignorant for want of means: He will prove it
from thy Baptismal Covenant and renewed engagements: The Congregation can
witness that you did promise to be his, and seal to it by the reception of
both his Sacraments: And as he will easily prove his right: so will he as
easily prove, that you denied it to him: He will prove it from your Works, from
the course of your life, from the stream of your thoughts, from your love,
your desires* and the rest of the affections of your disclosed hearts.

O Brethren, what a day will that be, when Christ shall come in person with
thousands of his Angels, to sit in judgment on the rebellious world, and claim
his due which is now denied him: when Plaintiff and Defendant Witnesses and
Jurors, Counselors and Justices Judges, and all the Princes on Earth, shall
stand equal before the impartial Judge expecting to be sentenced to their
unchangeable state: then if a man should ask you, [what think you now, Sir, of
living to God? Is it better to be devoted to him, or to the flesh? which now do
you take for the better master? what would you do now, if it were all to do
again?] what would you then say to such a Question? how would you answer it?
would you make as light of it as now you do? O sirs, you may hear these things
now from your poor fellow creature, as proud-hearted Gallants, or as
self-conceited Deriders, or as besotted worldlings, or senseless blocks, or
secret Infidels, that as those Deuteronomy. 29. 19. do bless themselves in their
hearts, and say, We shall have peace, though we walk in the imagination of our
hearts: But then you will hear them as trembling prisoners! Read the 20 verse
at leisure. Such a sight will work, when words will not: especially words not
believed, nor considered of. When you shall see the God that you disowned, the
Redeemer whom you ^eglected the Glory which you forfeited, by preferring the
plesures of the flesh before it, the Saints triumphing whom you refused to
imitate, and a doleful eternity of misery to be remedilesly endured, then
Saints will seem wiser men in your eyes, and how gladly would^ you then be
such? but O too late! what a thing is it, that men who say they believe such a
judgment, and everlasting life and death, as all Christians, profess to do, can
yet read, and hear, and talk of such things as insensibly, as if they were
dreams or fables! I know it is the nature of sin, to deceive, and of a sinful
heart to be too willing of such deceiving; and it is the business of Satan by
deceiving to destroy, and with the most specious baits to angle for souls; and
therefore I must expect, that those of you that are taken, and are nearest to
the pit, should be least fearful of the danger, and most confident to escape,
though you are conscious that you live not to God, but to your selves: But for
my part, I have read, and considered what God says in his Word, and I have
found such evidence of its certain truth, that I heartily wish, that I might
rather live on a dunghill, and be the s^^^n of the world, and spend my few
days in beggary and calamity, then that I should stand before the Lord my
Judge, in the case of that man whatever he be, that is not in heart and life
devoted unto God, but lives to his flesh: for I know that if we live after the
flesh, we shall dye, Romans 8. 13. I had rather lie here in Lazarus poverty, and
want the compassion and releife of man, then to be clothed with the best, and
fare deliciously, and hereafter be denied a drop of water to cool the flames of
the wrath of God.

I confess, this is likely to seem but harsh and ungreatful preaching to many
of you; some pleasant fingles, or witty sayings, or shreds of Reading, and
pretty cadency of neat expressions, were liker to be accepted, and procure
applause with them who had rather have their ears and fantasies tickled, then
rubbed so roughly, and be roused from their ease and pleasing dreams. But shall
I pr^ach for my self, while I pretend to be preaching you from your selves to
God? Shall I seek my se^f, while I am preaching of the everla^^ing misery of
Self-seekers? God fobid. Sirs, I know the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5 11. I
believe and therefore speak. Were I a Christian no deeper then the throat, I
would fish for my self, and study more to please you, then to save you; I love
not to make a needless stir in men's Consciences. nor to trouble their peace by
a Doctrine which I do not believe my self. But I believe that our Judge is even
at the door, and that we shall shortly see him coming in his Glory, and the
Host of Heaven attending him with acclamations; In the mean time, your
particular doom draws on; the fashion of all these things passes away; as
those seats will anon be empty when you are departed; so it is but a moment
till all your habitations shall change their possessors and the places of your
abode and too great delight shall know you no more. I must needs speak to you
as to transient, itinerant mortals, who must ere long be carried on men's
shoulders to the dust* and there be left by those that must shortly follow you
then farewell Honors and fleshly Delights, farewell all the accommodations and
contents of this world; O that you had sooner bid them farewel^; Had you lived
to Christ as you did to them, he would not so have turned you off, nor have
left your dislodged souls to utter desolation.

In a word, As ^u^e as the word of God is true, if you own him not now as your
Lord and Soveragin, he will not own you then as his chosen to salvation: and if
now you live not To him, you shall not then live With him. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap: for he
that so^e^h to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that s^weth
to the spirit, shall of the (...) everlasting life, Gal. 6. 7. 8. Consider this
ye that forget God, lest he tear you in p^eces, and there be none to deliver
you, Psalm. 50. 22.

Beloved Hearers, Believe as you pretend to Believe, and then live as you do
Believe; If you believe that you are not your own, but his that made you, and
bought you with a Price, and that he will thus try you for your lives, and
everlasting comforts, on this Question, Whether you have lived to him, or to
your selves? then live as men that do indeed believe it. Let your Religion be
visible, as well as audible; and let those that see your lives, and observe the
scope of your endeavors, see that you Believe it. But if you believe not these
things, but are Infidels in your hearts, and think you shall feel neither pain
nor pleasure when this life is ended, but that man dies as the beast, then I
cannot wonder if you live as you believe. He that thinks he shall dye like a
Dog* is like enough to live like a Dog* even in his filthiness, and in
snarling for the bones of worldly vanities, which the Children do contemn.

Having spoken this much by way of Exhortation: I shall add a few words for
your more particular direction that you may see to what my Exhortation does
tend, and it may not be lost.

1. Be sure that you look to the uprightness of your heart, in this great
business of devoting your selves to God; especially see,

1. That you discern and soundly believe that excellency in God, which is not
in the Creature; and that perfect felicity in his love, and in the promised
glory, which will easily pay for all your losses.

2. And that upon a deliberate comparing him with the pleasures of this world,
you do resolvedly renounce them, and dedicate your selves to him.

3. And specially that you search carefully lest any Reserve should lurk in
your hearts and you should not deliver up your selves to him absolutely, for
life and death, for better and worse, but should still retain some hopes of an
earthly felicity, and not take the unseen felicity for your portion: It is the
lot of the wicked to have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14. And let me
here warn you of one delusion, by which many thousands have perished, and
cheated themselves out of their everlasting hopes: they think that it is only
some grosser disgraceful sins, as swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, injustice,
etc. that will prove men's perdition; and because they are not guilty of these,
they are secure, when as it is the predominancy of the interest of the flesh,
against the interest of God in their hearts and lives, that is the certain
evidence of a state of Damnation, which way soever it be that this is
expressed. Many a civil Gentleman has his heart more addicted to his worldly
interest, and less to God, then some Whoremongers and Drunkards. If you live
with good reputation for Civility, yea for extraordinary ingenuity, yea for
religious zeal, and no disgraceful vice is perceived in your lives; yet if
your hearts be on those things which you possess, and you love your present
enjoyments better then God and the glory that he has promised, your case is as
dangerous as the Publicans and Harlots; you may spend your days in better
reputation but you will end them in as certain desolation as they. The Question
is only, Whether God have your hearts and lives? and not, Whether you denied
them to him with a plausible Civility: nay it is merely for their carnal elves,
to preserve their reputation, that some men do forbear those grosser, Crimes,
when yet God has as little of them as of the more visibly profane. Love not
the world nor the things that are in the world; If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2. 15.

2. If you are wholly, Gods, live wholly to him, at least do not stint him, and
grudge him your service. It is grown the common Conceit of the World, that a
l^fe of Absolute Dedication to God, is more ado then needs. What needs all
this ado, say they; cannot you be saved with less ado then this! I will now
demand of these men but an Answer to these few sober Quest^ons.

1. Do you fear giving more to God then his due? Is not all his own? And how
can you give him more then all?

2. He is not so backward in giving to you, that owes you nothing, but gives
you plenty, variety and continuance of all the good you enjoy; and do you think
you well requite him?

3. Christ said not of his life and precious blood, It is too much; And will
you say of your poor unprofitable Service, It is too much?

4. Who will you give that to which you spare from God? that time, and study,
and love and labor? to any that has more right to it or better deserves it,
or will better reward you then he will do?

5. Are you afraid of being losers by him? have you cause for such Fears; is be
unfaithful, or unable to perform his Promises? will you repent when you come
to heaven, that you did too much to get it? will not that blessedness pay you
to the full?

6. What if you had not wages but your work? is it not better to live to God
then to man? is not purity better then impurity? If feasting he grievous, it is
because you are sick; if the be your pleasure, it is because you are swine, and
not because the condition is desirable.

7. Will it comfort you more in the reckoning and review, to have laid out your
selves for God, or for the World? Will you then wish that you had done less for
heaven, or for earth? Sirs, these Questions, are easily answered, if you are
but willing to consider them.

8. Does it be seem those to be afraid of serving God too much, that are such
bankrupts as we are, and are sure that we shall not give him the twentieth part
of his due, if we do the best we can: and when the best that are scorned by the
world for their forwardness, do abhor themselves for their backwardness! yea
could we do all, we are but unprofitable servants, and should do but our duty,
Luke 17. 10. Alas, how little cause have we to fear lest we should give God too
much of our hearts or of our lives?

3. If you are not your own, remember that nothing else is your own; what can
be more your own then your selves?

1, Your Parts and Abilities of mind or body, are not your own; use them
therefore for him that owneth them.

2. Your Authority and Dignities are not your own; see therefore that you make
the best of them for him that lent them you.

3. Your Children themselves are not your own; design them for the utmost of
his service that trusts you with them; educate them in that way as they may be
most serviceable to God. It is the great wickedness of too many of our Gentry,
that they prepare their Posterity only to live plenteously and in credit in the
world, but not to be serviceable to God or the Commonwealth. Design them all
that are capable, to Magistracy or Ministry, or some useful way of life: And
whatever be their employment, endeavor to possess them with the fear of the
Lord, that they may devote themselves to him. Think not the Preaching of the
Gospel a work too low for the Sons of the Noblest person in the Land. It would
be an excellent furtherance to the work of the Gospel, if Noble men and
Gentlemen would addict their Sons to the Ministry that are fit for it, and can
be spared from the Magistracy; They might have more respect from their People,
and easier Rule them, and might better win them with bounty then poor men can
do: They need not to contend with them for Tithes or maintenance.

4. If you are not your own, your whole Families are not your own: use them
therefore as Families that are dedicated to God.

5. If you are not your own, then your wealth is not your own honor God
therefore with your substance, and with the first fruits of your increase,
Prove. 3. 9. Do you ask how? Is there no poor people that want the faithful
preaching of the Gospel for want of means or other furtherance? Is there no
godly Scholars that want means to maintain them at the Universities, to fit
them for this Work? Is there no poor Neighbors about you, that are ignorant,
that if you buy them Bibles and Catechismes, and hire them to learn them, might
come to knowledge and to life? Are there no poor Children that you might set
Apprentices to godly Masters, where soul and body might both have helps? The
poor you have always with you. It is not for want of objects for your charity,
if you hide your Talents or consume them on your selves; the time is coming
when it would do you more good to have laid them out to your masters use then
in pampering the flesh.

Some grudge that God should have the Tenths, that is, that they should be
consesecrated to the maintenance of his service; but little do these consider
that All is His, and must All be accounted for. Some question whether now there
be such a sin as Sacrilege in being; but little do they consider that every
sin is a king of sacrilege. When you dedicated your self to God, you dedicated
all you had; and it was Gods before; do not take if from him again remember the
halving of Ananias! and give God all.

Objection, But must we not provide for our Families?

Answer. Yes, because God requires it and in so doing you render it to him:
That is given to him, which is expended in obedience to him, so be it you still
prefer his most eminent interest.

Lastly, If you are not your own, then must not your Works be principally for
your selves, but for him that owes you. As the scope of your lives must be to
the honor of your Lord, so be sure that you hourly renew these intentions; when
you set your foot out of your doors, ask whether your business you go upon be
for God: when you go to your Rest, examine your selves what you have done that
day for God; especially let no opportunity over-slip you, wherein you may do
him extraordinary service. You must so perform the very labors of your
Callings, that they may be ultimately for God; so love your dearest friends and
enjoyments, that it be God that is principally loved in them.

More particularly as to the business of the Day, what need I say more then in
a word to apply this general Doctrine to your special Work?

If the Honorable Judges, and the Justices will remember, that they are Gods,
and not their own, what a Rule and stay will it be to them for their Work? what
an answer will it afford them against all solicitations from carnal self or
importunate friends? viz. I am not mine own nor come I hither to do mine own
Work; I cannot therefore dispose of my self or it, but must do as he that owes
me, does command me, How would this also incite them to promote Christ's
interest with their utmost power and faithfully to own the Causes which lie
owneth.

2. If all Counselors and Solliciters of Causes did truly take themselves for
Gods, and not their own, they durst not plead for, nor solicit a Cause which
they knew God disowneth; They would remember that what they do against the
Innocent, or speak against a righteous Cause, is done and said against their
Lord from whom they may expect ere long to hear, In as much as you said, or did
this against the least of these, you said, or did it against me. God is the
great Patron of Innocence, and the pleader of every righteous Cause; and he
that will be so bold as to plead against him, had need of a large Fee to save
him harmless. Say not, it is your Calling which you must live by, unless you
that once listed your selves in your Baptism under Christ will now take pay and
make it your profession to fight aggainst him: The emptier your Purses are of
Gain so gotten, the richer you are; at least the fuller they are, you are so
much the poorer; As we that are Ministers do find by experience, that it was
not without provocation from us, that God of late has let loose so many Hands,
and Pens, and Tongues against us though our calling is more evidently owned by
God, then any one in the world besides; so I doubt not but you may find upon
due examination, that the late contempt which has been cast upon your
profession, is a reproof of your guilt from God who did permit it. Had Lawyers
and Divines less lived to themselves, and more to God, we might have escaped,
if not the scourge of reproachful Tongues, yet at least the lashes of
Conscience. To deal freely with you, Gentlemen, it is a matter that they who
are strangers to our profession, can scarce put any fair construction upon;
that the worst cause for a little money should find an Advocate among you! This
deiveth the standers by upon this harsh Dilemma, to think that either your
Understanding, or your Consciences, are very bad. If indeed you so little know
a good cause from a bad, then it must needs tempt men to think you very
uhskilful in your profession. The seldom and smaller differences of Divines, in
a more sublime and mysterious profession, is yet a discovery so far of their
ignorance, and is imputed to their disgrace: But when almost every Cause, even
the worst that comes to the Bar, shall have some of you for it, and some
against it; and in the palpablest cases you are some on one side, and some on
the other, this strange difference of your judgments, does seem to bewray
their weakness: But if you know the Causes to be bad which you Defend, and to
be good which you oppose, it more evidently bewrayes a deplorate Conscience: I
speak not of your innocent of excusable mistakes in Cases of great
difficulties; not yet of excusing a Cause bad in the main from unjust
aggravations; But when Money will hire you to plead for injustice against your
own knowledge, and to use your wits to defraud the Righteous, and spoil his
Cause or vex him with delays for the advantage of your unrighteous Clyent, I
would not have your Conscience for all your gains, nor your Accomp^ to make for
all the world; Its sad that any known unrighteous Cause should have a professed
Christian in the face of a Christian Judicature to defend it, and Satan should
plead by the Tongues of men so deeply engaged to Christ: But its incomparably
more sad, that almost every unjust Cause should find a Patron; and no
contentious malicious person should be more ready to do wrong, then some
Lawyers to defend him, for a (dear bought) Fee! Did you honestly obey God, and
speak not a word against your judgment, but leave every unjust man to defend
his own Cause, what peace would it bring to your Consciences? what honor to
your now reproached Profession? what relief to the oppressed? and what an
excellent cure to the troublesome contentions of proud or malicious men?

3. To your Jurers and Witnesses I shall say but this, you also are not your
own; and he that owes you, has told you, That he will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain: Its much into your hands that the law has
committed the Cause of the Just; should you betray it by perjury and false
witness, while there is a Conscience in your guilty breast, and a God in Heaven
you shall not want a witness of your sin, or a revenger of the oppressed, if
the blood of Christ on your sound repentance do not rescue you.

4. If Plantiff and Defendant did well consider that they are not their own,
they would not be too prone to quarrels, but would lose their right, when God
the chief Proprietor did require it. Why do you not rather take wrong and
suffer your selves to be defrauded, then do wrong and defraud, and that your
Brethren? 1 Cor. 6, 7, 8, 9.

To conclude, I earnestly entreat you all that have heard me this day, that
when you come home, you will betake your selves to a sober consideration of the
claim that God has laid to you, and the Right he has in you, and all that you
have; and resolve without any further delay to give him his own, and give it
not to his enemies, and yours. When you see the Judgment set, and the
Prisoners waiting to receive their sentence, remember with what unconceiveable
Glory and Terror your Judge will shortly come to demand his due; and what an
enquiry must be made into the tenor of your lives. As you see, the Ecclipsed
Sun withdraw its light, This Sermon was proached in the time of the Eclipse.
so remember how before this dreadful final Judgment, the Sun and Moon, and
whole frame of Nature shall be dissolved! and how God will withdraw the light
of his countenance from those that have neglected him in the day of their
Visitation. As ever you would be His, then see that you be His now: own him as
your absolute Lord, if you expect he should own you then as his People. Woe to
you that ever you were Born, if you put God then to distrain for his Due, and
to take that up in your punishment, which you denied to give him in voluntary
obedience. You would all be His, in the time of your extremity; then you cry to
him, as your God for deliverance. Hear him now if you would then be heard: live
to him now, and live with him for ever. A Popish Priest can persuade multitudes
of Men and Women, to renounce the very possession of worldly Goods, and the
exercise of their outward Callings, in a mistaken devotedness to God. May not I
then hope to prevail with you, to devote your selves with the fruit of your
Callings, and Possessions to his unquestionable service? Will the Lord of mercy
but fasten these persuasions upon your hearts, and Cause them to prevail; what
a happy day will this prove to us all. God will have his Own! the Church will
have your utmost help, the souls of those about you will have the fruit of your
diligence and good examples, the Commonwealth will have the fruit of your
fidelity, the poor will have the benefit of your charity, I shall have the
desired end of my labor, and your selves will have the great and everlasting
gain.

A SERMON Of the absolute Sovereignty of Christ; And the necessity of man's
Subjection, dependence, and chiefest love to him.

Preached before the Judges of Assize at WORCESTER.

By RICH. BAXTER.

Luke 19. 27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

LONDON Printed for Nevill Simmons Bookseller in Kidderminster, l656.

Christian Reader,
WHen I had resolved at the desire of the Honorable Judge of As^ize, to publish
the foregoing Sermon, I remembered that about six years before, I had preached
another on the like occasion, on a subject so like and to so like a purpose,
that I conceived it not unfit to be annexed to the former. I have edeavoured to
show you in both these Sermons, that Christ may be preached without
Antinomianis^^; that terror may be preached without unwarrantable preaching
the Law; that the Gospel is not a mere promise, and that the Law it self is not
so terrible as it is to the rebellious. As also what that super structure is,
that is built on the foundation of General Redemption rightly under stood; and
how ill we can preach Christ's Dominion in his universal propriety and
sovereignty, or yet persuade men to sanctification and subjection without this
foundation. I have labored to fit all (or almost all) for Matter and Manner to
the Capacity of the Vulgar. And though for the Matter it is as necessary to the
greatest, yet is it for the Vulgar principally that I publish it; and had
rather it might be numbered with those Boooks that are carried up and down the
Country from door to door in Pedlars Packs, then with those that lie in
Booksellers Stalls, or are set up in the Libraries of learned Divines. And to
the same use would I design the most of my published labors should God afford
we time and abily and contetious brethren would give me leave.

August the 7th, 1654. Rich. Baxter.

A SERMON of the absolute Sovereignty of CHRIST.
Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings be instructed ye Judges
of the Earth.

Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, etc.


TTo waste this precious hour in an Invective against in justice and its
associates, is none of my purpose; they are sins so directly against the
principles in Nature, so well known, I believe, to you all, and so commonly
preached against upon these occasions, that upon the penalty of forfeiting the
credit of my discretion, I am bound to make choice of a more nccessary subject.
What? have we need to spend our time and studies to persuade Christians from
Bribery, Perjury and Oppresson? and from licking up the vomit which Pagans have
cast out? and that in an age of blood and desolation, when God is taking the
proudest Oppressiors by the throat, and raising Monuments of Justice upon the
^^nes of the unjust! And I would fain believe that no corrupt Lawyers do attend
your Judictures, and that Iezabels witnesses dwell not in our Country, nor yet
a Jurie that fear not an Oath: I have therefore chosen another subject, which
being of the greatest moment, can never be unseasonable, even to proclaim him
who is constituted the king and Judge of All, to acquaint you with his
pleasure, and to demand your subjection.

The chief scope of the Psalm is, To foretell the extent and pevalency of the
Kingdom of Christ, admonishing his enemies to submit to his Government, deriding
the vanity of their opposing projects and fury and forewarning them of their
ruin if they come not in.

The verses which I have read are the Application of the foregoing prediction
by a serious admonition to the proudest offenders: They contain, 1. The Persons
admonished [ Kings and Judges] 2. Their Duty. 1. In general to God serve him]
with the adjuncts annexed, 1. Rejoicing. 2. Fear and trembling, 2. More
specially, their duty to the Son, [Kiss him.] 3. The Motives to this duty. 1.
Principally and directly expressed [left he be angry] which anger is set sorth
by the effect [and ye perish;] which perishing is aggravated, 1. From the
suddeness and unexpectedness [in the way.] 2. From the dreadfullness [kindled.]
1. It is fire, and will kindle and burn. 2. A little of it will produce this
sad effect. 3. It will be Woe to those that do not escape it; which Woe is set
forth by the contrary happiness of those that by submission do escape. 2. The
motives subservient and employed, are in the monitory words [be wise, be
learned] q. d. else you will show and prove your selves men of ignorance and
madness, unlearned and unwise.

Some Questions here we should answer for explicaton of the terms. As

1. Whether the Lord in v. 11. and the Son in v. 12. be both meant of Christ
the second person?

2. Whether the Anger here mentioned, be the anger of the Father or the Son [
lest he angry.] I might spend much time here to little purpose, in showing you
the different judgment of Divines, of these when in the issue there is no
great difference which way ever we take them.

3. What is meant by [Kissing the Son] I answer, According to it is threefold
object it has a threefold duty contained in it.

1. We kiss the feet in token of Subjection; so must we kiss the Son.

2. We kiss the hand in token of Dependence; so must we kiss the hand of
Christ; that is, Resign our selves to him, and expect all our happiness and
receivings from him.

3. We kiss the mouth in token of love and friendship; and so also must we kiss
the Son.

4. What is meant by [ Perishing in the way] I answer, (omitting the variety of
interpretations) it is their sudden unexpected perishing in the heat of their
rage, and in pursuit of their designs dgainst the Kingdom of Christ.

I know no other terms of any great difficulty here.

Many Observations might be hence raised: As,

1. Serving the Lord is the great work and business that the World has to do.

2. This service should be accompanied with rejoicing.

3. So should it also with fear and trembling.

4. There is no such opposition between spiritual Joy and Fear, but that they
may and must consist together.

5. Scripture uses familiar expressions concerning man's communion with Christ
(such as this; Kiss the Son.)

6. There is anger in God, or that which we cannot conceive better of then
under the Notion of Anger.

7. There is a way to kindle this Anger; it is man that kindles it.

8. The way to kindle it chiefly, is, not kissing the Son.

9. The kindling of it will be the perishing of the sinner.

10. The Enemies of Christ shall perish suddenly and unexpectedly.

11. A little of Gods anger will utterly undo them.

12. They are blessed men that escape it, and miserable that must feeel it.

13. It is therefore notorious folly to neglect Christ and stand out.

14. Kings, Judges, and Rulers of the earth, are the first men that Christ
summons in, and the chief in the Calam tie if they stand out.

But I will draw the scope of the Text into this one Doctrine; in the handling
whereof, I shall spend the time allotted me.

Doct. No power or privilege can save that man from the fearful sudden
consuming wrath of God, that does not unfeignedly love, depend upon, and
subject himself unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

If they be the greatest Kings and Judges, yet if they do not kiss the Mouth,
the Hand, the Feet of Christ, his wrath will be kindled, and they will perish
in the way of their rebellion and neglect.

In handling this point I shall observe this Order.

1. I will show you what this love, dependence and subjection are.

2. What wrath it is that will thus kindle and consume them.

3. Why this kissing the Son is the only way to escape it.

4. Why no Power or Privilege else can procure their escape.

5. The Application.

For the first, I shall only give you a naked description, wishing that I had
time for a fuller explication.

1. Subjection to Christ is, The acknowledging of his absolute sovereignty both
as he is God Creator and as Redeemer, over all the world, and particularly our
selves; and a hearty consent to this his overaignty, especially that he be our
Lord, and his Laws our Rule, and a delivering up our selves to him to be
governed accordingly.

2. This dependence on Christ is, when acknowledging the sufficiency of his
satisfaction, and his power, and willingness to save all that receive him
manifested in his free universal offer in the Gospel we do heartily accept him
for our only Savior, and accordingly (renouncing all other) do wait upon him
believingly for the benefits of his sufferings and office, and the performance
of his faithful Covenant to us, in restoring us to all the blessings which we
lost, and advancing us to a for greater everlasting Glory.

3. This affection to Christ is, when in the knowledge and sense of his love to
us, both common and especial, and of his own excellency, and the blessedness of
enjoying him, and the Father, and life by him; our hearts do choose him and the
Father b^ him as our only happiness, and accordingly love him above all things
in the world.

As this three fold Description contains the sum of the Gospel, so has it
nothing but what is of necessity to sound Christianity. If any one of these
three be not found in thy heart, either I have little, skill in Divinity, or
thou have no true Christianity, nor can be saved in that condition.

Object. But does not the Scripture make believing the condition of the
Covenant? but here is a great deal more then believing.

Answ. Sometime Faith is taken in a narrower sense, and then it is not made the
sole condition of the New Covenant, but repentance and forgiving others, are
joined with it as conditions of our forgiveness; and obedience, and
perseverance as conditions of our continued justification and salvation. But
when Faith is made the sole condition of the Covenant, then it comprehends
essentially (not only supposes as precedent or concomitant) if not all three,
yet at least the two first of the fore described qualifications, viz.
Dependence and Subjection; which if it were well understood, would much free
the common sort of Christians from their soul destroying mistakes, and the Body
of Divinity from a multitude of common errors, and our Religion from much of
that reproach of Solisidianism which is cast upon it by the Papists.

2. I must be as brief in opening the second thing, viz. What wrath is it that
will thus kindle and consume them? What wrath is in God, we need not here
trouble our selves to enquire; But only what is intimated in the threats or
curses of the Covenants. As there are two Covenants, so each has his proper
penalty for its violation.

1. Then ti^l men do come in and submit to Christ, they lie under the wrath of
God for all their sins as they are against the Covenant of Works; or they are
liable to the curse of that Covenant: Christ's death has taken away the curse
of the Covenaut, not absolutely from any man, but conditionally, which becomes
absolute when the condition is performed. The Elect themselves are not by
nature under the Covenant of Grace, but remain under the curse of the first
Covenant, till they come in to Christ.

2. Whosoever rejects or neglects this Grace, and so finally breaks the
New Covenant, must also bear the curse or penalty thereof, besides all the
former, which will be a far greater curse, even as the blessings of this
Covenant are far greater then those of the first. It was a heavy punishment to
be cast out of Paradise, and from the presence and favor of God, and to be
cursed by him, and subjected to eternal death, and all Creatures below cursed
for our sakes, to bear all those curses and plagues threatened in Deuteronomy. 27. and
28. and to have the wrath of God smoke against us, etc. as Deuteronomy. 29 20. But of
how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, that does tread under
foot the blood of this Covenant, and do despite to the spirit of Grace! Heb.
10. 28, 29. It is true, that for all other sins, the wrath of God comes upon
the Children of Disobedience (or Unperswadableness) that is, on them that will
not be perswded to obey the Lord Christ, Epha 5. 6. But it is on no other with
us; for this is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather then light, John 1. 19.

3. Why is this kissing the Son, (that is loving, depending on, and submitting
to him) the only way to escape these curses?

Answ. 1. The most proper and primary reason which can be given is, The will of
the great Lawgiver, who having absolute sovereignty over us might dispose of
us as he please, and make us such Laws and Conditions as seem best to his
wisdom, upon which our justification and salvation should depend; He has
resolved that this shall be the only condition and way, and that as no man
shall be justified by a mere Christ or his death abstracted from Faith (that is
of Age and use of Reason:) so this Faith shall be the condition upon which they
shall be justified: or, as a Christ neglected shall save no man, so the
accepting or receiving of him, shall justify and save them, as the conditon of
the Covenant performed, under which Notion it is that Faith justifies.

2. Yet other improper or subordinate Reasons (which receive their life from
the former, and without it would be no Reasons) may be given; as 1. From the
equity; and 2. From the sutbleness and convenience.

1. It is but equal that he who has bought us, and that so dearly, and from a
state so deplorable and desperate as we were in, should be acknowledged and
accepted for our Savior and our Lord; and that we who are not our own, but are
bought with a price, should glorify him with our bodies and souls which are
his, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. Epecially when for that end he both dyed and rose
again, that he might rule or be Lord over both quick and dead, Romans 14. 9. If
one of you should buy a man from the Galleyes or Gallows, with the price of
your whole estate, or the life of your only Son: would you not expect that he
should be at your dispose? that he should love you, depend on you and be
subject to you?

2. And as salvation by free Grace through Christ is a way most suitable to Gods
honor, and to our own necessities and low condition, so in subordination
thereto, the way of believing is most rationally conducible to the same ends.
As we could not have had a fitter way to the Father then by Christ, so neither
could there be a fitter way to Christ, or means to partake of him then by
Faith. For though I cannot call it the instrumental Cause of our justification,
either Active or Passive; yet is this Faith (or Acceptance of Christ, for our
Savior and King, which is here called [ Kising the Son] the fairest condition
that we could reasonably expect, and the most apparently tending to the honor
of our Redeemer; applying and appropriating to our selves the person,
righteousness, and benefits procured and offered, but no^ the least of the
houor of the Work. All we do is but to accept what Christ has procured, and
that must be by the special assistance of his Spirit too.

4. The fourth thing I promised, is to show you, Why no other Privilege or
Power in the world can save him that does not kiss the Son? It may here
suffice, that I have showed you Gods determination to the contrary. But further
consider if any shonld hope to escape by their Dignities, Titles, Friends,
Strength or any other endowments, or virtuous qualifications) 1. What is their
task? 2. What is their power to perform it?

1. They must resist the unresistible will of God; They must do that which
Heaven or Earth, Men or Devils were never able yet to do: They have resisted
his Laws and his love; but they could never resist his purpose or his power.
The power that undertaketh to save the Enemy or Neglecter of Christ, must first
overcome the power of the Almighty, and conquer him that does command the
World: And who has the strength that is sufficient for this? Sinner, before
thou venture thy soul upon such a mad conceit, or think to be saved whether God
will or not, try first thy skill and strength in some inferior attempt; Bid
the Sun or Moon stand still in the Firmament, invert the several seasons of the
year. Bid the snow and frost to come in Summer, and the flowers and fruits to
spring in Winter: command the streams to turn their course, or the Tide its
times, or the winds their motion. If these will obey thee, and thy word can
prevail with them against the Law of their Creator, then may thou proceed
with a greater confidence and courage, and have some hopes to save the
neglecters of Christ: Or try first whether thou can save thy present life
against the course of nature and will of God; call back thine age and years
that are past, command thy pains and sickness to be gone: chide back this bold
approaching death: Will they not obey thee? Can thou do none of these? How
then can thou expect the saving of thy soul against the determinate will and
Way of God? Where dwells that man, or what was his name, that did neglect
Christ, and yet escape damnation? Who has hardened himself against him, and
has prospered? Job 9. 4. And do thou think then to be the first? Thou may
perhaps knock boldly at the Gate of Heaven; and plead thy Greatness, thy
virtues, thy Almsdeeds and formal devotion: but thou shall receive a sadder
answer then thou do expect: Jesus we know and obediential Faith in him we
know; but who are ye?

2 He that will save the soul that loves not, depends not on and subjecteth
not himself to Christ, must first make false the word of God, and make the true
and faithful God a liar; this is another part of his task; God has given it
under his hand for truth, That he that believes not, is condemned already,
Joh. 3. 18. That he shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him,
Joh. 3. 36. That they who are invited to Christ, and make light of it, or make
excuses, shall never taste of his Supper, Luke 14. 24. Mat. 22. 5. 8. That it
shall be easier for Sodom in the day of Judgment, then for that City which
refuses the offers of the Gospel, Mat. 12. 15. That whosoever would not have
Christ to reign over them, shall be brought forth at last, and destroyed before
him as his Enemies, Luke 19. 27. That they shall all be damned that believe not
the truth but have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 12, etc. And has
the Almighty said that thus it shall be? Who then is he that dare say it shall
not be? Is this the concluded Decree of Heaven? what power or policy is able to
reverse it? has God said it and will he not do it?

Thus you see his task, that will undertake to save one neglecter of Christ.

2. Let us now consider, what Power that is that must perform it: If it be
done, it must be either, 1. By Wisdom: or 2. By Strength; whereas the chiefest
of men even the Kings and Judges of the Earth, are both ignorant and Impotent.

1. Ignorant. Though Judges are learned in the repute of the World: Alas, poor
crawling breathing dust! Do you know the secrets of your Masters counsel? and
are you able to over reach them, and frustrate his designs? Does this Book know
what is written in it? Can the Seat you sit on, overtop your counsels? more
likely then for you to overtop the Lord: silly worms, you know not what God
is, nor know you any one of his unrevealed thoughts, no more then that Pillar
does know your thoughts: you know not what you are your selves, nor see any
further then the superficies of your skin; what is thy soul? and when did
thou receive it? Do thou know its form, or did thou feel it enter? which
part did thou feel it first possess? Thou can call it a Spirit, but know
thou what a Spirit is? or rather only what it is not; Thou know not that
whereby thou know; and how was thy body formed in the womb? what was it an
hundred years ago? what is that vital heat and moisture? what causes that
order and (diversity of its parts? when will the most expert Anatomists and
Physicians be agreed? Why, there are mysteries in the smallest worm which thou
can not reach; nor could thou resolve the doubts arising about an Ant or
Atome, much less about the Sun, or Fire, or Air or or Wind, etc. and can thou
not know thy self, nor the smallest part of thy self, nor the smallest
Creature? and yet can thou overreach the everlasting Counsels?

2. And is thy might and Power any greater then thy Policy? Why, what are the
Kings and Rulers of the Earth, but lumps of Clay, that can speak and go?
moving shadows, the Flowers of a day, a corruptible seed, blown up to that
swelled consistence in which it appears, as Children blow their bubbles of
Soape, somewhat invisibly condensate; which that it may become visible, is
become more gross, and so more vile, and will shortly be almost all turned into
invisible again; and that little dust which corruption leaves by the force of
fire, may be dissipated yet more, and then where is this specious part of the
man? Surely now that body which is so much esteemed, is but a loathsome lump of
corruptible flesh, covered with a smooth skin, and kept a little while from
stinking by the presence of the soul, and must shortly be cast out of sight
into a Grave, as unfit for the sight or smell of the living, and there be
consumed with rot^enness and worm: These are the Kings and Rulers of the Earth;
this is the power that must conquer Heaven, and save them that rebel against
Christ the Lord; They that can not live a month without repairing their
consuming bodies by food, one part whereof does turn to their vital blood and
spirits, and the other to most loathsome unsufferable excrements; so near is
the kin between their Best and Worst. Judge all you that have common reason,
whether he that cannot keep himself alive an hour, and shortly will not be able
to stir a finger to remove the worms that feed upon his heart be able to
resist the strengh of Christ, and save the soul, that God has said and sworn
shall not be saved? Ah poor souls, that have no better Saviors! And well may
Christ, his Truth and Cause prevail, that have no stronger enemies.

Use 1. You have here a Text that will fully inform you, how you are like to
speed at the Bar of Christ; who shall dye, and who shall live; The great
Assize is near at hand, the feet of our Judge are even at the door; go thy way
unbelieving sinner, when thou have had all the pleasure that sin will afford
thee, lie down in the dust and sleep a while, the rousing voice shall quickly
awake thee, and thine eyes shall see that dreadful day! O blessed! oh doleful
day! blessed to the Saints, doleful to the wicked: O the rejoicing! O the
lamenting that there willbe! the triunphant shoutings of joyful Saints! the
hideous roaring cries of the ungodly! when each man has newly received his
Doom^, and there is nothing but eternal Glory, and eternal fire. Beloved
hearers, every man of you shall shortly there appear, and wait as the
trembling prisoner at the Bar, to hear what Doom must pass upon you; Do you
not believe this? I hope you do believe it. Why what would you give now to
know for certain how it shall then go with you? why here is the Book by which
you must be judged, and here is the sum of it in my Text, and the grounds
upon which the Judge will then proceed. Will you but go along with me, and
answer the Questions which hence I shall put to you, and search and judge your
selves by them as you go, and you may know what Doom you may then expect; only
deal faithfully, and search thoroughly; for self flatery will not prevent your
sorrow.

And here you must know; that it is the kiss of the heart, and not of the lips,
which we must here enquire after: The question will not be at the Great Day,
Who has spoke Christ fair? or who have called themselves by the name of
Christians? or who has said the Creed or the Lords Prayer oftnest? or cried,
Lord, Lord? or come to Church? for carried a Bible? or who has held this
opinion? or who that? It would make a man's heart ache to think how zealously men
will honor the shadow of Christ and bow at his Name, and reverence the Image
of the Cross which he dyed on, and the names and relics of the Saints that
dyed for him, and yet do utterly neglect the Lord himself, and cannot endure
to be governed by him, and resist his spirit, and scorn his strict and holy
ways, and dispitefully hate them that most love and obey him, and yet belive
themselves to be real Christians. For God sake, Sirs, do not so delude your
immortal souls, as to think your Baptism and your outward devotion, and your
good meanings (as you call them) and your righteous dealing with men, will
serve the turn to prove you Christians: Alas, this is but with Judas, to kiss
the mouth of Christ, and indeed to fetch your death from those blessed lips,
from whence the Saints do fetch their life: I will show you some surer signs
then these.

1. And first let me a little enquire into your subjection to Christ. Do you
remember the time when yon were the servants of sin, and when Satan led you
captive at his will? and the Prince of darkness ruled in your souls? and all
within you was in a carnal peace? Do you remember when the Spirit in the word
came powerfully upon your hearts, and bound Satan, and cast him our, and
answered all your r^asonings, and conquered all your carnal wisdom, and brought
you from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18.
Or at least are you sure, that now you live not under the same Lord and Laws as
the ungodly do? Has Christ now the only sovereignty in your souls? Is his word
thy Law which thou dare not pass? does it bind thy thoughts, and rule thy
tongue? and command thy self and all thou have? Have thou laid all down at the
feet of Christ? and resigned thy self and all to his will? and devoted all to
his dispose and service? If custom bid thee curse and swear, and Christ forbid
thee, which do thou obey? If thy Appetite bid thee take thy cups and fare
deliciously every day; If thy company bid thee play the good fellow, or scorn
the Godly; If thy covetousness bid thee love the world, and Christ forbid thee,
which do thou obey? If Christ bid thee be Holy, and walk precisely, and be
violent for Heaven and strive to enter in, and the world and the flesh be
enemies to all this, and cry it down as tedious folly; which do thou obey?
Do thou daily and spiritually worship him in private, and in thy Family, and
teach thy Children and Servants to fear the Lord? I entreat you Sirs, deal
truly in answering these Questions; never man was saved by the bare title of a
Christian; If you are not subject to Christ, you are not Christians, no more
then a Picture or a Carcass is a man; and your salvation will be such as your
Christianity is: subjection is an essential part of thy Faith, and obedience is
its fruit In short then; do thou make him thy fear? and tremble at his word?
Dare thou run upon fire, or water, sword or canon, rather then wilfully run
upon his displeasure? would thou rather displease thy dearest friend, the
greatest Prince, or thine own flesh, then wittingly provoke him? When Christ
speaks against thy sweetest sin, thy nature or custom, or credit, or life,
against thy rooted opinions, or thy corrupt traditions: Art thou willing to
submit to all that he reveals? Do thou say, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant
hears? Lord, what would thou have me to do? I am ready to do thy will, O
God,

Beloved Hearers, This is the frame of every Servant of Christ, and this is the
acknowledging and accepting him for your Lord. I beseech you cozen not your
souls with shows and formalities: if ever you be saved without this subjection,
it must be without Christ's merits or mercy: It must be in a way that Scripture
reveals not ^nay, it must be in despite of God; his truth must be falsified;
his power must be mastered before the disobedient can be saved from his wrath.

2 Examine also your Dependence on Christ, whether you kiss his Hands as well
as his Feet. Do you understand that you are all by nature Condemned men and
liable to the everlasting wrath of God? that Christ has interposed and paid
this Debt, and bought us as his own by the satisfaction of that justice; that
all things are now delivered into his hands, John 1^. ^. and he is made Head
over all things to his Church Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. Do thou take him for thy
only Savior? and believe the History of his Life and Passion, the truth of
his divine and humane nature, his Resurrection, his Office, and his approaching
Judgment? Do thou see that all thy supposed Righteousness is but vanity and
sin, and that thy self art unable to make the least satisfaction to the Law by
thy Works or Sufferings; and if his blood do not wash thee, and his
righteousness justify thee, thou must certainly be damned yet, and perish for
ever? Do thou therefore cast thy self into his arms, and venture thy
everlasting state upon him, and trust him with thy soul, and fetch all thy help
and healing from him? When sin is remembered and thy Conscience troubled, and
the forethoughts of judgment do amaze thy soul, do thou then fetch thy
comfort from the view of his blood, and the thoughts of the Freeness and
Fullness of his Satisfaction, his Love, and Gospel-offers and promises? Do
thou so build upon his promise of a Happiness hereafter, that thou can let
go all thy happiness here, and drink of his Cup, and be baptized with his
Baptism, and lose thy life upon his promise that thou shall save it? Can thou
part with goods and friends, and all that thou have, in hope of a promised
Glory which thou never saw? If thou can drink with him of the Brook in the
way, thou shall also with him lift up the head Psalm 110 v. last. Do thou
perceive a Mediator as well as a God in all thy mercies, both special and
common, and taste his blood in all that thou receivest, and wait upon his hand
for thy future supplies? Why, this is kissing the hand of Christ, and depending
upon him. O how contrary is the Case of the World! whose confidence is like the
Samaritans worship; they trust God and their Wits and Labors; Christ and their
supposed Merits; I would I might not say, Christ and deceit and wicked
contrivances. Oh blasphemous joining of heaven and hell to make up one
foundation of their trust!

3. Examine a little also your love to Christ, Do you thus kiss the Son? do
your souls cleave to him, and embrace him with the strongest of your
affections? Sirs though there is nothing that the blind world is more confident
in then this [that they love Christ with all their hearts] yet is there nothing
wherein they are more false and faulty; I beseech you therefore deal truly in
answering here. Are your hearts set upon the Lord Jesus? do you love him above
all things in this World? do you stick at your answer? do you not know? sure
then at best you love him but little, or else you could not choose but know it.
Love is a stirring and sensible Affection; you know what it is to love a
Friend; Feel by this Pulse, whether you live or dye: Does it beat more strongly
toward Christ then to any thing else? Never question man, the necessity of
this; he has concluded, If thou love any thing more then him, thou art
unworthy of him, nor can be his Disciple. Are thy thoughts of Christ thy
freest and thy sweetest thoughts? are thy speeches of him thy sweetest
speeches? when thou awakest, art thou still with him, and is he next thy heart?
when thou walk abroad, do thou take him in thy thoughts? can thou say
and lie not, that thou were ever deeply in love with him, that thou do love
him but as heartily as thou love thy friend, and art as loath to displease
him; and as glad of his presence, and art as much troubled at his strangeness
or absence? Has thy Minister or godly Acquaintance ever heard thee bemoaning
thy soul for want of Christ, or inquiring what thou should do to attain him:
or thy Family heard thee commending his excellency, and laboring to kindle
their affections toward him? why love will not be hid; when it has its
desire, it will be rejoicing!: and when it wants, it will be Complaining. Or at
least, Can thy Conscience witness thy longings, thy groans, thy prayers for a
Christ? Will thou stand to the Testimony of these Witnesses? Do you love his
weak, his poor despised Members? Do you visit them, cloth them, feed them to
your power? not only in a Common Natural Compassion to them as they are your
Neighbors: but do you love or relieve a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, or a
Disciple in the name of a Disciple? Mat 10. 40, 41, 43. shall all these decide
the Question?

Beloved Hearers, I profess to you all in the Name of our Lord, that it is not
your bold and confident affirming that you love Christ, which will serve your
turn when Christ shall judge: he will search deep, and judge according to the
truth in the inward parts. How many thousands will then perish as his utter
Enemies, that verily thought themselves his friends? How easily now might they
find their mistake, if they would but be at the pains to examine themselves?
Oh try, try, Sirs, before God try you; judge your selves before Christ judge
you. It would grieve a man's heart that knows what it is to love Christ, to
believe, to be subject to him, to see how rare these are in the world and yet
how confident and careless most men are! It may be that you may think much that
I so question your love; yet Christ that knew all things, questioned Peter's
love to him, and that three times till it grieved P^t^r. I am a stranger to the
most of you, and therefore know not your conditions or inclinations: yet judge
me not censorious if I fear the worst, and if I measure you by the rest of the
world; and then I may confidently and sadly conclude that Christ has few
loving Subjects among you. If we could hear your Oaths and vain speeches turned
to heavenly soul-edifying discourse and your covetousness to conscionablene^s,
and see that the word of Christ were your Law, and that you laid out your
endeavors for heaven in good earnest, then we should say; These People are the
loving Subjects of Christ. But when men are enemies to Christ's Doctrine, and
ways and worship, and had rather live after the flesh, and the world, and the
traditions of their Fathers, and are notorious for profaness, superstition and
enmity to Reformation, who can choose but condole your case? and if your
obstinacy will not endure us to help you, yet you shall give us leave whether
you will or no, to lament you.

Use 2. But its time that I turn my speech to Exhortation: And oh that you
would encourage me with your resolution to obey! My business here to day is as
his Herald and Ambassador, to proclaim the Lord Jesus your King and Savior;
and to know whether you will heartily acknowledge and take him so to be, or not:
and to persuade you to take so fair an offer, while you may have it: and to
kiss the Son, lest his wrath be kindled. This is my business here, in which if
I had not some hope to speed, the Lord knows I would not have been here to day.
You will say, This is a common Errand: do you think we never heard of hrist
before? I confess it is common blessed be God for it (and long may it so
continue and increase, and let it be as constant and durable to us as the Sun
in the Firmament: and the Lord grant that England^ sins or Enemies may never
bereave them of the blessing of the Gospel; and then it will be a (...) Land
then yet ever was on the face of the Earth) but is it as common to receive
Christ in love and obedience? I would it were I know the name of Christ is
common; the Swearer does swear by it; the Beggar begs by it, the Charmer puts
it into his charms, and the Jester into his jests, and every Papist and
ignorant Protestant does mutter it ofttimes over his Prayers: But who trembles
at it? or triumphs in it? who makes it his Fear and his Joy? and give up
their souls and lives to be governed by Christ? I do here solemnly proclaim to
you, that the Lord Jesus will not be put off with your complements; he cares
not for your mere name of Christianity, nor your Cap, nor your knee; If thy
heart be not set upon him, thou art none of his; His word must be your Law, and
you must depend on him alone for soul and body, or never look for mercy at his
hands; He is the Author of eternal salvation to them (only) that obey him, Heb.
5. 9.

What say you then, Sirs, in answer to my message? and what course do you
resolve upon? shall Christ be your love, and your Lord, or not? Will you kiss
the Son, or will you slight him still? methinks you should easily be resolved,
and say, Away with pleasure, and credit, and worldly gain; away with these
bewitching delights and companions; Christ has bought my heart, and he shall
have it, he is my Lord, and I will be ruled by him. Hearers, I hope God has
kept your alive till now to show you mercy, and brought some sinners hither to
day to prevail with their hearts: And my hope is somewhat strengthened by Gods
disposal of my own Spirit: I was strongly tempted to have preached this Sermon
in the enticing words of humane wisdom, tending to a proud ostentation of
parts: But Christ has assisted me to conquer the temptation, and commanded me
to preach him in plainness and evidence of the Spirit. I come not to persuade
you to opinions or factions, to be for this side, or for that; but to be with
all your hearts for Christ, as ever you look that Christ should be for you: to
love him as he that has bought you from eternal wrath, and dyed to save you
from the everlasting burnings; to lay hold on him with most earnest
affectionate apprehension, as a man that is ready to drown would do upon a
bough, or upon the hand of his friend that would pull him to the shore: to wait
for the Law of thy direction from him, and do nothing till thou have asked
counsel at his word, and know his mind whether thou should do it or no; till
thou feel thy Conscience bound by his Law, that thou can not stir till he
give thee leave; that the commands of parents and Princes may stoop to his,
much more the commands of custom and company, of credit or pleasure, of the
world or flesh: These are the things that I exhort you to and I must tell you
that Christ does flatly expect them at your hands.

I will here back these Exhortations with some persuading Considerations. Think
of what I say, and weigh it as we go. If I speak not truth and reason, then
reject it with disdain and spare not: but if it be and thy Conscience tell thee
so, take heed then how thou do neglect or reject it, lest thou be found a
fighter against the Spirit, and lest the curse of God do seize upon that heart
that would not yield to truth and reason.

And I will draw these Considerations only from my Text.

1. Thou art else a Rebel against thy Sovereign Lord. This I gather from the
command in my Text: and indeed the scope of the whole Psalm. God has given
thee into the hands of his on and made him Lord and King of all, and commanded
all men to accept him, and submit unto him. Who can show such title to the
Sovereignty? such right to rule thee as Christ can do? He is thy maker and so
is not Satan; he dearly bought thee, and so did not the world; Thou wast not
Redeemed with silver and Gold, and corruptible things. 1 Pet. 1. 18. I make
this challenge here in the behalf of Christ; let any thing in the world step
forth and show a better title to thee, to thy heart, and to thy life, then
Christ does show: and let them take thy heart, and take thy rule. But why do I
speak thus? I know thou will confess it; and yet will thou not yield him thy
chiefest love and obedience? out of thy own mouth then art thou condemned and
thou proclaimest thy self a knowing and wilful Rebel.

2. To deny thy affections and subjection to Christ, is the most barbarous
unkindness that a sinner can be guilty of. Did he pity thee in thy lost
estate, and take thee up when thou laist wounded in the way, and make thee a
plaster of the blood of his heart? And is this thy requital? Did he come down
from heaven to earth, to seek thee when thou wast lost, and take upon him all
thy dept, and put himself into the prison of the world and flesh? has he paid
for thy folly, and born that wrath of God which thou must have suffered for
ever? and does he not now deserve to be entertained with most affectionate
respect? but with a few cold thoughts instead of hearty love, and with a few
formal words instead of worship? What hurt had it been to him if thou had
perished? what would he have lost by it if thou had lain in Hell? would not
Justice have been glorified upon a disobedient wretch? Might not he have said
to his Father, What are these worms and sinners to me? must I smart for their
folly? must I suffer when they have sineed? must I debase my self to become
man, because they would have exalted themseves to become as God? if they will
needs undo themselves, what is it to me? if they will cast themselves into the
flames of Hell, must I go thither to fetch them out? -- Thus Christ might have
put off the suffering and the shame, and let it fall and lie where it was due:
but he did not; His compassion would not suffer him to see us suffer; Justice
must be satisfied, the threat must be fulfilled; Christ sees that we cannot
overcome it, but he can, therefore he comes down into flesh, he lives on
earth, he fasteth, he weepeth, he is weary, he is tempted, he has not a place
to put his head, he is ha^ed, he is spit upon, he is clothed as a fool, and
made a scorn, he sweateth blood, he is Crucified with Thieves, he bares the
burden that would have sunk all us to Hell; and must he after all this, be
neglected and forgotten? and his Laws that should rule us, be laid aside and be
accounted too strict and precise for us to live by? O let the Heavens blush;
and the Earth be ashamed at this barbarous ingratitude! How can such a people
show their faces at his coming, or look him in the face when he shall judge
them for this! would you use a friend thus? No, nor an enemy. Me thinks you
should rather wonder with your selves, that ever Christ should give you leave
to love him, and say Will the Lord endure such a wretch to kiss him? will he
suffer himself to be embraced by those arms which have been defiled so often by
the embracements of sin? will he so highly honor me, as to be his subject and
his servant, and to be guided by such a blessed and perfect Law? and does he
require no harder conditions then these for my salvation? Take then my heart,
Lord it is only thine; and oh that it were better worth thy having, or take it
and make it better: the Spear has opened me a passage to thy heart* let the
Spirit open thee a passage into mine: deservedly may those Gates be fuel for
Hell, that would not open to let in the King of Glory.

3. To deny thine affection and subjection to the Son, is the greatest folly
and madness in the world. Why does he require this so earnestly at thy hands?
is it for thy hurt, or for thy good? would he make a prey of thee for his own
advantage? is it for any need hat he has of thee, or of thy service, or
because thou have need of him for thy direction or salvation? would he steal
away thy heart as the world does to delude it? would he draw thee as Satan does
to serve him, that he may torment thee? if so, it were no wonder that thou art
so hardly drawn to him: but thou know sure that Christ has none of these
ends.

The truth is this: His dying on the Cross, is but part of the work that is
necessary to thy Salvation; this was but the paying of the debt; he must give
thee moreover a peculiar interest, and make that to be absolutely thine, which
was thine but conditionally; he must take off thy rags, and wash thy sores, and
qualify thy soul for the prepared Glory, and bring thee out of the prison of
sin and death, and present thee to his Father blameless and undefiled, and
estate thee in greater dignity then thou fellest from: and all this must he do
drawing thee to himself, and laying himself upon thee as the Prophet upon the
Child, and closing thy heart with his heart, and thy will with his will, and
thy thoughts and ways with the Rule of his Word; And is this against thee or
for thee? is there any hurt to thee in all this? I dare challenge Earth and
Hell, and all the Enemies of Christ in both, to show the least hurt that ever
he caused to the soul of a believer, or the least wrong to the soul of any.

And must he then have such a stir to do thee good? must he so beseech thee to
be happy, and follow thee with entreaties? and yet art thou like a stock that
neither heare's nor fee^'s? Nay do thou not murmur and strive against him* as
if he were about to do thee mischief* and would rather cut thy throat then cure
thee, and were going to destroy thee, and not to save thee? I appeal to any
that has not renounced his Reason, whether this be not notorious brutish
unreasonableness; and whether thou be not liker a beast, that must be cast or
held while you dress his sores, then to a man that should help on his own
recovery? Foolish Sinner! It is thy sin that hurts thee, and not thy Savior:
why do thou not rather strive against that? It is the Devil that would
destroy thee, and yet thou do not grudge at they obedience to him. Be judge
thy self, whether this be wise or equal dealing.

Sinner, I beseech thee in the behalf of thy poor soul, if thou have such a
mind to renounce thy Savior, do it not till thou have found a better Master;
say as Peter, Wither shall we go? Lord thou have the words of eternal life: And
when thou know once where to be better, then go thy way, part with Christ
and spare not: If thy merry company, or thy honor, or thy wealth, or all thy
friends and delights in the world will do that for thee which Christ has done,
and which at last he will do if thou stick to him; then take them for thy Gods,
and let Christ go. In the mean time let me prevail with thee, as thou are a
man of reason, sell not thy Savior till thou know for what, sell not thy soul
till thou know why, sell not thy hopes of Heaven for nothing. God forbid that
thy wilful folly should bring thee to Hell, and there thou should lie
roaring and crying out for ever, This is the reward of my neglecting Christ, he
would have led me to Glory, and I would not follow him, I sold heaven for a few
merry hours, for a little honor, and ease, and delight to my flesh: here I lie
in torment, because I would not be ruled by Christ, but chose my lusts and
pleasure be fore him. -- Sinner, do not think I speak harshly or uncharitably
to call this neglect of Christ thy folly: As true as thou live and hear me
this day, except thy timely submission do prevent it (which God grant it may)
thou will one of these days befool thy self a thousand times more then I now
befool thee, and call thy self mad, and a thousand times mad, when thou
think how fair thou wast for heaven, and how ready Christ was to have been
thy Savior and thy Lord, and how light thou made of all his offers: Either
this will prove true to thy cost, or else am I a falls Prophet, and a cursed
deceiver. Be wise therefore, be learned, and kiss the Son.

The former Considerations were drawn from Aggravations of the sin; the
following are drawn from the Aggravations of the punishment, and that fom the
words of the Text too.

1. God will be angry if you kiss not the Son. His wrath is as fire, and this
neglect of Christ is the way to kindle it. If thou art not a Believer, thou art
condemned already: but this will bring upon thee a double condemnation. Believe
it for a truth. All thy sins as they are the Covenant of Works even the most
heinous of them, are not so provoking and destroying as thy slighting of
Christ. Oh what will the Father say to such an unworthy wrecth! Must I send my
Son from my bosom to suffer for thee? must he groan when thou should groan?
and bleed when thou should bleed and dye when thou should dye? And can
thou not now be persuaded to embrace him and obey him must the world be courted
while he stands by? must he have the naked title of thy Lord and Savior, while
thy fleshly pleasures and profits have thy heart? what wrath can be too great,
what hell too hot, for such an ungrateful, unworthy wretch! Must I prepare thee
a portion of the blood of my Son, and wilt not thou be persuaded now to drink
it? must I be at so much cost to save thee, and will thou not obey that thou
may be saved? Go seize upon him justice, let my wrath consume thee, let hell
devour thee, let thy own Conscience for ever torment thee; seeing thou have
chosen death, thou shall have it; and as thou have rejected Heaven, thou shall
never see it, but my wrath shall abide upon thee for ever, Joh. 3. 36. -- Woe
to the sinner if this be once thy sentence! thou were better have all the world
angry with thee^ and bound in an oath against thee, as the Jews against Paul,
then that one drop of his anger should light upon thee: thou were better have
Heaven and Earth to fall upon thee, then one degree of Gods displeasure.

2. As this wrath is Fire, so is it a consuming fire, and causes the sinner
utterly to perish. All this is plain in the Text: not that the Being of the
soul will cease: such a perishing the sinner would be glad o^: A happy man
would he think himself, if he might dye as the bruits and be no more; but such
wishes are vain. It is but a glimpse of his own condition, which he shall see
in the great combustion of the world; when he sees the heaven and earth on
fire, he see's but the picture of his approaching woe. But alas, it is he that
must feel the devouring fire. The world will be but refined or consumed by its
fire; but there must he burn, and burn for ever, and yet be neither consumed
nor refined. The Earth will not feel the flames that burn it, but his soul and
body must feel it with a witness; Little know his friends that are honorably
interring his Corpse, what his miserable sonl is seeing and feeling; Here ends
the story of his prosperity and delights, and now begins the Tragedy that will
never have end; Oh how his merry days are vanished as a dream! and his jovial
life as a Tale that is told! His witty jests his pleasant sports, his Cards and
Dice, his merry company and wanton dalliance, his Cups and Queans, yea his
hopes of heaven and confident concerts of escaping this wrath, are all perished
with him in the way; As the wax melts before the fire, as the chaff is
scattered before the wind, as the stubble consumes before the flames, as the
flowers do wither before the scorching Sun; so are all his sinful pleasures
withered, consumed, scattered and melted. And is not the hearty embracing of
Christ and subjection to him, a cheap prevention of all this? Oh who among you
can dwell with the devouring fire? Who can dwell with the everlasting burnings?
Isai. 33. 14. This God has said he will surely do; if you are able to gain-s^y
and resist him, try your strength; read his ehal enge, Isai. 27. 4. Who would
set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would
burn them together.

3. This perishing will be sudden and unexpected, in the way of their sin and
resistance of Christ, in the way of their fleshly delights and hopes; They
shall perish in the way, l These. 5. 3. Mat. 24. 37: As fire does utterly break
out in the night when men are sleeping, and consumes the fruit of their long
labors: so will this fire break forth upon their souls; and how near may it be
when you little think on it? A hundred to one but some of us present. shall
within a few months be in another world; and what world will it be, you may
easily conceive if you do not embrace and obey the Son. How many have been
smitten with Herod in the midst of their vain glory? How many like Ahab have
been wounded in fight, and dunged the Earth with their flesh and blood, who
left the Lords people to be fed with bread and water of affliction in
confidence of their own return in peace? How many, have been swallowed up like
Pharaoh and his Host in their rash and malicious persuit of the godly? Little
thinks many an ignorant careless soul, what a change of his condition he shall
shortly find; Those thousands of souls that are now in misery, did as little
think of that doleful state while they were merrily pleasing the flesh on earth,
and forgetting Christ and their eternal state, as you do now; they could as
contemptuously jeer the Preacher as you, and verily believe that all this talk
was but words and wind, and empty threats and ventured their souls as boldy
upon their carnal hopes: Little thought Sodom of the devouring fire, when they
were fnriously assaulting the door of their righteous reprover: As little do
the raging enemies of godliness among us, think of the deplorable state which
they are hasting to! They will cry out themselves then. Little did I think to
see this day, or feel these torments! -- Why, thou would not th^nk of it, or
else thou might: God told thee in Scripture, and Ministers in their
preaching, but thou would not believe till it was too late.

A little of Gods wrath will bring down all this upon those that embrace not
and obey not the Son. If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, etc. As his
mercy being the mercy of an infinite God, a little of it will sweeten a world
of crosses; so therefore will a little of his wrath consume a world of
pleasures; one spark fell among the Bethshemites, and consumed fifty thousand
and seventy men, but for looking into the Ark, till the people cry out, Who can
stand before this Holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 19, 20. How then will the neglecters
of Christ stand before him? Sirs, me thinks we should not hear of this as
strangers or unbelievers! There did but one spark fall upon England, and what a
combustion has it cast this Kingdom into? how many Houses and Towns has it
consumed? How many thousand of people has it impoverished? how many children
has it left fatherless? and how many thousand bodies has it bereaved of their
souls? And though there are as many hearty prayers, and tears poured forth to
quench it, as most Kingdoms on earth have had; yet is the fire kindled afresh,
and threatens a more terrible desolation then before, as if it would turn us
all to ashes. One spark fell upon Germany, another upon Ireland, and what it
has done there, I need not tell you. If a little of this wrath do but seize
upon thy body what cries and groans and lamentations does it raise? If it be on
one member, yea but a tooth, how do thou roar with intolerable pain, and
would not take the world to live for ever in that condition? If it seize upon
the Conscience, what torments does it cause, as if the man were already in the
suburbs of Hell? He thinks every thing he sees is against him; he fears
every bit he eats should be his bane: If he sleep, he dreams of death and
judgment; when he awaketh, his Conscience and horror awake with him: he is
weary of living, and fearful of dying; even the thoughts of heaven are terrible
to him, because he thinks it is not for him. Oh what a pitiful sight is it to
see a man under the wrath of God! And are these little little sparks so
intolerable hot? What then do you think are the Everlasting flames? Beloved
Hearers, if God had not spoke this I durst not have spoke it; The desire of my
soul is that you may never feel it or else I should never have chosen so
unpleasing a subject, but that I hope the foreknowing may help you to prevent
it; But let me tell you from God, that as sure as the heaven is over your head,
and the earth under your feet, except the Son of God be nearer thy heart, and
dearer to thy heart then friends, or goods, or pleasures, or life, or any thing
in this world, this burning wrath will never be prevented. Mat. 10. 37. Luke
14. 26.

5. When this wrath of God is thoroughly kindled, the world will discern the
blessed from the wretched; Then blessed are they that trust in him. It is the
property of the wicked, to be wise too late: Those that now they esteem but
precise fools, will then be acknowledged blessed men: Bear with their scorns
Christians in the mean time; they will very shortly wish themselves in your
stead, and would give all that ever they were masters of, that they had sought
and loved Christ as earnestly as you, and had a little of your oil when they
find their lamps are out, Mat. 25. 8.

And now Hearers, what is your resolution? perhaps you have been enemies to
Christ under the name of Christians: Will you be so still? Have you not loathed
this busy diligent serving of him? and hated them that most carefully seek
him, more then the vilest drunkard or blaspemer? Have not his word and service
and sabbaths been a burden to you? Have not multitudes ventured their lives
against his Ordinances and Government? Nay is it not almost the common voice of
the Nation in effect, Give us our sports and liberty of sinning, give us our
Readers, and singing-men, and drunken Preachers, give us our Holy Days and
Ceremonies, and the Customs of our forefathers; Away with these precise
fellows, they are an eyesore to us; these precise Preachers shall no^ control
us, this precise Scripture shall be no Law to us, and consequently this Christ
shall not Rule over us.

How long has England rebelled against his Government! Mr. Vdal told them in
the days of Queen Elizabeth, that if they would not set up the Discipline of
Christ, in the Church, Christ would set it up himself in a way that would make
their hearts to ache. I think their hearts have aked by this time: and as they
judged him to the Gallows for his Prediction, so has Christ executed them by
thousands for their Rebellion against him; and yet they are as unwilling of his
Government as ever. The Kings of the Earth are afraid lest Christ's Government
should un-king them. The Rulers are jealous lest it will depose them from their
Dignities; even the Reformers that have adventured all to set it up, are
jealous lest it will incroach upon their power and privileges. Kings are
afraid of it, and think themselves but half kings, where Christ does set up his
Word and Discipline. Parliaments are afraid of it, lest it should usurp their
Authority. Lawyers are afraid of it, lest it should take away their gains, and
the Laws of Christ should overtop the Laws of the Land. The people are afraid
of it, lest it will compel them to subjection to that Law and way which their
souls abhor: Indeed if men may be their own judges, then Christ has no enemies
in England at all; we are his friends, and all good Christians: It is
Precisians and Rebels that men hate, and not Christ; It is not the Government
of Christ that we are afraid of but the domineering of aspiring ambitious
Presbyters. (viz. That Generation of godly learned, humble Ministers, who have
done more then any before them, to make themselves incapable of preferment or
domineering) and when men disobey and disregard our doctrine, it is not Christ,
but the Preacher that they despise and disobey. And if the Jews might so have
been their own Judges, it was not the Son of God whom they crucified, but an
enemy to Caesar, and a blasphemer that works by the Devil. It was not Panl a
Saint that they persecuted, but one that they found to be a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition amongst the people. But were there no seditious persons
but Apostles and Christians? nor no troublers of Israel, but Elias? nor no
enemies to Caesar, but Christ and his friends? Oh. God will shortly take off
the vail of hypocrisy from the actions of the world, and make them confess that
it was Christ they resisted, and that it was his holy ways and word that did
kindle their fury; else would they as soon have fallen upon the ungodly rabble,
as they did upon the most zealous and conscionable Christains: And however you
mangle and deform them with your false accusations and reproach, he will then
know and own his people and his Cause, and will say to the world, In despising
them you despised me; and in as much as you did it to one of these little ones,
you did it unto me. As Dr. Stoughton says, If you strike a Schismatic, and
God find a Saint lie a bleeding, and you to answer it, I would not be in yor
coat for more then you got by it. Has the world ever gained by resisting
Christ? Does it make the Crown sit faster on the heads of Kings? or must they
not rather do to Christ, as King John to his supposed Vicar, resign their
Crowns to him, and take them from him again as his Tributaries, before they can
hold them by a certain tenure? read over but this Psalm and judge. Herod must
kill the child Jesus to secure his Crown: The Jews must kill him least the
Romans should come and take away their place and Nation, Joh. 11. 48, And did
this means secure them? or did it bring upon them the destruction which they
thought to avoid?

Or have the people been greater gainers by this, then their Kings? What has
England got by resisting his Gospel and Government, by hating his servants, and
by scorning his holy ways? What have you got by it in this City? what say you?
have you yet done with your enmity and resistance? have you enough, or would
you yet have more? If you have not done with Christ, he has not done with you;
you may try again, and follow on as far as Pharaoh if you will, but if you be
not losers in the latter end, I have lost my judgment; and if you return in
peace, God has not spoken by me, (1 King. 22. 28)

Sirs, I am loath to leave you till the bargain be made: What say you? Do you
heartily consent that Christ shall be your sovereign; his Word, your Law; his
people, your Companions; his worship, your recreation; his merits, your refuge;
his glory, your end; and himself the desire and delight of your souls? The Lord
Jesus now waits upou you for your resolution and answer; thou will very
shortly wait on him for thy Doom: as ever thou would then have him speak
life to thy soul, do thou now resolve upon the way of life, Remember thou art
almost at death and judgment: what would thou resolve if thou knew that
it were to morrow? if thou did but see what others do now suffer for
neglecting him that does now offer thee his grace; what would thou then
resolve to do? Sirs, it stirs my heart to look upou you (as Xerxes upon his
Army) and to think that it is not an hundred years till every soul of you
shall be in Heaven or in Hell* and it may be not an 100 hours til some of your
souls must take their leave of your bodies; when it comes to that, then you
will cry, Away with the world, away with my pleasures; nothing can comfort me
now but Christ; why then will you not be of the same mind now? When the world
cries away with this holiness, and praying, and talking of heaven! give us our
sports, and our profits and the customs of our forefathers, i. e. away with
Christ, and give us Barabbas: then do you cry, away with all these, and give
us Christ.

Oh, if it might stand with the will of God, that I might choose what effect
this Sermon should have upon your hearts; verily it should be nothing that
should hurt you in the least but this it should be, It should now fasten upon
your souls, and pierce into your Consciences, as an Arrow that is drawn out of
the quiver of God; it should follow thee home to thy house, and bring thee down
on thy knees in secret, and make thee there lament thy case, and cry out in
bitterness of thy spirit, Lord, I am the sinner that have neglected thee, I
have tasted more sweetness in the world then in thy blood, and taken more
pleasure in my earthly labors and delights, then I have done in praying to
thee, or meditating on thee; I have complemented with thee by a cold
profession; but my heart was never set upon thee: -- And here should it make
thee lie in tears and prayers; and follow Christ with cries and complaints,
till he should take thee up from the dust, and assure thee of his pardon, and
change thy heart, and close it with his own. If thou were the dearest friend
that I have in the world, this is the success that I would wish this Sermon
with thy soul; That it might be as a voice still sounding in thine ears* that
when thou art next in thy sinful company or delight, thon might as it were,
hear this voice in thy Conscience, Is this thine obedience to him that bought
thee; That when thou art next forgetting Christ, and neglecting his worship in
secret, or in thy family, or public, thou might see this sentence, as it
were written upon thy wall, Kiss the Son least he be angry, and thou perish:
that thou might see it, as it were written upon the ^ester of thy Bed, as
often as thou lie down in an unregenerate state; and that it may keep thine
eyes waking, and thy soul disquieted, and give thee no rest, till thou had
rest in Christ. In a word, If it were but as much in my hands as it is in
yours, what should become of this Sermon, I hope it would be the best Sermon to
thee that ever thou heardest; it should lay thee at the feet of Christ, and
leave thee in his arms; Oh that I did but know what Arguments would persuade
you and what words would work thy heart hereto. If I were sure it would
prevail, I would come down from the Pulpit, and go from man to man upon my
knees with this request and advice in my Text; O kiss the Son lest he be angry
and you perish.

But if thy heardned heart make light of all, and thou go on still in thy
careless neglect of Christ, and yet wilt not believe but thou art his friend
and servant, I do here from the Word, and in the name of Christ, pass this
sentence upon thy soul: Thou shall go hence, and perhaps linger out in thy
security a few days more, and then be called by death to judgment, where thou
shall be doomed to this everlasting fiery wrath. Make as light of it as thou will, feel it thou shall, put it off and escape it if thou can: and when thon
have done, go boast that thou have conquered Christ: In the mean time, I
require this Congregation to bear witness, that thou had warning.

This to all in general: My Text yet directs me to speak more particularly to
the Rulers and Judges of the Earth.

Honorable and Reverend Judges, worshipful Magistrates, if you were all Kings
and Emperors, all is one to Christ; you were but high and mighty dust and
ashes: Christ sends his Summons first to you; he knows the Leaders Interest
in the Vulgar; you are the Commanders in the Host of God and must do him more
service then the common Soldiers: If one of you should neglect him, and stand
out against him, he will begin with you in the sight of the rest, and make your
greatness a stepping stone to the honor of his justice, that the lowest may
understand what they have to do, when they see the greatest cannot save
themselves.

Shall I say you are wiser then the People, and therefore that this Admonition
is needless to you? No, then I should accuse the Spirit in my Text: The Cedars
of the Earth have always hardly stoopt to Christ, which has made so many of
them rooted up. Your Honors are an impediment to that self-abasing which he
expects; your Dignities will more tend to blind you, then to illuminate;
There Is few of any sort, but fewest of the great and wise, and mighty that are
called: Yet a man would think, that among those that have held out in these
trying times there should be no need of these suspicions: But has there not
been always a succession of Sinners, even of those that have beheld the ruins
of their Predecessors? Who would have thought, that a generation that had seen
the Wonders in Egypt, and had pa^^ed through the Sea* and been maintained in a
Wilderness with constant Miracles, should yet be such vile Idolaters, or
murmuring unbelievers, that only two of them should enter into Rest? The best
of Saints have need of self-suspition and vigilance; My advice therefore to You
is this, Learn wisdom by the Examples that your eyes have seen; Them that honor
God, he will honor; and they that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

More particularly, let me advise you, as your Duty to the Son, 1. That you
take your commission and office as from him. I think it a doctrine more common
then true, that Ministers only are under Christ the Mediator, and Magistrates
are only under God as Creator. Christ is now Lord of All, and you are his
Servants: As there is no power but from God, so none from God but by Christ.
Look upon your selves as his Vicegerents; therefore do not that which beseems
not a Vicegerent of Christ. Remember, that as you see to the execution of the
Laws of the Land, so will Christ see that his Laws be obeyed by you, or
executed on you. Remember when you sit, and judge offenders, that you represent
him that will judge you and all the world: And oh how lively a resemblance have
you to raise your apprehension! Think with your selves: Thus shall men tremble
before his Bar; thus shall they wait to hear their doom; and be sure that your
judgment be such, as may most lively represent the judgment of Christ, that
the just may depart from your Bar with joy, and the unjust with sadness, Let
your justice be most severe, where Christ is most severe; and so far as you can
exercise your clemency, let it be about those offenses which our laws are more
rigorous against, then the laws of God. Be sure yet that you understand the
extent of your commission; that you are not the sole officers of Jesus Christ;
you are under him as he, is head over All; Ministers are under him as he is
head to his Church, Ephesians. 1, 22. Ministers are as truly the Magistrates
Teachers, as Magistrates are their Governors; yea, by as high and undoubted
authority must they over-see, govern, and command (ministerially as their Lords
Ambassadors) both Kings and Parliaments, to do whatsoever is written in this
Bible, as you may command them to obey the laws of the Land; yea and as strict
a bond lies on you to obey them so far as they speak according to this word,
and keep within the bounds of their Calling, as does on them to obey you in
yours, Heb. 13. 7, 17. Deal not with them so dissemblingly, as to call them
your Pastors, Teachers, Overseers and Rulers (as Scripture bids you) and yet
to learn of them but what you list or to deny them leave to teach or advise you
further then they receive particular warrant and direction from your selves:
Should our Assembly limit all their Ministerial advice to the warrant and
directions of Parliament, and not extend it to the warrant and directions of
Christ; would they not become the servants and pleasers of men? If you do not
your best to set up all the Government of Christ, even that in and proper to
his Church, as well as that which is over them and for them; men may well
think, it is your own seats and not Christ's that you would advance. I would all
the Magistrates in England did well consider, that Christ has been teaching
them this seven years, that their own peace or honors shall not be set up
before his Gospel and Government; and that they do but tire themselves in vain
in such attempts; then they would learn to read my Text with the Vulgar,
Apprehendite disciplinam: And if the Decisive power of the Ministry be
doubtful, yet least they would set up their Nunciative in its vigor, Christ
will rule England, either as subjects, or as Rebels: and all that Kings and
States do gain by opposing his Rule, will not add one cubit to the stature of
their greatness. Yet I do not understand by [the Government of Christ] a rigid
conformity to the model of this or that party or faction, with a violent
extirpation of every dissenter. It is the ignorant part of Divines (alas! such
there are) who with the simple fellow in Erasmus, do expound Paul's Haereticum
hominem devita i e. devita toll. It is the Essentials, and not the Accidentals
of Discipline that I speak of: And if so me disengaged standers by be not
mistaken (who have the advantage by standing out of the dust of contention)
each party has some of these essentials, and the worst is nearer the truth
then his adversary is aware of: And were not the crowd and noise so great, that
there is no hope of being heard, one would think it should be possible to
reconcile them all: However, shall the work be undone, while each party
striveth to have the doing of it? I was afraid when I read the beginning and end
of this controversy in France. The learned Ramus pleads for Popular
Church Government in the Synod; they rejected it as an unwarrantable novelty;
the contention grew sharp* till the Parisian Massacre silenced the difference.
And must our differences have so sharp a cure? will nothing unite disjoined
Christians, but their own blood? God forbid. But in the mean time while we
quarrel the work stands still: some would have all the workers of iniquity
now taken out of the Kindome of Christ, fotgetting that the Angels must take
them out at last, Mat. 13. Some Ministers think as Myconius did when he was
called to the Ministry by a Vision, leading him into a cornfield and bidding
him reap, he thought he must put in his sickle at the bottom, till he was told,
Domino meo non opus est stramine, modo aristae in horrea colligantur: My Master
needs not straw, gather but the ears and it shall suffice.

Once more: I know I speak not to the Parliament that should remedy it; but yet
that you may be helpful in your places to advance this work of Christ, let me
tell you what is the great thing in England that cries for Reformation next our
sins, even the fewness of Overseers in great Congregations, which makes the
greatest part of Pastoral work to lie undone, and none to watch over the people
in private, because they are scarce sufficient for the public work. It is
pity that Musculus, that may be head of a Society of Students if he will
continue a Papist, must weave and dig for his living, if he will be a
Protestant. It is pity that even Luthers wife and children must wander
destitute of maintenance when he is dead: When Aesop the Stage Player can leave
his Son 150000. l. and Roscius have 30. l. a day for the same Trade; and
Aristotle be allowed 800. Talents to further his search into the secrets of
nature: But am I pleading that Ministers may have more maintenance? No, be it
just or unjust, it is none of my errand. But oh that the Church had more
Ministers, which though at the present they cannot have for want of men, yet
hereafter they might have if it were not for want of maintenance: Alas then,
what pity is it that every Reformation should diminish the Churches Patrimony:
If the men have offended, or if the office of Bishops or Deans be
unwarrantable: yet what have the Revenues done? Is it not pity that one Troop
of an hundred men, shall have seven commanding officers allowed them, besides
others; and 10000 or 40000 shall have but one or two Overseers allowed them for
their souls? when the ministerial work is more laborious and of greater
concernment, then the work of those Commanders. I tell you again, The great
thing that cries for Reformation in England next to sin, is the paucity of
Ministers in great Congregations. I tell you this, that you may know which way
to improve your several interests for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ
in England.

To you Lawyers and Jurers, my advice is this, Kiss the Son. Remember the
judgment is Christ's; every cause of Truth and Innocence does he own, and will
call it his Cause. Woe therefore to him that shall oppose it! Remember every
time yon take a Fee to plead against a Cause that you know to be just you take
a Fee against a Cause of Christ, Will you be of counsel against him that is
your Counselor and King? dare you plead against him, that you expect should
plead for you? or desire judgment (as the Jews) against your Lord and Judge?
Has he not told you, that he will say, In as much as ye did it to one of these
little ones, ye did it unto me? Remember therefore when a Fee is offered you
against the Innocent, that it is a Fee against Christ; and Judas gain will be
loss in the end, and will be too hot to hold long; you will be glad to bring it
back, and glad if you could be well shut of it, and cry, I have sinned in
betraying the Cause of the Innocent. Say not, It is our Calling that we must
live upon; If any man of you dare upon such grounds plead a Cause against his
Conscience, if his Conscience do not plead it again more sharply against him,
say I am a false Prophet. If any therefore shall say of you, as the Cardinals
of Luther, Cur homini os non obstruitis auro and argento, let the same answer
serve turn, Hem pecuniam non curat, etc. If any Honorable or Worshipful friend
must be pleasured, enquire first whether he be a better friend then Christ;
Tell him, the cause is Christ's, and you cannot befriend him except he can
procure you a dispensat on from him. When Pompy saw his soldiers ready to fly,
he lay down in the passage, and told them, they should tread upon him then;
which stopped their flight; so suppose every time you are drawn in to oppose a
just Cause, that you saw Christ saying, Thou must trample upon me if thou do
this As Luther to Melancton Ne Causa fidei sit sine fide: so say I to you all,
Ne Causa justitiae sit sine justitia. When you begin to be cold in a good
Cause, suppose you saw Christ showing you his scars; as the Soldier did to
Caesar, when he desired him to plead his Cause; see here, I have done more then
plead for you. We have had those that have had a tongue for a fee or a friend,
but none for Christ; but God has now therefore shut their mouths; and we may
say of them (as Granius by his bad Lawyer, when he heard him grown hoarse) If
they had not lost their voices, we had lost our Cause. To conclude, Remember
all of you, that there is an appeal from these earthly judgments; these Causes
must all be heard again, your witnesses reexamined, your oaths, pleadings, and
sentence reviewed; and then (as Lampridius says of Alexander Severus, That he
would vomit choler if he saw a corrupt Judge) So will Christ vomit wrath, and
vomit you out in wrath from his presence, if corrupt; Therefore kiss the Son
lest he be angry and you perish, etc. I am sensible how I have encroached on
your great affairs; Melancthon was wont to tell of a Priest that begun his
Sermon thus, Scio quod vos non libenter auditis, and ego non libenter
concionor, non diu igitur vos teneam. But I may say contrary: I am persuaded
that you hear with a good will: and I am certain that I preach willingly, and
therefore I was bold to hold you the longer.

FINIS.
A SERMON Of Judgment, Preached at Paul's before the Honorable Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of the City of London, December. 17. 1654. And now enlarged

By RICH. BAXTER.

Romans 14. 12. Every one of you shall give account of himself to God.

John 5. 28, 29. The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good to the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of
Damnation.

LONDON Printed by R. W. for Nevill Simmons Bookseller in Kidderminster, 1656.

TO The Right Honorable Christopher Pack, Lord Mayor of London, with the Right
worshipful Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
BEing desired to Preach before you at Paul's, I was fain to preach a Sermon
which I had preached once before to a poor ignorant Congregation in the
Country, having little leisure for study in London. I was glad to see that the
more curious stomachs of the Citizens did not nauseate our plain Country
Doctrine, which I seemed to discern in the diligent attention of the greatest
Congregation that ever I saw met for such a work: But I little expected that
you should have so far esteemed that discourse, as to have thought it meet for
the view of the world, as I understood by a Message from you, desiring it may
be Printed. I readily obey your w^ll, when it gives me the least intimation of
the will of God. Its possible some others may afford it the like favorable
Acceptance and entertainment. I am sure the subject is as necessary as common;
and the Plainness makes it the fitter for the ignorant, who are the far
greatest number, and have the greatest need. I have added the 9, 10, 11, and
12. Heads or Common places, which I did not deliver to you for want of time;
and because the rest are too briefly touched (as contrived for an hours work) I
have enlarged these; though making them somewhat unsuitable to the rest, yet
suitable to the use of those that they are now intended for: The Directions
also in the end are added.

Blessed be the Father of Lights, who has set up so many burning and shining
lights in your City, and has watered you so plenteously with the Rivers of his
Sanctuary, that you have frequent opportunities for the refreshment of your
souls, to the joy of your friends, the grief of your enemies, and the glory of
that Providence which has hitherto maintained them, in despite of Persecution,
Heresies and Hell! It was not always so in London: It is not so in all other
places, or famous Cities in the world: Nor are you sure that it will be always
so with you. It does me good to remember what blessed Lights have shined among
you, that new are more gloriously shining in a higher sphere: Preston, Sibbes,
Stoughton, Tailor, Stock, Randal, Gouge, Gataker, with multitudes more that are
now with Christ! It did me good to read in the Preface to Mr. Gatakers funeral
Sermon, by one of your reverend and faithful Guides, what a number of sound and
unanimous Laborers are yet close at work in that part of Christ's Vineyard! And
it did me good in that short experience and observation while I was there, to
hear and see so much of their Prudence, Unity and Fidelity.

Believe it, it is the Gospel of Christ that is your Glory: and if London be
more honorable then other great and famous Cities of the earth, it is the light
of Gods face, and the plenty and power of his Ordinances and Spirit that does
advance and honor it. 0 know then the day of your visitation!

Three things I shall take leave to propound to your Consideration, which I am
certain God requires at your hands. The first is, that you grow in knowledge,
humility, heavenliness and Unity, according to the blessed means that you
enjoy. In my eyes it is the greatest shame to a people in the world, and a sign
of Barbarousness or blockishness, when we can hear and read what a famous,
learned powerful Minister such a place, or such a place had, and yet see as
much ignorance, ungodliness, unruliness and sensuality as if the Gospel had
scarce ever been there. I hope it is not thus with you; but I have found it so
in too many places of England. We that never saw the faces of their Ministers,
but have only read their holy Labors, have been ready to think, Sure there are
few ignorant or ungodly ones in such a Congregation! Sure they are a people
rich in Grace, and eminently qualified above their brethren, who have lived
under such Teaching as this! At least, sure there can be none left that have an
enmity to the fear of God! But when we have come to the Towns where such men
spent their lives, and laid out their labors, we have found ignorant sottish
worldlings, unprofitable or giddy unstable Professors, and some haters of
godliness among them. O what a shame is this to them to the eyes of wise men!
and what a confounding aggravation of their sin before God! Thrive therefore
and be fruitful in the Vineyard of the Lord, that it may not repent him that he
has planted and watered you.

The second is this; Improve your interest to the utmost, for the continuance
of a faithful Ministry among you: and when any places are void, do what you can
to get a supply of the most Able men. Your City is the Heart of the Nation: you
cannot be sick but we shall all feel it. If you be infected with false
Doctrines, the Countries will ere long receive the Contagion. You have a very
great influence on all the Land, for good or evil! And do you think the
undermining enemies of the Church have not a special Design upon you in this
point? and will not promote it as far as is in their power? Could they but get
in Popish or Dividing Teachers among you, they know how many advantages they
should gain at once! They would have some to grieve and trouble your faithful
Guides, and hinder them in the work, and lessen that estimation which by their
Unity they would obtain: And every Deceiver will hope to catch some fish, that
casts his Net among such store. We beseech you, if there be Learned, Holy,
Judicious men in England that can be had for supply on such occasions, let them
be yours; that you may be fed with the Best, and Guided by the Wisest, and we
may have all recourse to you for advice; and where there are most Opposers and
Seducers, there may be the most Powerful, Convincing helps, at hand; Let us in
the Country have the honest raw young Preachers, and see that you have the
chief Fathers and Pillars in the Church. I speak it not for your sakes alone,
but because we have all Dependence on you.

The third thing which I humbly crave, is, that you will Know them which Labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their work sake; and be at peace among your selves. 1
These. 5. 12, 13. And that you will instead of grieving or rejecting your
Guides, Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13. 17. 7.
Encourage your Teachers, for their work is great, their spirits are weak, they
are but frail men; the enemy is more industrious against them then any men; and
their discouragements are very many, and the difficulties which they must
encounter are very great. Especially, Obey, submit and encourage them in the
work of Government and Exercise of Christ's Discipline, and managing the Keys
of the Kingdom which he has put into their hand. Do you not perceive what a
strait your Teachers are in! The Lord Jesus requires them to exercise his
Discipline faithfully and impartially: He gives them not empty Titles of Rule,
but lays upon them the burden of Ruling: It is his work, more then their
honor that he intends: and if they will have the Honor, it must be by the
work. The work is, as to Teach the ignorant, and convince the unbelieving and
gainsaying, so to admonish the disorderly and scandalous, and to reject and
cast out of the Communion of the Church the Obstinate and Impenitent; and to
set by the Leprous, that they infect not the rest; and to separate thus the
precious from the vile by Christ's D^scipline, that dividing separation, and
soul destroying Transgressions may be prevented or cured. This work Christ has
charged upon them, and will have it done who ever is against it. If they obey
him and do it, what a tumult, what clamours and discontents will they raise!
How many will be ready to rise up against them with hatred and scorn! though it
be the undoubted work of Christ, which even under persecution was performed by
the Church-Guides. When they do but keep a scandalous untractable Sinner from
the Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, what repinings does it raise!
But, alas, this is a small part of the Discipline: If all the apparently
obstinate and impenitent were cast out, what a stir would they make! And if
Christ be not obeyed, what a stir will conscience make? And it is not only
between Christ and men, but between men and men, that your Guides are put upon
streights. The Separatists reproach them for suffering the Impenitent to
continue members of their Churches, and make it the pretense of their
separation from them; having little to say of any moment against the authorized
way of Government; but only against our slackness in the Execution. And if we
should set to the close Exercise of it, as is meet, how would City and Country
ring of it, and what Indignation should we raise in the multitude against us! O
what need have your Guides of your Encouragement and best Assistance in this
straight! God has set them on a work so ungrateful and displeasing to flesh
and blood, that they cannot be faithful in it, but twenty to one they will draw
a world of Hatred upon themselves, if not men's fists about their ears. Festred
sores will not be lancht and searched with ease: Corrupted members are unwilling
to be cut off, and cast aside: Especially if any of the great ones fall under
the censure, who are big in the eyes of the world and in their own. And yet our
Sovereign Lord must be obeyed; and his house must be swept, and the filth cast
out, by what names or Titles soever it be dignified with men. He must be
pleased, if all be displeased by it. Withdraw not your help then from this
needful work. It is by the Word, Spirit, and Ministry, that Christ the King
of his Church does Govern it: Not separatedly, but jointly, by all three: To
disobey these, is to disobey Christ: and subjection to Christ is Essential to
our Christianity. This well thought on might do much to recover the Unruly that
are Recoverable. You may conjecture by the strange opposition that
Church Government meets with from all sorts of carnal and corrupted minds, that
there is somewhat in it that is eminently of God. I shall say no more but this,
that It is an Able, Judicious, Godly, Faithful Ministry, not barely heard and
applauded, but humbly and piously submitted to, and obeyed in the Lord, that
must be your truest present glory, and the means of your everlasting Peace and
Joy.

So testifies from the Lord, Your servant in ^he faith of Christ, Rich. Baxter.

To the Ignorant or Careless Reader.
SEeing the Providence of God has commanded forth this plain Discourse, I
shall hope (upon experience of his dealing in the like cases with me) That he
has some work for it to do in the world. Who knows but it was intended for the
saving of thy soul, by opening thine eyes and awaking thee from thy sin who are
now in Reading of it! Be it known to thee, it is the certain Truth of God, and
of high concernment to thy soul that it treats of; and therefore requires
thy most sober Consideration. Thou have in it (how weakly soever it is managed
by me) an advantage put into thy hand from God, to help thee in the greatest
work in the world, even to prepare for the great approaching Judgment. In the
name of God, I require thee, cast not away this advantage: Turn not away thine
ears or heart from this warning that is sent to the^ from the living God!
Seeing all the world cannot keep thee from judgment, nor save thee in
Judgment: let not all the world be able to keep thee from a speedy and serious
preparation for it. Do it presently, lest God come before thou art ready! Do it
seriously, lest the Tempter overreach thee, and thou should be found among
the foolish self-deceivers, when it is too late to do it better. I entreat this
of thee on the behalf of thy soul, and as thou tenderest thy everlasting Peace
with God, that thou would afford these matters thy deepest Consideration.
Think on them, whether they are not True and weighty: Think of them lying down
and rising up. And seeing this small Book is fallen into thy hands, all that I
would beg of thee concerning it, is, that thou would bestow now and then an
hour to read it, and read it to thy family or friends as well at to thy self;
and as you go, Consider what you read, and Pray the Lord to help it to thy
heart, and to assist thee in the Practice, that it may not rise up in Judgment
against thee. If thou have not leisure at other, take now and then an hour on
the Lords days, or at night to that purpose; and if any passage through
brevity (specially near the beginning) seem dark to thee, Read it again, and
again, and ask the help of an Instructor, that thou may understand it. May
it but help thee out of the snares of sin, and promote the saving of thy
Immortal soul, and thy comfortable appearance at the great day of Christ, I
have the thing which I intended and desired. The Lord open thy Heart, and
accompany his Truth with the Blessing of his Spirit! Amen.

A SERMON Of Judgment, Preached at Paul's before the Honorable Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of the City of London, Dec. 17. 1654.
2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body; according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terrors of the
Lord we persuade men.
IT is not unlikely, that some of those wits that are taken more with things
new then with things Necessary, will marvel that I choose so common a subject,
and tell me that they all know this already. But I do it purposely upon these
following Considerations. 1. Because I well know, that it is these Common
Truths that are the great and necessary things which men's everlasting happiness
or misery does most depend upon. You may be ignorant of many Controversies and
Inferior points, without the danger of your souls but so you cannot of these
Fundamentals. 2. Because its apparent by the lives of men, that few know these
Common Truths savingly* that think they know them. 3. Because there are several
degrees of knowing the same Truths, and the best are imperfect in degree, the
principal growth in Knowledge that we should look after, is not to know more
matters then we knew before, but to know that better, and with a clearer light
and firmer apprehension; which we darkly and slightly knew before. You may more
safely be without any knowledge at all of many lower Truths, then without some
further degree of the knowledge of those which you already know. 4. Besides it
is known by sad Experience, that many perish who know the Truth, for want of
the consideration of^, and making use of what they know, and so their knowledge
does but condemn them. We have as much need therefore to teach and help you to
get these Truths which you know into your hearts and lives, as to tell you
more. 5. And indeed, it is the impression of these great and master-Truths,
wherein the vitals and essentials of Gods Image upon the soul of man does
consist: And it is these Truths that are the very Instruments of the great
works that are to be done upon the heart by the spirit and our selves. In the
right use of these it is that the Principal part of the skill and holy wisdom
of a Christian does consist; and in the diligent and constant use of these
lies the life and trade of Christianity. There is nothing amiss in men's hearts
or lives, but it is for want of sound knowing and believing, or well using
these Fundamentals. 6. And moreover, me thinks, in this choice of my subject, I
may expect this advantage with the Hearers, that I may spare that labor that
else would be necessary for the proof of my Doctrine: and that I may also have
easier. access to your hearts, and have a fuller stroke at them and with less
resistance. If I came to tell you of anything not Common, I know not how far I
might expect belief from you You might say, These things are uncertain to us or
all men are not of this mind. But when every Hearer confesses the truth of my
doctrine, and no man can deny it, without denying Christianity it self, I hope
I may expect that your hearts should the sooner receive the impression of this
Doctrine, and the sooner yield to the duties which it directs you to: and the
easier let go the sins which from so certain a Truth shall be discovered.

The words of my text, are the reason which the Apostle gives both of his
persuading other men to the fear of God, and his care to approve to God his own
heart and life. They contain the Assertion and Description of the great
Judgment, and one Use which he makes of it. It assures us, that Judged we
must be, and who must be so Judged, and by whom, and about what, and on what
terms, and to what end.

The meaning of the words, so far as is necessary, I shall give you briefly. We
all, both we Apostles that Preach the Gospel, and you that hear it, must,
willing or unwilling, there is no avoiding it, Appear, stand forth or make our
appearance, and there have our hearts and ways laid open, and appear as well
as we. Before the Judgment seat of Christ; i. e. before the Redeemer of the
world, to be Judged by him as our Rightful Lord. That every one, even of all
mankind which are were, or shall be, without exception; May receive, that is,
may receive his sentence adjudging him to his due; and then may receive the
execution of the sentence; and may go away from the bar with that Reward or
Punishment that is his due according to the Law by which he is Judged. The
things done in his body, that is the due Reward of the works done in his body;
or as some copies read it, The things proper to the body, i. e. due to the man,
even body as well as soul. According to what he has done whether it be good or
bad: i. e. This is the cause to be tried and Judged, whether men have done well
or ill, whiles they were in the flesh, and what is due to them according to
their deeds. Knowing therefore, etc. i. e. Being certain therefore that these
things are so, and that such a Terrible Judgment of Christ will come, we
persuade men to become Christians and live as such, that they may then speed
well, when others shall be destroyed; or as others, Knowing the fear of the
Lord, that is, the true Religion, we persuade men.

Doct. 1. There will be a Judgment. Doct 2. Christ will be the Judge. Doct. 3.
All men shall there appear. Doct. 4. Men shall be then Judged according to the
works that they did in the flesh, whether good or evil. Doct. 5. The end of
Judgment is, that men may receive their final due by Sentence and Execution.
Doct. 6. The knowledge and consideration of the terrible Judgment of God,
should move us to persuade, and men to be persuaded to careful preparation.

The ordinary method for the handling of this subject of Judgment should be
this. 1. To show you what Judgment is in the General, and what it does
contain: and that is, 1. The persons. 2. The cause. 3. ^he Actions. 1. The
parties are, 1. the Accuser. 2. the Defendant. 3. Sometime Assistants. 4. The
Judge. 2. The cause contains, 1. The Accusation. 2. the Defense. 3. With the
Evidence of both. 4. And the Merit. The Merit of the cause is, as it agrees
with the Law and Equity. 3. The Judicial Actions are, I. Introductory. 1.
Citation. 2. Compulsion if need be. 3. Appearance of the Accused. II. Of the
Essence of Judgment, 1. Debate by 1. the Accuser. 2. Defendant, called the
Disceptation of the cause. 2. By the Judge. 1. Exploration 2. Sentence. 3. To
see to the Execution: But because this Method is less suitable to your
capacities; and has something humane, I will reduce all to these following
heads.

1. I will show what Judgment is. 2. Who is the Judge; and why. 3. Who must be
ludged. 4. Who is the Accuser. 5. How the citation, constraint and appearance
will be 6. What is the Law by wh men shall be judged. 7. What w^ll be the cause
of the day: what the Accusation, and what must be the just Defense. 8. What
will be the Evidence. 9. What are those frivolous insufficient excuses by which
the unrighteous may think to escape. 10. What will be the sentence: who shall
dye, and who shall live; and what the Reward and Punishment is. 11. What are
the Properties of the Sentence. 12. What and by whom the ex^cution will be. In
these particular heads we contain the whole Doctrine of this Judgment, and in
this more familar method shall handle it.
I. FOR the first, Judgment as taken largely, comprehends all the
forementioned particulars; As taken more strictly for the Act of the Judge, it
is the trial of a Controverted case. In our case note these things following.

1. Gods Judgment is not intended for any Discovery to himself of what he
knows not already: he knows already what all men are; and what they have done;
and what is their due: But it is to discover to others and to men themselves
the ground of his sentence, that so his Judgment may attain its end: for the
glorifying his grace on the Righteous, and for the convincing the wicked of
their sin and desert, and to show to all the world the Righteousness of the
Judge, and of his Sentence, and Execution, Romans 3. 4, 26. and Romans 2. 2.

2. It is not a Controversy therefore undecided in the mind of God, that is
there to be decided; but only one that is undecided, as to the knowledge and
mind of creatures.

3. Yet is not this Judgment a bare Declaration, but a Decision, and so a
Declaration thereupon: the cause will be then put out of controversy, and all
further expectation of Decision be at an end; and with the justified there will
be no more Accusation, and with the condemned no more hope for ever.

II. FOR the second thing, who shall be the Judge; I answer, The Judge is God
himself by Jesus Christ.

1. Principally, God as Creator.

2. As also, God as Redeemer; the humane nature of Jesus Christ having a
derived subordinate power. God lost not his right to his creature either by
man's fall, or the Redemption by Christ, but by the latter has a new further
right: but it is in and by Christ that God Judges: For as mere Creator of
innocent mar, God judges none, but has committed all judgment to the Son,
who has procured this right by the redeeming of fallen man, John 5. 22. But as
the Son only does it in the nearest sen^e so the Father as Creator does it
remotely and principally.

1. In that the power of the Son is derived from the Father, and so stands in
subordination to him as Fountain or Efficient.

2. In that the Judgment of the Son (as also his whole Mediatorship) is to
bring men to God their maker as their ultimate end, and recover them to him
from whom they are fallen, and so as a means to that end, the Judgment of the
Son is subordinate to the Father.

From hence you may see these following Truths worthy your consideration.

1. That all men are Gods creatures, and none are the workmanship of themselves
or any other; or else the Creator should not Judge them on that right.

2. That Christ dyed for All, and is the Redeemer of the world, and a sacrifice
for All; or else he should not Judge them on that Right. For he will not Judge
wicked men as he will do the Devils; as the mere enemies of his Redeemed ones,
but as being themselves his subjects in the world, and being bought by him, and
therefore become his own, who ought to have glorified him that bought them, 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy
2. 6. 7.

3. Hence it appears that all men were under some Law of grace and did
partake of some of the Redeemers mercy. Though the Gospel came not to all, yet
all had that mercy which could come from no other Fountain but his Blood, and
which should have brought them nearer to Christ then they were, (though it were
not sufficient to bring them to believe:) and which should have led them to
Repentance. Romans 2. 4. For the neglecting of which they justly perish; and not
merely for sinning against the Law that was given man in innocence: Were that
so, Christ would not Judge them as Redeemer, and that for the abuse or
not-improvement of his Talents, as he tells us he will do, Mat. 25. per totum.

4. If God will be the Judge, then none can expect by any shifts or indirect
means to escape at that day. For how should it be?

1. It is not possible that any should keep out of sight, or hide their sin and
the evil of their actions, and so delude the Judge: God will not be mocked
now* nor deceived then, Gal. 6. 7. they grossly deceive themselves that imagine
any such thing: God must be Omniscient and All-seeing* or he cannot be God.
Should you hide your cause from men and from Devils, and be ignorant of it your
selves, yet cannot you hide it from God. Never did there a thought pass thy
heart, or a word pass thy mouth, which God was not acquainted with: and as he
knows them, so he does observe them. He is not as Imperfect man, taken up with
other business, so that he cannot mind All. As easy is it with him to observe
every Thought or Word, or Action of thine, as if he had but that one in the
world to observe: and as easy to observe each particular sinner, as if he had
not another creature to look after in the world. He is a fool indeed that
thinks now that God takes no no^tice of him, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9. or, that
thinks then to escape in the crowd: He that found out one Guest that had not
on a wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12. will then find out every unholy soul, and
give him so sad a salutation as shall make him speechless. Job 11. 11. For he
knows vain man; he sees wickedness also, and will he not consider it?

2. It is not possible that any should escape at that Day by any Tricks of wit
and false Reasoning in their own Defense. God knows a sound Answer from an
unsound, and a Truth from a Lie. Righteousness may be perverted here on earth,
by out-witting the Judge; but so will it not be then: To hope any of this is to
hope that God will not be God. It is in vain then for the unholy man to say he
is holy; or for any sinner to deny, or excuse, or extenuate his sin: To bring
forth the counterfeit of any Grace, and plead with God any shells of
hypocritical performances, and to think to prove a Title to heaven by any thing
short of Gods Condition; all these will be vain attempts.

3. And as impossible will it prove by fraud or flattery, by persuasion or
bribery, or by any other means, to pervert Justice by turning the mind of God
who is the Judge: fraud and flattery, bribery and importunity may do much with
weak men; but with God they will do nothing. Were he changeable and partial, he
were not God.

4. If God be Judge, you may see the Cavils of Infidels are foolish, when they
ask, How long will God be in Trying and Judging so many persons, and taking an
Account of so many Words, and Thoughts and Deeds? Sure it will be a long time,
and a difficult work. As if God were as man, that knows not things till he
seek out their Evidence by particular signs. Let these fools understand, if
they have any understanding, that the infinite God can show to every man at
once, all the thoughts, and words, and actions that ever he has been guilty
of. And in the twink of an eye, even at one view, can make all the world to see
their ways and their deservings. Causing their Consciences and Memories to
present them all before them in such a sort as shall be equivalent to a verbal
debate. Psalm. 50. 21, 22. he will set them in order before them.

5. If Jesus Christ be the Judge, then what a comfort must it needs be to his
members, that he shall be Judge that loved them to the death, and whom they
loved above their lives, and he who was their Rock of hope and strength, and
the desire and delight of their souls!

6. And if Jesus Christ must be the Judge what confusion will it bring to the
faces of his enemies, and of all that set light by him in the day of their
visitation? to see Mercy turned against them, and he that dyed for them, now
ready to condemn them: and that blood and grace which did Aggravate their sin,
to be pleaded against them, to the increase of their misery: how sad will this
be!

7. If the God of Love, and Grace and Truth be Judge, then no man need to fear
any wrong. No subtilty of the Accuser, nor darkness of Evidence: no prejudice
or partiality, or what soever else may be imagined, can there appear to the
wrong of your cause. Get a good cause and fear nothing: and if your cause be
bad, nothing can deliyer you.

III. FOR the Third Point, Who are they that must be judged?

Answ. All the rational Creatures in this lower world. And it seems, Angels
also, either all, or, some: But because their case is more darkly made known to
us, and less concerns us, we will pass it by. Every man that has been made or
born on earth (except Christ;, who is God and man, and is the Judge) must be
judged. If any foolish Infidel shall say, Where shall so great a number stand?
I answer him, That he knows not the things invisible; either the nature of
Spirits and spiritual bodies, nor what place contains them, or how; but
easily he may know that he that gave them all a being, can sustain them all,
and have room for them all, and can at once disclose the thoughts of all, as I
said before.

The first in Order to be judged, are, the Saints, Mat. 25. and then with
Christ they shall judge the rest of the World, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. not in an equal
authority and commission with Christ, but as the present Approvers of his
Righteous Judgment. The Princes of the earth shall stand then before Christ,
even as the Peasants; and the honorable as the base, the rich and the poor
shall meet together, and the Lord shall judge them all, Prove. 22. 2. No men
shall be excused from standing at that Bar, and giving up their account, and
receiving their doom* Learned and unlearned, young and old, godly and ungodly,
all must stand there. I know some have vainly imagined, that the righteous
shall not have any of their sins mentioned, but their graces and duties only;
but they consider not, that things will not then be transacted by words as we
do now, but by clear di^coveries by the infinite Light; and that if God should
hot discover to them their sins, he would not discover the Riches of his Grace
in the pardon of all these sins: Even then they must be humbled in themselves,
that they may be glorified, and for ever cry, Not unto us Lord, but unto thy
name be the glory.

IV. FOR the Fourth Particular, who will be the Accuser?

Answ. 1. Satan is called in Scripture the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.
10. and we find in Job 1: and other places, that now he does Practice it even
before God: and therefore we judge it probable that he will do so then. But we
would determine of nothing that Scripture has not clearly determined.

2. Conscience will be an Accuser, though, especially of the wicked, yet in
some sense of the righteous: for it will tell the truth to all: and therefore
so far as men are faulty, it will tell them of their faults. The, wicked it
will accuse of unpardoned sin, and of sin unrepented of; the godly only of sin
repented of and pardoned. It will be a Glass wherein every man may see the face
of his heart and former Life* Romans 1. 15.

3. The Judge himself will be the Principal Accuser; for it is he that is
wronged, and he that prosecutes the cause and will do justice on the wicked:
God judges even the righteous themselves to be sinners, or else they could not
be pardoned sinners. But he judges the wicked to be impenitent, unbelieving,
unconverted sinners. Remember what I said before, that it is not a verbal
accusation, but an opening of the truth of the cause to the view of our selves
and others, that God will then perform.

Nor can any think it unworthy of God to be men's Accuser by such a disclosure,
it being no dishonor to the purest light to reveal a dunghill, or to the
greatest Prince to accuse a Traitor. Nor is it unmeet that God should be both
Accuser and Judge; seeing he is both absolute Lord, and perfectly just, and so
far beyond all suspicion of Injustice. His Law also does virtually accuse, John
5. 45. But of this by it self.

V. FOR the Fifth Particular, How will the sinners be called to the Bar?

Answ. God will not stand to send them a Citation, nor require him to make his
voluntary Appearance: but willing or unwilling, he will bring them in.

1. Before each man's particular Judgment, he sends Death to call away his
soul; a surly Sergeant, that will have no Nay: How dear so ever this World may
be to men, and how loath so ever they are to depart, away they must, and come
before the Lord that made them; Death will not be bribed. Every man that was
set in the vinyard in the morning of their lives, must be called out at evening
to Receive according to what he has done: then must the naked soul alone
appear before its Judge, and be accomptible for all that was done in the body:
and be sent before till the final judgment, to remain in happiness or misery,
till the body be raised again, and joined to it.

In this appearance of the soul before God it seems by Scripture, that there
is some Ministry of Angels; for Luke 16. 22. it is said that the Angels carried
Lazarus, that is, his soul, into Abraham's bosom. What local motion there is, or
situation of souls, is no fit matter for the enquiry of Mortals: and what it is
in this that the Angels will do, we cannot clearly understand as yet; But most
certain it is, that as soon as ever the soul is out of the Body, it comes to
its account before the God of Spirits.

2. At the end of the world the bodies of all men shall be raised from the
earth, and joined again to their souls; and the soul and body shall be judged
to their endless state; and this is the great and general Judgment, where all
men shall at once appear. The same power of God that made men of nothing, will
as easily then New make them by a Resurrection; by which he will add much more
perfection, even to the wicked in their Naturals, which will make them capable
of the greater misery; even they shall have immortal and incorruptible bodies,
which may be the subjects of immortal woe, 1 Cor. 15. 53. John 5. 28, 29.

Of this Resurrection, and our Appearance at Judgment, the Angels will be some
way the Ministers: As they shall come with Christ to Judgment so they shall
sound his Trumpet, 1 These. 4. 16. and they shall gather the wicked out of Gods
Kingdom; and they shall gather the Tares to burn them, Mat. 13. 39, 40, 41. in
the end of the world the Angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from
among the just, and shall cast them into the Furnace of fire, Mat. 17. 49, 50.

FOR the sixth particular, What Law is it that men shall be Judged by?

Answ. That which was given them to live by: Gods Law is but the sign of his
will, to teach us what shall be due from us and to us; before we fell he gave
us such a Law as was suitable to our perfection; when we had sinned and turned
from him, as we ceased not to be his creatures, nor he to be our Lord, so he
destroyed not his Law, nor discharged or absolved us from the duty of our
obedience. But because we flood condemned by that Law, and could not be
Justified by it, having once Transgressed it, he was pleased to make a Law of
Grace, even a new a remedying Law, by which we might be saved from the deserved
punishment of the Old. So we shall be tried at Judgment upon both these Laws.
but ultimately upon the Last. The first Law commanded perfect Obedience, and
threatened Death to us if ever we disobeyed; the second Law finding us under the
Guilt of sin against the first, does command us to Repent and Believe in
Christ, and so to return to God by him; and promises us pardon of all our sins
upon that Condition, and also if we persevere, everlasting Glory. So that in
Judgment though it must first be evinced that we are sinners, and have
deserved Death according to the Law of pure nature; yet that is not the upshot
of the Judgment. For the enquiry will be next, whether we have accepted the
remedy, and so obeyed the Law of grace, and performed its Condition for pardon
and salvation; and upon this our Life or Death will depend. It is both these
Laws that condemn the wicked; but it is only the Law of grace that justifies
the righteous.

Obj. But how shall Heathens bejudged by the Law of grace, that never did
Receive it?

Answ. The express Gospel some of them had not, and therefore shall not
directly be judged by it; but much of the Redeemers mercy they did enjoy, which
should have led them to repent and seek out after Recovery from their misery,
and to come nearer Christ and for the neglect and abuse of this, they shall be
judged; and not merely for sinning against the Law that was given us in pure
innocence: So that Christ as Redeemer shall judge them as well as others:
though they had but one Talent, yet must they give an account of that to the
Redeemer, from whom they received it. But if any be unsatisfied in this, let
them remember, that as God has left the state of such more dark to us, and the
terms on which he will Judge them; so does it much more concern us to look to
the terms of our own Judgment.

Obj. But how shall infants be judged by the Gospel, that were incapable of it?

Answ. For ought I find in Scripture, they stand or fall with their parents,
and on the same terms; but I leave each to their own thoughts.

VII. FOR the seventh head, What will be the cause of the day to be enquired
after? what the Accusation, and what the Defense?

Answ. This may be gathered from what was last said. The great Cause of the day
will be to enquire and determine who shall dye, and who shall live; who ought
to go to heaven, and who to hell for ever, according to the Law by which they
must then be Judged.

1. As there is a twofold Law by which they must be Judged, so will there then
be a twofold Accusation. The first will be, that they were sinners, and so
having violated the Law of God, they Deserve Everlasting Death accordding to
that Law; If no defense could be made, this one Accusation would condemn all
the world; for it is most certain that all are sinners, and as certain that all
sin deserves Death. The only defense against this Accusation lies in this
Plea; Confessing the charge, we must plead that Christ has satisfied for sins,
and upon that consideration God has forgiven us; and therefore being forgiven,
we ought not to be punished; To prove this we must show the pardon under Gods
hand in the Gospel. But because this pardoning Act of the Gospel does forgive
none but those that Repent and Believe, and so return to God, and to sincere
Obedience for the time to come; therefore the next Accusation will be, that we
did not perform these Conditions of forgiveness; and therefore being
Unbelievers, Impenitent and Rebels against the Redeemer, we have no right to
pardon, but by the sentence of the Gospel, are liable to a greater punishment
for this contempt of Christ and Grace This Accusation is either true or false
where it is true, God and Conscience, who speak the truth, may well be said to
be the Accusers: Where it is false, it can be only the work of Satan the
malicious adversary; who, as we may see in Jobs case, will not stick to bring a
false Accusation.

If any think that the Accuser will not do so vain a work, at least they may
see that potentially this is the Accusation that lies against us, and which we
must be justified against. For all Justification implies an Actual or
Potential Accusation.

He that is truly accused of final Impenitency, or Unbelief, or Rebellion, has
no other Defense to make; but must needs be condemned.

He that is falsely accused of such nonperformance of the condition of Grace,
must deny the Accusation, and plead his own personal Righteousness as against
that Accusation; and produce that Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience and
Perseverance by which he fulfilled that Condition, and so is Evangelically
Righteous in himself, and therefore has part in the blood of Christ, which is
instead of a Legal righteousnses to him, in all things else, as having procured
him a pardon of all his sin, and a right to everlasting glory.

And thus we must then be Justified by Christ's satisfaction only, against the
accusation of being sinners in general, and of deserving Gods wrath for the
Breach of the Law of works: But we must be justified by our faith, repentance
and sincere Obedience itself, against the Accusation of being Impenitent,
unbelievers, and Rebels against Christ, and having not performed the Condition
of the promise, and so having no part in Christ and his Benefits.

So that in Sum you see, that the cause of the day will be to enquire,
Whether, being all known sinners, we have accepted of Christ upon his terms,
and so have right in him and his benefits, or not? Whether they have forsaken
this vain world for him, and loved him so faithfully, that they have manifested
it, in parting with these things at his Command? And this is the meaning of
Mat. 25. Where the enquiry is made to be, whether they have fed and visited him
in his members, or not? That is, whether they have so far loved him as their
Redeemer, and God by him, as that they have manifested this to his members
according to Opportunity, though it cost them the hazard or loss of all: Seeing
danger, and labor, and cost, are fitter to express love by, then Empty
Complements and bare Professions.

Whether it be particularly enquired after, or only taken for granted that men
are sinners, and have deserved Death according to the Law of works, and that
Christ has satisfied by his death, is all one as to the matter in hand, seeing
Gods enquiry is but the Discovery and Conviction of us. But the last Question,
which must decide the Controversy, will be, whether we have performed the
condition of the Gospel?

I have the rather also said all this, to show you in what sense these words
are taken in the text, that Every man shall be Judged according to what he has
done in the flesh, whether it be good or bad. Though every man be Judged worthy
of Death for sinning, yet every man shail not be Judged to dye for it; and no
man shall be Judged morthy of Life for his good works: It is therefore
according to the Gospel, as the rule of judgment, that this is meant. They
that have Repented and believed, and returned to true, though imperfect
Obedience, shall be Judged to everlasting Life, according to these works; not
because these works Deserve it, but because the free Gift in the Gospel,
through the blood of Christ, does make these things the condition of our
possessing it. They that have lived and dyed Impenitent, Unbelievers and Rebels
against Christ; shall be judged to everlasting punishment, because they have
deserved it, both by their sin in general against the Law, and by these sins in
special against the Gospel. This is called the Merit of the Cause, that is,
what is a man's due according to the true meaning of the Law; Though the due may
be by free gift. And thus you see what will be the cause of the Day, and the
matter to be enquired after and decided, as to our Life or Death.

VIII. THE next point in our method, is, to show you, What will be the Evidence
of the Cause?

Answ. There is a fivefold Evidence among men. 1. When the fact is notorious.
2. The knowledge of an unsuspected Competent Judge. 3. The parties Confession*
4. Witness. 5. Instruments and visible effects of the action. All these
Evidences will be at hand, and any one of them sufficient for the conviction of
the guilty person at that day.

1. As the sins of all men; so the Impenitency and Rebellion of the wicked was
notorious, or at least will be then. For though some play the hypocrites, and
hide the matter from the world and themselves, yet God shall open their hearts
and former lives to themselves, and to the view of all the world. He shall set
their sins in order before them so, that it shall be utterly in vain to deny or
excuse them. If any menwill then think to make their cause as good to God as
they cannow do to us, that are not able to see their hearts, they will be foully
mistaken. Now they can say they have as good hearts as the best: then God will
bring them out in the light; and show them to themselves and all the world,
whether they were good or bad. Now they will face us down that they do truly
Repent, and they obey God as well as they can; but God that knows the
Deceivers, will then undecieve them. We cannot now make men acquainted with
their own unsanctified hearts, nor convince them that have not true Faith,
Repentance or Obedience; but God will convince them of it; They can find shifts
and false answers to put off a Minister with; but God will not so be shifted
off. Let us preach as plainly to them as we can, and do all that ever we are
able to acquaint them with the impenitency and unholiness of their own heart,
and the necessity of a new heart and life, yet we cannot do it; but they will
Believe whether we will or not, that the old heart will serve the turn; But how
easily will God make them know the contrary? We plead with them in the dark;
for though we have the candle of the Gospel in our hands when we come to show
them their corruption, yet they shut their eyes, and are wilfully blind; But
God will open their eyes whether they will or not, not by holy Illumination,
but by forced conviction; and then he will plead with them as in the open
light. See here thy own unholy soul; can thou now say thou did love me
above all? can thou deny but thou did love this world before me? and serve
thy flesh and lusts, though I told thee if thou did so thou should dye?
Look upon thy own heart now, and see whether it be a holy or an unholy heart, a
spiritual or a fleshly heart; a heavenly or au earthly heart? Look now upon all
the course of thy life, and see whether thou did live to me, or to the world
and thy flesh? Oh how easily will God convince men then of the very sins of
their thoughts, and in their secret Closets, when they thought that no witness
could have disclosed them! Therefore its said that the Books shall be opened,
and the dead Judged out of the books, Revel. 20. 12. Dan. 7. 10.

The second Evidence will be the knowledge of the Judge. If the sinner would
not be convinced; yet it is sufficient that the Judge knows the Cause; God
needs no further witness; he saw thee committing adultery in secret, lying,
stealing, forswearing in secret. If thou do not know thy own heart to be
unholy, it is enough that God knows it. If you have the face to say, Lord,
when did we see thee hungry? etc. Mat. 25. 44. yet God will make good the
charge against thee, and there needs no more Testimony then his own. Can
foolish sinners think to lie hid or escape at that day, that will now sin
wilfully before their Judge? that know every day that their Judge is looking on
them while they forget him, and give up themselves to the world, and yet go on
even under his eye, as if to his face they dared him to punish them?

3. The third Evidence will be, the sinners Confession. God will force their
own Consciences to witness against them, add their own tongues to confess the
Accusation. If they do at first excuse it, he will leave them speechless, yea
and condemning themselves before they have done.

Oh what a difference between their language now and then! Now we cannot tell
them of their sin and misery, but they either tell us of our own faults, or bid
us look to our selves, or deny or excuse their fault, or make light of it: but
then their own tongues shall confess them, and cry out of the wilful folly that
they committed, and lay a heavier charge upon them then we can now do. Now if
we tell them that we are afraid they are unregenerate, and least their hearts
are not truly set upon God; they will tell us they hope: to be saved with such
hearts as they have: But then, Oh how they will confess the folly and falseness
of their own hearts! You may see a little of their case even in despairing
sinners on earth, how far they are from denying or excusing their sins. Judas
cries out, I have sinned in bttraying Innocent blood, Mat. 27. 4. out of their
own mouth shall they be Judged. That very tongue that now excuses their sin,
will in their torments be their great Accuser. For God will have it so to be.

4. The fourth Evidence will be the witness of others. Oh how many thousand
witnesses might there be produced, were there need to convince the guilty soul
at that day!

1. All the Ministers of Christ that ever preached to them, or warned them,
will be sufficient witnesses against them: we must needs testify that we
preached to them the truth of the Gospel, and they would not believe it. We
preached to them the goodness of God, yet they set not their hearts upon him:
we showed them their sin and they were not humbled. We told them of the danger
of an unregenerate state, and they did not regard us: we acquainted them with
the Absolute Necessity of holiness, but they made light of all: We let them
know the deceitfulness of their hearts, and the need of a close and faithful
examination, but they would not bestow an hour in such a work; nor scarce once
be afraid of being mistaken and miscarrying. We let them know the vanity of
this world, and yet they would not forsake it, no not for Christ and the hopes
of glory; We told them of the everlasting felicity they might attain, but they
would not set themselves to seek it.

What we shall think of it then, the Lord knows; but surely it seems now to us
a matter of very sad consideration, that we must be brought in as witnesses
against the souls of our neighbors and friends in the flesh. Those whom we now
unfeignedly love, and would do any thing that we were able to do for their
good, whose welfare is dearer to us then all worldly enjoyments; Alas, that we
must be forced to testify to their faces for their condemnation! Ah Lord, with
What a heart must a poor Minister study, when he considers this, that all the
words that he is studying must be brought in for a witness against many of his
hearers! with What a heart must a Minister Preach, when he remembers that all
the words that he is speaking must condemn many, if not most of his hearers! Do
we desire this sad fruit of our Labors? No: we may say with the Prophet, Jer.
17. 16. I have not desired the woeful day, thou know: No, if we desired it,
we would not do so much to prevent it: we would not study, and preach, and
pray, and entreat men that if it were possible we might not be put on such a
task. And doubtless it should make every honest Minister study hard, and pray
hard, and entreat hard, and stoop low to men, and be earnest with men in season
and out of season, that if it may be, they may not be the condemners of their
peoples souls. But if men will not hear, and there be no remedy, who can help
it? Christ himself came not into the world to condemn men, but to save them,
and yet he will condemn those that will not yield to his saving work: God takes
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent, and return,
and live, Ezekiel. 18. 23, 32. and yet he will rejoice over those to do them hurt,
and destroy them that will not return, Deuteronomy 28. 63. And if we must be put on
such a work, he will make us like-minded. The Holy Ghost tells us, that the
Saints shall Judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. and if they must Judge, they will
Judge as God Judges; you cannot blame us for it sinners: we now warn you of it
before hand, and if you will not prevent it, blame not us, but your selves.
Alas! we are not our own Matters. As we now speak not to you in our own names,
so then we may not do what we list our selves, or if we might, our wills will
be as Gods will. God will make us Judge you, and witness against you; Can we
absolve you, when the righteous God will condemn you? when God is against you,
whose side would you have us be of? We must be either against God or you. And
can you think that we should be for any one against our Maker and Redeemer? We
must either condemn the Sentence of Jesus Christ, or condemn you: and is not
there more reason to condemn you then him? can we have any mercy on you, when
he that made you will not save you, and he that formed you, will show you no
mercy? Isa. 27. 11. Yea when he that dyed for you, will condemn you, shall we
be more merciful then God? But alas! If we should be so foolish and unjust,
what good would it do you? If we would be false witnesses and partial Judges,
it would not save you; we are not Justified if we absolve our selves, 1 Cor. 4.
4. how unable then shall we be against Gods Sentence to Justify you? If all
the world should say, you were holy and penitent, when God knows you were
unholy and impenitent, it will do you no good. You pray every day that his will
may be done, and it will be done: It will be done upon you because it was not
done by you. What would you have us say, if God ask us, Did you tell this
sinner of the need of Christ, of the glory of the world to come, and the vanity
of this? Should we lie, and say we did not? what should we say if he ask us,
Did not you tell them the misery of their natural state; and what would become
of them if they were not made new? Would you have us lie to God, and say we did
not? Why, if we did not, your blood will be required at our hands, Ezekiel. 33. 6.
and 3. 18. and would you have us bring your blood upon our own heads by a lie?
Yea, and to do you no good, when we know that lies will not prevail with God?
No, no, sinners; We must unavoidably testify to the confusion of your faces.
If God ask us, we must bear witness against you and say? Lord, we did what we
could according to our weak abilities, to reclaim them: Indeed our own thoughts
of everlasting things were so low, and our hearts so dull, that we must confess
we did not follow them so close, nor speak so earnestly as we should have done:
we did not cry so loud, or lift up our voice as a Trumpet to awaken them, (Isa.
58. 1.) we confess we did not speak to them with such melting compassion, and
with such streams of tears beseech them to regard, as a mutter of such great
concernment should have been spoken with; We did not fall on our knees to them,
and so earnestly beg of them for the Lords sake, to have mercy upon their own
s^uls, as we should have done. But yet we told them the Message of God: and we
studied to speak it to them as plainly and as piercingly as we could Fain we
would have convinced them of their sin and misery, but we could not: Fain we
would have drawn them to the admiration of Christ, but they made light of it,
Mat. 22. 5. we would fain have brought them to the contempt of this vain world,
and to set their mind on the world to come, but we could not; Some compassion
thou know Lord we had to their souls; many a weeping or groaning hour we
have had in secret, because they would not hear and obey; and some sad
complaints we have made over them in public; We told them that they must
shortly dye and come to Judgment, and that this world would deceive them, and
leave them in the dust; we told them that the time was at hand when nothing but
Christ Would do them good, and nothing but the favor of God would be
sufficient for their happiness; but we could never get them to lay it to heart.
Many a time did we entreat them to think soberly of this life, and the life to
come, and to compare them together with the Faith of Christians, and the reason
of men; but they would not do it; many a time did we entreat them but to take
now and then an hour in secret to consider who made them, and for what he had
made them, and why they were sent into this world; and what their business here
is; and whether they are going, and how it will go with them at their latter
end; But we could never get most of them to spend one hour in serious thoughts
of these weighty matters. Many a time did we entreat them to try whether they
were Regenerate or not? whether Christ and his Spirit were in them, or not?
Whether their souls were brought back to God by Sanctification? but they would
not try; We did beseech them to make sure work and not leave such a matter as
everlasting Joy or Torment to a bold and mad adventure; but we could not
prevail. We entreated them to lay all other businesses aside a little while in
the world, and to enquire by the direction of the word of God, what would
become of them in the world to come; and to Judge themselves before God came to
Judge them, seeing they had the Law and rule of Judgment before them; but
their minds were blinded, and their hearts were hardened; and the profit, and
pleasure, and honor of this world did either stop their ears, or quickly steal
away their heartt, so that we could never get them to a sober consideration,
nor ever win their hearts to God.

This will be the witness that many a hundred Ministers of the Gospel must give
in against the souls of their people at that day. Alas, that ever you should
cast this upon us! For the Lords sake, Sirs, pity your poor Teachers, if you
pity not your selves. We had rather go a 1000. miles for you; we had rather be
scorned and abused for your sakes: we had rather lay our hands under your feet,
and beseech you on our knees with tears, were we able, then be put on such a
work as this. It is you that will do it if it be done. We had rather follow you
from house to house, and teach and exhort you, if you will but hear us, and
accept of our exhortation. Your souls are precious in our eyes, for we know
they were so in the eyes of Christ, and therefore we are loath to see this day;
we were once in your case, and therefore know what it is to be blind, and
careless, and carnal as you are, and therefore would fain obtain your
Deliverance. But if you will not hear, but we must accuse you, and we must
condemn you; The Lord Judge between you and us For we can witness that it was
full sore against our wills. We have been faulty indeed in doing no more for
you, and not following you with restless Importunity; (the Good Lord forgive
us;) but yet we have not betrayed you by silence.

2. All those that fear God, that have lived among ungodly men, will also be
sufficient witnesses against them. Alas! they must be put upon the same work,
which is very unpleasant to their thoughts as Min^sters are; They must witness
before the Lord, that they did as friends and neighbors admonish them* that
they gave them a good example, and endeavored to walk in holiness before
them; but alas! the most did but mock them, and call them Puritans and precise
fools, and they made more a^o then needs for their salvation; They must be
forced to testify, [Lord we would fain have drawn them with us to hear the
word, and to read it, and to pray in their families, and to santifie the holy
day, and take such happy Opportunities for their souls; But we could not get
them to it; we did in our places what we were able, to give them the Example of
a Godly Conversation, and they did but deride us; they were readier to mark
every slip of our lives, and to observe all our Infirmities, and catch at any
Accusation that was against us, then to follow us in any work of holy
obedience, or care for our everlasting peace;] The Lord knows it is a most
heavy thing to consider now, that poor neighbors must be fain to come in
against those they love so dearly, and by their Testimony to Judge them to
p^rdition. Oh heavy case to think of, that a master must witness against his
own servant* Yea a husband against his own wife, and a wife against her
husband; yea parents against their own children, and say; [Lord] taught them
^hy word but they would not learn I told them what would come on it, if they
returned not to thee: I brought them to ^ermons, and; I prayed with them and
for them. I frequently* minded them of th^se everlasting things, and of this
dreadful day which they now see. But youthful lusts, and the temprations of
the flash and the Devil led them away and I could never get them thoroughly and
soundly to lay it to their hearts.] Oh you that are parents, and friends, and
neighbors, in the fear of God bestir you now that you man not be put to this
at that day of Judgment. Oh give them no rest, take no nay of them till you
have persuaded their hearts from this word to God, lest you be put to be their
condemners: it must be now that you must prevent it or else never* now while
you are with them, while you and they are in the flesh together, which will be
but a little while: Can you but now prevail with them, all will be well, and
you may meet them Joyfully before the Lord.

3. Another wittness that will testify against the ungodly at that day, will
be their sinful companions those that drew them into sin, or were drawn by
them, or joined with them in it. Oh little do poor drunkards think, when they
sit merrily in an Ale house, that one of them must bear witness against another
and condemn one another: If they thought of this, me thinks it should make them
have less delight in that company: Those that now join with you in wicked ness
shall then be forced to witness, [I confess Lord, I did hear him swear and
curse; I heard him deride those that feared the Lord, and make a jest of a holy
life: I saw him in the Alehouse when he should be hearing the Word of God, or
reading, or calling upon God, and preparing for this day. I joined with him in
fleshly delights, in abusing thy creature and our own bodies.] Sinners, look
your companions in the face the next time you are with them, and remember this
that I now say; that those men shall give in Evidence against you that now are
your associates in all your mirth; Little thinks the fornicator and lustful
wanton that their sinful mates must then bear witness of that which they
thought the dark had concealed and tell their shame before all the world. But
this must be the fruit of sin. Its meet that they who encouraged one another
sin, should condemn one another for it. And marvail not at it; for they shall
be forced to it whether they will or no; Light will not then be hid: They man
think to have some ease to their consciences, by accusing and condemning
others. When Adam is questioned for his sin, he presently accuses the woman,
Genesis 3. 1^. when Judas his conscience was awakened, he runs to the Pharisees
with the money that dr^w him to it, and they cast it back in his own face, See
thou to it, what is that to us? Mat. 27. 4 5, 6. Oh the cold comfort that
sinners will have at that day! and the little pleasure that they will find in
remembering their evil wai^s! Now when a fornicator or a worlding, or a merry
voluptuous man is grown old, and cannot act all his sin again, he takes
pleasure in remembering and telling others of his former folly; what he once
was; and what he did; and the merry hours that he had; but then when sinners
are come to themselves a little more, they will remember and tell one another
of these things with another heart. Oh that they did but know now how these
things will then affect them.

4. Another witness that will then rise up against them, will be the very
Devils that tempted them: They that did purposely draw them to sin, that they
might draw them to Torment for sin: They can witness that you harkned to their
Temptations, when you would not harken to Gods Exhortations; They can witness
that you obeyed them in working Iniquity. But because you may think the
Accusers Testimony is not to be taken, I will not stand on this. Though it is
not nothing where God knows it to be true.

5 The very Angels of God also may be witnesses against the wicked; Therefore
are we advised in Scriputre, not to sin before them, Eccl. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before the Elect Angels, etc. They can testify
that they would have been ministering Spirits for their good, when the wicked
rather chose to be slaves to the Spirit of malitiousness. The holy Angels of
God do many a time stand by you when you are sinning. They see you when you see
not them; they are employed by God in some sort for your good, as well as we:
And as it is the grief of Ministers, that their labors succeed not, so may we
suppose that according to their state and nature it is theirs For the that
Rejoice in heaven at the conversion of one sinner, may be said to sorrow, or to
lose those joys, when you refuse to be converted. These noble Spirits, these
Holy and Glorious attendants of Christ, that shall wait upon him to Judgment,
will be Witnesses against Rebellious sinners, to their Confusion. ^irs, you
have all in you naturally a fear of Spirits* and invisible powers: Fear them
aright: lest hearkening to the deceiving Spirits, and refusing the help of the
Angels of God* and wilfully sinning before their faces you should cause them at
that day, to the terror of your souls to stand forth as witnesses against you,
to your Condemnation.

6 Conscience it self will be most effectual witness against the wicked at that
day. I before told you it will be a Discerner, and force them to a Confession:
But a further office it has, even to witness against them. If none else in the
world had known of their secret sins, conscience will say, I was acquainted
with them.

7. The spirit of Christ can witness against the ungodly, that he often moved
them to Repent and Return, and they rejected his motions: that the spoke to
their hearts in secret, and often set in with the Minister, and often minded them
of their case, and persuaded them to God; but they resisted, quenched and
grieved the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. As the Spirit witnesses with the Spirits of
the righteous that they are the children of God, Romans 8. 16. so does he witness
with the Conscience of the wicked, that they were children of Rebellion, and
therefore are justly children of wrath. This Spirit will not always strive with
men; at last being vexed, it will prove their enemy, and rise up against them,
Genesis 6. 3. Isa. 63. 10. If you will needs Grieve it now, it will Grieve you
then. Were it not a Spirit of Grace, and were it not free mercy that it came to
offer you, the Repulse would not have been so condemning, nor the witness of
this Spirit so heavy at the last. But it was the Spirit of Jesus, that came
with recovering Grace, which you resisted: And though the wages of every sin is
death, yet you will find that it will cost you somewhat more to Reject this
salvation, than to break the Creators ^aw of works. Kindness, such Kindness,
will not be rejected at easy rates.

Many a good motion is now made by the Spirit to the Heart of a sinner, which
he does not so much as once observe; and therefore does not now Remember them.
But then they shall be brought to his Remembrance with a witness. Many a
thousand secret motions to Repentance, to Faith, to a Holy Life, will be Then
set before the eyes of the poor, unpardoned, trembling sinner, which he had
quite forgotten: And the Spirit of ^od shall testify to his Confusion. [At
such a Sermon I persuaded thy heart to Repent, and thou would not; At such a
time I showed thee the evil of thy sin, and persuaded thee to have forsaken it
but thou would not; I minded thee in thy secret thoughts, of the neerness of
Judgment, and the Certainty and Weight of everlasting things, the need of
Christ, and faith, and holiness, and of the Danger of sinning; but thou did
drown all my motions in the cares and pleasures of the world. Thou harknedst
rather to the Devil than to me; The sensual inclinations of thy flesh did
prevail against the strongest Arguments that I used: Though I showed Reasous,
undeniable Reasons, from thy Creator, from thy Redeemer, from nature, from
grace, from heaven, and from hell, yet all would not so much as stop thee, much
less turn thee, but thou would go on; Thou would follow thy flesh, and
now let it pay thee the wages of thy folly: Thou would be thy own guide, and
take thine own Course, and now take what thou gettest by it]

Poor sinners, I beseech you in the fear of God, the next time you have any
such motions from the Spirit of God, to Repent, and Believe and Break off your
sins, and the Occasions of them, consider then what a mercy is set before you:
and how it will confound you at the day of Judgment, to have all these motions
brought in against you, and that the Spirit of Grace it self should be your
Condemner! Alas, that men should choose their own Desructon. and wilfully
choose it! and that the foreknowledge of these things should not move them to
relent.

So much concerning the witness that will be brought in against the sinner.

5. The fifth Evidence that will be given against the sinner, will be, The
Instruments and Effects. You know among men, if a man be found murdered by the
highway, and you are found standing by with a bloody sword in your hand;
especially if there were a former dissension between you, it will be an
Evidence that will prove a strong presumption, that you were the Murderer: But
if the fact be certain by other Evidence, then many such things may be brought
for aggravation of the fault.

So a twofold Evidence will be brought against the sinner from these things.
One to prove him guilty of the fact: the other to Aggravate the fault, and
prove that his sin was very great.

For the former. 1. The very creatures which sinners abused to sin, may be
brought in against them to their Conviction and Condemnation. For though these
creatures shall be consumed with the last destroying Fire, which shall consume
all the world, yet they shall have a Being in the memory of the sinner (an esse
Cognitum.) The very Wine or Ale, or other liquor which was abused to
drunkenness may witness against the Drunkard. The sweet morsels by which the
Glutton did please his Appetite, and all the good creatures of God which he
luxuriously devoured, may witness against him* Luke 16. 19. 25. He that fared
deliciously every day in this life, was told by Abraham when he was dead* and
his soul in Hell, [Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comfored, and thou art
tormented,] Though their sweet morsels and cups are past, and gone, yet must
they be Remembered at Judgment and in Hell. [Remember Son] says Abraham; Yea,
and Remember he must* whether he will or no; Long was the Glutton in sinning,
and many a pleasant bit did he taste: and so many Evidences of his sin will lie
against him, and the sweetness will then be turned into gall.

The very clothing and ornaments by which Proud person did manifest their
Pride, will be sufficient Evidence against them: as his being clothed with
Purple and fine Linen, is mentoned, Luke 16. 19.

The very Lands, and goods, and houses of worldlings will be an Evidence
against them: Their Gold and Silver, which the covetous do now prefer before
the everlasting Riches with Christ, will be an Evidence against them. James 5.
1, 2, 3, 4. Go to now, ye Rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments, moath-eaten; Your
Gold and Silver is cankered, and the Rust of them shall be a Witenss against
you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire; Ye have heaped Treasure
together for the Last days. Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped
down you fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cryety; and the cries of
them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye
have lived in pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; Ye have nourished your
hearts as in a day of slaughter. Oh that worldlings would well consider this
one Text; and therein observe whether a life of earthly pleasure and fullness of
worldly Glory and Gallantry, be as desirable as they imagine, and to what Time
and Purpose they now lay up their Treasures; and how they must hear of these
Things hereafter; and what effect the review of their Jovial days will have
upon their miserable condemned souls.

2. The very circumstances of Time, Place, and the like, may Evidence against
his Condemnation. The drunkard shall Remember, In Such an Ale house. I was so
often drunk, and in such a ^avern I wasted my time. The Adulterer and Fornicator
shall Remember the very Time the Place, the Room, the Bed, where they committed
wickedness. The Thief and Deceiver will Remember the Time, Place, and the
persons they wronged and the Thing which they robbed or deceived them of. The
worldling will Remember the business which he preferred before the service of
God; the worldly matters which had more of his heart then his Maker and
Redeemer had; the work which he was doing when he should have been Praying or
Reading, or Catechizing his Family, or thinking soberly of his latter end. A
thousand of these will then come into his mind, and be as so many Evidences
against him to his Condemnation.

3. The very effects also of men's sins will be an Evidence against them. The
wife and children of a Drunkard are Impoverished by his sin; His family and the
neighborhood is disquieted by him. These will be so many Evidences against
him. So will the abuse of his own Reason; The enticing of others to the same
sin, and hardening them by his example.

One covetons unmerciful Landlord does keep a hundred, or many hundred persons
or families in so great necessities, and care and labor, that they are tempted
by it to overpass the service of God, as having scarce time for it, or any room
for it in their troubled thoughts; All these miserable families and persons,
and all the souls that are undone by this Temptation, will be so many Evidences
against such Oppressors.

Yea, the poor whom they have neglected to relieve when they might: the sick
whom they have neglected to visit, when they might, will all witness then
against the unmerciful, Mat. 25.

The many ignorant, worldly, careless sinners, that have perished under an
idle, and unfaithful Minister, will be so many witnesses against him to his
Condemnation! They may then cry out against him to his face [I was ignorant
Lord, and he never did so much as teach me, catechize me, nor tell me of these
Things; I was careless, and minded the world, and he let me go on quietly and
was as careless as I, had never plainly and faithfully warned me, to waken me
from my security.] And so their blood will be required at his hands, though
themselves also shall perish in their sins, Ezekiel. 33, 7. 8.

2. And as these Evidences will convince men of sin, so there are many more
which will convince them of the Greatness of their sin. And these are so many
that it would too much lengthen my discourse to stand on them. A few I shall
briefly touch.

1. The very mercy of God in Creating men, in giving and continuing their Being
to them, will be an Evidence for the Aggravation of their sin against him.
What? will you abuse him, by whom it is that you are men? will you speak to his
dishonor* that gives you your speech? will you live to his dishonor who gives
you your Lives? will you wrong him by his own creatures? and neglect him
without whom you cannot subsist?

2. The Redemption of men by the Lord Jesus Christ, will be an evidence to the
exceeding Aggravation of their sins. You sinned against the Lord that bought
you, 2 Pet. 2. 1. When the Feast was prepared, and all things were Ready, you
made light of it, and found excuses, and would not come, Mat. 22. 4, 5, 6. Luke
14. 17, 18. Must Christ Redeem you by so dear a price from sin and misery, and
yet will you continue the servants of sin, and prefer your slavery before your
freedom, and choose to be Satan's drudges, rather then to be the servants of
God? The sorrows and sufferings that Christ underwent for you, will then prove
the increase of your own sorrows. As a neglected Redeemer, it is that he will
condemn you. And then you would be glad that it were but true Doctrine, that
Christ never dyed for you, that you might not be condemned for refusing a
Redeemer, and sinning against him that shed his blood for you. How deeply will
his wounds then wound your consciences! You will then Remember, that to this
end he both ^yed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and
the Living? And that he therefore dyed for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose
again; Romans 14. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Mat 28. 18. 19. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18. You
will then understand that you were not your own, but were bought with a price,
and therefore should have glorified him that Bought you, with your Bodies and
Spirits, because they were His, 1 Cor. 6* 19, 20. This one Aggravation of your
sin will make you doubly and remedilesly miserable; that you Trod under foot
the Son of God and counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith you were
sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. and crucified to your
selves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6. 5 6.

3. Moreover; All the personal mercies which they received, will be so many
Evidences for the condemnation of the ungodly. The very earth that bore them,
and yielded them its fruits, while they themselves are unfruitful to God The
Air which they breathed in: the food which nourished them: the clothes which
covered them, the houses which they dwelt in, the beasts that labored for
them, and all the creatures that dyed for their use: All these may rise up
against them to their condemnation. And the Judge may thus expostulate with
them, [Did all these mercies deserve no more Thanks? should you not have served
him that so liberally maintained you? God thought not all these too good for
you, and did you think your hearts and services too good for him? He served
yous with the weary labors of your fellow creature: and should you have grudged
to bear his easy Yoke? They were your slaves and drudges, and you refused to
be his free servants and his Sons? They suffered Death to feed your bodies, and
you would not suffer the short forbearance of a little forbidden fleshly
pleasure for the sake of him that made you and redeemed you.]

Oh how many thousand mercies of God will then be reviewed by those that
neglected them to the horror of their souls, when they shall be upbraided by
the Judge with their base requital! All the deliverances from sickness and from
danger; all the honors, and privileges, and other commodities, which so much
contented them, will then be Gods Evidence to shame them and confound them. On
this supposition does the Apostle reprove such, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man,
according to his Deeds.

4. Moreover. All the means which God used for the Recovery of sinners in the
day of their visitation, will rise up against Impenitent souls, in Judgment to
their condemnation. You can hear Sermons carelessly and sleepily now; but O
that you would consider, how the review of them will then awake you! You now
make light of the warnings of God and man, and of all the wholesome advice that
is given you, but God will not then make light of your contempt. Oh what
cutting Questions will they be to the hearts of the ungodly, when all the means
that were used for their good, are brought to their remembrance on one side,
and the temptations that drew them to sin on the other side, and the Lord shall
plead his cause with their consciences, and say [Was I so hard a Master, or was
my work so unreasonable, or was my wages so contemptible, that no persuasions
could draw you into my service? was Satah so good a Master, or was his work so
honest and profitable, or was his wages 'so desirable, that you would be so
easily persuaded to do as he would have you? Was there more persuading Reason
in his allurements and deceits, then in all my holy words, and all the
powerful Sermons that you heard, or all the faithful admonitions you
received; or all the good examples of the righteous, or in all the works of God
which you beheld? Was not a reason fecht from the love of God, from the evil
of sin, the blood of Christ, the Judgment to come? the glory promised, the
torments threatened, as forcible with you, and as good in your eyes, to draw you
to holiness, as a Reason from a little fleshly delight or worldly gain, to draw
you to be unholy?]

In the name of God, sinners, I entreat you to bethink your selves in time, how
you will sufficiently answer such Questions as these. You should have seen God
in every creature that you beheld, and have read your duty in all his works;
what can you look upon above you, or below you, or round about you, which might
not have showed you so much of the wisdom, and goodness, and greatness of your
maker, as should have convinced you that it was your duty to be devoted to his
will? And yet you have his written word that speaks plainer then all these; And
will you despise them all? will you not see so great a Light? will you not hear
so loud and constant calls? shall God, and his Ministers speak in vain? And can
you think that you shall not hear of this again, and pay for it one day? you
have the Bible, and other good books by you; why do you out read them? You have
Ministers at hand: why do you not go to them, and earnestly ask them, Sir, What
must I do to be saved? and entreat them to teach you the way to life; you have
some neighbors that fear God; why do you not go to them, and take their good
advice, and imitate them in the fear of God, and in a holy diligence for your
souls? Now is the time for you to bestir your Selves; Life and Death are before
you. You have gales of grace to further your voyage: There are more for you
then against you. God will help you: his Spirit will help you: his Ministers
will help you: every good Christian will help you; the Angels themselves will
help you, if you will resolvedly set your selves to the work; And yet will you
not stir? Patience is waiting on you; Mercies are enticing you; Scourges are
driving you; Judgment stays for you; The Lights of God stand burning by you
to direct you; And yet will you not stir, but lie in darkness? And do you think
you shall not hear of this? Do you think this will not one day cost you dear?

IX THE ninth part of our work, is to show you, What are those frivolous
excuses by which the unrighteous may then endeavor their defense?

Having already showed you what the Defense must be, that must be suffiicient
to our Justification;

If any first demand, Whether the Evidence of their sin will not so overwhelm
the sinner, that he will be speechless and past excuse? I answ. Before God has
done with him, he will be so; But it seems at first his dark understanding, and
partial corrupted conserence will set him upon a vain Defense. For Mat. 7. 22,
23. Christ tells us that [Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord* have
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy
name have done many wonderful works? And then will I profess to them, I never
knew you, Depart from me^ ye workers of iniquity. And in Mat 25. 11. The
foolish Virgins cry, [Lord, Lord, open to us.] And verse. 44. [Then shall they
also answer him* saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or thirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not Minister unto thee?] And
verse. 24, 25. They fear not to cast some of the cause of their neglect on God
himself, [Then he which had received the one Talent came and said, Lord, I knew
that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in
the earth; lo, there thou have that is thine.]

It is clear then, that Excuses they will be ready to make, and their full
conviction will be in order after these Excuses (at least as in their minds, if
not in words) But what the particular Excuses will be, we may partly know by
these Scriptures which recite them, and partly by hearing what the ungodly do
now say for themselves. And because it is for their present benefit that I now
make mention of them, that they may see the vanity of all such Excuses, I will
mention them as I now meet with them in the mouths of Sinners in our ordinary
discourse; and these Excuses are of several sorts; some by which they would
justify their estate; some Excuses of particular actions; and that either in
whole, or in part, some by which they would put by the penalty, though they
confess the sin; some by which they lay the blame on other men: and in some
they would cast it upon God himself. I must touch but some of them very briefly.

The first Excuse. I am not guilty of these things which I am accused of. I did
love God above All, and my Neighbor as my self. I did use the World but for
Necessity, but God had my heart.

Answer. The all-seeing Judge does know the contrary; and he will make thy
Conscience know it. Look back man, upon thy heart and life. How seldom and how
neglectfully did thou think of God? how coldly did thou worship him, or
make any mention of him? how carelessly did thou serve him? and think much of
all that thou did therein? Thou rather thoughtest that his Service was making
more ado then needs, and did grudge at those that were more diligent then
thy self; but for the World, how heartily and how constantly did thou seek
and serve it? and yet would thou now persuade the Judge that thou did love
God above all? He will show thee thy naked heat, and the course of thy former
life, which shail convince thee of the contrary.

The Second Excuse. I lived not in any gross sin, but only in small
Infirmities; I was no Murderer, or Adulterer, or Fornicator, or Thief, nor did
I deceive or wrong any, or take any thing by violence.

Answ. Was it not a gross sin to love the world above God, and to neglect
Christ that dyed for thee, and never to do him one hours hearty service, but
merely to seek thy carnal self, and to live to thy flesh? God will open thine
eyes then, and show thee a thousand gross sins, which thou now forgettest or
make light of; and it is not only Gross sins, but All sin, great or small,
that deserves the wrath of God, and will certainly bring thee under it for
ever, if thou have not part in Christ to relieve thee Woe to the man that ever
he was born that must answer in his own name for his smallest offenses

The Third Excuse. I did it ignorantly; I knew not that there was so much
required to my Salvation. I thought less ado might have served the turn: and
that if I looked to my body, God would take ca^e of my soul; and that it was
better to trust him what would become of me hereafter, then to trouble my mind
so much about it. Had I known better, I would have done better.

Answ. If you knew not better, who was it long of but your self? Did God hide
these things from you? Did he not tell them you in his Word as plainly as the
tongue of man can speak, That except you were regenerate and born again, you
should not enter into the Kingdom of God John 3. 3^ 5. That without holiness
none should see God? Heb. 12. 14. That you mist strive to enter in at the
strait gate; for many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24.
That if you lived after the flesh, you should dye: and if by the Spirit you
mortified the deeds of the body, you should live. Rom 8. 13 That if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ* the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And to be
carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace, Romans
8. 9. That you must not lay up for your selves a treasure on earth, where rust
and moths do corrupt, and thieves break through and steal, but must lay up for
your selves a treasure in heaven, where rust and moths do not corrupt, and
thieves break through and steal, Mat. 6. 19, 20. That you must seek first the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. 23. and not Labor for
the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to everlasting life,
which Christ would have given you, John 6. 27. That if you be risen with
Christ, you must seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, and not the things that are on earth, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yea
Your very Conversation should be in Heaven, Phil. 3. 19. 20. 21.

What say you? Did not God tell you all this and much more; and plainly tell it
you? Turn to your Bibles and see the words, and let them witness against you.

2. And could you think with any Reason, that your souls being so much move
precious then your bodies you should yet do so much more for your bodies, then
your souls? could you think all the labor of your lives little enough for a
frail body that must lie shortly in the dirt; and that your Immortal souls
should be no more re^arded? Could you think with any Reason, that your souls
should do so much for a life of a few years continuance, and do no more for a
life that shall have no end?

3. And whereas you talk of trusting God with your souls, you did not trust
him: You did but on that pretense, carelessly disregard them. If you trust God,
show any word of Promise that ever he gave you to trust upon, that ever an
Impenitent, Carnal* Careless person shall be saved? No; he has told yon enough
to the contrary. And could you think that it was the will of God, that you
should mind your bodies more then your souls, and this life more then that to
come? Why, he has bid you strive, and run, and sight, and labor, and care,
and seek, and use violence, and all diligence for the safety of your souls, and
for the life to come: But where has he bid you do so for your bodies? No, he
knew that you were prone to do too much for them; and therefore he has bid you
[Care not, and Labor not] that is, Do it as if you did it not; and let your
care and Labor for earthly things be none in comparision of that for heavenly
things. You know God can as well maintain your lives without your care and
labor, as save your souls without it: And yet you see he will not, he does
not: You must plough, and sow, and reap, and thresh, for all Gods Love and Care
of you, and not say, I will let all alone and trust God. And must you not much
more use diligence in much greater things? If you will trust God, you must
trust him in his own way, and in the use of his own means.

The fourth Excuse. I was never brought up to learning, I cannot so much as
read: Nor did my Parents ever teach me any of these things, but only set me
about my worldly business, and provide food and raiment for me: but never once
told me that I had a soul to save or lose, and and an everlasting life to
provide and prepare for. And therefore I could not come to the knowledge of
them.

Answ. The greater is their sin, who thus neglected you. But this is no
sufficient Excuse for you. Heaven is not prepared for the Learned only: nor
will Christ ask you at Judgment, whether you are good Scholars or not, no nor
so much as whether you could write or read. But consider well! was not Gods
word so plainly written, that the unlearned might understand it? Did he not put
it into the most familiar style, though he knew it would be offensive to the
proud Scholars of the world, of purpose that he might fit it to the capacities
of the ignorant? And if you could not read, yet tell me, Could not you have
learned to read at 20, or 30 years of age, if you had been but willing to
bestow now and then an hour to that end? Or at least, did you not live near
some that could Read? and could you not have procured them to read to you, or
to help you? And did you not hear these things read to you in the Congregation
by the Minister? or might have done if you would? And if your Parents did
neglect you in your youth, yet when you came to a fuller use of Reason, and
heard of the matters of salvation from Gods Word, did it not concern you to
have looked to your selves; and to have redeemed that time which you lost in
your youth, by doubling your diligence when you came to riper years? The
Apostles gathered Churches among Heathens that never heard of Christ before;
and converted many thousand souls that were never once told of a Savior, or
the way to salvation, till they had past a great part of their? lives. If you
loitered till the latter part of the day, it behoved you then to have bestirred
your selves the more: and not to say, Through the fault of my Parents. I lost
the beginning of my life, and therefore I will lose all; they taught me not
then, and therefore I will not learn now; have you not seen some of your
neighbors, who were as ill educated as your selves, attain to much knowledge
afterward by their Industry? And why might not you have done so, if you had
been as Industrious as they? May not God and Conscience witness, that it was
because you cared not for knowledge, and would not be at pains to get it, that
you knew no more? Speak truth, man in the presence of thy Judge; was thy heart
and mind set upon it? Did thou pray daily for it to God? Did thou use all
the means thou could to get it? Did thou attend diligently on the word in
public, and think of what thou heardest when thou came home? Did thou go
to the Minister, or to others that could teach thee, and entreat them to tell
thee the way to salvation? Or did thou not rather carelessly neglect these
matters; and hear a Sermon as a common tale, even when the minister was
speaking of Heaven or of Hell? It was not then thine unavoidable Ignorance, but
thy negligence.

Yea further, answer as in the presence of God: Did thou obey so far as thou
did know? Or did thou not rather sin against that knowledge which thou
had? Thou knew that the soul was better then the body, and everlasting
life more to be regarded then this transitory life; But did thou regard it
accordingly? Thou sure knew that God was better then the world, and Heaven
then earth: at least, thou was told of it; But did thou accordingly value
him, and love him more? Thou knew sure that there was no salvation without
Faith, and Repentance, and newness of life, and yet they were neglected. In a
word, many a thousand sins which were committed, and duties that were omitted,
against thy own Knowledge and Conscience, will mar this Excuse

The fifth Excuse. I lived not under a powerful Minister to tell me of these
things: but where there was no Preaching at all.

Answ. And might you not have gone where a powerful Minister was, with a
little pains? Yea, did not the very plain Word that you heard read* tell you of
these things? and might you not have had a Bible your selves, and found them
there?

The Sixth Excuse. I was a Servant, and had no time from my labor to mind
these matters; I lived with a hard master that required all his own work of me,
but would allow me no time for the service of God. Or else, I was a poor man,
and had a great charge to look, after, and with my hard labor had much ado to
live, so that I had no time for heavenly things.

Answ 1. Who should be first served? God, or man? What should be first sought
after? heaven or earth? Did not Christ cell thee, One thing is necessary? Luke
10. 41, 42, Was it not as needful to see that you escape Damnation, and get
safe to Heaven when this life is ended, as to see that you had food and raiment
for your selves and yours?

2. Did you spend no time in Recreation, nor Idleness, nor vain talking? why
might not that at least have been spent about Heavenly things?

3. Could you have taken no time from your rest or eating, or at other
Intermissions? Man's Body will not endure so great Labors as have no
Intermission. And why then might not godliness have been your ease and
recreation?

4. Or might you not have minded these things even when you were about your
labor, if you had but a heart to them?

5. At least you might have spent the Lords own Day in hearing, reading, and
pondering of these matters, when you were forced to forbear your worldly
labors, even by the wholesome Law of the Land. These therefore are all but vain
Excuses; and God will shortly make thee speak out, and plainly confess, It was
not so much for want of Time or Helps, or warning, as for want of a heart to
use them well. I should have found some time, though it had been when I should
have slept, if my heart had been but set upon it.

The Seventh Excuse. Little did I think ^o have seen this day: I did not
Believe that ever God would be so severe. I thought his Threatenings had been
but to keep men in awe: and I suspected either that the Scripture was not his
word, or else I thought he would be better then his word. I thought all that I
heard of another life had been uncertain; and therefore was loath to let go a
certainty for an uncertainty, and lose my present pleasures which I had in hand
for the hopes of that which I never did see.

Answ. He that will not know his misery by believing to prevent it, shall know
it by feeling to endure it. You were told and told again what your unbelief
would bring you to. Did Gods Word make Heaven and Earth? does it support them,
and secure them and is not his Word sufficient security for you to have trusted
your souls upon? did you know where was any better security to be had? and
where was any surer ground for your confidence? And did you think so basely and
blasphemously of God, that he would falsify his Word, lest such as you should
suffer? and that he was fain to rule the world by a Lie? Did God make the world
so easily? and can he not govern it by true and righteous means? what need God
to say that which he will not do, to awe sinners? can he not awe them by Truth?
is it not just that those should eternally perish, that will entertain such
desperate thoughts of God, and then by such wicked imaginations encourage
themselves in sin against him?

And for the Truth of Scripture, God did not bid you believe it without
Evidence. He stamped on it the Image of his own Purity and Perfection, that you
might know it by that Image and superscription, if you had eyes to see them: He
sealed it by uncontrouled multitudes of Miracles; He delivered it down to your
hands by infallible witnesses, so that he left you no room for rational
Doubting.

And you knew that the matters of this world were not only uncertain* but
certainly vain and transitory, and would shortly come to nothing, and leave you
in distress. If it had then been uncertain whether there were a Glory and
Mi^ery hereafter (as it was not) should not Reason have taught you to prefer
the least probabilities of an everlasting unspeakable happiness, before that
which is certainly perishing and vain? These vain Excuses will but condemn you.

The Eighth Excuse. I was so enticed and persuaded by sinner to do as they did,
that I could not deny them: they would never let me rest.

Answ. And were you not as earnestly persuaded by God to forsake sin and erve
him, and yet that would not prevail with you? You could not deny the Devils and
fools, but you could deny God and all his Messengers. Were not Ministers as
earnest with you every week to repent and amend? What did men entice you with?
with a little deluding fleshly pleasure for a few days? And what did God
entice you with? with the Promise of endless unconcievable felicity! And if
this were a smaller matter in your eyes, then the other, then you have had your
choice be content with it, and thank your selves. In your life time you had the
good things which you chose, and preferred before heaven, and therefore cannot
expect to have heaven besides.

The ninth Excuse. I lived among ungodly persons, that derided all that feared
God; so that if I had not done as I they did, but had made any more ado to be
saved, should have been the very scorn of the place where I lived.

Answ. And was not heaven worth the enduring of a scorn? Is not he worthy to go
without it that thinks so basely of it? Did not Christ tell you, that if you
were ashamed of him before men, he would be ashamed of you before his Father
and the Angels of heaven? Mark 8. 38. He sufferered more then scorns forth you:
and could not you suffer a scorn for im and your selves? seeing you chose
rather to endure everlasting Torment, than a little derision from ignorant men,
take that which you made choice of. And seeing so small a matter wonld drive
you from heaven, and part God and you as a mock, as the wind of a man's mouth,
No wonder if you be commanded to Depart from him into everlasting fire.

The tenth Excuse. I had ungodly persons to my Parents, or Masters, or
Landlord, or Governors, who threatened to undo me, if I had addicted my self to
so strict a life, and if I would not believe and do as they did.

Answ. What if they threatened you with present Death? Did not God also threaten
you with everlasting Death, if you were not ruled by him? And whose threatening
should you have chiefly feared? Is man more dreadful than God? Is death more
terrible then Hell? Did not Chirst bid you Fear not them that can kill the
body, and after that can do no more; but fear him that is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell sire: yea I say unto you, fear him, Mat. 10. 28. Luke 12.
4, 5. and Isa. 51. 7. Fear ye not the Reproach of men, neither be afraid of
their revilings. For the moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool: but My Righteousness shall be for ever, ard my
salvation from Generation to Generation. Seeing therefore you have chosen
rather to suffer from God for ever for your sin, then to suffer small matters
for well-doing for a moment, you must ever bear your own choice. Christ told
you before hand, that if you could not forsake all the world and your own lives
for him, you could not be his Disciples, Match. 10. 37, 38, 39. And seeing you
thought his terms too hard, and would needs seek you out a better service, even
take what you have chosen and found.

The eleventh Excuse. I saw so many follow their pleasure and their worldly
business, and never look after these higher things, and so few go the other
way, that I thought sure God would not damn so great a part of the world, and
therefore I ventured to do as the most did.

Answ. God will make good his word upon many or few. Did you doubt of his will,
or of his power? I For his will, he has told it you in his word. For his power
he is as ab e to punish many as one man. What is all he world to him, but as a
drop of a Bucket, as the dust of the balance? He told you before hand that the
gate was strait, and the way to heaven was narrow, and few did find it; and the
gate to destruction was wide, and the way was broad, and many did enter in at
it. Mat. 7. 13, 14. And if you would not Believe him you must bear what your
unbelief has brought you to. Wha^ if you had twenty children, or servants, or
friends: and the greater part of them should prove false to you and seek your
destruction, or prove disobedient, and turn to your enemy? would you think it a
good excuse: if the rest should do the like, because of their example? will you
therefore wrong God, because you see others wrong him? would you spit in the
face of your own Father, if you saw others do so? God warned you, that you
should not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2, And if yet you will do
as most do, you must even speed as most speed. You should not so much consider,
who they be as what they do, and whither they go, and who they forsake, and
what they lose, and what strength is in the Reasons that move them to do this
And then you would find, It is God they forsake, it is sin they choose; it is
heaven they lose, it is hell they run into; and it is no true reason, but
Satan's delusion, and sensual inclinations that lead them to it. And should men
be imitated be they many, or be they few, in such a course as this?

The twelfth Excuse. I saw so many faults in those that were accounted Godly,
and saw so much Division among them, that I thought they were as bad as others;
and among so many opinions, I knew not what Religion to be of.

Answ. 1. A spot is soonest seen in the fairest cloth. And the malicious world
uses to make such far worse then they are.

2. But suppose all were true that malice says of some, you could not say the
like by others.

3. Or if you could, yet it was Gods Law, and not men's faults, that was made
the Rule for you to live by: Will it excuse you that others are bad?

4. And from their diverse opinions, you should have taken counsel at Gods
word, which was right: Did you first search the Scripture impartially, as
willing to know the Truth, that you might obey it? and did you pray daily that
God would lead you into the truth? and did you obey as much as you knew? Did
you join with the godly so far as they are all agreed? they are all agreed in
the Fundamental Articles of Christianity, and in all things absolutely
necessary to a holy Life, and to salvation: that all known sin is to be
forsaken, and all known duty to be done. Why did you not so far then agree with
them? Alas, the imperfections of the godly, and the false Accusations of the
malicious world, will prove but a poor cover for your wilful ungodliness, and
Christ will convince you of the vanity of these Excuses.

The thirteenth Excuse. The Scriptures were so dark, that I could not
understand them. And I saw the wisest men differ so much in the exposition of
them, that I thought it was in vain for me to trouble my self about them. If
God would have had us live according to the Sriptures, he would sure have
written them plainly, that men might understand them.

Answ. 1. It is all plainly written according to the nature of the subject: But
a prejudiced, disaffected, yea or but untaught, disused soul cannot at first
understand the plainest Teaching. The plainest Greek or Hebrew Gramer that can
be written, will be utterly obscure to him that is but newly entered the English
School: yea after many years time that he spends in learning. Did you study
hard, and pray for Gods teaching, and enquire of others, and wait patiently in
Christ's School, that you might come to further knowledge by Degrees? and were
you willing to know even those Truths that called you out to self-denial, and
that did put you on the ^ardest flesh displeasing duties? Had you done thus,
you would have admired the Light of the Holy Scripture, and now have rejoiced
that ever you saw them, and not have quarrelled at its seeming Darkness. This
word might have made you wise to salvation, as it has done others, Act. 20.
32. 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. This Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; The statutes
of the Lord are Right, Rejoicing the heart: the Commandment of Lord is pure,
enligtning the eyes, Psalm. 19. 7, 8.

2. So much as is of Necessity to salvation, is as plain as you could desire.
Yet if you be Judged by these, you will be condemned: For you did not obey that
which was most plain. What darkness is in such words as these, Except ye
Repent, ye shall All perish, Luke 13. 3. 5. Love not the world, nor the things
in the world: if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
1 John 2. 15 He that will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. Matthew. 16.
24.

3. If there had been nothing that seemed difficult to you, would you not have
despised its simplicity, and have thought your selves wise enough at the first
Reading, and needed no more?

The fourteenth Excuse. There were so many seeming Contradictions in the
Scripture, and so many strange improbable things, that I could not believe it.

Answ. The contradictions were in your fancy, that did not understand the word
which you read. Must the raw unexperienced Learner despise his book or Teacher,
a often as in his ignorance he thinks he meets with contradictions? Did you think
God was no wiser then you, and understood not himself, because you understood
him not? Nor could reconcile his own words, because you could not reconcile
them? You would needs be a Judge of the Law, instead of obeying it, and speak
evil of it rather then do it, Jam. 4. 11.

2. And those things which you called improbable in the word* were the wonders
of God, of purpose to confirm it. If it had not been confirmed by wonders, you
would have thought it unproved, and yet now it is so confirmed, you will not
believe the Doctrine, because the witness seems incredible. And that is,
because they are matters above the power of man: As if they were therefoe above
the power of God! You shall at last have your eyes so far opened, as to see
those seeming contradictions reconciled, and to certainty of those things which
you accounted Improbable: that you may be forced to confess the folly of your
Arrogance and Unbelief: and then God will judge you in Righteousness, who
presumed unrighteously to Judge him and his word.

The fifteenth Excuse. It seemed so unlikely a thing to me, that the merciful
God should damn most of the world to everlasting fire, that I could not believe
it.

Answ. 1. And did it not seem as unlikely to you, that his word should be false?

2. Should it not have seemed as unlikely that the Governor of the world should
be unjust, and suffer his Law to be unexecuted and ^he worst to speed as well
as the best! and to suffer vile sinful dust to despise his mercy, and abuse his
patience, and turn all his Creatures against him, without due punishment?

3. Did you not feel pain and misery begin in this life?

4. You saw Toads and Serpents which had never sinned: And you would rather
live in any tolerable suffering, then to be a Toad. And is it not Reason, that
it should go worse with contemptuous sinners, then with those creatures that
never sinned?

5. Could you expect that those should come to heaven, that would not believe
there was such a state, but refused it, and preferred the world before it? And
to be out of heaven is to be out of all Happiness: and he that is so out of all
happiness, and knows that he lost it by his own folly, must needs Torment
himself with such considerations, were there no other Torments. And as man is
capable of greater felicity then bruits, so must he needs be capable of more
misery.

The sixteenth Excuse. The things which God promised in heaven, and threatened
in Hell, were all out of my sight: and therefore I could not heartily believe
them. Had I but once seen them, or spoke with one that had seen them, I should
have been satisfied, and have contemned the things of the world.

Answ. Will you not believe till you see or feel? was not Gods word sufficient
Evidence? would you have believed one from the dead that had told you he had
seen such things? and would you not believe Stephen that saw them? Act. 7. 56.
Or Paul that heard and saw them? 2 Cor. 12. 3, 4. Nor Christ that came
purposely from heaven to reveal them? why flesh and blood cannot see them. You
see not God: will you not therefore Believe that there is a God? indeed,
whatever you imagine, if you would not Believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, neither would you have believed though one had risen from the
dead. For Gods word is more credible then a dead man's: and Christ did rise from
the dead, to attest it. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believed.
Noah saw no rain when he was preparing the Ark: but because he believed, he
made ready and escaped, Heb. 11. 7. when the world that would not Believe, did
perish. But seeing Gods word was of no more weight with you, and no knowledge
would serve your turn but by seeing and feeling; you shall see and feel
everlastingly to your sorrow.

The seventeeth Excuse. It was so strict a Law that God would have Ruled me by,
and the way to Heaven was so strait and difficult, that I could not endure it.
I was not able to deny my flesh, and live such a life.

Answ. 1. You were not Able, because you were not Willing. that was there but
your own wicked hearts that should make such a life seem grievous to you? Every
thing is hard and grievous to him who loathes it, and whose heart is against it.
The chief thing that God called you ^o, was to love him, and make him your
Delight. And are Love and Delight such grievous things? It was not grievous to
you to love your meat, or drink, or money: It was no hard matter to you to love
a friend that loved you: no nor to love your sin, which was your enemy: And
what should make it seem hard to love God, but a wicked heart? Is not he better
and more Lovely then all these? And had you but Loved him, all the rest of his
service would have seemed easy to you. To think of him, to speak of him, to
pray to him, to praise him, yea to deny all and suffer for him, would have been
sweet and pleasant to you, so far as you had Loved him. It was not God
therefore, but your own naughty hearts that made his work seem grievous to you,
and the way to heaven seem hard. He told you truly, that his yoke was easy,
and his burden light, and his Commandments were not grievous, Mat. 11. 29. 1.
Joh. 5 3. They that tried them found them the very Joy and Delight of their
souls; and why could not you do so?

2. But what if the way to heaven had been harder then it was? was not heaven
worth your labor? were you afraid of being a loser by it? Could not God
requite your labor or sufferings? Does any Repent when they come to Heaven,
that it cost them so dear to come thither? And is not hell worse then the
hardest way to heaven? seeing you have chosen hell to save you a labor and
suffering in in this life, you must have your choice. And seeing you thought
not everlasting life to be worth so much as God required, that is, the
Accepting thankfully, and minding, and seeking, and preferring it before this
life, you have none to blame for the loss of it but your selves.

The eighteenth Excuse. It was God that made me of a sensual nature: He gave me
an Appetite to Meat, and Drink, and Ease, and lust; He gave me that flesh which
ruled me; how then can be condemn me, for living according to the nature which
he gave me?

Answ. He gave that Appetite to be exercised moderately under the rule of
reason, for the preservation and propagation of mankind. But did he not also
give you Reason to govern that Appetite? and the Revelation of his will to
guide that Reason? He gave you your flesh, to be a servant, and not a master.
Your beast has fleshly Appetite without reason; and therefore God has put him
under you who have Reason that you should Rule him. Will you let your beast do
what he list, and madly run upon whom he list, and say, you do but let him live
according to his nature, which God has given him? Why God that gave him such a
nature, did intend him to be Ruled by a higher nature, even by the Reason which
he gave to you: And so he did also by your flesh and sensual Appetite.

The ninteenth Excuse. But I lived among so many baits, which enticed this
flesh, that I could not resist them. My meat was a snare to me, my drink a
snare, my clothes, my house, my land a snare, every beauty that I saw was a
snare: and the better all these were, the stronger was my snare. If God would
not have had my heart ensnared and drawn from him, he should not have put so
many baits in my way. Yea and they were so Near to me, and Daily with me, that
though I was resolved to forbear them before, yet when they were brought to my
hand, I could not forbear.

Answ. Is this the thanks that God has for his mercies? He sent you all these
as favors from his own hand: He wrote his own name upon them, that in them you
might see his power, and wisdom, and goodness, and so be led up to the
Consideration of him, that you might fall in love with himself, who was the
fountain, the life, the end of all. And do you overlook God in the creature,
and live as without him in the world, and dote upon that which should have
drawn you to himself, and then lay the blame on God? If he send a Suitor to
speak to you in his name, and write you a love Letter with his own hand, will
you fall in Love with the Messengers or the Letter, and neglect the Sender, and
then blame him that wrote his letter on so fair a paper, or in so neat a hand,
or that sent it by such a comely Messenger? Certainly, these Excuses are too
gross, to take with the wise and righteous God, or to seem sufficient to a well
informed Conscience.

2. And whereas you speak of the power of these objects, was there not much
more in God, in Christ, in the promised glory, to have drawn your heart another
way? why then did not these take as much with you as the other? You could not
choose, forsooth, but be enticed with such baits as were fitted to your sensual
Appetite, and such things as a dog, or a swine may enjoy as well as a man: But
you could chosse, when Christ and glory were offered you: yea you did choose to
refuse the offer, and tread them under feet by your neglect! When Satan set
your Cups, and your ^arlots, and your profits before you, on one side; did not
God set his favor and everlasting hapiness on the other side? And was it wise
or equal dealing, to prefer your lusts before that glory?

3. Moreover it was not in the power of any of those baits to force your will,
or to necessitate you to choose them. They could be but Baits to entice you,
and it was still in your own choice, wheth^r you would yield to the encicement,
and choose them or not. Shall every man be false to God that has any bait to
entice him from him? will you excuse your child or friend, if he would be false
to you, upon as great enticements as these? If a cup-of drink, or a whore, or a
little gain, could draw him more then all you love and interest, I do not think
you would hold him excused.

And whereas you speak of the Neerness and Continuance of these allurements, I
would fain know, was not God as Near you, and Continually near you, to draw you
to himself? Faith might have ^een him, though flesh and blood cannot. Did he
not stand by you when you were in your cups and lustful Pleasure? Did he not
tell you of the danger, and offer you far better things, if you would obey him
and despise those baits? But you would hearken to none of this; You should have
remembered that he stood over you, and was looking on you; and you should have
said as Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? You had also Scripture near you, and Reason near you, and Conscience near
you, as well as the bait was near you. And therefore this is a vain Excuse.

The twentieth Excuse. It was God that let loose the Devil to tempt me; and he
was to subtle for me to deal with; and therefore what wonder if I sinned and
were overcome?

Answ. 1. He did not let loose the Devil to constrain you to sin. He could but
entice, and you might choo^e whether you would yield. The Devil could nether
make you sin against your will, nor yet Necessitate you to be willing.

2. You were a sure friend to Christ that while, that would forsake him as often
as you were tempted by the Devil. Is that a friend or a servant worthy to be
regarded, that will disobey you* or betray you as often as he is tempted to it?

2. Will you excuse your servant, if he leave your work undone, and follow
cards, or dice, or the Alehouse, and say, I was tempted to it by one that was
cuninger then I? shall every Murderer or Theif escape hanging, because the
Devil was too cunning for him in his Temptations? would you have the Jury or
the Judge to take this for a good excuse?

4. And why did you not hearken to God that enticed you the other way? You
forget what helps he afforded you to discover the wiles of Satan, and to
vanquish the Temptation? He told you it was an enemy that tempted you: and
would you hearken to an enemy? He told you it was a dream, a shadow, a painted
pleasure, a gilded carcass, a lying promise, and deceitful vanity by which you
were tempted; And yet would you regard it before your God? He told you that it
was your God, your Savior, your hopes, your everlasting happiness that the
Tempter would beguile you of: And yet would you be beguiled? He told you, and
plainly, and often told you that the Tempter would lead you to eternal fire,
and undo you everlastingly before you were aware: and that a fatal hook was
covered with that bait: And yet would you swallow it?

5. It is plain by all this, that it was not your natural weakness of faculties
that caused you to be overcome by the subtilties of the Devil, as a silly child
is deceived by the crafty fellow that overwits him: But it was your
carelessness, inconsiderateness, your sensual inclinations, and vicious
disposition, that drew you to a wilful obeying of the tempter, and rejecting
the wholesome advice of Christ. This therefore is a frivolous Excuse of your sin.

The one and twentieth Excuse. But I hope you will not say that all men have
Free Will^ And if my will were not free, how could I choose but sin?

Answ. Your will was not free from Gods Rule and Government; nor was it free
from its natural inclination to Good in general; for either of these were more
properly slavery.

3. Nor was it free from the Influence of a dark understanding, 4. Nor free
from its own contradicted vicious Inclination. 5. Nor freed from the
Temptations of the flesh, the world and the Devil,

But it was 1. Free from any natural Determination to evil, or to any thing
that was doubtful. 2. And free from the Coaction or Violence of any. 3. And
free from an irresistible Determination of any exterior cause, at least
ordinarily. So that naturally, as men, you have the power or faculty of
determining your own wills, and by your wills, of Ruling your inferior Faculties
in a great measure; yea of Ruling the senses and the Fantasy it self, which
does so much to dispose of our Understanding. And if your wills which are
naturally free, are yet so habitually vicious, that they incline you to do
evil, that is not an excuse, but an Aggravation of your sin. But of this more
under the next.

The two and twentieth Excuse But I have not Power of myself to do any thing
that is good: What can the creature do? without Christ we can do nothing. It is
God that must give me Ability, or I can have none: and if he had given it me, I
had not been an Unbeliever or Impenitent. I can no more Believe of myself, than
I can ful^ill the Law of my self.

Answ. 1. These are the vain Cavils of learned folly, which God will easily
answer in a word. The word [Power] is taken in several senses. Sometime, and
most commonly and fitly, for a faculty or a strength by which a man Can do his
duty, if he Will. This Physickal Power you have, and the worst of sinners have
while they are men on earth. Were they Actually willing, they might acceptably
perform sincere obedience; And were they Dispositively willing, they might
Actually Believe and will. And thus the ungodly have Power to Believe.

Sometime the word [Power] is taken for Authority or Leave; for legal or civil
Power. And thus you have all not only Power or Liberty to Believe but also a
Command which makes it your Duty, and a Threatening adjoined, which will condemn
you if you do not.

Sometime the word [Power] is taken Ethically and less properly, for a
disposition* Inclination, Habit or Freedom from the contrary habit or
disposition. And in this sense its true, that none but the effectually called
have a Power to Believe. But then observe, 1. That this is but a moral less
proper, and not a Physical proper Impotency: And therefore Austin chooses
rather ^o say that all men have power to believe, but all have not a Will, or
Faith it self? because we use to difference Power from willingness; and
willingness actuateth the Power which we had before. And therefore our Divines
choose rather to call Grace a Habit when they speak exactly, then a Power; and
Dr. Twiss derides the Arminians for talking of a Power subjected in a Power 2.
Note that this Impotency is but the same thing with you unwillingness and
wilful blindness, in another word. 3. Note that this Impotency is long of your
selves as to the Original, and much more as to the not-curing and removing of
it, Has God given you no means toward the cure of this disability, which you
have neglected? 4. Note that this Impotency is nnjust excuse but an Aggravation
of your sin. If you were willing to be the servant of Christ, and yet were not
Able, either because he would not accept you or because of a want of natural
faculties, or because of some other naural difficulty which the willingest mind
could not overcome, this were some Excuse: But to be Habitually wilful in
refusing Grace, is worse then to be merely Actually unwilling. If a man have so
accustomed himself to murder, drunkeness, stealing, or the like wickedness, so
far that he cannot leave it, will you therefore forgive him, or will any Judge
or Jury hold him excused? Or rather think him the more unfit for mercy? 5. Note
also that the want of a supernatural Habit, no nor the presence of the contrary
Habit, do not Efficiently determine the will to particular acts: much less take
away its natural Fre^^om. 6. And that till Habits attain an utter predominancy,
(at least) there is a Power remaining in the will to resist them, and use means
against them. Though Eventually the perverse Inclination may hinder the use of
it.

The three and twentieth Excuse. I have heard from learned men, that God does
determine all Actions, Natural and Free, as the first Efficient Physical
immediate Cause: or else nothing could Act. And then it was not long of me that
I chose forbidden Objects, but of him that irresistly moved me thereto, and
whose Instrument I was.

Answ. This is a trick of that wisdom which is foolishness with God, and to be
deceived by vain Philosophy.

1. The very principle it self is most likely to be false, and those that tell
you this, to err. Much more, I think, may be said against it then for it.

2. I am sure it is either false or reconcilable with Gods Holiness, and man's
liberty and culpability; so that its a mad thing to deceive yeur selves with
such Philosophical uncertain^ies, when the Truth which you oppose by it is
infallibly certain. That God is not the Author of sin, but man himself, who is
justly condemned for it, is undoubtedly true: and would you obscure so clear a
Truth, by searching into points beyond homane reach if not unsound, as you
conclude them?

The four and twentieth Excuse. But at least, those learned Divines among us
that doubt of this, do yet say that the will is necessarily and infallbly
Determined by the Practical Understanding, and that is as much unresistibly
necessitated by Objects: and therefore whatever act was done by my
understanding or will, was thus necessitated, and I could not help it. The^
say, Liberty is but the Acting of the faculty aggreeably to its nature: And it
was God as Creator that gave Adam his faculties: and God by providential
dtspose, that presented all Objects to him, by Which hi understanding, and so
his Will were unvoidable necessitated.

Answ. This is of the same nature with the former: uncertain, if no^ certainly
false. Were this true, for ought we can see, it would lay all the sin and
misery of this world on God, as the unresistible necessitating Cause; which
because we know infallibly to be false, we have no reason to take such
principles to be true which infer it. The understanding does not by a necessary
efficiency Determine the will but morally; or rather, is regularly a Condition
or necessary Antecedent, without which it may not Determine itself. Yea the
Will by commanding the sense and fantasy, does much to determine the
Understanding. As the eye is not necessary to my going, but to my going right,
so is not the Understandings Guidance necessary to my willing (there the simple
Apprehension may suffice but to my Right willing. There are other ways of
Determining the Will Or if the Understanding did Determine the Will Efficiently
and Necessarily, it is not every act of the Understanding that must do it. If
it be so, when it says, This must be done, and says it importunately; yet not
when it only says, This may be done, or you may venture on it; which is the
common part which it has in sin.

I am not pleased that these curious Objections fall in the way, nor do I
delight to put them into vulgar heads; but finding many young Scholars and
others that have converted with them, assaulted with these Temptations, I
thought meet to give a touch, and but a touch, to take them out of their way:
As Mr. Fenner has done more fully in the Preface to his Hidden Manna, on this
last point, to which I refer you. I only add this;

The will of man in its very Dominion does bear Gods Image. It is a self
Determining Power, though it biased by Habits and needs a Guide. As the Heart
and Vital Spirits by which it acts, are to the rest of the Body, so is It to
the soul. The Light of Nature has taught all the world to carry the Guilt of
every crime to the will of man, and there to leave it; Upon this all Laws and
Judgments are grounded. From Ignorance and Intellectual weakness, men commonly
fetch Excuses for their faults; but from the Will they are Aggravated. If we
think it strange that man's will should be the first cause, so much as of a
sinful mode, and answer all occuring Objections: it may suffice that we are
certain the Holy Majesty is not the Author of sin; and he is able to make all
this as plain as the Sun, and easily answer all these vain Excuses though we
should be unable. And if we be much ignorant of the frame and motions of our
own souls, and especially of that high self determining principle, Free Will,
the great spring of our actions, and the curious Engine by which God does
Sapientially Govern the world, it is no wonder; Considering that the soul can
know it self but by Reflection, and God gave us a soul to use, rather then to
know itself; and to know its qualities and operations, rather then its Essence.

The five and twentieth Excuse. No man can be saved, nor avoid any sin, nor
believe in Christ, but those whom God has predestined thereto. I was under
an irreversible Sentence before I was born: and therefore I do nothing but what
I was predestined to do; and if God decreed not to save me, how could I help
it?

Answ. 1. Gods Judgments are more plain, but his Decrees or secret purposes
are mysterious: And to darken certainties, by having recourse to points
obscure, is no part of Christian Wisdom. God told you your Duty in his word,
and on what terms vou must be Judged to Life or Death; Hither should you have
recourse for Direction, and not to the unsearchable mysteries of his mind.

2. God decrees not to Condemn any but for sin. Sin, I say, as the Cause of
that Condemnation, though not of his Decree.

3. Gods Decrees are acts Immanent in himself, and make no change on you, and
therefore do not necessitate you to sin, any more then his foreknowledge does.
For both cause only a necessity of Confequence, which is Logical, as the
Divines on both sides do Consess. And therefore this no more caused you to sin,
then if there had been no such Decree. And its a doubt whether that Decree be
not negative; A willing suspending of the Divine will, as to evil; or at most A
purpose to permit it.

The six and twentieth Excuse. If it be no more, yet does it make my perdition
unavoidable; For even Gods foreknowledge does so; For if he foreknow it, all
the World cannot hinder it from coming to pass.

Answ. Must God either be Ignorant of what you will do, or else be the cause of
it? If you foreknow that the Sun will rise to morrow, that does not cause it to
rise. If you foreknow that one man will murder another, you are not the cause
of it by foreknowing it. So is it here.

The seven and twentieth Excuse. God might have hindered my Sin and Damnation if
he would.

Answ. And will you wilfully sin, and think to escape because God does not
hinder you? The Prince that makes a Law against murder, could lock you up, and
keep you from being a Murderer! But are you excusable if he do not? We are
certain that God could have hindered all the sin and and death, and confusion,
and misery that is in the world* And we are as certain that he does not hinder
it (but by forbidding it and giving men means against it:) And we are certain
that he is Just, and Good, and Wise in all; and not bound to hinder it: And
what his Reasons are, you may better know hereafter: In the mean time, you had
been better have looked to your own Duty.

The eight and twentieth Excuse. How could I be saved if Christ d d not dye for
me? He dyed but for his Elect; and none could be saved without his Death.

Answ. He did dye for you and for more then his Elect, though he Absolutely
purposed only their salvation. Your sins crucified him, and your debt lay upon
him; and ^e so far ransomed you* that nothing bu^ your wilful refusal of the
benefits could have condemned you.

The nine and twentieth Excuse. It was Adams sin that brought me into this
Depravedness of will, Which I can neither care, nor could prevent.

Answ. 1. If Adam cast away his holiness. he could no more convey that to us
which he cast away, then a Nobleman that is a Traitor, can convey his lost
Inheritance or Honors to his son.

2. You perish not only for your Original sin, but for rejecting the Recovering
mercy of the Redeemer: you might have had Christ and Life in him for the
Accepting.

The thirtieth Excuse. God will require no more than be gives. He gave me not
Grace to Repent and Believe; and wihtout his gift I could not have it.

Answ. 1. God will justly require more then he gives; that is, The improvement
of his Gifts, as Mat. 25. shows. He gave Adam but a Power to persevere, and not
Actual perseverance: Yet did he justly punish him for want of the Act; even for
not using by his own will the Power which he had given him.

2. It is long of your self, if God did not give you Grace to Believe: It was
because you wilfully refused some preparatory Grace. Christ found you at a
great distance from him, and he gave you Grace sufficient to have brought you
nearer to him than you were; you had grace sufficient to have made you better
than you were, and restrained many sins, and brought you to the means, when you
turned your back on them: Though this were not sufficient to cause you to
Believe, it was sufficient to have brought you nearer to Believing; and through
your own wilfulness, became not Effectual: Even as Adam had sufficient grace to
have stood, which was not Effectual. So that you had not only. Christ offered
to you, if you would but Accept him; but you had daily and precious helps and
means, to have cu^ed your wills, and caused you to Accept him: for neglect of
which, and so for not believing, and so for all your other sins, you ^ustly
perish.

The one and thirtieth Excuse. Alas, man is a worm, a d^y lea^, Job 13. 25. a
silly foolish creature: and therefore his Actions be not regardble, nor deserve
so great a punishment.

Answ. Though he be a worm, and as nothing to God and foolish by sin, yet is he
naturally so noble a creature, that the image of God was on him, Genesis 1. 26.
and 5. 1 Jam. 3. 9. and the world made his servants, and Angels his attendants,
Heb. 1. 14. so noble, that Christ dyed for him, God takes special care of him;
He is capable of knowing and enjoying God; and heaven is not thought too good
for him if he will obey. And he that is capable of so great Good, must be
capable of as great. Evil, and his wa^es not to be so overlooked by that God
that has undertaken to be his Governor: When it tends to Infidelity, the
Devil will teach you to debase man, even lower than God would do.

The two and thirtieth Excuse. Sin is no Being: and shall men be damned for
that which is nothing?

Answ. 1. It is such a mode as deformeth Gods creature. It is a moral Being. It
is a Relation of our actions and hearts to Gods will and Law.

2. They that say, Sin is nothing, say Pain and Loss is nothing too. You shall
therefore be paid with one nothing for another. Make light of your misery, and
say, It is nothing, as you did of your sin.

3. Will you take this for a good Excuse from your children or servants it they
abuse you? Or from a Theif or a Murderer? shall he escape by telling the Judge
that his sin was Nothing? Or rathe^have death, which is nothing, as the just
eward of it?

The three and thirtieth Excuse. But sin is a Tranfient thing. At least it does
God no harm, and therefore why sold he do us so much harm for it?

Answ. 1. It hurts not God, because he is above hurt. No thanks to you, if he
be out of your reach. 2. You may wrong him, when you cannot Hurt him. And the
wrong deserves as much as you can bear. If a Traitor endeavor the death of the
Prince, in vain, his endeavor deserves death, though he never hurt him. You
despise Gods Law and Authority: you cause the Blaspheming of his name, Romans 2
24. He calls it A pressing him as a ^art is pressed with sheaves, Amos 2. 13.
and a grieving of him.

3. And you wrong his Image, his Church, the public good, and the souls of
others.

The four and thirtieth Excuse. But Gods nature is so Good and Merciful, that
sure be will not damn his own creature.

Answ. 1. A merciful Judge will hang a man for a fault against man: By
proportion then what is due for sin against God?

2. All the death and calamity which you see in the world, comes from the anger
of this merciful God: why then may not future misery come from it?

3. God knows his own mercy better then you do; and he has told you how far
it shall extend.

4. He is infinitely merciful; but it is to the Heirs of mercy: Not to the
final Rejecters of His mercy.

5. Has not God been merciful to thee in bearing with thee so long, and
offering thee Grace in the blood of Christ, till thou did wilfully reject it?
Thou will confess to thy everlasting woe that God was merciful; Had he not been
so merciful, thou would not have been so miserable for rejecting it.

The five and th^rtieth Excuse. I would not so Torment mine enemy my self.

Answ. No reason you should. Is it all one to wrong you, and to wrong the God
of Heaven? God is the only Judge of his own wrongs.

The six and thirtieth Excuse. All men are siners; and I was but a sinner.

Answ. All were not Impenitent, Unbelieving, Rebellious sinners; and therefore
all are not unpardoned condemned sinners. All did not live after the flesh, and
refuse to the last to be converted, as you did. God will teach you better to
difference between sinners and sinners.

The seven and thirtieth Excuse. But if Christ have satisfied for my sins, and
dyed for me, then how can I justly suffer for the same sins? will God punish
one sin twice?

Answ 1. Christ suffered for man in the Nature of man; but not in your person,
nor you in him. It was not you that provided the price, but God himself. Christ
was not man's Deligate in satisfying, and therefore received not his
Instructions from us, nor did it on our terms, but his own. It was not the same
thing which the Law threatened, that Christ underwent: for that was the
Damnation of the sinner himself, and not the suffering of another for him; it
cannot therefore be yours, but on Christ's own terms. He dyed for thy sin, but
with this intent, that for all that, if thou Refuse ^^m* thou shall dye thy
self. It is therefore no wrong to thee to dye, for it was not thou that dyedst
before: And Christ will take it for no wrong to him; For he will Judge thee to
that Death. It is for refusing a Christ that dyed for thee that thou must
perish for ever.

The eight and thirtieth Excuse. But I did not Refuse Christ. I believed and
trusted in him to the last; and Repented of my sins, though I sometime
wasovertaken with them.

Answ. Had this been true, thy sin would not have condemned thee. But there is
no mocking God. He will show thee then thy naked heart, and convince thousands
that thought they Believed and Repented that indeed they did not. By thy works
also will this be disovered, that is, by the main bent and scope of thy life,
as Matthew. 25. throughout and Jam. 2.

The nine and thirtieth Excuse. I did many Good Works; and ^ hope God will set
those against my evil works.

Answ. Thy good works were thy sins, because indeed they were not good, being
not done in sincerity of heart for God. The best man's works have some
infirmity, which nothing can cleanse but the blood of Christ, which thou have
made light of, and therefore have no part in. If all thy lise had been spent in
perfect works except one day, they would not make satisfaction for the sins of
that day. For they are but part of thy Dut. Woe to him that has no better a
Savior at Judegment, then his own good works.

The Fortieth Excuse. I lived in poverty andmisery on earth, and therefore I
hope I have had my suffering here and shall not suffer in this world and
another too.

1. By that Rule all poor men, and murderers, and thieves that are tormented
and hanged, should be saved, but as Gooliness has the promise of this life and
that to come, so Impen^tency and Wickedness has the Threatening of this life
and that to come.

2. The Devils and the damned have suffered much more then you already; and yet
they are never the nearer a Deliverance. When thou have suffered ten thousand
years, thy pain will be never the nearer an end. How then can a little misery
on earth prevent it? Alas poor soul, these are but the foretasts and beginnings
of thy sorrow. Nothing but pardon through the blood of Christ could have
prevented thy Condemnation; and that thou rejectedst by Infidelity and
Impenitency. His Sufferings would have saved thee, if thou had not Refused
him; but all thy own Sufferings will yield thee no Relief.

So much for the answering of the Vain Excuses which poor Sinners are ready to
make for them selves; Wherein I have been so large, as that this part I confess
is disproportionable to the rest: but it was for these two Reasons.

1. That poor careless souls might see the vanity of such Defenses; and
consider, if such a worm as I can easily confute them, how easily and how
terribly will they be all answered by their Judge?

2. I did it the rather, that godly Christians might the better understand how
to deal with these vain Excuses when they meet with them: which will be daily,
if they deal with men in this sad Condition.

X. WE have done with that part of the Judgment which consists in the
exploration or trial of the cause; we now come to that which is the Conclusion
and consummation of all; and that is, to show you what the Sentence will be,
and on whom.

And for this, we must go strait to the word of God for our light, it being
impossible for any man to have any particular knowledge of it, if Christ had
not there revealed it unto us. Indeed almost all the world do acknowledge a
life after this, where it shall go well with the good, and ill with the bad.
But who shall be then accounted Righteous, and who Unrighteous, and on what
terms and grounds, by whom they shall be judged, and to what condition, they
know not.

The Sentence in Judgment will be, 1. Either on those that never had means to
know Christ. 2 Or on those that had.

1. For the former, as it less concerns us to enquire of their case, so it is
more obscurely revealed to us in the Scripture. It is certain that they shall1
be judged according to their Use of the means which they had, Romans 2. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. and the Talents which they received, Mat. 25. But that it ever
falls out that he that has but the One Talent of natural helps does improve
it to salvation, or that ever they who knew not Christ, are Justified and saved
without that knowledge (being at age and use of reason) I find not in the
Scriptures. I find indeed, that [As many as have sinned without Law, shall also
perish without Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be Judged by
the Law. Romans 2. 12. But not that any are Justified by the works of nature,
such as are here said to be without Law. I find also, that [They have the work
of the Law written in their hearts their conscience also bearing witness and
their Thoughts the mean while ^ccusing, or else Excusing one another, in the
day when God shall Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to the
Gospel] Romans 2. 15, 16. And I believe it is a Just Excuse, and not an unjust
which is here meant But it will be but an Excuse so far as they were guiltless
and that will be but in tanto, and not in toto in part only; and so not a full
^ustifiction A Heathens conscience may excuse him from those sins which he was
never guilty of; but not from all. But no more of them.

2. The case of those that have had the Gospel, is more plainly opened to us in
Gods Word, Their Sentence, is opened in many places of Scripture, but most
fully in Matthew 25. whence we will now collect it.

There we find that Jesus Christ the Redeemer, as King of the world, shall sit
in Judgment on all men at the last; and shall separate them one from another,
as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and so shall pass the final
Sentence. This Sentence is twofold, according to the different Condition of
them that are judged. To them on the right hand, there is a Sentence of
justification, and Adjudication to everlasting glory; To them on the left hand,
there is a Sentence of Condemnation to everlasting Punishment.

The Sentence on each of these contains, both the state which they are Judged
to, and the reason or cause of the Judgment to that state. For as God will not
Judge any to Life or Death* without just cause, so he will publish this cause
in his sentence, as it is the manner of Judges to do; If you say, Christ will
not use a voice; Let it satisfy, that though we know not the manner, yet if he
do it but by mental discovery; as he shows men what shall everlastingly befall
them, so he will show them why it shall so befall them.

1. The Sentence on them on the Right hand, will contain, 1. their
Justification and Adjudication to Blessedness, and that both as generally
denominated, and as particularly determined, and described, 2. And the cause of
this Judgment.

1. In general they shall be pronounced Blessed. Satan would have had them
cursed and miserable; the Law did curse them to misery; Many a fearful thought
has possessed their own breasts, least they should prove at last accursed and
miserable; But now they hear the contrary from their Judge. All the Promises in
the Gospel could not perfectly overcome those their fears; all the comfortable
words of the Ministers of the Gospel conld not perfectly subdue them; all the
tend^er mercies of God in Christ d^d not perfectly subdue them; But now they
are vanquished all for ever. He that once had heard his Redeemer in Judgment
call him Blessed, will never fear being Cursed more. For he that Christ
Blesses, shall be Blessed indeed.

The Description of their blessedness follows, Come inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And also they are called
Blessed Of the Father. Here is the fountain of their Blessedness, The Father;
and the state of their blessedness in Being the Fathers; For I suppose they are
called the Blessed of the Father, both because the Father blesses them, that
is, makes them Happy, and because these blessed ones are the Fathers own. And
so Christ will publish it to the world in Judgment, that he came to glorify
the Father, and will proclaim him the Principal Efficient and Ultimate end of
his work of Redemption and the blessedness of his Saints; and that himself is
(as Mediator) but the way to the Father. It is the Father that prepared the
Kingdom for them, and from the foundation of the world, prepared it; Both for
[them] as chosen ones, and for them as future believers and Righteous ones. It
is called a Kingdom partly in respect to God the King, in whose glory we shall
partake in our places: and partly Metaphorically from the Dignity of our
Condition. For so it is that our selves are said to be made Kings, Rev. 1. 6.
and 5. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 9. and not that we are properly Kings; for then we must
have subjects who must be Governed by us.

Thus we see their Blessedness in the Fountain, end and state of Dignity: As to
the Receptive Act on their part, it is expressed by two words; one signifying
their first entrance on it, Come: the other their Possession, Inherit: that is,
possess it as given by the Father, and Redeemed by the Son, and ho^d it in this
Tenure for ever.

The true Believer was convinced in this life, that indeed there was no true
blessedness, but this enjoyment of God in the Kingdom of heaven. The Lord
revealed this to his heart by his Word and Spirit: And therefore he contemned
the seeming happiness on earth and laid up for himself a Treasure in heaven,
and made him friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, and ventured all his
hope in this Vessel. And now he finds the wisdom of that choice in a rich
return. God made him so Wise a Merchant as to sell All for this Pearl of
greatest price: and therefore now he shall find the gain. As there Is no other
true Happiness, but God in glory; so is there nothing more suitable and welcome
to the true Believer. O how welcome will the face of that God be, whom he
loved, whom he sought, whom he longed and waited for. How welcome will that
Kingdom be which he lived in Hope of! which he parted with All for! and
suffered for in the flesh! How glad will he be to see the Blessed face of his
Redeemer, who by his manifold Grace has brought him unto this! I leave the
believing soul to think of it, and to make it the daily matter of his
Delightful Meditation; What an unconceivable Joy in one moment, his Sentence of
Christ will fill his soul with. Undoubtedly it is now quite past our
comprehension: though our imperfect forethoughts of it may well make our lives
a continual Feast.

Were it but our Justification from the Accusations of Satan, who would have us
Condemned either as sinners in general, or as Impenitent, Unbeleiving Rebels,
against him that Redeemed us, in sp cial, it would lift up the heads of the
Saints in that day: After al^ the fears of our own hearts, and the slanderous
Accusations of Satan and the world, That we were either Impenitent Infidels, or
Hypocrites, Christ will then Justify us and prononce us Righteous. So much for
the Condition to which they are Judged.

2. The Reason or Cause of this Justification of the Saints, is given us both
1. In a general denomination, and 2. In a particular Description. 1. In
General, it is because they Were Righteous, as is evident, Mat. 25. 46. The
Righteous shall go into life Everlasting. And indeed it is the business of
every just Judge. to justify the righteous and condemn the unrighteous. And
shall not the Judge of all the earth judge righteously? Genesis 18. 25 God makes
men Righteous, before he judges them so: and Judges them Righteous Because
they are so. He that abominateth that man who says to the Righteous, thou art
wicked, or to the wicked thou art Righteons; who Justifies the wicked. and
Condemns the Righteous, will certainly never do so himself.

Indeed he will Justify them that are sinners, but not against the Accusation
that they are sinners: but against the Accusation, that they are guilty of
punishment for sin: but that is, because he first made them just; and so
Justifiable, by by pardoning their sin, through the blood of Christ.

And its true also, that he will Justify those that were wicked, but not those
the are wicked: but Judgment finds them* as Death leaves them and he wlll
not take them for wicked, that are sanctified and cleansed of their former
wickedness ^o that Christ will first pardon them before he justify them
against the charge of being sinners in general; and he will first give men
Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, before he will justify them against the
charge of being Impenitent, Infidels or Hypocrites, and consequently
unpardoned, and doubly guilty of damnation. This twofold righteousness, he will
first Give men, and so constitute them Just, before he will Declare it, and
Sentence them just.

2. The Reason of the sentence, particularly Described, is from their Faith and
Love to Christ, expressed in their Obedience, self-denial and forsaking all for
him. For I was hungry and ye fed me; I Was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was
a stranger and ye took me in; Naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye
visited me; I was in prison and ye came to me: Verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done
it unto me Mat. 25. 35. to 41. Here is 1. The causal conjunction for, 2. And
the Cause or Reason it self.

Concerning both which, Observe, 1. How it is that man's Obedience and
self-denial is the Reason and Cause of his Justification. 2. Why it is that God
will have the Reason or Cause thus declared in the Sentence.

For the first; observe that its one thing to give a Reason of the Sentence,
and another thing to express the Cause of the Benefit, Given us by the promise,
and Judged to us by the Sentence. Man's Obedience was no proper Cause why God
did in this life Give pardon of sin to us, or a Right to glory: much less of
his Giving Christ to dye for us. And therefore as to our Constitutive
Justification at our Conversion, we must not say or think that God does
Justify us, For, or Because of any works of our Obedience, Legal or
Evangelical. But when God has so Justified us, when he comes to give a Reason
of his Sentence in Judgment, he may and will fetch that Reason, partly from
our Obedience, or our performance of the Conditions of the New Covenant. For as
in this life, we had a Righteousness consisting in free pardon of all sin
through the blood of Christ, and a Righteousness consisting in our personal
perormance of the Conditions of the promise which gives that pardon and
continues it to us: so at Judgment we shall accordingly be justified. And as
our Evangelical personal Righteousness, commonly called Inherent, was at first
only in our Faith and Repentance, and Disposition to obey: but afterward in our
Actual sincere Obedience, in which sense we are Constitutively Justified or
made Righteous here by our works, in James his sense, Jam. 2. 24. so
accordingly a double Reason will be assigned of our sentential Justification;
One from our pardon by Christ's blood and merits; which will prove our Right to
Impunity and to ^lory. The other from our own Faith and holy Obedience, which
will prove our Right to that pardon through Christ, and to the free Gift of a
Right to glory: and so this last is to be pleaded in subordination to the
former. For Christ^s beeome the the Author of Eternal salvation to all them
that Obey him. Heb. 5. 9. He therefore that will be saved, must have a Christ
to save him as the Author, and an Obedience to that Christ as the Condition on
of that salvation; and consequently both must be declared in the Judgment

The Reason why the ludge does mention our Good works, rather then our
Believing, may be because those holy self-denying expessions of Faith and Love
to Christ do contain or certainly imply Faith in them, as the life of the tree
in the fruit: but faith does contain our works of Obedience but only as their
cause. These works also are a part of the personal Righteousness which is to be
enquired after, that is, we shall not be Judged righteous, merely because we
have Believed, but also because we have added to our Faith virtue: and have
improved our Talents, and have loved Christ to ^he hazard of all for his sake.
For it is not only or principally for the goodness of the work considered in it
self, or the good that is done by (...) to the poor; but it is as these works
did express our Faith and Love to Christ, by doing ^im the most costly and
hazardous service; hat by Fath we could see Christ in a poor beggar or a
prisoner; and could love Christ in These better then our worldly goods or
liberties; which we must part with or hazard by the works that are here
mentioned.

2. The Reasons why Christ will so publicly Declare the personal righteousness
of men, to be the Reason or Cause of his Justifying sentence, it is because It
is the business of that day, not only to glorify Gods mere Love and Mercy, but
eminently to glorify his Remunerative Juice; and not only to express his love
to the Elect as such, but to expess his love to them as Faithful and Obedient,
and such as have denied all for Christ, and Loved God above all; And to show
his justice to the men, and faithfulness in fulfilling all his promises, and
also his holiness in the high estimation of the holiness of his people. I shall
express this in the words of a Learned Divine (Dr Twiss against M. Cotton, page
40.) Was there no more in Gods intention when he elected some, then the
manifestation of the riches of his glorious grace? Did not God purpose also to
manifest the glory of his Remunerative Justice? It is not undeniable that God
will bestow salvation on all his Elect (of ripe years) by way of reward and
Crown of Righteousness, Which God the Righteous Judge will given? 2 Timothy 4. 2
These. 1. It is great pity this is not considered, as usually it is not:
Especially for the momentous Consequence thereof in my Judgment. So far he.

So much of the Sentence of Justification which shall be passed by Christ at
Judgment Upon the Righteous.

2 We are next to consider of the Sentence of ^ondemnation which shall then by
Christ be passed on the unrighteous. Which is delivered to us by Christ, Mat.
25. in the same order as the former.

This Sentence contains, 1. The Condemnation it self. 2. The Reason or Cause
of it.

The Condemnation expresses the misery which they are judged to. 1 Generally
in the Denomination, Cursed. 2 Particularly by Description of their Cursed
state.

To be cursed, is to be a People destinated and adjudged to utter unhappiness;
to all kind of misery without remedy.

2. Their Cursed condition is described in the next words. Depart fromme in to
Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

1. Depart! From whom? from the God the made them in his Image. From the Redeem
that bought them by the price of his blood, an^ offered to save them freely,
for all their unworthyness, and many a time entreated them to Accept his offer,
that their souls might live. From the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier and comforter
of the faithful, who strove with their hearts, till they quenched and expelled
him. O sad Departing! who would not then choose rather to Depart from all the
friends he had in the world, and from any thing Imaginable; from his life, from
himself, if it were possible, then from Christ? Depart! from what? why from the
presence of the Judge; from all further Hopes of salvation for ever: from all
possibility of ever being saved, and living in the joyful inheritance of the
Righteous. Depart! Not from Gods Essential presence, for that will be with them
to their evelasting misery, but from the presence of his Grace, in that measure
as they enjoyed it. Depart! Not from your fleshly, pleasures, and honors, and
profits of the world; These were all gone and past already; and there was no
further need to bid them Depart from these; Houses and Lands were gone. Mirth
and Recreations were gone. Their sweet morsels and cups were gone. All the
Honor that men could give them was gone, before they were set at Christ's bar
to be Judged. But from all expectations of ever enjoying these again, or ever
tasting their former delights; from these they must Depart: No from their sin,
for that will go with them. But the Liberty of commiting that part of it which
was sweet to them, as Gluttony, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Idleness, and all
Voluptuousness; from these they must Depart. But this is consequential; It is
Christ and the Possibility of salivation, that they are Sentenced to Depart
from.

But Whither must they Depart? 1. Into fire. 2. Into that fire which was
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 3. Into everlasting fire.

1. Not into a Purifying, but a Tormenting fire. Whether Elementary or not;
Whether properly or Metaphorically called fire, let us not vainly trouble or
selves to enquire. It is enough to know, that as fire is one of the most
grievous Tormentors of the flesh, so grievous will be those infernal Torments
to the whole man, soul and body; Such as is most fitly represented to us under
the notion of fire, and of burning. Its easy for a secure unbelieving soul to
read and hear of it! but woe, and ten thousand woes to them that must endure
it. In this life they had their good things, when it went harder as to the
flesh with better men; but now they are tormented, when the godly are
comforted, as Luke 16. 25.

2. But why is it called a fire prerared for the Devil and his Angels? 1. What
is this Devil That has Angels? 2. Who are his Angels? 3. When was it prepared
for them? 4. Was it not also prepared for wicked men? To these in order.

1. It seems by many passages in Scripture, that there is an Order among
Spirits, both Good and Bad; and that there is one Devil that is the Prince over
the rest.

2. It seem therefore that it is the rest of the evil spirits, that are called
his Angels. And some think that the wicked who served him in this life, shall
be numbered with his Angels in the life to come. Indeed the Apostle calls him
The God of this world, 2 Cor 4. 4. as is ordinarily Judged by Expositors; and
the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. And he Calls false seducing Teachers the
Ministers of Satan. 2 Cor. ^1. 15 But that wicked men are Here meant as part of
his Angels, is not clear.

3. If it be the preparation of Gods purpose that is here meant, then it was
from Eternity; but if it be any Commination of God as Ruler of the Angels, then
was this fire prepared for them Conditionally, from the beginning of that
Commination, and was Due to them at their fall

4. It seems that the Reason why here is no mention of preparing Hellfire for
the wicked, but only for the Devils, is not be cause indeed it was not prepared
also for the wicked; but to note, that it is the Torment which was first
prepared for, or assigned to the Devils, thereby showing the greatness of the
misery of the wicked, that the Devil and his Angels must be their Companions.
Though some think, as is said before, that the reason why wicked men are not
Mentioned here, is because they are part of the Angels of the Devil, and so
included. And some think it is purposely to manifest Gods General Love to
mankind, that prepared not Hell for them, but they cast themselves into the
Hell prepared for the Devils. But the first seems to be the true sense.

And how apparently Righteous are the Judgments of the Lord! that those men
who would here entertain the Devil into their hearts and daily familiarity,
should be then entertained by him into his place of Torments, and there remain
for ever in his society! Though few entertained him into Visible familiarity
with their bodies as Witches do, who so make him their Familiar; yet all wicked
men do entettain him into more full etc ^nstant familiarity* with their so uls
then these withces do with their bodies. how famliariar is he in their
thoughts, to fill them with vanity, lust, or revenge! How familiar is he in
their hearts to fill them with covetousness, malice, pride, or the like evils?
and to banish all thoughts of returning to God, and to quench every motion that
tends to their recovery? How familiar is he with them, even when they seem to
be worshipping God in the public Assembles; stealing the word out of their
hearts, filling them with vain and wandering thoughts, blinding their minds that
they cannot understand the plainest words that we are able to speak to them,
and filling them with a proud rebellion against the Direction of their
Teachers, and an obstinate refusal to be ruled by them, be the matter never so
necessary to their own salvation? How familiar are these evil Spirits in their
houses, filling them with ignorance, worldliness, and ungodliness, and turning
out Gods service, so that they do not pray together once in a day, or perhaps
at all? How familiarly does Satan use their tongues, in cursing, swearing,
lying ribaldry, backbiting, or slandring? and is it not just with God to make
these fiends their familiars in Torment, with whom they entertained such
familiarity in sin? As Christ with all the Blessed Angels and Saints will make
but one Kingdom or family, and shall live altogether in perpetual Delights; so
the Devil and all his Hellish Angels and wicked men shall make but one
household, and shall live altogether in perpetual misery. O poor sinners I you
are not troubled now at his presence, and power in your hearts; but will you
not then be troubled at his presence, and tormenting power? As^ long as you do
not see him, let him do what he will with you, it grieves you little or nothing
at all; but what will you say when you must see him and abide with him for
ever? Oh Sirs his nam^ is easily heard, but his company will be terrible to the
stoutest heart alive. He shows you a smiling face when he tempts you, but
he has a grimmer face to show you, when temptations have conquered you and
torments must succeed! As those that write of Witches, say, he appears at
first to them in some comely tempting shape, till he have them fast tied to
him; and then he beats them, and affrights them, and seldom appears to them but
in some ugly hew. Believe it, poor sinners, you do not hear or see the worst of
him, when you are merry about your sinful Pleasuers, and Rejoicing in your
Hopes of the Commodities or Preferments of the world; he has another kind of
Voice which you must hear, and another face to show you, that will make you
know a a little better, whom you had to do with! You would be afraid now to
meet him in the dark; what will you be to live with him in everlasting
darkness? Then you will know who it was that you entertained and obeyed, and
played with in your sins.

3. And as the Text tells us, that it is a fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angles: So it tells us, that it is An everlasting fire. It had a beginning*
but it shall have no end. If these wretches would have chosen the service of
God, they would have met with no difficulty or trouble, but what would have had
a speedy end. Poverty and Injuries would have had an end: scorns and abuses
would have had an end: fasting, humiliation sorrow for sin, watching, and
fighting against our spiritual enemies, would all have had an end. But to avoid
these, they chose that ease, that pleasure, which has brought them to that
torment which never will have end. I have said so much of these thing already
in my Book called the Saints Rest, that I will now say but this much. It is one
of the wonders of the world, how men that do believe, or think they do believe
this word of Christ to be true, that the wicked shall go into Everlastin fire,
can yet venture on sin so boldly, and live in it so fearlesly, or sleep quietly
till they are out of this unspeakable Danger! Only the Commonness of it, and
the known wickedness of man's heart, does make this less wonderful. And were
there nothing else to convince us that sinners are Mad and Dead as to spiritual
things, this were enough; That ever the greatest pleasures or profits of the
World, or the most enticing baits that the Devil can offer them, should once
prevail with them to forget these endless things, and draw them to reject an
Everlasting Glory, and cast themselves desperately into Everlasting fire; Yea
and all this under daily warnings and instructions; and when its told them
before hand by the God of Truth himself! For the Lords sake, Sirs, and for your
souls sakes if you care not what Ministers say or what such as I say, yet will
you soberly read now and then this 25. Chapter of Matthew, and Regard what is
told you by him that must be your Judge! and now and then bethink your selves
soberly, whether these are matters for wise men to make light of? and what it
is to be Everlastingly in Heaven or in Hell fire.

2. We have seen what is the Penalty contained in the sentence against the
ungodly; The next thing that the Text directs us to, is the Cause or Reason of
the Sentence, verse. 42. For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Then
Reason is not given expressly either of their sin against the Law of works, that
is, Because they were sinners, and not perfectly Innocent; Nor yet from their
unbelief, which is the great sin against the Law of Grace: But it is given from
their not expressing their Faith and Love to Christ is works of mercy and
self-denial. And why is this so?

1. We must not suppose that these words of Christ do express the whole
Judicial process in every point; but the chief parts. It is supposed that all
men are convicted of being sinners against the perfect Law of the Creator, and
that they are guilty of Death for that sin: and that there is no way but by
Christ to obtain deliverance. But because all this must be acknowledged by the
righteous themselves, as well as by the wicked, therefore Christ does not
mention this, but that only wchich is the turning point or cuase in the
Judgment. For it is not all sinners that shall be finally Condemned but all
Impenitent, Unbeleiving sinners, who have Rebelled finally against their
Redeemer.

2. And the reason why Faith it self is not expressed is, 1. Because it is
clearly employed, and so is love to Christ as Redeemer: in that they should have
Relieved Christ himself in his members: that is, as its expressed, Matthew. 10.
42. they should have received a Prophet in the name of Prophet; and a Disciple
in the name of a Disciple; All should be done for Christ's sake; which could not
be, unless they Believed in him, and Loved him. 2. Also because that the bare
Act of Believing is not all that Christ requires to a man's final Juitification
and Salvation; But holy self denying Obedience must be added. And therefore
this is given as the Reason of their Condemnation that they did not so obey.

We must observe also, that Christ here puts the special for the general;
that is, one way of self-denying Obedience, and expression of Love, instead of
such Obedience in general! For all men have not ability to relieve those in
misery, being perhaps some of them poor themselves. But all have that Love and
self-denial, which will some way express it self. And all have hearts and a
Disposition to do thus, if they had ability; without such a Difposition, none
can be saved.

It is the fond conceit of some, that if they have any love to the godly, or
wish them well, it is enough to prove them happy. But Christ here purposely
lets us know, that whoever does not Love him at so high a rate, as that he can
part with his substance or any thing in the world, to those uses which he shall
require them, even to relieve his servants in want and sufferings for the
masters sake, that man is none of Christ's Disciple, nor will be owned by him at
the last.

XI. THE next point that we come to, is to show you the Properties of this
Sentence at Judgment.

When man had broken the Law of his Creator at the first, he was liable to the
Sentence of Death, and God presently sat in Judgment on him, and sentenced
him to some part of the Punishment which he had deserved; But upon the
Interposition of the Son, he before the rest, resolving on a way that might
tend to his Recovery; And Death is due yet to every sinner for every sin which
he commits, till a pardon do acquit him. But this Sentence which will pass on
sinners at the last Judgment does much differ from that which was passed on
the first sin, or which is Due according to the Law of works alone; for,

1. As to the Penalty, called the Pain of Loss, the first Judgment did deprive
man of the favor of his Creator; but the second will deprive him of the favor
both of the Creator and Redeemer; The first Judgment deprived him of the
Benefits of Innocence: the second deprives him of the Benefits of Redemption;
The Loss of his hopes and possibility of a pardon, of the Spirit, of
Instification and Adoption, and of the benefits with Conditionally were promised
and offered him; these are the Punishments of the last Judgment, which the Law
of works did never threaten to the first man, or to any, as it stood alone.

Also the loss of Glory as Recovered, is the proper penalty of the violated Law
of Grace: which is more then the first loss. As if a man should lose his Purse
the second time, when another has once found it for him; Or rather as if a
Traitor Redeemed by another, and having his life and honors offered him* if he
will Thankfully Accept it and come in, should by his Refusal and Obstinacy,
lose this Recovered Life, which is offered him; which is an addition to his
former penalty.

Besides that the Higher degree of Glory will be lost, which Christ would
bestow on him, more then was lost at first. The very work of the Saints in
heaven, will be to Praise and Glorify him that Redeemed them; and the Father
in him* which would not have been the work of man, if he had been innocent.

2. As to the Pain of sense, the last ludgement by the Redeemer will Sentence
them to a far sorer Punishment then would have befaln them, if no Savior had
been offered them, Heb. 10. 29. The conscience of Adam if he had not been
Redeemed, would never have tormented him for Rejecting a Redeemer, nor for
refusing or abusing his gracious offers, and his mercies; nor for the
forfeiting of a Recovered Happiness; nor for refusing the easy terms of the
Gospel, which would have Given him Christ and Salvation for the Accepting; nor
for neglecting, any means that tended to Recovery: NO nor for refusing
Repentance unto Life, nor for disobeying a Redeemer that bought him by his
blood. As all these are the Penalties of the Redeemers Law and Judgment, so is
it a sorer penalty then Conscience would have inflicted merely for not being
perfectly Innocent; and they will be far soarer gripings and gnawings of the
never-dying worm for the abuse of these Talents, than if we had been never
trusted with any after our first forfeiture. Yea and God himself will
accordingly proportion his Punishments. So that you see that Privatively and
Positively, or as to their Loss and their Feeling, the Redemer will pass on
them a heavyer doom then the Creator did, or would have done according to the
first Law to perfect man.

3. Another Property of the Judgment of Christ, is, that It will be final,
Peremptory, and Excluding all further hopes or Possibilities of a Remedy. So
was not the first Judgment of the Creator upon fallen man. Though the Law of
pure Nature knew no Remedy, nor gave man any hope of a Redeemer; yet did it no^
exclude a Remedy, nor put in any bar against one; but God was free to Recover
his Creature if he pleased. But in the Law of Grace he has Resolved, that
there shall be no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of
Judgment and fire which shall devour the adversary, Heb. 10. 26. 27. and that
the fire shall be Everlasting, the worm shall not dye, and the fire shall not
be quenched, Mat. 25 ult. Mat. 13. 42, 50. John 5. 27. Mat. 5. 26. Mat. 3. 12.
and Luke 3. 17. Mark 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 48. He that now breaks that pure Law
that requires perfect innocence (as we have all done) may fly to the Promise
of Grace in Christ, and Appeal to the Law of Liberty, or deliverance, to be
Judged by ^that. But he that falls under penal^y of that the Law whichshould
have saved him, u^ all final Unbelievers and Impenitent, Ungodly persons do,
has no other to Appeal to. Christ would have been a Sanctuary and Refuge to
thee from the Law of works, had thou but Come in to him: But who shall be a
Refuge to thee from the wrath of Christ? The Gospel would have freed thee from
the Curse of the Law of works, if thou had but believed and obeyed it: But
what shall free thee from the Condemnation of the Gospel? Had there no
Accusation lain against thee, but that thou wast in general a sinner, that is,
that thou wast not perfectly Innocen^, Christ would have answered that charge
by his blood. But seeing thou art also guilty of those special sins which he
never shed his blood for, who shall deliver thee from that Accusation? When
Christ gave himself a ransom for sinners, it was with this Resolution both in
the Father and himself, that none should ever be Pardoned, Justified or Saved
by that Ransom, that did not in the time of this life, sincerely return to God
by Faith in the Redeemer, and live in sincere obedience to him, and persevering
herein. So that he plainly excepted* final Infidelity, Impenitency and
Rebellion from pardon: He never dyed for the final nonperformance of the
Conditions of the New Covenant. So that his Judgment for these will be
peremptory and remediless. I^ you say, Why cannot God find out a remedy for
this sin, as well as he did for the first? I say, God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. He
must be True and Faithful, as necessarily as he must be God, because of the
Absolute perfection of his nature; and he has said and resolved, that there
shall be no more remedy.

Many other Properties of Gods Judgment general there are, as that
Righteeousness, Impartiality, Inflexibility, and ^he like, which because I
would not make my Discourse too long. I will pass over, contenting my self with
the mention of these which are Proper to the Judgment of the Redeemer,
according to his own Laws in special.

XII. THE twelfth and last thing which I promised to unfold, is, The Execution
of this Judgment. Here ^ should show you both the Certainty of the Execution,
and by whom it will be, and how; but having done all this already in the third
Part of the foresaid Book of rest, I shall now only give this brief touch of it.

No sooner is the dreadful Sentence past, Go ye cursed into Everlasting fire,
but away they must be gone: There is no delay; much less any Reprieve to be
expected: and yet much less is there any hope of an Escape. If the Judge once
say, Take him Jailer; and if Christ say, Take him Devils, you that Ruled and
Deceived him, now Torment him, all the world cannot rescue one such soul. It
will be in vain to look about for help! Alas, there is none but Christ can help
you; and he will not, because you refused his help: Nay, we may say, He cannot;
not for want of Power; but because he is True and Just, and therefore will make
good that word which you believed not. It is in vain then to cry to hills to
fall on you, and the mountains to cover you from the presence of him that
sits on the Throne. It will be in vain now to Repent, and wish you had not
slighted your salvation, nor sold it for a little pleasure to your flesh It
will be then in vain to cry Lord, Lord, open to us; O spare us; O pity us; O
do not cast us into these hideous flames! Do not turn us among Devils! do not
Torment thy Redeemed ones in this fire! All this will be then too ^ate.

Poor sinner, whoever thou art that read or hear these lines, I beseech
thee in Compassion to thy soul, Consider, How fearful the case of that man will
be, that is newly doomed to the Everlasting fire, and is haled to the Execution
without Remedy! And what mad men are those that now do no more to prevent such
a misery, when they might do it on such eas^^ terms, and now have so fair an
Opportunity in their hands?

The time was when Repentance might have done thee good: but Then all thy
Repentings be in vain. Now while the day of thy Visitation lasts, had thou
but a heart to pray and cry for mercy, in faith and fervency through Christ,
thou might be heard. But then Praying and Crying will do no good! should
thou roar out in the extremity of thy horror and amazement, and beseeth the
Lord Jesus but to forgive give thee one sin, or to send thee on earth once
more, and to t^y thee once again in the flesh, whether thou ^ouldst not love
him, and lead a holy life, it would be all in vain. Should thou beese^ch him
by all the mercifulness of his nature, by all his sufferings and bloody death,
by all the merciful promises of his Gospel, it would be all in vain. Nay,
should thou beg but one daye^ reprieval, or to stay one hour before thou were
cast into those flames, it would not be heard; it would do thee no good. How
earnestly did a deceased Gentleman, Luke. 16. 24. beg of Abraham for one drop
of water from the tip of Lazarus's finger to cool his tongue, because he was
tormented in the flame! And what the better was he? He was sent to Remember,
that he had his Good things in this life; and that Remembrance would torment
him more. And do not wonder or think much at this, that Christ will not then be
entreated by the ungodly. You shall then have a Remember too, from Christ or
Conscience. He may soon stop thy mouth, and leave thee speechless, and say,
Remember man, that I did one day send thee a Message of peace, and thou would
not hear it. I once did stoop to Beseech thee to return, and thou would not
hear. I besought thee by the tender mercies of God; I besought thee by all the
Love that I had showed these; by my holy Life; by my cursed Death; by the
Riches of my Grace: by the offers of my Glory; and I could not get^ thee to
forsake the world, to deny thy flesh, to leave one beloved sin for all this! I
besought thee over and over again! I sent many a Minister to thee in my name; I
waighted on thee many a day, and year and all would not do; thou would not
Consider, Return and Live: And now it is too late; my sentence is past, and
cannot be recalled: Away from me thou worker of iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

Ah Sirs, what a case then is the poor desperate sinner left in! How can I
write this, or how can you that read or hear it, without trembling once think
of the Condition that such forlorn wretches will be in! When they look above
them, and see the God that has forsaken them, because they forlook him first,
when they look about them, and see the Saints on one hand whom they despised,
now sentenced unto Glory; and the wicked on the other hand whom they
accompanied and imitated, now Judged with them to everlasting misery; when they
look below them, and see the flames that they must abide in, even for evermore;
and when the Devils begin to hale them to the Execution; Oh poor souls! Now
what would they give for a Christ, for a promise, for a time of Repentance, for
a Sermon of mercy, which once they slept under, or made no account of! How is
the ease altered now with them! Who would think that these are the same men,
that made light of all this on earth, that so stoutly scorned the reProofs of
the word, that would be wo^ldly, and fleshly, and drunk, and proud, let
Preachers iay what they would; and perhaps hated those that did give them
warning. Now they are of another mind; but all too late. Oh were there any
place for Resistance, how would they draw back, and lay hold of any thing,
before they would be dragged away into those flames! But there is no resisting;
Satan's Temptations might have been resisted but his Executions cannot; Gods
Judgments might have been Prevented by Faith and Prayer, Repentance and a holy
life; but they cannot be resisted when they are not prevented. Glad would the
miserable sinner be, if he might but turn to nothing, and cease to be; or that
he might be any thing rather than a reasonable creature: but these wishes are
all in vain. There is one Time, and one Way of a sinners Deliverance; If he
fail in that one, be perishes for ever; all the world cannot help him after
that. 2 Cor. 6. 2. I have heard thee in a time accepted: and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: Behold now is the Accepted time: behold now is
the day of salvation. Now he says, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock; If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will sup with him, (...) he with me. But for the time to come hereafter, hear
what he says, Prove. 1, 24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye Refused, I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded But ye have set at no^ght all
my counsels, and would no^e of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity;
I will mock When your fear comes: when your fear comes as Desolation, and
your destruction comes as a whirlwind: when distress and anguish comes upon
you: then shall they call upon ^e, but I will not Answer: they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me, for that they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord; They would none of my counsels: they despised all
my Reproof: therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices; for the Turning away of the simple shall slay
them and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them; But who so harkneth to me,
shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil. I have recited all
these words that you may see and consider, whether I have spoke any other thing
than God himself has plainly told you of.

Having said this much of the Certainty of the Execution, I should next have
spoke somewhat of the manner and the Instruments, and have showed how God will
be for ever the Principal Cause, and Satan and (...) own Conseiences the
Instruments, in part; and in what manner Conscience will do its part, and how
impossible it will be to quiet or resist it. But having spoke so much of all
this already elsewhere, as is said before, I will forbear here to repeat it,
leaving the Reader that desires it, there to peruse it.

The Uses.
Use 1. BEloved hearers, it was not to fill your fancies with news that God
sent me hither this day; not to tell you of matters that nothing concern you;
nor by some terrible words to bring you to an hours amazement and no more; But
it is to tell you of things that your eyes shall see, and to foretell you of
your danger while it may be prevented; that your precious souls may be saved at
the last, and you may stand before God with comfor at ^thas day; But because
this will not be every man's case^, no nor the case of most, I must in the name
of Christ desire you to make this day an enquiry into your own souls, and as in
the presence of God let your hearts make answer to these few Questions which I
shall propound and debate with you.

Qu. 1. Do you soundly Believe this Doctrine which I have preached to you? What
say you Sirs? do you verily Believe it as a most certain Truth, that you and I,
and all the world must stand at Gods bar and be Judged to Everlasting Joy or
Torment? I hope you do all in some sort Believe this: but blame me not if I be
jealous whether you soundly believe it, while, we see in the world so little of
the effect of such a Belief. I confess I am forced to think that there is more
infidelity then faith among us, when I see mo^^ ungodlyness then godlyness
among us. And I can hardly believe that man that will say or swear that he
believes these things, and yet lives as carelessly and carnally as an Infidel.
I know that no man can love to be damned; yea I know that every man that has a
reasonable soul, has naturally some love to him self, and a fear of a danger
which he verily apprehends; he therefore that lives without all fear, I must
think lives without all apprehension of his danger. Custom has taught men to
hold these things as the Opinion of the Country; but if men soundly believed
them, surely we should see stranger effects of such a faith, then in the most
we do see. Does the sleepy soul that lives in security, and follows this
world as eagerly as if he had no greater matters to mind; that never once
trembled at the thoughts of this great day, nor once asked his own soul in good
sadnes^, My soul, How do thou think then to escape? I say, does this man
Believe that he is going to this Judgment? Well, Sirs, whether you beleve it
or not, you will find it true; and believe it you must before you can be safe.
For if you do not Believe it, you will never make ready. Let me therefore
persuade you in the fear of God to consider, that it is a matter of undoubted
Truth.

1. Consider that it is the express word of the God of Truth; revealed in
Srip^ure as plainly as you can desire. So that yon cannot be unbelieving
without denying Gods Word, or giving him the lie, Mat 13, 38, 39. 40, 41, 42,
43, 49, 50. Mat. 25. throughout, Romans 2. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16. and 1. 32.
John. 5. 28, 29. The hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of
damnation, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed to all men once to dye, and after this,
the Judgment. Romans 14. 9. l2. So then every one of us shall give Account of
himself to God, Rev. 20. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great stand before
God: and the Books were opened and another book was opened, which is the Book
of life; and the dead were Judged out of those things which were written in the
Book^, according to their works. Mat. 12. 36. 37. But I say unto you, that
every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account thereof at the day
of Judgment: For by thy words thou shall be Justified, and by thy Words thou
shall be condemned. Many more most express Texts of Scripture do put the Truth
of this Judgment out of all question to all that believe the Scripture, and
will understand it. There is no place left for a Controversy in the point: It
is made as ^ure to us as the Word of the living God can make it; And he that
will question that, what will he Believe? What say you Sirs! Dare you doubt of
this which the God of Heaven has so positively affirmed? I hope you dare not.

2. Consider, it is a master part of your faith, if you are Christians, and a
fundamental Article of your Creed, that Christ shall come again to Judge the
quick and the dead. So that you must Believe it, or renounce your Christianity,
and then you renounce Christ and all the hopes of mercy that you have in him.
Its impossible that you should soundly Believe in Christ, and not believe his
Judgment and Life Everlasting; because as he came to bring Life and
immortality to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. so it was the end of his
Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, to bring you thither; and its part of his
honor and office which he purchased with his blood, to be the Lord and Judge
of all the world, Romans 14. 9. Joh. 5. 22. If therefore you believe not heartily
this Judgment; deal plainly and openly, and say you are Infidels, and cast
away the hypocritical vizor of Christianity, and let us know you, and take you
as you are.

3. Consider that it is a Truth that is known by the very light of nature, that
there shall be a happiness for the Righteous, and a misery for the wicked after
this life: which is evident.

1. In that we have undeniable natural reason for it. 1. God is the Righteous
governor of the world, and therefore must make a difference among his Subjects,
according to the nature of their wa^es; which we see is not done here, where
the wicked Prosper, and the good are afflicted; therefore it must be heareafter.

2. We see there is a necessity that God should make promises and threatenings
of everlasting hapiness or misery, for the right governing hf^ the world; for
we certainly perceive that no lower things will keep men from destroying all
humane society, and living worse then bruit beasts; and if there be a necessity
of king such threats and promises, then there is certainly a necessity of
fullfilling them. For God needs no lie or means of deceiving, to rule the
world.

2. And as we see it by Reason, so by certain experience, that this is
descernable by the light of nature, for all the world, or almost all, do
believe it. Even those nations where the Gospel never came, and have nothing
but what they have by nature: even the most barbarous Indian^ acknowledge some
life after this: and a difference of men according as they are here: Therefore
you must believe thus much, or renounce your common Reason and humanity* as
well as your Christianity. Let me therefore persuade you all in the fear of God
to confirm your souls in the belief of this, as if you had heard Christ or an
Angel from Heaven say to you, Oh man thou art hasting to Judgment.

Qu. 2. MY next Question is, Whether you do ever soberly consider of this great
day? Sirs, do you use when you are alone to think with your selves, how certain
and how dreadful it will be? how fast it is coming on? and what you shall do?
and what answer you mean to make at that day? ^are your minds taken up with
these considerations? Tell me, is it so, or not?

Alas Sirs! Is this a matter to be forgotten? Is not that man even worse then
mad, that is going to Gods Judgment and never thinks of it? when if they were
to be tried for their lives at the next Assize, they would think of it, and
think again, and cast 100 times which way to escape. Methinks you Should rather
forget to go to bed at night, or to eat your meat, or do your work, then forget
so great a matter as this.

Truly, I have often in my serious thoughts been ready to wonder that men can
think of almost any thing else, when they have so great a thing to think of.
What! forget that which you must remember for ever! forget that which should
force remembrance, yea and does force it with some, whether they will or not! A
poor despairing soul cannot forg^t it: He thinks which way ever he goes he is
ready to be Judged. Oh therefore Beloved, Fix these thoughts as deep in your
hearts as thoughts can go. Oh be like that holy man, that thought which way
ever he went, he heard the Trumpet sound, and the voice of the Angel calling to
the world, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment. You have warning of it from
God and man, to cause you to Remember it; do not then forget it. It will be a
cold excuse another day, Lord, I forgate this day, or else I might have been
ready: you dare not sure trust to sech excuses.

Qu. 3. MY next Question to you, is, How are you affected with the
Consideration of this day? Barely to think of it will not serve: To think of
such a day as this with a dull and senseless heart, is a sign of fearful
stupidity. Did the knees of King Belshazzar knock together with trembling, when
he saw the handwriting on the wall? Dan. 5. 6. How then should thy heart be
affected that sees the handwriting of God as a summons to his bar?

When I began to preach of these things long ago, I consess the matters seemed
to me so terrible, that I was afraid that people would have run out of their
wi^s with fear; but a little experience showed me, that many are like a dog
that is bred up in a forge or furnace, that being used to it, can sleep though
the hammers are beating, and the fire and hot iron flaming about him, when
another that had never seen it, would be amazed at the sight. When men have
heard us 7 years together; yea 20 years, to talk of a day of Judgment, and
they see it not, nor feel any hurt, they think it is but talk, and begin to
make nothing of it. This is their thanks to God for his patience: Because his
Sentence is not executed speedily, therefore their hearts are set in them to do
evil, Eccl. 8. 11. As if God were slack of his Promise, as some men Account
slickness, 2 Pet 3. 9. When one day with him is as a 1000. years, and a 1000.
years as one day. What if we tell you 20 years together that you must dye, will
you not believe us, because you have lived so long and seen no death coming?

Three or four things there be that should bring any matter to the heart. 1. If
it be a matter of exceeding weight. 2. If it concern not others only, but our
selves. 3. If it be certain. 4. If near.

All these things are here to be found, and therefore how should your hearts be
moved at the Consideration of this great day!

1. What matter can be mentioned with the Tongue of man of greater moment? For
the poor creature to stand before his Maker and Redeemer, to be Judged to
everlasting Joy or Torment? Alas! all the matters of this world are plays, and
toys, and dreams to this; Matters of profit or disprofit are nothing to it;
Matters of credit or discredit are unworthy to be named with it; Matters of
temporal life or death are nothing to it. We see the poor brui^ beasts go every
day to the slaughter, and we make no great matre^ of it, though their life be
as deer to them as ours to us. To be Judged to an Everlasting death or torment;
this is the great danger, that one would think should shake the stou^est heart
to consider it, and awake the dullest sinner to prevent it.

2. Its a matter that concerns every one of your selves, and every man or
woman that ever lived upon the earth, or ever shall do; I am not speaking to
you of the affairs of some far Country, that are nothing to you but only to
marvail at; which you never saw, nor ever shall do; no; It is thy own self man
or woman that hear me this day, that shall as surely appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, as the Lord lives, and as he is true and faithful;
and that is as sure as thou live on this earth, or as the heaven is over
thee. That man that hears all this with the most careless blockish heart,
shall be awakened and stand with the rest at that day; that man that never
thought of it, but spent his time in worldly matters, shall leave all and there
appear; that man that will not believe these things to be true, but make a jest
of them, shall see and feel what he would not Believe, and he al^o shall be
there; The godly that waited in hope for that day, as the day of their ^ull
D^l^verance and Coronation ^hey shall be there. Those that have lain in the
dust these 5000. years, shall rise again, and all stand there. Hearer, whoever
thou art, believe it, thou may better think to live without meat* to see
without light, to escape death, and abide for ever on earth, then to keep away
from that Appearance. Willing or unwilling, thou shall be there. And should not
a matter then that so concerns thy self, go near to thy heart, and awake thee
from thy security?

3. That it is a matter of unquestionable certainty, I have partly showed you
already, and more would do if I were preaching to known Infidels. If the
careless world had any just reason to think it were uncertain, their
carelessness were more excusable. Methinks a man should be affected with that
which he is certain shall come to pass, in a manner as if it were now in doing.
^ These. 5. 2. Ye perfectly know that the day of the Lord so comes, etc. says
the Apostle.

4. This day is not only certain, but it is ne^r; and therefore should affect
you the more. I confess, if it were never so far off, yet seeing it will come
at last, It should be carefully regarded: But when the Judge is at the door,
Jam. 5. 9. and we are almost at the bar, and it is so short a time to this
assize, what soul that is not dead will be secure?

Alas. Sirs! what is a little time when it is gone? how quickly shall you and I
be all in another world, and our souls recieve their particular Judgment, and
so wait till the body be raised and judged to same Condition? It is not a 100.
years in all likelihood, till every soul of us shall be in heaven or hell: and
its like, not half or a quarter of that time, but it will be so with the
greater part of us: and what is a year or two, or a 100? how speedily is it
come? how many a soul that is now in heaven or hell, within a 1000 years dwelt
in the places that you now dwell in, and sat in the seats you now sit in? And
now their time is past, what is it? Alas; how quickly will it be so with us?
You know not when you go to bed, but you may be Judged by the next morning: or
when you rise, but you may be Judged before night: but certainly you know that
shortly it will be; and should not this then be laid to heart? Yea the General
Judgment will lt no be long: For certainly we live in the end of world.

Qu. 4. MY next Question is, Whether are you ready for this dreadful Judgment
when it comes, or not? Seeing it is your selves then must be tried, I think it
concerns you to see that you be prepared. How often has Christ warned us in
the Gospel, that we be always ready; because we know not the day or hour of
his coming? Mat. 24. 44. 42. and 25. 13. 1 These. 5. 6. and told us how sad a
time it will be to those that are unready? Mat. 25. 11, 12. Did men but well
know what a meeting and greeting there will be between Christ and an unready
soul, it would sure startle them, and make them look about them. What say you
Beloved Hearers, are you ready for Judgment, or are you not! Me thinks a man
that knows he shall be Judged, should ask himself the Question every day of
his life; Am I ready to give up my Account to God! Do not you use to ask this
of your own hearts? unless you be careless whether you be saved or damned, me
thinks you should, and ask it seriously.

Qu. But who be they that are ready? how shall I know whether I be ready or not?

Answ. There is a twofold readiness. 1. When you are in a safe case. 2. When
you are in a comfortable case, in regard of that day. The latter is very
desirable, but the first is of absolute necessity: this therefore is it that
you must principally enquire after.

In General, all those, and only those are ready for Judgment, who shall be
justified and saved, and not condemned when Judgment comes; They that have a
good cause in a Gospel sense. It may be known before hand who these are; for
Christ Judges, as I told you, by his Law. And therefore find out whom it is
that the Law of grace does justify or condemn, and you may certainly know whom
the Judge will Justify or condemn; for he Judges righteously.

If you further ask me who these are; remember that I told you before that
every man that is personally righteous by fulfilling the Conditions of
Salvation in the Gospel, shall be saved; and he that is found unrighteous, as
having not fulfilled them, shall perish at that day,

Qu. Who are those?

Answ. I will tell you them in a few words, lest you should forget, because it
it a matter that your Salvation or Damnation depends upon.

1. The soul that unfeignedly repents of his former sinful course, and
turns from it in heart and life, and loves the way of godliness which he
hate^, and hates the way of sin which he loved, and is become thoroughly a New
Creature, being born again and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, shall be
Justified: but all others shall certainly be condemned.

Good news to repenting converted sinners: but sad to Impenitent, and him that
knows not what this means.

2. That soul that feeling his misery under sin and the power of Satan, and the
wrath of God, does believe what Christ has done and suffered for man's
restoration and Salvation, and thankfully accepts him as his only Savior
and Lord, on the terms that he is offered in the Gospel, and to those ends,
even to Justify him, and sanctify and guide him, and bring him at last to
everlasting glory; that soul shall be Justified at Judgment: and he that does
not, shall be condemned.

Or in short, in Scripture phrase, He that believes shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be condemned, Mar. 16. 16.

3. The soul that has had so much knowledge of the goodness of God, and his
love to man in Creation, Redemption, and the following mercies, and has had so
much conviction of the vanity of all creatures, as thereupon to Love God more
then all things below, so that he has the chiefest room in the heart, and is
preferred before all creatures ordinarily in a time of trial: that soul shall
be Justified at Judgment and all others shall be condemned.

4. That soul that is so apprehensive of the absolute Sovereignty of God as
Creator and Redeemer, and of the Righteousness of his Law, and the Goodness of
his holy way, as that he is firmly Resolved to obey him before all others, and
does accordingly give up himself to study his will, of purpose that he may obey
it, and does walk in these holy ways, and has so far mortified the flesh, and
subdued the world and the Devil, that the Authority and Word of God can do more
with him, then any other; and does ordinarily prevail against all the
persuasion and interest of the flesh, so that the main scope and bent of the
heart and life is still for God; and when he sins, he rises again by true
Repentance; I say that soul, and that only, shall be Justified in Judgment,
and be saved.

5. That soul that has such Believing thoughts of the life to come, that he
takes the promised blessedness for his portion, and is resolved to venture all
else upon it, and in hope of his glory, does se^ light comparatively by all
things in this world, and waits for it as the end of this life, choosing any
suffering that God shall call him to, rather then to lose his hopes of that
felicity, and thus persevereth to the end: I say that soul, and none but
that,shall be justified in Judgment, and escape Damnation.

In these five marks I have told you truly and briefly, who shall be Justified
and saved, and who shall be condemned at the day of Judgment. And if you would
have them all in five words, they are but the Description of these five Graces,
Repentance, Faith, Love, Obedience, Hope.

But though I have laid these close together for your use, yet lest you should
think that in so weighty a case I am too short in the proof of what I so
determine of; I will tell you in the express words of many Scripture Texts, who
shall be Justified, and who shall be condemned.

[ John. 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness none shall see God. Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Acts 26. 18. I send thee to open their
eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance among the
sanctified by Faith that is in me. Joh. 3. 15, 16. 17, 18, 19. Whoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life: he that believes
on him, is not condemned; he that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not Believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God: and this is
the condemnation, that light is come in to the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their deeds were evil, John. 5. 28, 29. The hour is
coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come
forth, they that have done good to the Resurrect on of life, and they that have
done evil to the Resurrection of damnation. Mat. 25. 30. Cast the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Lu.
19 27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither and slay them before me, Mat 22. 12. 13. Friend, how came thou
in hither, not having on a wedding gatment? And he was speechless. Then said
the King to the servants: Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast
him into outer darkness, etc. Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto you, that except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. Heb. 5. 6. He is become the Author of
eternal salvation to all them that obey him. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they
that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in by the Gate into the City. Romans 8. 1. 13. There is then no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Gal. 5. l8. But if
ye be Led of the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Gal. 6. 7. 8. Be not
deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap: for he that sows to the flesh* shall of the flesh reap Corruption: but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit read life Everlasting. Matthew.
6. 21. For where your Treasure, is there will your heart be also,] Read Psalm. 1.
and many other Texts to this purpose, of which some are cited in my Directions
for Peace of Conscience: Dir. 11. p. 115. 116.

And thus I have told you from Gods Word, how you may know whether you are
ready for Judgment; which is the fourth thing that I would advise you to
enquire after.

O Sirs, what shift do you make to keep your souls from Continual Terrors, as
you as long remain unready for Judgment? How do you keep the Thoughts of it
out of your mind, that they do not break your sleep and meet you in your
business, and haunt you every way you go, while Judgment is so near, and you
are so unready? But I shall proceed to say next Question.

Qu. 5 AND in the last place, to those of you that are not yet Ready, nor in a
Condition wherein you may safe at that day ' my Question is, How are you
resolved to prepare for Judgment for the time to come? Will you do no more
than you have done hitherto? Or will you now set your selves with all your
might, to make preparation for so great a day? me thinks you should be now past
all demurs, delays, or further doubtings about such a business; and by the
consideration of what I have said already, you should be fully Resolved to lose
no more time, but presently to awake, and ^e^ upon the work. Me thinks you
should all say, We will do any thing that the Lord shall Direct us to do,
rather then we will be unready for this final doom! O that there were but such
hearts in you, that you were truly willing to follow the gracious Guidance of
the Lord, and to use but those sweet and reasonable means which he has
prescribed you in his Word, that you may be ready for that day! Alas, it is no
hard matter for me to tell you, or my self, what it is that we must do, if we
will be happy; and it is no very hard matter to Do it, so far ar we are truly
willing; but the difficulty is to be truly and thoroughly willing to this work.
If I shall tell you what you must do for preparation, shall I not lose my
labor? Will you resolve and promise in the strength of Grace, that you will
faithfully and speedily endeavor to practice it, whoever shall gainsay it?
Upon hope of this, I will set you down some brief Directions, which you must
follow, if ever you will with comfort look the Lord Jesus in the face at the
hour of Death, or in the Day of Judgment.

THE first Direction is this, See that your souls be sincerely established in
the Belief of this Judgment and everlasting life: For if you do not soundly
believe it, you will not seriously prepare for it. If you have the Judgment
and belief of an Infidel, you cannot have the Heart or the Life of a Christian.
Unbelief shuts out the most of the world from heaven; see that it do not so by
you! If you say, You cannot Believe what you would: I answer, Feed not yor
^^belie^ by wilfulness, or unreasonableness; Use Gods means to overcome it, and
shut not your eyes against he light, and then try the issues; Heb. 3. 12, 13,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

THE second Direction. Labor diligently to have a sound understanding of the
nature of the Laws and Judgment of God. On what terms it is that he deals
with mankind: and on what terms he will Judge them to Life or Death: and what
the Reward and punishment is. For if you know not the Law by which you must be
Judged, you cannot know how to prepare for the Judgment. Study the Scripture
therefore, and mark who they be that God promises to save, and who they be
that he threatens to Condemn. For according to that Word will the Judgment
pass.

THE third Direction. See that you take it as the very business of your Lives,
to make ready for that day. Understand that you have no other business in this
world, but what does necessarily depend on this. What else have you to do, but
to provide for everlasting? and to use means to sustain your own bodies and
others of purpose for his work, till it be happily done ^ Live therefore as men
that make this the main scope and care of their Lives; and let all things else
come in but on the by. Remember every morning when you awake, that you must
spend that day in preparation for your Account, and that God does give it you
for that end. When you go to bed, examine your hearts, what you have done that
day in preparation for your last Day: And take that time as lost which does
nothing to this end.

THe fourth Direction. Use frequently to think of the Certainty, neerness and
dreadfulness of that day, to keep Life in your Affections and Endeavors; lest
by Inconsiderateness your souls grow stupid and negligent. Otherwise, because
it is out of sight, the heart will be apt to grow hardened and secure. And do
not think of it slightly as a common thing, but purposely set your selves to
think of it, that it may rouse you up to such Affections and Endeavors as in
some measure are answerable to the nature of the thing.

THE fifth Direction. Labor to have a lively feeling on thy heart, of the evil
and weight of that sin which thou art guilty of, and of the misery into which
it has brought thee, and would further bring thee if thou be not delivered,
and so to feel the need of a Deliverer. This must prepare thee to partake of
Christ now; and if thou partake not of him now, thou can not be saved by him
Then. It is these souls that now make light of their sin and misery, that must
then feel them so heavy, as to be pressed by them into the infernal flames. And
those that now feel little need of a Savior, they shall then have none to save
them, when they feel their need.

THE sixth Direction. Understand and Believe the sufficiency of that Ransom and
Satisfaction to Justice, which Christ has made for thy sins* and for the
world, and how freely and universally it is offered in the Gospel. Thy sin is
not uncurable or unpardonable, nor thy misery remediless; God has provided a
remedy in his Son Christ, and brought it so near thy hands, that nothing but
thy neglecting, or wilful refusing it, can deprive thee of the Benefit. Settle
thy soul in this belief.

THE seventh Direction. Understand and Believe, that for all Christ's
satisfaction, there is an Absolute Necessity of sound Faith and Repentancte to
be in thy own self, before thou can be a Member of him, or be Pardoned,
Adopted, or Justified by his blood. He dyed not for final Infidel^ty and
Impenitency, as predominant in any soul. As the Law of his Father which
occasioned his suffering: required perfect Obedience, or suffering: So his own
Law, which he has made for the conveyance of his Benefits, does require yet
true Faith and Repentance of men themselves, before they shall be pardoned by
him; and sincere Obedience and Perseverance, before they shall be glorified.

THE eighth Direction. Rest not therefore in an unrenewed, unsanctified state;
that is, till this Faith and Repentance be wrought on thy own soul, and thou be
truly broken of from thy former sinful course, and from all things in this
world; and art Dedicated, Devoted and Resigned unto God. Seeing this change
must be made, and these graces must be had, or thou must certainly perish: in
the fear of God, see that thou give no ease to thy mind till thou art thus
changed. Be content with nothing till this be done. Delay not another day. How
can thou live merrily, or sleep quietly in such a Condition, as if thou
should dye in it, thou should perish for ever? Especially when thou art
every hour uncertain whether thou shall see another hour, and not be presently
snatch away by death? Methinks while thou art in so sad a case, which way ever
thou art going, or what ever thou art doing, it should still come into thy
thoughts, Oh what if I should Dye before I be Regenerate, and have part in
Christ!

THE ninth Direction. Let it be the daily care of thy soul, to mortify thy
fleshly desires, and overcome this world; and live as in a continual Conflict
With Satan, which Will not be ended till thy life do end. If any thing destroy
thee by drawing away thy heart from God, it will be thy carnal self, thy
fleshly desires, and the allurements of this world, which is the matter that
they feed upon. This therefore must be the earnest work of thy life, to subdue
this flesh, and set light by this world, and resist the Devil, that by these
would destroy thee. It is the common case of miserable hypocrites, that at
first they list themselves under Christ as for a fight, but they presently
forget their state and work; and when they are once in their own conceit
Regenerate, they think themselves so safe, that there is no further danger; and
thereupon they do lay down their Arms and take that which they miscall, their
Christian Liberty, and indulge and please that flesh which they promised to
mortify, and close with the world which they promised to contemn, and so give
up themselves to the Devil, whom they promised to fight against. If once you
apprehend all your Religion lies in mere Believing, that all shall go well
with you, and that the bitterness of death is past, and in a forbearance of
some disgraceful sins, and being much in the Exercise of your Gifts, and in
external ways of Duty, and giving God a Cheap and plausible obedience in those
things only which the Flesh can spare; you are then fallen into that deceitful
hypocrisy, which will as surely condemn you, as open profaneness, if you get
not out of it. You must live as in a fight, or you cannot overcome. You must
live loose from all things in this world, if you will be ready for another. You
must not live after the flesh, but mortify it by the Spirit, if you would not
dye, but live for ever, Romans 8. 13. These things are not indifferent, but of
flat necessity.

THE tenth Direction. Do all your works as men that must be judged for them. It
is not enough (at least in point of Duty and Comfort) that you Judge this
preparation in General to be the main business of your live^, but you should
also order your particular Actions by these Thoughts, and measure them by their
Respects to this approaching Day. Before you venture on them, enquire whether
they will bear weight in Judgment, and be sweet or bitter when they are
brought to trial? Both for matter and manner, this must be observed. Oh that
you would Remember this when Temptations are upon you. When you are Tempted to
give up your minds to the world, and drown your selves in earthly cares, will
you bethink you soberly whether you would hear of this at Judgment? and
whether the world will be then as sweet as now? and whether this be the best
preparation for your Trial: When you are Tempted to be Drunk, or to spend your
precious time in Alehouses, or vain unprofitable company, or at Cards or Dice,
or any sinful or needless sports; bethink you then, Whether this will be
comfortable at the Reckoning? and whether time be no more worth to one that is
so near eternity, and must make so strict an account of his Hours? and whether
there be not many better works before you, in which you might spend your time
to your greater advantage, and to your greater comfort when it comes to a
Review? When you are tempted to wantonnese, fornication, or any other fleshly
intemperance, bethink you soberly, with what face these Actions will appear at
Judgment, and whether they will be then pleasant or displeasant to you? So
when you are tempted to neglect the daily worshipping of God in your families,
and the Catechizing and Teaching of your children or servants, especially on
the Lords Day, bethink your selves then, what account you will give of this to
Christ, when he that entrusted you with the care of your children and servants,
shall call you to a reckoning for the performance of that trust?

The like must be Remembered in the very manner of our Duties. How diligently
should a Minister study? how earnestly should he persuade? how unwearyedly
should he bear all oppositions and ungrateful returns? and how carefully should
he watch over each particular soul of his charge (as far as is possible) when
he Remembers that he must shortly be Accountable for all in Judgment? And how
importunate should we all be with sinners for their Conversion, when we
consider that themselves also must shortly be Judg^d? Can a man be cold and
dead in prayer, that has any true apprehension of that Judgment upon his
mind, where he must be accountable for all his prayers and performances? O
Remember, and seriously Remember, when you stand before the Minister to hear
the word, and when you are on your knees to God in prayer, in what a manner
that same person, even your selves must shortly stand at the Bar of the
dreadful God! Did these thoughts get thoroughly to men's hearts, they would waken
them out of their sleepy Devotions, and acquaint them that it is a serious
business to be a Christian. How careful should we be of our thoughts and words,
if we believingly remembered that we must be accountable for them all! How
carefully should we consider what we do with our Riches, and with all that God
gives us, and how much more largely should we expend it for his service in
works of Piety and Charity, if we believingly remembered that we must be Judged
according to what we have done, and give account of every Talent that we
receive? Certainly the believing consideration of Judgment, might make us all
better Christians then we are, and keep our lives in a more innocent and
profitable frame.

THE eleventh Direction. As you will certainly renew your failings in this
life, so be sure that you daily renew your Repentance and fly daily to Christ
for a renewed pardon, that no sin may leave its sting in your souls. It is not
your first pardon that will serve the turn for your latter sins. Not that you
must Purpose to sin, and Purpose to repent when you have done, as a Remedy: for
that is an hypocritical and wicked purpose of repenting, which is made a means
to maintain us in our sins; But sin must be avoided as far as we can; and
Repentance and Faith in the blood of Christ must remedy that which we could not
avoid. The righteousness of pardon in Christ's blood is useful to us only so far
as we are sinners; and comes in where our Imperfect Inherent Righteousness
does come short; but must not be purposely chosen before innocence: I mean, we
must rather choose, as far as we can, to obey and be innocent, than to sin and
be pardoned, if we were sure of pardon.

THE twelfth Direction. In this vigilant, obedient, penitent course, with
confidence upon God as a Father, Rest upon the Promise o^ Acceptance and
Remission through the Merits and Intercession of him that Redeemed you; Look up
in hope to the Glory that is before you, and believe that God will make good
his Word, and the patient expectation of the righteous shall not be in vain.
Cheerfully hold on in the work that you have begun: and as you serve a better
matter than you did before your change, so serve him with more willingness,
gladness and delight. Do not entertain hard Thoughts of him, or of his service,
but rejoice in your unspeakable happiness of being admitted into his family and
favor through Christ. Do not serve him in drooping dejection and
discouragement, but with Love, and Joy, and filial fear. Keep in the Communion
of his Saints, where he is cheerfully and faithfully praised and honored, and
where is the greatest visible similitude of heaven upon earth; especially in
the celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, where he seals up a Renewed
pardon in his blood, and where unanimously we keep the Remembrance of his Death
until he come. Do not cast your selves out of the Communion of the Saints, from
whom to be cast out by just Censure and Exclusion, is a dreadful emblem and
forerunner of the Judgment to come, where the ungodly shall be cast out of
the presence of Christ and his Saints for ever.

I have now finished the Directions, which I tender to you for your preparation
for the Day of the Lord; and withal my whole Discourse on this weighty point.
What effect all this shall have upon your hearts, the Lord knows; it is not in
my power to determine. If you are so far blinded and hardened by sin and Satan,
as to make light of all this, or coldly to commend the Doctrine, while you go
on to the end in your carnal worldly condition as before; I can say no more,
but tell thee again, that Judgment is near, when thou will bitterly bewail all
this too late. And among all the rest of the Evidence that comes in against
thee, this book will be one, which shall testify to thy face before Angels, and
men, that thou wast told of that Day, and entreated to prepare.

But if the Lord shall show thee so much mercy as to open thy eyes, and break
in upon thy heart, and by sober Consideration turn it to himself, and cause
thee faithfully to take the warning that has here been given thee, and to obey
these Directions, I dare assure thee from the word of the Lord, that this
Judgment which will be so dreadful to the ungodly, and the beginning of their
endless terror and misery, will be as joyful, to thee, and the beginning of thy
glory: The Savior that thou have believed in, and sincerely obeyed, will not
condemn thee. Psalm. 1. 5, 6. Romans 8. 1. John 3. 16. It is part of his business
to Justify thee before the world, and to glorify his merits, his Kingly
power, his holiness, and his rewarding Justice in thy Absolution and Salvation.
He will account it a righteous thing to recompense Tribulation to thy
Troublers, and Rest to thy self; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power: Even then shall he come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, in that day; Even because
his servants Testimony, and his Spirits among them was believed, 2. These. 1. 6,
7, 8 9, 10. That day will be the great marriage or the Lamb, and the Reception
of thee, and all the Saints into the glory of thy beloved, to which they had a
Right at their first Consent and Contract upon earth: And when the Bridegroom
comes, thou who art Ready shall go in to the Marriage: when the door shall be
shut against the sleepy negligent world; and though they Cry, Lord, Lord, open
to us, they shall be repulsed with a Verily I know you not, Mat. 25. 10, 11,
12, 13. For this day which others fear, may thou long, and hope, and pray,
and wait, and comfort thy self in all troubles with the remembrance of it, 1
Cor. 15. 55, 56. 57, 58. 1 These. 4. 17, 18. If thou were ^^ady to be offered to
death for Christ, or when the time of thy departing is at hand, thou may look
back on the good fight which thou have sought, and on the course which thou
have finished, and on the Faith which thou have kept, and may confidently
conclude, that henceforth there is laid up for thee a Crown of Righteousness,
which The Lord the Righteous Judge shall give thee at that day: and not to thee
only, but unto all them also that Love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. Even
so, Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20.

FINIS.

