SCHISM Detected in both Extremes. OR TWO SORTS OF Sinful Separation.

The FIRST PART detecteth the Schismatical Principles of a Resolver of three
Cases about Church Communion.

The SECOND PART Confuteth the Separation pleaded for, in a Book famed to be
written by Mr. Raphson.

Romans 15. 7. Receive ye one another as Christ received us, to the Glory of God.
LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel. 1684.

THE DANGEROUS SCHISMATIC CLEARLY DETECTED, and fully CONFUTED; For the Saving
of a Distracted Nation from that which would destroy Christian Love and Unity.

Occasioned by a Resolver of Three CASES about CHURCH COMMUNION.

By RICHARD BAXTER a Catholic Christian, who is against confining Christian
Love and Communion to any Sect how Great soever.

Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. John 13. 35. By
this shall all men know you are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another. 1
John 4. 16. He that dwells in Love dwells in God, and he in him. Romans 14.
1. 17, 18. Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
Disputations: for the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: for he that in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside near
Mercers-Chappel, 1683.

The English Schismatic, detected and confuted: Occasioned by a Resolver of
Cases about Church Communion.
CHAP. I.
SAYS THE RESOLVER,
. 1. THE Church is a Body or society of men separated from the rest of the
World, and united to God and to themselves by a Divine Covenant.

A. He says this is the plainest description he can give: That is not the
fault of his Auditors or Readers. 1. As to the Genus, a Community of equals
without Rulers is a body: but I suppose he means not such. 2. Is it enough
that it be of Men? sure now they should be Christians? 3. Many are separated
from the rest of the World, secundum quid, that are no Christians; some in one
respect and some in another, and none in all respects. 4. United to God, is an
ambiguous word, no Creature is United to him perfectly so as to be thereby what
he is, God, in the created Nature. Only Christ is united to him Hypostatically
in his created Nature. All are so far united to him in natural being, as that
in him they live and move and have their being: And the Nature of man is one
sort of his Image: All things are united to him as effects to their constant
efficient. The Church should not be defined without any mention of Christ: The
Churches Union with God is by Christ. 5. Christ himself as Head is an essential
part of the Church, and should not be left out of a Definition, tho the mere
Body may in common speech be called the Church, as the People may be called a
Kingdom. 6. Will any Divine Covenant serve? or must it not be only the
Baptismal Covenant? 7. Is it called Divine only as made by God, or as commanded
by God and made by Man, or as mutual? Certainly Gods Law and offered or
Conditional Promise is most frequently called His Covenant in Scripture; and
this uniteth not men to God, till they consent and Covenant with him. Their own
Covenant Act is necessary hereto: And that is a Divine Covenant, only as
commanded, and accepted and done by Gods assisting Grace. 8. The form of a
Church is Relative, and the Terminus is essential to a Relation. It is no
definition that has not the End of the Association: Therefore this is none at
all; and so the beginning tells us what to expect.

This description has nothing in it* but what may agree to diverse forms of
Society, and so has not the form of a Church: And if he intended not a
Definition, but a loose description, I would a defining Doctor had had the
Chair, during this controversy.

Let us try this description upon a Mohammedan Kingdom, Army, or Navy, or
suppose them mere Deists.

1. Such a Kingdom, Army, or Navy may be a Society. 2. Of Men. 3. Separated
from the rest of the World secundum quid and ad hoc (and none are separated
from it simpliciter and ad omnia: e. g. No man is Separated from the common
humanity, No Deist from any but Atheists, and no Christian in believing a God
and the Law of Nature and Nations.) 4. They are United to God so far as owning
a God and Worshipping him amounts to, besides the Union of the Creature with
the Creator in whom he lives, etc. And no unregenerate ungodly Christian is
united to him savingly. 5. They are united among themselves. 6. This is by a
Covenant: 7. And by a Covenant Divine, as to command, approbation and object.
It is God that they Covenant to own and obey: The common Profession of the
Mahometans, is, There is one God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. It is Divine in
tantum as commanded. For God Commands all men to Own him; to believe that God
is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: And God so
far approves it: St. James says, ( Thou do well) to him that believes
there is a God, much more that is professedly devoted to him.

Let us by this examine the Jewish Church: Jews now may be 1. A Body, 2. Of
Men, 3. Separated from the rest of the World, even in Religion and Church
pretensions. 4. United to God as Creatures, as Men, as the corporal seed of
Abraham, and as professing Belief, Love and Obedience to God, as their God. 5.
Strictly united among themselves: 6. By a Covenant, 7. Which God once
commanded, and still approves so far as they own God.

Let us consider whether this description take not in, those in every Nation
that fear God and work Righteousness, that never heard of Christ, (being thus
combined.) And whether the Kingdom of God, be not larger than his Church: Join
the Head and Tail of this man's book together, and by the Head (the description)
for ought I see, Jews, Mahometans, if not almost; all Heathens, are the Church:
But at the End, I think none on Earth is the Church: At least none that
separate from a pair of Organs, or an ignorant Curate; Nor can any man know who.

Page 2.. 2. He explaineth his Word [ Body] as opposed to a confused Multitude.

A. But a Community of Equals, that have no Governors, may have order, and be
no confused Multitude. And he himself after pleads over much for ^^^^necessity
of Rulers.

P. 3.. 3. And in many places, his Confusion and grand error is repeated, that
the Christian Church is but one: p. 7. We know no Church but what all
Christians are members of by Baptsme, which is the Universal Church; p. 8.
There is but one Church, of which all Christians are members, as there is but
one Covenant; p. 19. If there be but one Church and one Communion, of which all
true Christians are members, etc. p. 23. I am no otherwise a member of any
particular Church, than I am of the Universal: p. 40. It Is a schismatical
Notion of membership that divides the Christian Church into distinct
memberships, and therefore into the distinct Bodies: And. p. 19. and often he
says, those Churches which are not members of each other, are separate
Churches and Schismatics.

A. I had hoped that no man but Mr. Cheny had talked at this rate.

I. It Is agreed on, that there is but one Universal Church: The contrary is a
Contradiction. 2. It is agreed, that there is no lawful particular Church which
is not a part of the Universal. 3. That whoever has just Union and Communion
with a true particular Church, has Union and Communion with the Universal: 4.
That all men in their Worship of God, should accordingly perform it (and do all
that they do) as Men in that Relation to the Universal Church: None of this is
controverted.

II. But I had hoped never to have heard any but Seekers say, that there are
not many lawful particular Churches, distinct from the whole and from one
another, though not disjunct in the Common Essentials. For the proof of the
contrary,

1. I begin with that which I expect should be most powerful; The man's own
after-Confessions, to which he is often brought. Page 8. Distance of Place and
the necessities and conveniences of Worship and Discipline, has divided the
Church into several parts and members, and Particular Churches, etc. So page
14. page 19. All Christian Churches ought to be members of one. More fully p.
20, 21. This is ad hominem, Yea and Nay is his Resolution.

2. But I Will bring other Arguments that prevail more with me. The Sacred
Scriptures often tell us of many Churches, therefore there are many. Act. 9. 31.
The Churches had rest; and 15. 4. Confirming the Churches; 16. 5. So were the
Churches established in the Faith; Romans 16. 4. All the Churches of the
Gentiles: So ver. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 17. So ordain I in all Churches; 11. 16.
Neither the Churches of God ( have such Custom;) 14. 33. As in all the Churches
of the Saints; 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches. So 16. 1. 19.
and 2 Cor. 8. 1. The Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia: 18.
Whose Praise is in the Gospel through all the Churches. So 19. 23, 24. and 11.
8. 28. The care of all the Churches; 12. 13. Inferior to the other Churches.
Gal. 1. 2, 22. 1 These. 2. 14. 2 These. 1. 4. Rev. 1. 4. To the seven Churches,
ver. 11. 20. Angels and Candlesticks of the seven Churches. And 2. 7, 11, 17,
29. and 3. 6, 13, 22, 23. and 22. 16. His Concordance might have showed him all
these in order, Phil. 4. 15. No Church communicated with me (concerning giving
and receiving) but ye only. The dispute now must be, whether the Apostles or
this Resolver be to be believed: They say there are many Churches, parts of
One; he says, There is but one, and it is Schismatical to divide it into
distinct memberships or Bodies, etc. It Is no Schism here to say, I am for Paul
and the Holy Scripture: Let who will believe the contradictor.

3. My next Argument is this: Where there are many Political Societies,
consisting of Christian Pastors and People, professedly associated for the
ordinary Exercise of those Relations as such, in holy Communion, in Christian
Doctrine, Worship, Order and Conversation, for Edification in true Faith, Hope,
Love and Obedience, and the Glorifying of God therein. There are many distinct
true Churches, parts of the Church Universal; But on Earth there are many such
Societyes, etc. Ergo, etc.

Either the controversy is De re or de nomine (for we called Separatists use
to separate these.) 1. If de re; Let the existence of the thing defined be
tried by Scripture, Reason and common Experience: 2. If de nomine; Forma quae
dat esse dat Nomen: Here is the true specific form which is found in many
single Churches, ergo the Name of such single (or individual) Churches is due
to them.

4. Again ad hominem, from the consequences: 1. If there be not many single
Churches in the Universal, then there are not many Patriarchal, National,
Provincial, Metropolitical, Diocesan, or Parochial Churches: For non entium non
datur numerus: Many nothings is a contradiction Multae sunt ergo sunt; Ab est
tertij adjecti ad est secundi valet argumentum.

But if there be not many, then 1. All the Parish Churches in England being but
one, and not many, a Patron can have right to present to no one as a Church,
more than to another. 2. Then the Parson, Vicar or Curate is no more the Parson
of one Church than of another; nor bound to no more Care and Duty; for there is
but one. 3. Then no one is bound to go to one Parish Church more than another;
for there is but one. 4. Then the Temple and Tithes belong no more to one than
another. 5. Then no Bishop is the proper Bishop of one Diocesan Church, more
than of another. 6. Then all the revenues of the Bishop of London, are no more
appropriate to one Church than to another. 7. Then you owe no more Obedience to
the Bishops of one Diocesan Church than another: 8. Then you make the King no
more Head or Governor of the Church of England, than of another. 9. Then a
Diocesan owes no Reverence to a Metropolitan Chruch (if there be none such.)
10. Then many Churches cannot have Communion nor send Bishops to Councils; (if
there be not many) 11. And the charge of Separation from a Church that is no
Church, is a contradiction.

5. I add, from Parity of Reason, if many distinct subordinate Societies may
make one Civil Body Politic, so they may one Universal Church: But the
Antecedent is undoubted. If it be Learnedly said with Mr. Cheny, that one whole
cannot be Part of another whole; One may attain the perfection by that time he
has worn the Breeches but a few years, to know that a whole Family may be part
of a whole Village, and a whole Vicinage be part of a whole City, and a whole
College be part of a whole University; and a whole City part of a whole
Kingdom; and a whole Kingdom part of the whole Earth.

And if it be objected, that the Names of the whole and parts are here diverse;
but a Church and a Church are the same Name. I Answer, at the same age one may
learn that the same Name proves not the sameness of the things Named; and that
ex penuria nominum the Genus and Species, the Totum and Parts have often
equivocally the same Name, with the Addition of just Notes of distinction.
Sometimes an Academy of many School is called Schola, and so are the single
Schools therein: The City of London is a Society; and so are the Societies of
Merchant-Taylors, Drapers, Mercers, etc. therein.

. 4. But these Churches must be members of one another, or they are
Schismatics.

A. 1. How can that be, if they be all but one. 2. This is also above or below
the ferula age. They are no members of one another, but all members of the
whole: Yet how often have we this with the sting of Schism (as Damning as Murder
of Adulter) in the Tail of it. The hand is not a member or part of the Foot, or
the Foot of the Hand, or the Liver a member of the Lungs, etc. but each one of
the Man: If ever I were a Schoolmaster again, I would persuade may Boys, that
A is not a member of B, nor B of C, etc. but each of the Alphabet; And that one
leaf of their Book is not a member of another, but both of the Book; And if
they were ripe for the University, I would persuade them that Exeter College
is not a member of Corpus Christi, nor that of Lincoln, etc. but all of the
Universitie of Oxford. And I think that Bristol is not a member of Exeter or
Gloucester, etc. but all of England; and that the Company of Stationers are not
part of the Society of Merchants or Drapers, etc. but all of London.

What a Privilege is it, that a Man may believe this about any such thing
without Schism and Damnation! And how dreadful to fall into such Church-mens
hands that in their Case make it Schism, Separation and Damnation. But there
is a Remedy.

. 5. But he has reason for what he says: p. 3, 4. [Indeed it is extremely
absurd and unreasonable, to say, that the Christian Church, which is built on
the same Foundation, etc. who enjoy all Privileges in Common, should be
divided into as distinct and separate Bodies, tho of the same kind and nature,
as Peter, James and John are distinct Persons -- It Is absurd to say, That where
every thing is common there is not one Community.

Ans. Let us not swallow this without Chewing: 1. Whether all be extremely
absurd and unreasonable which such Doctors call so; I am grown to doubt as much
as whether all be Schism which Schismatics call so: Ipse dixit is no Proof.

2. What the meaning of this great, Decantate Word [ Separate] is; must anon be
enquired: But, may not Churches be distinct and not culpably separate? He
confesses afterward both local distinction and separation.

3. How far are the Universal Church and Particular Churches distinct? As Whole
and Parts? Must the World at last learn that Whole and Parts are not distinct?
If you take it for absurd to distinguish a Man from a Body, or from a Liver,
Hand or Foot, Dissenters do not; nor to distinguish a College from an
University, a House from a Street, a Street from a City, etc.

But how are the Particular Churches distinguished one from another? Reader, so
constantly do such men fight with themselves, that it is meet to ask, whether
they that thus say there are not many distinct Churches, do not assert a far
wider difference between many, than those they dissent from. We affirm that
there are many, and that they differ not in specie, but numero, as Colleges,
Cities do among themselves; but these men, after all this, hold not only a
numerical, but a specific difference, even as Parochial, Diocesan, Provincial,
Patriarchal, National; at least Presbyters and Diocesans differing Ordine vel
Specie with them, the Church denominated from them must do so too.

6. But he confirms it. [Peter, James and John, tho they partake of the same
common nature, yet each of them have a distinct Essence and Subsistence of
their own, and this makes them distinct Persons; but where the very Nature and
Essence of a Body or Society consists in baving all things common, there can be
but one Body.

Ans. I hope its no culpable Separation to distinguish things as differing
specie and numero; and this is the Doctors meaning, if his words are
significant: and the common way of expressing it would have been, [Peter and
John differ numerically but not in specie; but two Churches differ neither
specie nor numero.]

And 1. Reader, whereas he said before, that the Church is not divided into
distinct Bodies, as James and John, etc.] did you think till now, that James
and John, and the Doctor, and the several Bishops had not been distinct parts
of the Church in their distinct natural bodies?

2. And why may there not be distinct Politic Bodies, or Compound in one whole
as well as natural? certainly, all things corporeal save Attomes are Compounds:
A Muscle, a Hand, a Foot, parts similar and dissimilar in man are all
compounded of lesser Parts. If many Students may make one College, why may not
many Colleges make one University? It Is strange if a Doctor deny this.

3. But let us consider of his Reason, and enquire 1. Whether the Church have
all things Common. 2. Whether the very Essence of it consist in this.

I. It is granted that the whole Essence of the Genus and Species is found in
every individual of that Species, Natural or Politic; but did we ever hear,
till Mr. Cheny and this Doctor said it, that Politic Bodies differ not numero
as well as Natural? The Kingdom of England and of France are two; the Church of
Rome and Constantinople long strove which should be uppermost, but who ever
said that they were not two?

II. Have they all things common? Dissenters would have excepted Wives and
Husbands, (tho the Canons called Apostolical do not;) Why should the Essence of
a Church lie in this, and not the Essence of a City or Kingdom? Tories in
Ireland would have all common; Merchants and Tradesmen, Knights, Lords and
Princes here would not. But it is no Schism here also to distinguish simpliciter
and secundum quid, Propriety and the use of Propriety: There is no Community
without Propriety: Men have first a Propriety in themselves, their members,
their food, the acquests of their Labors, their Wives and Children, and Goods.
And they consent to Community to preserve this Propriety, because every man
loves himself: And yet they must use their Propriety, (even of Life) for
common good, because all are better than one: But if they had no Propriety they
could not so use it for the Commonwealth.

And I never conformed to the Doctrine that denies Propriety in Church Members
and Particular Churches, and thought all simply common. I Will tell you what
Particular Churches have to individuate them, not common to all.

1. They consist of individual natural Persons, many of which as much differ
from many other Persons, (those in England from those in Spain) as one man does
from another.

2. Their Graces and gifts are numerically distinct (Faith, Hope, Love, etc.)
from those of other Churches tho ejusdem speciei. 3. England and France, London
and Oxford, have Churches of different place and Situation: 4. But the formal
individuating difference is their nearest Relation to their several Pastors; as
several Kingdoms, Cities, Schools are numerically distinct by their distinct
Kings, Majors, Schoolmasters, so are several Churches ejusdem speciei. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Know those that are among you and over you in the Lord, and
esteem them highly in love for their Works sake. As every man's Wife, Children
and Servants must be used for the common good, and yet are not common, one man's
Wife and Children are not another; So the Bishop of London, of Oxford etc.
must govern his Church for the good of the Universal; but he is not the Bishop
of Gloucester, Norwich, Paris, Rome.

These are differences enough to constitute a numerical difference of Churches:
Paul distinguishes the Bishops of Philippi, Ephesus* etc. from others.

Do you yet see no Privileges that one has Proper, and not common to all?
none that make a difference in specie, but both ^^^^umerical and gradual. 1.
All Churches have not Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, Doctor Stillingfleet,
Doctor Sherlock to be their Teachers: Air Churches be not taught all that is in
this Resolver. 2. All Churches have not men of the same soundness nor
excellency of Parts: It was once taken for lawful to account them specially
worthy of double honor who labored in the Word and Doctrine, and to esteem
men for their works sake. Paul says of Timothy, I have no man like minded. If
those that heard not a Sermon in many years differed not from your
Congregation, why do you preach?

I am reproached in Print for telling the world this notorious truth; That I
lived till ten years old, where four men, four years hired successively were
Readers and Schoolmasters; two Preached (as it was called) once a Month, the
other two never: Two drank themselves to beggary. After I lived where many
Parishes about us had no Preachers: The Parish that I lived in, had a Church
with a Vicar that never preached, and a Chapel with a Parson eighty years old,
that had two Livings twenty Miles distant, and never preached: His Son a Reader
and Stage Player was sometime his Curate: His Grandson, my Schoolmaster, his
Curate next that, never preached in his life, but drunk himself to beggary. One
year a Tailor read the Scripture, and the old man (the best of them all) said
the Commmon-Prayer without book (for want of sight.) The next year a poor
Thresher read the Scripture. After that a Neighbors Son (my Master) was
Curate, who never preached but once, and that when he was drunk, (in my hearing)
on Mat. 25. Come ye Blessed, and go ye Cursed;] the saddest Sermon that ever I
heard. These things were no rarities: Now my assertion is, That the Church that
had such as Austin, Chrysostom, Jewel, Andrews, and such worthy men as London
now has many, had Privileges distinct from these, (and many the like) that I
was in.

If you say that every Bishop and Preacher is as much the Bishop and Preacher
to all other single Churches, as to that which is his Title; then 1. He must be
condemned for not teaching them all. 2. Then he may claim maintenance from them
all. 3. Then he may intrude into any man's Charge. 4. Then no Church is
unchurcht for want of a Bishop, for any one Bishop is Bishop to every Church in
the World; and so ubi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia, signifies but that Church and
Bishop are on the same Earth; and Ecclesia est Plebs Episcopo adunata may be
verified if there be but one in the World. 5. And so Mr. Dodwell and such are
self-confuted before you are aware: Geneva, Holland, and all Presbyterians are
true Churches, for they have all Bishops; e.g. The Bishop of London is Bishop
to them all: For if one man be no more a Member of one single Church than of
another, and so no more a Subject to one Bishop than to another, then one
Bishop is no more Pastor of one Church than of another.

7. And how can you magnify the Church of England for a Wise, Learned, Pious
Clergy above other Churches, if all Privileges be common, and they have no
proper Pastors of their own.

8. Do you think that the Church, e. g. Of Hippo, that was in Austins days,
was the same numerical single Church with that which is there now, (were there
any) or with the Diocesan Church of London? if not, then at least distance of
time, and change of Persons makes diverse Particular Churches; and it is no more
against the unity of the Church Universal to have diverse particular Churches in
it in the same Age, than in diverse Ages.

In short, Diversity of matter and form makes a numerical Diversity (as of
Natural, so) of Politic Bodies of the same species: But the Churches of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira, Philadelphia etc. were of diverse matter and form
numerically; Ergo they were diverse Political Churches.

Sure God does not commend Laodicea for Philadelphia's Church Virtues, nor
condemn the Church of Philadelphia for the other Churches Sins.

And if the Angels be Bishops, why are some Bishops praised as the Bishops of
such Churches, and the Bishops of other Churches threatened.

But I confess this is a ready way to end the Controversies between the Bishops
of several Churches which shall be greatest, if they be all but one.

But I hope that when the Bishop of Rome and his Church was corrupted, it is
not true that every Bishop and Church fell with him, (or with any that has
turned to Mahumetanism.)

To be no longer on this, (which I thought no Prelatist would ever have put me
on) if these men speak not notoriously against Scripture, against the constant
Language of Canons and Fathers, Historians and Lawyers, and all Antiquity, and
all Christian Countries and Divines, (yea, even those that at Trent would have
had only the Pope to be of immediate Divine Right) then I know not any thing by
Reading. And if poor Nonconformists must be put to defend themselves against
such singularities, and be Schismatics unless they will differ from all the
Christian World of all Ages, there is no Remedy.

7. But p. 5, 6. he tells us, [ that a Church is made by a Divine Covenant --
God only can constitute a Church: Such Persons, if there be any so absurd, are
not worth disputing with, who dare affirm the Church to be an humane Creature,
or the invention of men. -- And no Church can depend on humane Contracts; for
then a Church would be a humane Creature and Constitution, whereas a Church can
be founded only on a Divine Covenant --

1. Who would think but this man were a Nonconformist, that talks so like them
( e. g. Amesius in Medul. Theol.) against humane Church Forms? But what then
will Bishop Bilson, and almost all other Bishops and Christians be thought of,
who affirm Patriarchal and Metropolitical Churches (and many of the Diocesane)
to be but humane Constitutions and Inventions. And if these be not worth the
disputing with, it seems, that you differ from them more than Separatists do:
and then were not all these Schismatics? and then, are not you a Schismatic
if you communicate with them? yea, your Mr. Dodwel himself makes Diocesan
Churches to be a humane Creature; and A. Bishop Bromhall much pleads for man's
power to make Patriarchal Churches; and so do such others.

2. But is it true that humane Contracts make not a Church? Ans. Not alone: But
I think that all Churches are made by mutual Contracts, and humane is one part
of that which is mutual.

1. As to the Universal Church, 1. God as Legislator and Donor, instituteth the
species of Covenanting by Baptism, and therein he commands man's consent to
his offered Covenant; and conditionally promises to be our God: But,
Conditionale nihil ponit in esse: This much makes no Christian, nor Church. To
command a man to be a Christian, and conditionally to promise him life if he
will be one, proves him not to be one; else all were Christians that reject an
offered Christ.

2. But when man consents and covenanteth with God, then Gods conditional
gift becomes actual and efficacious, the man being a capable Recipient, and not
before: and in this it is the Contract that is the Fundamentum Relationis; but
a single Promise is not a mutual Covenant or Contract.

So that it is no wiser Divinity to say, Gods Covenant and not man's consent,
Covenant or Contract with God, does make Christians, and the universal Church;
than it is sober Reason to say, That Gods Institution of Marriage or
Magistracy only does make the Relation of Husband and Wife, without their
covenanting consent, or does make Commonwealths, without the consent or
Covenant of Sovereign and Subjects. Did this Doctor think that Voluntariness is
not as necessary to the Relation of Christianity as to the Relation of Prince
and Subjects; yea, or of Husband and Wife? if he do, he is shamefully mistaken.
Baptism delivers men possession of Pardon, Grace and right to Glory; and can
men have this against their wills? One would think by the Doctrine and course
of some men, that they could force men to Pardon and Salvation! if I believed
that their force could accomplish this, I would never call it Persecution. If
they can force men to be true Christians, they may force them to be justified
and saved; and then they are very uncharitable if they do not: Let them then
cease preaching and disputing us to their Opinion, but bring us all to Heaven
whether we will or not.

Yea the self-contradictor, playing fast and loose, confesses p. 6. That no
man at age can be admitted to Baptism, till he profess his faith in Christ, and
voluntarily undertake the Baptismal Vow: And is not that humane Covenanting?

Yea, he knows that the Liturgy makes even Neighbors or Strangers, vow and
covenant, both in the name of the Child and for the Child. And so necessary
does the Episcopal Church think humane Covenanting, that without this no Child
must be Baptized publicly though the Parents would covenant, and that they can
neither for Love nor Money (for many poor men hire Godfathers) get any one
(much less three) who examined, will seriously purpose to perform the Covenant
for the Child's holy Education which they make.

II. But is not humane Covenanting a cause of single Church Relation as well as
of universal? I see no cause to doubt it; and I am sure that the Church for a
thousand years (before and since Popery came in) have declared him no Bishop
that comes in without consent of Clergy and People; which Consent is their
covenanting act.

To make a single Church, manifold consent goes to the Fundamentum Relationis.
1. God commands single Church Officers, order and consent, and promises them
his blessing where they are met: The Lord and his Angels are among them: No
command is vain, and without a virtual Promise. 2. To this a threefold humane
consent is needful, Ordinarily: 1. the Persons called. 2. The Ordainers (when
it may be had.) 3. The Peoples. He that formerly, from the Apostles days, for
a thousand years, should have said, that neither the covenanting, that is the
consent of the Pastor, or People, or Ordainers, is necessary to the Fundamentum
of a single Church Relation or Form, would have been taken for a wild-brain'd
Schismatic at least.

8. But says this Doctor (and another of them) [p. 6. But the Independent
Church Covenant between Pastor and people, is of a very different nature from
this: Unless any man will say, that the voluntary Contract and Covenant which
the Independents exact from their Members, and wherein they place a Church
state, be part of the Baptismal vow; if it be not, then they found the Church
upon a humane Covenant; for Christ has made but one Covenant with Mankind
which is contained in the Vow of Baptism; if it be, then no man is a Christian
but an Independent.

Ans. Alas for the Church that is taught at this rate!

1. I never saw what Independents do in this case; but I think none of them
that are Sober own any other sort of Church but the universal, and single
Churches as members of it, and therefore require no Contract but 1. To the
Covenant of Baptism or Christianity. 2. To the Duties of their particular
Church-relation.

2. And nothing is here of necessity but manifested Consent (which is a real
Contract) but a clearer or a darker, an explicit or implicate consent differ
only ad melius esse.

3. Is not God the Author of Magistracy, Marriage, etc. And is it any violation
of Gods part, if Rulers and People, Husband and Wife be Covenanters by his
command?

4. Is it any renuntiation of Baptism to promise at Ordination to obey the
Archbishop and Bishop, and to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience? Is it not
still exacted? Are not the Takers of it obliged? are not Covenants imposed on
all that will be Ministers in the act of Uniformity? are not multitudes kept
out and cast out for not making these Covenants? Quo teneam nodo, etc. How
should one deal with such stippery men? Good Mr. Zachary Cawdry that wrote to
have all men to covenant Submission to Bishops and Parish Ministers, did not
dream that it was any violation of Baptism.

5. Do not men owe duty to their Pastors which they owe to no others? If not,
put them not on it: Why are you angry with them for going from you? Why does
the Canon suspend those that receive them to Communion from another Parish that
has no Preacher? Why are we ruined for not covenanting as aforesaid? if yea,
then is it against Baptism to promise to do our duty?

6. But has God commanded or instituted no Covenant but Baptism? Yes sure, the
Matrimonial at least; and I think Ordination is covenanting for the Ministry:
Did not the Apostle Acts 14. 23. ordain Elders in every Church? if you would
have [by Suffrage] left out of the Translation, no sober man can doubt but it
was by the Peoples consent; and was it without their consent that Titus was to
ordain Elders in every City? Could any then come otherwise in? Did not all
Churches hold and practice this after, and was it none of Gods Institution? If
so, God requires us not to take any of you for our Bishops or Pastors: Who
then requires it? What means Paul when he says, they gave up themselves to
the Lord and to us, by the Will of God.

7. Can the wit of man imagine how it is possible without consent, for a man to
be made the Pastor of any Flock? Who ever ordained a man against his will? or
for any man to have Title against his will, to the proper oversight and
pastoral care of any one Pastor, or the privileges of any Church? If any think
they may be crammed and drencht with the Sacrament, or that an unwilling man
may have a sealed pardon and gift of Salvation delivered him, he will make a
new Gospel. And how any particular Pastor is bound to give that man the
Sacrament ordinarily, that consents not ordinarily to receive it of him, I know
not. No man is a member of any City, or any Company of Freemen in the City,
but by mutual consent; and the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King
makes not the Oath of a Citizen as such or of a Member of a Company as such,
unlawful.

8. Does this Doctor think that he ever yet proved to sober men, that the
Covenant aforesaid, of Godfathers and Godmothers, to make Christians, and
members of the universal Church, is more (or so much) of Gods Institution, than
the Contract or Consent between Bishops or Pastors and People to make a single
Political Church?

9. If it follow not, that no man is the Kings Subject that swears not to the
City; It will not follow, that none is a Christian, but an Independent, or
Church-consenter.

10. How are your Parish or Diocesan Church members known to your selves or any
others? Are all that dwell in the Parish or Diocese your Church members? Then
Atheists, Sadducees, Hobbists, and all vicious men and thousands that never
communicate, are such: Yea those that you call Separatists. If it be every
transient Communicant, have you a proper Pastoral care of every Travelers Soul
that so communicates with you? You after plead that his very ordinary Communion
makes him not a member, if he be unwilling to be one. And is not his consent
then necessary? Or if ordinary Communion be the test (how few then of great
Parishes are of the Church) yet that is because such Communion signifies their
Consent to your oversight of them.

9. But it is much to be approved which p. 5. and often he says, that to be taken
into Covenant with, God, and to be received into the Church is the very same
thing, as to the Universal Church. By which all his gross Schismatical
Accusations after wards are confuted. No, man then is out of the Church that is
not out of the Baptismal Covenant, either by not taking it, or by renouncing
some Essential part of it? And when will he prove, that to take him, rather
than Dr. Bates that was cast out, to be a Teacher or Pastor at Dunstans, or to
take this man and not another to be the Lawful Bishop or Priest, and to obey
him in every Oath and Ceremony, is an Essential part of the Baptismal Covenant,
or of Christianity? But; such a rope of Sand, as Mr. Dodwell and this man tie
together, to bind men to their Sect, will serve turn with some that know not
who speaks Truth, by any surer way than prejudice.

10. His Doctrine of Separation and gathering Churches out of Churches is anon
to be considered: But whereas he adds, p. 7. [ These men convert Christians
from common Christianity, and the Communion of the Universal Church to
Independency.]

Ans. My acquaintance with them is small, save by reading their Books: And
there are few Men of any Common Denomination (Episcopal, or other) that are not
in many things disagreed. But I must in Charity to them say, that as far as I
can judge by their Writings or Speech, he palpably slandereth them; and that
none that are grave and sober among them do separate their Churches from the
common Christianity or the Universal Church, any more than the Company of
Stationers, Ironmongers, etc. are separated from the City of London, or London
from England, or Trinity College from the University of Cambridge or Oxford. I
never met with man, and I am confident never shall do, that does not take his
Independent Church to be part of the Universal, and Dependent as a part on the
whole. If belying others stopped at words, the wrong were small: But when it is
made but the stairs to hatred and destroying, it is his way to cure Schism that
is commonly painted with Horns and Cloven feet. If a man come from a Country
Village and be made by Covenant a Citizen of London, how prove you that he
renounceth King or Kingdom?

But he says, p. 9. Those who wilfully separate from the Corporation to which
the Charter was granted, forfeit their Interest in the Charter.

Ans. What Reader does this man presume upon that will not ask him, how he
proves 1. That Gods Law or Charter to his Church does not require them to
congregate in distinct single Churches (as London Charter does to erect several
Companies, and the Universities several Colleges?) 2. And that God has not in
his Word given order or command for such single Churches: But that the Apostles
and Titus by fixing Elders to their several Churches and Cities, separated from
the Universal Church? 3. And that their subordinate Churches have not need of
distinct subordinate consent and duty: And that our Diocesan Churches all
separate from the Universal? Did he think these things need no proof at all?

It may be he will say that the Diocesan depend on the Universal, but the
Presbyterian or Independent do not.

I Answer, Dependence is either that of Subjects on Sovereign or Magistrates
for Government, or that Of a Community of Equals for Communion. In the former
respect they depend on none but Christ as Universal Sovereign, Nor on any
Foriegners for Governments: In the latter, they depend on all true Churches for
Communion: And Doctor Hammond and most Diocesans hitherto have said that
Diocesan Churches are thus far Independent or National at most.

And if any be for a Foreign Jurisdiction, in Charity before they persuade
England to it, they should procure them a Dispensation from all the Oaths, that
have sworn all this Kingdom against endeavoring any change of Government, and
against a Foreign Jurisdiction: For some Fanatics now Dream that PER is the
Mark of the Beast, and that (...) (which is the number of his Name, is nominal
as well as numeral, and refers to [ CH-urch (...) (and) S Tate] (For as for
them that find a man's name in them, I abhor their Exposition more.)

11. P. 9. [God (says he) has not made any Covenant in particular with the
Church of Geneva, France or England, etc.

A. 1. God has made one General Law, for Christians congregating with their
fixed Elders or Bishops in particular Churches all the World over: And his
Command is not without Promise of being with them to the End of the World; and
that Promise becomes a Promise to every Church so congregate. God has not
made distinct Laws or Promise to every Christian: But the Promise to Justify
all Believers justifies each single Person when he believes. If the King
should make one common Law to command all his Subjects that are Freeholders to
live in Corporations or Hundreds, described with their privileges, those
privileges would be all theirs that are so incorporated: As one Charter may
Privilege every London Company, diversified by subordinate Agreements.

2. And that God who will have them thus incorporated and distributed into
several single Churches, does Covenant (or Promise) according to their demerits
to each. Do I need to recite the peculiar Promises and threats to the seven
Asian Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. which are Covenants to them?

12. Next Page 10. He will tell us what Communion is, and in many words, it is
to tell us that Communion is nothing but Union: I know that quoad notationem
nominis, Communion may signify, Union with others: But they that write
Politics have hitherto distinguished. Union and Communion, taking Communion
for Actual Communication, or exercise of the duties of men in Union? But to
speak cross to other Writers on the same Subjects and give no reason for it,
and to confound Union and Communion, is one part of this edifying Resolution.

. 13. Page 11. [Our Communion with the Church consists in being members of the
Church, which we are made by Baptism,] (says he.)

Then the Baptized are still in Communion with the Church, till their baptism
be nullified: And has he proved us Apostates?

. 14. Page 12. Should any man who is no member of the Church, nor owns himself
to be so, intrude into the Church and Communicate in all Holy Offices, it is. no
Act of Communion, etc.

A. I thought communicating ordinarily in Holy Office, had gone for an owning
of Communion: If it do not, would you would tell us how to know who are of your
Church.

. 15. P. 13. Says he (Church Communion does not consist in particular Acts of
Communion, which can be performed among those who are present and Neighbors,
but in membership: Now as a member is a member of the whole Body (not merely of
any part of it, etc.) All the Subjects of England who never saw nor converst
with each other, are members of the same Kingdom.]

A. 1. That word [ meerly] has more Craft than justice or Honesty: Merely
signifies Only I suppose; and if he would make his Reader think that they that
are for single Church peculiar membership and consent, do take themselves to be
[ merely or only] members of those single Churches, and not of the Universal,
it is shameless injury.

2. Will he ever draw men to conformity by making them believe, that because
they owe Common Communion to all Christians, therefore we owe no special duty
to the Bishops, Priests, Churches or Neighbors where we are settled? Do the Men
of one College, School, Corporation, owe no more duty to that than to all
others? Do the Freeholders of Bedford-shire choose Knights for Middlesex; or
the Citizens of Oxford choose Officers in London? These seem strange
Resolutions to us.

3. But does he remember that [ if Communion consist not in Acts, of Communion
to such, but in membership even with the distant,] then he that is baptized,
and no Apostate, and performs no other Acts of Communion to the Bishops,
Parson or People where he lives, than he is bound to perform to them a hundred
or thousand miles off, is no Separatist. Methinks this favors Separation too
much.

. 16. Page 14. When he denied any Divine Covenant to make us members of
particular Churches distinguished from the Universal (as all National, Diocesan
and Parochial are, as parts from the whole) he presently confuteth all again,
saying [ The exercise of Church Communion, as to most of the particular duties
and Offices of it must be confined to a particular Church and Congregation (for
we cannot actually join in the Communion of Prayers and Sacraments, etc. but
with some particular Church.]

A. Oportuit fuisse memorem, -- 1. Reader, does not this man here confess that
there are particular Churches? 2. If these be not distinct from the whole, then
each particular is the whole. 3. If the Exercise must be in particular
Churches, must not men Consent to their Relations and Duties? Is it a sin to
Promise Duty? 4. Sure it is not mere Place, but a mutual Relation of Pastors
and People that distinguishes these Churches. The Presbyterians preached once
in the same Places that you do, and yet you take them not for the same Church
Pastors. If one from York or Cornwall come into your Pulpit without consent, do
People stand as much related to him as to you? Some men are of extraordinary
sufficiency to resist and conquer the clearest evidence of Truth.

But he adds [every Act of Communion tho performed to some particular Church,
is and must be an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church.]

A. And who denies this? No sober Independent or Presbyterian that ever I met
with. It Is a weighty Truth.

. 17. P. 14. Says he [Praying, and Hearing and Receiving the Lords Supper
together does not make us more in Communion with the Church of England than
with any other true and Orthodox part of the Church, tho in the remotest part
of the World.]

A. I think that is not true: With the remotest parts you have only Catholic
Communion with the Church Universal: In England and London you have that and
more; even special subordinate Communion with your own King, Bishop and Flock.

2. And has not the Church of England such Communion in obedience to its own
Laws; (as the Act of Uniformity,) Convocation and Canons, which you have not
with all abroad? Do your Bishops in Convocation make Canon Laws for all the
World? Do you Swear Canonical obedience as much to the Bishop of Paris, or
Haffnia, etc. as to your Ordinary? Do the Canons of all Churches impose our
Liturgy, or ipso facto excommunicate all that affirm any thing in it, or our
Ceremonies or Church Government, to be against Gods word? Sure this is a
peculiar kind of Communion.

3. If not, why are all the Nonconformists cast out that offer to officiate and
Communicate on such terms as are common to all sound Churches?

Page 15. Says he [There is nothing in all these Acts of Communion which does
more peculiarly unite us to such a particular Church than to the whole
Christian Church.]

A. What, neither in these Acts nor any other! Then we are no more bound to
hear you, or maintain you as our Pastor, than to hear and maintain the whole
Christian Church.

. 18. P. 20. Says he [There is no other Rule of Catholic Communion for
private Christians, but to communicatee in all Religious Offices and all Acts
Government and Discipline with Christians those with whom they live.

A. 1. Elsewhere you added [ sound and Orthodox:] Else they that live with
Arians, Socinians, Papists (in Spain, France, Italy, etc.) are bound to
communicate with them in all Religious Offices and obey them. 2. This
concludes, that where Presbytery or Independency is the way of the place where
we live, all must thus communicate and obey. The King and Custom then may make
any way to become our Duty. 3. If you tell us that it is only with the Sound and
Orthodox, you were as good say nothing, unless you tell us who must judge that,
whether the People themselves, or who for them. 4. But if this be the only rule
for private Christians, what shall they do, e. g. in Aethiopa, Egypt, Syria,
and many other Countries where the Churches are such as General Councils and
other Churches judge Heretics or Schismatics? And what shall they do, when at
Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople, etc. one party is uppermost (by the
Judgment of Councils and Prince) one Year, and another contrary party the next.
And what shall they do where the Prince equally tolerateth both, and it is hard
to know which is the more numerous? as in Zeno's and Anastasius Reign, etc. And
what shall they do when many Churches in one City are of diverse Tongues, as
well as Customs? Have the Greeks, French and Dutch in London no rule of
Catholic Communion but communicating in all Offices with the English, and
obeying all your Bishops Court?

. 19. P. 21. Says he [Distinct and particular Churches* which are in Communion
with each other, must have their district bounds and limits, as every member
has it is natural and proper place, and Situation in the Body.]

A. Why may not the Greeks; Dutch and French live in Communion with the
Churches London though they live dispersedly among them! In Brandenburg,
Hassia, and many free Cities, and Belgia, where Lutherans and Calvinists (as
called) live together, and own each other as Brethren, why may not both be
Churches of Christ?

. 20. P. 21, 22. A great deal more he has of the like, making Schismatics at
his Pleasure. [This is plain in the Case of the Presbyterian and Independent
Churches and those other Conventicles -- They are Churches in a Church, --
Nothing can justify the Distinction of Christians into several Churches, but
only such a distance of place as makes it necessary, etc. p. 22. Distinct
Churches in the same place can never be under the same Communion.

A. These things are repeated so often, and the word [ separate] so deceitfully
rolled over and over, that I will answer all together under his third Case at
the End.

. 21. P. 27. See how openly he recanteth most aforesaid: There is a sense
indeed wherein we may be said to be members of one particular Church considered
as distinct from all other particular Churches: But that principally consists
in Government and Discipline. Every Christian is a member of the Whole
Christian Church, and in Communion with it, but he is under the immediate
instruction and Government of his own Bishop and Presbyters, and is bound to
personal Communion with them; and this constitutes a particular Church, in
which all Acts of Worship and all Acts of Discipline and Government are under
the Direction and conduct of a particular Bishop.]

A. Omitting that he seems to make the Parochial Churches no Churches, but
parts of one, here he says all that he seemed to write against, and that those
that he reproacheth hold, allowing the difference of the extent of Churches.
And is it Edifying to read such a discourse, that says and unsaith by
self-contradiction? And he adjoyns 28. p. how by agreement Patriarchal and
National Churches are made! And is not Agreement a humane Contract?

CHAP. II.
Of his first Case.
. 1. PAge 31. His first Case, Whether Communion with some Church or other be a
necessary Duty incumbent on Christians:] And he thinks the Resolution of this
is as plain, as whether it be necessary for every man to be a Christian: For
every Christian is baptized into the Communion of the Church.

A. In this I know no Christian adversary to him: But it being the Universal
Church that he gives his proof of necessary Communion with, it is odd to say,
We must have Communion with some Church or other: As if there were more than
one Universal Church. 2. But we grant more, that all that can well, should be
also members of some single Church.

. 2. P. 32. He says [ External and, Actual Communion is an Essential duty of a
Churchmember (meaning a Christian.)]

A. 1. And yet before he denied that Communion lay essentially in this
Exercise, but only in Union; Yea and Nay is his Custom. 2. Some few Christians
(as those that live where such Communion cannot be had without sin, etc.) are
not bound to it; therefore it is not true that it is Essential to Universal
Church Membership. And I think sickness ends not the essentials, that
disableth men.

3. Note Reader, that by this man's Doctrine we are all unchristened and damned
if we do not gather into disallowed Churches, if we be unjustly cast out of the
allowed ones: For all must be Church members that will be Christians, and an
unjust Excommunication cannot disoblige us from Christianity, nor bind us to
consent to be damned. Now read the 5th 6th 7th 8th, etc. Canons of the Church
of England, which ipso facto Excommunicate all that affirm any thing in their
Liturgy, Articles, Ceremonies or Government sinful, and answer Spala^^^^ensis
arguments against Excommunicating ipso facto, and prove all this just, and you
may prove what you will just. But you see where he lays the Controversy: If
any be Excommunicated without sufficient cause, or by Lay Civilians to whom God
never gave that power, or by such Bishops or Pastors as have no just Authority
for want of a true call or Consent; or if any unlawful thing be made necessary
to Communion, all such persons must by his own confessions hold
Church Communion whether these Imposers will or not; for all Christians are
bound to be of some Church.

. 3. P. 33, 34. He says that [None but public Prayers are the Prayers of the
Church properly, and acts of Communion, that is, such as are offered by the
hands of men authorized and set apart for that purpose, etc.]

Ans. Who would have thought that we are more for the Liturgy than he? I
undertake to prove, that all the Responsal Prayers, and all the Litany Prayers,
in which the Minister names but the matter to them, and the People make it a
Prayer by speaking the petitioning parts, are all the public Prayers of the
Church, and so are all the petitioning Psalms spoke or sung by the People, and
not only that which is offered by the Priest: I do not think that he believes
what he carelessly says here, himself.

But the Independents are stiffer for his first Thesis (of the necessity of
Church Communion) than he is, his unfit words I pass by.

CHAP. III.
Of his second Case.
. 1. THE next question of Occasional Communion as distinct from fixed, he turns
out of doors, as if there could be no such thing, and it is very true as to the
Church universal; but as to visible, actual Communion with this or that
particular Church, it is not true.

1. A Traveller of another Country, who on his journey communicates with every
Church where he passes, is not a fixed Member of that Church: for, 1. The
Pastor or Bishop has not that peculiar Charge of him as of fixed members. 2.
He is not bound where he passes to take such notice of the lives of
Communicants or Pastors, and to admonish the Offenders, and tell the Church, as
fixed members are. 3. He has not the right in chooseing Pastors or Deacons as
the fixed Members have. 4. An itinerant Bishop in transitu is not their fixed
Bishop; ergo an Iterant Layman is not a fixed Member.

The same I may say of one that is a fixed member of another Church in the same
City, and comes to that only to signify universal Communion, or neighbourly;
which, though he deny to be lawful, I shall further prove anon.

And the same I may say of those that dwell where there is no fixed single
Church at all, for want of a Pastor, but they congregate only when some strange
Minister passes through the Town.

CHAP. IV.
His third Case.
. 1. PAge 48, 49. He resolves his third Case: [Whether it be lawful to
Communicate with two distinct and separate Churches] negatively, and says, [It
is contrary to all the Principles of Church Communion, as any thing can
possibly be; it is to be contrary to our selves, it is Communicating with
Schism: That the Presbyterian and Independent Churches have made an actual
separation from the Church of England he has evidently proved; -- and they are
Schismatics, and to communicate with them is to partake in their Schism; and
if Schism be a great sin, and that which will damn us as soon as Adultery and
Murder, then, it must needs be a dangerous thing to communicate with
Schismatics. And p. 42. There cannot be two distinct Churches in one place,
one for occasional, and another for constant Communion, without Schism.]

Ans. To save those that are willing from the Poison of these Schismatical
Doctrines, lapt up in confusion by men that abhor distinction, or understand
not what they say; I will first lay down that truth that he fights against,
with convincing evidence, and then show you the mischief of his false Doctrine
and Application.

. 2. The confusion of these Words [ Church, Communion, Separation and Schism]
which every one signify diverse things, is the chief means to blind* and
deceive his Reader; whether it do so by himself I know not.

I. The Word Church signifies sometime the universal Church; sometime a single
Organized Church as part of it, and sometime humane combinations of such single
Churches; and that into Diocesan, Classical, Provincial, Patriarchal, National,
and Papal.

II. The Specification and Nomination of Churches is from the formal cause, and
the proper Government is that form: And the Individuation is from matter and
form, but principally from the form.

III. The Union of Pastor and Flock in Relation makes that which is a form
aptitudinal (as the Soul to the Body) to be the form in act (as the Union of
Soul and Body) and Gods command and consent with the consent of the necessary
relate and correlate cause that union.

IV. Union is in order to Communion, which is primary by the exercise of the
formal powers on the matter, and secondary by the action of all the parts
according to their several capacities and Offices.

V. The Union of the Church is of diverse degrees. 1. The formal Union of the
Head and Body, which makes it essentially the [ Christian Church.] 2. The
Union of the parts among themselves as Christian, which makes them a Body
capable of Union with the Head. 3. The Union of the parts as unequal Organized,
the Official with the rest, which makes it an Organized Body, fit for its
special use and welfare. 4. Union in integrity of parts, which makes it an
entire Body. 5. Union in due temperament and Qualities, which makes it a
healthful Body. 6. Unity in Common Accidents, which make it a Comely Beautiful
Body joined with the rest. But, 7. Union in mutable Accidents is unnecessary
and impossible.

VI. These several degrees of Union are found in Bodies natural and Politic.
1. The Union of Soul and Body makes a man, and an Embryo before it be
organized. 2. The Union of the Body makes it capable of the Souls further
Operation. 3. The Union of the Organical, chief parts, (as Heart, Lungs, etc.)
to the rest make it a true humane Body completed to the nutriment and action
of Life. 4. That it have Hands and Fingers, Feet and Toes, and all integral
parts, makes it an entire Body. 5. The due site, temperament and qualities of
each part make it a sound Body. 6. Comely color, hair, action, going, speech,
etc. make it a comely Body. 7. To have all parts of equal quantity and office,
would make it uncomely: And to have the same hair, color, etc. is unnecessary
at all.

1. The Union of King and Subjects as such makes a Kingdom. 2. That the People
be agreed; for one conjunct interest and Government makes them a Community
capable of Polity or Government. 3. That there be Judges, Majors and Justices,
and subordinate Cities of Societies, makes it an Organized Body, in which
Kingly Government may be exercised to its end, the common good. 4. That no
profitable part be wanting, (Judge, Justice, Sheriff, etc.) makes it an entire
Kingdom. 5. That all know their place, and be duly qualified with Wisdom, Love,
Justice, Conscience, Obedience to God first, to the Sovereign Power next, to
Officers next, etc. makes it a found and safe Kingdom. 6. That it be well
situate, fertile, rich, eminent in Learning, Skill, etc. makes it an adorned
beautiful Kingdom. 7. That all be equal in Power and wealth is destructive; and
that all be of one Age, complexion, calling, temper, degree of knowledge, etc.
is impossible: And that all have the same language, clothing, utensils, etc.
is needless at least.

VII. Jesus Christ is the only Universal Sovereign of the Church, both of vital
influence and Government; nor has he set up any under him, either Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, or mixed, Pope, Council, on diffused Clergy, that
has the Power of Legislation and Judgment as governing the whole Chorch; but
only Officers that per parts govern it among them, each in his Province, as
Justices do the Kingdom, and Kings and States the World; nor is any capable of
more.

VIII. To set up any universal Legislators and Judge, (Pope or Council) is to
set up an Usurper of Christ's Prerogative, called by many a Vice-Christ or an
Antichrist; and as bad as making one man or Senate the Sovereign of all the
Earth; and to attempt the setting up of such or any foreign Jurisdiction in
this Land, is to endeavor to perjure the whole Kingdom that is sworn against
it in the Oath of Supremacy, and sworn never to endeavor any alteration of
Government in Church or State in the Corporation Oath, the Vestry Oath, the
Militia Oath, the Oxford Oath, with the Uniformity Covenants: And if any should
endeavor to introduce such a foreign Jurisdiction who themselves have had a
hand in driving all the Kingdom to all these Oaths against if, I doubt whether
all the Powers of Hell can devise a much greater crime against Clergy, Cities,
and all the Land. Good reason therefore had Doctor Isaac Barrow to write
against it as he has done, and to confute Mr. Thorndike, and all such as of
late go that pernicious way, by the pretense of Church Union and Communion. As
if one universal Sovereign and Legislator and Judge, were not enough to unite
Christ's Kingdom, or man could mend his universal Laws, and could not stay for
his final judgment; and Churches and Kingdoms might nor till then be ruled
without one humane universal Sovereign by necessary and voluntary agreement
among themselves.

XI. To be a true Believer or Christian, (or the Insant seed of such) devoted
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to the sense of the Baptismal
Covenant, uniteth each Member first to Christ himself directly, and
consequently to his Body or Church; and this coram Deo, as soon as it is done
by heart consent; and coram Ecclesia, regularly, as soon as he is invested by
Baptism; which Baptism, when it may be had so, is regularly to be administered
by none but an authorized Minister or Deacon; but if through necessity or
mistake it be done by a Layman, the Ancient Christians took it not for a
nullity, much less if the Baptizer was taken for a Minister by mistake, being
in his place; and if no Baptism can be had, open covenanting is vallid.

X. The Papists (and their truckling Agents here) have here hampered themselves
in a fatal contradiction: To make themselves masters of the World, they would
persuade us, that Sacraments only regenerate and sanctify, and that God saves
none (by any known way and grant) but by his Covenant Sealed by the Sacraments;
and that he authorizeth none to administer this Covenant but Prelates and their
Priests, and none can validly have it from other hands: And so if you will but
abate them the proof of many things that stand in the way, Heaven and Hell,
Salvation and Damnation are at the will and mercy of such Prelates and Priests.
But unhappily they cannot retrieve their old Opinion, but maintain that Laymen
and Women may baptize in necessity validly, and that Baptism puts one into a
State of Salvation.

XI. As he that swears and keeps his Allegiance to the King is a Subject and
Member of the Kingdom, though he be no Member of any Corporation; so, though he
disown a thousand fellow Subjects; yea, though he deny the Authority of
Constable, Justice, Judge; so he that is devoted to Christ truly in the
Baptismal Covenant, is a Christian, and a Member of the Universal Church,
though he were of no particular Church, or did disown a thousand Members, or
any particular Officer of the Church.

XII. All faults or crimes are not Treason: A man that breaks any Law, is in
that measure Culpable or punishable: but every breach of Law, or wrong to
fellow Subjects or Justices, as it is not Treason, so it does not prove a man
no Subject; though some may be so great as to deserve death and make him
intolerable: And so it is in the case of our Subjection in the Church to Christ.

XIII. To own Christ's Instituted species of Church Officers is needful to the
just Order, Safety and Edification of the Church (as to own the Courts of
Judicature, Justices, etc. in the Kingdom) but to own this or that numerical
Officer as truly commissioned, is needful only to the right administration of
his own Province.

XIV. As Christ did his own work of universal Legislation by himself and his
Spirit eminently in the Apostles and Evangelists, who have recorded all in
Scripture, so he settled Churches to continue to the end associated for
Personal Communion in his holy Doctrine, Worship, Order and Conversation with
authorized Ministers, subordinate to his administration in his Prophetical,
Priestly, Kingly and Friendly Relations. And tho these may not always or often
meet in the same place, their neighborhood makes them capable of Personal
presential Communion, as men that may know and admonish each other and meet by
turns, and in presence manage their concerns; which differenceth single
Churches of the lowest order from associated Churches of men, that have
Communion only by others at distance.

XV. As Logicians say of other Relations, the matter must be capable of the
end, or it is not capable of the name and form; so is it here: e. g. It is no
Ship that is made of mere Sponge or Paper, or that is no bigger than a Spoon;
it is no Spoon that is as big as a Ship: One House is not a Village, nor one
Village a City, nor a City a mere House. So twenty or an hundred or a thousand
Parishes associate, cannot be a single Church of the first or lowest Order,
being not capable of mutual Knowledge, Converse or personal present Communion:
Nor are two or three Laymen capable to be such a Church, for want of due
matter. But supposing them capable, tho a full and rich Church have advantage
for Honor and Strength, yet a small* and poor one is ejusdem ordinis as truly
a Church; and so is their Pastor, as Hierom says of Rome and Eugubium; so
Alexandria and Mijuma, etc. Gregory Neocaesar was equally Bishop of nineteen at
first, as after of all save nineteen in the City.

XVI. If the Apostles have Successors in their care and Superiority over many
Churches, it will prove that there should yet be men of eminent worth to take
care of many Churches, and to instruct and admonish the younger Ministers: But
it will neither prove 1. That they succeed the Apostles in the extraordinary
parts of their Office. 2. Nor that they have any forcing power by the Sword. 3.
Nor that one Church has power over others by Divine right; for the Apostles
fixed not their power to any particular Churches, but were general Visitors or
Overseers of many: Yet if the same Man who is fixed in a particular Church,
have also the visiting admonishing oversight of many as far as was an Ordinary
part of the Apostles Office, and be called an Archbishop, I know no Reason to
be against him.

XVII. There be essential and Integral Acts of the Sacred Ministry instituted
by Christ: These none may take the Power of from any Ministers, nor alter the
species or integrity of the Office, by setting up any such Superious as shall
deprive them of that which Christ has instituted, or arrogating the like
uncalled. But as in worship, so in Order and Church Government, there are
undetermined accidents: As to choose the time and place of Synods, to preside
and moderate and such like: And these the Churches by agreement, or the
Magistrate may assign to some above the rest: And if the Magistrate affix
Baronies, Honors, Revenues, or his own due Civil forcing Power, and make the
same Men Magistrates and Ministers, whether we think it prudent and well done
or not, we must honor and obey them.

XVIII. Some call these humane Accidental Orders, forms of Church Government,
and affirm (as Bishop Reignolds did, and Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicon and
many excellent men by him cited) that no form of Church Government is of Divine
Command. Which is true of all this second sort of Government which is but
Accidental and humane; but not at all of the first sort which is Divine and
Essential to Christ himself first, and to Pastors as such by his appointment;
so that the essential Government of the Universal Church, by Christ, and of
each particular Church by Pastors specified by him (if not of Supervisors of
many as succeeding Apostles and Evangelists in their Ordinary work) are of
unalterable Divine right. But the humane forms are alterable: Such I account 1.
The Presidency and Moderatorship and accidental Government of one Bishop in a
single Church over the other Presbyters, Deacons, etc. 2. The accidental
Government of a Diocesan as an Archbishop over these lowest Bishops and
Churches. 3. And the Superiority of Metropolitans and Patriarchs over them, so
it be but in such Accidentals and within the same Empire, not imposing a
foreign Jurisdiction. These tota specie differ from the Divine Offices.

XIX. All these single Church being parts of the Universal are less noble than
the whole, and are to do all that they do as members in Union with the Whole,
and to do all as Acts of Communion with them.

XX. The General precepts of doing all to Edification, Concord, Peace, Order,
etc. oblige all the Churches to hold such correspondencies as are needful to
these Ends: And Synods are one special means, which should be used as far and
often as the Ends require: And if National Metropolitans and Patriarchs order
such Synods, I am not one that will disobey them. But if on these pretenses any
would make Synods more necessary than they are, and use them as Governors, by
Legislation and Judgment over the Particular Bishops by the use of the Church
Keys, and will affixe to them or Metropolitans, besides an Agreeing Power and
the said Government in Accidentals, a proper Church Government by making and
unmaking Ministers or Christians, excommunicating and absolving as Rulers by
the said Keys, it may be a duty to disown such usurpations. As the King would
disown an Assembly of Princes any where met that would claim a Proper
Government of him and his Kingdom; Tho it were much to be wished that all
Christian Princes would hold such Assemblies for the Concord and Peace of
Christendom.

XXI. The Essentials of Faith, Hope and Loving Practice, essentiate the Church
objectively: And these are all summarily contained in the Baptismal Covenant,
explained in the Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalouge; and all with much more,
even Integrals and needful Accidentals in the Sacred Scriptures, which taking
in the Law of Nature, are Gods Universal Law.

XXII. There is no Church on Earth so sound and Orthodox as to want no Integral
part of Christian Religion: Proved: There is no man on Earth, much less any
multitude, so sound as to want no Integral part: But all Churches consist only
of Men; And therefore if all the Men be so far defective, all the Churches are
so.

It is not their Objective Religion Generally and implicitly received that I
mean, but their Subjective Religion, and their explicit reception of the
Objective. The Scripture is our perfect Objective Religion in it self, and as
an Object proposed, and in general and implicitly we all receive it. But as a
man may say, I believe all that is in the Scripture, and yet be ignorant of the
very Essentials in it; so a man may explicitly know and believe all the
Essentials and more, and yet be ignorant of many Integrals.

All things in Scripture proposed to our Faith, Hope and Practice, are the
Integrals of our Religion: But no Christian understands all these proposals
or words of Scripture: Therefore no Christian explicitly believes them all,
or practiceth all. To hold the contrary, is to hold that some Church is perfect
in Understanding, Faith, Hope and Practice, without Ignorance, Error or Sin:
that is, not to know what a man or a Christian on Earth is.

XXIII. Much less do all Churches agree in unnecessary indifferent accidents,
nor ever did, nor ever will or can do.

XXIV. The measuring out Churches by limits of Ground, Parochial or Diocesan,
is a mere humane ordering of a mutable accident, and no Divine Determination:
And if all were taken for Church members-because they dwell in those precincts,
it were wicked: But if it be but all in those precincts that are qualified
Consenters, it is usually a convenient measure: But such as in many Cases must
be broken.

XXV. If a Church with Faithful Pastors be well settled in a place first where
there are not more than should make up that one Church, it is not meet for any
there to gather a distinct Church (tho of the same Faith) without such weighty
reason as will prove it necessary, or like to do more good than hurt: 1.
Because Love inclines to the greatest Union; 2. Because a Great Church is more
strong and honorable than a small, if the number be not so great as to hinder
the Ends. 3. And the Ancient Churches kept this Union.

XXVI. If Magistrates make such Laws about Church Accidents as tend to further
the Churches welfare, or are so pretended, and not against it, we must obey
them. But if they wiil either invade Christ's Autherity or cross it, by making
Laws against his, or such as are proper to his Prerogative to make, or invade
the Pastors Office, and the Churches proper right given by Christ, or determine
Accidents to the Destruction of the Substance (the Church, Doctrine, Worship or
Ends) these bind the Consciences of none to Obedience; but Christ must be
obeyed, and we must patiently suffer.

XXVII. Self-interest, Self-Government and Family-Government are all antecedent
to Public Government, which Rules them for the Common good, but has no
Authority to destroy them: No King or Prelate can bind a man to do that which
would damn his Soul, nor to omit that which is needful to his Salvation: All
power is for Edification: They are Gods Ministers for God.

XXVIII. As it belongs to self-government to choose our own Diet, and Clothes,
and Wives, and Physicians, (tho we may be restrained from doing public hurt on
such pretenses;) And it belong to Family Government to educate our own
Children, and choose their Tutors, Callings, Wives, etc. so it more nearly
belongs to self-government to choose the most safe and profitable means of our
own Salvation, which no man may forbid us; and to avoid that which is
pernicious or hurtful; and to Family-Government to do the like for our Children.

XXIX. It is false Doctrine of those late Writers who tell us, that only
Sacraments sanctify or give right to Salvation: The whole Tenor of the Gospel
tells us that men are brought to Faith and Repentance, and to be Christians,
and Godly men, and by Faith to be justified, by the Preaching of the Gospel:
and that Gods word is his appointed means of Salvation, which his Ministers
must preach skilfully, instantly, in season and out of season, to that End: And
if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

XXX. The Gospel saves not like a Charm, by the bare sound or saying of the
words; nor the Sacrament like an Amulet; But as a Moral means (specially blessed
by him that instituted it) to work on man as Man, by informing his Mind,
persuading his Will and exciting his Affections, as Men are wrought on in other
Cases; (which methinks those called Arminians should least deny, who are said
to lay more of the Spirits operation on Moral suasion than their Adversaries;
yea and those that account it Fanaticism to expect any other gift of Prayer
from the Spirit but what is given morally by use.) And the contrary Doctrine
feigneth God to Work even constantly by Miracle: And as the Papists make every
Mass-Priest a Miracle Worker in Transubstantiation, so do they that make the
bare saying over the Words and doing the outward Acts in the Sacrament, to save
us ex opere operato, and the Pastoral teaching and oversight of an ignorant
drunken Lad or Reader to be (near)as great a help to Salvation, as the Ministry
of a wise skilful, Holy and exemplary Pastor, and the clear affectionate
Preaching of Gods word: And that tell us (as Mr. Dodwell) how sufficient a man
is to administer the Sacramental Covenant that understands what a Covenant is
in matters of Common Conversation.

XXXI. If a Wise: and Skilful and Conscionable Ministry be as needless to
Edification and Salvation as some Men pretend, it is as needless that they
should study to be such, and vain to Glory that they are such, and that the
Church of England has such a Ministry, and vain to expect that men should pay
them any more respect than I owed my Master that never preached but once, and
that drunken; (and diverse very like him.) Or that they should use this as an
argument to draw men to hear them.

XXXII. If the King or Law should settle a Physician of his (or a Patrons)
choice in every Parish, it were well done if it be but to have help at hand for
Volunteers: Bui: if he command all to use them and to use no other before them
or against them, where unskilful or untrusty men are placed, no man is bound to
obey this command: No men's Law can dissolve the Law of Nature, nor disoblige a
man from a due care of his Life, nor bind him to cast it away upon Obedience to
ignorant or bad and treacherous Men. And a man's Soul is more precious than his
Health or Life; and he is bound to greater care of it; and is no more to trust
it on the will of his Superiors How vast is the difference between an ignorant
rash Physician or Pastor, and one that is wise, experienced and trusty? They
that scorn Men for going for greater edification from one to another, do not so
if a man prefer a skilful Physician to one that kills more than he cures; or a
skilful and careful Tutor for his Son, yea or a Farrier for his Horse.

XXXIII. If one Preacher be not for Edification to be greatly preferred before
another, then One Book is not: And so it is no matter what Book they read or
value; and what a Student will this make? And what a Trade for the Booksellers?
And why then should their own Books be so valued? And why then do they silence
hundreds or thousands and forbid them to preach on pain of ruin, (tho no false
Doctrine be proved against them) if they think not that the difference is very
great.

XXXIV. When Councils hereticated and condemned Thousands or Hundreds of
Priests and Bishops, whom Christian Emperors and Princes owned as Orthodox,
they did not then think every Patron, Prince or Prelate a competent Judge with
what Pastor Men should trust the conduct of their Souls: Nor did they think so
that forbad men hearing fornicators: Nor Cyprian that required the People to
forsake Basilides and Martial (and Peccatorem Praepositum.)

XXXV. So full was the proof given in the Book called, The first Plea for
Peace, that the Church from the beginning denied Princes and Magistrates to be
entrusted with the choice of Bishops, or Pastors to whom the Churches were
bound to trust the conduct of their Souls, that he who denies it, is not
worthy to be, therein disputed with. And yet we doubt not but they may force
Infidel Subjects and Catechumens to hear sound and settled Preachers and
Catechists; And may dispose of the Tithes, Temples and many other Accidents of
the Church; and may drive on Pastors and People to their Duty.

XXXVI. It is false Doctrine that two distinct Churches may not be in the same
Precincts or City; This being a mere Accident which abundance of Cases make
unnecessary and unlawful: Which I shall prove.

That which is no where commanded by God, is no duty: But that there shall be
but one Church (or Bishop) in the same Precincts, is not commanded of God,
Ergo, etc. (Divine of Gods making.)

They own the Major in the case of Indifferent thing. If they deny the Minor
let the affirmers prove any such command. We grant a command of Love and
Concord, and a prohibition of all that is against them. But in many instances,
to have several Churches in the same precincts, is not against them.

If they fly to the Canons of foreign Councils, the reason of them we shall
weigh and duly regard; But they were National, and had their Legislative Power
only from their own Princes and their Counselling Power only from Christ: And
we disown all foreign Jurisdiction.

XXXVII. In all these Cases following (and more) two Churches may be in the
same precincts (yea and a City.)

1. In Case that several Bishops are called justly to dwell in the same City,
or Diocese, and many of their Flock be with them, e. g. Many Bishops of England
dwell long, yea mostly in London or in London Diocese: e. g. The Bishop of Eli
dwells in the Parish of St. Andrews Holbourn: Qu. Whether there he be a Subject
to Dr. Stillingfleet as his Pastor, and bound to obey him? or whether many out
of his Diocese (thousands) may not as Lawfully dwell half the Year in London as
he? And whether when he preaches to them, he do it not as their Bishop (in
London Diocese.) And so of many other Bishops that here reside.

XXXVIII. 2. Either our Parish Churches are true Churches, or not. If not, the
Separatists are so far in the right; And separate not from true Churches eo
nomine because they separate from them. If yea, then many Churches are in the
same City and Diocese. (Of their agreement and dependence on the fame Bishop I
shall speak anon.)

XXXIX. 3. In case that in one City, there be resident Stranges, that are sent
on Embassies, or live for Merchandise, or flee from Miseries, and are the
Subject of other Princes, whose Laws and Customs they are under, e. g. At
Frankford, Hamburgh, Middleburgh, Dantzick, Constantinople, there have been
English distinct lawful Churches: And in London there are Dutch and French
Churches: And if the King allowed a Swedish Church, a Danish Church, a Saxon
Church, etc. with their several Bishops, who is so weak as to need proof that
this is lawful, and they true Churches?

XL. 4. In case men of different Language are not capable of mutual converse by
personal communion or help: As Dutch, French, Italian, Greeks, Germans, etc.
Grotius and Dr. Hammond (often in Dissert. and Annot.) do maintain that Peter at
Rome had a Church of Jews, and Paul a Church of Gentiles: And that the like
distribution of Churches of Jews and Gentiles, there was at Antioch, Alexandria
and other places: And by this they Salve the Contradictions in Church History
about the Succession of Linus, Cletus and Clemens: And the Apostles settled not
a sinful Church way.

XLI. 5. Yea Grotius maintains that the Apostles settled the Churches at first
not like the Jewish Priesthood, but in the order of their Synagogues; (de
Imper. sum. Patest. and in Annot.) And that as there were diverse Synagogues in
a great City with their Archisynagogus and Elders, so there were diverse
Churches in a City with Bishops and Presbyters.

XLII. 6. When there are a greater number of Persons in one City or precinct
than can have any just personal Knowledge and Communion, and more than any one
Bishop with his Presbytery can perform the needful Pastoral oversight to, it is
lawful and a duty, to gather another Church in that City or Precinct: But this
is truly the Case of many great Cities, though worldly Wisdom have at Rome, and
other places often denied notorious evidence and experience. He that will gather
up all the duties that Dr. Hammond says were charged on the Bishops (in his
Annotations on all the Texts that name Elders and Bishops) if he can believe
that any Bishop can perform the tenth part of them to all in the Diocese of
London, York, Lincoln, Norwich, etc. I will not dispute against him if he
maintain a Bishops Ubiquity, or that at once he can be in twenty places. But if
they say, that what then was commanded them to do personally, they may do by
others, I say, that if they may change the Work, they may change the Power,
that specifieth the Office; and so it is not the same Office in specie
instituted in Scripture: And then Laymen may have Power to preach and
administer Sacraments, and do the Office of Priests, and yet be no Priest (as
Civilians do of Bishops) which is a Contradiction. Certainly if there be more
Scholars in the City than one Master can Teach and Rule, it is no Schism to set
up more Schools and Schoolmasters, but a duty. And if the Lord Mayor on
pretense of City Government should put down but as great a part of Family
Government, as those Diocesans do of Parochial Church Government, who allow
none under them to be truly Episcopi Gregis, and have the power of their Church
Keys, I think that it were no Schism to restore Families so that the City
might have more than one (entirely.)

XLIII. 7. If the Sovereign Power upon Politic or Religious Reasons should
determine, that e. g. Dr. A, and Dr. B, and Dr. C. shall all be Bishops in
London, to such Volunteers of Clergy and Laity as shall choose each of them to
be their Bishop, and this without altering their dwellings, no man can prove it
sinful; And of his reasons the King is judge.

XLIV. 8. If the Bishop or Clergy of a City, Diocese or Nation, do agree by Law
or Canon to admit none to the Ministry or Communion that will not commit a
known sin deliberately as the Condition of his Communion, it is a duty to
congregate under Other Pastors in those precincts. This is confessed: If they
should not only hold any error, or practice sin, but require men to subscribe
and approve it, and say it is no sin, no man ought to do this; nor yet to live
like an Atheist:, and forsake all Worship because men forbid him, if it were
but to subscribe one untruth: But alas, this is no rare Case: In one Emperors
Reign all were Anathematized that subscribed not to the Council of Chalcedon,
and quickly after all that did, or that would not renounce it: The same
division and changes were made by the Councils against and for the
Monothelites, de tribus Capitulis, Images, etc. And when all Men living have
many Errors, and the Church of England disclaimeth her Infallibility, and yet
will receive no Minister that will not subscribe that there is nothing in her
Books contrary to the word of God, the Case is hard. But when all the things
mentioned in the Plea for Peace are proved lawful, we shall be more yielding in
this Case.

XLV. 9. If true and sound Christians mistakingly think one or many things to
be heinous sins, (as Perjury, Lying, Renouncing Obedience to God, and
Repentance, etc.) which are things indifferent, but of so great difficulty that
most Learned and Godly and Willing Men cannot discern the Lawfulness and agree,
and yet are not necessary nor just conditions of Ministry or Communion, and so
it is the Imposer that entangleth them by difficulty in their disseut, it is
not lawful for these men therefore to forbear all Church Worship, but must use
it as they can.

XLVI. 10. If any Church unjustly excommnnicate such men; or others, they must
not forbear all Church order and worship because men so excommunicate them. No
man must Sin to escape Excommunication; and every man in the World is a
sinner:, And therefore all the World must be excommunicated, if all Sinners
must be so. As I before said, the times often were when almost all the Bishops in
the Empire were excommunicated by one another: Councils and Popes have often
excommunicated some for trifles and some for Truth and Duty. And such must not
therefore renounce all Church Worship and Communion.

The Church of England do by their standing Law ipso facto excommunicate all
(as aforesaid) that affirm any thing to be repugnant to Gods Word or sinful, in
their whole Church Government, Articles, Liturgy and Ceremonies, and so to
stand till they Publicly revoke this as a wicked Error. Now many Lords and
Commoners in Parliaments, have spoken against some of these particulars; and
some out of Parliament: Many Ministers have done the like when the King
Commissioned them to treat for Alterations; And many when the Accusations or
demands of others have called them to give a Reason of their Actions. Some have
maintained that it is repugnant to Gods word that Lay Civilians should have the
decretive Power of the Keys, and that the Parish Minister must cast out of
Communnion all that the Lay Doctors or Chancellors excommunicate, and all that
dare not receive kneeling, and that they should deny Christendom to all that
scruple the Englisn sort of Godfathers Covenants, and the transient Symbolical
Image of the Cross, with abundance such things: Now all these are ipso facto
excommunicate. And tho they be not bound to avoid the Church till this be
applicatorily declared, yet actually excommunicate they are, and that by a
higher authority than the Bishops; and they know the Churches decree; and the
Priests are sworn to Canonical Obedience; And he that will not tempt them to be
forsworn, nor come into a Church that has excommunicated him, seems therein
excuseable: But must he therefore renounce the Church of God?

XLVII. 11. If the People are so set against one Bishop for another, as that
half being for one and half for the other, and both Orthodox, they cannot be
persuaded to unite in one. A Council at Rome determined in the Case of Paulinus
and Flavian at Antioch, that both of them should hold their distinct Churches,
and so live in love and peace. And though one or both parties in this were
mistaken Sinners, so are all morral men, who yet must not live like Atheists.

XLVIII. 12. An undetermined accident must be so determined as most serves to
do the greatest good and avoid the greatest Evil: But whether diverse Churches
shall promiscuously live in the same City or Diocese or Parisn, is an Accident
not determined by God, and either way may be for the greatest good, as
circumstances vary. e.g. When in a Church half cannot consent to condemn the
words of Theodoret, Theodore Mopsuest, and Ibas, and half will condemn them
with the Council; if these can serve God quietly in Love and Peace in different
Congregations, but cannot endure one another in the same, it is most for the
Churches Peace that they be permitted to join with those of their own Mind.

When one Pope declared that it is sound Doctrine to say [ One of the Trinity
was Crucified,] when another had declared that it is not sound Doctrine, they
that held with one Pope, and they that held with the other might both be true
Churches in different Assemblies: When Justinian raised the bloody controversy
between the Corrupticolae and the Phantasiastae, wise men thought both sides
were true Churches: Yea and so did many wise men think of the Orthodox and
Nestorians and many Eutychians.

XLIX. 13. It Is a common case under Turks and Heathens, that they give liberty
of Conscience for Christians of all parties: Now suppose that in Aleppo, in
Constantinople or elsewhere, there be (partly for Country sake and partly for
Language, but most for different Judgments) one Church of Armenians, one of
Greeks, one of Englishmen, etc. what Law of God makes only one of these to be
a true Church, and which is it?

L. 14. Suppose that the settled Church e. g. in Holland, Sweden, Saxony, is for
Presbytery, or for an Episcopacy that arose from Presbyters ordination, or that
had none or a short Liturgy, and the Prince would tolerate English men (as
Frankford did) to set up a Church of the English Form and Liturgy, I think few
Prelatists would deny it to be lawful.

LI. I omit other instances, and come to the matter of Separation, which word
serves this man and such other in so general and undistinguished a sense, as
would make one think he were of Mr. Dodwell's mind, That words in dispute have
but one signification, which all are bound to know that use them. Even a Bell
by the same sound sometime signifies a call to Church, and sometime a Funeral,
and sometime Joy; but [ Separate, Separate] is rung over and over with these
men, as if it signified but one thing.

1. He that hears half the Sermon and Service, and goes out of Church, does
Separate at that time from the rest.

When a Protestant Heretic was doing Penitence with his Faggot at St. Mary's
in Oxford, and the Friar was Preaching, a mistaken Voice in the street made
them think the Heretics had set the Church on fire, and they separated from
the Preacher, one Friar stuck by the belly that was going out at the window;
the door being wedged with the crowd, a Boy that saw it open above their heads,
got up on their shoulders, and went on 'till he slipped into a Monks Cowl, and
there lay still 'till the Monk was got out, and felt something on his back, and
thinking it was an heretical Devil, began to conjure him in the Name of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, to tell him what he was, and the Boy cried, O good Master I
am the Bakers boy, etc. Quaere, Whether this was Schismatics separation.

At Walsall in Staffordshire, Mr. Lapthorne (known to me in his Iusty age) who
had been a Nonconformist, but thought it an honor to be converted by a King,
and gloried that King James in conference changed him; but being as rustic a
thunderer as Father Latimer and more, he was wont to let fly without much fear;
one Mr. Martin in the Parish accounted the greatest enemy to Puritans, when he
heard what he liked not, would go out of Church; one day (in a path way where
Mr. Lane had rode a little before) pelting Crabs with a pole, the ground opened
and swallowed him and his pole, that they could never be found (being a
Cole-mine long on fire;) ever after that, when any one would go out of Church
at a blustering passage, Mr. Lapthorne would call to him, Remember Martin;
Quere, Whether all these were separating Schismatics?

But this is too far off: In Dunstans West, where Dr. Sherlock, Preaches, when
I was licensed: twenty, years ago, at Christmas, as I was Preaching, some Lime
or Stone fell down in the Steeple with the crowd, the Church being old and
under suspicion, they all thought it was falling, and most ran out in tumult,
and some cast themselves headlong from the Gallery for have; when they were
quieted and came in again, the Boys in the Chancel broke a Wainscot Skreen
with climbing on it, and the noise made them run out again; one old woman going
out, cried, It Is just with God because I took not the first warning, Lord
forgive me, and I Will never come again: Quere, Whether these, or at least this
resolving Woman was a Schismatic, and separated from the Catholic Church?

If not, there is some separation that is not so bad as Murder; and methinks
the Doctor should forgive it for the success; for the Parish hereupon resolved
to pull down the Church and build it new, a far better Fabric where the Dr.
now Preaches; and it drove me away that I preached there no more; Whether this
new Church built where the old one had possession before, be not a Schismatical
Separatist, I leave to him.

LII. 2. Local Separation without Mental can make no culpable Schism; for Nil
nisi Voluntarium est morale; if a man be imprisoned or be sick and cannot come
to the Church, it is innocent Separation; I have been at no Church this half
year, much against my will, O that God would heal me of this Separation!

LIII. 3. If it must be mental Separation that must be culpable, then it is
diversified according to the mental degree and kind; and no man separateth from
the universal Church who separateth not from somewhat essential to it; to
separate from its Integrals or Accidents may be culpable, but it is no
Separation from the Church, no more than every breach of the Law is a
Separation from the Kingdom.

LIVE. 4. Some separate as to place, locally and not mentally, some mentally and
not locally, and some both: He that daily observes the outward Communion of
the Church, and yet takes it for no Church, or denies its Faith, Hope or
essential Duty, separateth indeed. All those men that live unbelievingly,
atheistically, wickedly, that in their converse prate against the Scripture and
immortality of the Soul, and that hate and persecute serious Godliness, are
damnably separated from Christ, and therefore from, the Catholic Church, and
are so to be esteemed so far as this is known, tho when, it is unknown, the
Church can take no notice of it.

LV. 5. It being only Humane Laws and Circumstantial Conveniences that make it
unmeet to have diverse Churches Bishops living promiscuously in the same
Parishes, Cities, Dioceses or Nations; where Laws and circumstances allow it,
it is no unlawful separation.

LVI. 6. He that lives in foreign Lands (Christian, Mohammedan or Heathen)
where various Churches live promiscuously ( Greeks, Armenians, Protestants,
Papists, etc.) is no Schismatic, if he choose which he thinks best, and be
absent locally from the rest, condemning them no further than they deserve.

LVII. 7. He that removes into another Diocese or Parish for his worldly
interest, seperateth without fault from the Church he was in.

LVIII. 8. It is a lawful separation to remove ones dwelling, because the
Minister is ignorant, unskilful, or otherwise bad, and this for the better
edification of his Soul, and the use and help of a more able faithful Minister,
even Law and Custom and reason do allow it.

LIX. 9. Tho the Canon 57. and 28. forbid Ministers often to give the Sacrament
to Strangers that come out of other Parishes, even where no Preaching is, yet
those many sober People that use this in London, are not taken to be
Schismatics, as bad as Murders: Many that are esteemed the most sober
religious Conformists do ordinarily go from their own Parish Churches, some
(in Martins and St. Giles's Parish, etc.) for want of room, and some for more
Edification, to Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Burnet, Dr. Fowler, Mr.
Gifford, Mr. Durham, Mr. Hornech and such others, and communicate with them;
and tho these are called by the late Catholics by the Name of Dangerous
Trimmers, I think even Dr. Sherlock will think it more pardonable than Murder,
if they come to him.

LX. 10. If the King and Law should restore the ancient order that every City,
that is, every great incorporate Town in England should have a Bishop, (yea or
every great Parish) and that the Diocesans should be their Archbishops, and
our new Catholics should tell the King and Parliament that they are hereby
unchristened Schismatics, as dangerous as Adulterers of Murderers, for
gathering Churches within a Church, I would not believe them.

LXI. 11. If ( e.g. at Frankford, Zurick, Lubeck, Hamburgh, etc.) a Church is
settled in the Lutheran way, and another in the Bochemian way, described by
Lasitius and Commenius, (which is a conjunction of Episcopacy, Presbytery and
Independency) or a Church that had no Liturgy, or none but that which the
French Protestants and Dutch have, would it be damning Schism, for such as Cox
and Horn at Frankford to set up an Episcopal Church in the English mode, and
with their Liturgy, and so far to separate from the rest?

LXII. 12. If it be true that John Mayor, Fordon, and others say that
Presbytery was the Government of the Church of Scotland before Episcopacy was
brought in, was the introduction of Episcopacy by Palladius a damning Schism by
separating from the former, or a Reformation; is just Reformation Schism?

LXIII. 13. When the Church first set up Patriarchs, Metropolitans, General
Councils, Monasteries, Parish Churches distinct from Cathedrals, Organs, New
Liturgies, and multitudes of Ceremonies, this was a departing or separating
from the contrary Church way which was there before, was it therefore Schism?

LXIV. 14. When Socrates tells us of some Countries that had Bishops in the
Country Villages (like our Parishes) was it a damning Schism to separate from
this custom, by decreeing that even small Cities should have no Bishops, Ne
vilescat nomen Episcopi? or when the Chorepiscopi were put down, where they had
been?

LXV. 15. If a man separate not from any thing essential to the Church of
England, he separateth not from that Church, though he refuse that which is its
Accidents, or some Integral parts: We are charged with separating from the
Church of England, as if it were a matter of fact beyond dispute, and scorned
for denying it, even by them that will not tell us what they mean by the Church
of England, or by Separation. By the Church of England we mean the Christian
Kingdom of England, or all the Christians in England, as living in one land,
under One Christian King who Governs them by the Sword, which includes their
Concord among themselves in true Christianity; we are Christians, we profess
agreement in Christianity with all Christians we are under the same King as
they are, and profess subjection, and take; the same Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy; yea, we are not charged with differing in any thing called Doctrinal
from their Thirty Nine Articles; but we disown certain late Covenants and Oaths
which are not Twenty three Years old, and the Subscription to one Canon about
the Innocence of all in their Liturgy; now either these new Oaths, Covenants
and Canon, Liturgy and Ceremonies are essential to the Church of England, or
not; If yea, then, 1. It Is a poor humane Church, made by them that made these
Oaths, Liturgy and Ceremonies. 2. And then it is a new upstart Church, and no
man can answer the Papists where it was before Luther, or before Henry 8. yea,
if its essentials were made by this King and Parliament, 1662. then the present
Church is no older: But if these things be indifferent, or not essential to the
Church, then to separate only from these, is not to separate from the Church.

If it be said, That for the sake of these we separate from the Church it self,
and therefore from its essence; we abhor the accusation, and challenge them to
prove it: If we separate from the Church essentially, it is either Locally or
Mentally; not Locally, for we are yet in England, nor is Local distance only a
sin; not Mentally, for we own it for a true Christian Kingdom, called a
National Church, bound to serve Christ in Love and Concord to their Power: We
deny not the King to be the Governor, nor Christians to be Christians, no nor
the particular Churches and Ministers to be true (tho culpable) Churches and
Ministers, nor their Sacraments to be true Sacraments; we profess to hold with
them one Catholic Body, one Spirit, one God, one Chirist, one Faith, one
Baptism (in the essentials) and one Hope, and are ready to promise to live in
Concord with them in all other things, as far as will stand with our Obedience
to God; so that we separate not from the Church of England as such, but from
some of its Accidents, which we dare not be guilty of.

LXVI. 16. The same I say of a Parish Church; he that locally removes, e. g.
from a Church that has Organs, to one that has none, separateth from a pair
of Organs, but not Mentally from the Church, unless the Organs be its essence.

LXVII. 17. They that are for the true ancient Episcopacy, ( e. g. as much as
Archbishop Usher's Reduction which we offered did contain) but dislike the Lay
Civilians power of the Keys, and Officials, Surrogates, Archdeacons
Government, etc. do not separate from the Church as Episcopal, but from the
humane Novelties which they disown.

LXVIII. 18. If a Parishioner fall out with his Priest, and they go to Law
about Tithes, Glebes, Words, etc. and the Suit be long, and the man dare not
Communicate with him believing that he hates him, tho the animosity should be
culpable, being but personal, his going from-him to another Church is not
separating from Christ; (for I hope that even Mr. Dodwell himself will not say
that every Priest is Christ.)

LXIX. 19. Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, surely there is some
qualification essential to the Ministry; if a man want that qualification, it
is a Duty to separate from him as no Minister, e. g. When I came to
Kederminster, (after my subjection to six or seven worse) I found the Vicar,
one reputed ignorant of the Fundamentals, (he was brought in by Sir Henry Blunt
a Papist) who Preached but once a quarter, which most thought he might better
have forborne, and his Curate Mr. Turner at Mitton Preached once a day, whom I
found ignorant of the Catechism Principles by Conference, and he confessed he had
but one Book, Musculus common places in English, and he said some of that to
the People, and they took it for a Sermon; he lived by unlawful Marrying,
infamous for Drinking and Quarrelling; he that had taken these for no
Ministers, and separated from them, had not thereby separated from Christ or
his Church Catholic.

LXX. 20. If it prove as hard to know who is the true Pastor in a competition
of Pretenders, as it was to know which was the true Pope, when there were two
or three, (above twenty times) or whether, e. g. Optandus was true Bishop of
Geneva that knew not Letters, or whether Duke Heriberts Son consecrated in
Infancy was Archbishop of Rhemes, or any other Infant consecrated be a Bishop,
(officiating per alios, Surrogates, Chancellours, Officials, etc.) it is not
here a Separation from Christ to separate from either of the Pretenders: He
that mistaketh not, is not liable to the Charge, he that mistakes, does not
err in an Article of Faith, but in a difficult point of humane title, and the
qualification and right of a single man; and my Opinion is, that if such a
title were tried before our Judges or King, and they should mistake and give
Judgment against him that had right, this were no separating from Christ, nor
proof that they are Infidels.

LXXI. 21 If the Case of two contending Bishops or Presbyters come before a
General or Provincial Council, and they mistake and give it to the wrong, and
so separate from the right, I do not think that thereby they separate from
Christ or the Church Catholic, e. g. The Constantinopolitan Council first gave
the Church of Constantinople to Nazianzene, and after judged him out as having
no right; if by this they separated from Christ, they that take them for the
Catholic Church representative, must say that the Catholic Church separated
from Christ and it self.

When another Council wrongfully deposed Chrysostom, and separated from him,
and Cyril Alexandr. persuaded the continuance of it, did the universal Church
separate from it self and Christ? If a General Council which should be wisest,
be excusable from damning Schism, whenever it misjudgeth and separateth from a
rightful Bishop, sure every Layman and woman that does the same, does not
separate from Christ.

If it prove that a General Council deposed Nestorius as unjustly as David
Derodon thought, or Dioscorus as unjustly as others thought, or Flavian as
unjustly as the Orthodox think, this proves them Guilty of some Schism, but
not of separating from the universal Church.

When Menna of Constantinople, and the Pope excommunicated each other, when a
Synod in Italy renounced Vigilius, and all his Successors were an hundred years
deposed from their Primacy, and a Patriarch at Aquileia set up in his stead for
a great part of Italy, because Vigilius subscribed to a General Council, de
tribus Capitulis, this was Schism (some where) but not separating from Christ.

LXXII. 22. If a man in England should think that all the old Councils were
obligatory, which decree that he shall be taken for no Bishop that comes in by
the choice (yea or Mediation) of Courtiers, Princes or great men, or any that
have not the true Consent of Clergy and People, and thereupon should conclude
that Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc. so chosen and imposed are Laymen and no
true Bishops and Pastors, this were a separating from those Persons, but not
from Christ and the Universal Church, when as Mr. Thorndike says, that till
the right of Electing Bishops by the Clergy and People be restored, we need
look no further for the reason of the Contempt of Episcopacy here.

So if a man think that God never trusted every Ignorant Wicked man that can
but get Money and buy an Advowson, to choose those Pastors to whose conduct all
the People are bound to trust their Souls, (and the Bishop to admit them for
fear of a Quare impedit, if they have but a Certificate and can speak Latin)
This is not damning Separation.

LXXIII. 23. If a Bishop set up a seeming Convert, really a Papist ( e. g. Mr.
Hutchinson alias Berry, or one of them that lately Confessed themselves
Papists,) the People that find by experience what the man is, are not damned
Schismatics for not taking him for their Pastor, or for going from him.

If Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester was a Papist, did he separate from
Christ that separated from the Diocesan Church of Gloucester, while he was an
Essential part? Or that did not implicitly trust all the Priests that he
ordained?

LXXIV. 24. If in a Cathedral Church one withdraw from their Service, because
of their difference in singing, Ceremonies, etc. from the Parish Churches, tho
it be the Bishops Church that he separateth from, it is not as a Church, nor
from any thing essential to it, e. g. Miles Smyth Bishop of Gloucester (the
famous Hebrician, and chief in our Bibles Translation) declared and performed
it, that he would never come more to his Cathedral, because the Dean (in Lauds
time) kept up the Altar. Qu. Whether he separated from himself or his Church?
Vbi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia: Who were the Separatists? They that followed the
Bishop, or they that separated from him and kept to the Ca^^^^hedral? The same
I say of Williams Bishop of Lincoln that wrote against Altars.

LXXV. 25. If faithful Pastors and People are settled in concord, and the higher
Powers make a Law to depose and eject them without just cause (as Multitudes
were in many Emperors days, and Multitudes by the Interim in Germany in
Charles the fifths time; and Multitudes in the Palatinate by Ludovicus, and in
too many other Countries) those that leave the Temples and Tithes to the
Magistrate, but cleave to their old Pastors in forbidden meetings (called
Conventicles) supposing the Pastoral Relation not dissolved (as the Joannites
clave to Chrysostom) do not thereby separate from the Catholic Church: Had the
Power been lawful that set up another way, when Dr. Gunning kept up his
Meetings at Exeter House, it had not been a Separation from Christ that he then
made.

LXXVI. 26. If the Law command all to take one man for his Pastor, and a Parent
command his Child, or a Husband his Wife to take another and not that, and the
Child or Wife know not which should be obeyed, and whether the choice belong
more to the Domestic, or the Public Government, it is not a separating from
Christ, which way ever such an one shall go.

LXXVII. 27. Yea if I should think that self-Interest and self-Government bind
me rather to choose a Pastor for my self, than to stand to such a choice by
Prince, Patron or Prelate, which I think intolerable, as well as (against their
will) I may choose a Wife, or a Physician, or a Tutor, or a Book, or my daily
food, this is not separating from the Universal Church.

LXXVIII. 28. If owning the same Diocesan make them of one Church who differ
more than Nonconformists and Conformists do, then owning the same Christ,
Faith, Scripture, etc. makes them of one Catholic Church who differ less.
But, etc. Jesuits, Dominicans, Jansenists, and all the Sects of Papists are
taken for one Church, because they own the Pope and Councils. In England the
Diocesan Conformists are taken for one Church, tho some of them are as much for
a Foreign Jurisdiction, as Archbishop Laud, Archbishop Bromhall, Bishop
Gunnings Chaplain, Dr. Saywell, Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Heylin, and many more, have
manifested in their words and writings. And some that subscribe the Articles of
General Councils erring in Faith and against Heathens Salvation, and against
free will, and for Justification by Faith only, etc. do show that they differ
in the Doctrines of Religion, (unless the sound or syllables be its Religion)
while one and another take the words in contrary senses. Some are for Diocesans
being a distinct Order from Presbyters, some (as Usher and many such) deny it:
Some hold them to be of Divine Right, and some but of humane; some think the
King must choose them, some rather the Clergy and People; some hold them
Independent, others rather subject to the Archbishops and Convocation; some
think all that bear Office in their Church Government are lawful, others think
Lay-Civilians Government by the Keys unlawful (and so are ipso facto
excommunicate by their own Canons;) some that promise Canonical Obedience to
their Ordinary, take the Judges of the Ecclesiastical Courts for their
Ordinaries; and others only the Bishops; some think they are sworn to obey
their Ordinaries, if they rule according to the Canons (and so to pronounce all
Excommunicate that the Canon excommunicates, if commanded;) Others think
otherwise, that they are judges themselves whether the Canons command licita
and honesta; some take the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome no
true Church; others think otherwise. Many more (Arminian and other) such
differences there are, and yet all of one Church, both Catholic, National,
Diocesan and Parochial (often:) Much more are those Nonconformists that differ
from the Church in nothing but what the Imposers call Indifferent.

LXXIX. 29. If one that prays in the Litany against false Doctrine and
Schism, and reads the Conformists telling him of the danger of it, should;
verily think that Dr. S. printeth and preaches false Doctrine, and such as
plainly tends to serve Satan against Christian Love and Peace, and to the
most Schismatical dividing and damning of Christians, should hereupon separate
from him for fear of Schism and false Doctrine, and go to a safer Pastor, I
think it were not to separate from Christ.

LXXX. 30. If a Bishop in any Diocese in London should openly write or plead
for a Foreign Jurisdiction, and we are told that none are true Ministers that
depend not obediently on the Bishop, he that for fear of the Law, or of
Personal or common perjury, should separate from that Bishop and his numerical
Diocesan Church, does thereby neither separate from the Catholic Church, nor
from the Church of England. As if the Kings Army should have a Colonel that
declared himself an obliged Subject to the King of France and bound to obey
him, the Regiment may forsake that Colonel. Yea if the General of the Kings
Army should give up himself in subjection to the Enemy or a Foreign Power, and
say, I will take a Commission from the Turk, and my Officers shall only obey
me, and the Soldiers obey them, were not this an Army of Traitors or Rebels,
though none but the General took a Commission from the Enemy? So if the Bishops
should all take Commissions from the Pope, or declare themselves Subjects to a
Foreign Jurisdiction, it were no separating from Christ, to separate from them
all, in Loyalty to Christ, and to avoid National perjury and Schism.

LXXXI. 31. If a man think that he is bound to use all Christ's instituted means
of Salvation, and live in a Church that wilfully omitteth any one of them, e.
g. either Infant baptism, or singing Psalms, or Praying, or Preaching, or the
Lords Supper, or all Personal care, and discipline to exclude the grossly
intolerable, to resolve the doubting, etc. He that in Obedience to Christ goes
to a Church and Pastor (in the same Diocese or City) that omitteth none of
these, is no damned Schismatic.

LXXXII. 32. He that is unjustly cast out of the Church, and by its very Laws
excommunicated ipso facto, is no damned or Sinful Schismatic for Worshipping
God in a Church that will receive him: Nor any one that is denied Communion
unless he will sin; Much more if they should prove half as many and great Sins
as the Nonconformists have said they fear (in the first Plea for Peace, etc.)

LXXXIII. 33. If a Foreigner that does but half understand our language,
withdraw to a Church and Pastor whose tongue he understands, obeying God and
Nature is no damning Schism.

LXXXIV. 34. If one that is erroneously conceited of the obligation of General
Councils, should think it a sin to kneel at the Sacrament on any Lords day in
the year, or any Week day between Easter and Whitsuntide, because Tradition and
the twentieth Canon of the first Council, and that at Trull, etc. do forbid
then to adore kneeling, this separating on that account to another Congregation
is not damning.

If it be said, that Mr. Thorndike and others tell us that it is not necessary
that we do the same things which the Supreme Catholic Power commanded, but
that we subject our selves to the same Power which may change their own Laws. I
answer, 1. The asserting of that Universal Sovereignty is the greatest Crime
and Heresy of all. 2. By this it seems that our Religion is very mutable, and
very uncertain, and a man has need to take heed of obeying any old Canons,
till he know the mind of the present Church; (and who those be, and how to know
it.) 3. But what if the same man read Dr. Heylin (of Sab.) telling him that
this custom against Adoration-kneeling continued a thousand years, and was
never revok't by any true General Council, but changed by little and little by
men's practice: And what if he question who those Changers were, and whether
their practice was Rebellion at first, and whether they had power to repeal the
Canons of the greatest Councils without a Council. Sure they that are for such
Councils universal sovereignty, when they have cast men into these shares,
should scarce tell them that they are damnable Schismatics, for joining with
such Churches as obey these Councils, rather than with those that mine men for
not disobeying them.

LXXXIV. And now Reader if thou art one that think of these things with
Christian Sobriety and impartiality, I appeal to thee whether if I should be of
the mind of Mr. Dodwell, and such self-conceited Resolvers, I should not write
my own Condemnation, and be one of the grossest Schismatics that any History
has mentioned, unless ever there were any man so mad as to hold himself to be
all the Church: Yea, when he no more distinguishes of Separation and Schism,
but involves almost all Christians in his Condemnation, and tells us that
Schism will damn us as soon as Adultery and Murder, is it not obvious for all
men to infer that we are as odious as Adulterers and Murderers? and does he not
Preach Christians into the hatred of each other? and can any wonder if Rulers
should think the Punishment of Murderers is not worse than we deserve? It is
not Newgate only, but Tyburn that these healing men do seem to assign us; it
would be too tedious to look over all these again, and show you how great the
number is that these men damn, and how few on Earth in any Age they excuse from
being so far like Murderers.

LXXXV. 1. It seems to me that he virtually damneth all Christians on Earth as
such Schismatics; for it is most certain that all men have sin, and culpable
imperfection in Knowledge, Will and Practice; and if any say, That he has no
sin, he is a Liar, says St. John; and it is certain that all two persons on
Earth have many errors, and many differences from one another; it is certain
that the Love and Duty of Christians toward each other is culpably defective
in all men: It is certain that no man living is so perfect in knowledge as to
know all the indifferent things in the world, which may be imposed, to be
Indifferent! And long and sad experience has told the Church, that both gross
errors and sins, and things called Truths or indifferent, which few can be
sure of, may be imposed. What follows from all this, but that all men on Earth
may easily fall under the imputation of disobedience to Prelates, and so be
Excommunicate, and then they have their choice (when no man is perfect, and
they cannot change their minds) 1. Whether they will be damned as
Excommunicate and practical Atheists that give over all Church Worship; 2. Or
as damnable Schismatics, for worshipping God in Churches when they are
excommunicate; 3. Or as persidious Liars, that will make false Confessions,
Professions and promises, to get off an Excommunication. When Mr. Dodwel
numbers those with Schismatics that [ suffer themselves to be excommunicate,]
if they have no other means in their Power to hinder it, it seems these great
Enemies to absolute reprobation, do think all Christians being unavoidably born
to imperfection of Knowledge, are as unavoidably born to damnation whenever
Prelates or Priests please thus to precipitate them.

LXXXVI. 2. Particularly, 1. The first and second Canons ipso facto
excommunicate all that say [ that any manner of Obedience and Subjection within
his Majesty's Realms and Dominions is due to any usurped and foreign Power:] By
this all Papists and all pretended Protestants (such as Dr. Barrow confuteth)
who hold any manner of Obedience and Subjection due to Pope or Foreign
Councils, are Excommunicate.

2. Those that say that the Book of Common Prayer contains any thing in it
repugnant to the Scriptures are, ipso facto excommunicate. Which now by the new
Laws are interpreted of the present Books.

3. In this all are excommunicate who say, the Mis-translations (in Psalms,
Epistles or Gospels, of which many instances have been given) to be any thing
repugnant in the Scripture.

4. And all that say, It is against the Scripture to deny Christendom to all
Infants that have not such Vowers in their Names and for their Education as we
call Godfathers, and Godmothers, tho the Parent (who is forbidden it) offer his
Child by Sponsion.

5. And all that say it is against Scripture to deny Christendom to all that
refuse the Covenanting transient Images of a Cross.

6. And all that say that it is against Scripture for all Ministers to profess
[ that it is certain by Gods Word that baptized Infants (without exception) so
dying are undoubtedly saved] when no word of God is cited that says it, and
adding to Gods word is dreadfully threatened, and when it is certain that all
Ministers are not certain of any such thing (and I think no one.)

7. All are ipso facto excommunicate that say, It is against Gods Word to deny
Church Communion in the Sacrament to all that dare not take it kneeling, for
fear (tho mistaken) of breaking the second Commandment by Symbolizing with
Idolaters, that are seeking to reduce the Nation to their Sin, and that live
round about us.

8. All are excommunicate that say it is against Scripture to pronounce all
saved that are buried, except the unbaptized, self-murderers and the
excommunicate, while thousands of Sadducees, Hobbists, Infidels, Papists,
Perjured, Adulterers, Drunkards, etc. dwell among us.

9. By the fifth Canon all are ipso facto excommunicate that say, [ Any of the
Armies are in any part erroneous, or such as they (perhaps as doubters) may not
with a good Conscience subscribe to,] and cousequently all the aforesaid
Conformists that think the sense erroneous while they subscribe those words and
snall affirm, e. g. that Canons are made necessary to Salvation, tho the matter
cannot be proved by Scripture, contrary to Art. 6.

Those that contrary to Art. 8. say, any thing in Athanasius Creed may not be
subscribed.

Such as Bishop Taylour that against Art. 9. deny Original Sin.

Those that say contrary to Art. 10. that the Word [ no Power] excludes Common
natural Power, or makes Nature to be Grace.

Those that write against our being accounted righteous, only for Christ's
merits, and say that another subordinate Righteousness is named many hundred
times in Scripture, contrary to Art. 11.

Those that contrary to Art. 13. say, that works done before the Inspiration of
the Spirit may make men meet to receive Grace.

Those that with Dr. Hammond write for works that are not commanded but
counseled, and Free-will-offerings, contrary to Art. 14.

All they that take Infants and new baptized Persons to have no sin, contrary
to Art. 15.

All that say, that after we have received the H. Ghost, we cannot depart from
Grace given, contrary to Art. 16.

Those that deny the Doctrine of Election, in Art. 17.

Those that say, any on Earth may be saved by diligent living according to the
light of Nature, without knowing the name of Christ, contrary to Art. 18.

Those that contrary to Art. 19. reject that Description of a visible Church,
which reaches to such as our Resolver damneth.

All that contrary to Art. 20. say, that the Church [ may not enforce any thing
to be believed for necessity to Salvation, besides the Scripture] even those
that say, it is necessary to Salvation, by avoiding Schism to believe that all
imposed Tyths, Covenants Practices, and Ceremonies are not sin.

All that contrary to Art. 21. say, that General or other Councils may be
gathered without the command and will of Princes, and deny they may err, and
things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation have neither Strength nor
Authority, unless it may be declared that they are taken out of Holy Scripture.

Those that deny Art. 23. that those are lawfully called and sent into the
Ministry, who have public Authority given them in the Congregation, to call
and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard, are chosen and called hereto, (for
want of Canonical Succession.)

Those that contrary to Art. 24. would have Gods Worship performed to them that
understand not the language, to avoid the Schism of having many Churches in a
City.

Those that take Confirmation or Penance, or the other three for Sacraments of
the Gospel contrary to Art 25.

Those that contrary to Art. 26. would not have it believed to be the Peoples
duty, who know the Offenses of Bad Ministers, to accuse them.

All that contrary to Art. 27. are against Infant Baptism, as agreeable to
Christ's Institution.

All that contrary to Art. 28. say, the Body of Christ is given and taken and
eaten in the Sacrament otherwise than in a Spiritual manner by Faith.

All that say, that in some wise the wicked are Partakers of Christ in the
Sacrament, contrary to Art. 29.

All that contrary to Art. 30. say, There is other satisfaction for Sin besides
Christ's Blood.

All that say, that Men justly Excommunicate may be reconciled and received by
the multitude without open penance (which is ordinary) contrary to Art. 33.

All that contrary to Art. 34. think that a General Council may ordain such
Traditions or Ceremonies as shall in all places be one or the like: and that
every Particular or National Church may not abolish those Ceremonies or Rites
which the General Council or College ordained.

Many things in the Book of Homilies [especially against peril of Idolatry] are
blamed by many Conformists, contrary to Art. 35.

All that contrary to Art. 36. say, that the Book of Ordination wants some
things necessary.

All that contrary to Art. 37. think that Pope or foreign Bishops have any
Jurisdiction by right in this Land: And all that (by mistake) say, the King
has not chief Power in all his Dominions, meaning in France, of which he
professes to be King, and we so call him even in our Prayers to God.

All that say, contrary to Art. 38. that it is not their Duty liberally to give
Alms, according to their ability.

All that contrary to Art. 39 think men in conforming may swear upon trust of
their Superiors words, without judgment, and true understanding of Justice and
Truth.

A^^^^l these are already ipso facto Excommunicated by this one Canon, and if
they elsewhere worship God, are called Separatists and Schismatics, in danger
of Damnation, as Adulterers and Murderers are: And how grea^^^^ a number are
these?

10. All are ipso facto Excommunicate by the sixth Canon, who affirm, that the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, by Law established, are
superstitious, or such as ( now commanded) men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with a good Conscience APPROVE, use and subscribe as occasion
requires. That is, all that thus mistake kneeling at the Sacrament, on the
reasons aforenamed, to be against the second Commandment, or that judge so of
the Surplice, or that think the Gross, as described by the Canon and Liturgy,
has all the Essentials of a humane unlawful Sacrament of the Covenant of
Grace. And all that are against the Rites of Godfathers that never owned the
Child as theirs, to be the only Sponsors in its Name, and to Vow its Christian
Education (when I never knew one living that so much as made the Parents
believe that he intended it:) And all that think the words of the Liturgy
(making Imposition of hands an assuring sign of Gods Gracious acceptance) make
Confirmation a humane unlawful Sacrament, and say so. All these are cut off.

11. By Canon seventh all are ipso facto excommunicate that affirm, that the
Government of the Church of England, under his Majesty, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and THE REST THAT BEAR OFFICE in the same, is
repugnant to Gods word; that is, all Bishops, Ministers, Noblemen, Gentlemen or
People, that say that it is against Gods word for Lay Civilians or Chancellours
to govern by the Church Keys, excommunicate or absolve: And all that think it
unlawful for Surrogates that are not Bishops but Presbyters, either as a Crier
pro forma to pronounce all excommunicate or absolved who are so decreed by the
Lay Chancellor, or else for them (or a Priest-Chancellour) to govern a Diocese
by the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution being no Bishops; and all that
think it sinful for Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, etc. who are no
Bishops, to exercise the same Government by the Keys over so many Pastors or
Churches, or for a Bishop. to do his Office by others that are no Bishops, any
more than a Priest by those that are no Priests; or for a Diocesan with his Lay
Court, to Govern many score or hundred Churches under him, without any
subordinate Bishop in those Churches, that is, to set up the Name and show, and
make Christ's Discipline impossible: Or for Lay Chancellors or Surrogates to
publish Excommunications in the Bishops Name, which he never knew of, nor tried
the cause: Or for such Chancellours to oblige all Parish Ministers to publish
all their Excommunications which are agreeable to these Canons. What quality
and number they are of that call any of this sinful, I pretend not to know: But
they are all now excommunicate men.

12. The eight Canon ipso facto excommunicateth all that affirm that the form
and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons has any
thing, repugnant to Gods Word, etc:] That is, all those that hold Bishops and
Presbyters to be the same Order (contrary to the words of that Book.) Which yet
even the Church of England while Papists declared in King Aelfriks Canons (see
Spelman:) And all such as Thorndike, who say the People and Clergy should
choose their Bishops; or that say the Peoples consent is necessary to the
Pastoral Relation to them, and that the old Canons for this are in force.

13. The ninth Canon ipso facto excommunicateth the Separatists.

14. The tenth Canon excommunicateth all that affirm [that Ministers that
refuse to subscribe to the Liturgy, etc. and their Adherents may truly take to
themselves the Name of another Church, not established, by Law and dare publish
that this their pretended Church has long groaned under the burden of imposed
grievances, by the Church of England, and the Orders and Constitutions therein
by Law established.] (Ipso facto is not here.) This reaches to all that
confine not Gods Church in England to the Party that subscribe and their
Adherents: If any say, that if such as Blondel, Rivet, Amesius, or any other
the most Learned, holy, peaceable men that dare not subscribe as aforesaid,
should with any Christians worship God together, and that these are a true
Church (though he judge them faulty) and that these Canons are grievances, such
are to be excommunicated: (Though it be gross Schism in others to confine not
only the Purity but the Verity of a Church to their own Party:) For such to
feel and groan loud here is Excommunication.

15. The eleventh Canon much to the same purpose requires the Excommunication
of all that affirm that any Subjects in England may rightly challenge the Name
of true and lawful Churches besides those allowed by Law, though the King
should License them.

16. The twelfth Canon ipso facto excommunicateth all, that make Rules and
Orders in Causes Ecclesiastical without the Kings Authority, and submit to
them, e. g. All that without the Kings authority agree to turn the Table
Altarwise, to require People to kneel at the Rails, or to bow toward the Alter
or East, or to set up Organs, etc. All these are now excommunicate by an
Authority above the Bishops, which no Bishop or Priest can dispense with (but
only forbear to publish and execute it, but not nullify it) no nor absolve any
that publicly repent not of it as a wicked Error.

16. By Canon fourteenth, if any Minister shall diminish any part of the
Orders, Rites, Ceremonies, Prayers, etc. inregard of Preaching or ANY OTHER
RESPECT, or shall add any thing in matter or form, (e. g. If he let the Parent
express the dedication of his Child to God, or lay any charge on any Parent) he
breaks the Church Law, and so far separateth from it.

17. By Canon fifteenth when twenty or thirty thousand are commanded to come to
a Church that cannot receive six thousand, and the Alleys and Pewes are wedged
so that they cannot all kneel, yet all that kneel not at the Prayers, and all
that say not audibly the Confession, Lords Prayer, Creed and Responses, disobey
the Laws of the Church, and so far separate from it.

18. When twenty thousand Persons are commanded to come in more than can, if
ten thousand of them (or any number) should come to the Churchyard or Porch,
to show that they are not presentable, but would get in if they could, the
nineteenth Canon commands to drive them away.

19. The Liturgy and Canon 22. etc. bind all under the penalty of the Law to
receive the Sacrament thrice every year: If a secret Infidel, Sadducee,
Hobbist, Socinian, or any Heretic say, I am not able to change my Judgment,
which is inconsistent with the Sacrament, or if one whose Conscience tells him
of the guilt of Adultery, and that he is not resolved to confess and forsake it
yet; or one that by Melancholy causelessly fears unworthy receiving to
damnation; I say, if any of these will avoid the charge of Schism, they must
run upon worse, till grace recover them, which is not at their command. And yet
all notorious Offenders are prohibited it Canon 26. and particularly the
Perjured: And if the tenth part so many be perjured in England in City and
Country, as many fear, it is a very great number that are incapable of
Comm-union with the Church.

20. By Canon twenty seventh on pain of Suspension no Minister must wittingly
administer the Communion to any but such as Kneel, or to any that refuse to be
present at public Prayers, etc. So that all that Kneel not in receiving are
rejected, and if they worship God elsewhere, must be taken for Schismatics, as
dangerous as adulterers or murderers.

21. The twenty eighth Canon forbids admitting strangers to Communion, and
commands sending them home to their Parish Churches: It Is disobedience to
violate this.

22. The twenty ninth Canon forbids urging Parents to be Present when their
Children are baptized, and admitting them to Answer as Godfathers for their own
Children; and any Godfather to make any other Answer or speech than the
prescribed.

23. The thirtieth Canon describes the Cross as a Sacrament, as seems to us.

34. By the thirty sixth Canon no man must be a Minister that subscribeth not
that the Book of Common Prayer and Ordination contains nothing in it contrary
to the Word of God, and that he himself will use no other form in public,
Prayer and administration of the Sacraments: By which all that refuse this, or
that use the forms made and imposed by the Bishops on occasions of public
Fasts and Thanksgivings, seem all to be under disobedience to the Church.

35. By Canon forty ninth no Person not Licensed as a Preacher, may in his
Cure or elsewhere, expound any Scripture, or Matter or Doctrine, but only
shall study to read plainly the Homilies: So that all Ministers before License
to preach, all Schoolmasters, all Parents, or Masters, that do expound to
their Scholars, Children or Servants, the meaning of Baptism, or of any
Article of the Creed, any Petition of the Lords Prayer, any one of the Ten
Commandments (to fit them for Confirmation, or Salvation) otherwise than by
plain reading the Homilies or Church Catechism, does disobey the Law of the
Church: And so do all Tutors in the Universities that expound any Scripture,
matter or Doctrine to their Pupils, before they are examined or approved by the
Bishop; or any Judge on the Bench or Justice that presumes to do it to the
hearers, or any Friend or Neighbor in discourse: For it is [No Person
whatsoever not examined and approved by the Bishop of the Diocese.] How few in
England separate not from the Church as far as this disobedience amounts to? If
by [no Persons] be meant only [no Ministers] it is hard enough, that Ministers
may not be allowed out of the Church what Laymen are allowed.

36. All those that deny not the validity of Baptism or the Lords Supper when
they are done by an unpreaching Minister, but yet think that a man utterly
unable to Teach otherwise than by Reading, may not lawfully be encouraged in so
high a function, (any more than a man in Physic or School-teaching that has
not necessary skill, or is utterly illiterate,) and thinks it a sin to consent
to take such an Ignorant fellow for the Pastor of his Soul if he can have
better; If this man, I say, go to the next Parish Church for Sacraments, he is
to be suspended first and next excommunicate: Specially if he should judge that
Ignorant Reader, no true Minister for want of necessary capacity.

37. Surplices, Hoods and Tippets are made the matter of Obedience, Canon fifty
eighth.

38. By Canon thirty eighth no Minister must refuse or delay to Christen any
Child (without exception) according to the form of the Common Prayer, that is
brought to Church to him on Sundaies or Holy Days, though the Parents be both
Jews or Heathens or Atheists or Sadducees: The Minister must be suspended that
refuses it.

39. The seventy first Canon suspendeth all Ministers that Preach in any
private house (except to the sick or impotenti n time of necessity.) By which
had Paul here preached publicly and from house to house, or Timothy in season
and out of season as dreadfully adjured, or Christ preached as he often did, they
must be suspended: And every Minister that preaches to his Family. And no
doubt, repeating his Sermon, is preaching the same again.

40. All Ministers must be suspended and then excommunicate, that without the
Bishops License appoint or keep any solemn Fasts publicly or in private
houses, other than by Law appointed, or be wittingly present at any: Though it
were in time of Plague, or when diverse of his Neighbors are sick or troubled
in Conscience, or in preparation to a Sacrament, or on some great occasion in
Noble-mens Houses and Chapels: He is not to be trusted to fast and pray with
his own Flock or Friends, or come among them, lest being excommunicate he be a
damned Schismatic.

The same prohibition is for holding meetings for Sermons called Exercises:
Which Archbishop Grindall was zealous to set up, (Q. Was he then a
Schismatic? or is the damning dangerous Engine made since?)

41. By Canon seventy third if any Ministers meet in any private ehouse (as many
did by consent in 1660. and 1661.) to do any thing that any way tends to
impeach the Common Prayer or any part of the Government and Discipline (e. g.
to Petition King or Parliament for the least Reformation of it) he is
excommunicate ipso facto.

42. Canon seventy fourth brings all Ministers apparel under Church Laws, for
the Shape.

43. Canon seventy sixth Excommunicateth all that voluntarily relinquish their
Ministry, and use themselves as a Laymen. And man having free will, that is
done voluntarily, which is done in Obedience to men's command: And yet we are
ruined in the World, if we will not leave our Ministry, at their Command.

44. It Is tedious to go over all the rest: I end at the end of them. Canon 139.
excommunicateth all them that affirm that the Synod is not the true Church of
England by Representation: that is, 1. All that take it for the Church real and
not Representative, lest they make the diffused Church (People and all) to be
Chief Church Governors, while Convocations govern but as their
Representatives. 2. All that say, that it is only the Bishops and not the
Presbyters in Convocation that are the Governing Canon-making Church. 3. All
that say that the Clergy represent not King, Nobles, parliaments, Laiety, and
that these are true parts of the Church of England. All these are ipso facto
excommunicate.

45. The 140. Canon Excommunicateth them that deny the Canons obligation of
absent Dissenters, which yet even many Papists deny of Councils Canons.

46. The last Canon Excommunicateth all that contemn these Canons, as taking
them to be the work of a Company of Persons that conspired against Religious
Godly men. All this huge Catalogue are here excommunicate.

47. If any part of all this be Schism, Mr. Dodwell ad this man seem to teach
Separation from the Church of England: Or if the late silencing, hunting and
ruining of two thousand Ministers were Schism, and as bad as Bishop Tailor in
Duct. Dubit. Mr. Hales of Eaton, Chillingworth, etc. say of the like, then
these men make all the Church of England to be in as damnable a State as
Adulterers and Murderers. Yea they make all damnable Schismatics that hold
Communion with the Church of England; for that is their Sentence on them that
communicate with Schismatics; viz. that they are guilty of their Schism.

48. They unchurch and damn the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Laodicea,
Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. in the Apostles days: For the Scripture tells us of many
guilty of Schism in all these, and yet the rest communicated with them; for the
Scripture speaks more of Schism in a Chruch, than of Schism or Separation from
a Church, Romans 16. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 3. 3. and 11. 18. Mat. 12, 25. Luke
12. 52, 53. I Cor. 12. 25. Jam. 3. 15, 16. And yet no one was commanded to
separate from those Churches; no not from those that had Heresies among them,
such as denied the Resurrection, and taught Fornication, and eating things
offered to Idols, that were drunk at the Sacrament or Love Feasts, nor those
that had Jewish Schismatics, who talked like ours, Act. 15. Except ye be
circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved. The Churches were
not all unchurcht and damned that communicated with such. Yea Peter was guilty
of encouraging them in Schism, that would not eat with the Christian Gentiles,
but he was not unchristened by this.

49. They separate from or unchurch almost all the Ancient Churches in the
days of the most famous Emperors and Councils. For I have manifested past
doubt that they almost all did Hereticat^^^^ or separate from one another. It
was Schism either in Victor to Excommunicate the Asian Bishops, or in them to
deserve it and be excommunicate. The owning or disowning several Councils,
specially that of Calcedon and that at Constde tribus Capitulis, etc. was the
Schism of almost all the Imperial Churches; one part condemning the other. And
if either were in the Right, it salves not the Case with them: For most of the
same men that went that way called the Right in one Princes Reign, went
contrary in the next, and so condemned each other round; especially about
Images adoration.

50. Hereby they cut off that Succession of that sort of Ordination, which they
say must be uninterrupted, while it came down from Churches excommunicated by
one another, or make the Proof of it impossible.

51. They separate from all the Greek Church at this day, as guilty of Schism,
both in their Succession from Schismatic Bishops, at Constant. Alexand.
Antioch, Jerusalem, etc. and in their excommunicating not only the Church of
Rome for a wrong cause (the filioque, but other Churches, and for diverse Acts
of Schism.

52. They must by their Principles Separate from the Abassines, Egyptians,
Syrians, and all the Eastern and Southern Churches that are called Jacobites,
and Nestorians: For Councils and other Churches condemn them: And they condemn
the Councils of Ephesus, and Calcedon, and all since: And they must separate
from and condemn the Churches of Armenia, Georgia, Circassia, etc. because they
separate from others, and are separated from.

53. Their Principles utterly unchurch the Church of Rome, 1. Especially
because it is guilty of the greatest Schism on earth, by setting up a false
Church form and head: 2. And because they Schismatically condemn and Unchurch
three parts of the Church on earth, even all save their Sect: 3. And for their
many other Schismatical Doctrines and Practices: 4. And as being condemned by
the Greek Protestants and most Churches, and separated from by the Church of
England which they own.

54. They separate in Principles from all or near all General Councils (save
the first) as having separated from other Councils and condemned them, and
being again condemned by them.

55. Some of them condemn and separate from all the Protestant Churches that
have Bishops, in Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Transylvania, etc. because they had
not their Ordination Successively from Bishops but Presbyters at the
Reformation: And because they have been guilty of Schism against others.

56. The Principles of Mr. Dodwel and his Associates condemn the Church of
England, as Schismatical, 1. Those that claim Succession from Rome, whose own
Succession has been often and long interrupted, by incapacities and Schisms. 2.
For holding Communion with those Protestant Churches which these men call
Schismatics.

57. They condemn and separate from all the Churches called Presbyterian in
France, Holland, Geneva, Scotland formerly, and those in Helvetia that have no
Bishops; Tho some would threat kindness on them by saying that they would have
them and cannot? And why cannot they?

58. Their Principles make the Bishop of Oxford, Bristol, etc. Schismatics:
For their Dioceses are Churches taken out of Churches, being lately parts of
other Dioceses.

59. And they condemn all the Parish Churches in England as Churches distinct
from Cathedrals: For they are all Churches gathered out of Churches: At first
the Cathedrals were the only single Churches: Next Monasteries were gathered;
and next our Parish Churches. And the Parish Church of Covent Garden, is a
Church taken out of a Church.

60. Their Principles damn St. Martin that separated to the death from all the
Bishops Synods and them that were near him (save one Man) because they
persuaded Maximus to use the Sword against Priscillian Gnostics, and brought
men of strict Religion under Suspicion of Priscillianism: And sure the ruined
persecuted Protestants here, are more Orthodox than the Priscillians. And they
damn Gildas that told the English Clergy, that he was not eximius Christianus
that would call them Ministers; (Do they not disgrace the many Churches
dedicated to the Memory of St. Martin, if he be a damned man?) I doubt they
damn Paul and Barnabas for local angry separating from each other: Whatever
they do by Peter and Barnabas for the Separation blamed Gal. 2.

61. If all are Schismatics that here conform not, all those called
Conformists are such, that conform to the words in a false sense.

62. They separate from all that obey the twentieth Canon of the Nicene
Council: And from all that obey the Councils that forbid communicating with a
Fornicating Priest: And from all that obey the Councils which nullify the
Episcopacy of such as are obtruded by Magistrates, or not consented to by the
Clergy and people. And many more such.

Abundance more instances of their Separation, and Damnation, I might add: In
a word, I think then Principles are, as I first said, for damning and
separating from all men living, for all men living are guilty of some sort and
degree of Schism, that is, of Errors, Principles or Practices in which they
culpably Violate that Union and Concord that should be among Christians and
Churches: Every defect of Christian Love, and every sinful Error, is some
degree of such a violation. All Christians differ in as great matters as things
indifferent: And no man living knows all things Indifferent to be such: And
these men distinguish not of Schism, nor will take notice of the necessary
distinctions given (in the third Part of the Treatise of Church Concord,) And
solutio cont^^^^ causes pain: nor do they at all make us understand what sort
of Separation it is that they fasten on, but talk of Separation in general, as
aforesaid.

LXXXVII. They seem to be themselves deceived by the Papists in exposition of
Cyprians, words de Unit. Eccles. Vnus est Episcopatus, etc. But they themselves
seem to separate from Cyprian as a Schismatic, and consequently from all the
Church that has professed Communion with him, and with all the Councils and
Churches that joined with him: For Cyprian and his Council erred by going too
far from the Schism and Heresy of others, nullifying all their Baptisms,
Ordinations and Communions: And for this error they declared against the
Judgment of the Bishop of Rome and other Churches; and they were for it
condemned as Schismatics by the said Bishop: And here is a far wider
Separation than we can be charged with. 2. And Cyprians words came from the
Mind that was possessed with these opinions, and are expressive of his
Inclination. 3. Yet they are true and good, understood as he himself often
expounds them; the Bishop of Oxford cites some instances, many more are
obvious, in which he opposes the Bishop of Rome, saying, that none of them
pretends to be a Bishop of Bishops; and limiting every man to his own
Province, and saying that they were to give account to none but God, with much
the like.

But in what sense is Episcopacie one? 1. Undoubtedly not as numerically in the
personal Subjectum Relationis: One Bishop is not another; if you should say
Paternity is One, none believe that one man's Relation of Paternity is another.
The Relation is an accident of its own Subject, as well as Quantity, Quality,
etc. 2. Nor does any man believe that many Bishops go to make up one Bishop in
Naturals. 3. Nor did ever Cyprian hold or say that all Bishops go to make up
one Politic Governing Aristocracie, as many go to make one Senate or
Parliament, that has a power of Legislation and judgment by Vote as one
Persona politica. He never owned such a humane Sovereignty.

But Episcopatus unus est, I. In specie, all Bishops have one Office; 2.
Objective: As the Catholic Church is one, whose welfare all Bishops ought to
seek: 3. And so finaliter as to the remote End; and are bound to endeavor
Concord. 4. And as effects, all are from one efficient institutor. As it may be
said that all official Magistracy in England is one: 1. As from one King or
summa potestas: 2. As described by one Law, and as Justices of one Species: 3.
As all their Cities and Counties and Hundreds are but part of one Kingdom,
whose welfare all are for: 4. And as they are all bound to keep as much common
Concord as they can; if any mean more, they should ten us what; If any mean
that all Bishops make one numerical Universal Government, they are heinous
Schismatics, and the kingdom is Sworn agaisst their Judgment: And these Men
damn them in damning Schismatics.

The truth is, Cyprian de Unitate, Ecclesiae (leaving out the Papists
additions) is a good Book and worthy, to be read of all; and take Cyprian's
Description of the Epispcopacy of the Church which we must unite with, and the
nature of that Union, and we would rejoice in such. But if Cyprian had lived to
see (...) Arians or Donatists the greater number; or any Sect after (...)
themselves the Church because that Princes set them up, and had seen them
depo^^^^e Chrysostom and such other, doubtless he would never have pleaded the
Unity of Episcopacy for this, but have judged as he did in the Case of Martial
and Basilides; nor did he ever plead for an universal humane Sovereignty.

LXXXVIII. If we are damned Schismatics, I can imagine no pretended manner of
Separation in which our Schism consists, but first, either Local as such. 2. Or
Mental, as such. 3. Or Local, caused by Mental.

If Local, as such be it: All Christians are Schismatics, for being locally
separated from others, and absent from all Churches; and places save one.

If Mental Separation be it, either all Mental Division is such, or but some
only; if all, then all mortal men are Schismatics, as differing in a multitude
of things from others; If it be not all, what is it? is it all difference in
the Essentials of Christianity? we grant it; and we are charged with no such
thing. Is it all difference in the Integrals or Accidents? so do all differ
that are not perfect. Is it all want of Love, or all Incharitableness to one
another? all on earth have some degree of it; and those are likest to have
most, that do as the Bishops did against the Priscillianists, bring godly
people under reproach, on pretense of opposing Heresy; or that seek the
Silencing, Imprisonment, Banishment or Ruin of men as faithful as themselves:
For our parts, we profess it our great Duty, to love all men as men, all
Christians as Christians, all godly men as godly, all Magistrates as
Magistrates, etc. Is it for our separating in mind from any Principles in
specie necessary to Communion in the Church Universal, or single Churches? let
it be opened what those Principles be: We own all Christianity, and all
Ministry of Gods Institution, and all his Church Ordinances: We own Bishops
over their Flocks, let them be never so large, so they be capable of the Work
and End, and alter not the true species; and we submit to any that shall by the
Word admonish Pastors of many Churches of their Duty, or Sin, or seek their
good. Nor do we refuse Obedience to any humane Officers set up by Princes, to
do nothing against Christ's Laws, not nothing but what is in Princes power in
the Accidents circa Sacra.

Is it because we disown any Numerical Rulers? we own the King and his
Magistrates, we own all that we can understand to be true Pastors; and if we
are in doubt of their Calling, we resist them not, unless obeying Christ before
them be resistance: But our Accusers loudly profess, that Usurpers are not to
be owned; and if they go on the ground, that he has right that the Prince is
for, we would know, whether that hold in Turkey, in Italy, Spain, France, or
only in England, or where? If it be where Princes are Orthodox, do they make
all the People Judges of their Princes Orthodoxness? And we would know, whether
EVERY BISHOPS and PRIESTS right, as a true Minister, called of God, and set
over us, be necessary to Salvation, to be believed or known by all the People?
if it the, woe to us, that ever such men were set over us, whose right we cannot
know: What abundance of things go to make a Bishops or Priests right known! 1.
That he has capable sufficiency. 2. That he is a just Bishop, that is chosen by
the King, the Dean and Chapter obediently consenting, and that the Clergy's and
Peoples consent is unnecessary. 3.That the Diocesan species (over multitudes of
Churches without any subordinate Bishop) is of Christ, or lawful. 4. That their
work, according to the Canon, is lawful. 5. That all our Patrons have right to
choose Pastors for all the People. 6. That they are true Pastors over them that
consent not. 7. That if they prove worse far than Martial and Basilides, and be
owned by the Bishops as they were, the people may not forsake them (plebs
obsequens divinis praeceptis,) which says Cyprian have most power to choose or
refuse.

Is every Christian bound on pain of Damnation to know all these, and then to
examine and judge Bishops and Priests accordingly? or if they mistake one or
more men's Commission, do they therefore separate from the Catholic Church? If
so, what a case was the East in by the difference between Chrysostom and his
Competitors? Photius and Ignatius and hundreds others? and France, about the
Archbishops of Rhemes, when he was put out that deposed Ludovicus 4. and when
an Infant was put in, and often besides?

What if the Alexandrians, when Athanasius was banisned by, Constantine
himself, were half for him, and half against him? Or Basil at Caesarea was put
down, and hundreds more, or when Theodosius first and second and Martian, and
Valentinian, and Zeno, and Anastasius and abundance more, set up and pulled
down, and set up again against each other? What, I say, if the People now
mistook who had the best Title? Is this separating from the Catholic Church?
When the Interim cast out hundreds in Germany; When Ludovicus cast out
Multitudes in the Palatinate, and half the People stuck to the ejected,
persecuted Pastor, and the rest to the Magistrates choice, which of them
separated from the Universal Church? Is every Priest the Universal Church, or
an essential part of it? then it dies when he dies, and Apostatizeth when he
does. How many Ages in above 23 Duplicates or Schisms, was the World uncertain
which was the true Pope? suppose, e. g. Arthur Jackson, Edmund Calamy, and many
such were placed in their Incumbency, by the Bishops, Patrons and Parish
consent, according to the Law of Christ and the Land, and by a mew Act of
Uniformity they be all turned out, the Flock not consenting, nor any Bishop
accusing, trying or deposing them (save in Legislation,) and some of the Parish
think this dissolveth not their Relation to him, and they cleave to him as
before, without any change save of Place and Tithes, and others forsake such a
one, and follow the Magistrates choice, may not both these be still of the
Catholic Church? If not, I know where the old Canons laid the charge and
danger. It Is wonderful selfishness in those men, that if they can but get into
the Seat, take it for granted, that all must own their right on pain of
Damnation.

And what if in any such Land, the Prince change his mind, or the next differ,
and put down all these same men, and set up such as differ from them more than
we do, is it damning Schism for any of their People still to adhere to them?

LXXXIX. Do you find that Mr. Dodwel, Dr. Saywel, Dr. Sherlock, or any of these
men, do, in Pulpit and Press, ingenuously tell the People the truth of the
Case, when they liken men as Schismatics to Murderers for danger? Did you ever
hear them say, [The Canon, which is the Churches Voice and Law, does
Excommunicate you all that do own your Opinions against Conformity, and
commands us not to admit you to the Sacrament, and yet to pronounce your
Excommunication for not taking it: We confess they have been holy and Learned
Men that have thought many things imposed unlawful; and therefore we wonder not
if it be not in your power to change your judgment, no more than to be perfect
in knowledge; and we confess if you are unjustly Excommunicated, or any of the
things made necessary to Communion be against Gods Word, then it is the Church
that guilty of Schism, but because this is not so, we accuse you of Schism,
even of separating from the Universal Church, and from Salvation.

XC. I do admire, that never any one of them would be prevailed with to prove
the Canons Excommunications ipso facto lawful, when even Papists have scorned
all such doings; and when the learned of all their own admired men, that were
for comprimising matters with Rome, even Mar. Ant. de Dom. Spalatensis de Rep.
Eccl. has so confidently, copiously and strenuously damned it: Christ would
have none Excommunicate, whatever the Crime be, without Impenitency after due
admonition for Repentance, but these Canons ipso facto Condemn and
Excommunicate Godly men, without ever admonishing them, or calling them to
repent, or hearing or seeing them: Nothing is necessary but the proof of the
fact, and then the Law is instead of a Judge; and to oblige the People to avoid
them, it must be published.

If this and all things named in the first Plea for Peace, be sinless, studying
and disputing is not the way to know what is sinful.

XCI. But, says the Resolver, [ Christ has but one Body, and to be a Member
of two separate and Opposite Churches, is to be contrary to ourselves.]

Ans. But I had hoped your Catechized Boys had known, 1. That one Body has
many parts. 2. That particular Churches are parts of this Body, as Corporations
are of the Kingdom. 3. That all the parts are imperfect, and made up of none
but sinners. 4. That every good man is partly bad, and so contrary to himself
5. That Churches may be so far separate as to be distinct, and yet not so far
as to be contrary or opposite. 6. That they may be opposite in Accidents and
Integrals, that are one in specie in Essentials. 7. That a man may own several
Churches, and Communicate with them for that which they agree in, and yet not
own both, (or either perhaps) in that which they are opposite in. 8. That there
being somewhat opposite in all men and Churches on Earth, you damn your selves
for Communicating with them. 9. That a man may have more Communion with the
Church which he Locally separateth from, even for sin, than with that which he
is present with.

E. g. A Congregation or Nation of men of eminent Sanctity and Order, sound
Doctrine and Worship, may, by humane frailty take some one falsehood or
uncertain thing to be necessary to Ministry or Communion (as they say some
Churches unhappily of late reject all that own not the Antiquity of the Hebrew
Points) I cannot have local Communion with that Church, for they will not
receive me, unless I subscribe either a falsehood, (or that which I judge
false;) but yet I highly honor and love them, and have mental Catholic
Communion with them, when perhaps necessity may make me Locally join with a
Church of far worse men and Order, that will impose no sin on me. 10. And I
would advise these men, did they not despise my advice, for the Church of
Englands sake, and their own, to retract their Errors, and not lay such a
Snare before the People. Should you say in the Pulpit, [If the Church be guilty
of any Schism by her Impositions, (oftnamed) Excommunications and silencing of
Christ's Ministers, and afflicting good people without just Cause, then I, and
all that communicate with it and me, communicate in the guilt of Schism, and
are all in as much danger of Damnation by it as Adulterers and Murderers] tell
not your hearers this, for if you do, some will think you bid them separate or
be damned, and only make a doubt whether most men have Noses or not.

XCI1. Qu. But is not the Inference true?

Ans. No, it is false: There are twenty cases in which 1. One may be guilty of
Schism and not be a Schismatic, as denominated from what predominateth: 2. And
as many in which he is not at all guilty that communicates with the guilty.

And let the world (that is sober and awake) judge now whether these men or we
be the greater Schismatics, and which more condemns or separateth from the
Church of England. We say that all Churches have some degree of Schism, and so
has the Church of England, as it has imperfection, Error and Sin; but that
it is not therefore no Church, nor is it unlawful to communicate with it; All
Christians and Churches must not be separated from that are guilty of some
degree of Schism.

If any will turn these Serious matters into Jest, and say, as Dr. Saywell,
that they will receive Greeks, Lutherans, etc. that come to their Communion,
his Serious Readers will tell him, that so will most Sects receive those that
approve of their Communion and come to them: Joining with you signifies that
they are of your way therein; But will you go to their Churches and Communicate
with them? You will receive the damned Schismatics if they come to you, when
yet you make it damnable to join in their meetings with them. This quibbling
beseems not grave men in great matters.

To conclude, Reader, God having allowed more Legislative Power to men in
things Secular than in Religion, I may say this case is like ours in debate.

I. Some Judges and Lawyers say, that the Oath of Allegiance makes a Subject in
this Kingdom; that the Renouncing or Violating it by Treason, or Rebellion, or
deserting the Kingdom, overthrows the Relation. But that other particular
faults or quarrels against Neighbors, Justices, Judges, yea the King himself,
are punishable according to the Laws, but are not all Rebellion, nor dissolve
Subjection, nor oblige the Subjects to renounce civil converse with each other;
though some contempt and obstinacy may outlaw them. Such is our Judgment of
Church Relation and Communion, which 1 need not rehearse.

II. Suppose a sect of Lawyers and Judges arise, that say, no men are the Kings
Subjects, but are Rebels, that break any of his Laws, that Shoot not in long
Bows, that Bury not their dead in Woollen, that swear profanely, that eat
flesh in Lent unlicensed, that have any unjust Lawsuit, that wrong any
Neighbor, that oppress any Poor man, all these are Rebels; yea all that plead
opposite Causes at the Bar, and all Judges that judge contrary to one another,
and all that misunderstand any point of Law and Practice accordingly, and all
that besides the Oath of Allegiance do constitute Marriages, Families, Schools,
Societyes by any other Covenants of their own, and all that are of different
Cities and Companies, parts of the Kingdom, or all whose Justices, Mayors,
Sheriffs, etc. differ from one another in any point of Law and practice: Or all
that obey not every Constable and Justice; or that go to diverse Justices in the
same Precincts, or that go from one Justice to another to avoid unrighteous
Judgment, or that go from the Physician of the Place for Health, and from the
Schoolmaster of the Town for greater edification, or that Travel beyond Sea for
Knowledge, yea all that understand not every word in the Law, that may concern
them: If any say, none of these are the Kings Subjects, but Rebels, opposite to
him and one another, and deserve to be all hanged as Murderers, and so are all
that have Communion with them; Quaere, 1. Whether these men are for the Unity
of England? 2. And are Friends to the King that deprive him of all his
Subjects; as much as those that would have him have no Subjects, that be not of
the same Age, Stature, Complexion and Wit. 3. And whether they are Friends to
Mankind? 4. And whether they. condemn not themselves if they live not as
Anchorets, out of humane Society. 5. And whether that Nation be not by
infatuation prepared for Destruction that would believe them, and would hate,
scorn and ruin them that are of the first mentioned opinion, according to the
saying, Quos perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat.

As to the more dangerous Doctrine now threatening this Land, that would subject
England to a Foreign Jurisdiction, on pretense of a Necessity of either an
Universal Church Monarch, or Church-Parliament Senate or Council, or of all the
Church on Earth represented by Patriarchs or Metropolitans, or that plead for
Subjection to them, under the Name of Communion, they require a distinct
Answer. But Dr. Is. Barrow, and Mr. Beverley's Catholic Catechism, have
effectually done it.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART AGAINST SCHISM: BEING ANIMADVERSIONS On a Book famed to be Mr.
Raphson's.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
WHEN I had Written the first of these Discourses, I came after to know more of
the Authors Judgment, by another Book against me; which I also Answered, but it
lies by unprinted. I also wrote, for the use of some private Friends, my
Reasons for Communion with those ParishChurches who have Capable Ministers,
which many Importuned me to Print; but that also is yet undone: But a Book
famed to be Mr. Raphsons coming out, I thought it my duty to Animadvert on
that, and to bear my Testimony against Schism on both Extremes, left I be
guilty of Partiality, and of the Sin and suffering of many that may be deceived
by them. If these Two be not overmuch discouraged, the other Two against both
the Extremes may come hereafter.

THE SECOND PART AGAINST SCHISM, etc. The Reasons of Mr. Raphson, and such
others, against going to the Parish-Churches, considered.
THE Matter of his Book, as against Persecution, is very considerable; the
Style is very close and pungent: His Doctrine against Communion with the
Churches that use the Liturgy, is that which I examine.

The sum of it is, 1. That kneeling at the reception of the Sacrament, and the
use of the Liturgy, are unlawful.

2. That they are false Worship, and Idolatry.

3. That the places where they are used, are Idol-Temples.

4 That to join there in them, is to partake in Idolatry.

5. The proof of all this is by this Argument; Worship not institute, is not
lawful; but kneeling in receipt of Bread and Wine, is Worship not instituted by
Christ: therefore not lawful; therefore not pleasing, p. 160, 161. To which, by
way of Motive, he adds, p. 275. How many once in the separation, are returned
back to the Vomit they once cast up, and wallow in the mire of a worldly
worship? etc. Is compliance in Idol-Temples, going to Dan and Bethel, bowing to
Baal, sitting, or drinking with the superstitious inacts of religious
adoration, a witness for, or against defection? Are you turned as silly sheep
(that once were called shepherds), to bleat after other shepherds, that Christ
never sent, nor bid you go after them, etc. Looks it not like a declining of
the Camp of Christ, the work of the Gospel, and setting your face toward
Babel, etc.? Is scandal of no weight with you, etc.? How dare you venture your
souls to sit under Means that he says shall not profit you; and which is worse,
lies under his curse? Jer. 23. 32. Mal. 1. 14. with more such. Either this
Writer knows how ill he deals with his Reader, or not: If he do, it is a
double fault: if not (which I think), it is a doleful case, that every
wellmeaning man, that can but be confident in his ignorance and error, and
father it on God, should become such a snare to them that cannot see through
his Pretenses, and should himself suffer for sinning, and call it the Cause of
God, and condemn all that sin not as confidently as he; and hereby harden his
afflicters, by showing them his weakness, and impenitently justifying his sin.

If he would not have ensnared his Reader, he should first have opened the
meaning of the words of his Question, that they might know how much of the
Dispute is material, and how much only about words. 2. And then he should have
so proved his assertion and accusation, as might satisfy a good Conscience in
a matter wherein God, the Church, and Souls, are so much concerned; and not
have poured out Accusations by way of Motives, upon unproved and false
suppositions.

I find but one Argument, which I shall now answer plainly:

His Major is, [Worship not instituted, is not lawful] Ans. 1. The word
[Worship] in general, signifies, 1. Any thing done in honor to another; and
so all our obedience to God is Worship: It is to his glory that we must do all.
I suppose that this he means not. 2. Any immediate act or expression of the
honor and reverence of the heart. If this be not it that he means by
Worship, I know not what he means.

This Worship, as within, is the secret act of the soul; as expressed, it is the
act of the body.

Of such Worship there are two sorts: One sort is made necessary, statedly, by
God's commanding it in particular. To this no man must add the like, or from it
diminish any thing so commanded, either pretending God's authority, or his own.
The other sort is but the subordinate ordering of the former, and is but the
manner of doing it. This God does not institute in particular, but only give
man a general Rule, how to choose it himself; which is, That all be done in
love, and to edification, decently and in order.

Either this latter sort is to be called Worship, or not: If it be, then it
falls under his opposition: If not, then, 1. He must give us a definition of
Worship, which shall exclude it; and so Worship must be somewhat else than the
direct or immediate acting or expressing honor to God: And then who knows what
he means by it? 2. And then when we plead for men's making none but this, he
should to avoid deceit, confess that the Controversy is only of the Name
(whether Modes and Circumstances of God's instituted Worship, may be called
Worship), and not at all of the Thing (whether it be lawful or not): This had
been like a Christian Teacher.

Now I answer, 1. to his first Proposition: 1. Worship which is neither
instituted particularly, nor in the general, appointing man how to choose it,
is unlawful, 2. And to invent worship without God's allowance, contrary, or of
the same kind, as if he had not done his part, is unlawful. 3. But for man to
choose and use such worship as is but the right ordering of God's Institutions,
is commanded by him, and a Duty; and therefore not unlawful.

2. As to his Minor, or Second Proposition, I answer, Kneeling at the
Sacrament, and communicating with Parish Churches that have tolerable
Ministers, are not instituted of God in particular, but the Genus of them is
instituted, and we commanded to choose our selves, according to God's general
Rules, to the best of our understanding: and so they are our Duty, and not
unlawful.

I give the Instances of these two sorts of worship:

First, God has Instituted, that our Minds Worship him, in believing, and
receiving all his Gospel Revelations, and trusting them; and in desiring all
things Petitioned in the Lords Prayer, and in consenting to all commanded in
the Scriptures; and in Dedicating our selves to him cordially in Baptism, and
renewing it in the Lords Supper, in commemoration of Christ's Death, till he
comes. He has Instituted the Corporal Expresions of all these; That we confess
Christ in all the necessary Articles of Faith; That we ask the Petitions of the
Lords Prayer; That we perform the Commands of the Decalogue toward God, and
all others in the Scripture. These are the Instituted Worship which none must
alter.

Secondly, The Manner and Ordering which is the Second sort (which I leave
every one to call Worship, or not, when they have defined Worship) which man
may, and must choose himself, without any Particular Institution of God, contain
such Acts as these.

1. Undetermined gestures of Reverence and Honor in time of Public Worship.
As to be uncovered, or put off the Hat at Prayer, or the Lord's Supper. This we
do directly in honor and reverence to God, whom we there Worship; and
therefore it is it self a subordinate act of Worship.

So to stand, or kneel at Prayer, and not to sit. Though in Scripture we read
of sitting, standing, kneeling, and prostration: yet no one of these is made
necessary by Institution: yet are they subordinate Acts of Worship, expressing
our inward Worship of God: And the reason why being uncovered, or kneeling, are
now chosen, is not a particular Institution, but because the Custom of the
Country has made them the most congruous Expression of our inward Worship:
when as Paul tells us, That then and there it was a sharne for a man to be
covered: and the whole Church for many hundred years forbad all kneeling, in
Adoration, on the Lord's Days. And more,

To these I add, the gesture of the Adult in Baptism, whether they shall be
Baptized kneeling, to signify Humble Reception, or not, is left to choice.

So is the Gesture in singing Psalms: If any think, that speaking to God by
prayer, praise, or thanksgiving in Psalms, should in honor to God be done
Standing, or Kneeling, rather than Sitting, it is no addition to God's
Institution. And that we commonly use sitting in Psalmody, and not when we Pray
in Prose, is merely because Custom makes one more offensive than the other.

The same I say of the Gesture of Preaching, which some do sitting with their
Hats on, and others stand to avoid a seeming dishonor of Gods Name and
Service. Also, some holy Nonconformists I have known, that would rarely name
God but with their Hats put off, or bowing their Heads; or with Hands and Eyes
lift up toward Heaven. (Old Mr. Atkins at Tipton near Dudley, did thus use to
show such Reverence, when he named God, that would strike Reverence into those
that saw and heard him: and has often Affected me more than a Sermon.) This was
External Worship, not Instituted in the particulars, but in general of
Reverence to God.

2. Another instance is in Vows to God, which are acts of Worship: But for the
Matter of them, several things may be Vowed which are not particularly
commanded, but only in the General. And for the Form or Words, I do not think
that Mr. Raphson can show me all that Vow called the Covenant, in any
particular Institution; and yet I conjecture, that he takes it not to be
Idolatry, nor Unlawful.

3. Another Instance is, in things devoted and offered to God The Scripture in
general says, Honor God with thy substance, and with the first Fruits of thy
increase. And that Christians at first sold all, and laid at the Apostles Feet;
which yet Peter tells Ananias he might have chosen not to do. And for many
hundred years after, they brought their Weekly Donations for the Ministers,
Sacraments, and Poor, to the Altar, and Offered it first to God: And so Paul
would have the Corinthians give their Collections as to God, for the Saints.
But no Institution told them how much they should give, but the General Rule.

4. Another Instance is, the length or degree of outward Worship: If I pray two
hours rather than one, it is an act of Honor, or Worship, not particularly
commanded.

So whether men shall in Public read one Chapter, or two; sing one Psalm or
two, or more, is undetermined by God

5. Another is about set Days and Hours for Worship; as to keep a yearly
Thanksgiving for Deliverance from the Powder Plot; the Spanish Invasion; for
the Reformation, etc. So also Fasts, and what days Lectures shall be kept, and
what hour: And what day and hour the Lord's Supper shall be Administered; which
are Circumstantial Acts of Worship.

6. Another Instance is in the choice of Psalms and Hymns: the use of David's
are Lawful, and so are others: but no Institution tyeth us to One, but leaves
us to choose.

7. Another Instance is in the Tunes and Meter of Psalms, which we use as
Subordinate Acts of Worship. It is but lately that the Churches used Meter and
Melody of Tune; but Prose read with a loud Voice: yet I hope we are not
Idolaters for our Meter and Melody: which I may say also of Church Music,
which David used, and we may do, where it is Edifying; but it is no Institution
now. Yea, when Paul directs the Church to use Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs; Which is for singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord, and therefore
it is Worship, which some men must indite and make.

8. Another Instance is, in the versions of the Psalms of David; where among
many we may choose which seems best.

9. Another Instance is, in the public and private Reading of the Scriptures
Translated: where every word is the work of man: God wrote it not in English,
but in Hebrew and Greek; but man Translates it, some well, and some
defectively; yet I hope, an English Bible is not an Idol.

10. So also the dividing the Scriptures into Chapters, and Verses, which are
the Works of man, is no Idolatry.

11. And another Instance is, the Method and Words of Sermons and Prayers:
whether a Minister shall Preach by way of Doctrine, Reason, and Use; or
otherwise: and Expound by way of Paraphrase, or otherwise; what words he shall
use, God has not instituted in particular; but men's invention makes these,
some suddenly, and some beforehand.

12. Another Instance is, the use of helps, or written Words; Whether one shall
use Notes in Preaching, and read them, or not? Whether the words of a Prayer
shall be written, and read, or not; God has not determined. And so Books of
Catechism, Public Confessions: Prayers, Meditations as formed; are all the
works of man, and no Idolatry. And if Parents impose words of Prayer on their
Children, it is no Sin; as Deuteronomy. 6. and 11 show.

13. Another Instance is in the form of Ordination, when the Words and many
Circumstances are undetermined. Imposition of Hands is a Iawfu1 Sign: and so is
doing it by a Writing, or by mere Words, without that Imposition; some receive
it Kneeling, some Standings; some by one Form of Words, some by another, etc.
some from one Ordainer some from many, etc. And none of these determined by
Institution.

14. The same is true of Discipline; The Form of Words for Admonition, for
Absolution, for Excommunication, for the Penitents Confession and Request, are
left to Humane Wisdom, so the matter and manner be regulated by the general
Law. And they that say, that God has Instituted, that the Church shall be
Governed Necessarily by fixed Classes, with Appeals to National Synods, and
that here a Major Vote has Governing Power over the lesser part; yea, and that
these must be made up of Two sorts of Elders, of which one sort are
un-ordained, or are not Authorized to Administer the Word and Sacraments, do
but add to the Word of God, if they say these National Assemblies are the
Supreme Church Power; what Law of God did ever Institute, That a Minister, or
Classis, e.g. in Geneva, Breme, Scotland, is not as much subject to the Decrees
of a larger Council of many Nations; and that the Synod at Dort had not as much
Power as a lesser at Hague: or a Synod of many Nations as much as one in
Scotland? But if (as by parity of Reason they must) they say, that General or
large Councils are the Governors of National Assemblies, as they are of
Classis and Presbyteries: then they bring us under a Foreign Jurisdiction,
which the Kingdom is sworn against; and I think they are Papists, but of the
French sort, who make General Councils Superior Governors of the Universal
Church.

And if they determine the bounds of Church Power, by the Magistrates Laws, and
yet damn Erastians, they seem in ignorance to deal too hardly with themselves.

15. Another Instance is, in the Place of Public Worship: God has not
determined where the Assembly shall meet: where the Pulpit, Font, Table, etc.
shall stand. And if great and lofty Structures, called Temples, be Built,
purely to show how we honor God, and Religion: as Constantine, and others
after him, did at Constantineple, Alexandria, Jerusalem, over the Grave of
Christ, and all over the Empire: this Actual Expression of Honor to God, is
Cultus modalis and secundarius, a subservient sort of Worship, and no Idolatry,
but Lawful.

16. The same I say of Church Utensils: If for the Honor of God and Religion,
the Pulpits, and Tables have Ornaments of Silk, Cups, and Trenchers, and
Flaggons of Silver; the Font and Seats have some special Neatness, etc. this is
left to Man's Determination, without any particular Institution, and is no
Idolatry.

17. And if as Judges and Lawyers have distinguishing Habits, the Ministers
have so, (officiating, and at other times) to no worse end (or manner) than the
said Utensils are put; I know no Institution that is crossed by it, nor that
forbids it.

18. Another Instance may be of Speaking in the Assembly, whether it shall be
One Minister, or Two, or Three. Whether Laymen may not be Interlocutors by
Questions, yea, and sometime Preach and Pray, etc. God has not particularly
determined, but left to Human Choice.

19. Many good Christians knowing the Lord's Day to be an Instituted Day of
Thanksgiving for the greatest Mercies, do as an Act of Honor wear their best
Clothes, and Feast themselves and the Poor accordingly that day: This is
Lawful, by the General Law; but not particularly Instituted by God.

20. Professing Signs in our Covenantings with God, and Confessing of our
Religion, are left to be chosen only by the General Laws of Edification, and
Order. When a Nation, or Church, or Person renew their Covenant with God, and
their Confession of Faith, it may be done (when the Ruler demands their
consent) either by word or by subscribing, or by lifting up the hand, or by
standing up, or by bowing the Head; for these are all, or most found in
Scripture instances; yea, sometimes they fell by Prostration to the Ground:
yea, and so they often did in receiving a Charge or Message from God, by his
Ministers.

I will add no more Instances; These are enough. If yet it be said, That none
of these be acts of Worship: I again Answer, 1. Then do not by Slander call
them so, and say still, that Man's inventing or using these, is using false
Worship, If they be no Worship, they are no false Worship. Confess then, that
it is but a bare name that you charged with Idolatry: for its only such things
as these that we would add. 2. But de nomine, If an Action done directly to
honor God be to be called Worship; some of these at least may be called
Secondary subordinate Worship: But if you appropriate the Name to Gods stated
Ordinances, these must not be called Worship; but the manner, order,
circumstances, or accidents of Worship. But call them what you will, they are
but what God allows, and the General of them he commands.

I need not say much to his Applicatory Words. 1. To return from Separation, to
Love and Union, is as fitly called, a Returning to their Vomit, as returning
from Drunkenness and Fornication, to Sobriety and Chastity may be so called.
Repentance is casting up our Sin.

2. The Names of bowing to Baal, Dan and Bethel, Babylon, Idols, etc. are as
easily used by Quakers, Ranters, Familists, etc. against all God's Church and
Worship: And they were worn so threadbare by the railing Separatists (then
called Brownists), against the Old Learned Godly Nonconformists, that they
turned to the Speakers reproach. And I suppose he knows that the Scots were
called as bad, and worse, by the Army that conquered them in 1650, etc.

3. That sitting or drinking with the superstitious in arts of religicus
adoration, is a sign of defection. This would make all Backsliders Who so sit
and drink with him, and such as he, who is so superstitious, as to turn sin
into duty, and duty into sin, and falsely father Laws on God: Yea, that is worse
than superstitious, as is after manifested. 2. Superstition is an offering
somewhat as pleasing to God, which is not pleasing to him. All Christians
havesome degree of this in Matter or Manner; for we know but in part, and
prophecy in part, etc. And so no Christians must join with others. But must
they not give over all Religious Duty themselves, seeing their own defects more
defile them than other men's? 3. Christ does not disown all imperfect worship
that has some Superstition: And we must receive one another as Christ
receives us. 4. It was Superstitious persons that Paul commands Christians
to receive to Communion, Romans 14. 5. Thus he condemns the Apostles, and the
Churches then, and the Scripture it self. 6. It is dreadful revolting to choose
rather forbearance of all Church Communion, than to Communicate with our Parish
Churches, when better cannot be had, and men are not forced to any sin
themselves. And he that will communicate with none that sin in Preaching,
Prayer, Sacraments, shall communicate with none 7. It is a gross Service of
Satan and Popery, to fight against Love and Unity, and bring all the Public
Assemblies under disgrace, as unlawful, that Popery may take possession
unresisted.

4. His words of [ silly Sheep bleating after any Shepherd, etc.] are but a Net
to catch silly Souls. It Is the common Trap of the Papists, to put ignorant
people to prove the Calling of the Ministers, or forsake them. They that preach
the Gospel, and do the Office (tho faultily), and are in possession, have a
Calling sufficient to justify the. Hearers, when it may not be enough to
justify themselves: A better Call than the High Priests that Christ did send
men to.

5. As to the Argument of Scandal; It is of dreadful weight to deter a tender
Consience (as from conforming to sin, so) from his groundless Separation, and
war against Unity and Love.

6. That God says such Means shall not profit; yea, curses it, is a slander
against God and Scripture, and all the Church on Earth that is known; by
perverting and misapplying the Text.

I shall now better prove the lawfulness of using such things as these, than he
has proved it unlawful.

1. That which no Low of God, or valid Law of Man, forbids, is not unlawful:
but the use of the things forementioned, no Law of God, or valid Law of Man
forbids: Therefore the use of the things forementioned, is not unlawful.

He that will say that there is any such Law, must show that Law, and prove his
Affirmative: But let him take heed of adding to God's law: A false Prophet that
fathered a false Message from God, was an heinous sinner. Is it not worse
falsely to father a Law on him?

Perhaps they will say, that God forbids, adding or diminishing: I answer, He
does so: Therefore let them take heed of it, who say his Law forbids that which
it never forbad, but in general commands. If we must not add to the Laws of
the Land, yet the Bookbinder that covers them, and the Lawyers and Judges
that expound them, do not add thereby to the Law. When the Hearers bowed, and
prostrated themselves in reverence to God, they did not by this add to the Law;
nor yet when they made a Vow uncommanded, or a Free-Will-Offering: And I think
it was no sinful addition to the Law, for the Publican to smite his Breast, and
look downward; and when Jeremy said, No man smites on his thigh, and says,
what evil have I done? The meaning is not, No man idolatrously gives God false
worship. And I think, that they that rent their clothes to express their
repentance, did not add to God's Word, nor yet do it as necessary worship, tho
Joel says, Rent your hearts, and not your garments.

Some Object, That Christ's sitting at the Sacramental Supper, is a Law to us,
forbidding any other gesture. But this Author professes, that all the actions
of Christ, or his Apostles, are not Laws binding us to do the like: If they be,
we break many such Laws; as when we do not eat a full Meal before the
Sacrament, when we do it not without women, only to a Family, or to Twelve,
only to Teachers, in an upper Reom, in an Inn, or Private House, and that we do
not lie along, leaning, as they did; especially when we take it not at
Supper-time, and turn the Lord's Supper to a Breakfast or Dinner. The Apostles
brake no Law when they differed from any of these, which were but occasional
Circumstances.

It Is said by some, That Christ's Example binds us to a Table Gesture: But 1.
That may be convenient, and yet not necessary: The bare Example binds us not to
it. 2. If it did, that were but like the general Law; Let all be done to
edification, and in order; and binds to no one sort of gesture at all: For then
when they eat standing, it would bind us to stand; and if they eat kneeling (as
Laborers often do at Harvest-work in the Fields), it would bind us to kneel; if
they eat lying, as the Jews did, it would bind us to that: and so this would
but tie us to the Custom of the Country. But in feasting with God, we may
sometimes do it more lowly than in a common Tablegesture, and break no Law.
When Mary was, it is like, on her knees, washing Christ's feet with her Tears,
if he had offered her Bread or Wine, it is like it had been no Idolatry so to
take it.

But the grand Objection is, that we worship Bread and Wine; which can be no
better than a slander, when the very Liturgy and Doctrine of the Church, not
only renounce Transubstantiation, but the very real Presence of Christ's Body,
which yet many thousand Protestants believe.

Object. But you kneel before the Bread and Wine, and make it a mediate Object
of adoration, contrary to the Second Commandment.

Answ. 1. We neither make any Image, nor invent this Medium, nor yet symbolize
with Idolaters, while we renounce the very Object (Transubstantiate Bread)
which they adore, and therefore break not the Second Commandment, no more than
we do in kneeling in lawful Prayer, because they kneel in praying before
Images, or to Angels.

2. An Object of worship is either a mere motive exciting Object, or else a
terminative mediate worshipped Object. The first is more than lawful: For we
should be moved and stirred up by the works of God, even by our Meat and Drink,
by Sun and Moon, and all that we see, to worship God: And this is properly but
the Object of our thoughts, and the motive of our outward acts: And the
Sacrament is no more. But if we did direct our worship terminatively to the
Bread and Wine, as a mediate Object, by which it should pass to God, this were
to break the Second Commandment, like Image Worship.

There are many Instances in Scripture, of people that have bowed to God before
the Prophet, moved by his word and presence, who yet break not the Second
Commandment, nor idolized the Words or Prophets: So Joshua fell down to the
Angel, Josh. 4. We give thanks for the Meat that stands before us on the Table,
as a Motive-Object; and we may do it on our knees: Is this an idolatrous
worshipping of our Meat? I have many a time seen a miserable Beggar, when one
has given him Money or Meat, fall down on his knees, and take it, saying, I
thank God and you; Did this make the giver his Idol? How sad is the case of
ignorant young Christians, whose Consciences must be racked or cheated by such
Sophistry, because their wits be not ripe enough to find out the deceit?

II. Another Argument: That is not unlawful which God commands us in general
to choose and do, and so allows in the Particulars: But such are the Twenty
Things before mentioned, etc.

God commands us to do all things in Love, and Concord, and Order, to
edification. This must needs reach to the undetermined circumstances. We cannot
worship God publicly at all, but it must be in some words, in some gestures,
in some time, in some place; nor profess our Faith, and Covenant-consent, but
by some sign: and so of the rest. If you choose no one, when God has tied us
to none, but bid us choose to edification, we break his General Law. If you can
prove that we choose amiss, the Fault will be, not that we choose, but that we
choose not better.

III. That is not unlawful which Christ and his Apostles did before us without
blame, and belongs also unto us. But such is the use of such Modes and
Circumstances of God's instituted worship, which are left variable, and free to
occasional choice, etc.

What Christ did, I shall speak more anon. Paul has his [ Not the Lord, but
I]; signifying, that the thing was not determined by a Law, Romans 14. He judges
circumstantial differences such as should not break communion, when yet they
that kept days, or kept them not; and they that did eat, or not eat, did it as
to the Lord. And did he bid them not judge each other for idolatry? or say, Romans
14. 17, 18. That Idolaters were acceptable to God, or approved of men? or Rom*
15. or bid them receive Idolaters, as Christ received us? He regulateth their
Church-Meetings, How many shall speak at a Meeting, and by what course and
order; and that women shall be veiled, and not men; and that they salute each
other with an holy Kiss, etc. not by a Law that setleth the Particulars, but by
the General Law of doing all in order, and to edification; and pleads not
Institution, but the Custom of the Churches, which is alterable, as the
signification of such acts are. And St. James will have the Elders anoint the
sick with Oil for recovery, which yet binds not us. The Papists use this as
an Institution, as they do imposition of hands in Confirmation: They say in
Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost, and breathe on the Person: They wash the
feet of one another in imitation of Christ: And yet these men condemn them in
this, as superstitious, for imitating Christ and his Apostles, and
Scripture-Examples, and cry down Popery, and at the same time call us
Idolaters, for going beyond Scripture-institution. The same I say of their
keeping Lent, in imitation of Christ's forty days fast, etc. Is it Idolatry
both to follow, and not to follow Scripture-Examples?

To all the rest I add one Instance more: Swearing by appeal to God, is a most
solemn act of worship: but the sign of taking an Oath, is left free to
convenient choice. Abraham's Servant did it by putting his hand under his
thigh: Was this a common Law, or Institution? Others did it otherwise: We do it
by laying our hand on the Book, and kissing it. These. are neither sinful
additions, or Idolatry. The Memorial of God's Works, and Men's Covenants, were
kept, sometime by pitching Stones, sometime by Pillars, sometime by set days
(as the Feast of Purim,) sometime by laying up the Ensigns (as Goliah's Sword,
etc.) And all these lawful, and no Ido: latry.

IV. Lastly, I will unveil these men's Doctrine of Separation, and then judge
whether it be the Doctrine of Christ, which is a Law of Love, and Union, and
Peace; or the Wisdom from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
etc.

1. It is false, that all such Secondary Modal Worship, is unlawful, which is
not instituted by a fixing Law.

2. It is deceit not to distinguish these different things.

3. The charge of [ false Worship] unexplained, is mere deceit: 1. Worship is
so far [ false], as it is contrary to the Rule. Every Sermon, Prayer or
Sacrament which we administer, has faultiness and sin, and is so far [ false
Worship]. 2. But Worship offered God on pretense that he instituted it when he
did not, or that Man has authority to command the like, is yet worse false
Worship. 3. And the worship of false Gods or Idols, is yet worse than that, and
abhorred of God.

4. His making all faulty circumstances, such as he names, to be Idolatry,
because false, as he calls it, is yet more sinful, and of mischievous
importance.

5. So is it to make the Churches Idols Temples, where they do kneel at the
Sacrament, and use the Liturgy.

6. So is it to feign falsely, that God calls men to come out from such, and
be separate, because he calls them out of Babylon; falsely adding to the Laws
of God.

7. By his Doctrine he makes Christ an Idolater (which Imention with horror):
For he 1. used Circumstances riot instituted before, or by himself: He preached
on a Mountain, in a Ship, etc. not commanded: He commended Mary for anointing
him, washing his Feet with Tears, wiping them with her Hair, not instituted in
particular: He commended the Publican for smitinig on his breast, standing far
off, not looking to Heaven, without particular Command: His Custom was to go to
the Synagogue-worship: He from his childhood performed Temple-Duties and
Service: He commanded the Lepers cleansed to go to the Priests, and offer their
due, and his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses Chair, etc.
And yet 1. The High Priests were not of Aaron's line, according to Institution.
2. They bought the Office of Heathen Romans. 3. They had it not for life,
according to institution. 4. Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Manners, were
heinously corrupted, so that the Hearers were to beware of the Leaven of their
Doctrine, and not to imitate their lives. 4. They were bitter enemies of
Christ, and Persecutors: yet Christ never bid his Disciples to separate from
any thing but their errors; but says, They shall cast you out of the
synagogues. And doubtless Christ committed no sin; nor can we be so holy as he.

8. He condemns Abraham, and all the Jewish Church of old, that used such
things that were not instituted in Worship, as is before mentioned in swearing,
etc.

9. He makes the Apostles Idolatrous that used the like.

10. He makes the Primitive Churches Idolatrous, and the Scriptures to approve
it. For they used such uninstituted things: yea, the Romans were guilty of
differences in God's Service, and despising and judging each other for them;
The Corinthians were Carnal in making Parties and Divisions, they defrauded
each other, and went to Law before Heathens. They had Fornicators, Judaizing
envious Slanderers of Paul, Heretical deniers of the Resurrection; such as eat
in Idols Temples, or of their Sacrifices: Were drunk at, or before the
Sacrament. The Galatians are yet sharplier charged: Almost all the Seven
Churches Romans 2. and 3. had Nicholaitans, or Jezabels Doctrine, which God
hated: and no Christian is called to separate from the Communion of any one of
all these; but commanded to amend, and live in Unity, without divison.

11. He condemns as Idolaters all the Churches on Earth, for Six Hundred, if
not One Thousand Years after the Apostles; not One Church Christian, or
Heretic (as far as any History tells us that I have found) did ever deny such
things, as he calls False Worship, or Idolatry. They all ^ent further than our
Parish Churches do. At Baptism they used the White Garment, tasting Milk and
Honey, Chrisme or anointing the Forehead, Crossing; they adored only Standing,
and not Kneeling, every Lords Day, all as significant Ceremonies: No one Church
or Person is said to scruple these; I think they did not well: but God rejected
not their Worship.

12. He makes all, or near all the Churches on Earth, Idolaters, at this day:
All on Earth, save the Protestants are far grosser in their Liturgies and
Ceremonies than the English: Of the Protesants, Sweden, Denmark, Saxony, and
all the Lutherans, have Liturgies, Crossing, Ceremonies, Church-Images,
Consubstantiation. The Helvetians are such as are called Erastians, making the
Magistrate, the only Ruler, and Sacraments common. Geneva, and France, yea and
Helland, have their Liturgies and some Rites.

13. He condemns Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and all Dissenters
that are here called Protestants. For they have al1 many of the foresaid
uninstituted things: They put off the Hat in Church at Prayer. They stand up at
the Blessing; they use uncommanded gestures at Sacrament; they use
Psalm-versions, Metres, Tunes Scripture-Translations, Divisions into Chapter
and Verse, never instituted particularly. The Scots used a Government by
Classes, National Assemblies of various Elders, ruling by Vote, instead of mere
consulting for Concord, uncommanded.

14. I humbly propose it to consideration, Whether by consequence (which he
sees not, nor owneth) do not deny Christ, and all the Gospel, and work of man's
redemption: I challenge him to name me one Church on Earth for many hundred
years after the Apostles, that had not that which he calls false Worship and
Idolatry: Suppose this were but in a few Ages, as the second, third, or fourth
Century: Then a Temple of Idols, and Company of Idolaters, is no true Church:
And if at any time there was no Church there was no Head of the Church: No
Kingdom, no King: No Wife, no Husband, that is no Christ. How much more, if he
make all, or near all the Church Idolaters to this day, and himself with the
rest?

15. If it be a heinious sin to bear false Witness against a Neighbor, or to
slander one man, what is it to slander and back-bite all the Church on Earth,
and Christ himself?

16. Is it not a work of Satan to destroy Love, and to render almost all
Christians odious? And does not he do so, that calls them Idolaters? Is not
this Preaching men, into the hatred of each other? Do we owe no Love to any
Christians, but such as is due to Idolaters? Is not the fruit of the Spirit
otherwise described?

17. Does he not deny that Communion of the Saints, which is an Article of the
Creed? and tempt weak Christians into sinful Separations, Divisions, Slanders,
Judgings, Murmurings, Envies, which are the fruits of the flesh?

18. Does not this directly destroy the Church by Dissolution? When there is
none to be owned or joined with, that has not somewhat which he calls false
worship. And is not separating the Materials, destroying the house?

19. Does he not directly rush into the Sin which, he condemns adding to
God's Laws, and saying he forbids what he forbids not? yea, fathering on him
Laws more rigorous than the Jewish, as disowning Christ's Church as Idolators
and false Worshippers?

20. I add, such woefully harden men in that which they themselves suffer by,
and which they call enmity and persecution, and make more Conformists while
they deny it, than R. B. whom he frivolously talks of, ever did (except it be
a Conformity to Truth and Goodness.) For when men read and hear others
confidently rage against Truth and Duty,by rash presumptuous ignorance, they
judge of all our dissent by this: And while many run into this Guilt, it seems
to justify their Afflicters: And it tempts weak Persons to suffer for sinful
separation as evil doers, thinking it is for Truth. Oh with what grief will
understanding men see Christians together, as in a state of enmity by mistakes.
To see some at once require from others, things good and necessary, things
Lawful but unnecessary; things necessary in their Genus, but not this more than
that, and some things sinful, as if they were all almost alike. To see those
whose Senses are not exercised to discern things that differ, misled by the
words and reverence of men, to swallow some Sins as excellent Duties, and fly
from things Lawful; yea, often from great Duties, as odious Sins, and suffer
rejoyeingly for sinning against God, and condemning all that sin not as they
do; yea, even all, or almost all the Churches on Earth; yea, and calling them
Idolaters for being wiser and better than they, who alas, do in all things show
themselves to be ignorant Babes, and who speak evil of that which they
understand not And then to see others revile, and hate, and ruin these
mistaking Christians by a far more dangerous mistake; as if Religious fear of
Sin, were an unsufferable thing, and such were intolerable Hypocrites, and
Conscience were a disgraceful thing; and as if themselves and all Mankind were
not liable to worser Errors, than to take some lawful things for Sin, when they
see unlawful things stand near them, or among them.

But of all this, I have often spoken, and now only say again, That if those
justly called Separatists, and who think Parish Communion under honest
Ministers to be idolatry, or unlawful, will but without prejudice read what is
written to prove it lawful by the old Godly, Judicious Non-Conformisits,
especially John Ball's Trial of Separation, Mr. Hildersham Mr. Bradshaw, Dr.
Ames, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Gifford, Mr. John Paget, Mr. Brightman, Mr. Rathband,
etc. they will need no more to save them from this scandalous Schism: But if
Peter withdraw or separate from the Gentiles for fear of offending the Jewish
Christians, and Barnabas be led away with the Dissimulation, Paul must oppose
it to their Faces: And I that have seen what the Spirit of Division has done,
and read that God never blessed unnecessary separation, will imitate Paul. And if
this World be uncurable, the Lord prepare me for that World where Love and
Unity have no Enemies.

FINIS.

