

The Emblem of Ingratitude.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE UNJUST, CRUEL, AND Barbarous Proceedings against the
ENGLISH at AMBOYNA in the East- Indies; By the NETHERLANDISH Governor and
Council there. ALSO, A farther Account of the Deceit, Cruelty, and Tyranny of
the Dutch against the English, and several others; from their first to their
present Estate: With Remarks upon the whole matter. Faithfully collected from
Ancient and Modern Records.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for William Hope, at the North Entrance into the Royal
Exchange. 1672.

To the Reader.
[It is not intended to detain the Reader with any Prefatory Discourse, as to
the Additions in this Book; the faithful Author of the Relation of the
Barbarous Cruelty, etc. having said so much in his Epistle to the Reader, which
is directly as follows.]
GEntle Reader, thou may (perhaps) wonder why this Relation of the business
of Amboyna, so many Months since taken upon the Oaths and depositions of our
people that came thence, and presented to his Majesty, and the Lords of his
Privy Council, comes now at last to the Press, and was not either sooner
published, or altogether suppressed. The truth is, the English East- India
Company have ever been very tender of the ancient amity and good correspondence
held between this Realm and the Netherlands, and have been very loath, by
divulging of the private Injuries done them by the Netherlands East- India
Company, to give the least occasion of any distaste or disaffection, which
might happily grow between these two Nations, for the sake, and on the behalf
the two Companies respectively. For which cause, although the wrongs and
injuries, or rather contumelies done unto the English by the Dutch in the
Indies, have been as intolerable as manifold; as to say nothing of those great
heaps of them buried in the Amnesty of the Treaty of the year 1619. and only to
point at the general heads of those committed since that Treaty, and grossly
contrary to the main intent, and express words and disposition of the same:
First, in the point of Hostility; the invasion of the Islands of Lantore and
Polaroon, then and before in the quiet possession of the English, in the name
of the Crown of England; the taking of the same Islands by force; the razing
and demolishing of the English Forts; the binding of the English (that had not
so much as resisted them) to stakes with ropes about their necks, throttling
them with the same, and flourishing their naked Swords about them, as if they
would presently have dispatched them; then taking them so amazed and bound, and
tumbling them down the rocks; and after, carrying their crushed and bruised
carcasses away in Irons: Secondly, in the point of their usurped Sovereignty;
their taking upon them the Conusance of controversies between the English and
the Indians, for matters passed far without the compass of the Netherlands
pretended jurisdidiction, and executing their sentences thereupon by plain
force; seizing of the English Companies goods, fining, imprisoning, stocking,
yea, whipping our people at a post in the open Marketplace, and after, washing
them with Vinegar and Salt: Thirdly, in point of Partnership with the English;
their putting great Sums to the Common Account, which were disbursed to the
private and sole behoof of the Dutch; giving great Presents for the glory of
the Dutch, without consent of the English, and making War for the enlargement
of their own Dominion, yet bringing the Charge to the Common Account; together
with infinite other the like, the particulars whereof would arise to a just and
ample Volume: Nevertheless, the English Company from time to time contented
themselves with informing His Majesty, and His Honorable Privy Council with
their grievances privately in Writing, to the end, that necessary Relief and
Reparation might be obtained, without publishing any thing to the World in
Print, thereby to stir up or breed ill blood between these Nations, which are
otherwise tied in so many reciprocal Obligations. And the same course they have
hitherto holden also in this Crying business of Amboyna; only offering to the
Manes of their murdered Countrymen, Factors and Kinsfolks, their effectual
Endeavors in a dutiful course unto His Majesty for Justice for their Innocent
Blood, and Reparation of the Honor of the Nation herein interessed. In which
their wonted way they were so constant, that they could not be driven out of
the same by the contrary course of some of the other Party; that not glutted
nor mollified with the Blood of these Innocents, nor with all the other
Sufferings of the English in the Indies, published a Pamphlet in Print in the
Netherlands Language, not only in Justification of this barbarous Butchery, but
withal in disgrace of the English Nation, and the Laws and justice of the same.
But behold now further, the same Pamphlet, being called in by an Edict of the
States General, was yet afterward translated, and printed in English, and
dispersed even in this Realm it self, to brave and disgrace us at our own
doors, and in our own Language. This, no English patience can bear: The Blood
of the Innocent cries out against it, the Honor of the Nation suffers in it.
Wherefore the English East- India Company is hereby enforced, contrary to their
desire and custom, to have recourse to the Press, to maintain the Reputation of
those their Countrymen and Servants, that lost their Lives unjustly; and to
acquaint the World with the naked truth of this cause, hitherto masked,
muffled, and obscured in a Fog of Factions, Concealments, and crafty
Conveyances of the Author of this Pamphlet, and his clients, the Governor and
Council (so termed) of Amboyna.

Having thus acquainted thee, gentle Reader, why this Business was no sooner
published in Print, it remains yet further, that thou be satisfied in an
Objection or two more, which common Reason will suggest unto thee. Without
doubt, reading this Discourse, and being a true Patriot of thine own Country,
and a well-willer of the Netherlands (as we presume and wish thee to be,) thou will wonder how it comes to pass, that our Nation, which has not been wont to
receive such disgraces, should now be so weak and unprovided in the Indies, as
to suffer such indignities, and to be so grossly overtopped, outraged and
vilified there? as also thou will no less admire, that any of the Netherlands
Nation, which has received such and so many favors and supports from hence,
and held so good and ancient correspondence with our Nation, should now offer
and commit such odious contumelies on English men, their Partners and Allies by
special Treaty. Herein thou will soon answer thy self, if thou but consider the
different end and design of the English and Dutch Companies trading in the
Indies, appearing by their several course and practice respectively. The
English being Subjects of a peaceable Prince, that has enough of his own, and
is therewith content, without affecting of new acquests; have aimed at nothing
in their East- India Trade, but a Lawful and competent gain by Commerce and
Traffic with the people of those parts. And although they have in some places
builded Forts, and settled some strength, yet that has not been done by force
or violence, against the good will of the Magistrates or people of the Country;
but with their desire, consent, and good liking, for the security only of the
Trade, and upon the said Magistrate and peoples voluntary yielding themselves
under the obedience and Sovereignty of the Crown of England; their own ancient
Laws, Customs and Privileges, nevertheless reserved. Further, the same English
had undoubted confidence in the Netherlands Nation there also trading,
especially being lately conjoined with them in the strict Alliance and social
Confederacy of the year 1619. and therefore attended nothing from them, but the
offices of good affection and partnership. Upon these grounds, the English
Company made their equipages answerable only to a course of Commerce and
peaceable Traffic; not expecting any Hostility, neither from the Indians, nor
especially from the Dutch. On the other side, the Netherlanders, from the
beginning of their Trade in the Indies, not contented with the ordinary course
of a fair and free Commerce, invaded diverse Islands, took some Forts, built
others; and labored nothing more, than the Conquests of Countries, and the
acquiring of new Dominion. By which reason, as they were accordingly provided
of Shipping, Soldiers, and all Warlike provision, as also of places of
Rendevouz upon the shore, and thereby enabled to wrong the English as well as
others: So the cost and charges of their Shipping, Forts and Soldiers,
employed upon these designs, rose to such an height, as was not to be
maintained by the Trade they had in those parts. Wherefore, for a supply, they
were forced (as some of their own Countrymen and Adventurers in their Company,
affirm) to Fish with dry Nets, that is to say, to pick quarrels of the Indians
(...) to take their Ships, and make Prize of their Goods. Which yet not
answering their Charge and Adventure, they proceeded also to quarrel with the
English, to debarr them of Trade to free places; and for attempting such Trade,
to take theie Ships and Goods. Touching which, when a good Order was set by the
said Treaty of the year 1619. yet they saw, they could not make their Reckoning
to any purpose, unless they utterly drove the English out of the Trade of those
parts; thereby to have the whole and sole Traffic of the commodities of the
Indians in these parts of Europe, in their own hands; and so to make the Price
at their pleasure, sufficient to maintain and promote their Conquests, and
withal to yield them an ample benefit of their Trading. Which unless they can,
by this and the like worrying and wearying of the English bring to pass, it is
easy to be judged by those that understand any thing of the course and state
of the Trade of those parts, that albeit their Returns hereafter should prove
as great continually, as of late extraordinarily they have happened to be, yet
the main Stock and Estate of the Company must needs abate and decay by some
Hundred thousands of Pounds yearly. Thus, Reader, thou see what has made us
unprovided against such Accidents, and what now enforces the Dutch East- India
Company, or their Servants in the Indies, against the common Genius of their
Nation, and the wonted firm affection betwixt these two Nations mutually, thus
to degenerate and break out into such strange and incredible Outrages against
their nearest Allies and best deserving Friends. Farewell.

A TRUE RELATION Of the Unjust, Cruel, and Barbarous proceedings against the
English at Amboyna in the East Indies, by the Netherlanders there, upon a
forged pretense of a Conspiracy of the said English.
AFter the fruitless issue of two several Treaties: the first Anno 1613. in
London; and the other An. 1615. at the Hague in Holland, touching the
differences between the English and Dutch in the East Indies, at last by a
third Treaty, Anno 1619. in London, there was a full and solemn composition
made of all the said differences, and a fair order set for the future
proceeding of the Supposts of both Companies in the Indies, as well in the
course of their Trade and commerce, as otherwise. Amongst sundry other points,
it was agreed, Tha^ in regard of the great bloodshed and cost, pretended to be
bestowed by the Hollanders in winning of the Trade o^ the Isles of the
Molluccos, Banda, and Amboyna, from the Spaniards and Portugals, and in
building of Forts for the continual securing of the same, the said Hollanders
therefore should enjoy two third parts of that Trade, and the English the other
third; and the charge of the Forts to be maintained by Taxes and Impositions to
be levied upon the Merchandise. Wherefore in consequence of this agreement, the
English East India Company planted certain Factories for their share of this
Trade; some at Molluccos, some at Banda, and some at Amboyna. Of the two former
of these, there will be, at this present, small occasion to speak further; but
the last will prove the Scene of a sad Tragedy.

This Amboyna is an Island lying near Seran, of the circuit of forty leagues,
and gives name also to some other small Islands adjacent. It bears Cloves;
for gathering and buying in whereof, the English Company for their part, had
planted five several Factories: the head and Rendezvous of all, at the Town of
Amboyna; and therein first Master George Muschamp, and afterward Mr. Gabriel
Towerson, their Agents with directions over the smaller Factories at Hitto and
Larica upon the same Island, and at Loho and Cambello, upon a point of their
neighboring Island of Seran.

Upon these Islands of Amboyna, and the point of Seran, the Hollanders have
four Forts, the chief of all is at the said Town of Amboyna, and is very
strong, having four Points or Bulwarks with their Curtains, and upon each of
these Points, six great pieces of Ordnance mounted, most of them of brass. The
one side of this Castle is washed by the Sea, and the other is divided from the
land, with a Ditch of four or five fathom broad, very deep, and ever filled
with the Sea. The Garrison of this Castle consists of about two hundred Dutch
Soldiers, and a Company of free Burgers. Besides these, there is always a
matter of three or four hundred Mardikers (for so they usually call the free
Natives) in the Town, ready to serve the Castle at an hours warning. There lie
also in the road (for the most part) diverse good Ships of the Hollanders, as
well for the Guard of the place by Sea, as for the occasions of Traffic: this
being the chief Rendezvous, as well for the Island of Banda, as for the rest of
Amboyna. Here the English lived; not in the Castle, but under protection, in a
house of their own in the Town; holding themselves safe, as well in respect of
the ancient bonds of amity between both Nations, as of the strict conjunction
made by the late Treaty before mentioned.

They continued here some two years, conversing and trading together with the
Hollanders, by virtue of the said Treaty. In which times there fell out sundry
differences and debates between them: The English complaining that the
Hollanders did not only lavish away much Money in building, and unnecessary
expenses, upon the Forts and otherwise, and bring large and unreasonable
reckonings thereof to the common account; but also did, for their part, pay the
Garrisons with Victuals, and Cloth of Coromondell, which they put off to the
Soldiers at three or four times the value it cost them, yet would not allow of
the English Companies part of the same charge, but only in ready Money;
thereby drawing from the English (which ought to pay but one third part) more
than two thirds of the whole true charge. Hereupon, and upon the like
occasions, grew some discontents and disputes, and the complaints were sent to
Jacatra, in the Island of Java Major to the Council of defense of both Nations
there residing: who also, not agreeing upon the points in difference, sent the
same hither over into Europe, to be decided by both Companies here; or, in
default of their agreement, by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords the States
General, according to an Article of the Treaty of the year, 1619. on this
behalf. In the mean time the discontent between the English and the Dutch,
about these and other differences, continued, and daily increased, until at
last there was a sword found, to cut in sunder that knot at once, which the
tedious disputes of Amboyna and Jaccatra, could not untie. And this was used in
manner as follows.

About the eleventh of February 1622. Stilo veteri. A Japoner Soldier of the
Dutch in their Castle of Amboyna, walking in the night upon the wall, came to
the Sentinel (being a Hollander) and there, amongst other talk, asked him some
questions touching the strength of the Castle, and the people that were
therein. It is here to be noted, that those Japoners (of whom there is not
thirty in all the Island) did, for the most part, serve the Dutch as Soldiers,
yet were not of their trusty bands always lodged in the Castle, but upon
occasion called out of the Town to assist in the watch. This Japoner aforesaid,
was for his said conference with the Sentinel, apprehended upon suspicion of
Treason, and put to the Torture. Thereby (as some of the Dutch affirmed) he was
brought to confess himself, and sundry others of his Contrymen there, to
have contrived the taking of the Castle. Hereupon, other Japoners were examined
and Tortured, as also a Portugal, the Guardian of the Slaves under the Dutch.
During this examination, which continued three or four days; some of the
Englishmen went to and from the Castle upon their business, saw the prisoners,
heard of their tortures, and of the crime laid to their charge; But all this
while suspected not, that this matter did any whit concern themselves, having
never had any conversation with the Japoners, nor with the Portugal aforesaid.
At the same time there was one Abel Price, Abel Price examined.
Chyrurgion of the English, prisoner in the Castle for offering in his
Drunkenness to set a Dutch man's house on fire. This fellow the Dutch took, and
showed him some of the Japoners, whom they had first most grievously tortured,
and told him, they had confessed the English to have been of their confederacy
for the taking of the Castle; and that if he would not confess the same, they
would use him even as they had done these Japoners, and worse also. Having
given him the Torture, they soon made him confess whatever they asked him. This
was the fifteenth of February 1622. Stilo veteri. Forthwith, about nine of the
Clock the same morning, they sent for Captain Towerson, and the rest of the
English that were in the Town, to come to speak with the Governor in the
Castle: They all went, save one that was left to keep the house. Being come to
the Governor, he told Captain Towerson, that himself and others of his Nation
were accused of a conspiracy, to surprise the Castle, and therefore, until
further Trial were to remain prisoners. Instantly also they attached him that
was left at home in the house, took the Merchandise of the English Company
there, into their own custody, by Inventory; and seized all the Chests, Boxes,
Books, Writings, and other things in the English house. Captain Towerson was
committed to his Chamber, with a Guard of Dutch Soldiers. Emmanuel Tomson was
kept prisoner in the Castle; the rest, viz. John Beomont, Edward Collins,
William Webber, Ephraim Ramsey, Timothy Johnson, John Fardo, and Robert Brown,
were sent aboard the Hollanders Ships then riding in Harbor, some to one Ship,
and some to another, and all made fast in Irons. The same day also the
Governor sent to the two other Factories in the same Island, to apprehend the
rest of the English there. So that Samuel Colson, John Clark, George Sharrock,
that were found in the Factory at Hitto, and Edward Collins, William Webber,
and John Sadler at Larica, were all brought prisoners to Amboyna, the sixteenth
of February. Upon which day also John Powl, John Wetheral, and Thomas Ladbrook,
were apprehended at Cambello, and John Beomont, William Grigs, and Ephraim
Ramsey, at Loho, and brought in irons to Amboyna the twentieth of the same
month. In the mean time the Governor and Fiscal went to work with the
prisoners that were already there: And first they sent for John Beomont, and
Timothy Johnson, from aboard the Unicorn; who being come into the Castle,
Beomont was left with a guard in the Hall, and Johnson was taken into another
room. Where, by and by, Beomont heard him cry out very pitifully; then to be
quiet for a little while, and then loud again. After taste of the torture, Abel
Price the Chyrurgion, that first was examined and tortured, (as is above
remembered) was brought in to confront and accuse him: But Johnson not yet
confessing any thing, Price was quickly carried out, and Johnson brought again
to the torture; where Beomont heard him sometime cry aloud, then quiet again,
then roar afresh. At last, after he had been about an hour in this second
examination, he was brought forth wailing and lamenting, all wet, and cruelly
burnt in diverse parts of his body, and so laid aside in a by-place of the Hall,
with a Soldier to watch him that he should speak with no body. Then was
Emanuel Tomson brought to examination; Emanuel Tomson examined.
not in the room where Johnson had been, but in another, something farther from
the Hall. Yet Beomont being in the Hall, heard him roar most lamentably, and
many times. At last, after an hour and an half spent in torturing him, he was
carried away into another room another way, so that he came not by Beomont
through the Hall. Next was Beomont called in, and being demanded many things,
all which he denied with deep Oaths and protestations, was made fast to be
Tortured, a cloth tied about his neck, and two men ready with their Jarres of
water to be poured on his head. But yet for this time the Governor bad loose
him, he would spare him a day or two, because he was an old man. This was all
Saturdays work, the fifteenth of February aforesaid.

Upon Sunday the sixteenth of February, William Webber, Edward Collins, Ephraim
Ramsey, and Robert Brown, were fetched from aboard the Rotterdam, to be
examined. At the same time came Samuel Colson, William Grigs, and John Clark,
George Sharrock, and John Sadler, from Hitto and Larica, and were immediately,
upon their arrival, brought into the Castle Hall.

Robert Brown Tailor was Robert first called in; Robert Brown examined.
and being tormented with water, confessed all in order as the Fiscal asked him.

Then was Edward Collins called in, Edward Collins examined.
and told, that those that were formerly examined, had confessed him as
accessory to the Plot of taking the Castle. Which when he denied with great
Oaths and execrations, they made his hands and feet fast to the Rack, bound a
cloth about his throat, ready to be put to the torture of water. Thus
prepared, he prayed to be respited, and he would confess all. Being let down,
he again vowed and protested his innocence; yet said, that because he knew that
they would by torture make him confess any thing, though never so false, they
should do him a great favor, to tell him what they would have him say, and he
would speak it, to avoid the torture. The Fiscal hereupon said, What, do you
mock us? and bad, Up with him again; and so gave him the torment of water:
which he not able long to endure, prayed to be let down again to his
Confession. Then he devised a little with himself, and told them, That about
two months and a half before, himself, Tomson, Johnson, Brown, and Fardo, had
plotted, with the help of the Japoners, to surprise the Castle. Here he was
interrupted by the Fiscal, and asked, whether Captain Towerson were not of that
conspiracy. He answered, No. You lie, said the Fiscal; did not he call you all
to him, and tell you, that those daily abuses of the Dutch, had caused him to
think of a Plot, and that he wanted nothing but your consent and secrecy? Then
said a Dutch Merchant, one John Joost that stood by, Did not you all swear upon
a Bible to be secret to him? Collins answered with great Oaths, that he knew
nothing of any such matter. Then they bad make him fast again: whereupon he
then said, All was true that they had spoken. Then the Fiscal asked him,
whether the English in the rest of the Factories, were not consenting to this
Plot. He answered, No. The Fiscal then asked him, whether the President of the
English at Jaccatra, or Master Welden Agent in Banda, were not Plotters or
privy to this business. Again he answered, No. Then the Fiscal asked him, by
what means the Japoners should have executed their purpose. Whereat, when
Collins stood staggering and devising of some probable fiction, the Fiscal holp
him, and said, Should not two Japoners have gone to each Point of the Castle,
and two to the Governors Chamber door; and when the hurlyburly had been
without, and the Governor coming to see what was the matter, the Japoners to
have killed him? Here one that stood by, said to the Fiscal, Do not tell him
what he should say, but let him speak of himself. Whereupon the Fiscal, without
attending the answer to his former question, asked what the Japoners should
have had for their reward. Collins answered, 1000 Ryals apiece. Lastly, he
asked him, when this Plot should have been effected. Whereunto, although he
answered him nothing, (not knowing what to devise upon the sudden) yet he was
dismissed, and very glad to come clear of the Torture, though with certain
belief that he should dye for this his confession.

Next was Samuel Colson brought in, Samuel Colson examined.
being newly arrived from Hitto, as is before touched, and was the same day
brought to the Torture, who, for fear of the pain wherewith he saw Collins come
out, in such a case, that his eyes were almost blown out of his head with the
Torment of water; chose rather to confess all they asked him: and so was
quickly dismissed, coming out weeping, lamenting, and protesting his innocence.

Then was John Clark, John Clark examined.
that came with Colson from Hitto, fetched in, and a little after was heard (by
the rest that were without in the Hall) to cry out amain: They Tortured him
with water and with fire, by the space of two hours. The manner of his Torture
(as also of Johnsons and Tomsons) was as follows: First they hoised him up by
the hands with a cord on a large door, where they made him fast upon two
staples of Iron, fixed on both sides at the top of the door posts, haling his
hands one from the other as wide as they could stretch. Being thus made fast,
his feet hung some two foot from the ground; which also they stretched asunder
as far as they would retch, and so made them fast beneath unto the door-trees
on each side. Then they bound a cloth about his neck and face so close, that
little or no water could go by. That done, they poured the water softly upon
his head, until the cloth was full up to the mouth and nostrils, and somewhat
higher; so that he could not draw breath, but he must withal suck in the
water: which being still continued to be poured in softly, forced all his
inward parts, came out of his nose, ears, and eyes, and often as it were
stifling and choking him, at length took away his breath, and brought him to a
swoun or fainting. Then they took him quickly down, and made him vomit up the
water. Being a little recovered, they triced him up again, and poured in the
water as before, eftsoons taking him down as he seemed to be stifled. In this
manner they handled him three or four several times with water, till his body
was swollen twice or thrice as big as before, his cheeks like great bladders, and
his eyes staring and strutting out beyond his forehead: yet all this he bare,
without confessing any thing; insomuch as the Fiscal and tormentors reviled
him, saying that he was a Devil, and no man, or surely was a Witch, at least
had some charm about him, or was enchanted, that he could bear so much.
Wherefore they cut off his hair very short, as supposing he had some witchcraft
hidden therein. Afterward they hoised him up again as before, and then burnt
him with lighted Candles in the bottom of his feet, until the fat dropped out
the Candles; yet then applied they fresh lights unto him. They burnt him also
under the elbows, and in the palms of the hands; likewise under the arm pits,
until his inwards might evidently be seen. At last when they saw he could of
himself make no handsome confession, then they led him along with questions of
particular circumstances, by themselves framed. Being thus wearied and overcome
by the torment, he answered, yea, to whatsoever they asked: whereby they drew
from him a body of a Confession to this effect; to wit, That Captain Towerson
had upon New Years day last before, sworn all the English at Amboyna to be
secret and assistant to a plot that he had projected, with the help of the
Japoners, to surprise the Castle, and to put the Governor and the rest of the
Dutch to Death.

Having thus martyred this poor man, they sent him out by four Blacks: who
carried him between them to a Dungeon, where he lay five or six days, without
any Chyrurgion to dress him, until (his flesh being putrified) great Maggots
dropped and crept from him, in a most loathsome and noisome manner. Thus they
finished their Sabbath days work; and it growing now dark, sent the rest of
the English (that came that day from Hitto, and till then attended in the Hall)
first to the Smith's shop, where they were laden with Irons, and then to the
same loathsome Dungeon, where Clark and the rest were, accompanied with the poor
Japoners, lying in the putrefaction of their Tortures.

The next morning being Monday the seventeenth of February, Old Style, William
Griggs, and John Fardo, with certain Japoners, were brought into the place of
examination.

The Japoners were first cruelly tortured to accuse Griggs, William Griggs
examined.
which at last they did: and Griggs, to avoid the like torture, confessed all
that the Fiscal demanded. By and by the like also was done by John Fardo, John
Fardo examined.
and other Japoners: but Fardo himself endured the torture of water, and at
last confessed whatsoever the Fiscal asked him; and so was sent back to prison.

The same day also John Beomont was brought the second time to the Fiscals
Chamber; John Beomont examined.
where one Captain Newport a Dutch man's son (born in England) was used as an
Interpreter. William Griggs was also brought in to accuse him; who said, that
when the consultation for taking of the Castle, was held, then he (the said
Beomont) was present. Beomont denied it with great earnestness and deep Oaths.
At last being triced up, and drenched with water till his inwards were ready to
crack, he answered affirmatively to all the Fiscals interrogatories: yet as
soon as he was let down, he clearly demonstrated to Captain Newport, and
Johnson a Dutch Merchant, then also present, that these things could not be so.
Nevertheless he was forced to put his hand to his confession, or else he must
to the torture again, which to avoid, he subscribed; and so had a great iron
bolt and two shackles rivitted to his legs, and then was carried back to prison.

After this George Sharrock Assistant at Hitto, George Sharrock examined.
was called in question; who, seeing how grievously others were martyred, made
his earnest Prayer to God (as since upon his Oath he has acknowledged) that he
would suffer him to make some such probable lies against himself, as the Dutch
might believe, and so he might escape the torment. Being brought to the Rack,
the Water provided, and the Candles lighted, he was by the Governor and Fiscal
examined, and charged with the Conspiracy. He fell upon his knees, and
protested his Innocence. Then they commanded him to the Rack, and told him;
Unless he would confess, he should be tormented with fire and water to death,
and then should be drawn by the heels to the Gallows, and there hanged up. He
still persisting in this his innocence, the Fiscal bad him be hoised up. Then
he craved respite a while and told them, that he was at Hitto, and not in
Amboyna, upon New Years day, when the consultation was pretended; neither had
been there since November before, as was well known to sundry of the Hollanders
themselves, that resided there also with him. Hereupon they commanded him again
to the Rack: but he, craving respite as before, now told them, that he had many
times heard John Clark (who was with him at Hitto) say, That the Dutch had done
them many unsufferable wrongs, and that he would be revenged of them: to which
end, he had once broken with Captain Towerson, of a Plot. At which word the
Fiscal and the rest were attentive, encouraging him to proceed. So he went on,
saying, that John Clark had entreated Captain Towerson that he might go to
Maccasser, there to consult and advise with the Spaniards to come with Galleys,
and rob the small Factories of Amboyna and Seran, when no ships were there.
Here they asked him, what Cap. Towerson said to this, He answered, that Captain
Towerson was very much offended with Clark for the motion; and from thenceforth
could never abide him. Hereupon the Fiscal called him Rogue, and said he prated
all from the matter, and should go to the torture. He craved favor again, and
began another tale; to wit, That upon Twelf-day then last past, John Clark told
him at Hitto, that there was a practice to take the Castle of Amboyna; and
asked him, whether he would consent thereunto. Whereupon he demanded of Clark,
whether Captain Towerson knew of any such matter. Which, Clark affirming; then
he (the said Sharrock) said, that he would do as the rest did. Then the Fiscal
asked him, what time the consultation was held: He answered, In November last.
The Fiscal said, That could not be: for, the consultation was upon New Years
day. The Prisoner said as before in the beginning, that he had not been in
Amboyna since the first of December, till now that he was brought thither. Why
then quoth the Fiscal, have you belied your self? whereto the Prisoner
resolutely answered, that all that he had spoken touching any treason, was
false, and feigned only to avoid torment. Then went the Fiscal out into
another room to the Governor, and anon returned, and sent Sharrock, unto the
Prison again. The next day he was called again, and a writing presented him;
wherein was framed a formal confession of his last conference with Clark at
Hitto, touching the plot to take the Castle of Amboyna: which being read over
to him, the Fiscal asked him, whether it were true, or no. He answered, No, Why
then, said the Fiscal, did you confess it? He answered, for fear of Torment.
The Fiscal and the rest in a great rage told him he lied; his mouth had spoken
it, and it was true, and therefore he should subscribe it. Which as soon as he
had done, he fell presently into a great passion, charging them bitterly to be
guilty of the innocent blood of himself and the rest, which they should look to
answer for at the day of Judgment: withal he grappled with the Fiscal, and
would have stopped him from carrying in the confession to the Governor, with
whom he also craved to speak; but was instantly laid hold on, and carried away
to prison.

William Webber, William Webber examined.
being next examined, was told by the Fiscal, that John Clark had confessed him
to have been at Amboyna on New years day, and sworn to Captain Towerson's plot,
etc. All which he denied, alleging, he was that day at Larica: yet being
brought to the torture, he then confessed, he had been at the consultation at
Amboyna, upon New Years day, with all the rest of the circumstances in order as
he was asked. He also further told them, he had received a Letter from John
Clark; after which was a Postscript, excusing his brief writing at that time,
for that there was great business in hand. But one Renier a Dutch Merchant,
then standing by, told the Governor, that upon New Years day, the time of this
pretended consultation, Webber and he were merry at Larica. So the Governor
left him and went out. But the Fiscal held on upon the other point, touching
the Postscript of Clark's Letter, urging him to show the same. Which when he
could not do, though often terrified with the torture, he gave him respite;
promising to save his life, if he would produce that Letter.

Then was Captain Towerson brought to the examination, Gabriel Towerson
examined.
and showed what others had confessed of him. He deeply protesting his
innocence, Samuel Colson was brought to confront him: who being told, that
unless he would now make good his former confession against Captain Towerson,
he should to the Torture, coldly re-affirmed the same, and so was sent away.
They also brought William Griggs and John Fardo to justify their former
confessions to his face. Captain Towerson seriously charged them, that as they
would answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment, they should speak nothing
but the truth. Both of them instantly fell down upon their knees before him,
praying him for Gods sake to forgive them, and saying further openly before
them all, that whatsoever they had formerly confessed, was most false, and
spoken only to avoid torment. With that the Fiscal and the rest offered them
again to the torture: which they would not endure, but then affirmed their
former confessions to be true.

When Colson (who had accused Captain Towerson before) was required to set his
hand to his confession, he asked the Fiscal, upon whose head he thought the sin
would lie: whether upon his that was constrained to confess what was false, or
upon the constrainers? The Fiscal, after a little pause upon this question,
went in to the Governor then in another room; but anon returning, told Colson
he must subscribe it: which he did; yet withal made this protestation: Well,
quoth he, you make me to accuse my self and others of that which is as false,
as God is true: for, God is my witness, I am as innocent as the child new born.

Thus have they examined all that belong to the English Company in the several
Factories of the Island of Amboyna.

John Wetheral examined.
The one and twentieth of February, they examined John Wetheral, Factor at
Cambello in the Island of Seran. He confessed, he was at Amboyna upon New Years
day: but for the consultation, whereof he was demanded, he said he knew of no
other, but touching certain cloth of the English Company, that lay in the
Factories rotting and worm-eaten, which they advised together how to put off to
the best avail of their Imployers. The Governor said, they questioned him not
about cloth, but of Treason: whereof when he had protested his innocence, he
was for that time dismissed. But the next day he was sent for again, and
Captain Towerson brought to confront and accuse him, having before (it seems)
confessed somewhat against him. But Mr. Towerson spoke now these words only:
Oh, Mr. Wetheral, Mr. Wetheral, speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, as
God shall put into your heart. So Captain Towerson was put out again, and
Wetheral brought to the torture of water with great threats; if water would not
make him confess, fire should. He prayed them to tell him what he should say,
or to write down what they would, he would subscribe it. They said, he needed
no Tutor; they would make him confess of himself. But when they had triced him
up four several times, and saw he knew not what to say, then they read him
other men's confessions, and asked him from point to point, as they had done
others: and he still answered, Yea, to all.

Next was called in John Powl, John Powl examined.
Wetherals assistant at Cambello: but he, proving that he was not at Amboyna
since November, (save now when he was brought thither prisoner) and being
spoken for by one John Joost, who had long been well acquainted with him, was
dismissed without torture.

Then was Thomas Ladbrook, Thomas Ladbrook examined.
servant to Wetheral and Powl at Cambello, brought to be examined: but proving
that he was at Cambello at the time of the pretended consultation, and serving
in such quality, as that he was never acquainted with any of the Letters from
the Agent of Amboyna, he was easily and quickly dismissed.

Ephraim Ramsey was also examined upon the whole pretended conspiracy, Ephraim
Ramsey examined.
and particularly questioned concerning Captain Welden the English Agent in
Banda; but denying all, and proving that he was not at Amboyna at New Years
tide, being also spoken for by John Joost, was dismissed, after he had hanged
in the Rack a good while, with irons upon his legs, and the cloth about his
mouth.

Lastly, John Sadler, John Sadler examined.
servant to William Griggs at Larica, was examined; and being found to have
been absent from Amboyna at New Years tide, when Griggs and others were there,
was dismissed.

Thus have we all their examinations, tortures, and confessions, being the work
of 8. days, from the 15. to the 23. of February. After which was two days
respite before the sentence. John Powl, being himself acquitted as before said,
went to the prison to visit John Fardo, one of those that had accused Capt.
Towerson. To him Fardo religiously protested his innocence; but especially his
sorrow for accusing Mr. Towerson: for, said he, the fear of death does nothing
dismay me; for, God (I trust) will be merciful to my soul, according to the
innocence of my cause. The only matter that troubles me, is, that through fear
of Torment I have accused that honest and godly man Captain Towerson, who (I
think in my conscience) was so upright and honest toward all men, that he
harbored no ill will to any, much less would attempt any such business as he
is accused of. He further said, he would before his death receive the
Sacrament, in acknowledgement that he had accused Captain Towerson falsely and
wrongfully, only through fear of Torment.

The five and twentieth of February, old style, all the prisoners, as well the
English, as the Portugal and the Japoners, were brought into the great Hall of
the Castle, and there were solemnly condemned, except John Powl, Ephraim
Ramsey, John Sadler, and Thomas Ladbrook, formerly acquitted, as aforesaid.

Captain Towerson having been (during all his imprisonment) kept apart from the
rest, so that none of them could come to speak with him; writ much in his
Chamber, (as some of the Dutch report) but all was suppressed, save only a Bill
of Debt, which one Th. Johnson, a free Burgher, got of him by favor of his
Keepers for acknowledgement, that the English Company owed him a certain sum of
money. In the end of this Bill he writ these words: Firmed by the Firm of me
Gabriel Towerson, now appointed to dye guiltless of any thing that can be
justly laid to my charge. God forgive them their guilt; and receive me to his
mercy. Amen. This Bill being brought to Mr. Welden, the English Agent at Banda,
he paid the money, and received in the acknowledgement.

William Griggs (who had before accused Captain Towerson) writ these words
following in his Table Book: We, whose names are here specified; John Beomont
Merchant of Loho, William Griggs Merchant of Larica, Abel Price Chyrurgion of
Amboyna, Robert Brown Tailor, which do here lie Prisoners in the Ship
Rotterdam, being apprehended for Conspiracy, for blowing up the Castle of
Amboyna: we being judged to death this fifth of March, Anno 1622. which we
through torment were constrained to speak, that which we never meant, nor once
imagined, the which we take upon our deaths and salvation: they tortured us
with that extreme torment of fire and water, that flesh and blood could not
endure: and this we take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death
guiltless of our accusation. So therefore we desire, that they that shall
understand this; that our Imployers may understand these wrongs, and that your
selves would have a care to look to your selves: for their intent was to have
brought you in also; they asked concerning you; which if they had tortured us,
we must have confessed you also. And so farewell: written in the dark.

This Table Book was afterward delivered to Mr. Welden aforenamed, by one that
served the Dutch.

Samuel Colson also, another that accused Captain Towerson, writ as follows
in the waste leaves of a book, wherein were bound together the Common Prayers,
the Psalms, and the Catechism.

In one page thus; March 5. Stilo novo, being Sunday, aboard the Rotterdam,
lying in Irons.
UNderstand that I Samuel Colson, late Factor of Hitto, was apprehended for
suspicion of conspiracy; and for any thing I know, must dye for it: wherefore,
having no better means to make my innocence known, have writ this in this Book,
hoping some good English men will see it. I do here upon my salvation, as I
hope by his death and passion to have redemption for my sins, that I am clear
of all such conspiracy; neither do I know any English man guilty thereof, nor
other creature in the World. As this is true: God bless me.

Sam. Colson.




On the other side, upon the first page of the Catechism, is thus written: IN
another leaf you shall understand more, which I have written in this Book.

Sam. Colson.




In the beginning of the Psalms, and in the leaf so referred unto, is thus
written; viz. THe Japons were taken with some villainy, and brought to
examination: being most tyrannously tortured, were asked if the English had any
hand in their Plot. Which torture wade them say, Yea. Then was Mr. Tomson, Mr.
Johnson, Mr. Collins, John Clark brought to examination, and were burned under
the arms, armpits, the hands, and soals of the feet, with another most
miserable torment to drink water; some of them almost tortured to death, and
were forced to confess that which they never knew, by reason of the torment
which flesh and blood is not able to endure. Then were the rest of the
Englishmen called one by one, (amongst which I was one) being wished to
confess, or else I must go to torment; withal caused Mr. Johnson, who was
before tormented, to witness against me, or else he should be tormented again;
which rather than he would endure, he said, What they would have, he would
speak. Then must I confess that I never knew, or else to go to torment; which
rather than I would suffer, I did confess that, which (as I shall be saved
before God Almighty) is not true, being forced for fear of torment. Then did
they make us witness against Captain Towerson, and at last made Captain
Towerson confess all, being for fear of most cruel torment, for which we must
all dye. As I mean and hope to have pardon for my sins, I know no more than the
child unborn of this business. Written with my own hand the first of March,
Stilo novo.

Sam. Colson.




Yet in another page were these words; I Was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, where
I desire this Book may come, that my Friends may know of my innocence.

Sam. Colson.




This Book he delivered to one that ^erved the Hollanders, who sowed it up ^n
his Bed, and afterward, at his oppor^unity, delivered it to Mr. Welden before
named.

All these said writings are yet extant under the hands of the several parties,
well known to their friends here in England.

The six and twentieth of February, Stilo veteri, the Prisoners were all
brought into the great Hall of the Castle (except Captain Towerson and Emanuel
Tomson) to be prepared for death by the Ministers. The Japoneers now all in
general, as some of them had done before in particular, cried out unto the
English, saying; Oh you English men, where did we ever in our lives eat with
you, talk with you, or (to our remembrance) see you? The English answered, Why
then have you accused us? The poor men, perceiving they were made believe each
had accused others, before they had so done indeed; showed them their tortured
bodies, and said, If a stone were thus burnt, would it not change his Nature,
how much more we that are Flesh and Blood?

Whilst they were all in the Hall, Captain Towerson was brought up into the
place of examination and two great Jar^ of water carried after him. What h^
there did or suffered was unknown to the English without: but it seems they
made him then to underwrite his confession. After supper John Powl, Ephraim
Ramsey, Thomas Ladbrook, and John Sadler, who were found not guilty, as
aforesaid, were taken from the rest, and put into another room. By and by also
were Samuel Colson, and Edward Collins brought from the rest; into the room
where Emanuel Tomson lay: The Fiscal told them, it was the Governors mercy, to
save one of them three: and it being indifferent to him, which of them, were
the man, it was his pleasure they should draw lots for it, which they did, and
the free lot fell to Edward Collins; who then was carried away to the Chamber,
where John Powl, and the rest that were quit, lodged, and Samuel Colson back
into the Hall. Anon also John Beomont was brought out of the Hall into the
Chamber, where John Powl, and the rest of the acquitted persons were, and was
told, that he was beholding to Peter Johnson the Dutch Merchant of Loho, and to
the Secretary; for they two had begged his life.

So then there remained in the Hall ten of the English; for Captain Towerson
and Emanuel Tomsom (as is said before) were kept in several rooms apart from
the rest. To these that remained in the Hall, came the Dutch Ministers, who
telling them how short a time they had to live, admonished and exhorted them to
make their true confessions; for it was a dangerous and desperate thing, to
dissemble at such a time. The English still professed their innocence, and
prayed the Ministers that they might all receive the Sacraments, as a seal of
the forgiveness of their sins; and withal, thereby to confirm their last
profession of their innocence. But this would by no means be granted. Whereupon
Samuel Colson said thus unto the Ministers; You manifest unto us the danger of
dissimulation in this case. But tell us, if we suffer guiltless, being
otherwise also true believers in Christ Jesus, What shall be our reward? The
Preacher answered, By how much the clearer you are, so much the more glorious
shall be your resurrection: With that word, Colson started up, embraced the
Preacher, and gave him his purse, with such money as he had in it, saying;
Domine, God bless you: tell the Governor, I freely forgive him; and I entreat
you, to exhort him, to repent of his bloody Tragedy, wrought upon us poor
innocent souls. Here all the rest of the English signified their consent to
this Speech. Then spoke John Fardo to the rest, in presence of the Ministers,
as follows: My Countrymen, and Brethren, all that are here with me, condemned
to die; I charge you all, as you will answer it at Gods Judgment Seat, if any
of you be guilty of this matter, whereof we are condemned, discharge your
Consciences, and confess the truth for satisfaction of the World. Hereupon
Samuel Colson spoke with a loud voice, saying, According to my innocence in
this treason, so Lord pardon all the rest of my sins: and if I be guilty
thereof more or less, let me never be partaker of thy heavenly joys. At which
words, every one of the rest cried out, Amen for me, Amen for me, good Lord.
This done, each of them knowing whom he had accused, went one to another
begging forgiveness for their false accusation, being wrung from them by the
pains or fear of torture. And they all freely forgave one another: for none had
been so falsely accused, but he himself had accused another as falsely. In
particular, George Sharrock (who survived to relate this nights passage)
kneeled down to John Clark, whom he had accused of the tale at Hitto above
mentioned, and craved forgiveness at his hands. Clark freely forgave him,
saying; how should I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not forgive you,
having my self so falsely accused Captain Towerson and others?

After this, they spent the rest of the doleful night in Prayer, singing of
Psalms, and comforting one another; though the Dutch that guarded them, offered
them wine, bidding them drink Luslick, and drive away the sorrow; according to
the custom of their own Nation in the like case, but contrary to the Nature of
the English.

Upon the morrow morning, being the Execution day, the 27 th. of February,
Stilo veteri, John Powl being freed (as is above recited) came into the room
where the condemned persons were, and found them at Prayer. They all requested
him to relate unto their friends in England, the innocence of their cause;
taking it upon their deaths, that what they had confessed against themselves
and others, touching this crime, was all false, and forced by fear of torture.

The same morning William Webber was called again into the Fiscals room, and
there pressed to produce the Letter, which he had before confessed to have
received from John Clark, in the Postscript whereof some great business was
intimated. They promised him his life, if he would deliver or produce them that
Letter: which although he did not, nor indeed could, yet at last they pardoned
him, and sent him to the rest that were saved, and Sharrock with him.

That morning Emanuel Tomson understanding that John Beomont was pardoned, made
means to have him come and speak with him; which, with much ado, he obtained.
Beomont found him sitting in a Chamber, all alone in a most miserable fashion;
the wounds of his torture bound up, but the matter and gore-blood issuing
through the Rollers. He took Mr. Beomont by the hand, and prayed him, when he
came into England to do his duty to the Honorable Company, his Masters, to Mr.
Robinson, and to his Brother Billingsley, and to certify them of his
innocence, which (said he) you your self know well enough.

All things being prepared for the Execution, the condemned were brought forth
of the Hall along by the Chamber where the quit and pardoned were; who stood in
the door, to give and take the farewell of their Contrymen now going to
Execution. Staying a little for this purpose, they prayed and charged those
that were saved, to bear witness to their friends in England of their
innocence, and that they died not Traitors, but so many innocents, merely
murdered by the Hollanders, whom they prayed God to forgive their
blood-thirstiness, and to have mercy upon their own souls.

Being brought into the Yard, their sentence was there read unto them from a
Gallery, and then they were thence carried unto the place of Execution,
together with nine Japons and a Portugal; not the ordinary and short way, but
round about in a long procession, through the Town; the way guarded with five
Companies of Soldiers, Dutch and Amboyners, and thronged with the Natives of
the Island, that (upon the summons given the day before by the sound of the
Drum) flocked together to behold this triumph of the Dutch over the English.
Samuel Colson had conceived a Prayer in writing, in the end whereof he
protested his innocence: which Prayer he read to his fellows the night before,
and now also at the place of Execution devoutly pronounced the same; then threw
away the paper, which the Governor caused to be brought to him, and kept it.

Emanuel Tomson told the rest, he did not doubt but God would show some sign of
their innocence; and every one of the rest took it severally upon their death,
that they were utterly guiltless; and so one by one, with great cheerfulness
suffered the fatal stroke.

The Portugal prayed over his Beads very devoutly, and often kissed the Cross;
swearing thereupon, that he was utterly innocent of this treason: yet
confessed, that God had justly brought this punishment upon him, for that
having a wife in his own Country, he had, by the persuasion of the Dutch
Governor, taken another in that Country, his first being yet living.

The Japons likewise (according to their Religion) shut up their last Act with
the like profession of their innocence. So there suffered ten Englishmen, viz.
Captain Gabriel Towerson the Agent of the English at Amboyna, Samuel Colson
Factor at Hitto, Emanuel Tomson Assistant at Amboyna, Timothy Johnson Assistant
there also, John Wetheral Factor at Cambello, John Clark Assistant at Hitto,
William Griggs Factor at Larica, John Fardo Steward of the house, Abel Price
Chyrurgion, and Robert Brown Tailor.

The Portugal also suffered with them: his name was Augustine Perez; he was born
at Bengala.

The names of the Japoneses that suffered (if any be curious to know them) were
as follows: Hititso all born at Firando. Tsiosa all born at Firando. Sinsa
all born at Firando. Sidney Migiel born at Nagansacque. Pedro Congie born at
Nagansacque. Thome Corea born at Nagansacque. Quiandayo native of Coraets.
Tsabinda of Tsoncketgo. Zanchoe of Fisien.


Besides these, there were two other Japoneses; the one named Soysimo, born at
Firando; and the other Sacoube, of the same place: the former of which being
tortured, confessed both to have been privy to this pretended treason, and to
have offered his service unto the English, to aid them in taking of the Castle:
and the latter confessed to have had knowledge of the consultation of the other
Japons to this purpose. But neither of them was executed, nor so much as
condemned: The reason whereof was not known to the English that were saved.

They had prepared a cloth of black Velvet, for Captain Towerson's body to
fall upon; which being stained and defaced with his blood, they afterward put
to the account of the English Company.

At the instant of the execution, there arose a great darkness, with a sudden
and violent gust of wind and tempest; whereby two of the Dutch Ships, riding in
the Harbor, were driven from their Anchors, and with great labor and
difficulty saved from the Rocks. Within a few days after, one William Danckin,
who had told the Governor, That Robert Brown, the English Tailor, had a few
Months before told him, he hoped that within six Months the English should
have as much to do in the Castle of Amboyna, as the Dutch: This fellow, coming
upon an Evening to the Grave where the English were buried, being all (save
Captain Towerson) in one pit, fell down upon the Grave; and having lien there a
while, rose up again stark mad, and so continued two or three days together,
and then dyed. Forthwith also fell a new sickness at Amboyna, which swept away
about a thousand people Dutch and Amboyners: in the space wherein, there
usually dyed not above thirty at other seasons. These signs were by the
surviving English, referred to the confident prediction of Emanuel Tomson
abovenamed, and were by the Amboyners interpreted as a token of the wrath of
God for this barbarous Tyranny of the Hollanders.

The next day after the execution, being the eight and twentieth of February,
Stilo veteri, was spent in Triumph for the new General of the Dutch then
proclaimed, and in public rejoicing for the deliverance from this pretended
Treason. The day following, being the first of March, John Beomont, George
Sharrock, Edward Collins, and William Webber, were brought to the Governor;
who told Webber, Beomont, and Sharrock, that they were pardoned in Honor of
the new General, and Collins, that he was to go to Jaccatra, there to stand to
the favor of the General. So the Governor made them drink Wine with him, and
courteously dismissed them: willing them to go and consult with the rest that
were saved, who were fit to be placed in the several Factories. Which done, and
their opinions reported to the Governor, he accordingly commanded each to his
place; adding, that he would thenceforth take upon him the patronage and
Government of the English Companies business. To which purpose, he had within a
few days past, opened a Letter that came from the English President at
Jaccatra, directed to Captain Towerson; being (as he said) the first English
Letter that ever he intercepted; further saying, that he was glad that he found
by that Letter, that the English at Jaccatra were innocent touching this
business.

The Governor and Fiscal having thus made an end at Amboyna, dispatched
themselves for Banda: where they made very diligent enquiry against Captain
Welden, the English Agent there; yet found no color nor shadow of guilt to lay
hold on: but at last entertained him with courteous speeches, professing to be
very glad, that they found him, as well as the English at Jaccatra, to be
without suspicion of this Treason, (as they term it.) Captain Welden,
perceiving the disorder and confusion of the English Companies affairs at
Amboyna, by means of this dealing of the Dutch; forthwith hired a Dutch Pinnace
at Banda, and passed to Amboyna: where, instantly upon his arrival, he
re-called the Companies servants, sent (as before) by the Dutch Governor to
the upper Factories.

Having enquired of them, and the rest that were left at Amboyna, of the whole
proceedings lately passed, he found, by the constant and agreeing relation of
them all, that there was no such Treason of the English as was pretended: as
also understanding what strict command the Governor had given to the surviving
English, not once to talk or confer with the Country people concerning this
bloody business, although the said Country people every day reproached them
with Treason, and a bloody intention to have massacred the Natives, and to have
ripped up the bellies of women with child, and such like stuff; wherewith the
Dutch have possessed the poor Vulgar, to make the English odious unto them. The
said Mr. Welden therefore finding it to sort neither with the honor, nor
profit of the English Company, his Masters, to hold any longer residence in
Amboyna, he took the poor remnant of the English along with him, in the said
hired Pinnace for Jaccatra; whither the Governor had sent John Beomont and
Edward Collins before, as men condemned, and left to the mercy of the General,

When this heavy news of Amboyna came to Jaccatra and the English there, the
President forthwith sent to the General of the Dutch, to know by what Authority
the Governor of Amboyna had thus proceeded against the English, and how he and
the rest of the Dutch there at Jaccatra, did approve these proceedings. The
Governor returned for answer, that, The Governor of Amboyna's Authority was
derived from that of the Lords States General of the United Neatherlands; under
whom he had lawful Jurisdiction both in Criminal and Civil causes, within the
district of Amboyna; further, that such proceeding was necessary against
Traitors, such as the English Executed at Amboyna might appear to be by their
own confessions: a Copy whereof he therewith sent to the English President; who
sent the same back to be Authentickly certified, but received it not again.

Hitherto has been recited the bare and naked Narration of the Progress and
passage of this action, as it is taken out of the Depositions of six several
English Factors; whereof four were condemned, and the other two acquitted in
this Process of Amboyna: all, since their return into England, examined upon
their Oaths in the Admiralty Court. The particular of Captain Towerson's, as
also of Emanuel Tomson's examinations and answers, are not yet come to light,
by reason that these two were kept apart from all the rest, and each alone by
himself; nor any other of the English suffered to come to speak with them,
except only that short Farewell, which John Beomont took of Tomson, the
morning before the Execution before mentioned. The like obscurity is yet
touching the Examinations and Answers of diverse of the rest that are Executed;
being, during their imprisonment, so strictly looked to, and watched by the
Dutch, that they might not talk together, nor mutually relate their miseries.

But because the Hollanders defend their own proceedings by the confessions of
the parties executed, acknowledging severally under their hands, that they were
guilty of the pretended crime; it will not be amiss to recollect and recall
unto this place, as it were unto one sum and total, certain circumstances
dispersed in several parts of this Narration; whereby, as well the innocence of
the English, as the unlawful proceedings against them may be manifested.

First, Therefore it is to be remembered, that the Japons were apprehended,
examined, and tortured three or four days, before the English were attached;
and the same as well of their apprehension, as torture, was rise and notorious
in the Town of Amboyna, and the parts adjoining. Tomsom, in this interim, and
the very first day of the examination of the Japon, went to the Castle to ask
leave of the Governor to land some Rice, and brought back the news with him to
the English house of the cruel handling of these poor Japons. This had been
Item enough to the English, if they had been guilty, to shift for themselves:
whereto also they had ready means by the Curricurries or small Boats of the
Amboyners, which lie along the Strand in great number, wherewith they might
easily have transported themselves to Seran, to Bottom, or to Maccasser, out of
the reach and Jurisdiction of the Dutch: but in that they fled not in this
case, it is a very strong presumption, that they were as little privy to any
treason of their own, as suspicious of any treacherous train laid for their
bloods.

In the next place let it be considered, how impossible it was for the English
to atchieve this pretended enterprise.

The Castle of Amboyna is of a very great strength (as is before declared;) the
Garrison therein two or three hundred men, besides as many more of their free
Burgers in the Town. What their care and circumspection in all their Forts is,
may appear not only by the quick Alarm they now took at the foolish question
of the poor Japon, made to the Sentinel, above recited; but also by that which
a little before happened at Jaccatra, where one of their Soldiers was shot to
death for sleeping in the Watch.

Durst ten English men (whereof not one a Soldier) attempt any thing upon such
a strength and vigilance? As for the assistance of the Japons, they were but
ten neither, and all un-armed, as well as the English: For, as at the seizure
of the English house, all the provision therein found, was but three swords,
two Muskets, and half a pound of powder: so the Japons (except when they are in
service of the Castle, and there armed by the Dutch) are allowed to have no
Arms, but only a Catan, a kind of short sword: and it is forbidden to all the
Dutch, upon great penalty, to sell any hand-gun, powder or bullets to the
Japons or Amboyners. But let it be imagined, that these twenty persons English
and Japons, were so desperate as to adventure the exploit; how should they be
able to master the Dutch in the Castle, or to keep possession when they had
gotten it? what second had they? There was neither Ship nor Pinnace of the
English in the Harbor. All the rest of the Japons in the Island, were not
twenty persons, and not one English more. The nearest of the rest of the
English were at Banda, forty Leagues from Amboyna; and those but nine persons,
all afterward cleared by the Governor and Fiscal themselves, from all
suspicion of this pretended crime, as were also the rest of the English at
Jaccatra.

On the other side, besides the strength of the Castle and Town of Amboyna, the
Hollanders have three other strong Castles, well furnished with Soldiers in the
same Island, and at Cambello near adjoining. They had then also in the road of
Amboyna, eight Ships and Vessels, namely, the Rotterdam of 1200 Tun, the
Unicorn of 300 Tun, the Free-mans Vessel of 100 Tun, the Calck of 60 Tun,
Captain Gamals Junek of 40 Tun, the Flute of 300 Tun, the Amsterstam of 1400
Tun, and a small Pinnace of about 60 Tun; and all these well furnished with Men
and Ammunition. It is true, that the Stories do record sundry valiant and hardy
enterprises of the English Nation, and Holland is witness of some of them, yea,
has reaped the fruit of the English resolution; yet no Story, no Legend
scarcely reports any such hardiness, either of the English or others, That so
few persons, so naked of all provisions and supplies, should undertake such an
adventure upon a counter-party, so well and abundantly fitted at all points.

But let it be further granted, that they might possibly have overcome all
these difficulties; yet to what end and purpose should they put themselves into
such a jeopardy? They knew well enough, that it was agreed between both
Companies at home, That the Forts in the Indies should remain respectively in
the hands of such, as had possession of them at the date of the Treaty, Anno
1619. and that the same was ratified by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords States
General. They knew likewise, and all the world takes knowledge of his Majesty's
Religious observation of Peace and Treaty with all his Neighbors, yea, with
all the world: what reward then could these English hope for, of this their
valor and danger? Certainly none other than that which is expressly provided by
the Treaty it self, that is, To be punished as the disturbers of the Common
Peace, and Amity of both Nations.

But let these English men have been as foolish in this Plot as the Hollanders
will have them; is it also to be imagined, that they were so graceless, as when
they were condemned, and seriously admonished by the Ministers to discharge
their consciences, yet then to persist in their dissimulation, being otherwise
of such godly behavior, as to spend the time in Prayer, singing of Psalms, and
spiritual comforting one another, which the Dutch would have had them bestow in
drinking, to drive away their sorrow? Let Colsons question to the Minister be
considered: his and the rests offer and desire to receive the Sacrament, in
sign and token of their innocence; their mutual asking forgiveness for their
like false accusations of one another, forced by the Torture; Tomsons last
farewell to Beomont; Colsons prayer, and his writing in his Prayer Book;
Fardo's farewell to Powl; also his conjuring exhortation to his fellows, to
discharge their consciences, and all their answers thereunto; craving Gods
mercy or judgment, according to their innocence in this cause; their general
and Religious profession of their innocence, as to their Countrymen, at their
last parting with them; and finally, the sealing of this profession with their
last breath and blood, even in the very Article of death, and in the stroke of
the Executioner. What horrible and unexampled dissimulation were this? If some
one or more of them had been so fearfully desperate, yet would not there one
amongst ten be found to think of the judgment to come, whereunto he was then
instantly summoned without Essoin, Bail, or Mainprise? What? had they hope of
reprieve and life, if they kept their countenance to the last? Yet what hope
had Tomson and the rest, when Captain Towerson's head was off? Nay, what desire
had Tomson and Clark to live, being so mangled and martyred by the Torture?
They were executed one by one, and every one several took it upon his death,
that he was guiltless.

Now to blanch and smooth over all this rough and Barbarous proceeding; it is
here given out, that the Governor and Fiscal found such evidence of the Plot,
and dealt so evenly in the process, that they spared not their own people;
having used some of their Native Hollanders, partakers of this treason, in the
same manner as they did the English. But this, as well by the Relation here
truly and faithfully set down, grounded upon the sworn Testimony of six
credible witnesses, as also by other sufficient reports of diverse, (lately come
out of those parts) appears to be a mere tale, not once alleged by any in
the Indies in many months after the Execution, but only invented and dispersed
here, for a Fucus and a fair color upon the whole cause, and to make the world
believe, that the ground of this Barbarous and Tyrannous proceeding was a true
crime, and not the unsatiable covetousness of the Hollanders, by this cruel
treachery to gain the sole trade of the Molluccos, Banda and Amboyna, which is
already become the event of this bloody process.

To add hereunto by way of aggravation, will be needless; the fact is so full
of odious and barbarous inhumanity, executed by Hollanders upon the English
Nation, in a place where both lived under terms of Partnership and great amity,
confirmed by a most solemn Treaty.

Thus you have had an account of the great misery inflicted upon defenseless
mortals, the English, by their fellow Creatures, yea pretended Friends and
Allies, the Dutch; a misery indeed as great as their malice could invent, or
cruelty pursue and practice. For it is too probably to be feared, by their own
contrived accusations imposed upon, and extorted from the innocent Sufferers,
that their cruelty reached not only to the transitory destruction of their
frail bodies, but to the eternal ruin also of their immortal souls.

A Tyranny so execrable, that Heaven would not withhold a severe and speedy
Vengeance upon the Authors and Actors of it; for thereupon, First, King James
and King Charles the First, excepted those Murders from the Indempnities that
passed in those times between us and the Hollanders. Secondly, a sudden
Hurricane or terrible Tempest did much damage to the Dutch Ships in the Haven
of Amboyna, about the very time of this horrid Execution. Thirdly, the first
informer against the English, fell down as dead upon the very place where the
murdered men were buried, rising again distracted, in which condition he
continued till his dying day. Fourthly, in the year 1630. eighteen Dutchmen
(whereof three were guilty of the Massacre at Amboyna) supping at Frankford in
their way to Strasburgh, boasted how they served our Nation; which one in the
company noting, and relating it to two English Captains then in the German
Wars, whose Kindred had suffered there; the Captains laying in Ambush for the
Hollanders with a Troop of Horse, took them and commanded them to prepare for
death; upon which the Dutch submissively laid their Treasure at their disposal,
hoping thereby to redeem their lives; but they resolutely replied, your
Treasure we seek not, but you must die, for that our Countrymen and Friends you
murdered at Amboyna: and so hanging up one Johnson the chief Amboynist, and
giving the rest leave, by casting the Dice, to try their fate which of them
should bear the News of this to Holland, they dispatched all but him, whom they
sent home to relate the certainty of Divine vengeance, and assure his
Countrymen, that doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth.

They indeed promised before, the year 1625. but never made any suitable
satisfaction for these injuries, nor restored to us any of those Islands of
Spices that they had taken from us; but added to their insolences a strict
Order against all free Trade to Flanders, monopolizing it to themselves; and
indeed wherever they have seen any advantage, by cunning, force or fraud,
without any consideration of Right, League, Humanity or Religion, they have
endeavored to prosecute their designs.

This cruelty of the Dutch against the English is much more horrible, if
considered with those aggravating circumstances that attend it, for when
England was newly recovered from Popery, and unsettled, when engaged in Ireland
and the Countries about, when governed by a Woman, when threatened from Spain,
did then relieve the distressed States, espoused their quarrel, and ventured
their lives and fortunes in their cause. Yea, so great was the endearment, that
they seemed but one Nation, being constantly entertained with the affection of
Brethren, the love of Friends and the respects of Neighbors and Allies.

The Cruelty of the Dutch against the Polaroons.
POlaroon, one of the Islands of Banda, was in possession of the English at the
time of the Treaty, in the Year 1619. and by agreement was to remain theirs;
after the Treaty came to the Indies, the Hollanders forbear the publishing
thereof in the Islands of Banda, until they had taken Polaroon. But knowing
that it must be restored again, according to the Treaty, they first take all
courses to make the Island little or nothing worth: They demolish and deface
the Buildings, transplant the Nutmeg-trees, plucking them up by the roots, and
carrying them into their own Islands of Nera and Poloway, there to be planted
for themselves; and, at last, find a means to dispeople the Island, and to
leave it so, as the English might make no use of it worth their charge of
keeping: It happened that there was a young man (the son of an Orankey, or a
Gentleman in Polaroon) that had committed Felony; for which, by the Laws of his
Country, he was to die; This fellow, to save his life, fled to another Island
of Banda, called Rofinging, and there turned Christian: but quickly
understanding, that that would not preserve him safe from punishment, he went
back secretly to his own Country of Polaroon, and having lurked there a few
days, took his passage for Nera, another Island where the Dutch have a Fort;
and told the Dutch Governor, that the Orankeys of Polaroon had conspired to
Massacre the Dutch, as well at Polaroon as at Poloway, with help of the People
of Seran, that should send over thirty Curricurries for that purpose.
Immediately upon this information, certain Prows or Fish-boats of the Polaroons
that were fishing at Poloway were seized, and the People made Prisoners. And
Command was sent by the Dutch Governor to Polaroon, that the Orankeys should
come over to him, that there might be further inquisition made of this matter.
The Priest of the Polaroons and seventy Orankeys instantly took a Prow, or
small Vessel of their own, and embarked themselves for Poloway. As they were at
Sea, and yet out of the sight of the Dutch Castle, they were met by a
Fisher-boat of Bandanezes, and told, how all the rest were apprehended, and
that if they went to Poloway, they were all but dead men. Nevertheless, the
Priest and the rest, although they had space and means to make their escape to
Seran, and other places safe enough from the Hollanders; yet were so confident
of their Innocence, that they would needs go to Poloway to vindicate and clear
themselves: Where, as soon as they were arrived, they were instantly carried
Prisoners to the Castle; and, the Governor with a force of 200 Men, went
forthwith for Polaroon; whence he brought all the rest of the Orankeys, and
made them Prisoners in the same Castle, and presently brought them to the
torture of water and fire, even in the same sort as our People were afterward
at Amboyna; only herein differing, that of those at Poloway, two were so
tortured that they died in their tortures, the rest being one hundred and sixty
two persons, were all upon their own forced Confessions, Condemned and
Executed. The Priest when he came to the Place of Execution, spoke after this
manner, in the Mallaian tongue: All ye great and small, rich and poor, black
and white, look to it; we have committed no fault. And when he would have
spoken more, he was taken by the hands and feet, laid along, and cut in two by
the middle with a Sword: After which, the Governor caused the Wives, Children
and Slaves of those of Polaroon, to be all carried out of that, and dispersed
into other Islands, subject to the Dutch: by reason of which Banishment, being
deprived of the Natives assistance, neither the English nor Hollanders
themselves can carry on their trade so commodiously as they might have done;
which shows the vigor of their malice and the insatiableness of their cruelty
was such, that they had rather submit to some damage, and embrace their own
loss, than let their unreasonable and savage designs pass unaccomplished.

Some Injuries and Abuses done to the English in diverse parts, either by the
Order or permission of the Dutch.
THey forced us to Trade at second hand. 1. In Ternata, under their Fort
Tabuche. 2. In Motir. 3. In Tidore. 4. In Balvan, Hillo, Amboyna. 5. At Banda.
6. Poloway. 7. The Coast of Cormandel, near the Arsenal at Jaccatra. 8. Their
chief places Bantham, Japan, Jamby, though we advanced them to all these
places. They represented us as Pirates, and when they had done any mischief,
said, they were English Men, until for our safety, we were fain to distinguish
our selves from them by the solemnity of November the 5 th and 17 th.

They contrived to blow up our Warehouses; Forbad us all Commerce upon Queen
Elizabeth her Death, made all Christians so odious, that the first question in
those parts was, Are ye Flemmings?

They seized our Yards, Wharffs, etc. giving order to kill every English Man,
that would not swear fealty to them; upon the erecting of their Fort at Banna,
intending to put all English into an old Ship, and blow it up. They search and
stop our Ships; give out that they are under a King: Making us pay a Custom at
Bantham. They seized our Ships at Poloway, although the Island was given our
King; Leading our men about the Streets with Halters about their Necks and an
hour glass before them; intimating, that after that ran out they should be
hanged.

And (though the Mogul would not look on them till Sir Thomas Roe assured them
they were our friends) they seized our Polaroon, 1617. Suborning the slaves to
burn our Ships; loading our men with irons, dismembring some, setting others
lamentably wounded, in hard Grates; wherein their legs swelled so, that they
could go neither in or out without great misery; Pissing over their heads in
Dungeons every Morning, and allowing them but a halfpenny loaf and a pint of
water a day.

It was proved at Jaccatra, that the States were seven years plotting a War
between the English and the Dutch at the Indies, threatening likewise to land
sixty thousand men in twenty four thousand flat-boats in England.

They carried us in Cages from Port to Port, boasting that our King was their
Vassal.

Though we assisted them between the years, 1577. and 1625. in their Indian
trade, so that they got 1500 Tuns of Gold in private hands; besides 400 in
common; How did they use us in Amboyna?

They disputed our Right to the Sea, stopped our entrance to, and Trade at
Bantham, Scanderoon, Guinee, Angola, etc. Burned our Factories at Jambee.

They surprised us at Guinee, abused us in the restoring of the Island
Polaroon, which they have promised from time to time, since 1622. They would
needs, forsooth, give us Law in the New Neither Lands, which is but a spot of
ground they held of us by courtesy.

They put our men in nasty Dungeons in Castle-delmina, to lie in their own
Excrements, having not bread and water enough to sustain Nature; leaving the
living and the dead (after exquisite tortures) to lie together. These injuries
(with infinite more of the like nature, to the value of 600000 l. in Goods)
being aggravated with their preparations for War to maintain them, even when
his Majesty solicited them to Justice and Peace, will make it evident to the
world, that, War (which being defined, the State of two parties contending by
public force about Right and Wrong) is become necessary to us, since equity is
denied, and we are so long eluded of due satisfaction for those many injuries
we have so frequently sustained by them. Their unworthiness and impiety is very
heinous toward Heathens, much more toward Christians, and most of all toward
the English, who have been their chief promoters, continual Patrons and
greatest Agents under Heaven of raising them to that height and mightiness they
are now arrived at. And lastly, I shall refer the Reader to his Majesty's Royal
Declaration, from all which any competent judge may gather, Reasons many and
weighty enough why his offended Majesty of Great Britain no longer delays to
vindicate his own Sovereignty and Peoples Rights, whom God long preserve in
honor and safety and give him victory over all his Enemies.

The Perfidy and Treacherousness of the Dutch with all Nations in general.
IF the Treachery of the Dutch had extended and spread it self no further than
the English Nation, they would at least pretend that we were partial and unjust
in our accusations; But to prevent that scandal, a cloud of witnesses may be
produced to back and second our Testimony; for there is scarce any Nation whom
they have traded with, but are in some measure sensible of their false
dealings, and can experimentally attest their perfidious transactions.

In the Year 1630. the Dutch entered into a league Offensive and Defensive,
with Lewis the 13 th of France, upon condition he would make no Peace with
Spain without them; Notwithstanding which, they endeavored a truce with Spain,
without either his advice or consent; as appeared (by several passages of
underhand dealings of the Dutch with the Spaniards) in a complaint made by the
French Ambassador to the States.

Yea, when another League Offensive and Defensive was concluded, Feb. 8. 1635.
between France and Holland, and a War with Spain commenced thereupon, the Dutch
went so far underhand in promoting and procuring a Peace with the Spaniards,
that their Attorney General Musch was dispatched to Don Martine Axpe, the King
of Spain's Secretary, about a Treaty, though they denied it to the King of
France, who notwithstanding had intimation of it, and thereupon told my Lord
Paw their Ambassador, that these secret proceedings did contradict their solemn
Treaty, and differed much from the Justice he had showed toward them. The same
League being continued from 1636. to 1642. in the year 1640 they treat again
with the Spaniard, contrary to the League with the French; that intimated their
Nonability to Treat with Spain without the Concurrence of his Majesty of
France. Yea, a Peace was Negotiated and managed by several Letters intercepted
to the Cond. Pinneranda, and showed the States by the French Ambassador at the
Hague, at the very same time, when 12000 French ventured their Lives and
Fortunes for them against Dunkirk and Flanders, which Peace was concluded at
Munster, though confessed by Here Van Nederhurst, one of the Plenipotentiaries
there, to be contrary to the agreement between France and Them, and so
manifested by a Declaration of the King of France.

They that durst deal thus with the French, think they may presume to deal
worse with the Portugals, with whom when they revolted from Spain, as they had
done before; they entered into a firm League at Lisbon, and the Hague, 1640.
with mutual clearness (as to outward appearance) on both sides. But, see the
Craft of these People! They insert in their Articles of Peace, that it should
not begin beyond the Line, till a year after: In the mean time, advising their
Men at Brazil, and elsewhere to take all they could get from the Portugeze, as
they did, Angola, Malacca and Brazil.

Ambassadors were sent from Portugal to demand these places: The Hollanders
produced the said clause of the Truce, which was all the Portugeze could get of
them; for, said they, there is no wrong done, in regard in that clause it is
said, That each side should hold and keep what he can take, and in such a Time.

Whereupon, The Portugal Ambassador said to them, very well, That it must be
understood, Bona Fide, Viz. That which should be taken, without having any
knowledge of the Truce.

Neither have they been more faithful to the Swedes, when they engaged to
assist them against the Danes, and in the midst of their Service deserted them,
making Conditions of Peace for themselves and retiring.

And the King of Spain has also had sufficient experience and proof of their
perfidiousness, from whose Government they first revolt, and afterward
unworthily Treat him.

There is yet another Testimony, Their dealings with the King of Macassar;
which story whoever peruseth and censures with an unbyassed judgment, must from
thence necessarily gather their huge ingratitude and injustice.

Their perfidious dealing with the King of Macassar.
THe Dutch by virtue of their late success against the K. of Macassar in the
Isle of Chaelebes, made the said King to sign an Article suddenly, for
banishing all the Portugezes and English, out of his Territories, and never
from thence forward to admit them, or any of their Adherents to drive any
Negotiations, or Trade under the Government of the Macassars, The occasion of
the War and the sum of the story is as follows.

The East India Company, who for diverse years have had in design, the
engrossing the whole Trade of Spice, etc. into their own hands, did in order
thereunto engage one of the Princes of Macassar (that has vast quantities of
Cloves growing on Islands in his own Territories, and in places unknown to the
Dutch) to Trade only with the Merchants belonging to the East India Company of
the Netherlands, which the said Prince (who is Brother in-law to the King of
Macassar, and is himself King of Ternate) did consent to, on Conditions
following, Viz.

That the General of India, Governing the said Company, or his Successors, or
some person or persons by him or them deputed, shall well and truly pay, unto
the said King of Ternate, his Heirs or Assigns every year, the just sum of 25
thousand Crowns, for prohibiting his Subjects Trading with any other Nation,
particularly are mentioned the English and Portugezes. This contract was for
some years strictly observed on both sides, but Anno 1658, 1659, and 1660. The
Governor General of India for the said Company, John Maetsuycker and his
Counsel, sent not the sum of Money to the said King of Ternate, agreed upon
(and yet demanded the excluding of all others but themselves of trading with
his Subjects) but instead thereof presented the said Prince with several
rarities of Europe, upon which the King of Ternate Complains to his Brother,
the King of Macassar, advising with him what was the most prudent course for
him to take in that affair.

Adding that if the Dutch performed their Contract, he had not half the
Advantage he could have, by permitting a free Trade to all Nations Negotiating
into those parts:

The King declared that his Brother had no reason to take any notice of the
said Contract with the Netherlandish East India Company, and advises him to
publish a free Commerce with the English, Portugezes, or any other; not
excluding the Netherlanders, promising the King of Ternate, that if the said
East India Company should be unreasonable to resent it so, as to make a War
upon a point wherein themselves were only to blame, he would assist his
Brother in the just defense of his rights to the utmost of his power.

For prevention of this free-Market, the General and his Council, in the year
1660. abetted a Prince, by name Radia Palacca, in the Kingdom of Macassar,
against his Sovereign, and backed the pretensions of the said Prince with an
Army, under the Command of John Van Dam, (afterward Governor of Amboyna and
Banda) and possessed themselves of many Towns and Villages, and one strong
Castle; but this small Conquest was soon vanquished by the powerful Arms of the
King of Macassar.

The Prince fled out of his Country, and, soon after the Dutch East India
Company quitted their Castle and other Holds they had possessed themselves of,
in the name and right of the said Prince, on Conditions following.

First, That the Netherlanders should never aid, abet, or assist any the
Subjects of the King of Macassar or his lawful Successors against their
Sovereign.

Secondly, That the 25000 Dollars or Crowns formerly Covenanted, to be yearly
paid to the King of Ternate, by the General for the East India Company should
be paid, Bona Fide, without fraud or covin. As also that the King of Macassar
should receive a considerable sum of Money, well and truly paid to him, for the
charge he had been at in levying an Army by the said East India Companies
Officers residing at Batavia, (the certain sum is not known) besides a yearly
Pension.

Upon these Conditions, The King of Macassar and King of Ternate engaged they
would Trade in the Spicery of Cloves, only with the East India Company of the
Netherlands.

But the aforesaid revolted Prince which is called Radia Palacca, the King of
Bougeroons or Bougis, was not to enjoy any of his Territories or Dominions, but
it was consented to by the King of Macassar, that he might reside in Batavia,
or other the Holds of the Netherlandish East India Company: And, in the process
of the story, he kept his Court at Batavia, receiving an honorable allowance
from the said Companies General, and had respect according to his Quality.

Soon after the Conclusion of this Peace, The East India Company received in
all points the former privileges they had enjoyed from the King of Ternate,
having entirely the Trade of the Cloves, the utmost of their Compact.

But the Dutch in the year 1663, sent the Kings instead of the yearly sum
agreed upon, the third part of the value in Presents, which the Kings of
Macassar and Ternate perceiving, resolved to make the best Market of their
Spice they could with the English and Portugezes; The Netherlanders having now
a second time broke their Contract with them, and resenting the Injustice of
the Dutch so high, that they threattned to cut off all the Netherland Merchants
in the Territory of Macassar, the Consul or chief of whom, was Abraham
Verspreet.

The News of this arriving at Batavia, the General Maetsuycker dispatched the
Ship Nightingale under the Command of one Jart Backer with a great present, but
to stand upon his Guard. In order hereunto, he departed in the latter end of
October. 1666 from Batavia, and arrived at Macassar the 12 th of December.
following, but went in with his fighting Sails only abroad, but yet pretended
all peace and satisfaction imagineable, earnestly desiring a free trade, or
liberty to bring off the Netherlanders. The King of Macassar refused all trade,
but not the peoples departure, unless he would deliver to his Officer the
Rudder of his Ship, for his assurance, that they should trade for nothing
without his consent, and paying such duties as belonged to him. To this, the
Merchants on Shore consented, but the Commander of the Ship utterly refused to
send the Rudder, answering, he would keep the Rudder fast to his Ship, as long
as he could; with much ado at length, they fixed a present upon the King of
Macassar, which he accepting, the Netherlanders began to expect an
accommodation of all things, and the Nightingale, and Lioness proceeded on
their Voyage, the Nightingale for Amboyna and Banda, the Lioness for Amboyna
only, who was shipwrack'd in her Voyage on an Island belonging to the King of
Macassar.

The Macassars saved abundance of goods, which they restored to the owners,
only detained such small part, as in right (according to the custom of the
place) belonged to their King, and that would upon reasonable terms satisfy
them for their labor in preserving the goods: Upon this the Netherlanders
begin to threaten the Macassars, which the King resented very high, upon which
the Chief of the Company in that place fled with his wife and Children, but
Cornelius Knight of Alemar, second man of the Company, who staid to execute his
charge, was put to the sword with all the Netherlanders that stayed with him;
this happened in the year, 1665.

The Company to be avenged of this affront, set out the Here Cornelius
Speelman, with what Land and Sea sorces they thought necessary, and with them
went the Malecontented Prince, Radia Palacca King of Bougis and his Allies, who
have very much contributed to the Victory mentioned in this following brief
Narrative.

In November 1666. Admiral Cornelius Speelman sailed out of the Bay of Batavia,
with 13 Ships extraordinarily manned, and about the 20 th of December arrived
before the City of Macassar, putting out the red flag, afterward he Steered
into the Bay of Turnate, and on the 23d. of December, burnt 10 Villages, with
much Paddy and Rice, and a new man of War, and brought off 14 Prisoners and 14
Heads.

On the 24 th he arrived before Bonteyn, landed 10 Companies, burnt 30 Towns
100 Ships, and 3000 Last of Rice and Paddy, and this happened in the Macassars
Magazine.

December 31. He sailed toward Bouton, a place belonging to Radia Palacca, and
found it besieged by the Macassars, with an Army of 10000 men, and about 450
great and small Ships; here he landed and burnt 60 of their Vessels, and many
of the People running away into Radia Palacca: The Macassars seeing their power
weakened, broke up in the night, and set the place of their Camp on fire.

January 3. Three Principal Commanders of the Macassars Army, with 5500 able
men, submitted themselves to the East India Company; and being disarmed, were
set upon in an Island between Boughton and Pontisiana, whereof 400 were made
Slaves.

In the interim 5000 Bougis were run over from the Macassar to Radia Palacca
with 86 Prows, so that with some stragglers, there fell 11000 into the hands of
the Company and 4000 Last of Rice.

With this success, the Admiral sailed to the Eastern Provinces, and having
settled things there, returned the 8th of June from Amboyna, with 16. Ships, and
14 Shallops, whereof 4 were from the King of Ternate. The Admiral afterward
coming near to Bontoin, found it strongly fortified and guarded with 6000
Macassars, and after several hot encounters, burnt all with little damage.
After this, their Admiral set sail to Macassar, where on the 19 th of July,
they shot Briskly from the Kings Fort. Afterward happened diverse hot skirmishes,
and then the Bonnese Army which came from Turata, consisting of 6000 men,
landed with the Dutch before Glisson, besides these there were about 7000
Bougis and 3000 Ternatanes, and the King of Macassars Forces were about 20000.
With which Army they fell upon Glisson, and after many desperate encounters, it
was taken by Radia Palacca and the Admirals party, by casting many hand
Granado's and Fire-pots into their Forts: Afterward the Enemy fled, and after
several Encounters, where the Macassars had the worst, the City of Sambouca was
besieged, and on the 24 th of June, the Wall thereof blown up, which made the
King of Macassar retire into the Land, and keep his Principal Residence at Goa.
Where, being in want of all things, was forced to desire a Peace with the
Dutch, which they granted upon such terms as they pleased themselves: Whereby
all Forts toward the Sea, but such as the Dutch please to possess, shall be
demolished; The most considerable and best part of the Land made theirs, to
Plant, and themselves freed from all Customs for the future, with several sums
and fealties to be paid to them for the present Peace.

I shall now only add one instance or two, which will declare the demeanor of
the Dutch in Japan, and then conclude with a brief rehearsal and bare
recapitulation of some injuries and abuses they have done to the English.

In the Year 1640. The Dutch make their addresses to Caesar, the chief
Governor of the Japonians, and with all possible acknowledgments submissively
petition him to grant them the privilege of building a house, wherein they
pretended to dispose of, and lay up their Merchandise, and also to have the
Governor and Members of their Society inhabit; which being once obtained, they
not only raise up a sumptuous and beautiful building for habitation, but so
strongly fortify it, and in so convenient a Situation, that they seem to out
brave and threaten the Japonians; and will they, nill they, to maintain their
Residence there; so that now they have confidence enough to monopolize all
Wares, and put them off to the Japonians at what rate they list: But their
subtle contrivances being brought under suspicion, were quickly discovered, and
their towering ambition unexpectedly laid in the dust; for the Governor
forthwith sent to them a great Band of Soldiers, with a Command, that they
should either demolish their new petty Babel, or be immediately put all to the
Sword; but self-interest soon prompted them what they should do, therefore
(though unwillingly) yet with a seeming cheerfulness they obey the Governors
gracious command, and most busily ply them to their new imposed task, laying
wast that which they did so much pride themselves in and were at so great
charge to get accomplished. And ever after their actions were more narrowly
observed, and the Japonians claimed the privilege of paying them in their own
Coin, to wit, monopolizing all merchandise, and imposing it on them at their
own price. Thus you see the just recompense of ingratitude.

But further, The Dutch seem to be a people wholly addicted to secular
Interest, choosing rather to enjoy their lives and profits, than hazard either
in propagating the Christian Religion; for the Laws of the Japonian Kingdom
being very strict and severe against Christians, whereby they are frequently
persecuted and meet with grievous and lamentable tortures, to the end they may
deny their Faith; the Dutch have not been observed at all to endeavor the
promoting the Gospels publication, but rather submitted to Heathenish dictates,
so, that they may live without trouble and molestation, than quit their Trade,
and be deprived of their so sweet and delicious worldly gains.

And thus you have a brief account of the deportment of the Dutch in Foreign
Parts, which sufficiently demonstrates their ingratitude and injustice to those
they have had Commerce with.

But their indignities to the English exceed all in number and quality, which
the time would fail to recapitulate, how they solicited our Queen, and yet
covertly applied themselves to the French King: How they promised us Free
Trade, yet stopped our Ships: How they borrowed our Money to buy a Peace with
Spain: How they admitted our Ambassadors to their supreme Senate, yet because
they should not understand all debates, they presently set up a secret Council:
How they entreated the Queen to send over the Earl of Leicester, yet abused him
so far, that he quitted their unworthy Country, and left behind him a Medal
whereon there was engraven, a Dog and a Flock of Sheep, with this Motto, Non
oves sed Ingratos.

How they depended on our Field-Officers, and yet raised jealousies amongst
them one against another. How they delivered us the Caution Towns we had taken,
yet were never quiet till we had trucked for them: How they owned King James
their Protector, yet set up a blasphemous Reader (I mean Vorstius) in
Competition with him: What earnestness they used to dissuade him from Alliance
with Spain when they had a Correspondent there.

How they complemented King Charles the First (of blessed Memory) when they
disputed his right to his own Seas: How they protest their obligations to him,
yet cheat us of the Impost upon their Herring-Fishing, and presume to fight
with Oquendo the Spanish Admiral in our very Havens: How they had their Agents
here during our Civil War, under pretense of Mediating our Peace, observing the
Advantages they could make of our War.

How affectionately they there embraced the King's Interest, and yet how
suspiciously their Ambassadors faulter'd about his Death.

How zealously they espoused his Majesty's Interest that now is, while hopeful,
1649, 1650, 1651, 1652. (for a pretense to hide their design of quitting the
Homage they owed to England and engrossing its Trade) and when that was done,
how cunningly they deserted it, from 1653, to 1660. How eager they were to
entertain his Majesty (though not till they had assurance of his Restoration)
and yet how kind to his excellent Sister and her Son.

How instant for Peace at White Hall, and yet how unreasonable in their
Usurpations, Pyracies, Depredations and Surprises in Africa and America? How
ready to deliver the Pepper Islands, and what pretense from year to year to
keep them: How earnest in soliciting a War with the Turks in Algiers, yet how
treacherous in deserting it: For having gotten the Royal assurance for their
Aid, Sir John Lawson was appointed to attend their Service, and the Interest of
Christendom, but then they most perfidiously fell off without any notice of
their departure, and made as fast as they could for Guiny to fight against his
Majesty's Subjects there, whilst his Subjects assisted them in the Streights.
How importunate in their Addresses for Peace, yet how diligent in their
Preparations for War: How ready to make satisfaction for Old Injuries, when in
the mean time they offer New Ones: How respectful to his Majesty in their
Embassies, yet how abusive of his Person, Government and Relations, in their
Licensed Libels and Pictures; what Civility, what Kindness pretended, yet how
barbarous to our Prisoners at home, how severe to our Merchants abroad. Thus
you have had some hints of the base and unworthy actings of the Dutch, whose
several branches would admit their respective aggravations, but that is left to
the impartial and judicious examiner of each cause, for I never intended to
cloth the Relation with Burlesque or Railery, but rather chose to publish the
truth in its most becoming attire, brevity and perspicuity.

Thus have I given you an exiguous draught of our ignoble and ill natured
Neighbors the Netherlanders, of whom, an ingenious Jocalist gives this
description, That they rob God of his Honor, The King of his due; The Fishes
of their Quarters; and burn up the earth before the day of Judgment.

The Learned sort of Readers who would be further satisfied, may peruse these
Pages in Varenius his History, where they may find these Passages.

In the Island of Japan, The Dutch having leave to build a Ware house, made it
a strong Castle against the King, p. 194.

Of 400000 Christians there massacred, the Dutch were the Occasion. p. 212.

And for obtaining of Trade, do dissemble all show of Christianity, p. 208.

This Varenius was a Physician of their own Country, An excellent Geographer,
who walking out in Holland to take the Air, never returned again, perchance
being made away for discovering the iniquity of his Countrymen.

The next Royal Author I refer ye to, is the King, in His Majesty's Declaration
published in 1672. Where, If you can peruse it with unbyassed Judgment, you
will find Provocations and Indignities too great, too manifest and too manifold
for a Prince to pardon with respect to his own Sovereignty and his Peoples
safety: Whom the God of Hosts prosper in these his hostile designs both by Sea
and Land, and Crown all his Royal undertakings with Honor and Victory.

Finis.

