JACOB is become a FLAME and the house of ESAV Stubble.

Or the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon, in which the Seed of the woman
is bruising the Serpents Head.

And Cain the first Birth (the Persecutor) is found the Vagabond and Abel and
Abraham (that wandered) the friends of God.

Being a true discovery of the two seeds or births, between which the enmity is
put, the time and day being come in which the Elder must serve the Younger.

With a few words to the Priests, Bishops, Episcopal-men, and professors of
this last Age, and a short warning to the Rulars and Inhabitants of the EARTH.

Do men gather Grapes of Thorns or Figs of Thistles.
IN the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea and all living
Creatures, and the end of their creation was to serve, and manifest the glory
and wisdom, power and goodness of God their Creator, and for no other end were
they Created in the beginning, and that all his works of Creation should be in
subjection unto him, being ruled and governed by his pure Righteous power,
Counsel, and wisdom.

And to the end that his wonders, and power, and goodness, and wisdom might be
the more manifest, he endued man with a proportion of the same, that he himself
is, even pure, wisdom, Love, Holiness, Truth, Justice and Goodness, or
whatsoever might be named of the properties and qualities of the Creator,
(mark) this was the end of Gods Creation, (especially of mankind) to set forth
his own glorious virtues, and holy righteous power, that so his workmanship
might be a continual praise unto him, living in subjection to that pure power,
by which they were created; this was Gods end even to glorify himself in these
things.

Therefore said his dear Son (who came to restore man, and the whole Creation
into its first state) Herein is my Father glorified that you manifest or bring
forth good fruits, (mark) this glorifies God, and his end of Creation, by this
is answered even the bringing forth of those virtues in power and life again:
But whilst man is in the transgression, separation and alienation from God, he
answers not the end of his Creation, but is out of his right and proper
habitation fallen short of his glory; neither can he manifest Gods wonders, and
power, wisdom and truth, and goodness in that state, but does manifest and
bring forth the power and lying wonders, works and properties of the wicked
one, which is called the old Serpent the Devil and Satan, whose workings are
contrary to God, and the welfare of his Creation, therefore is he called the
Adversary and was known so to be, by the true Seed in all Ages, who came again
to be restored into that state in which they enjoyed the power and virtues and
wisdom of God, and so in the end of their Creation, even bearing good fruits,
gloryfying God in body, soul and spirit.

Now consider, man in the beginning was made uprightly, and planted a noble
Vine, and in that state was blessed of God his Creator, in whose power and
virtues he should have continued, and in the wisdom authority and dominion
thereof to have ruled over all the Creation, yet as a subject to that power by
which he was made and created, and not aspire above it (mark that) for it was
so, and this was the first appearance of the Adversary, even to draw out the
simple mind to be more wise, knowing and seeking something to himself, with a
promise (mark that) ye shall be as Gods, knowing, to which harkening, and
obeying, the upright and simple mind is deceived and beguiled of that wisdom,
Power, Glory, and Blessedness which endures for ever, and so feeds on that
which dies of it self, against the command of God, for knowledge does vanish
away, but the life, power, and blessings of God endures for ever, and will
never dye, though Heaven and Earth may pass away.

Therefore consider O mankind, in what state thou were at first created, and by
what spirit and power thou wast then upheld and guided, and to what state or
seed, the everlasting blessings of God the Creator, are due and of right unto;
for now are the Springs and Fountains of the great deep broke open unto the
children of men, and the great day of God and the Lamb is manifest and come, in
which all things, works and fruits shall be proved and tried of what seed,
root, or ground soever, and every seed shall have his own body (he that has an
ear to hear let him hear) and now shall the seed and body of the Serpent, call
to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, to hide them from the wrath of the
Lamb (the woman's seed) and of him that sits upon the throne, to whom be
blessings and goodness, all glory and honor Amen, for ever.

Now this was the Serpents seed, (whose head is and must be bruised) that at
its beginning sprang up in the mind, with a deceivable promise of being wise,
and knowing of himself, lifting up above, and without respect of subjection to
his Creator, so from this root grew pride, selfishness, earthly wisdom, and
disobedience to every good motion of that holy righteous power, by which he was
created, and here is that Proverb true After pride comes a fall, for its not of
God, but abomination to him, and the seed of evil doers shall never be
renowned, but must be bruised by the dread and power of the Lord of Heaven and
earth, and be chained down as a slave of abominations for ever; and the day is
come in which the Almighty has laid hold on this Dragon, and will seal him
down into the pit of perdition no more to arise and deceive the Nations of the
Earth, and the Ax of his displeasure (against unrighteousness) is laid at the
root of the great tree of wickedness, and down must it come as a Millstone that
is cast into the depth of the Sea, as you have heard of Babylon, for this is
the Mother (or original) of all Harlots and abominations of the earth, and they
that live in wickedness, and take pleasure in ungodliness, are the children of
this womb of Confusion, where all is out of the true order, and subjection of
the Holy pure God of truth, yet are wise to do evil, but to do good have no
knowledge, being lifted up out of the fear of God that made them: yet there is
a government, and kingdom, and fruits and properties of this seed of
wickedness, in the time of its reign and predominancy. As there is of the seed
of God in its reign and government, but contrary in nature, fruits and effects,
and this wicked deceivable one has got a Church, Religious, Worships, and
Orders, (as they call them) and are in the imitation of the true seed things
(like Cain) but from the root of confusion and enmity as by its fruits and
effects is manifest through the Creation of God: this is that Elder which must
[now] serve the Younger, having had its day; (or rather night) and time to
manifest it self fully in the Creation, that so the just God might Judge, and
destroy it, Root, and branch, with a witness; and that every mouth may be stopped
and silent, but what shall justify the Righteous Judge in his Judgments which
are equal, just, and true.

And this time of the growth, manifestation, Reign, and Government of this
Seed (the man of Sin, or son of perdition, which has been exalted above all
that is called God;) And the sufferings and oppressions of the Righteous seed,
has been the time of the Creators forbearance, long suffering, and patience,
(he that can hear, let him hear) even the long suffering of the Lord God
gracious and merciful, whose Name is I AM and besides him there is no Savior,
(he that can receive it let him) and happy is the man that has him on his
side, and that he may not be moved, for the great God is come, to move and to
remove, and shake all foundations, Roots, Seeds, Plants, and Trees that are not
of the Root of Iesse the Plant of his own Right hand's planting; And wickedness
shall be broaken as a tree: Therefore look to it you ungodly ones, (ye seed of
evil doers, (for your time is short, you have had your day, (or rather your
hour and power of darkness) in which you have delighted to live in, and
manifest the Root and fruits of the wicked one, even the Serpents seed, which
has been bruising the heel of the woman's seed, even causing them to suffer by
reproaches, cruel mockings, and persecutions, as your brethren Ishmael, Cain,
and Haman, with many more of the same seed and stock, have done to the
Righteous seed in Ages past, but now are the last of that Generation, even the
Dragons Tail; which think to draw down the stars of Heaven by your power of
pride, Rage and madness, and are casting out many floods of Venom against the
woman, and the remnant of her seed, which keeps the Commandments and testimony
of Jesus: But it is in vain for you to strive against God the Creator of heaven
and earth, woe is your portion (in so doing) you will be ground to powder in
the dreadful day at hand.

For as I have received of the mighty God in his eternal Counsel, do I declare
unto you, that you that now are in the Spirit of Pride, Envy, Malice,
uncleaness, Pleasures of this evil world, Scoffing and deriding the poor and
harmless, and are in the flattering titles, and respecting persons, and
forcing, and persecuting about Religion and Worship, in disdainfulness,
fullness and Idleness, Hypocricy and all manner of unrighteousness, I say you
that are in this seed or spirit, which brings forth these fruits and effects,
whether you be Popes, Emperors, Bishops, Kings, Priests, Princes, Dukes,
Earls, or Counsels of ungodly men, or any other of these flattering titles you
bear, you are of the same seed, stock, or offspring, as was Cain, Ishmael,
Haman, Esau, and the rest of that Generation, mentioned in the Scriptures of
truth out of whose Loins proceeded many Princes, as were the Princes of
Ishmael, and Dukes of Edom, which were of Esaus stock, who sold his
Birthright for a mess of Pottage: Hear this ye ungodly, and set your ears
tingle, for this is your state who for the satisfiing the Lusts of the fleshly
Birth (which are but for a season) that war against your souls, have lost the
comfort, rest, and eternal peace thereof, in the salvation of the pure
Righteous God; and instead of fearing his great and dread full Name, and
departing from iniquity, and submiting to the strivings, and reprofes of his
Light and holy Spirit, (which lets you see the evil of your ways) you are like
Goliath of Gath, the uncircumcised Philistine, who defied the Armies of the
living God, and are vaunting your selves with your Challenges, upbraiding, and
deridings against the true Israel, for whose sake he will break the strength of
Nations, as he did in the days past when they were oppressed.

And be it known to you, who are in the seed and spirit before mentioned by
what names or flattering titles soever you are called, oppressing the innocent,
(who have no helper in the earth, but the living God alone) and are living in
the pleasures of sin, and ways of unrighteousness; you are unto God the pure
eternal Jehovah of Israel, even as Pharaoh, Sodom, and Egypt, who are smitten
with blindness, not seeing the heavy plagues and dreadful Judgments that are
swiftly coming upon you: O ye Sons of transgression, and children of falsehood,
who love the glory and pleasures of this world which passes away, and the
honor below, and vanity of vanitys, which vexes the pure spirit of the
Righteous God, and oppresses your own souls; your day hastens, in which you
will be as Stubble in the firery Oven even all you heathen that are at ease,
for the great and dreadful God of Israel is very sorely displeased with you,
and the woe and vengeance of his fury burns against you, even this last
Generation of Persecutors; though you may plot, consult, and decree against his
remnant whom he has Redeemed from that seed, fruits, works, and ways which you
are in, even out of Babylon and are brought to Sion, where they declare the
vengeance of the Almighty God, against Babylon the great Whore, (whored from
God the contrary to God) which has ruled, and sat over Nations; I say though
you may combine and contrive much, in the abundance of the wicked counsels of
your hearts, and decree unrighteous decrees, yet you shall not prosper nor
prevail to accomplish your intents, and purposes against my people, (I the
Lord have spoken it) no more then Pharaoh, Goliath, Herod, or Haman did, who
sought the young Child's life to destroy it, but was prevented, so you may
consider it did ever any fight against God, his seed and people, and prosper;
But you may object being of the contrary seed, and say, are you the seed of
God, or his people, against whom we have made Laws and decrees, traps, and
snares, even you that are called Quakers, for we look upon you as Heretics,
disobedient and dangerous persons, not submiting to Governments, not honoring
Authority, nor respecting persons, nor giving us (flattering) titles, but are
of another generation, then we are of, therefore do we consult, and contrive
how to destroy you, from being a people by imprisoning spoiling of goods, and
banishment, and death also if we could bring it about, and that even the whole
Nation would not rise against it, for all sober people (we perceive) are
affected with you and your ways and dealings amongst them, by which we are
afraid to proceed so far, as otherwise is in our hearts to do. To which I shall
answer in the Name of the Lord.

That we who by the sinful and adulterous generation, are scornfully called
Quakers, are the people, servants, and children of the most high God, which
might be demonstrated, or proved, parallel to his chosen seed and people in all
Ages, by the spirit, ways, worship, and practices, life, and conversation of
his servants and Children from the beginning to this day.

First consider there are but two seeds in the whole Creation, between which
emnity is put, and are obsolute contrary in Nature, fruits, and effects, that
is the seed of the Serpent; And the seed of the Woman, which is Christ (in his
people) the same to day, yesterday and for ever the Imanuel, who is now coming
in ten thousands of thousands of his Saints called Quakers who tremble at his
word, for they are the people that shall spring up and spread from the Root of
Iesse over the face of the whole Earth, through the virtue and power of this
seed Christ Jesus, whose fruits and effects, is Love, meekness, patience,
temperance, mercy, fullness, justness, soberness, righteousness, holiness,
peace, and joy in the eternal power and spirit of the pure God, doing to all
men as they would they should do to them: these and such like are the fruits of
the tree of this seed of the Woman, (Christ) which must bruise the head of the
Serpent, whose seed brings forth contrary fruits and effects in every
particular, though in some things it might imitate the Righteous seed (as Cain
did) in matter of sacrifice, or worship, or the like, but still its from
another seed root and ground which is acursed, for said God cursed is the
ground for thy sake (mark that) the ground not the simple earth which is good,
but the ground of envy, murder, and wickedness, that had opened his mouth (in
him) to swallow up his brothers blood, from which it cries against him, and his
generation of murderers about sacrifice and worship, at this day and for ever,
so this is the other seed, whose fruits and effects are manifest, as says the
Scriptures, (even the seed of the fleshly Birth, which persecutes the birth
born of the Spirit of the living God) which are these envy, pride, wrath,
malice, striffe, anger, highmindedness, frowardness, bitterness, uncleaness,
laciviousness, covetousness, drunkeness, wantoness, revellings, rioting,
emulations, witchcraft, hatred, heresies, Idolatry, injustice partiallity, and
hipocrisy, these and such like are the fruits and effects of the Serpents seed
which has spread as a great tree of wickedness over the whole earth, and is
that cursed one that has so long cumbred the ground.

And these are also the Children of Babylon the great Whore which has Reigned
over the Nations, and Kings of the Earth, happy is the man that dasheth these
against the stone, (Christ Jesus the light that discovers them) and these are
those wares and costliness, and precious things of Babylon, even the fruits and
pleasures of sin, the glory, riches, worships, and beloved practices of
iniquity, which proceeds from this seed of falsehood, satisfying a ground that
is accursed for ever; Therefore says God come out of Babylon, my people
partake not of her sins (or fruits) that ye be not pertakers of her plagues.

And now is the day come, in which Babylon shall receive at the hand of the
Almighty, the Cup of the wine of his fury and indignation without mixture, and
shall drink the dregs thereof and wring them out, and all her Merchants that
have lived deliciously, and delighted in her wares and costliness, and traded
with her, shall houl, wail and lament, beholding the smoke of her torments
which ascends up for ever and ever.

Hear this, you superstitious, and Idolatrous Priests, Bishops and Hirelings,
for the foolish woman, whose feet are not in her house, but is without, loud,
stubborn, and clamourous, is now pulling down her own house with her hands
(mark that) by her own ungodly actions, wicked words and practices, slanders,
persecutions, and grievous abominations even pulling, or drawing down the just
judgments, plagues, and eternal vengeance of the righteous God upon her own
head, (he that reads let him understand) for the time is at hand) therefore
consider, all ye that live in enmity against the harmless seed and people this
day, are not you in pride which is abomination to God, and Ambition and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and love pleasures and vanities, lusts of
uncleanness, deceit and flattery, more then the pure living God of truth and
righteousness, and are not you in the stoutheartedness, disdainfulness,
feignedness and Hypocrisy, dissimulation and all manner of wickedness, and are
not you become the hold of every foul spirit, and cage of unclean and hateful
birds, read your state, and do not strive against that, that lets you see it,
nor say no by any pretense or covering; for the dreadful God has found you
out, and his judgments and vengeance is your portion, and the great day of the
Lamb is come, in which you are not able to stand.

(This is the ground of your rage, seeing you have but a short time) as it is
written the wicked cannot stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
Congregation of the Righteous. Therefore hearken all ye who are in the
Babilonish Garments (the night attire of the great Whore) the Almighty, strong,
and powerful God of Heaven and Earth, is stripping and making her bare, and
naked, as in the day in which she was borne to the the view of all Nations, Men
and Angels, for the hour of her judgments is come, her sins have reached to
heaven, and are come into the remembrance before God, even her envy and rage,
scorning and disdaining persecuting and cruelty, lusts and pleasures, and
vanities, and all manner of Injustice, iniquity and ungodliness, flattering and
deceitful titles, ambition, dissimulation, Hypocrisy and Idolatry, and the like
abominations: this is also the tongue of the Egyptian Sea which God Almighty of
Heaven, will shortly dry up that people may go over dry-shod (he that has an
ear let him hear and understand) the day hastens yea, it comes swiftly, in
which righteous, just, sober, and godly men and people shall walk with boldness
with comfort and courage in the ways of holiness, uprightness and truth in all
the Nations of the earth or else the Lord God, has never spoken by me (which I
know he has and will perform it.)

Therefore tremble ye careless daughters that are at ease, walking haughtily
with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, howl, howl and weep bitterly, ye
light puffed up and vainglorious men and women, the day of your calamity comes
on like an armed man, and you shall not escape, and upon all you that cry out
against the children and servants of the most high God, saying they will not
obey Magistrates, nor reverence such as are in Authority, nor respect and
honor Superiors, nor be subject to the Kings Laws, but are proud and wilful
stubborn and disobedient, and will not worship as we worship, nor admire men's
persons, though they might have advantage by it.

Hear now my answer ye people whose portion is in this life, who are of the
household and stock of Esau the profane person, whose house is now as Stubble.

The God of heaven by his dreadful, and Almighty power and Judgments, has
broken in upon us, and laid low the haughtiness, and hewed down the tree of
wickedness and unrighteousness in us, from whence these evil fruits before
mentioned, proceeded, and has redeemed us from our vain conversation in which
we were as other Gentiles, walking in the vanitys of our minds, in the Lusts of
Ignorance, and has raised up by the same power, a seed of his own begetting in
us, having cast out the heathen (in us) that knew not God, and prepared room
for his own Life, and power and wisdom, (which is foolishness to the world) to
take possession of our hearts and consciences for ever, to which our souls are
subject, knowing him to be the higher power, who has put down all Rule and all
Authority (in us) which was contrary to him, who is now become our King, and
our Lawgiver, Teacher and Savior, which no man can remove from us into a
corner, and we are led and guided by his spirit, who is the wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of peace, and are not Rebellious,
wilful, or stubborn neither to God nor man, in what is manifest to be his will
concerning us.

And as for Magistrates, and such as are in the Authority and power of God, as
was Moses and such men fearing God hating covetousness, injustice, and
unrighteousness, we dearly own, and honor in the Lord, even such as are
punishers of evil doers, favorers, and encouragers of them that do well, these
are [Magistrats] (in Gods behalf) bearing the Sword of Justice and true
Judgment, and not in vain, being (in the power and wisdom of God) a terror
to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well, these are worthy of honor,
these rule well, these answer the witness of God in all people, these Judge
Righteously, equally, and justly, without partiallity, in the fear and dread,
and domion of God having respect to him, and his honor only in what they do,
not seeking their own honor, (which would perish) but in meekness, soberness,
and soundness of mind and Judgment, without respect of persons, judging
between man and man, being able to discern the ground of all causes and
controversies in the Light and Counsel of God, (whose servants they are) mark
that, these are [Magistrats] and not every one that bears that name, no more
then all that profess Christ in words, are Christians, who can say Lord, Lord,
and we are Christians, and we love God, when they hate the light, his own
witness in them, and walk in darkness, being Liars and Hypocrites, for none are
Christians, really and in Gods sight, but they that follow Christ in the
Regeneration, being borne again through the strength and power, and virtue of
his own life and spirit, being guided by it, out of all unrighteousness into
holiness, righteousness, and truth, for they that say they are Christians and
are not are Liars, and of the Synagoge of Satan, whose will and works they do,
even they it is that bear the name of [Magistrates] and are not really so: Now
[Magistrates] are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, (mark that) but
such as have been, and yet are so called, in England (New and Old,) have been
and yet are a terror to good works, contrary to the end and will of God,
government on Earth, and the very word [Magistrate] so that such are but like
them that said they were Jews and were not, but of the Synagogue and generation
of him who has been a liar from the beginning, for this I testify in the Lord
without respect of persons, that such are not [Magistrates] ordained by him,
that are out of his fear and those good properties, and qualities before
mentioned (though they may be rich, and great men in the earth, as Cain, Esau,
and Haman were, yet are like the Priests that bear rule by their means, and not
by the power, wisdom, and mercy of God,) who will rage, and fume, and storm,
like a wild Bull in a net, before they have heard the causes, and controversies
of such as are brought before them, because the spirit of Pride, and Ambition,
(which is of the Devil,) is not bowed unto, and will imprison people (right or
wrong) without breach of any [just] Law of God or man, these are not
[Magistrates] but evil doers; and [Magistrates] are for the punishing of evil
doers, neither is that a just Law (but an unrighteous decree) which is made to
be a terror to good works, and an encouragement to evil doers, this is turning
Judgment into Gall, and Righteousness into Hemlock, and the Sword backwards:
Consider these things, for with them God is not pleased, who beholds the prey
that is made on them that depart from iniquity in the Land.

For such do well (and are not evil doers) who meet together in the fear of the
true God, to wait upon him in the light of his counsel, by it to be guided into
all truth through the knowledge of his will concerning them and their
salvation, that so they may serve God in his holy way acceptably all the days
of their life with reverence and godly fear, (for our God is a consuming fire)
and he or she that bears witness in the spirit of truth, and power of
righteousness, against Pride, Idolaty, Popery, or superstition, or any other
ungodly lusts, deceit or hypocricy, as preaching for money, or Judging for
rewards, and such like, Injustice, Oppression, and cruelty, or any of the
fruits of the corrupt tree, (which God is hewing down for the fire, I say that
man or woman, boy or girl, of the streets of Jerusalem that so does as before
mentioned, in the name of the Lord, does well; and they that abuse them for so
doing, does evil, and God shall require it at their hands, for he or she that
stands a witness in the power, and wisdom of God (which is the higher power)
against the fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, is in so doing the
souls friend, (he that can hear let him him hear,) for to the higher power
(which was before the lusts and wills of men, or the powers of darkness, Death,
Hell, and transgression, (the lower condemned power was) are we subject, and
this seed (or life) which God has raised in us, (who at this day are called
Quakers) cannot bow down to the Devil (the lower power) nor worship that spirit
of Pride, enmity, ambition, and wickedness, which God has determined to
destroy root and branch, and them that live in, and worship it, for it is the
Image of the old Serpent, the Devil, and destroyer of mankind, to which the
pure Image or son of the living God, could never bow, but was always a sufferer
(for a season) under its enmity and cruelty, as may be seen throughout all ages
to this day, for it is no new thing to see him that is born after the flesh,
oppress, and persecute him that is born after the spirit; for it began at Abel,
[even about sacrifice] and is the same at this day, for whatsoever you may say,
and profess in words ( Cain could also talk and contend in the same nature)
that matters not while you are in the spirit of Pride and enmity (which is of
the Devil,) your Sacrifice is not accepted, of the Righteous holy God, but is
unto him, as an odious smoke of Brimstone in the Nostrills of a man, and your
Church (so called) is not the body of Christ Jesus, (the Lambs wife,) but of
the great whore, which has drank the blood of the Saints; living in pleasures,
wantonness, pride, scornfulness, disdain, flattery, deceit, and vanity, with
your tongues at Liberty out of Gods fear, in wrath and envy, lust and
malitiousness, swearing, cursing, and corrupt communication, rioting and
sporting, and all manner of ungodliness; these are not the fruits of Gods
spirit (in which he is only worshipped,) nor graces of Christ's Church, (but the
Whores night garments) for the Christians were, (and are) to abstain from all
appearance of evil, and to wait upon God, through his power to be sanctified
throughout, in body, soul, and spirit, hating even the garment spotted with the
flesh; against which work the Serpent and his seed, in all Ages have set
themselves, and took counsel together, and made Laws and decrees, even to
hinder the appearance, growth, and Dominion of the Righteous seed, and Image of
God which is Christ (in his people in all generations,) the seed of the woman
which is brusing the Serpents head.

Therefore All ye Rulers, Priests, Bishops, Lip-professors, and people who are
gainsayers of the light, the truth, the way of God in his people, and are
persecutors, opposers, proud, wanton, disdainful, wild, scornful and rebellious
against Gods witness, that lets you see your evil deeds and vain conversation:
and all you swearers and drunkards, liars, envious, unbeleiving whoremongers,
hypocrites, whores, sorcerers, fearful and abominable, you are all without
(without are dogs (the biters) and every one that loves and makes a Lie.

Hear this you that oppose the power of the pure dreadful God, and its mighty
works amongst the children of men, which he has begun in his people, (called
Quakers) it is too weighty for you, it shall break you to pieces, and confound
you, (its Gods work you oppose and not man's) and if you say in your hearts, you
will make us bow before you have done with us, I tell you nay, God has raised
a seed in us of his own life and Image, (can ye not understand) which can never
bow to unrighteousness, Idolatry, hypocricy, and deceit, but stand in the Royal
power, and Authority of the Living God, bearing testimony against it, and fear
not him that can but kill the body, and after that has power to do no more,
but is in the pure fear, dread, and terrible power of the Almighty God, who
has raised it up, compassing it about, as a wall of fire and you can never
quench it, for it is that love (which is stronger then death,) that is shed
abroad in our hearts, (blessed is the man that hears, beleiveth, and
receives it,) therefore it is imposible for you to prevail against it, unless
you could prevail against God, or were stronger then him, then might you
hinder his handy works and mighty wonders which he has determined to bring to
pass in these last days, for let me tell you the Kings, and Rulers, Priests,
and Bishops for to you now am I speaking, and that from the eternal God of
Heaven, that you are at this day verily opposing the great and weighty work of
God which he will accomplish, and none shall be able to hinder, and verily you
shall as easily pluck the Sun, Moon, and Stars, out of the Firmament (in which
the living God has set them by his power, and orders them by his wisdom,) as
stop, hinder, or fustrate the decree or purpose of God, concerning his people,
and their Enemies in these last days.

For the day is come, of which his former Prophets have prophesied, and
declared, that in the last days, he would pour out of his spirit upon his sons
and daughters, and they should prophecy; But this is a strange work which you
cannot understand, as it is witten, many shall be tried, purified, and made
white, but the wicked, will do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand [who are in that wisdom which the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of:] And in the day when the proud were
called happy, and them that tempted God, were even delivered, did some fear the
Lord, and met often together, and thought upon his name, for when a book of
remembrance was written before the Lord, and they shall be mine says God, and
I will spare them, as a man spares his son that serves him (though men will
not spare them, who are servants of the Devil,) and is not this the day, ye
this is the day, even the notable day, the great and dreadful day, in which the
mighty God will cut short his work in Righteousness, and because of this,
Nations shall be distressed, and in great perplexity, the Sea shall roar, and
men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming upon the Earth, and men shall walk like blind men, because of their
Rebellion against God, and God shall send his Plagues upon the Earth, like
showers of Hail, even Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence, and Earthquakes, and
dreadful Thunderings upon the head of the wicked, and all flesh shall fail
before him, and the Mountains shall quake at his presence, for the terible God
shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice in Jerusalem, and the earth shall
tremble, and pain shall take hold of the ungodly as a woman in travail, and
they shall not escape.

Therefore seek not to get ease, and covering, by your unrighteous decrees
against the Saints of the most high God, or by afflicting and abusing them; for
we whom you have thus dealt with, are his chosen Generation, his Royal
preisthood, his peculiar people, zealous of good works, whose cause he will
plead with all flesh, and there is not a man upon the face of the whole earth,
that God has respect unto, or his offering, but in this seed of Abraham (which
is Christ in us) which he has raised to offer up living sacrifices, acceptable
in his sight, for the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to him, and there
are but two seeds, roots, or grounds (as (I have said) from whence all good and
evil springs, the one is the seed of Gods own sowing, which is now arising to
spread over the whole earth even the Plant of Righteousness, Truth, and Equity,
and the other is the seed of Enmity against God, his truth and people; and this
is the seed of evil doers, which shall never be renowned: And the son of God is
come the seed of Renown, and has given us an understanding, that we know him
that is true, (and are in him that is true) and we know him that is false and
out of the truth, and we know God only is to be worshipped, and the Devil
denied, though he might rage, storm, and persecute, or promise all the Glory,
Kingdoms, and pleasures of this world, to be bowed unto, or worshipped, yet the
Royal seed cannot give glory to another, therefore would the Devil (like his
son Haman) have him destroyed out of the world, in which he himself has been
worshipped as God, blinding, and vailing the mind of mankind, from the true
knowledge and understanding, of the noble seed, (the heir) whose right it is
alone to Reign, and he must Reign [now] till all his enemies are trampled
under his feet, the Lord has spoken it, to whom be all Honor, Worship, Glory,
Dominion, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Eternal songs of deliverance, and
Redemptions, over all Heaven and Earth, Halelujah, Amen.

ALL you Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Episcopal men, or any other that are
professing God, Christ and Scriptures, and are offering Sacrifice in your own
wills, and time, and places, out of the fear, and counsel, and wisdom of God.

This is the word of the Lord God, you and your Sacrifices are not accepted in
his sight, but are Abomination unto him, even iniquity and Idolatry, and all
your prayers, singings, preachings, fastings, feastings, and roarings, enters
not into the ears of the Lord God of Sabboths, but is a smoke in his nostrils
all the day long, and all your Sacrifices, and Sacraments (as you call them)
are not better in the sight of the pure living God of Heaven, then if you cut
off a Dogs neck, or offered Swines blood, for it is so you offer Swines blood,
(and not the blood of the Lamb without spot, the acceptable seed) and the broth
of Abominable things (which the Lord abhors) is in your Vessels; if you have
ears to hear, hear, you offer Swines blood, the life of the Swine (the greedy
devourer) that lives in your dwellings, in which the Devils is entered, and you
are running violently down the steep place, and you will perish among the
waters if you Repent not, and turn speedily, the Lord has spoken it.

Therefore hear, hear you that are offering Sacrifice, and prayers, (called
Common) and are in your will Worships, and feigned humility, never commanded of
God, and though you make a great noise with your Organs, and Sacraments, and
Surplices, and Tippits, and Girdles, and tables, and fingings, and pipings, and
ringings, and the like, its all but as the hidious howling of a Dog at
midnight, whilst you live in lusts, envy, pride, coveteousness,,
coveteousness,, and unrighteousness, and no more accepted of the Righteous
holy, just God, then Cains was (the Vagabond) who slew his brother, being in
the same nature and ground of malice, and wickedness, and God has set a mark
upon you, (as upon Cain) which shall never be blotted out, unless you turn, and
be converted (from that root) and sink down in your minds to the righteous
suffering seed in you, which never had fellowship in these things in which you
are thus excercised, but reproves you in secret for sin, and lets you see the
evil and vanity of your ways.

For while you do evil sin lies at your door, and your prayers and Sacrifices
do not enter into the acceptance of the holy God, for God hears not sinners,
but if any man be a Worshiper of God, and does his will him he hears, but
none worships God, but them (...) worship him in spirit and in truth, even in
that spirit which you daily greive and provoke with your abominations, and
Sacrifices, and Oblations, sinning, and superstitions which he is weary to
bear, of which he will shortly ease himself, and of you also, if you proceed in
these things which never came into his mind to commend or require at your hands.

Therefore hear and consider, and fear and tremble before the just God of
power, who is arisen to plead with you about these things, and will reprove you
for your words, worships, and Sacrifices, feigned imitations, which are without
the true knowledge, darkening the Counsel of God in your own selves and others,
whereby his pure way of life and truth is not heeded, but evil spoken of, and
his Eternal Counsel (by you) is not understood, which is to stand still in the
Light of Christ Jesus the Savior, and not will, nor run, but as led and guided
by it; which leads out of all unrighteousness, into soberness, goodness,
equity, and all truth, and it will let you see (if you are quiet in your minds)
that the jealous God of holiness, has no fellowship, nor delight in your ways
of superstition and wickedness, but secretly says, Return return, this is
not your rest for it is poluted; but and if you will not hear, and come into
the still waters of Shiloah, which run saftly, but will still ride upon Horses,
even go on in the strength of your wills in your great noise of false worships,
ways, Sacrifices, and ungodliness, then they that pursue you (even the
Judgments of God) shall be very swift against you faith the Lord God of Hosts.

This is your warning, and visitation as shall be witnessed whether you hear or
forbear.

Some occasional Queries concerning a Vagabond.
1. Qu. Whether the ground of being a Vagabond, be the want of an outward
Inheritance, Habitation, or earthly riches, or certain dwelling place in the
Earth (as some have said) yea or nay, if yea, then how was Cain as a Vagabond,
seeing he was a Rich man, and had an Inheritance and certain dwelling place in
the Earth, who builded a City, and called it after the name of his son, Genesis 4.

2. Qu. And if the want of an outward Inheritance, or certain dwelling place in
the Earth be the only ground of being a Vagabond, then whether Abraham was a
Vagabond when he went out of his own Country, not knowing whether he went,
(having not so much ground as to set his foot on,) of whom it is written, he is
called the friend of God, Acts 7. Heb. 11.

For there has been a great noise in the World, amongst the Rich and great
men, and professors thereof, in these latter days, saying, if you cannot give
an account of your certain dwelling place, habitation, or place of abode in the
earth, we account you as Vagabonds, and wanderers, and Rogues, and you must be
prosecuted against as such, by our Law, Ordinace, or Act of Parliament or the
like; which if they have such a Law that does Judge and conclude, such to be
Vagabonds as have no certain dwelling place in the earth and that this (in
their account) is the ground of being a Vagabond, then mark how far this Law
will reach.

3. Qu. Whether it will not reach as far in this case as did the Scribs and
Pharisees, the Jews Law, to the son of God, who said we have a Law, and by our
Law he ought to dye, for said Christ, the Foxes have holes, (such as Herod) and
the fowls of the Air have nests, (of whom the Devil is Ruler) but the son of
man has no where to lay his head.

Now this Law taks hold of him, and of Abraham his friend, and of his Apostles
and Prophets in the days past who wandered in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins,
being destitute and afflicted, having no certain dwelling place: But if you say
nay, these are no Vagabonds, though Christ had not a place to lay his head on,
nor Abraham a foot of ground, and wandered into a strange Country, not knowing
whether he went, and the Apostles and Patriarks wandered, and were in Dens and
Caves of the Earth, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented by the wicked men
of the World (who was not worthy of them) having no certain dwelling place,
yet these were no Vagabonds, but good men, Righteous men, sincere and holy men
of God.

4. Qu. Then what is the absolute ground of being a Vagabond, seeing these men
are no Vagabonds, though they have no certain dwelling place (but wandered up
and down) in the earth, and that Cain is a Vagabond, though a rich man and
builded a City.

5. Qu. Whether the word [Vagabond] does not signify a separation or wandering
from God (who is truth and love) or a being banished from his presence, by
reason of envy, murder, and rage, which seperates from the pure just God.

For Cain said (when he had been wrath and had slain his brother,) now shall I
be a Vagabond and a fugitive in the Earth, and from thy presence shall I be
hid (mark that) and behold every one that finds me, will s ay me, so he fled
from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, (on the East of
Eden,) where this Murderer built a City (a strong hold) being afraid every one
that found him would kill him, mark here the first builder in the Earth was a
Vagabond, a rich man a persecutor, and a Murderer about Sacrifice, Genesis 45.

6. Qu. Now whether envy, wrath, persecution, murder, cruelty, oppression, and
imprisoning about Sacrifice and Worship, be not the very ground and cause of
being a Vagabond, or separated from God and not the want of a certain dwelling
place in the Earth.

Seeing Cain is a Vagabond, though he builded a City, and Abraham, and the
Apostles and Prophets, and many other holy men of God and Christ, are no
Vagabonds, though they wandered and had no City, house, or dwelling place in the
Earth, or so much ground as to set their foot, or to lay their head on.

7. Qu. Whether God has not chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and
heirs of his everlasting Kingdom, and whether the rich men that did oppress
them, and draw them before Judgments seats, were not the blasphemers, and such
as tormented and afflicted them, in envy, ambition, and wrath, were not the
Vagabonds, seeing such things seperates from God, and hides his presence from
them.

8. Qu. Whether Lazarus was a Vagabond, who was very poor, and lay begging at
the rich man's Gate, where the Dogs came, in more love then their owner) ticking
his sores, or whether this hard hearted Rich man was not the Vagabond, seeing
he was cast into Hell torments, where he was separated (with a great Gulf) from
the presence and Glory of Gods love for ever, and Lazarus the beggar carried
into Abraham's bosom, (the friend of God) by an Angel, being comforted, and the
other (who lived in pleasures unrighteousness; and deliciousness, every day in
his life time) tormented Luke 16. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

Now seeing Cain is a Vagabond, being in the wrath, envy, and transgression,
(the ground of it;) Let us search the line of true Judgment yet further, and
see if we can find more rich men to be Vagabonds, and Blasphemers, though they
have Citys (like Cain,) or habitations in the Earth.

9. Qu. Whether Ishmael (the wild man the mock and scoffer) was not cast out
of Abraham's house (the friend of God) into whose bosom the poor man Lazarus was
carried and whether he was not separated by his wildness mocking and enmity,
(whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him,) from the
presence of God and was a Vagabond, seeing the word Vagabond signifies a
separation, or being driven from, (or cast out of Gods presence.

10. Qu. Whether Esau the cunning Hunter the profane person, was not a
Vagabond, seeing he sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage and lost the
blessing, and afterward sought a place of Repentance, but could not find it,
(but was rejected,) though he sought it carefully with tears; (consider this ye
profane and ungodly ones, whose pleasures, and treasures are in this life) out
of whose Loins came the Dukes of Edom, and twelve Princes from the Loins of
Ishmael (the wild man the mocker and scoffer, who was cast out of Abraham's
house,) and these had Towns and Castles (like their brother Cain) and great
possessions in the Earth, Genesis 21.9, 25.16, 36.40. H^b. 12.16.

11. Qu. Whether such as are in the envious wrathful, wild, mocking, and
scoffing nature. [Now] and are profane persons cunningly hunting [Now] and
persecuting and afflicting about Sacrifice [Now] and drawing the poor of this
world, (wh are chosen rich in faith, and heirs of Gods Kingdom) before the
Judgment seats [Now,] Whether these are not the Blasphemers, Vagabonds, and
separated from Gods presence [Now] (in this state) though they may be great and
rich in this world (as the Princes of Ishmael Cain, and the Dukes of Edom,)
seeing God has chosen the poor of this world rich in fai h, and heirs of his
Kingdom without end, from which Cain was a Vagabond, though he builded a City,
and called it after the name of his son, Genesis 4.17.

THerefore hearken all you Kings, Rulers, Governors and people upon earth, and
take heed you do not persecute and imprison, or abuse the servants and Children
of the most high God, (wherever they come in your Dominions or Countries) under
the name of Vagabonds, wanderers, or Idle persons, or the like, (who come in
love to your souls;) And be you warned that you hurt not them, who do no evil,
I charge you in the name of the dreadful God that made heaven and earth, least
you bring Innocent blood upon your own heads, and as you will answer it in the
terrible day at hand, for the Almighty God is no respecter of persons, (who is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;) neither does poverty or riches in this
world, make a Vagabond, or keep from being a Vagabond, for they were no
Vagabonds, who had here no continuing City, but sought one to come, whose
builder and maker is God, though they wandered about in sheep skins, and Goat
skins, in Dens and Caves of the earth, yet these were no Vagabonds, but had a
habitation in God, of whom they obtained a good report, through faith, and were
blessed; of whom the world was not worthy.

And if any of us, who are of the same seed, and generation, and built upon the
same foundation Christ Jesus, (the Light that lights every man,) who was
hated, scorned, derided, and drawn from prison to Judgment; I say if any of us
who declare his Generation now, (by afflictions, persecutions, cruel mockings
imprisonments, and drawing before Judgment seats) should like Abraham in
obedience to the voice of the Lord God of our fathers, go out of our own
Countries, not knowing whether we went, even we who are called Quakers, (that
tremble at his word,) yet we are no Vagabonds, but obedient children and
servants of the most high God of power, and compassions, before whom all
Nations shall bow and tremble; Therefore be awakened all ye Rulers and
Inhabitants of the Earth, and consider these things, and be not rash heady, nor
high minded, nor hasty to give heed to false reports, or to fulfill the lusts
and wills of envious wrathful and ambitious men, or to lay hands suddenly, or
violently on any, without just cause, but be meek, patient, and sober, and
search out the truth of causes, and controversies, and consider the Scriptures
before written, for the people of the living God, are at this day strangers and
Pilgrims in the Earth, as all our fathers were; Therefore fear God, and be very
careful, (heeding the light, his witness in you which lets you see between good
and evil) for some have entertained Angles unawares, Heb. 13.2.

Be wise thererore now O ye Kings and Rulers, and be instructed, and learn
Righteousness, ye that be Juddges of the Earth, and serve the God with fear and
trembling, least his anger be wholly kindled against you, and then you perish
from the way of everlasting peace and happyness.

I am a lover of the Holy God and good men of truth, mercy, and Righteousness,
and am w^y^ing in the spirit of Love and patience for the Resurrection of the
dead, that the Righteous and holy seed may arise, and come into Rule and
Dominon, in and through the whole Creation, called William Bailey.

THe decree of God, the first Birth is to slay,
That all its fruits and Offspring might decay,
Which has sild the Earth with Pride and Violence
Even like the Plague, and grevious Pestilence;
The zeal of God, against it now does burn,
Which will consum't, in Jacobs blessed return;
For the first born of Egypt, must be brought
To death, who has the seconds mischief sought,
Which now must rule, the Nations with his Rod,
Though Cain may flee, and build in the Land of Nod,
Yet there his hand, will find him out again,
Then endless will be, his punishment and pain,
And all that came from the first Birth must go
In It Condemnation, and eternal woe,
Which caused the wrath of God, on earth to come,
Therefore its great destruction, is the Sun
Of what the Prophets by past, have declared
That Babylon no longer should be spared,
But Vengeance on her head, should poured be,
That all her Plagues, and nakedness may see,
And by her Torments learn, for to amend,
Least furious Plagues, again on them he send;
For with his sword he will cut down Ceadars tall,
And with great noise, Now Babylon must fall,
And all her Merchants, they shall weep and wail,
For God will neither leave her, head nor tail,
And he will not spare his Arrows for to spend
Till of her seed h'hath made a final end;
All flesh shall fail, all knees shall feeble be
The Joints and Loins of men, now loosed you will see,
The Earth shall reel, the Mountains they shall quake,
Because God pleads with them for his Seeds sake,
These things are near, and hasten they do now
The time is come, that Nations all must bow
To him that is born, who must the Scepter sway,
And bring to dust, what stands against his way
His Name is Light his burden is so to,
Easy his Yoke, to those who life for-goe,
And in his Name sake, and in his will can rest,
These are the Souls that are for ever blessed
But as for them that will not he should Reign
The time draws near, in which they must be slain. Amen
Ha le lu jah.
W. B

Babylon the Great is fallen is fallen, and become the habitation of Devils,
Revel. 18.
THE END

