THE RESURRECTION Founded on Justice.

THE Resurrection founded on Justice: OR, A VINDICATION OF THIS Great Standing
Reason Assigned by the Ancients and Modern: WHEREIN The Objections of the
Learned Dr. HODY against it, are Answered: Some Opinions of Tertullian about
it, Examined: The Learned Doctor's three Reasons of the Resurrection, Inquired
into: And some Considerations from Reason and Scriptures, laid down for the
Establishment of it.

By N. B. M. A.

Si Resurrectio non est, neque Deus, neque Providentia. Damasc. lib. 4. Non sit
Particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit and in Causa. Tertul. de Resur.
Carn. cap. 15. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Helder, at the Angel in
Little-Britain. MDCC.

TO THE READER.
THis small Tract is sent into the World without the shelter and protection of
any Patronage; if it be Truth, it needs none; if otherwise, it deserves none;
Such as it is, it is well meant, and humbly submitted to the Judgment of the
Learned. Being sensible of my manifest insufficiency, no ways furnished with
Abilities or Advantages to manage the Dispute with the Learned Author; I laid
all thoughts of it aside, presuming that some worthy Hand would undertake it:
But after a long expectation, finding nothing but a deep Silence, the great
opinion that I have of the Argument grew so mightily upon me, as that it has by
a strong impulse compelled me to say somewhat for it; not out of any fond
conceit of my own performance, but to provoke others to appear in Vindication
of that Doctrine, which has been Taught, Approved, Applauded by all without
exception, in all Ages; and always represented as the Basis and Pillar of this
great Article of our Faith. For my Apology I have the Practice of the Long
Robe, which allows the Puisney Lawyer to open the great Cause which afterward
is taken and maintained by the most able Counsel: And in Martial Discipline,
nothing more usual than for a Private Sentinel, seeing the Enemies approach, to
give the Allarm to the more Generous Commanders to come in to the Relief of
that Post, which himself was no ways able to maintain. This in truth is the
design of this small Essay, to cry out for help, and call in the assistance of
Men of Conduct and Learning. It matters not though he who gave the first
Charge, fail in the Engagement, as too impotent to withstand the more powerful
Arms of his mighty Adversary; ^ut he has this satisfaction, that he has
appeared in a good Cause, has according to the proportion of his Talent,
contributed his utmost Aid, has withal the Honor to fall by a great Hand, and
like Scaeva in the Poet, overpowered by an unequal Force, he sinks with his
Assurance, -- Veniet qui vindicet arces
Dum morimur --
That some noble Caesar with his puissant Auxiliaries is at Hand, Some
accomplished Pen will take up the Argument and do it Right, which here (though I
can truly say, is heartily, yet must confess) is very weakly attempted.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. Shows the Import of the Resurrection. Chap. II. What Oppositions it
has met withal. Chap. III. On what Grounds it stands, and how the Objections
against it are Answered, with a brief Analysis of this Discourse. Chap. IV.
Sets out the State of the Argument, and shows how it has been the great Reason
assigned by all Jews, Fathers, Schoolmen, and Moderns. Chap. V. Contains the
three Objections of the Learned Author against it, with an Answer to the first.
Chap. VI. Gives a further Answer. Chap. VII. Offers Satisfaction to the second
Objection. Chap. VIII. From several Topics proves our Bodies to be more than
Instruments only. Chap. IX. Contains an Answer to the third Objection. Chap. X.
Examineth three Opinions of Tertullian about it. Chap. XI. Inquireth into the
three Reasons of the Doctrine assigned by the Learned Author. Chap. XII.
Shows the third Reason to be the same with that which is here contended for.
Chap. XIII, alias XIV. Lays down several Arguments from Reason for the
Esablishment of it. Chap. XIV, alias XV. Vrges several Authorities from
Scripture to the same Purpose. With the Conclusion.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis one Error the Reader is desired more especially to correct, page 69. line
12. after not, add fully.

ERRATA. PAge 19. Line 10. read Lirinensis; P. 21. l. 10. r. concession; l.
ultr r. detected; p. 71. l. 10. for Peter r. Paul; p. 79. l. 13. r.
dispossessed; p. 99. (Notes) l. 4. after Deos dele and the, ib. l. 7 before Old
add And the; p. 111. l. 18. r. Graces; p. 126. l. 5. r. implied.

These and what other Errors may have passed the Press, the Candid Reader is
desired to Correct and Excuse.

CHAP. I.
THE Resurrection of the Dead, is the Grand and most Important Article of our
Religion; the Groundwork and Foundation of our Faith, Hope, and Expectation:
To fix Men in the Belief of which, was the main Business, Design, and Province
of the Apostles, as St Luke once and again has noted This is assigned as the
chief Reason of St Matthias's admission into the Apostleship, in the vacancy of
Judas Iscariot; that he might be a Witness of the Resurrection, Acts 1. 22. And
the whole College is frequently described by this Character, Witnesses of the
Resurrection, Acts 2. 32. 4. 33. 10. 41. and Acts 4. 2. They Preached through
Jesus the Resurrection of the Dead: This was the first, and great Argument of
St. Peter's Sermon upon his Inspiration, on the Day of Penticost, which was
attended with the blessed success of the Conversion of more than Three Thousand
souls, Acts 2. 41. it filled a great part of the rest of his, and their
Discourses. This was the principal Topic of St. Paul upon all occasions: In
his Sermon to the People, Acts 13. it is interwoven through every Part: In his
Disputation with the most learned Philosophers, the Epicureans and Stoics, in
the most learned University of the whole World, He Preached unto them Jesus and
the Resurrection, Acts 17. 18. In his conferences with the Scribes and the
Pharisees, he Discourses of the Hope and Resurrection of the Dead, Acts 23. 6.
In short, he keeps this Text and Theme still before the Rulers and Governors,
Felix, Festus, and Agrippa; and Drift, Design, and Nerves of his Discourses
meet and concenter in this great Article: Nay it seems plain and undeniable
that this was in a more peculiar and especial manner given them in charge, by
their great Master, who ordained them, as it is clearly intimated by St. Peter,
Acts 10. 42. He commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testify that it
was he that was ordained of God to be Judge both of the Quick and of the Dead;
the reason of this is visible at the first glance, from the repeated
Description which St. Paul gives of the Resurrection: In one place he calls it
The Hope and Resurrection, Acts 23. 6. in another, Acts 26. 6. The Hope of the
Promise made of God unto our Fathers, unto which Promise our Twelve Tribes,
instantly serving God Day and Night, hope to come; for which Hope's sake, King
Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews: The Apostle in the words next, and
immediately following, explains himself beyond all doubt. Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with you, that God should Raise the Dead? The
Resurrection then is, The Hope of the Promise, or rather the Reward hoped for
at the Resurrection, which in truth is the Life and Soul of Religion, the most
effectual and powerful motive to Piety, which makes every good Man
(notwithstanding the multitude of difficulties and discouragements, with which
he is at present surrounded) in love with it, and ingages him cheerfully and
immovably in God's Service. The encouragements of all our actions and labors
here is the expectation of some what lovely which attends them in the end:
Wherefore does the Ploughman Sweat and Toil, Dig and Delve, engage early and
late in the painful labors of Husbandry through the whole Circuit of it, Is it
not because he has a prospect of a joyful Harvest; when the Valleys shall st
and so thick with Corn, that they shall laugh and Sing, Psalm. 65. ult.
Wherefore does the Soldier run through so many Hardships, engage in so many
Difficulties, expose himself to so many imminent Dangers? What think you? are
not the considerations of the Rich Spoils, the Glorious Victory and Triumph, on
the other side of this Scene of Blood Slaughter and Death, the strong
Magneticks to draw him on? Can it be imagined that the Combatant at the
Olympicks would put himself at the expense of that Oil, Exercise and Pains,
which are indispensibly necessary to his Character, were it not for the
allurement of that Crown at the end of the Goal, which appears in his Eye most
beautiful and charming.

Take away the Resurrection, and you cut asunder the Nerves and Ligatures of
Religion, secure it and you have set it up; the denial of this shocks, and
overturns the other Articles of our Faith. The Establishment of it fixes them:
This I take to be the Import of the Hope of the Promise, and I am confirmed in
it from the use of the Hebrews, who were wont to call the Resurrection the
Seculum Mercedis, the great time of Recompense.

This Argument is professedly and largly handled by the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 15.
on both sides; where from the Negative, he acknowledges the Folly, the Vanity,
the Madness of preaching, setting up for, or pretending to Religion; then i. e.
if this great Truth labor, all that is built on it must of course fall to the
ground; then is our Preaching Vain, our Faith Vain: The great Heralds of the
Gospel are False Witnesses, we are in our Sins: Then those that are fallen
asleep in Christ are perished. The Apostle goes on, ver. 19. If in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most miserable. Whereas
Christians, with a supposition of a Resurrection and the immediate attendants
of it, must be confessed to take the best, and the wisest course, to have the
start and advantage of all Mankind besides: The contrary does most justly
charge them with weakness, folly, and distraction; and in the prosecution of
the Argument, he plainly lays open the Reasons of the same, ver. 29. Else what
shall they do that are Baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all; why
are they then Baptized for the dead, and why stand ye in jepordy every hour?
The true intent and meaning of which place (without engaging in the Intricacies
and Difficulties of it, which is a thing excentrick to my present purpose) I
take to be this. To what end do Men tie themselves up to the strict
Observations of this Way of Worship, and willingly expose themselves to all
manner of Butcheries, to most cruel Tortures, Racks, and Deaths? If there be no
Resurrection, this way is the most senseless and ridiculous: If so, the Saints
were Fools, the Martyrs were Fools, those that crucified their Bodies by the
severities of Mortification and Self-denial, must be confessed weak in their
intellectuals; and those that exposed themselves to Fire and Faggot, to the
Torments of the Amphitheatre, the most Cruel and Barbarous usages which Men or
Devils could invent to treat them with, were egregiously deceived and deluded.
The Apostle brings home the Argument to himself, ver. 31, 32. I protest by your
rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily; If after the
manner of Men I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me if
the dead rise not? Let us Eat and Drink, for to morrow we die; where the
Apostle counting his Practice, his Perils, his Sufferings, readily grants all
these to be mistakes and miscarriages, without the Resurrection; and prefers
the Doctrine and Practice of the Epicure before it. To what end should Men
Fast, Watch, and Pray, and deny themselves the enjoyments of this World, keep
under their Bodies, and bring them into subjection? To what end should Men
endure the contradictions of Sinners? To what end should Men expose themselves
to all the hardships, and misusages of Men of a wicked and barbarous World if
there be no Resurrection? But on the contrary, to our everlasting Comfort and
Encouragement, he assures us of a Resurrection; and That a most glorious one
too, which is the grand Subject of the remaining part of the Chapter; on which,
as on a Foundation impossible to be shaken, he endeavors to fix the Faith and
Practice of the Corinthians, and with them, of all that embrace this Holy
Profession: Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord: Go on with Courage, Resolution, and Perseverance, in
the conscientious discharge of your Profession, assuring your selves that there
are Golden Remains of goodness, and incomparable rewards that await Holiness in
the other World.

CHAP. II.
HOwever this great Article of our Faith, has met with ill treatment in the
World; it has in a great measure been made the Scoff, Derision, and Laughter of
Mankind, the subject of the pastime of the Scorner's Chair. When St. Paul at
Athens preached it up, he was, by the learned Professors and Philosophers,
there called Babbler, and a setter up of strange Gods for his pains, Acts 17.
18, nor did it find a kinder Reception among the People; for so we are expressly
told, ver. 32. When they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead, some mocked,
others said we will hear thee again of this matter. Neither had it a more civil
fate among the Governors, for upon this account Festus declares him beside
himself, and pronounces him mad, Acts 26. 24. The great Naturalist has given
his opinion much after the same rate, and has confidently averred it to be
beyond the power of God himself to bring it to pass. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 7.
The great Emperor and Apostate Julian, though he generally ridiculed all the
Doctrines of our Religion; yet this more especially. The ingenious, though
Atheistical Dialogist makes himself merry more than once upon this subject. It
would be too tedious to recount the like behavior of Porphiry and Celsus, and
other the professed adversaries of Christianity, in this matter: I shall
therefore give it you in a lump and wholesale from the known Testimonies of
Tertullian and St. Austin; The first tells us, there was not one sect of
Philosophers whatsoever but opposed it: The last assures us, There was no one
point of our Religion so vehemently, so pertinaciousty, so stiffly, so
contentiously rejected* they entertained some other Doctrines with respect and
favor; but for this of the Resurrection, they are not mealy-mouthed, they no
sooner hear it but it raises their indignation, they instantly reject, censure,
condemn it, and with open mouth boldly proclaim it impossible, in Psalm. 88.

CHAP. III.
NOtwithstanding all those Sarchasms and Contradictions of Sinners, this
Heavenly Doctrine is fixed on immovable Foundations, and will, and must stand
impregnable amidst all the shocks and assaults made against it: It Is built on a
Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. We are as strongly
secured here as of any one Article of our Faith, and that without being
beholden to the Ludicrous stories of the Jews, or the Idle and Fabulous Reports
of Pinto and the Heathens, which do the Doctrine no kindness, but disservice
rather. It Is supported on the unanimous Testimonies of the Fathers, of the
Councils, of the Creeds: The plain and undeniable Authorities of the Old, and
more especially the New Testament. The word and Promise of an Alknowing,
Infallible, Omnipotent God. So that all, or at least the most considerable
Objections that have been brought against it, are dashed in pieces and laid
even with the Dust; from the consideration of the Veracity and Alsufficiency of
that God, who has bound himself and his Attributes for the performance.

I am not ignorant how many learned and ingenious Men have taken much pains to
solve, from the principle of Philosophy, the Arguments brought against it. I
honor and admire them for their preformances; but I must freely say, I much
question whether the attempts of this kind come up to the point, whether they
are not too low and inferior to give it satisfaction.

My Reason is this, The Resurrection is confessed by all to be a work above
Nature, and how it can be made out by Natural Philosophy, I cannot understand.

Our Reason must be beholding to Revelation in this matter, and call in the
assistance of Faith, without which there can be no Assurance. In short, if we
believe the Creation, I cannot see any stumbling block here, that Power who
made the World and Man at first, out of nothing, must be readily acknowledged
able to raise him from the Grave, and to join together the scattered Particles
of his dissolved Body. The one seems more easy than the other: This is the
great, the Common Argument of the Ancients, and has without doubt been more
effectual to the purpose than a Cart-load of Chimical Experiments, than all the
notions of the most subtle Philosophers. But this I have said to make way to
my Design, which is to enquire into the strength of the Argument for the
Resurrection from a principle of Justice; In which I shall take this Method,

1. I shall briefly lay down the State of the Argument

2. I shall show how it has been the Great, the Principal, the most Topping,
and Chiefest Argument of all Ages.

3. I shall offer to answer the Objections which are levied against it.

4. I shall Examine his Reasons of the Resurrection.

Vlt. I shall endeavor to establish the Doctrine by such considerations as I
hope will secure it.

CHAP. IV.
THE State of the Argument in short is, The Body and the Soul are here joined
together as sharers in all the Concerns and Actions of this Life which is a
state of Probation, and therefore they are to stand or fall together in the
next, which is a state of Remuneration. The Body of the Saint and Good Man
concurs with his Soul in the exercise of Virtue and Piety in this World; and
can there be any thing more equitable than that they should be joined together
in that which is to come? On the the other hand, the Body of the Sinner must be
allowed a Partner with the Soul in Evil; and is there not all the reason in the
World that it should stand forth at the Bar, and be joined with it in the
punishment? The contrary must be pronounced downright Injustice. Can we have
such hard thoughts of the most Righteous Judge, that he should admit the Soul
of the Martyr upon his dissolution, to that Glorious Crown which he has
promised in the highest Heavens; and mean while have no regard to the Crucified
Tortured, Body that has born the heat and burden of the Day; been the saddest
Patient in all the Tragedy; but suffer it to lie neglected in the Grave? Vlt.
How can we imagine that the Soul of the Reprobate should be condemned to the
Torments of Tophet, for those sins it committed in conjunction with the Body;
and that the Body it self should escape scotfree, sleep undisturbed in the
Grave, and neither know nor feel any thing of those Flames. In this case have
we not reason to cry out with the Prophet Malachy, 2. 17. Where is the God of
Judgment? For Justice carries in the very Nature of it a due and impartial
distribution of Rewards and Punishments. If two work together, both have a
right to the Wages; it is downright injustice to give all to One, and nothing to
the Other. This is the substance of the Argument, of which I must take leave
further to acquaint the Reader, that it has been the great, the standing
Argument of all persuasions of Men in all Ages: In the first place I affirm
this was the great reason which the Jews still used and applied to the same
purpose. I would not boast of what I have not, I cannot pretend to Rabbinical
Learning; yet I am sure of what I assert, because many learned Men have told me
so, and I have seen Maimonides their second Solomon, their Renowned Epitomizer
in Latin; and many times met with the famous Fable of the Rabbis, which
because it comes home and pat to the purpose, I here insert: There was a great
Lord who planted a delicious Garden, wherein he placed two Keepers, a Blind Man
and a Lame Man, that he might be secure of his Fruit on all hands; but so it
was that after some time he found himself Robbed: He charges the Keepers with
the Theft; they both offer very plausible excuses; the Blind Man pleads he
could not see the Fruit, and therefore could not Steal it: The Lame Man
alleges the Infirmity of his Feet, he could not reach it, and so could not
take it away: At last the fallacy was found out, viz. 'Twas done by the mutual
combination of both: The Blind Man takes the Lame Man on his back, by whose
direction and assistance he is guided to the Trees, lifted up to the Fruit, and
so enabled to take it away; whereupon the Master after all their excuses, to no
purpose, gives them their doom; Both were joined in the Sin, and Both must
share in the Punishment. This is the case of the Body and the Soul, says the
Jewish Masters: The one acts in conjunction with the other; one could not Sin
without the other, and therefore both must stand and fall together; And I
cannot forbear to add, Nec Lex est justior ulla.

2. I do affirm this to be the constant, professed, most solemn reason, most
often and upon all occasions made use of by most, if not all the Fathers
without exception. The Learned and vastly read Author in his Elaborate
Treatise, has given us a considerable number of them, p. 209. Athenagor as,
Tertullian, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Theodoret,
Aenaeas Gazaeus, Damascenus, Nilus, Photius; and has cited the places. And
though I cannot pretend to any degree of the Doctor's knowledge in the Fathers,
yet I can easily give him a much larger List, and produce the places too; but
this I industriously avoid, because every Common-Place-Book will afford it; and
because it would be justly liable to Censure, and because in the present case
it is altogether needless, forasmuch as the Learned Author has liberally
granted, That all the ancient Greeks and Latins agree in this, that God is
obliged in justice to reward or punish the Body together with the Soul: Nay,
Origin himself who has set up a different Hypothesis makes use of the same.
It Is beside my intention to stuff this small Essay with a multitude of great
Names and Quotations.

In the next place I take leave to say that this is the great and main reason,
made use of in the present Argument, by the Master of the Sentences. The
Angelical Doctor, and the whole Tribe of the Schoolmen, as any one that has but
looked into them must acknowledge, and the Doctor himself has owned. In the
last place, I affirm this to be the main, chief, and constant reason urged by
all Modern Writers, Commentators, and others, not only of our own, but other
Nations: For my part I speak it uprightly, I can cast mine Eyes on no Book on
the subject, but I meet with it; and that not among the Scriblers of the lower
Rank, but amongst the Masters of the Assemblies, the most celebrated Authors,
Men of Renown in their Generations. I could easily fill a great deal of Paper
here, but I shall dismiss this Consideration with one Authority only, and that
is of the Learned Grotius, on Mat. 2. 32. Inter omnia Argumenta quae ad
probandam Resurrectionem adhiberi solent, etc. -- Amongst all the Arguments
which are brought to prove the Resurrection, I know none more effectual and
proper, than that which Clement the Bishop of Rome was wont to urge, having
received it from St. Peter, that if God be just there must be a Resurrection;
and this Doctrine this great Man approves of, and in that place establishes
with no mean Authorities. Whither (not to transcribe) I refer the Reader; and
because he tells us, 'twas the Doctrine which St. Clement received from St.
Peter, I could heartily wish that I could find out this passage in St. Clement,
in order whereunto I must confess I have sought after it, and have found it,
but not to my satisfaction, among the Dialogues of St. Peter and Simon Magus;
the 2d. Dialogue which bears the name of St. Clement, but no doubt is spurious,
and therefore not to be insisted on, nor recommended, however it may bear some
consideration, that so great a Man as Grotius gives this reason the Right Hand,
the Priority, and Precedence to all others; beside we have his word and
reputation for it, that it was the express Doctrine which the first Bishop of
Rome taught his Disciple and Successor; and if we were assured that it was thus
Delivered down and derived; we are bound to believe it, notwithstanding all the
Quircks and Niceties of Philosophy to the contrary: For the great Apostle's
Tongue was guided by an Infallible Spirit. Upon the whole I take, leave to say
(upon a much better account than Bellarmine did of the Annals of Baronius)
here is turris fortium Solomonis, a mighty Tower of strong Men which in reason
may be thought able to maintain the Argument and secure it; Defendit numerus
juctaeque umbone Phalanges, was thought a strong Allegation in a much lesser
Cause. Methinks, the Authorities of so many Learned Men in all Ages, should
uphold it, and not suffer it to be lost at this time a day: Methinks here, the
standing Rule of Vincentius Liricensis, if any, where, ought to sway; quod
semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus, what all Men, in all Ages, at all Times,
have asserted, must stand.

CHAP. V.
BUT the Learned Author, in his Treatise of the Resurrection, has been pleased
to lay it aside; and having paid his Respect and Deference to the ancient
Fathers, the avowed Patriots of it; He immediately Censures and Condemns it in
the words following, Page 210. If we seriously and impartially consider this
Assertion, we shall find* it not to be true, and he gives us those Reasons for
it; 1st, To speak properly the Body is not capable either of Sinning or doing
Well, it is only the instrument of the Soul, and the Arm that stabs, sins no
more than the Sword; it is the Soul only that is the Murderer: Neither 2dly, Is
the Body capable of Rewards or Punishments, it is the Soul that is sensible:
Nothing but what is sensible only, can be capable of Rewards and Punishments.
3dly, If it be injustice in God, to Punish the Soul alone without the Body, in
Conjunction with which she committed the Sin; then all the Matter which
constituted the Body when the several Sins were committed, must be raised again
and reunited to the Soul; for if some, why not all? But what Monsters of Men
should we be in the Resurrection, if all the substance, of which our Bodies
consisted from our Childhood to our Death, should be gathered together and
formed into a Body.

This is the Sum of the Charge, which the Learned Doctor has to lay against the
Doctrine which has been allowed of by all, and is the Attempt of this Paper to
cover and fecure: There are other Passages in the following part of his
Discourse, which shall be accounted for in their proper place.

And here I take it for granted, that there are no other difficulties that lie
in the way; no other Objections, at least of any moment, against it, because
they come from so accomplished an Author, who must be supposed to have said the
most that can be against it.

Without making any Apology, I shall endeavor to give satisfaction to all,
according to the method in which they lie.

And First, I answer by way of Confession, that the Body, properly speaking, is
not capable of Sinning, or of doing well, considered in its own Nature,
abstractively in its self; it is a passive principle, and can pretend to no
Life, Energy, Sense, or Motion in a single state: It Is likewise granted that
the Body without the Soul, is a Dull, Stupid, Senseless Clod of Earth, a
Stinking Carcass, a Sink of Rottenness and Corruption, incapable of Acting,
Doing, Suffering, Enjoying all whatsoever, or more than the Doctor can suggest;
but in a state of Conjunction with the Soul, it is far otherwise, so that it
injoys Life, Sense, and Motion; shares and ingages with it in all its concerns:
So that in the two first Reasons there is a manifest Fallacy of Division, which
runs through every part, visible to every common Eye; and is no sooner
de^^rted, but the whole Fabric of his subtle Argumentation sinks, and falls
even with the dust: Though the Body alone cannot, yet in conjunction with the
Soul, it may. When a Noble Lord takes to Wife one of the meanest Extraction who
has no pretensions of her own, to any thing that is great; yet upon her
Marriage she is Dignified and Endowed, with all the Privileges of her Right
Honorable Spouse: This, as near as I can represent it, is the Case of the Soul
and Body: The Heaven-born Bridegroom stoops to the Earth for a Partner;
Advances, Exalts the Beggar, confers Life, Sense, Motion on her; admits her to
Bed and Board, allows her a share in all his Dignities and Enjoyments. The Body
without the Soul can neither Sin nor do Well: But the happy wedlock has
ennobled this piece of Clay, and empowered it in conjunction to act with it. So
that I fancy the Doctor to be under a mistake, when he calls the Body only the
Instrument of the Soul: Certainly it is more, it is an essential Part, and the
Man can as well be without the Soul as without the Body; to call the Body
therefore an Instrument, is too low a Term, when it is manifestly the Colleague
and Companion of the Soul, and together with it, constitutes the Great Prince
and Lord of the Creation I shall challenge the most Acute of Philosophers to
give me the definition of a Man without a Body: Nec caro sine anima Homo, quae
post exilium Cadaver est, says Tertullian, The Soul without the Body is no
more the Man, than the Body without the Soul. If then it must be acknowledged a
Physical, Indispensible Principle of his constitution, the one half of the Man;
What a disparagement is it to call it an Instrument only? Now that it is so,
the Learned Doctor himself expressly tells us, Page 218. It Is a great mistake to
imagine, that the Identity or Sameness of Man consists wholly in the Sameness of
the Soul; if Euphorbus, Homer, and Ennius had had one and the same Soul, yet
they would not have been one and the same, but three distinct Men. It seems
then it is the constituting, the essential, and most distinguishing Principle,
it can make three Men of one Soul; and so by consequence threescore: And how
worthily it is called an Instrument only, let the World judge. I confess it is
often by Philosophers and Divines set out by this Expression, The Instrument of
the Soul, to denote, as I suppose, the transcendent excellency of the Soul
above it, and all that Life, Sense, and Activity it can pretend to, as derived
from the Soul, and dependent on it; yet, That it is more than an Instrument, is
acknowledged by the Learned Author, who calls it page 198. The Colleague and
Companion of the Soul; and page 204. Her old Acquaintance; and is undeniably
proved from 1 Cor. 6. 18. He that comitteth Fornication Sins against his own
Body: Here it is manifestly a Party, and so interpreted and understood by
Commentators on the place. The like might be observed of other sins, as of
Gluttony, Drunkenness, etc. which are properly called the Lusts or Sins of the
Flesh. But it is farther Objected, That the Arm that stabs, sins no more than
the Sword. Here then is a good plea for Criminals at the Bar, and it is much it
has never been made use of: but I believe the Homicide suspects that it would
do him no kindness; it would be received by the Court with Laughter, and
rejected with Scorn and Indignation; and reason good, for the Sword is a Tool
in its self Innocent and Harmless, it is the Arm that weilds it, that impresses
it, that' gives it Force and Vigor to destroy; so that if to gratify the
Objection, we allow the Arm to be an Instrument, yet that it is no more
concerned in the Matter than the Sword, is notoriously false, because the one
is a dead, the other a living Instrument; and there must be a vast difference
between these. The Arm considered apart, is no more able to kill, than the
Sword; nay, less able, because that has not so fit a disposition to pierce
through the Bowels as the other, being made acute for that purpose: But the Arm
united to the Body has Strength, Vigor, Motion in every part, and must be
allowed the true efficient Cause of the Murder; whereas the other is the
Means, the Weapon to effect it: And here also the Fallacy of Division is very
plain and visible.

CHAP. VI.
BUT the Objector adds, It Is the Soul only that is the Murderer. If it be so,
I wonder then what the Judge, Jury, and Executioner, the Gaol, or Gallows have
to say or do to the Body; if it be so, there is an horrible Scene of Injustice
all the World over; if so, Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi, was not the
single Case of the poor Grecians, who went to pot for the Miscarriages of their
Generals, but the common and deplorable Fate of all Mankind. Certainly if the
Soul only be the Murderer, the Body is free, ought not to be touched, is by
all Laws whatsoever, discharged both from the Guilt and Punishment of that
Crime in which it had no hand. For as it is Injustice on one side, not to punish
the Guilty; so it is no less on the other to punish the Innocent. If this quaint
Notion of the Philosopher could be made good before the Bench, it would bring
him in more Gain than all the Preferments beside: But alas, this nail will
never drive. He will never be able to persuade the World of the truth of it.
And indeed it does exceedingly labor: For, it is not the Soul, but it is the Man
that is the Murderer. And here also is a manifest Tang of the old Sophism. True
indeed, the Soul is the first, chief, and principal Actor in the Tragedy, but
we can by no means excuse the outward Part. It Is the Soul that bestows on the
Body Life, and sense, without which it could not possibly lay claim to either;
and even here it is Ridiculous to imagine, that the more Spiritual and noble
Part, uses the Terrestrial and earthy, as a Tool and Machine, an Instrument
only, i. e. barely agitates and moves it, as the Snail does his Shell; the
Waterman his Boat; the Rider his Horse; the Fencing-Master his Weapon; the Man
his Clothes. No, this has been sufficiently exploded by the Philosophers and
Schoolmen, in the colebrated Question on the present Subject, being by Both,
constantly maintained in the Negative. The Soul, during its Residence with its
beloved Bride, is liberal in his Endowments toward her, (as in the foregoing
Comparison) furnishes and sets her up with great Accomplishments, bestows
Sense, Vigor, Activity, Perception, on on her, so that derivatively she has
the Benefit, Use, and Enjoyment of all these. This is a Doctrine disputable;
and I believe will not go down with all; but for the Truth of it, I appeal to
the Sense of Mankind, and for its Support I briefly offer these Considerations.
1. The Soul diffuses it self through every Part of the Body, according to the
known Maxim of the great Peripatetick, and certainly to no other purpose, but
to bestow its Largesses. The Vegetable Soul gives Life to every Particle of the
Plant or Tree, and the Rational Soul cannot be supposed to be less liberal. 2.
It Is undeniable, that there is a mutual and reciprocal Influence of each toward
other. The Soul impresses the Body; on the other hand, That impresses the Soul.
The loving Pair mutually give and receive from each other; the noble Spouse
makes his Bride the generous Presents so often mentioned; She, on the other
hand, guides and directs the Soul in his Behavior; according to the known
Axiom, Mores animae sequuntur temper amentum corporis, which I confess I do
not understand, unless it come home to the purpose. The different Constitutions
and Complexions of our Bodies have a powerful influence on our Souls, and do,
in a great measure, overruled and command them. This is allowed by all, and
manifestly appears in the Behavior of Children suitable to their Progenitors:
They do, for the most part, follow their Way, and tread in their Steps. The
Body is the perpetual Dictator, and prescribes to the Soul the Manner and
Method of its Government. Thus, according to the peculiar Composure of the
outward, we find the Dispositions of the inward Man. He in whom the sanguine
Complexion is predominant, proclaims his Constitution by his Port and Actions,
is Bold, Courageous, Magnanimous and Heroic; whereas the Choleric Man tells
the World what he is made of, by his Peevishness and Petulancy: And so in all
other Cases as all here agree. And least the Suspicion of Traduction which
prevails with some, should enervate the force of the Argument, To put it
altogether without dispute, I lay down this as an undeniable Position, That the
Manners of Children are not only influenced by their Parents, but Nurses too.
The Concessions of Philosophers, Physicians, and confirmed Experience of all,
do give me a Supersedeas here, and pronounce the Proof of it altogether
needless. There is a Curious Dissertation in Aulus Gellius, lib. 12. cap. 1. of
Favorinus the Philosopher on this Subject, to a Noble Woman, persuading her to
give suck to her own Child, and not endanger the corrupting of his Manners by a
strange Milk. The Discourse is so full, excellent, and nervous, that I can
hardly forbear to transcribe it; and whereunto, for full Satisfaction I refer
the Reader. 3. That the Body is endowed with Life and Sensation, is undeniable
from the common and daily Experience of it in every part: Even the Extreme
Parts are endued with a ready and most exquisite Sensation. And, 4. the Truth
of it is abundantly confirmed from this usual Experiment, That if at any time
there happens a Sphacelus, a Mortification in any extreme part, instantly there
is recourse to the Surgeon and his Saw, to take off the dead part, for the
Preservation of the whole; which to me is little less than a Demonstration,
That the other Parts are truly and actually alive. The Body even of Adam (if
the Supposition may be allowed) before its Union with its Heavenly Partner, was
a senseless Clod of Earth; but when God breathed into him the Breath of Life,
then Man became a living Soul; a living Man, though we allow it a Carcass, upon
its Separation.

CHAP. VII.
THE Objector goes on: Neither is the Body capable of any Rewards or
Punishments, it is the Soul only that is sensible; and nothing but what is
sensible can be capable of Rewards and Punishments.

Here again we are assaulted with the old Paralogism, and therefore must
dismiss it with the same Answer. The Body without the Soul is capable of
neither Rewards nor Punishments; but in Conjunction with it is exquisitely
sensible, and enjoys either. What have we to do to consider the Body in a
separate state? This is foreign, impertinent, and beside the Argument in all
respects. Our Dispute lies about the Good or Evil that Men do in this Life, and
that Remunaration which according to their Deserts, shall attend them at the
Resurrection: In both which the whole Man is concerned, and not one part;
neither the Body without the Soul, nor the Soul without the Body, but both in
Conjunction. And though I will not deny; That the Soul while in the Body, may,
and does sometimes act Abstractively, without the Concurrence of the Body, in a
Spiritual and Intellectual Manner, in good or bad Desires, Cogitations, and
Contrivances, which are by the Philosophers called Immanent Acts; and so by
consequence has a separate, distinct Enjoyment of Pleasure or Pain, according
to the Result and Nature of them, wholly peculiar to its self, and altogether
independent from the Body; yet all other Rewards and Punishments here, are
conferred on the Soul by the Mediation of the Body; so far is the Objection
from being true, as that the contrary is undeniable. As the Body is beholden to
the Soul for the Capacity of Rewards and Punishments, so all the Rewards or
Punishments that are or can be placed on the Soul in this Life, are owing to
the Body, without which it is altogether impossible it should be invested with
either. How is the Soul of the most deserving Courtier preferred, but by the
Body? How is the Soul of the Valiant Soldier advanced to higher Dignity of
Command, but by the Body? How is the Soul of the Learned Doctor blessed with
Plurality of Preferments in the Church and University, but by the Body? And so
in all other Cases whatsoever. On the other hand, the same is no less visible
in the Distribution of Punishments: How is the Soul of the Malefactor brought
to suffer, but by the Body? Ask the Prisoner in the Dungeon, with his heavy
Load of Fetters on, how the Place and Irons come to affect his Soul; he will
readily tell thee, It Is by the Body. Ask the petty Thief at the the Cart's
Tail, how his Spiritual Part does rue for his Transgression, and he will tell
thee, it is by the painful Stripes inflicted on his Back. Ask the Man that has
undergone the Shame and Torment of the Hot Iron, how the principal Actor in the
Crime comes to have a share, he will immediately by his woeful Experience
resolve the Question, viz. by the scandalous Stigma in his Hand or Cheek; which
to his Anguish he has felt, and to his Disgrace must retain. In short, Ask the
Man in the Cart, tied with the fatal Halter, and just ready to be turned over,
how the first and chief Contriver of the Offense for which he is condemned, is
brought to suffer, and he can give thee no other Answer. The Soul is a
Spiritual, Intellectual, Invisible Being, no way subject to the Pleasure, or
Jurisdiction of any Power on Earth; it is no way capable of the Preferment of a
Palace, nor of the Confinement of a Prison, but above, and out of the Reach of
both, and can have no Color of pretense to any Rewards or Punishments
whatsoever, at present, (excepting those before mentioned) but in Conjunction
with, and by the Mediation of the Body. In Conclusion, our Answer here is, It Is
neither the one nor the other, in a divided or separate Sense, that has a Claim
or Title to Rewards or Punishments here; it is the Compositum, the Soul and Body
in Union and Conjunction together; i.e. it is the Man that can challenge this:
And as for an Answer to the Objection, with reference to the Body after the
Resurrection, (which is the main Subject of the present Discourse) if the Body
be not capable of Rewards or Punishments, I would fain have the Learned Dr. to
tell me, what does the Body of the Saint in Heaven, or what makes the Body of
the Reprobate in Hell? Sure I am, because so taught by Christ himself, as two
Evangelists have recorded it ( Matt. 10. 28. Luc. 12. 4.) That Men are able to
kill the Body, and God is able to destroy both Body and Soul. Now you cannot be
said, with any Congruity of Speech, to kill that which has no Sense, no Life;
and what is liable to be destroyed in Hellfire must be allowed capable of
Punishment, and by unavoidable Consequence, of Sin, whereof this is the Wages.
In short, this sacred Authority lays the Axe to the Root of the two first
Objections, and fells them to the Ground. If the Body can be killed, can be
destroyed in Hellfire; it cannot be denied to be sensible, capable of sinning,
of doing well, of Rewards and Punishments. All these are manifestly implied
here.

CHAP. VIII.
THat our Bodies are more than Instruments only, is a Truth that clearly shines
forth from the Make and Creation of them. Man was brought into the World last
of all, and therefore must be acknowledged the most perfect and complete of all
the Creatures; He is upon this account, called by the Philosophers, the
Microcosm, the Little World, the Epitome of the Greater: And though the Fabric
of all others, (though never so mean) must be owned to be stupendous; yet there
is certainly somewhat in Humane Bodies, surpassing and transcendent; if not in
the Matter, yet in the Manner and Figure of 'em. The Consultation of the
Eternal Trinity about this Affair, imports somewhat singular; a Product more
than ordinary. -- Come, Let us make man, (Genesis 1. 26.) the Prince, the Emperor
of all the rest. This is taught us in that passage of Elihu in Job 33. 4. The
spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me life.
The Expression elegantly notes the Exactness of his Frame: Man is the
Masterpiece of the Creation, (as his immortal Commentator ( Caryl) has
observed. Our Bodies are Temples built, and Temples sanctified: A living Man,
Genes. 2. 7. Man became a living Soul: And upon this account the Royal Psalmist
breaks forth into this sublime Rapture, Psalm. 139. 14. I will praise thee, for
I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul
knows right well. My substance was not hid from thee though I were made in
secret; and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth; Thine Eyes did
see my substance yet being imperfect, and in thy Book were all my members
written, which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there were none of them.
-- The Fabric of Man is of all other the most exquisite: This the Great Mrster
of Physic has professedly asserted, in a most Admirable Treatise of 17 Books;
which Gassendus thinks was penned with a Spirit of Enthusiasm, for the
Refutation of the Atheistical Doctrines of Epicurus: and the Mirror of of
Learning, (Orig. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 1.) calls it the Hundred and nineteenth
Psalm in Philosophy; or, A perpetual Hymn in Praise of the Great Creator; a
just Commentary on the former Passage of the Psalmist. The whole Work is a full
and pregnant Demonstration of a Deity, to which end it is applied by that
incomparable Prelate, who thereupon thinks it strange that Physicians of all
Men should be Atheists; who from the Subject of their Science have powerful
Arguments to the contrary. When we shall consider the admirable Contrivance of
Man's Body, the curious Formation of all its Parts, in order to the various
Designs, Services, and Uses of 'em; its astonishing, and innumerable
Excellencies, methinks we should account them more than barely Instruments. The
Philosophers and Divines have entertained Nobler Sentiments of it: They have
proclaimed it aloud to be the One half of that finishing Piece, which came last
out of the Almighty's hands; the One half of him, for whose sake and service
all others were made; the One half of him, who had the Dignity to be Lord over
all; who by his Frame, Endowments, and Advantages, is directed to devote, and
conseerate his Whole Self, all that he has, or is, to the Honor and Glory of
his bountiful Master.

2. But if this Consideration will not do, let us for a while contemplate the
Assumption, the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior. He took such a Nature as
ours, such a Body as ours, with all its Organical Parts. To this purpose he
stooped to Bethlehem; to the Womb of a poor Virgin, to the Stable and the
Manger; To this purpose, He that was in the form of God, and thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no Reputation, ((...)) emptied
himself, disrobed himself of his Divine Dignity, and took upon him the Form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of man. St. John tells us, John 1. 14.
That the Eternal Word that was in the beginning, and created all things, was
made flesh, and dwelt among us: And the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 2. 16.
gives us a Confirmation of it, with an Asseveration, Verily he took not on him
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; i.e. He was an entire Man like
any of us ( sin only excepted). Nay, what is more, that very Body which he
assumed, in which he lived, and in which he was crucified, is ascended up into
Heaven, where he sits at the Right hand of God, and by the powerful
Rhetoric of his Wounds, the Impression of which he now retains, is our Eternal
Expiatory Sacrifice, incessantly transacting the great Work of Advocation with
his Father, still making Intercession for us.

By this there is conferred on Humane Nature, the highest Honor and Dignity
imaginable; and this must teach us to put a value on our Bodies, and to look
upon them as more than Machines and Tools only. This (if I mistake not) is an
Inference most genuine, and naturally flowing from the Premises; and it is most
certainly the express Use which the Ancients would have us to make of it. Thus
St. Austine, on the present Subject, ( de Verit. Relig. cap. 6.) Demonstravit
nobis Deus quam excelsum locum inter creatur as habet humana natura, in hoc
quod in hominibus, in vero homine apparuit: God (says the holy Father) has
given us a Demonstration of the Dignity and transcendent Excellency of Humane
Nature, in that Christ, a VERY MAN, lived among Men. And to the same purpose
another great Author, ( Leo, Sermon. 1. de Not. Dom.) Agnosce, O Christian,
dignitatem tuam and divine consors factus naturae, noli in veterem vilitatem
degeneri consuetudine redire: i. e. Christ, by taking such a Body, has shown
thee the Dignity and Excellency of thine; taught thee not to disparage,
dis-esteem it, or use it unworthily.

3. But if neither of these be sufficient, come we in the third place, to cast
our Eyes a little on the Redemption; and in that great Work the Whole Man is
concerned. The Prince of our Salvation submitted himself to the Cross, and all
its shameful, miserable, painful Appendages, to become a Propitiation for Both.
Our Bodies as well as Souls are the Price of his Blood: And can any one then
account 'em no more but Instruments only? The thing is so evident, as that I
think it needless to say any more for it; nor can I imagine what can in the
least color be said against it.

4. Wherefore I pass to the next Argument under this Head, for Confirmation of
the Doctrine in hand; and that is Bodily Worship. Have not all the Orthodox
Pulpits echoed and sounded this aloud. How often have we been told, That we are
to serve God in our Bodies as well as Souls; the one is but maimed and
imperfect without the other; the Great Creator has an undeniable and manifold
Right to Both. How much, the true Sons of the Church have labored in this
Argument, cannot be unknown to any who know any thing of the Controversies
about the Modification of Worshipping God, which has been the grand Subject of
the Dispute of this last Age. -- How zealous, good Men have been to relieve
that abused and misapplied Place, John 4. 24. from Captivity, and to discharge
it from that hard and unworthy Service which the Dissenters would have imposed
upon it, and compelled it to bear; still asserting, that to serve God, as (in
Truth) we ought, we must serve him more than in Spirit only? How often has that
of the Apostle been made the Text, 1 Cor. 14. ult. That in God's Service regard
must be had to Decency and Order? How often have we been told, that we must not
make our Approaches to the most High in a slovenly manner, but in the most
humble and becoming Postures: To give Testimony of our inward, by the uniform
Port of our OUTWARD MAN, and to make the Worship acceptable and complete, to be
careful to join both these together? The truth is, the Body by its self is
altogether incapable of the least Performance; for as the Psalmist has
observed, The dead praise not God, neither they that go down to silence. But
yet we have the same infallible Assurance, that the living can and do praise
him: Do not our Lips, Tongue, and Mouth show forth his Praise? Do not our Hands
serve God when we lift them up toward the Mercy-seat of his holy Temple? Do not
our Feet bear a part also here, when they make cheerful and direct Paths to the
place where his honor dwells? Do not our Eyes and Ears go Sharers here, when
they behold and hear the wondrous things of God's Law, when they are
attentively exercised in his Statutes? In a word, Do not our whole Bodies
engage in this Divine Work, in their Submissions, Adorations, and Prostrations
before his Altar? What Nonsense is it for any Man to imagine the contrary; when
we are so often and pathetically commanded and called upon by God, in his Holy
Word to do it? Not to multiply Authorities here, the winning and endearing
Entreaty of the Great Apostle alone is sufficient, Romans 12. 1. Wherefore I
beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service: And if it be here said, that the Apostle by Bodies means the Whole
Man, I have no mind to deny the Allegation; but I reply, that the Body is also
concerned, and (as must be acknowledged from the Allusion to the legal
Sacrifices) in an especial manner pointed at: And if this be not Proof enough,
there are other places which cannot be understood in any other sense, which
refer peculiarly to the Body. Thus the same Apostle, speaking of the abominable
Sin of the Gentiles, says, Romans 1. 24. That they did dishonor their own Bodies
between themselves; And to the same purpose he calls upon his Corinthians to
glorify God with their Bodies which are his; and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. he prays,
that their Spirit, Soul, and Body be preserved blameless to the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Where Both the Objections of the Learned Author are put to
silence, and quashed by one word, Blameless; which clearly supposes our Bodies
capable of doing well, or evil, of Rewards and Punishments; otherwise there can
be no Congruity in the Discourse of the great Doctor of the Gentiles (who was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, was so Accomplished an Orator, as that
'twas one of the three celebrated Wishes of the great St. Austin, That he might
have seen him in the Pulpit; nay, what is more, was inspired from above): And
he must be allowed by all, to speak at a very impertinent Rate. I cannot see
any doubt or difficulty here: The Wicked sin and dishonor God with their
Bodies, and that, properly speaking, by the Lusts of the Flesh, the (...), by
the Lusts of the lower Belly, as the Father calls them: The Sins of Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and a multitude of others. Nay, St. John seems to fix
Sin more especially on the Body, in his first Epistle, chap. 2. 16. where he
reckons them up under three Heads, All that is in the World, the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. On the other hand, the Case
is altogether as undeniable: The good Man serves, honors, worships, and
glorifies God with his Body, in adorning it with Sobriety, Temperance,
Chastity, and other Exercises of Virtue; in keeping it clean, swept, and
garnished; a fit Receptacle and Mansion for the Holy Spirit, in a ready
Compliance and Conjunction with the Soul in all the Offices of Religion. This
most evidently appears to be the Doctrine of our Church, when we are admitted
to the highest and nearest Communion with God in the Eucharist, by that Clause
which is inserted and repeated in both Forms of Administration; when the Priest
delivers the Bread, He prays, That it may preserve thy Body and Soul unto
Everlasting Life; and again he uses the same Form when he gives the Cup, The
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy Body and
Soul unto Everlasting Life. Now to reason fairly; Unless our Bodies are capable
of Everlasting Life, I know not what sense we can make of the Prayer: And if
our Bodies are capable of Everlasting Life, as must be allowed, they are
necessarily implied subject to Everlasting Death, and by unavoidable
Consequence, must be allowed capable of doing good or evil. To conclude this,
St. Paul was so thoroughly convinced of Both, as that he rallies together a
multitude of Arguments, to prevent the one, and engage us in the other.

First, In 1 Cor. 6. 13. The Body is for the Lord, i.e. 'Twas made by him, and
therefore ordained and devoted to his Service.

Secondly, The Lord for the Body, i.e. He redeemed and sanctified it, and so
has a farther and improved Right to it.

Thirdly, God will raise our Bodies, v. 14. i.e. The Resurrection lays a
farther Obligation upon us.

Fourthly, Our Bodies are the Members of Christ, and therefore they ought not
to be the Members of an Harlot: We ought to keep them clean and pure for his
sake, as Parts of that Society whereof he is the Head.

Fifthly, He that commits Fornication sins against his own body; i.e.
Though there are some Sins without the Body, yet the Sins of Uncleanness are
properly Sins of the Body.

Sixthly, Our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, ver. 19. The Sins of
our Bodies turn this Holy Gu^st out of doors, and admit another Master, making
them the Devil's Brothel-Houses, and Styes.

Lastly, Our Bodies are bought with a price, ver. 20. Therefore not to glorify
God in own Bodies as well as Souls, since by a manifold Right they are both
his, is not simply Sin, but Sin of an high Degree, and deep Dye; no less than
the Sin of Sacrilege.

After all this, to corroborate the Argument, I might here expatiate upon the
great Cost and Expense which the Primitive Christians bestowed in Embalming
their dead Bodies; of which Tertullian, St. Augustine, and others, give us a
large Account, which comes home fully to the Point in hand, and can be applied
to no other purpose. By this Practice of theirs it is plain, they looked upon
their Bodies as perfumed with their Graces here, smelling sweet in their
Dormitories, deposited as in a Bed of Spices, and resting in full Hope of a
Glorious Retribution.

But I conceive I have no need of it; and therefore it may suffice only to have
noted it.

CHAP. IX.
I Pass to the Examination of the Third and last Objection, which as a Bar lies
in our way, and ought to be removed. If it be Injustice in God to punish the
Soul alone without the Body, in Conjunction with which she committed the Sin;
then all the Matter which constitued the Body when the several Sins were
committed, must be raised again, and reunited to the Soul; for if some, why not
all? But what Monsters of Men should we be in the Resurrection, if all the
Substance of which our Bodies consisted from our Childhood to our Deaths,
should be gathered together, and formed into a Body?

Without taking notice of the Severity of the Objection, I shall endeavor to
give satisfaction to it: And,

First, I Answer; That the Resurrection depends upon an All-sufficient and
Omnipotent Power; and though I cannot tell with what Matter the Bodies shall
arise, yet every good Man ought to rest satisfied in this, That a God of
infinite Abilities will take care to make good his Word; For there are an
hundred things (as the Learned Author has asserted, p. 221.) both in NATURE and
DIVINITY, the Existence of which we cannot doubt, and yet the Reason of them we
cannot comprehend. Of which he there gives us a multitude of Instances,
(whereunto I refer the Reader) and at last resolves the Resurrection into God's
good Pleasure, as the Highest Reason. It Is altogether surprising, how he came
to be so positive here, and in this difficult point impossible to be understood
or resolved by the wisest of Men, to be so magisterial; especially considering
that unlucky Passage which drops from his Pen, in the Words immediately
following, p. 222. I fancy my self (Philalethes) talking to a bold Refiner on
the Promises and Decrees of Almighty God, and one of those little Nothings that
call themselves Philosophers, that form to themselves Notions and Idaea's, then
deal with Revelation as the Tyrant did with the poor Innocents on his Bed,
either violently stretch it beyond its natural Reach, or chop off a part to
make it commensurate to their Intentions.

I will make no Animadversions here, though I have a fair Opportunity; but I
cannot forbear to say, that the Learned Author has made Monsters of all Men at
the Resurrection, if it be founded on Justice contrary to his own Reasoning, in
the places foregoing, where he professes his Ignorance, and challenges the
World to give an account of; as supposing it impossible: And yet boldly asserts
here, That all the Matter which was of the Body of the Man from his Childhood
to his Grave, must be rallied together at the Resurrection, or else there can
be nothing of Justice in the Case.

But, Secondly, I answer; This Assertion runs Counter to the Doctrine of the
Schoolmen and Ancients, who have with one Mouth determined, That the Child
shall not arise a Child, nor the Corpulent Man with his great Bulk; nor he who
sunk under a Marasmus, peep out of his Grave a Skeleton. Nor the Old Man appear
at the Resurrection with his Gray Hairs, or any Symptoms of Age; but all shall
arise ( inter Incrementum and Decrementum humanae naturae) about the Age of 33,
in a perfect State; statura^ quam habuit vel habiturus est, as Lombard, Sent.
4. Dis. 44. Aug. Civ. Dei, Lib. 22. Cap. 14.

Thirdly, I answer; That this is altogether beside the Question; We are to
consider the Body fallen, and to prove the Resurrection of that same Body, to
be joined to the same Soul, in order to a Judgment; And this is all that in
Reason can be expected: We are no ways concerned to look back to its various
and different States, from his Childhood to his Death; if we can produce the
same Prisoners before the Supreme Tribunal, there can be no Injustice in the
Thing; for the Learned Author has granted, and proved that our Bodies, from our
Childhood to our Graves, notwithstanding their constant, innumerable, great,
and wonderful Changes, are still the same. Page 132. Moreover he has granted,
That (according to the Supposition of Philosophers) though the Body be changed
once in seven Years; (which, obiter, I can never believe, and am sure is
impossible to be proved) yet he grants it is still the same. That a Man that
has kept his Bed for above seven Years, upon his Recovery rises the same Man,
though he have not now one Particle the same that he had when he took his Bed;
and he gives us the Reason of it, Because the Particles of the Body are
gradually changed in a continual Union with the Soul. The Body (he says) in
such a Case is the same, and may properly be said to raise again. And yet the
Learned Author in his Argument here, exacts all the Matter which constituted
the Body, when the several Sins were committed, to be raised again, to be
reunited to the Soul; which how congruous to himself, and how reasonable in
its self, I leave others to judge.

Fourthly, I answer; This Objection is too strict and subtle; It impeaches,
destroys, and overturns all Justice upon Earth, and renders it altogether
impossible: The Reason is irresistible; for there are fleeting Particles of
Matter, which constantly come and go, ebb and flow in our Bodies, through the
whole Course of our Lives, so that the Man is not to day what he was yesterday,
nor will be to morrow what he is to day. This is more manifest in long
Imprisonments; The Malefactor frequently comes into Gaol, plump and hail, full
of Flesh and Blood; but by his long Confinement is emaciated, and appears at
the Bar quite another Thing: Yea often times it so happens, that he is so much
impaired in his Health, Strength, Constitution, and Complexion, that he is
unavoidably dropping into the Grave without the Help of the Gallows; and yet no
Man ever questions the Justice of his Execution.

Sir Walter Rawleigh was beheaded for a Crime committed above 20 Years before,
and though (according to the Imagination of the Philosophers abovementioned)
this Body must be thrice changed in this Interval; yet the Equity of his
Sentence was never doubted. The like might be observed of Mary Queen of
Scotland. -- The Annals of all Nations overflow with Examples of Criminals
whose Punishments have been a long time protracted without the least suspicion
of Injustice.

Fifthly, Therefore I answer plainly, by denying the Consequence, viz. That it
does no way follow from the Principles of Justice, That all the Matter which
constituted the Body when the several Sins were committed, should be raised up
again; My Reason is, because much if not most of this Matter is accidental to
the Body; forasmuch as it is plain, the Body can be, and oftentimes is without
it. What frequent and considerable Alterations all Men undergo in this respect,
is abundantly confirmed by the Experience of all. Most Men generally are well
fleshed in Summer, but in the Time of Winter fall away. And this is more
visible in the Cattle of the Field, being for the most part Fat and Full in the
Hot Season of the Year, which affords plenty of Grass and Food: But when the
Frost and Snow comes in upon them, and diminishes their Pasture, then they pine
away, and are often starved. Men owe the Dimensions of their Bodies in a great
measure to their Ease, Health, Prosperity, and Affluence: Whereas Hunger, Cold,
Want, Poverty, Diseases, will make them dwindle and bring them down to nothing
but Skin and Bones. To this purpose I am sure, I have long since met with the
Determination of the Royal Society in their Philosophical Transactions, namely,
That the Fat and Corpulency of a Creature is nothing but the Repletion of the
Parenchyma: And that they would undertake to make a Dog or an Horse, Fat,
Fleshy, and Full in a very few Days. There is no necessity then for all the
Matter to be rallied together at the Resurrection; because much of it is
Accidental, not Essential to the Body: It has been, is, and may be without it.
Our Doctrine then must stand in spite of this Shock and Assault. The Justice
of God is secured, and the Saint in no manner of Danger of mounting from his
Grave a Monster; nor the Sinner neither in this, though he must be acknowledged
such in the worst of senses.

Lastly, If all that has been hitherto said cannot put the Objection to
silence, I will presume to borrow the mighty Sword of our Opponent, which alone
can do the Work, and as effectually as that of Goliath, cut off this Monstrous
Head. Page 187. his Words are these; It is farther to be considered, that
though the same Body that died is to rise again, yet it is not necessary that
all the Particles of it should be raised up; it is enough that such Particles
are raised, as made up the integrant and necessary Parts of the Body. By
necessary Parts, I mean those which remain after the utmost degree of
Maceration, without which the Body would not be integrant, but imperfect; and
these are chiefly the Bones, the Skin, the Nerves, the Tendons, the Ligaments,
and Substance of the several Vessels; as long as these, and all that are
necessary to Life remain, the Body is truly whole, though never so much
macerated; all the Flesh that is added makes nothing to the Wholeness or
Integrality of the Body, though it conduce to Strength and Ornament. -- And by
and by he adds, If the Body be extremely maciated, I do not doubt but in the
Resurrection it will be restored by foreign adventitious Matter, to its due and
just Proportion: So in Bodies that are full and flesby, there is a great deal
of Substance that is not necessary, which if it become the Flesh of another
Man, the Body may be raised up without it, and yet be Physically whole, and
truly the same. In Bodies that are fat and gross there is doubtless a great
deal superfluous, which will never be raised up; though it were never made the
Ingredient of another Man's Body.

CHAP. X.
Having considered the Objections, I Am to wait on the Learned Author in what
remains, who is laboring to find out a Reason of the Resurrection of the Body,
as indeed he is obliged; since he has taken away the main Pillar, and laid that
aside: In order whereunto he tells us, page 211. That the Soul does not die
with the Body, as some ancient Heretics and Arabians held. -- This is an
Opinion too ridiculous to be confuted. Then page 212. he tells us, That the
Soul does not sleep until the day of the Resurrection, as the Psychopannychists
imagined. All that is to be said here is, That this is a Notion so manifestly
false, so contradictious to Scripture, and has been so fully confuted by many
Learned Pens, particularly by the incomparable Divine of Geneva, in a Treatise
professedly written against it, as that there is no more to be said here. He
comes thence to consider the Opinions of Tertullian, and they are divided into
three Ranks.

First, He asserts the Sensibility of the separate Omnes ergo animae penes
inferos? inquis. Velis ac nolis, and supplicia jam illic, and refrigeria. --
Cur enim non putes animam and puniri and foveri in inferis, interim sub
expectatione utriusque judicii. -- Novit anima apud inferos and dolere and
fovere sine carne. De Anim. cap. 58.

Again. Simplicior quisquis fautor sententiae nostrae, putabit carnem etiam
idcirco repraesentandam esse in judicio, quia aliter anima non capiat passionem
tormenti seu refrigerii, utpote incorporalis: Hoc enim vulgus existimat. Nos
autem animam corporalem and hic profitemur, and in suo volumine probamus,
habentem proprium genus substantiae, soliditatis, per quam quid and sontire and
pati possit. Nam and nunc animas torqueri, foverique penes inferos licet nudas,
licet adhuc exules carnis, probavit Lazari exemplum. De Resurr. c. 17.


Soul, That it is of its self capable of Rewards and Punishments; is actually
in some measure comforted, or tormented before the Resurrection.

There are a multitude of other Passages of the same Father which testify the
same De Anima, cap. 7. and 9. 55, 56, 58. and alibi.
. And no doubt but that this great Father is Orthodox here.

Secondly, Notwithstanding in other places he seems to set up a quite opposite
Doctrine, viz. That the Soul is not capable of suffering without the Body; and
this he makes the Reason of the Resurrection Apol. cap. 48. Certe quia ratio
restitutionis destinatio judicii est, necessario idem ipse qui fuerit
exhibebitur; ut boni seu contrarii meriti judicium a Deo referat. Ideoque
repraesentabuntur and corpora. Quia neqne pati quicquam potest anima sola fine
materia stabili, id est, carne, c. 48.
. And elsewhere he asserts the Necessity of the Resurrection, because the Soul
without the Body is not capable of feeling either Pleasure or Pain Testim.
Anim. c.ult. Affirmamus te manner post vitae dispunctionem, and expectare diem
judicii, proque meritis aut cruciatui destinari, aut refrigerio, utroque
sempiterno. Quibus sustinendis necessario tibi substantiam pristinam,
ejudsdemque hominis materiam and memoriam reversuram, quod and nihil mali ac
boni sentire possis fine carnis passionalis facultate.
.

I shall reserve what I have to say to This, to the last place, and take leave
to invert the Order, and consider the other Opinion before it, conceiving it
more suitable and methodical to the Argument in hand: And that is,

Thirdly, He owns, That separate Souls are actually De Resurr. carn. cap. 17.
Porro si haec (cogitatus, concupiscentia, voluntas) satis essent ad
plenitudinem meritorum, ut non requirentur and facta, sufficeret in totum anima
ad perfectionem judicii, de his judicanda, in quae agenda sola suffecerat. Quum
vero etiam facta devincta sint meritis; facta autem per carnem administrantur;
jam non sufficit animam sine carne foveri; sive cruciari, pro operibus etiam
carnis, etsi habet corpus, etsi habet membra; quae proinde illi non sufficiant
ad sentiendum plene, quemadmodum nec ad agendum perfect. Denique, haec erit
ratio in ultimum finem destinati judicii, ut exhibitione carnis omnis divina
censura perfici possit.
rewarded or punished before the Resurrection; and he says it is for those good
or bad things it did without the Concurrence of the Body. He farther says, That
though the Soul be in its own Nature capable of Rewards or Punishments; yet it is
not so fully capable as when united to the Body. It is capable of greater
Pleasure or Torment when united to the Body, than in a State of Separation; and
therefore for those things which the Soul did in Concurrence with the Body,
must be punished and rewarded in the Body, that the Pleasure or Torment may be
perfect.

The Learned Author's Animadversion on this is, p. 217. But this is very
precarious; and if once it be granted, that the Soul is in its own Nature,
without an organized Body, capable of Rewards and Punishments, it cannot be
denied, but that it is of it self capable of being fully Rewarded and Punished.

I answer: Not to take any notice of the Tertullianicum (as his Learned
Commentators call it) of the gross Naevus here, etsi habet corpus, etsi habet
membra, which the Father applies to the Soul in a separate State, and is by no
means justifiable: Nor to undertake a Defense of him here or elsewhere, in an
exact, strict and rigid sense; for it is well known, that this African Father is
the most dark, abstruse, and intricate of the Latin Fathers, makes use of
uncouth, obsolete Words, which will no way bear a full and exact, but require a
moderate and sober Interpretation.

Premising this, I cannot see how he is in the main here precarious; to my
Understanding there is no begging at all in the Case: The Doctrine seems found
and approvable, supported and maintained by the Ancients, who accordingly have
placed the departed Souls in Abraham's Bosom, in Paradise, in outer Porches, in
Receptacles, under the Altar, the Promptuary of Saints, the Earnest of the
Kingdom; with a multitude of other such Expressions to the same purpose. 'Twere
easy here to fill up a great deal of Paper with the Names and Authorities of
the most considerable Pillars of the Church, who have espoused this Opinion;
but I industriously avoid the Vanity of it, and think it altogether needless in
the present Dispute, because the Learned Author, speaking of the Opinion of
Pope John XXII. tells us, That he only held that the Soul does not at all enjoy
the Beatisick Vision before the Resurrection; and for Confirmation of it, adds,
page 212. This indeed was the Opinion of the Primitive Fathers.

And albeit this Doctrine was Censured and Condemned in the Council of
Florence, yet this can have no Influence on us, who know too well what this
Council was, and the Age of it. And though it prevail with those of the Church
of Rome, yet it is observable, how that even the Learned Men that are Bigoted
to that way, do not stick to give us their Approbation of it. Meminerint hunc
errorem non efficere pietati, and eruditioni tam illustrium scriptorum, says
Pamelius, i.e. This Opinion is no prejudice to the Piety and Learning of those
Great Men: And another Eminent Writer of that Church calls it, Pia and beata
opinio veritati facile reconciliabilis per duplicem beatitudinem perfectam and
imperfectam; An holy and blessed Opinion, easily reconcilable to the Truth, by
the distinction of a perfect and imperfect Happiness: So that the difference
between the Opinion and Council seems to be only about the Place, in the
Condition both agree. About the Capacity of Separate Souls, I am not willing to
dispute, it is too sublime a Subject, and above our mortal Reach. Nor will I
eagerly contend for the Place, where (upon their dislodging here) they are
disposed of: But this Opinion I readily embrace, That before our Savior's
Ascension they were not admitted into Heaven, whatsoever they are since: Nor
will I presume to determine for what Things the happy Soul is rewarded; nor on
the other hand, for what the Soul of the Reprobate is punished; but so far I
conceive it to be plain, and allowed by the Concurrence of all, That Both at
present have their different Enjoyments, though imperfect. So that in my
Apprehension the Consequence of the Learned Author does Claudicare, stand in
need of a Crutch; it is and always will be a Cripple. The Soul of the Saint is
at present admitted to Happiness, I see nothing in Reason from hence to infer;
-- Therefore it is capable of being fully rewarded: On the other side, the Soul
of the Sinner is in its Separate State capable of Punishment, Ergo, it is
capable of being fully punished. I must freely say, I cannot see the least
color for the Inference; Wherever the Soul of Lazarus now is, it must be
(without doubt) allowed by all to be happy; but that it is as happy as it will
be after the Resurrection, I utterly deny. On the other side, That the Soul of
the Rich Glutton is now in a State of Punishment, must be readily assented to;
but that it is in a full, complete State, will, can, must never be granted.
This Assertion runs against the stream and current of Reason, Scripture, and
Antiquity; as will most manifestly appear in the Examination of the other
Opinion of Tertullian; which I now come to consider.

Thirdly, He seems to affirm in the Passage above cited, That the Soul is not
capable without the Body of Pleasure or Pain, of Punishments or Rewards, and
therefore concludes for a Resurrection: It Is beside my intent to attempt the
Defense of this Doctrine, though the Centuriators have undertaken it: And if the
Fire of Hell be real, (as I believe no one will deny, because constantly so
represented in the Scriptures) it would gravel the most accomplished of
Philosophers, from the Principles of Natural Philosophy only, to resolve how
this Fire can affect, and reach the Soul; how a Material can act upon an
Immaterial. Beside there are no mean Authorities, and not a few neither, to be
produced, who have asserted much the same thing: Thus Maldonate, as Learned a
Man as most, and incomparably well read, assures us, in Matt. 8. 29. Mirum
quanto consensu plerique veteres Authors docuerint, daemones ante diem judicii
non torqueri -- It was, it seems, the general Doctrine, That the Damned were
not punished before the Day of Judgment; which how it is to be understood he
there tells you. Notwithstanding all this, I think the foresaid Passage, in a
strict, literal, gross Sense, by no means defensible; we must give some Grains
of Allowance to the Writings of this Father, or else we shall make mad Work. We
must consider the Drift and Carriage of the Discourse, expound one Passage by
another, and judge charitably of all; and then the Meaning will be plain. One
while he allows the departed Souls, according to their different Deserts, a
present Portion of Pain or Weal: Other while he says, That the separate Souls
are rewarded or punished at present for the good or bad things they did without
the concurrence of the Body; and that though they are capable without the Body of
Pleasure or Pain, yet they are not so fully capable as when united to it. In
other places he seems to affirm the quite contrary, viz. That the Soul is not
capable of suffering at all without the Body; that in a divided State it can
feel neither Pleasure nor Pain, and upon this account concludes the Necessity
of a Resurrection. Now to a favorable Reader, who shall govern himself (as in
reason he is obliged) suitable to the method but now laid down; here will upon
mature deliberation appear no Contradiction, no Inconsistency in all this; the
one leads us to the understanding of the other. The separate Souls though in some
measure they do now partake of Rewards and Punishments, yet they are in a
manner nothing, in comparison to what they shall be; the Height and
Accomplishment of both awaits the Resurrection; when Body and Soul shall be
again united, then and then only the Condition of all shall be complete. And
that this is the Meaning of this Ancient Writer, is abundantly evident, not
only from the whole Thread of the Discourse, but also from some plain Passages
in it: As, ad perfectionem judicii, the Body is required to make the Judgment
complete. -- And again, Quae proinde illi non sufficient ad sentiendum plaene
quemadmodum neque ad agendum perfect: i. e. The Members of the Soul (as he
expresses it) are not of themselves sufficient to enjoy or suffer fully. Nay,
there are many other Passages frequently occurring, which as a Key open the
door to the Sense here; as the places above noted, where he again and again
allows the separate Souls capable of Pleasure or Grief without the Body: That
they can feel, or suffer any thing, licet exules carnis, without the Body.

I shall neither trouble my self nor the Reader but with two places more, and
they are both in one Chapter, ( Resur. Carn. cap. 17.) non qua sentire quid
sine carne non possit, sed qua necesse est illum cum carne sentire: And again,
Ad perficiendam autem operam carnis expectat, sic itaque ad patiendam
societatem carnis postulat, ut tam PLAENE per eam pati possit, quam sine ea
PLAENE agere non potuit: The blessed Soul to make up its Happiness full,
requires the Society of the Body; and on the other hand, the condemned Soul in
its Torments, calls for the Fellowship of the Body, that the Punishment might
be completed in both parts, in conjunction of which their Sins were committed.

This then being allowed to be the Sense of the Father (as I do not see how it
can well be denied) viz. That the Soul is not capable of Rewards and
Punishments without the Body: but by no means (as the learned Dr reports it p.
214;) That the Soul is not capable in its own nature without an organized Body
of any Perception; how, that it is not capable without ar humane Body of
either. Rewards or Punishments. This seems to be a too rigid, extreme, and
unreasonable Construction of those passages, and would unavoidably involve the
Father in the other Errors of the Death of the Soul, or the slumber of it. But
though the Learned Author does represent the Opinion of Tertullian in this
matter thus severely, yet he confesses this notion very consistent with the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, and the General Judgment that is to follow after
it; but he has this to object against it page 24. I know not how to make it
consistent with some other places of Scripture; here lies the difficulty, the
Scripture is plainly against it. I confess it does not well accord with it, as
it is here represented; and I cannot for my Heart imagine how he came to
interpret the Father so grossly Erroneous here who has produced so many places
wherein he loudly proclaims the contrary, and plainly and fully expresses
himself: in which if we take him, as by all means we are obliged to do, viz. Of
the imperfect state of the Soul in its separation, that it is not capable of
being fully rewarded or punished without the Body. I see nothing amiss here,
this Opinion must be allowed consistent with the Doctrine of the Resurrection
and the General Judgment which is to follow after it, harmoniously
correspondent with the Analogy of Faith, and the holy Scriptures; even those
very places which are alleged by the Learned Author page 215. Thus, in that of
our Savior to the Penitent Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise;
in which Words there is a Promise of an happy enjoyment to his dislodging Soul,
but an imperfect one, for we can Understand Paradise in no other sense but what
imports either the Place or Condition of the happy separate Souls, a place,
undeniably different from Heaven; a Condition of happiness in hand, but far
short and inferior to that hereafter. The Soul of the Celebrated Penitent was
immediately upon its departure, invested with a state of Bliss, but the full
measure of it cannot be expected before the Resurrection, Thus also in the
second Scripture, Phil, 1. 23. where St. Peter wishes To depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better. The Expression clearly intimates an happiness
which would accrue to his Soul by his dissolution, far above any thing that
this World could afford, as is Emphatically expressed in the Original by the
double comparative (...) The Soul of the great Apostle wherever he be, is
without dispute gloriously happy; yet (this is certain) that it cannot arrive
to the fullness of it, before it be united to that Body which was his Faithful
Companion and Partner, in all his Perils, Dangers, Hardships, Sufferings,
Conflicts, Labors here. And so in the third place, Rev. 6. 10. in which the
Souls of the Martyrs are represented from under the Altar, loudly crying for
Judgment. This Text to me is one of the most undeniable and adaequate proofs of
both the Doctrines under present consideration; for as on the one hand it
strongly establishes the blessed enjoyment of the separate Souls, so on the
other it will not suffer us to doubt of their imperfect state: The completion
and height of happiness is put off to the great Day of Recompense. The Text is
full, and deserves to be considered: I saw under the Altar the Souls of them
that were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held; and
they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do
thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth: And White
Robes were given to every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they
should rest yet for a little Season, until their fellow Servants also and their
Brethren, that should be killed, as they were should be fulfilled. Where every
Word and Clause makes for our purpose. Whether we understand it (as some) of
their Bodies, by a Prosopopeia, speaking from their Graves, or of their Souls
which are said to be under the Altar, i.e. Under the Protection of Christ, as a
Learned Critic does comment it: And they cried with a loud voice, which in my
apprehension imports not so much the multitude of them (an interpretation much
esteemed by some) as the vehemence and intention of their desire which is for
justice; and that chiefly in reference to themselves; Namely, that God would
translate and advance them to that Happiness which he has promised, and they
desiringly do desire. This exactly suits with all that follows after. They had
at present the Character, the Livery, the Privilege of Saintship, the earnest
of it: But the full of their Reward, they were not to receive until the time of
Harvest, the last Day, when both Parts were to meet again, and when the Noble
Army of Martyrs (all Conflicts and Fighting being for ever done away) should in
one Body assembled, be Crowned and Triumph together. Excellent is the
animadversion of Gregory the Great on this place ( Praef. in Job.) Singulae
stolae quia adhuc sola mentis beatitudine perfruuntur, binas vero accepturi
sunt quando cum gaudio perfecto animarum, etiam incorruptione corporum
restituuntur, i. e. The Souls under the Altar have single Robes now, their
Souls are admitted to an incohate imperfect Happiness; but double Robes
hereafter, at what time, their Bodies made incorruptible shall be restored to
their Souls; the glory and joy of both shall be complete. In short, that the
enjoyment of those Blessed Souls here at present is imperfect; is plainly
intimated by their cries, (both the matter and manner of them, they are
represented crying with a loud Voice, and that for vengeance;) and is formally
expressed in the answer made them -- they were to rest yet for a little Season,
until their fellow Servants also and their Brethren that should be killed, as
they were, should be fulfilled.

For farther confirmation of this Doctrine, which is of no small moment in our
present Argument; I cannot but recommend that most full and excellent passage
of the Learned In Mat. 22. 32. Naturalis amor corporis quem in animo omnes
deprehendimus, oftendit animam humanam esse (...) quae corpus perficiendo ipsa
simul perficitur finis sui adeptione: -- Aequitas non patitur ut corpus, quod
animi imperio multa molesta sustinet non etiam partem ferat premii. Add quod
humanae Naturae a Deo condita necesse sit finem aliquem propositum, qui ne
fingi quidem potest alius quam Beata vita totius hominis, nam finis partis
alterius non est finis totius, at totum hominem Deus condidit.
Grotius, in that place above cited.

The Natural love which we all by experience find our Souls to have toward the
Body, is an undeniable evidence that the Soul is in it self an IMPERFECT
SUBSTANCE, which by perfecting the Body, is it self also perfected by obtaining
its end. Besides JUSTICE will not allow, that the Body, which by the conduct
and command of the Soul has endured much, born the greatest part of all
difficulties and conflicts here; should have no share in the Reward. -- Add to
this, That it is not to be imagined but that the Supreme Creator should
propound some great end in erecting HUMANE NATURE; and that can be conceived to
be no less than the Happiness of the WHOLE MAN: Now the Happiness of a part
cannot be the Happiness of the WHOLE; but God made the WHOLE Man. Thus this
most Excellent Man reasons on our side. To the same purpose we may not omit the
Anima aptitudinem and inclinationem habet, ad corporis unionem sicut leve
sursum. Aquinas 1ae. Q. 76. 1 and 6m.
Notion of the Philosophers and Schoolmen, (which the Learned Author knows much
better than I can tell him) viz. That the Soul has as natural an inclination
to be united to the Body, as a light thing to mount upward; beside, if the
Philosopher had been silent, this Truth is undeniably established from the
sacred Authority but now alleged, viz. The earnest cries, and longing desires
of the Souls under the Altar, to be again united to their Bodies.

Nay this Doctrine has not only been constantly maintained, but also carried on
and advanced by the Schoolmen; who in this point are express and full, That the
happiness of the Saints shall be greater at the Day of Judgment than now it is
or can be; and they are so liberal withal as to give us the manner and reasons
of it, why it is so, and how it is brought about; Extensive augetur in corpore
extensive in anima quia anima gaudebit de bono corporis: intensive quia est
corporis perfectibile omnis pars imperfecta est and completur in toto. Aquin.
Suppl. Q. 93.
i. e. It is extensively augmented in the Body which before lay in the Grave
under the enjoyment only of a negative happiness; in an exemption from pain and
a rest from all its labors: But is in reunion admitted to a positive one; is
after a long separation placed in copartnership with the Soul, 2ly, it is
extensively augmented in the Soul which rejoices at the new Nuptials; has no
small satisfaction, complacency, pleasure, in the advancement and enjoyment of
his Bride, after so long a separation and Divorce. When two intimate Friends
that have not for many years seen one another, happily meet again, how great,
how ravishing, how superlative is their Joy? if there be joy in Heaven over one
sinner that repents, as we are sure there is, Luke 15, If it be one part of
the happiness of the Inhabitants of that Jerusalem that is above, that they
shall know their ancient Acquaintance and Relations with whom they have lived
on Earth, and sit down with them there, praising, exalting, congratulating each
others condition, as is by many asserted, and is not at all improbable. This
offers fairly for the proof of what the Shools have here determined; who in the
procedure of the Argument further tells, viz. That the Happiness is intensively
also advanced: Forasmuch as the Soul makes the Body perfect; for the support of
which they produce the known Axiom which is allowed of in all other cases, and
therefore ought to pass muster here; That every part is by its self imperfect,
it is perfected in the whole. It Is true, if we consider the Body as it is
represented by the School of Plato, a Sepulcher, a Prison; or really as it now
is, a sink of Infirmities, Diseases, and Indispositions; an heavy load and
weight, pressing down the Soul. I do confess I see nothing Beautiful or
Charming to make the Soul in love with it. But when we shall draw the Curtain,
and change the Scene, when we shall contemplate the glorious qualities
wherewith it shall be enobled after the Resurrection, when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal have put on immortality; when
it shall have obtained a most perfect Victory not only over Death, but all its
troublesome antecedents and consequences also: the known miseries of this Life,
and the calamities of the Grave; when, I say, the Body has surmounted all
these, and sits above 'em; this must induce us strongly to conclude for the
Argument in hand. If this be the case, (as in Truth it is) the Happiness of the
Saint must be advanced to such a degree, as surpasses our understanding: All
that we have to do is for ever to admire and adore. To conclude this part, it is
a Truth too plain to be disputed, That the separate Soulson all hands are not
under the full enjoyment of either Rewards or Punishments: That this is the
case of the Damned Spirits, needs no laboriousness of proof, the single
interrogation of those disposed in the Gospel, Mat. 8. 29. Art thou come to
torment us before the time? Alone is sufficient; nor have we less evidence on
the other hand. Wherever the Souls of the departed Saints under the Law were,
it is certain they were not in Heaven; for the Captain of our Salvation was the
first that opened those everlasting Doors, and made his entrance there; that
went before to provide mansion Places for his Faithful ones. Wherever the Souls
of the Gospel-Believers, since departed, have their Residence, though (as I
believe, notwithstanding the determination of the Council of Florence, and
others) we can conclude nothing of certainty here; nevertheless we have so much
evidence that their State is imperfect; as that I do not see how any Man can
have the forehead to deny. The Nail of this Doctrine is immovably fastened by
the Author to the Heb. 11. and last, where after he had given a large Catalogue
of the most renowned Saints departed, together with the Records of their most
noble Achievements; says expressly, That all these having obtained a good
report, through Faith, received not the Promise; God having provided some
better things for us, that they without us should not be perfect. In the
meaning of which place there can be no doubt, because the stream of
Interpreters here run in one Channel, altogether undivided; all agreed that
this is the sense. -- The Consummation of the Happiness of those under the Law
shall not prevent those under the Gospel; the Day of Judgment is the stated
time of both, whenthere shall be a general Resurrection: The accomplishment of
the great Patriarchs under the old dispensation, must await ours under the new;
the Labourors that entered the Vineyard the first Hour of the Day, shall not be
paid off before those that came in the last Hour; the wages of all is not to be
expected before the end of all; The Promise refers to the Resurrection, (as was
noted in the Preamble) and is put for the Thing Promised; which can be no other
than the Glorification of our Bodies in conjunction with our Souls, and this
makes the Happiness complete; which shall not be conferred on some, before
others, but shall be bestowed on all assembled together in a Grand Consistory
at the last Audit. This also is the professed Doctrine of our Church, as she
has Taught and Enjoined us in her Liturgy to Pray, -- Beseeching God of his
Gracious Goodness, shortly to accomplish the Number of his Elect; and to hasten
his Kingdom; that we, with all those departed in the true Faith of his Holy
Name, may have our perfect Consummation and Bliss both in Body and Soul in thy
Eternal and Everlasting Kingdom. A most Heavenly Prayer; this being
incomparably the best Shield, Buckler, the best Antidote and Preservative
against the loss of Friends, or the Consideration of our own approaching
Mortality, (with respect both to our selves and others) to bouy up our Spirits
amidst the Melancholy Apprehensions of the Rottentenness and Miseries of the
Grave, and exalts us above the Worms, and Corruption of it; directing us
assuredly to know and believe that there is a time coming, when there will be
an happy meeting of both (though they are now with Grief and Rluctancy divided)
when the happiness of both shall be complete: And this is an Authority
undeniably Authentic, and must (for any thing I can see to the contrary)
strongly and irrefragably establish the Doctrine contended for, viz. That our
Bodies are capable of Cewards and Punishments hereafter of doing Well or Evil
here.

CHAP. XI.
THE Learned Author having laid aside the Opinions of Tertullian, as not
serviceable to his purpose; not affording him a Satisfactory Reason of this
Decree of Almighty God concerning the Resurrection: To give a true Accounr of
it, thinks it necessary to mount a little higher, and to look a little farther
and passing by many conjectures, which he finds in the Schools, and in some of
our Ancient Writers, and among the Jewish Masters; p. 217. lays before you his
own Thoughts; and here he assigns three Reasons why God has been pleased to
decree, that the Soul in the Day of Judgment shall be again united to a Humane
Body In discussing of which, I shall beg leave to invert the order of them, as
more suitable to the method of my Discourse, and for the advantage of my
present Argument; which (if I mistake not) will gain one of those Reasons over
to our side and party, as falling over to it, and therefore ought to go
together.

The last Reason, which I here place first, why God will restore us to our
Humane Nature, and why he will raise up the very same Body is, p. 219. HE WILL
BECAUSE HE WILL, a very bad Reason for the Actions of Man, but a very good one
for God's; he will because he has Promised: Which the Learned Author
irrefragably confirms from what follows, p. 222. which I conceive my self
obliged to transcribe; and is as follows, -- I am the Lord, I have said it, and
who can say, What do thou? There is nothing that God does, but he does for a
very good reason: And who are we, that we should call him to an Account for
what he does? His Ways and his Counsels are many of them unsearchable to us;
and as Job tells us, Chap. 33, 13. He gives not Account of any of his Matter^
It Is his part to Act, ours to Admire and Submit; and as long as our Reason and
our Senses are not plainly contradicted, we are only to enquire WHAT, not How,
or WHY. I would fain know of those who deny the Resurrection of the same Humane
Body, because they do not know what use we can make of the particular parts in
the Life to come, whether they deny or doubt the existence of all other things;
the Reason of which they cannot comprehend: I would undertake to quiet the
Scruples of these Men, and to satisfy all their Queries, if they would be
pleased to answer a few Questions of mine: I could ask them the reason of an
Hundred things in Nature and Divinity. -- Which he there supposes
unaccconntable; and particularly in the case about the Resurrection, p. 221. He
acknowledges a multitude of difficulties altogether inextricable, i. e. for
which there is no reason to be given, and therefore must of necessity be
resolved into this, viz. the Will and Pleasure of God. I willingly concur with
the Learned Author here, and presume there is no one that will oppose him. For
this without paradventure is the highest and most supreme Reason which must put
to silence all Objections; remove all Difficulties whatsoever, and make things
which seem to us impossible, easy. Though with Mary we do not know how this
can be, Luke 1. 34, Though our reason cannot fathom, cannot comprehend it, yet
our Faith must give us an assurance that it will be; and teach us, with the
Mother of the Holy Jesus, with submission to conclude, -- Behold the Handmaid
of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word. This is a Reason above all
Reasons, allowed and approved of by all, and to which all others (however
Philosophical and plausible) must submit. This I gladly and readily note,
because I expect to receive some advantage from it in the subsequent part of
this Discourse, for I am in hopes to prove the Doctrine I have attempted to
defend, to be the express determination of God's revealed Will and Word, and
then all the most powerful Arguments of the Profoundest Philosophers, must
truckle under, and fall to the Ground: But (if I mistake not) this Reason of
Gods Word or Decree of the Resurrection of the Body, was not in the least the
Subject of the Dispute: The Question only arose from the Reason of this Decree.
There can be no doubt but that the Resurrection will be, because God has said
and ordained it: The Subject of the enquiry can be no other than the Reason of
God's Will and Pleasure here; Namely why God has Decreed the Resurrection of
the same Body; and this obliges the Learned Author to look farther; and
therefore,

Secondly, In the the next place he tells us, (p. 219.) That another Reason why
God has been pleased to ordain that the same Humane Body that Died, shall Rise
again and be reconjoined to the Soul; I take to be this (and that indeed I take
to be the first and chief reason of that Decree) we had all been immortal Men
if Adam had not sinned; 'twas God's design that we should never Die, but that
our Souls should remain for ever united to their Bodies; this Gracious design
being frustrated by Adam's Transgression; he was Graciously pleased to ordain,
that as in Adam all Die; so in Christ the second Adam, we should all at last
Triumph over Death, and be restored to those Bodies; and that Humane Nature,
which he first designed should be immortal; by the Death and Resurrection of
Christ our losses are to be repaired which Adam's sin occasioned, but our
losses cannot be repaired, unless we are restored to those Bodies which by his
sinning we lost.

To this Second Reason I say,

First, I have no mind to implunge my self, or Reader in the Decrees of
Almighty God, which is an Abyss or Ocean never to be fathomed: Nor am I
disposed to concern my self about the examination of that Question, Whether
Adam and his Posterity had Died if they had not Sinned? Only I shall briefly
and freely deliver my Opinion in this matter. That it seems to me very probable
that (allowing the supposition of his and their continuance in their spotless
purity) He and his Race after some time, like Enoch or Elias, or some other
way, (with Analogy and resemblance to these,) should have been translated; for
it is no way conceivable, how that Paradise, (which was but a Garden, as the
word imports, and by the boundaries and description of it must be acknowledged
a very small and inconsiderable part of the Earth) should have held, and
contained him and his numberless issue in the State of innocence, which state
must unavoidably by all be allowed, perfectly and entirely Prolifick,
absolutely free and dischargeb from all false Conceptions or Abortions, all
Impediments or Indispositions whatsoever, on either side; Passing by all this,
I say, that that which the Learned Author takes to be the First and Chief
Reason of this Decree of the Resurrection, I take to be no Reason at all, or at
least to be no adequate Reason of the General Resurrection; the utmost that it
can pretend to, (as it is here stated) is only the Resurrection of the Just;
the Reason is undeniable, for the Learned Author here sets it forth, and
expresses it, by a Gracious Design, and the Gracious Pleasure of God. Now how
this can agree with, and include the Resurrection on of the Reprobate, let the
World judge. The Subject of our Discourse is the Resurrection of all Men, of
which the Wicked are allowed by all to be by far the greater Number. And this
is a Doctrine that can meet with no Opposition; That these are to be called out
of their Graves to an Everlasting Death, to be taken out of the common Prison;
to be delivered over to Tormentors; to be cast into that Dungeon whence there
is no Redemption; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire never shall be
quenched; where there is utter Darkness and uninterrupted, weeping and gnashing
of teeth. In a word, The Resurrection of the Wicked is only in order to a
Judgment that is altogether insupportable. He is like the worst of Criminals
taken from the Gaol to undergo a much severer Doom. His Resurrection ushers in
the tremendous Sentence, Depart, ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Here the Designs carry in them the Advancement of
Divine Vengeance, Justice, and Glory, without the least Mite or Crumb of Grace
or Favor. The undone Reprobate placed on the other side of the Great Gulf, is
for ever excluded from all Hopes of these; not all his Cries, in his greatest
Extremity, can prevail for one drop of Water. There is no place for Favor or
Mercy in Hell, so that it seems to me somewhat strange, how the Learned Author
came to take up this for a Reason, and to allege for Confirmation of it, that
Passage of the Apostle, (1 Cor. 15. 22.) As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
all be made alive. I am verily persuaded, that this place was never before
understood of, or applied to the Resurrection of the Wicked, but of the
Righteous only. Neque vivificantur omnes in Christo, sed tantum qui Christo
adhaeserunt, says the Excellent Cameron, ( Eccl. tom. 10.) and all
Commentatators go the same way: And indeed no one without offering manifest
Violence to the Sacred Text, can put any other Interpretation on it, it being
the chief Design of the Apostle in that Chapter, (as is evident from the whole
Carriage of it) to set forth the Glorious Qualities attending the Bodies of the
Righteous at the Resurrection, without touching in the least on the other side:
Beside, we have most plentiful Assurance, That Christ's Coming, his Merits,
Death, and Resurrection, are so far from being Advantageous to all, that the
quite contrary is undeniable. These (greatest of Favors) shall sink those that
have despised them into the lowest, deepest, darkest, and most dismal Place of
Hell. To this purpose the Prophet Isaiah delivers himself expressly, chap. 8.
ver. 24. He (Christ) shall be for a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense to
both the houses of Israel; for a gin and a snare to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Which great Truth two Evangelists have left on Record, Matthew. 21.
44. Luke 20. 18. Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall-be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder. The very self-same
Doctrine is taught us by St. Paul, Romans 9. ult. and prosecuted and amplified at
large by St. Peter, 1 Epist. 2. 6, seq....

Beside, 'twere an easy Province to discharge this also from being a Reason of
the Resurrection of the Righteous, for it is a Truth that shines as clear as
the Sun at Noonday, That this Blessed Change advances the Saint to a State of
Happiness and Glory, beyond what Man could ever pretend to, had the still
continued in his Primitive Purity. But this is not my Business.

Wherefore I come to consider the Third and remaining Reason, assigned by the
Learned Author, Why the Soul at the Day of Judgment is again to be united to
the Body; which is as follows: p. 218. -- That as we are Men when we sin, or do
well, so we may be Men, when by a judicial Sentence we are punished or rewarded
for it: But we cannot be Men, unless we have Humane Bodies. St. Paul tells us,
THAT WE MUST ALL APPEAR BEFORE THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST, THAT EVERY MAN MAY
RECEIVE THE THINGS DONE IN HIS BODY, ACCORDING TO THAT HE HAS DONE, WHETHER IT
BE GOOD OR BAD. And as we are to give an account for what we did in the Body;
so in the Body we shall give an account, if it be reasonable that we should be
Men when we are punished or rewarded for what we did when Men; it seems much
more reasonable, that we should be then the same Men: But we cannot be the same
Men, unless we have the same Bodies.

CHAP. XII.
I Cannot here forbear with the Philosopher, to cry out (...), and with an
Ecstasy of Joy most willingly and gladly receive it. This certainly is a Reason
which must be allowed, approved of and applauded by all: A Reason, which
deserves the Inscription of Capital Golden Letters; and, as Job speaks, To be
graven with an iron pen and lead in a rock for ever, Job 19. 2. Or, as the
Prophet Jeremy expresses it, though in a different Sense, To be written with a
pen of iron, and the point a diamond, Jer. 11. 1. This is that Reason which,
being in love with, I do earnestly contend for, and am very unwilling to lose,
THE GREAT AND STANDING REASON OF THE RESURRECTION, IN ALL AGES EMBRACED, AND
COMMENDED BY AEL: Which though the Learned Anthor has been pleased to censure,
condemn, and throw aside as false and untrue, and to give us no less than three
Reasons for his Justification; yet here he ^akes it up again; and
notwithstanding his former Reflections on it, give it a new Reputation, and in
his most studied, refined, and last Reasons of this most important Doctrine of
the Resurrection recommends it to the World in the first place (as no doubt the
Flower and Prime of all). Nay, what is more, he sets it on the Foundation of an
Infallible Authority, (2 Cor. 5. 10.) which at present I shall wave, because I
design to consider (...) it at large in the latter Part of this Discourse,
industriously reserving it, as the finishing and concluding Nail wherewith to
fix the Doctrine, and render it immovable.

There is (I confess) some Variation in the Words, and Manner of Expression;
but in the Sense there is very little, or none at all; if it be otherwise, I
must openly confess my Ignorance: I appeal (in this as in other Cases) to the
Impartial Reader. I always have, and ever will pay the Learned Authora just
Deference and Regard. I honor and admire him for his great Worth, his vast
Reading, and his (...), his manifold Learning, and I look upon it almost an
Offense to differ from him. But I hope he will pardon my Presumption, for I
cannot help it: And it is no small Comfort to me, though we formerly differed, yet
we are now perfectly agreed, (the Variation of a few Words only excepted): What
he calls reasonable, I call equitable and just; what he calls Man, that I can
understand no other than his Soul and Body united, (which are allowed by all to
be the two Essential Parts of his Constitution) for my part, I see no other
Difference. The Ancients and Modern, and in a manner all Divines, (as has been
above acknowledged, and proved at large) say, That the Resurrection is founded
upon Justice; i. e. That the same Body is to be united to the same Soul
hereafter, that both may receive either Rewards or Punishments, according to
their Merits or Demerits here. The Learned Author says expressly, That it is
reasonable we should be Men when, we are punished or rewarded for what we did
when Men. And further adds, That it seems much more reasonable that we should
be the same Men: Which to my Understanding is all one.

CHAP. XIV.
HAving hitherto attempted the Vindication of this great Catholic Doctrine, to
give some satisfaction to the Objections brought against it, and to rescue it
from Captivity. Having also considered at large the Opinions of Tertullian to
this purpose, and the three Reasons assigned by the Learned Doctor. That which
remains now is to lay down some considerations for the safeguard and Protection
of it for the time to come, and I shall divide them into two ranks, viz.
Considerations drawn from,

First, Reason.

Secondly, Scripture.

I begin with the first, in order whereunto I beg this as a modest Postulatum
which I conceive cannot be denied me, verily there is a reward for the
Righteous doubtless he is a God that Judges the Earth, the Judge of the whole
Earth must do Right, Genesis 18. 25. Justice is one of the most signal attributes
of the Divine Nature, more frequently and eminently ascribed unto him above the
rest (...), Justice (says the Heathen) is the Eye of God, he will and must
sooner or later render unto every Man (without respect of Person) according to
his doings.

First, Now it is undeniable both from the frequent Assertions of Solomon and
other Holy Penmen, together with the universal Experience of all Ages; that the
course of it is interrupted, suspended, darkened, nay inverted in the present
administration of Affairs here. All things come alike to all, there is one
event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked, to the Good and to the clean and to
the unclean, to him that Sacrifices and to him that Sacrifices not, as is the
Good so is the Sinner, and he that swears as he that fears an Oath, Eccl.
9. 3. here just Men Perish in their Righteousness and Wicked Men prolong their
Lives in their Wickedness, Eccl. 7. 15. With a multitude of other Places to the
same purpose. The matter of Fact has always appeared so plain and visible as
that there has no attempt at any time been made against it; but constantly
allowed as an undoubted Aphorism. Upon all occasions taken up and made the
outcry, the stumbling Block, the grand Objection against Providence. It were an
easy matter to enlarge here; and to report the loud and heavy Charges of the
Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet at Cato parvo Pompeius nullo credimus esse Deos
-- Statius.

And Ovid upon this Account, Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos. and the

And Propertius, Et queritur nullos esse relicta Deos.

Old Tragedian, (...).

And Claudian, Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem
Curarent superi terras an ullus in esset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu.


But the most nervous and gravest of all is that of Cotta in Cicero 3d. de Not.
Deorum.


Heathens in this Arguments as also the frequent complaints of Holy Men Job 12.
6. Chap. 21, 24, 27. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 39. Psalm. 73. Jer. 12. 1, etc. Habak. 1.
Mal. 3. 14.
It may suffice to my purpose only to note how that the Wicked are so far from
being treated according to their deserts in this Life, as that the contrary for
the most part is bestowed on them, they go away with the Riches, Pleasures,
Honors, are accomodated with the prosperity, pomp, and Grandeur of the World.

Secondly, It Is also certain that the Wickedness of some is so superlatively
great, as that it cannot be sufficiently punished in this Life, by all that can
be inflicted on them, the repetition and accumulation of a multitude of Crimes,
each of which is in its own nature and by the Law, Capital, must be
acknowledged too great to be compensated by one single Death. He that has ran
through the whole Circle of Sin (as the case may be Stated) tho he be handled
according to the severest Method, both of shame and punishments can make no
equivalent or tolerable satisfaction for the same. The firebrand of the World,
who with the furys of War has destroyed Countries, depopulated Nations, sent
thousands of Souls to the other World in their Blood and Sins, can make no
sufficient atonement, by all that he can do or suffer here.

Thirdly, nor is it less evident on the other side, that the good Man does not
(I may safely say) oftentimes cannot receive a just recompense for all his
doings and sufferings here; he is encompassed with so thick a Cloud of
miseries, that his whole Life is but one continued conflict, with hardships and
difficulties, from the first to the last scene, the most doleful of Tragedies.
Like the Poor Beggar in the Gospel, he has a full measure of evil things, is
pinched with Cold, Hunger, Nakedness, boyls and sinks under his complicated
calamities: Or like the great Apostle (2 Cor. 11. 25, etc.) can give us a black
Role of miseries that have on every side attended him through the whole Race of
his Life, and have been his inseparable Companions to the grave: this was more
especially the case of these devout Christians that lived in the Fiery days of
Persecution, and has been and will always be, more or less, of Pious Souls to
the World's end.

Now if we reflect on these passages with a thorough, and serious
consideration, what conclusion can we possible draw from hence? Shall We take
an occasion upon this account as the Heathens have done, to arreign the Justice
of Heaven, with open mouth to charge God foolishly, or as we find Holy Men
sometimes muttering. Tush! God hides away his face, and he does not see, there
is no knowledge in the Almighty, then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my Hands in Innocence, it is vain to serve God, what profit is there in
it. No, verily these are Illogical and false inferences, from these
irregularities and failures here, we must firmly conclude there is a time
approaching, when the supreme Judge will set all things at rights, i. e. there
is a Resurrection, which is attended with impartial Justice to all, this I am
sure is the great use which the royal Psalmist points at and directs us to,
Psalm. 94. 14, 15. The Lord will not cast off his People, neither will he
forsake his inheritance, but Judgment shall return unto Righteousness. Tho now
they are at a distance, yet they shall shake Hands and meet again, and then the
Wicked shall be punished, and the Godly rewarded.

This I am sure is the Improvement St. Paul makes of it, 2 These. 1. 5. where
speaking of the Persecutions and Tribulations which the Saints endured, calls
them a manifest token of the Righteous Judgment of God. Not (...) but (...) not
an example but Demonstration; though now the Order of Justice be inverted, though
the Wicked which deserve punishment are far from it, tho they prosper and
triumph, are flourishing and spreading like the Cedars in Lebanus, and you that
are well deserving, are rudely and barbarously treated, you are to look on this
as an undeniable evidence, that there is a day of review approaching, when
Justice shall be done to all; this is undeniably the meaning of our Apostle
here, as appears not only from the expression but also from what follows, where
he expatiates on the Argument. That ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of
God, for which ye also suffer; seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled
rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels
in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power,
when he shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them
that believe in that day. The natural and genuine Interpretation of which Place
can be no other than if the Apostle had said, Have but a little patience and
the scene will be inverted, those who afflict and persecute you shall pay
dearly for it, and you that now suffer shall be gloriously rewarded at the
Resurrection of all, which is designed for Justice to all Men, and to every
part of Man.

Lastly, From the foregoing experiences (which must be allowed) there can no
inference be thought on more reasonable than that which the same Apostle has
elsewhere repeated, Acts 17. 30. That God has appointed a Day in which he will
Judge the World in Righteousness.

For the farther improvement of the Argument, I think fit to recommend in the
next place those various Parables in the Gospel so often mentioned; of the
Laborers, of the Talents, of the Husbandmen: For it is undeniable that all
these have a manifest tendency to the business in hand. All these are to be
considered, and according to their behavior treated, upon the Return of the
great Lord at the end of the Day, and of their Work, in all which we have a
special and exact Account of every Man's recompense according to his Works;
Justice in all the proceedings being made the standing Rule and Measure, and
the Resurrection, the unalterable time, and so by consequence appositely
answers our present design. In all these cases we have the repeated Declaration
of that great Judge, that he will give to all what he Promised, what is Right,
what properly belongs unto him. He that hid his Talent meets with a hard but
equitable Doom: He that improved it is advanced: In a word, the Loiterer ( eo
nomine) is punished as such, and the faithful Labourer is promoted. The
treatment of all here is proportioned to their former doings and deservings. So
we find it expressly noted by St. Luke 19. 17. He who had received five pounds,
and by his industry had gained five more, is kindly received with the Character
of a good and faithful Servant, and because of his ten pounds, has Authority
given him over ten Cities; and so with proportion in the next example, He whose
Pound had gained five, has a suitable command over five Cities.

Nor have we less evidence of the point in hand, from the Rewards, the Wages,
the Recompense of reward; which are Phrases that ever and anonoccur in Holy
Writ. All these are well known to be metaphorical and relative terms; and
therefore for a right understanding, necessarily direct us to the Correlative;
and that can be no other than the whole Man: All his Actions, all his Deeds,
all his Merits, shall be taken into consideration; the Traffic of his whole
life is brought upon examination, and accordingly he shall receive the returns
of them; at the settled time of the Resurrection.

Nor may we omit the diversities and degrees of Rewards and Punishments, which
attend the Bodies of Men in the other World, and can result from nothing but
Justice; For as it is the essence of it to take care to Punish the Evil Doer,
and to Reward the Man of Merit: So is it no less to dispense both with respect
to the deservings of either. This is the Method of all Tribunals here below,
and is industriously observed (as himself has assured us) by the Judge above.

To this purpose all Governments have provided great varieties of all kinds, to
answer the infinite cases that come before them, and how plentifully in this
the Supreme Governor is accommodated, the Magna Charta of Heaven will not
suffer us to be ignorant.

Forasmuch then as there are in that everlasting Dungeon below different
Stations, or at least Punishments provided for such as shall by a dreadful
Sentence be fixed there; of which (to pass by all others) the tremendous woes
pronounced against Corazin and Capernaum, Tire and Sidon, the outer darkness
and greater Damnation are undeniable evidences; it roundly follows that the
hand of Justice is conspicuous in all this: On the other side, forasmuch as
there are many mansions, higher and lower places of Honor and Glory prepared
for the Bodies of the Saints in the Empyraean Heaven, Of the truth of which we
are so abundantly secured, as that it would be a weak ^upererogation to attempt
the proof. We are by all the Rules of Reason and Logic to make the same
conclusion as heretofore; it being scarcely possible to derive it from any
other cause. If the Bodies of the Twelve Apostles (for the promise cannot be
applied to their Souls only, because it is to be made good after the
Resurrection, and at the Day of Judgment) are hereafter to be seated upon
Twelve Thrones, as Judges and Assessors of The Twelve Tribes of Israel, i. e.
Of all Mankind. If the Sons of Zebedee; the Martyred Saints, some of those of
the highest form shall fill those immediate places of the Right Hand, and of
the Left Hand of Christ of his Kingdom. If the eminent Christians in the
Gentile World shall come from the East and from the West, and take their Places
next to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the great Patriarchs of the Promise. If
those that have beaten down their Bodies, and brought them into subjeicton (by
their unwaried wrestling with the Flesh have obtained a Victory over it here)
shall receive the advantage thereof in their Exaltation above: if (as the
Apostle speaks) Every Man shall receive his own Reward according to his Labor,
1 Cor. 3. 8. if those that have done and suffered more in this Life; are
carried on and encouraged thereto, from an infallible assurance of a suitable
Retaliation: That is to say, of an emminent and proportionable Recompense at
the Resurrection of the Just; It is I think to any Man who will not shut his
Eyes against the Light, a Plain Case, viz. in all this the Justice of God is
signal and conspicuous.

Hither tend the advancements of Glory appropriated and applied by the Ancients
and Schoolmen to three sorts of Men; more especially,

First, To the famous Preachers of the Gospel, who with the great Apostle did
very gladly spend and were spent, labored more abundantly in the Vineyard. Of
the truth of this there can be no doubt, since Truth it self has assured us,
That they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. ult. 3.
And that the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of the
Father, Mat. 13. 43. And this is farther and more fully confirmed in the above
mentioned promise of Twelve Thrones to the first Heralds of the Gospel.

Secondly, To such as have kept themselves unspotted from the Flesh, have
adorned their Conversation with Purity and Chastity, and have fought Valiantly
and Victoriously in this Warfare. This is asserted by the Prophet Isaiah, in a
lofty and Rhetorical strain, (as his custom is) Chap. 54. 4, 5. Thus says the
Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please
me, and take hold of my Covenant, even to them will I give in mine House, and
within my Walls, a Place and a Name, better than of Sons and of Daughters: I
will give them an Everlasting Name that shall not be cut off. This is alluded
to by our Blessed Savior, Mat. 19. 12. and emphatically noted by St. John,
Rev. 14. 4. where those pure Virgins that were not desiled with Women are
represented, dignified with extraordinary marks of Glory above others, v. 5.
They sung a New Song which no Man could learn, they were admitted to follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goes, and are called expressly the first Fruits unto God
and unto the Lamb.

Thirdly, The Noble Army of Martyrs, who have cheerfully for the testimony of
the Faith and a good Conscience, suffered the most cruel Torments that Men or
Devils could inflict given their Bodies to the^ Wild Beasts and to the flames.

There can be no dispute of the truth of this point neither, forasmuch as that
it is (...) confirmed by the testimony of the infallible Spirit which assigns
an eminency of happiness to those that were slain for the Word of God, and for
the testimony which they held, white robes were given unto them, Rev. 6. 9, 10.
And positively pronounces the Right hand, and Left hand, the principal places
in the Kingdom of Heaven to belong to those that have drank of Christ's Cup,
and been Baptized with his Baptism, Mat. 20. 22. To this purpose excellent is
the animadversion of St. Augustine, Videbimus in illo regno in corporibus
Martyrum vulnerum Cicatrices, quae pro Christi nomine pertulerunt non enim
deformitas in eis, sed dignitas erit and quaedam quamvis in corpore non
corporis sed virtutis pulchritudo fulgebit. Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 3.

We shall see in Heaven in the Bodies of the Martyrs, the marks of those wounds
which they received for Christ's sake; and these will be no deformity, but an
honor to them; the Beauty of their Grace^ will gloriously shine forth through
these impressions. And again this great Father to the same purpose has noted,
In cicatricibus Martyrum, sole fulgidioribus extabit Martyrii gloriosissimum
Monumentum, non autem ullum corporis glorificati dehonestamentum. Civ. Dei, l.
6. 22. cap. 19. In the Scars of the Bodies of the Martyrs, brighter than the
Sun, shall shine forth the most glorious Trophy of Martyrdom. We all allow it
for the Honor and Reputation of a Soldier to show the Foot steps of those
wounds which he received in fighting valiantly for his King and Country.

And indeed this Consideration makes this Opinion very probable; it is generally
admitted by the Schools and others, and in the main, cannot be denied; and in
my apprehension does not a little contribute to the support of that Doctrine
which is our business to establish; If the Bodies of some of the Saints in
Heaven shall be signalized with Characters of Advancement of Glory, they are
certainly capable of Rewards.

For the farther improvement of the argument, I desire that it may be observed,
how that the Resurrection and Judgment are so interwoven and twisted together,
as that the one cannot be separated from the other; it is a truth which neither
can nor will be denied; that the one is in order to the other; And as at the
Assizes here below, when the Court is set, the Persons concerned are brought
from Preson to the Bar, in order to their Trials: So it is in this last and
general Assize, the Supreme Judge sends out his Officers to remand all out of
their Graves, from all Quarters of the World, to make their personal
appearance, to answer to their Charge, and abide the final determination of
this last Audit. And though there may and will be to the end of the World,
prevarications, failures, and deviations, in the proceedings of all Earthly
Tribunals, yet this highest Court of Justice must be acknowledged by all to be
altogether exempt from these: It Is placed beyond the possibility of the least
miscarriage.

Well then, the Reason of the Resurrection is the Judgment which is immediately
to follow after it; and if our Bodies are not concerned in the business
Transacted, what do they make here?

If they are no other than Instruments only, their appearance is altogether
needless, of which we have a full assurance by all the methods of Judicature
upon Earth. To what purpose should almighty God put himself to the expense of a
miracle, which must be allowed by all equivalent with the Creation? To what
purpose, I say, does the omnipotent Power in a more extraordinary and eminent
manner exert it self, in rallying together there the confused and scattered
Atoms of all Mankind, in bringing them back to their Ranks and Files, to the
same station and order in which they formerly stood; would he (think you) do
all this were our Bodies no more than Tools?

Credat Judaeus Apell^..... Is this suitable to the solemnity of this great Day
when all the World shall be present, and all the concerns of all Mankind from
first to last adjusted; What must the Archangel be sent before to prepare the
way, with his mighty Voice and Trump of God to rouse all out of their Graves,
to make their Personal appearance? What must the Son of God leave the bosom and
right hand of his Father, and now a second time come down in the Clouds of
Heaven, attended and environed with Miriads of his Holy Angels, exalted on his
Throne to sit in Judgment on things altogether insensible, altogether incapable
of doing good or evil, altogether incapable of Rewards and Punishments? I
cannot conceive how such an imagination should find any the least entertainment
with a Man of Reason; was there ever such a thing heard of as a most
magnificent Tribunal erected, with all the most solemn preparations and
attendants, to Examine, Arraign, Try, and Condemn mere Stocks and Stones,
Senseless Clods of Earth; which never were capacitated either to commit Sin, or
feel Pain? Now the No^ion of Philosophy with which we are at present engaged,
seems to charge the Supreme Tribunal with all this, for it, says expressly and
totidem verbis, viz. The Body is not capable either of Sinning, or doing Well,
the Arm which stabbs Sins no more than the Sword, the Body is not sensible, is
not capable of any reward or Punishment, Page 210. If then it can be made
appear, that our Bodies are in an especial manner concerned in the Business and
Determination of this great and terrible Day, there needs no farther Proof, to
bring the former absurdities home, and Fix them here.

Now, that they are so, seems abundantly evident, and undeniable. 1. Because
the Souls of all Men departed had passed their Judgment before; immediately
upon their respective Dissolutions, the Eternities of them all were Stated, and
they accordingly invested (tho their Bodies slept in their Dormitories).

Secondly, all the apparatus, the concomitants, and attendance of this Day
proclaim this aloud. This the effectual call of the Heavenly Pr^^o that
commands them out of their ^eds of Dust, this that irresistible Power which
brings them to the Bar, this their Place and Posture of standing there, this
the examination and inspection into their former Lives, this their remuneration
accordingly, in a Word, this the whole Process of the Day does abundantly
testify.

When a Person is remanded from the Goal, and brought directly before the
Bench, when his Indictment is Read, when he is Impleaded, when the Witnesses
are Examined, when an exact Scrutiny is made, when he is found Guilty, and
Sentence is pronounced against him: No one in his right Senses can doubt who
was the party concerned at the Trial.

Nor is it less than a contradiction in terms to imagine that this Party thus
handled, thus proceeded against, Properly speaking, was not capable of doing
Good or Evil, was not sensible, was not capable of Rewards or Punishments.

Thirdly and Lastly, To strengthen what we have here asserted, and to secure it
from the attack of the Philosopher, I desire it may be observed: How that the
Holy, Scriptures are on our side, and seem to countenance this Truth. St. John
does frequently tell us That the Dead were Judged -- and our Blessed Savior in
no less than three Places, is described by this Periphrasis, a Judge both of
the Quick and the Dead, Act. 10. 42. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 5. there is no need
of a comment here. The word Dead puts all out of doubt, it being properly
applicable to our Bodies only. Our Souls are (by the allowance of all)
pronounced Immortal; and in the Sense of the Scripture here, neither are or can
be subject to Death. So that here, if any where, the caveat of the Apostle
ought duly to be regarded. Col. 2. 8. Beware least any Man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain Deceit.

From this passage we are plainly taught that there is a sort of Philosophy,
both vain and deceitful, and how prejudicial it has been to Divinity, no one
(any way conversant with the Learned) can possibly be Ignorant.

Hence Valentinus owes his Heresy, hence Marcion his, the Jews (in our
Savior's time) has sucked in the (...) of Pythagoras to the corrupting of their
Religion.

And without doubt the Aereal Notions derived from the school of Plato led the
most Learned Origin aside in his Doctrine about the Resurrection, upon this
account it was that the Jews in the Days of the Maccabees enacted a prohibition
against Philosophy, and the known character that Tertullian gives them (
Petriarchas Haereticorum) can be derived from no other cause.

Of this stamp (if I mistake not) is the Philosophy before us, Fallacious and
Deceitful (as I have above Represented it,) and therefore we ought to be
careful, and fearful of it; the surest way not to be entangled with it, is to
lay it aside: What, tho the subtle Philosopher, urge me with a Syllogism which
I am not able to Answer, nor, (as is by him ingeniously confessed) himself
neither? What, tho he by his Logic entangles me in a difficulty which is not
easily effoyled? I am notwithstanding all his Quirks to be tenaceous of that
Truth, which I have all the Reason in the World (except his Fallacy) to
believe. When the Philosopher urged a strong and as was supposed an
irresistible Argument against Motion, the Respondent gave him a sufficient
Answer and confutation by his Walking. The Case comes home, the Body is
expressly summoned to appear and must be concluded a Party, notwithstanding all
that the Philosopher has to say against it.

The Sophister then here labors in the Fire, all his deceitful Logic will
never be able to persuade Men of understanding that the Body is barely the
instrument of the Soul, it is (as he has been often told) a Part, an essential
Part, the one half of the Man, which as such is properly and directly concerned
in the Negotiations Traffic and Actions of this State of Probation, and so
unavoidably interested in the account and as a Party together with the Soul to
Answer for all; and to stand or fall accordingly.

It Is not to be denied that our Senses are the great inletts of Sin, and
therefore ought to be allowed the proper Subjects of Punishment, in order
whereunto it is observable how that the greatest part of the Torments of Hell
which we find mentioned in its Black Catalogue seem in a peculiar and proper
manner to be marked out, and intended to this very Purpose, as most Offensive
and displeasing to them: For example here is Darkness, than which nothing can
be more offensive to the Sight, and to make it full here is utter Darkness. Is
Fire injurious to the Touch? Here it is with a Witness most frequently assigned
as the greatest severest Part of Hell. And that the Smell should not escape
scotfree, here is an addition of Brimstone.

And farther to affect the Organs of seeing and hearing; there are two other
Punishments expressly assigned to the Damned, viz. weeping and wailing, which
(unless we will interpret all these Metaphorically, contrary to the Judgment of
all) must be applied to the Body. In a Word, the Argument is clearly on our
side, it being the Doctrine of all (without exception) that there are in that
Dungeon below, Punishments provided for and appropriated to both Parts.

Lastly, The elaborate Treatise of the Learned Author seems to me a full Answer
and confutation of the Objections.

He has proved the Resurrection of the same Body, from the Antidiluvian
Patriarchs, the Jews, the Abissines, Peruvians, Prussians, Brasilians, etc. --
from all the Heathens -- he has proved it to have been the Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers; of the Councils; of the Creeds; of the Scriptures: Answered
all the Objections against it, and can it be supposed that he should take so
much pains to no purpose, does he in all this Learned undertaking contend de
lana Caprina? It must be confessed and allowed nothing less if the Body be
barely an instrument, a Machine; if it be not Sensible; Materiam superabat
opus, certainly he has stooped his noble Pen to too ignoble a Subject, he might
very well have spared his Labor: To what end should the same Body arise if it
never were capable of doing Good or Evil, neither can be of Rewards or
Punishments?

No verily, by this accomplished Work, he has obliged the World, and done the
Church good Service, effectually Proclaimed aloud the Truth, which is here
contended for. The Resurrection of the same Body carries in the very bowel of
it a Judgment, together with the consequences of it.

And if it be necessary that the same Body should appear, the Actions of the
former Life, are unavoidably fastened to it, together with the suitable Rewards
of that which is to come.

CHAP. XV.
IF these Sentiments were not (as we conceive them to be the suggestions of
Reason) to mount in the Argument a little higher, come we to Divine Revelation,
and to enquire what Authorities we can find here for the support of it.

For if our reason of the Resurrection receive any countenance from the Sacred
Oracles; its above the shock of the Philosopher, and can no more be impressed
by all his Notions, than the Creation of the World could be overturned by the
known Axiom of the great Stagyrite, ex nihilo nihil fit, out of Nothing Nothing
can be made.

I begin with two noted Authorities of our Savior, which because of a near
affinity to each other, I shall join here in one: That of our Savior in his
Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. 30. together with that of the Twelve Apostles when
he gave them their Commission, and instructed them in their Duty, Mat. 10. 28.
For if thy Right Eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and not thy whole
Body should be cast into Hell: And if thy right Hand offend thee cut it off,
and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for thee that one of thy Members
should perish and not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell.

And in the Second, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill
the Soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Body and Soul in
Hell -- in both which places we are again and again assured that the Bodies of
Men, as well as Souls are liable to the Punishments of Hell, unless we can
imagine that Christ here intended to alarm the World with a Brutum fulmen, an
ineffectual Threat (which is most impious to conceive.) To what purpose should
he give such frequent advertisements as those, if Hell were not to be the
Portion of evil Bodies?

The casting into Hell and destroying in Hell are applied to Bodies; it can be
understood in no other Sense but as a commination or affirmation, that they
shall be doomed upon their miscarriages here to the severest Torments in that
Region below.

If Men do not pluck out their Right Eyes, cut off their Right Hand -- they are
in danger of implunging the whole in the Lake that burns with Fire.

If Men do not fear God above Men, their Bodies as well as Souls are in danger
of Hell Fire.

So that from these two places, all those Conclusions follow, and appear as
clear as Crystal diametrically contrary to what the Learned Author would have
us to believe, viz.

First, That our Bodies are capable of Punishments because liable to be cast
into Hell.

Secondly, That they are capable of doing Evil at present, because that portion
of misery is here denounced against them, Hell being provided for none but the
wicked.

And the two opposites to these are altogether as apparent.

First, Our Bodies are capable of doing well here, we can cut of our Right Hand
-- we can fear God, or else it had never been here intimated as our Duty.

And Lastly, If we live in the discharge of our Duty, our Bodies shall be
admitted to glorious enjoyments in the other World. For this in the Antithesis
is manifestly applied.

The first Authority that I produce, shall be that of the Apostle, Rom: 2.
Where after he had pronounced the sinner inexcusable who committed the same
Sins which he condemned in others; and charged him with the sure Judgment of
God, which is according to truth from his impenitency and perseverance in it,
tells him, verse 5. That he thereby treasureth up to himself Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, who will render
to every Man according to his Deeds; to them who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life; But to
them that are contentius, and do not obey the Truth, Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile: But Glory, Honor, and Peace to every Man that
works Good,, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile, for there is no
respect of Persons with God. If this Text be well considered, it will afford a
good Argument; in order whereunto it is worthy our observation.

First, How that the Man is through the whole course of it charged both with
the Sin and consequences of it; as in the 1, 3, 6, and 11. Verses. O Man....

Secondly, That he is said to treasure up wrath, by which elegant metaphor,
nothing less can be signified, than that his sins are kept in a safe
reconditory to be brought forth against the Man in the great Day of Reckoning.

Thirdly, He is also here infallibly certified of the Justice of all the
Proceedings then, and that 1st, From the Nature of the Judgment it self, It Is
Righteous. 2dly, From the Character of the Judge set forth by this Paraphrase,
who will render to every Man according to his Deeds; which most certainly
carries an accent and emphasis with it, being so often in Scripture repeated,
as Psalm. 62. 12. Mat. 16. 27. Rev. 22. 12. 3dly, By another Property which
makes his Justice altogether as conspicuous. (...) he is no respecter of
Persons.

Fourthly, We have here withal a large amplification of the different states
which attend all according to their Deserts.

Lastly, So universal is this last Scrutiny as that no Man whatsoever is exempt
from it, neither Jew nor Gentile; that is, no Person at all, The Argument from
this Authority runs thus. There is a time coming when all Men (which
unavoidably supposes the conjunction of both parts) shall make their Personal
appearance before a most righteous Judge, when all their Deeds, of what kind
soever, shall be brought upon the Stage, and they impartially treated without
any other respects but their deservings. When, as St. Athanasius's Creed
expresses it, All Men shall rise with their Bodies, and give an account of
their Works; and they that have done Good, shall go into life everlasting, and
they they that have done Evil, into everlasting Fire.

And what is this but Justice both with respect to Body as well as Soul? for
both are here joined together, and one is the inseparable concomitant of the
other.

The Second Authority which I offer for the confirmation of the Doctrine which
I endeavor to vindicate, is John 5. 28. Marvel not at this, for the hour is
coming in the which all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice, and
shall come forth; they that have done Good unto the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

To bring my Text home to the Argument, we are necessitated to look back into
the context; where we find the occasion to be the cure of a Paralitical Man,
who had labored under this Chronical Disease for no less a Space than 38
Years, at which the Spectators deservedly wonder; whereupon our Blessed Savior
gives them an account of a much stranger thing than this -- namely, of the
Resurrection of the Bodies of all Men from the first to the last, at the end of
the World; Marvel not at this, for the hour comes when all that are in their
Graves, etc.

My observation from this Place for the Advantage of my Argument, is, First, we
have here a Resurrection (how strange soever and impossible it may seem to be)
confirmed and established from the Mouth of Christ himself; and secondly, we
have here the consequence of the Resurrection, and the main Reason of it (which
is the matter of our Dispute) and I most willingly appeal to the Reason of all
Mankind, whether it be not manifestly held forth in the latter Clause; for tho
the illative be suppressed, yet it is manifestly employed, and the latter part is
exegetical, i. e. gives us the Reason of the former.

The Bodies of good Men are to rise again, and to enjoy everlasting Happiness,
and the Bodies of the Wicked are to be united to their Souls, to suffer those
punishments, in conjunction now, which their Sins, committed in their former
Union, have deserved. The most natural Sense of the place is, as if Christ had
said, All Men shall rise, that they that have done Good, may go into Life
everlasting, and that they that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of
Damnation.

The Third and next Text is Rev. 20. 12, 13. I saw the Dead, small and great
stand before God, and the Books were opened; and another Book was opened, which
is the Book of Life, and the Dead were Judged out of these things which were
Written in the Books, and the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death
and Hell delivered up the Dead which were in them, and they were Judged every
Man according to their Works.

In this Vision St. John represents the general Resurrection, under the popular
Scheme of a grand Assize (with allusion in all probability to the like passages
of the Prophets Daniel and Malachy, Dan. 7. 10. Mal. 3. 16.) at which time the
Books of Records, containing the Indictments and Charges of those Summoned to
appear, are produced, faithfully Read and Examined: And as these are found, so
do the Persons at the Bar, either stand or fall: Even so is it to all intents
and purposes at the Resurrection, tho there will be no real Written Books of
Registers, but the Metaphorical ones of God's Omniscience, and every Man's
Conscience (which carries in it the whole Work of the Court, all the Officers
of it) we are hereby infallibly secured of the Accuracy of Justice in all the
Proceedings.

Every Line and Clause of this Text affords us ample evidence of the Doctrine
we contend for: As the Bodies of all Men shall arise to be brought to Judgment,
so shall all their Actions be laid open, carefully Scanned, Weighed and
Exaamined, to make the Sentence Righteous. Of which the Books (that is, the
Accounts, Charges, and Works contained in them) are the unvariable Measure and
Rule inviolably to be observed by the Supreme Judge in the final Determinations
of all Men. Now that the force of the Argument of this Text may not be eluded,
I desire the Reader to consider these three Remarks.

First, The Dead are raised in order to their Trial, and therefore must by all
be allowed in a special manner concerned.

Secondly, it is said expressly that the Dead were Judged, which cannot be
referred to the Souls of Men (which are Immortal, no ways subject to Death in
the Sense here) it must therefore by an unavoidable necessity be understood of
the Bodies, and so by consequence all the Business of this Judgment, from first
to the last, both the Works and Remuneration fastened here. And for the full
assurance of which, it ought to be,

Thirdly, Farther noted, how that it is twice repeated in the close of both the
Verses -- The Dead were Judged out of these things which were Written in the
Books -- and they were Judged every Man according to their Works.

Fourthly, After these I cannot pass by that of Heb. 6. 10. God is not
Unrighteous, to forget your Work and Labor of Love in Ministering to the
Saints. For our encouragment in well doing, the Apostle directs us, to cast our
Eyes on the recompense of reward which shall attend good and charitable Men at
last, and secures us in this, that Righteousness (which is the same with
Justice) shall be the standard of it, and clearly implies that if God should
forget, should not recompense the Saint according to his Works, he would be
Unrighteous.

Fifthly, Nor may we omit that infallible assurance which we have received from
the Mouth of our Blessed Savior in that full Place Mat. 25. 31. etc. where we
have a large Account of the Resurrection and Judgment, together with the
Method, Rule, and Reasons of both.

The cursed Sentence which shall be passed on the Bodies as well as Souls of
the Wicked (for they are now both joined together) has respect to the Sins
which in their former conjunction they committed, the one is Assigned the
express Reason of the other. So it runs, depart ye cursed into Everlasting
Fire, etc. For I was an Hungered and ye gave me no Meat, etc. here the illative,
For, is allowed by all Persuasions, Protestants as well as Papists, to be
Causal. And the whole Man was concerned in the Sin and must be joined in the
Punishment, and though in the adverse Part, when the welcome Invitation is given,
Come ye Blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom, etc. For I was an Hungered and
ye gave me Meat.... some Divines of the Reformation, will not have it here to
signify the Cause but the Consequence, to avoid the Force of the Argument for
Meritoriousness of good Works, which seems to me a very strange Distinction
(and as I conceive in the present Case altogether needless) for God may, ought,
and will reward us for our good Works; not for any real Merit of condignity in
them, but because he has been pleased out of his Goodness and Bounty, to give
us his Gracious Promises so to do, and upon this account is obliged to make
good his Word; but be this how it will, so much is certain, and must be
acknowledged by all, it is the main drift and design of our Blessed Savior in
the whole Discourse, to represent our Actions here done in the Body, to be the
Square and Measure of that Judgment which suitably shall attend both Body and
Soul hereafter.

Sixthly, After all this I might here call in to our Assistance, the profess^d
Argument of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. on the present Subject; but I have
considered this in the beginning of this Discourse: I shall therefore now
dismiss it with a Remark, or two. As, First, How he represents the
Resurrection, as the Basis of Christian Religion: He secures us of the
certainty of it, displays for our Comfort the Glorious Qualities of Bodies
then: Encourages us to persevere in doing Good here, from an assurance that our
Labor will not be in vain hereafter; intimating in the Expression by an
elegant (...) a most transcendent incomparable Reward: Which must of Necessity
be applied to the Body, whereunto the design of the whole Chapter tends. For it
must be acknowledged by all, the main End of it: Now the Reason of all, can
result from no other Principle, or at least none so considerable as this, viz.
That we have to do with a God who will Reward every Man according to his Work;
which fully comes up to what I am to prove.

Can any one imagine that there would be so much ado about our Bodies, if they
were not capable of an exalted enjoyment in Heaven? No verily, we may depend
upon the Truth of the contrary (let the Philosopher say what he pleases) for
the same Apostle has elsewhere assigned this as the Reason of it, Phil. 3.
last, God shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious Body; because our Conversation is in Heaven. Our Citizenship lies
there; we are free of that Jerusalem above, and this Angelical Alteration is in
order to our Investiture into all the unspeakable Privileges of it.

In short, the tendency of the whole Chapter resolves it self into this. That
Christians, notwithstanding all the discouragments in the way, ought to go on
with resolution and cheerfulness in the discharge of their Duty, upon the
assurance of a Resurrection; when their Bodies as well as their Souls shall
receive a recompense for all; and if this be the Case of the Saint (as it is
here plainly and fully represented) what the State and condition of the Sinner
will be upon his Resurrection we may easily conclude, not only from the Topic
of contraries, but also because he is to bring his Works along with him to the
Judgment Seat, and according to these shall receive his Sentence of him, who
will, must, and can do no other, than Judge the World in Righteousness.

Seventhly, I shall mention but one Text more, 2 Cor. 5. 10. FOR WE MUST ALL
APPEAR BEFORE THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST, THAT EVERY MAN MAY RECEIVE THE
THINGS DONE IN HIS BODY ACCORDING TO WHAT HE HAS DONE, WHETHER IT BE GOOD OR
BAD.

This is the very Scripture which the learned Author alleges for the
confirmation of his Reason for the Resurrection, viz. That as we are Men when
we do Well, or Sin, So it is reasonable that we should be Men, when we are
Rewarded or Punished for it. Which, as was intimated before, is the same
Doctrine with ours.

And this is that invictus Cunaeus, that invincible Fort which can never be
taken, which will and must maintain the great standing reason of the
Resurrection against the Assaults of the Philosopher, being above them all.
This is that Place which we have industriously reserved as the last and surest
Nail, to fix the Doctrine, and render it immovable: This is that place which
expresses and proclaims it as loudly and plainly as Letters, Words, and
Syllables can do it.

I do not see how it is possible for any one (that is not irresistibly perverse)
to avoid the force of it. For here our Bodies are cited before this Tribunal,
and all the Actions of our Lives are brought with them, to be reviewed, scanned
over, sentenced and Judged; all the actions of all sorts of Men, without
exception -- whether Good or Bad. And the proper wages of either is to be given
accordingly, and that in statu composito, the whole Man, his Body as well as
Soul. There are a multitude of Elegancies observable in the words, the chief of
which I cannot forbear to note. As,

First, The necessity of the Resurrection in order to a Judgment, (...), We
must appear, which gives us sure grounds to conclude that our Bodies are more
than Instruments, that they are in an especial manner concerned in the business
of the Bench. No upright, full Judgment can be passed without them.

Secondly, We have here the manner of it, significantly set out in the Idium of
the word (...), Appear clearly as in the Light, manifestly to be laid open in
every part, all that ever was done in the Body must appear with it.

Thirdly, The (...) as some Copies read it; the Body is brought to answer for
the proper things it did here, and ea quae corpori debentur, as another of the
Learned has Paraphrased it: The Body shall receive the things which are due,
which of right belong unto it; Sicut Justitia dicitur, suum cuique dare, as
another of the Critics comments it; and this is the very nature of Justice,
that every Body shall have the proper Reward which is exactly suitable to his
work. And congruenter ad id quod gessit, as another of no small Repuration has
given us the sense of it: The Judgment of every Body shall be tongruous and
correspondent to his actions. We see the main indictment is against the Body,
and all the deeds done in the former Life are applied to it, and according to
these it is we are either to stand or fall.

Fourthly, It Is farther to be noted how that St. Paul expresses himself by a
Trope a Metonymie of the Cause for the Effect, the Works for the Wages, the
things Done in the Body, for what is Due unto them And if this be not plainly
enough expressed to remove all scruples, cavils, doubts and gain-sayings, we have
here,

Lastly, The Reason of all this assigned by the infallible Spirit, -- THAT
EVERY MAN MAY RECEIVE THE THINGS DONE IN HIS BODY, ACCORDING TO WHAT HE HAS
DONE, WHETHER IT BE GOOD OR BAD.... Which sounds to me, as if the Apostle had
said, To this very end, to this very intent, for this very purpose, for this
very reason, The Process of the Day of Judgment requires the appearance of our
Bodies, as well as Souls, that Justice may be done to both. I can make no other
construction of it. That every Man may receive the things done in the Body
according to what he has done, whether it be Good or Bad.

Upon the whole I declare, that ever since I met with the Objections of the
learned Author against it, I have been scarcely able to put the thoughts of it
out of my Head; and the more I considered it, the more I am in love with, the
more I am established in it: And whereas the Learned Author would enervate,
throw it aside, and make it no reason at all; I on the contrary must confess
(beside the will and pleasure of God) that I look on it, as the first and great
Reason of the Resurrection: I do give it the supremacy and precedence to all
others. I must freely acknowledge, that I cannot, after my utmost search and
inquisition, possibly find out any Reason that can pretend to equal or rival
it, that can stand in competition with it. The Resurrection is in order to
Judgment, and Judgment and Justice here are all one.

I cannot for my heart Divine upon what other Account but this, the
Resurrection of the same Body, should be so constantly by all the Ancients
contended for, and expressly asserted, Resurrectionis vocabulum non aliam rem
vindicat quam quae recidit. Tertullian lib. 5. cap. 9. ad Mart. and the Greek
word (...) (as the learned Doctor has also noted) clearly implies the Rising
again of that which Fell, according to the vulgar saying, Resurrectio est ejus
qui recidit: Suitable to this the Creed of Aquileia has expressed this Article
by the Resurrection of this Flesh; and accordingly their Bodies were
particularly pointed at by those of that Communion as ( Ruffinus tells us) when
they made Public Confession of their Faith.

I will not dwell upon this, nor light a Candle to the Sun; but refer you to
the Elaborate Treatise of Dr. Beaumont on the present subject, who has proved
it to have been the constant Doctrine of the Fathers, beyond a possibility of
denial.

Now I desire the Philosopher to give me a reason of this Doctrine of which the
Ancients have been so tena^e^us; Why this Body, why this Flesh must arise? (for
it is but equal that I should give him a question to answer who in his
Objections has made a precedent, and done the like) if the Body be no other
ways concerned than an instrument only, if it be not sensible, if it be not
capable of doing Good or Evil, Rewards or Punishments, as he has in down right
words affirmed. If this be so, I earnestly request him to tell me, Why it must
be the SAME BODY that must arise? Why not another Body? Why not an Aereal Body?
Why any Body at all?

Dic Sodes, dic aliquem,
Dic Quintiliane colorem.
I do verily believe he will have an hard Task of it, and however he may be
himself persuaded, it will (I presume) be a a difficult matter for him to
persuade or convince others. For my part, I look on the Doctrine as a most
Divine Truth, and am immoveably fixed in the belief of it, notwithstanding all
the Arguments the Learned Author has brought against it; and I presume the
greatest part of Mankind are and will be of my Opinion.

It Is most certain that this Doctrine has a most natural tendency to the
advancement of Piety and suppression of Vice. There can be no Antidote or
Cordial, no Shield or Buckler more Sovereign than this to defend and support
the devout Christian, amidst all the difficulties and hardships with which he
is engaged in his present Pilgrimage; they are all silenced, mastered,
disappointed and overcome by one word, Resurgam.

There can be no more powerful motive to engage us in the pursuit of Holiness
than this, viz. The consideration of that plenteous recompense which shall be
conferred on the whole Man hereafter, with respect to his labors here, (...),
says St. Cyrill: The hope of the Resurrection is the Root of well-doing. This
must carry us on with Courage and Resolution through all the difficult, rugged,
and uneven passages we meet withal in our present Race; this must reconcile,
soften, and sweeten all the assurance that we serve so good a Master, who will
not fail fully to reward all his faithful Laborers in the next World, with
respect to their deservings in this.

Lastly, There can be no more effectual dissuasive against Sin, than the
Argument before us: If Men have any sense of their State, any love for
themselves, any kindness or regard for their Bodies as well as Souls, they are
carefully to avoid those ways which will inevitably implunge Both, in
everlasting Torments, in the great and terrible Day, when they shall be again
united, to the intent that they may be sharers in the Wages, who have been
Confederates in the Work.

FINIS

