WONDERS IF NOT MIRACLES OR, A Relation OF THE Wonderful Performances OF
VALENTINE GERTRVX OF Affance near Youghall in Ireland. Who Cures all manner of
Diseases with a stroke of his hand and Prayer, as is testified by many ear and
eye Witnesses.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1665.

WONDERS if not MIRACLES.
IT is not to be doubted but that the following Relation will meet with Readers
of diverse and different persuasions, and accordly be entertained: Some
questionless that will distrust the very thing it self: to whom I shall only
say, that the publisher is himself as difficult in his belief of fond reports
as any man; but has this backed with such Testimony, as that he conceives, not
to believe it, were ^o entertain an opinion, that there is no certainty or
truth in nature. Others there are, and those that would be accounted the more
learned) who are so fixed in that their Principle, that Miracles are ceased. as
that though they should be convinced, as to the matter of fact -- yet will
allow no other source of these strange passages then some occult Qualities, or
symbolical sympathies; or some untrodden method of Philosophy; or application
of Agents to Patients: Others will be apt enough to ascribe them to charms, or
Daemonaical contracts: Others again, to the Providence of God, and as
Forerunners of those great things which they expect in that great year of
Expectation 1666. I shall leave each to the enjoyment of his own opinion, and
only give you the Relation as I received it.

SIR,
AS for the Person in Ireland I formerly writ of, there is such a full
Concurrence of Testimonies concerning the truth of this Relation about him,
that it admits of no further doubt or scruple with us, in reference to the
matter of fact; neither do I see any reason (the first being proved) to
question, but that the things are wrought by the power of a Divine hand, in
which there can be no juggle or delusion as to the truth of the matter it self.
Besides the testimony before mentioned in my last, we have received a full
confirmation thereof by Captain Hastell of Plymouth which he had from his Son
in Waterford: As also from one Captain Lancaster living near this place and
being partner with Gertrux and Captain Pley of this Town in a parcel of Land
about Cornedy: who affirm, that they have received it under the hands of many
men of note in Ireland, and that no disease stands before him. To which may be
added the enclosed Relation from one Mr. ^eacher living in Youghall who was
both an eye and ear witness, containing a very sober and rational account of
the matter.

Upon the whole, the thing is wonderful, and stupendous, and astonishing, and
makes us as men in a dream, when we think or speak of it: And we cannot but
conclude, that God is about to do some great work in the World, and that this
is but the forerunner of some great things which we may shortly see, unto which
we desire to stand prepared. It is clear, that these 1500. years at least, we
cannot hear of any instance of the like nature. And that the Devil should have
such power it cannot enter into me to imagine; else the Miracles wrought by
Christ and his Apostles were no sealing evidence (as they were) of the truth of
the Gospel, and of the Divine stamp and authority of the same; in as much as
neither Man nor Devil could do the like with their utmost art and industry.

What the present instrument, is we cannot certainly say, only that all that
were of his acquaintance in these parts while he lived here, do give the
character of a very sober, discreet, civil Gentleman; what is his present frame
and posture we are not fully informed, more then what the enclosed Relation
signifies: Only that great and mavelous things are done by him cannot be
denied. -- The particular design of God therein we must leave undetermined till
time shall make it manifest.

Mr. Loyonell Beacher's Letter.
Sir,
Having heard of many diseases healed and cured by Valentine Gertrux of Affans,
diverse of them seemed so strange to me, that I could not give credit to the
reports; nor could I be satisfied till I went up thither my self, which I did
on White-munday, purposing to have returned by water in the same boat: But he
being gone from home with intention to be back again on Tuesday morning early
(that being one of the three days in the week that he has appointed for
touching diseased and distempered persons of all ages and Sexes) I stayed above
at Capo Coin that night, and went early in the morning to Affans, to a certain
house about a flight shot off his own; whether he had appointed the people to
come, because of the multitude flocking about his own dwelling house: So I went
in, and stood close by him, and saw him to stroke them, causing them to strip
off their Clothes, where their pains and griefs were: I saw him touch many of
the Kings Evil while I was there, and many also whom he had cured of that
Distemper, came to acknowledge it, which is the utmost reward he accepts from
any: I saw him heal eight persons of the dead Palsy in their Arms and Legs;
whom, after he had touched and stroaked them, he caused to be lifted up, and
they had instantly the right use of their Limbs: The same day I saw him touch
60. and odd persons, diverse of them troubled with the falling sickness, and of
them, some surprised and taken by it in the same Room: He being called to their
help, left other Patients and went to them, and while they were foaming at the
mouth, and wallowing on the ground, he stroaked their breast with his hand, and
immediately their pain ceased, and they stood up and said, that they were very
well. -- I also saw him restore many deaf persons to their hearing presently,
not failing any one therein, and this only by stroaking, and putting his
fingers into the holes of their Ears. He likewise cures the Convulsion fits
only by stroaking the persons afflicted with his hand: I saw diverse poor
Cripples came in halting on their Crutches, whom when he had stroaked on their
Legs, or Arms, (as their pains lay) they presently not only walked, but
leaped and skipped about the room: One of them not minding his crutches, left
them behind him in the room, but he called him back again, saying, Friend take
away thy cruches, for I hope here will be no need of them; so the poor man went
forth merrily with them in his hand.

He takes away all sorts of pain, and old Aches, though of twelve, sixteen, or
twenty years continuance, or longer, only with stroaking and smoothing the
part greived with his hand: immediately upon laying his hand upon the part, the
pain removes sensibly into another part of the body; as, from the back to the
breast, from thence into the legs and arms, or other extreme parts, and when
the party tells him where it is removed, he follows it with his hand, which
drives it out, sometimes at the fingers ends, sometimes at the toes, other
times at the crown of the head, and sometimes at the mouth, and when the person
says, it is gone, and he feels no more pain, he bids him be gone and
glorify God, and forsake his sins: He does it freely unto all, and is so far
from taking any reward, that he does not allow them to give him thanks, but
bids them praise and thank the Lord, for that he has vouchsafed to make use of
such a poor simple Creature, as he does, to do them good.

People of all sorts of diseases and distempers do daily so flock about his
house, that if he had not appointed them three days in the week, as I formerly
mentioned, he must have forsaken his own dwelling to have gotten rest. Some out
of prejudice say, that he has an universal charm againg all diseases; but
this is only a detraction, he only calls upon the name of God whilst he is
doing of it, and though briefly yet divinely: Thus have I given you a true
account of that, whereof I was both an Ear and an Eye witness, which had I not
been, I think I should not have believed, though all the People in Youghall had
told me of it.

Loyonell Beacher.

FINIS.

