THE MEANS To Free EUROPE From the French Usurpation; AND The ADVANTAGES which
the UNION of the CHRISTIAN PRINCES has produced, to Preserve it from the Power
of an Antichristian Prince.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, in Russel Street in Common-Garden, 1689.

THE MEANS To Free EUROPE From the French Usurpation.
THE Civil Wars in a State, have always been considered as the greatest and
most dangerous evils; they are like those internal Diseases of Man, which for
the most part after a languishing Life, are terminated by Death.

If we pass from Particulars, to the generality of Europe, is very likely, that
that part of the World had not found it self ready to perish under the cruel
Power of the Capital Enemy of Christendom, as it was very near during the last
Siege of Vienna; if all the Princes of Christendom had been in good
Intelligence, and in a sincere Union, and had uananimously endeavored to
Repulse their Common Enemy, who then durst not to have advanced so far in
Europe, if he had been drawn in only through the misunderstanding of the
Christian Princes, and not Invited into it and pushed on by a most Christian
Prince, the Eldest Son of the Church; who to facilitate hi^ Passage, has made
him a way through Rebellion, in Hungary which he has fomented to tha^ very end,
and maintained by money and Officers that he has sent thither, in the Design
after the takin^ of that City, the Imperial Seat, to share, for a Beginning,
with the Grand Seignior his Ally, all Germany; which the Sultan had agreed to,
as freely as Lewis the XIV. did seek after it, with a design however to deceive
one another, and in the end prevail over his Companion; and the French King to
do afterward, that which the Emperor does at this time, to drive the Turks
back to Adrianople.

But before we pass to the Deliverance of our Europe, let us mention the
Dangers it has been in these late years, and let us lay down for a sure
Foundation, and an indisputable Truth, that the Christians Disunion has given
opportunity to the Infidels to render Tributary Valachia, Transylvania,
Moldavia, and diverse other Territories, and in the last place to Invade
Hungaria; which has obliged a great number of poor miserable Christians not
only to fall into slavery, but to make Shipwreck in the Christian Religion; and
I dare assert, that had it not been for the pressing Offers of France by the
means of Teckeley, the Sultan had never broke the Truce, nor durst to have come
to set up the Standard of the Imposter Mahomet, before the Capital City of
Germany, as he did in the Year 1683. while his Ally was in Alsatia with an Army
of 40000 Men, ready to Invade the Empire, (which the Grand Seignior for his
part had favored) either to make himself Master of the whole, or to render
Tributary that which he could not have kept, and by that means mount step by
step to the Monarchy of Europe, little troubling himself about the Evils which
Christendom had suffered, neither by the barbarousness of his Army, or of those
of the Turks; so that Lewis the Great had but gratified his Ambition, and his
Passion of Ruling solely.

Thus on all sides, Europe did see it self on the Edge of the Precipices, and
in an Abiss of Evils, whence it could not be got out of again but by a stroke
from Heaven; not knowing which Condition to choose, the Ambition of the one, or
the Interest of the other, the French Tyranny, or the Mohammedan slavery,
finding them hoth equally Unjust, Barbarous, and Inhumane, and very opposite to
Christianity.

There are but few Persons in Europe, never so little Rational, but have been
informed of all the Advances of France, of Lewis the XIV's Proceeding, of his
Ambition, and of his Passion to Rule over his Equals, and to render the Kings
and Princes of the Earth his Tributaries; and to speak it in plainer Terms, to
become the sole Monarch of the World: As there is but one Son; boasting already
of giving Peace to whom he pleased, and to Exterminate or Bomb all that should
oppose themselves to his good Will and Pleasure, and like to another Jupiter,
cast his Thunderbolts on all that durst raise themselves against him,
designing, like God, to Rule over Consciences as well as over the Inheritances.

But the Ambitious Man, who raises himself on high and dangerous places, not
considering much how to get down again, never turns his Eyes on the side of the
Precipice; he runs to his desire, as if he were in good Intelligence with
Fortune, and as if the World was conducted by Fate in lieu of Divine
Providence. Mean time, we see that God confounds his Designs, and stops him
frequently in the midst of his Career, forcing him with shame, to quit a way in
which he thought to have continued with Glory. Lewis the XIV. had resolved
within himself to mount on the Imperial Throne, in the strange imagination he
had, that having attained thither, not only the Empire, but all the rest of
Europe would bow under his Orders, and at the approach of his Armies; in
effect, he spared nothing to compass it, with a Resolution to Sacrifice all to
his Passion, and to destroy all that should oppose it self to his Grandeur. To
this purpose, he began to oppress the one, to deceive the other, and to
entertain a third by fair and deceitful Promises, sparing neither specious
Titles nor Pensions, to those which he thought might be useful to him, by those
means, giving to some an Apple to play with, while he made himself Master over
the others, and in a manner separated Europe from it self, and every Prince
from his Ally, as well as from his true and real Interests, which has ever been
by all means to maintain an Equality amongst the Princes of Europe, that their
Forces being equally distributed, Christendom might be preserved in good Peace,
and every State in its own Rights and Liberties: Seeing that from the abasing
of the one, follows the elevation of the other, as we have seen; since when
Charles the First weakened his Power by the division of his Kingdoms, and after
that, his Son Philip permitting part of those Provinces which had been left to
his share to be taken from him; so was his Fall the Rise of the French Kings,
who have insensibly got the start of their Equals, and have got step by step up
to the Supreme Degree, which we have seen in this last Reign of Lewis the XIV.
who during a long time has not ceased from gaining Victory on Victory; taking
of Town upon Town; and as a boundless Torrent, carry all before him which
opposed his Course, his Violence not being to be stopped but by a Stroke from
Heaven, and by a Voice issuing from the British Throne, crying out, Nec plus
ultra.

Lewis the XIV. who had already, in his hopes, devoured a good part of Europe,
which lay groaning, and as it were overcome by the evils of a continual War,
has been, as it is not to be doubted, extremly surpised, to see himself
stopped on the sudden, by that surprising Change which has so lately happened
in England; and who can doubt, but that this change of Sovereigns has been a
Mortal Blow to him, seeing, that by that means he not only sees his Great and
Ambitious Designs overturned, and in lieu of a near Ally and intimate Friend,
he finds on the Throne none but an unreconcilable Enemy, burning with Zeal for
the Preservation of Europe, and with a desire of Punishing the Usurper? and
that which is yet more sensible to France, is, that this New Monarch will not
fail of being Seconded by all the Christian Princes. We have seen England, in
changing of Master, to make the face of the Affairs of Europe change also,
especially in the Low Countries, the decree of their Ruin having been
determined between the Two Kings, Lewis the XIV. and James the II. after that
France had long considered, the United Provinces as the only Obstacle that
could prevent it from Conquering the rest of Europe; well knowing, that those
States would at all times Oppose themselves to the Ruin of their Neighbors,
pushed on by a Motive of Generosity, of Equity, and of Interest also: Therefore
the King of France, could not perceive which way he should go about to overcome
his Opponents, but in mining and in destroying totally those Provinces, thereby
shutting them out of the power of hindering him, or of opposing his Design, and
that he could not do without England's consent: Wherefore after the death of
Charles the Second, he so dexterously did embark King James in his Design, and
set him at variance with his Parliament, through Religious Motives, by
ridiculous demands of the abolishing of the Test and Penal Laws, (which had
been established for the support of the Kingdom, and the preservation of the
Established Religion,) France was assured, that by that means it should set the
King and Parliament out of power of reuniting again, and that by those means
Lewis the XIV. should oblige that Prince whom he led by the Nose, to apply
himself to him for Money, which he certainly knew the Parliament would refuse
him; that in case they should grant it to him, it should be on such conditions
which the King would not accept: And thus that ill advised Prince would not
fail to turn himself toward France as he has done, and to let himself be
obseded and won by fair but false Promises, to render him absolute Master over
his People and his Parliament; with which Lewis the XIV. has so long fed and
entertained with dexterity the weak Imagination of his Ally, that he has lulled
him asleep into a Lethargy, very opposite to his right Interest, to that of his
People, and even to that of all Europe, of which it may be said, That England
holds the Scales.

In the year 1672. France was already working on her project against the United
States, through the means of England, if we consider with what weakness Charles
the Second permitted himself to be tied up by those Treaties he made, contrary
to so many Obligations which he had to the said States, and of his particular
Interest, feeding himself with hopes of a share in those said Provinces before
they were taken. With what weakness did the same Prince sell to France the Town
of Dunkirk, and behold with his Arms folded Lewis the XIV. take the principal
places of the Spanish Netherlands, not only Cambray, Valencienne, S. Omers,
Err, but so many others alalso, which were as so many bulwarks to stay the
fury of Lewis the XIV.

And ever after the Peace of Nimeguen, have not whole Provinces submitted to
the French Yoke? And while that under the shelter of that Peace, other
Sovereigns had disbanded their Forces, France alone kept his Arms, because it
knew what it was hatching, and what it designed to do. The Town of Luxembourg
was a Thorn in its side, and it would be Master of it; and Charles the Second
was as little moved at it, as if he had been paid, to let him do and say
nothing, and behold unconcerned that place taken from the Spaniard. Free
Europe, which little by little saw one Province after another, and one Town
after another submitted to France, did frequently cast its Eye toward the
Parliament of England, in hopes to receive some relief from that part; but
France had so well taken its measures there, that before that Illustrious Body
was assembled, diverse Lords at the sound of Louis d'Ors, were become deaf to
the Complaints of the generality, and some amongst them had even lost the use
of Speech, and were become motionless for the public good, and that of the
Nation; and so soon as the House of Commons began to harp on that string, the
King made use of his Authority to prorogue them to another time; and so
business run in the same course again, and gave leave to France to continue its
way, to gain Conquest on Conquest: In the mean time the true Englishmen, who
are the most jealous of their Liberties of any Nation, were forced to be
silent, and quietly behold themselves hedged in on all sides without opposing
it, nor daring to complain. Those that were lukewarm would frequently ask, Why
the Spaniards and the Imperialists, who had most interest in it, did not oppose
themselves to that Torrent, and to those French Conquests? I confess, that if
they could have done it alone, they ought to have gone about it, and they can
never be excused for having neglected it; but those who know a little the
Affairs of the World, are not ignorant of the misery Spain is fallen into,
during the minority of a King; and that the Netherlands are far remote from the
Empire, which has many Heads, and which of truth cannot assist them without its
Allies that are nearest to those Provinces, who are the King of England, and
the States of the United Provinces.

The Emperor has continually the Turks at his doors, over which he is to keep a
strict watch at all times. Besides, as I have already mentioned, the Empire's
composed of diverse Members, who have each their Sovereign and their different
Interests, and therefore a long time is required, and diverse Springs must play,
to set so great a Machine going; and frequently before the resolution of it be
taken, France has done its do, and then it speaks of Peace and of
Accommodation, by which means Lewis XIV. has for the most part kept his
Conquests, if they deserve that Name; after which every one retires home and
disbands. France makes show to do the same; and if it acquiesces so far to
disband some Troops in one part of the Kingdom, it raises others in another;
and thus remains still in the same posture to do mischief, ready to attempt
some new thing so soon as it finds any favorable opportunity. In that interval
France did not remain quiet, it had its Emissaries in all the Courts of
Germany, who using the slight of hand, acquired thereby many Creatures; it is a
Maxim which has long since succeeded well with them, and particularly at the
Court of England during the last Reigns; and those Emissaries have labored
with so much zeal and heat, and returned so frequently to the charge, doubling
the Dose when there was occasion, that they often succeeded, and by those means
have opposed themselves to the best Designs which the Emperor and the soundest
part of the Empire could have had.

But suppose that the Empire had been in as good an harmony as it is at
present, through the good Union there is betwixt the Emperor and his Princes,
and that France had nothing to do but with the Empire alone; I maintain, that
by only setting it self in a posture of Defense on the side of Germany, it
might make it self Master of a good part of the Spanish Netherlands, if its
Neighbors opposed not themselves to it, before the Emperor could remedy it.
Besides, that since the taking of Luxembourg, the passage is partly blocked up
to the Germans, and all that they could do, were to draw near to Burgundy, and
to Alsatia, or form some considerable Siege to draw the Arms of France that
way; but as that would have hel'd the Germans long in hand, the French King
would notwithstanding do his business in Flanders.

But if England had had on its Throne, as it has at present, a King well
intention'd for the welfare of Europe, and the particular good of his own
People, he might alone stop the French King in the apprehension he has of
landing Men on his Coasts in his own Kingdom; and this truth is so certain,
that Lewis the XIV. as powerful as he has been, as high as he would seem to be,
has never undertaken any thing that way, but after he had consulted the Kings
of England then Reigning, and even Cromwell himself, while he usurped the
Government of the three Kingdoms.

Thus we have seen that this Monarch before getting into Flanders, had sweetened
the Court of England by the means of his Honey; he taught them to speak French,
and to like whatever he did undertake, and quietly to let him so fast advance,
that at last it had no longer been in the power of the English to drive him
back. I know that France alone knows how much this has cost it; but what
matters at what rate, so one obtains ones Desires. Thus the most Christian King
having disposed England on that side, and having strength enough, as doubtless
he has, to set a considerable Army on foot on the side of Germany, (besides
that of Flanders,) that he is in a conditi-to hazard a Battle with the
Imperialists and their Allies, if these last had the ill fortune to be beaten,
as that may happen, the Success being various, it is certain, That then the
Germans would have much to do to rally again into any Body that were capable to
do any advantageous Exploit that Campaign for the good of Flanders; there being
nothing that wastes more the Troops that are composed of diverse Members, and
under diverse Chiefs, than the ill success of a first Campaign: And there needs
sometime but one Ally to decline the common Interest (like the Pin of a
Carriage,) to put all the rest out of power to do any thing, and to break the
best Designs which might have been formed; and it would be in such like
occasion, that the Pride of France would swell, and that the usurping Torrent
would overrun its bounds more than ever on the Netherlands, which would be
without hope of Remedies, if they were to wait for succor from Germany, as it
may easily be judged, by what I have said, and which might easily have
happened, there being nothing impossible in it.

Moreover, France which has most strong Reasons to be on its guard, and to
always fear, has long since so well provided for its Frontier places on all
sides, that it will require of its Enemies almost a whole Campaign to carry one
only of any importance.

Since France has left the way to Italy, the King is so fully persuaded, that
the Conquest of the seventeen United Provinces of the Netherlands would
facilitate him the ways to that of Europe, but particularly of the Empire; that
he has applied himself wholly to it, and has always endeavored to amuse by
illusive Promises, part of those very Provinces, while that he rendered himself
Master of the other parts under the Dominion of Spain, having first lulled
England asleep, France requiring only the favor to decide alone that Dispute
with Spain.

But that Lewis the XIV. might accomplish that first Design on the Spanish
Netherlands, there was a necessity that the States of the United Provinces,
which had a notable interest in the preservation of the Neighboring Provinces
under their lawful Prince, should give their helping hand to their ruin, or at
least should look on that Monarch without moving, till he had come on their
Frontiers: But there was but little likelihood of that; wherefore the French
King foreseeing well, that those States would never fall in that Lethargy, nor
would permit to have their hands tied up while a concealed Enemy approached
them, and penned them up close, taking from them little by little, all those
Places which were to serve them as Bars. It was for that very Reason, that that
Monarch did on the sudden alter his mind, and beholding according to his
Desires, what he had long expected, a Catholic Prince on the Throne of
England, who had for diverse years been in his Pay, allowing him considerable
Pensions when yet he was but Duke of York, and consequently did entirely
possess and obsende him: He made use of the ill Disposition of the new King, in
his Concerns with the States General, so that it was no longer difficult for
the French King, who waited but for that moment, to accomplish his Project;
thus those two Kings, the one pushed on by his Ambition, the other by his ill
Inclination, joined together to Exterminate the Seven United Provinces, under
the fair and specious pretense of Religion, and of Extirpating of Heresy, that
the other Catholic Princes, who were concerned in the Preservation of the
United Provinces, might not oppose themselves to such an holy Work, and so lull
them asleep. If that business had succeeded to Lewis the XIV. he had, without
striking one blow, rendered himself Master, all under one, of the Spanish
Netherlands; and after that, made use of all the Forces of his Kingdom,
together with those of his Conquests, to enter into Germany, and directly March
to the Empire, followed with an Army of more than an Hundred Thousand Men; what
Prince of the Empire, or the Emperor himself, could have disputed the Business
with him, or have put a stop to his March?

But for so great a Work, it was necessary to fasten England firmly to his
Interests, and to pull down the States of the United Provinces, which was the
chiefest Business, it not being likely, that Sovereigns, who so well know their
own Interest as do those States, should permit Lewis the XIV. to advance one
Foot of Ground more than he is already, (being but too forwards;) all that
Monarchs fair Promises, and his kind assurances of Friendship remaining without
effect, not being able to win them to be deceived: And perceiving that his
Credit was at an end ^n those Provinces, that all the Propositions of the Count
d'Avaux, his Ambassador, were suspected, and that he was still entertained with
much Circumspection, (as Lions are fed, still pulling the hand back;) finding
himself discovered and cried down, not to lose any more time to flatter and
amuse ^he said States, being not able to ^ccomplish his ends that way, he
^esolv'd to ruin them at the same time that King James the II. got on the
Throne; he knowing well his Genius, was satisfied that there wanted nothing but
a Golden Apple to amuse him; and to follow that itching desire which that
Prince had to render himself Absolute Master over all his Kingdom, to alter the
Laws and the Religion of it; and to feed him before hand with the hopes of the
Spanish Indies, that he might no longer find himself obliged to Assemble his
Parliament, who approved not of his Proceeding, no^ of that great Alliance he
had with France; which, under what shape soever it was represented to them did
always appear hiddeous. During all that long Interval, an^ till there were a
fair occasion t^ perform that great Design, the French Emissaries did
continually pour their cold Poison in the English Court, which was quaff'd o^
in large Draughts by some of the Grandees, which they endeavored to Digest
without noise, seeing that at the same time they thus underhand set forward
their Masters Interest; others who were not at such a distance, provided
themselves with an Apple against draught, as did many others in all the Courts
of Christendom.

It was in this contagious time, so infected with the French Lewis D'Ors, that
Europe was to tremble, and that all honest people, that concerned themselves in
the common Cause of the good of Christendom, were to shake at the very sight of
that weight which was going to crush Europe to pieces, seeing that its general
loss had immediately followed that of the Seventeen United Provinces; the
Emperor nor the King of Spain not being then able to prevent, nor put a stop to
that Torrent which had changed it self into a Deluge; from which, not England
it self had been Exempted in its time, if afterward it would not have danced to
the French Flutes, and obeyed the Orders of its Ambitious Monarch: I am willing
to make use of these Terms, seeing that all those that are Pensioners of
France, are so, but to Execute his Orders, and to Work to increase the Grandeur
of Lewis the XIV. not to oppose his Interests, but on the contrary, Sacrifice
their Honor and their Lives to them, so often as the Good and the Interest of
France should require it. If ever Lewis the XIV. had obtained his end, and had
made himself Master of the Forces of the Seventeen Provinces, as he plotted it
in his greedy Imagination, through the King of England's Means, there had then
been no ways left for this last to retire though he should perceive his Error,
as Charles the II. had done and he must either by fair or fou^ means have gone
on with that he had begun, through a weak Complacency; and then the Most
Christian King had raised his Voice and Arm at the same time, and had spoken in
Magisterial Terms to all the Princes of Europe; neither had that of England
been left for the last, but had been obliged to submit to the same Fate with
all the others, as a Reward for all the good Services that he should have
rendered him: I once again repeat, that the Designs of France were not new;
that long since, Lewis the XIV. had had them before him, even before that James
the II. had got on the Throne, and during his Brother's Reign, he luckily made
use of the Duchess of Orlean's Management, who was Sister to both the Kings,
Charles and James. But the First of them, who had continually before his Eyes
the Tragical end of his Father, and who was still very sensible of the
sufferings and troubles of his Exile, had much to do to resolve upon it; and
the Apprehensions which he had of his People did retain him, and hindered him
from Assisting France in all things as he was solicited to do; and he at last
did abandon it, as we did see by the Peace which he had made with the States of
the United Provinces, and then he seemingly did relinquish the Interests of his
Ally, not to Prorogue his Parliament, who very plainly did forsee the danger in
which the Nation was going to fall, had France continued its Progress as it had
began in 1672. and the years following.

After the Peace of Nimeguen, the Kings great Design against the United
Provinces, remained as buried during the remnant of King Charles his Reign; but
he soon raised it again, for at King James's Ascending the Throne, France
gathered new Vigor, and beholding there so good a Friend, with whom he was
tied in Religion and Inclination; Lewis the XIV. failed not to strike the Iron
while it was hot, and during the Three or Four Years of his Reign, the French
Emissaries gave diverse Assaults, and set all Hands to work; the French
Ambassador Barillon, made great Largesses, to all those whom he thought propper
to do his Master Service; the Curtisans tasted of the Cake as well as diverse
Ministers at Court; thus all unanimously did labor to persuade James the II.
so soon as he was King, to second Lewis the XIV. in his Designs (diverse not
knowing them) there needed no great Persuasion to attain it, because that
Prince was already sufficiently inclined to it of himself, and at that time, of
all Employs, that of Messenger was the most necessary; there was nothing seen
but such kind of Persons on the Road from London to Paris, and from Paris to
London, till the Treaty was finished; of which, the chief matter and knot of
the Business, was the ruin and destruction of the United Provinces* All the
Religious Orders, and above all, the Jesuits, did take a great Interest in that
Business, and already cried out, The Town was their own; there was a perpetual
motion among them; the Ships that crossed the Seas on both Parties, were
thronged with those Zealots and Apostolic Postilions; thus were all things in
motion for the Good of France, and for the Advancement of its Monarchs Designs,
some through Interest, some through Zeal, and others through mere Ignorance:
This Business thus built up with Lime and Stone, concluded and resolved on
betwixt the Two Kings, Lewis the XIV. the better to compass all things, was
desirous to strengthen himself toward the North, but having lost the
friendship of the Sweeds, for having failed in keeping those Treaties which had
formerly passed between the Two Crowns; France having no Prospect of patching
them up again, it took the Party of Denmark, though it was nothing near so
advantageous to it as was the other: To render it capable of employing it on
all occasions, he sent thither the Count of Roy, there to Command, with many
Officers and Men, but after the Siege of Hambourg, that General being retired,
the French Party did much diminish; besides, France could not Unite it self
with that Crown, in so straight an Alliance as it wished for; and that it were
necessary, because of those Measures which Denmark was to keep with the United
Provinces on the account of Trade, without which it cannot do well, neither can
it turn it to so good an account with France, it having at home all that it
could draw from thence; so that all that France can at present draw from that
Alliance, can but at the most come but to a Neutrality, provided the Emperor
and his Allies will give their consent.

Lewis the XIV. was reckoning upon that, when he assured James the Second that
the King of Denmark would not disturb, but on the contrary favor them, in case
that the Swede should join with their Enemies: It was on that Pillow Lewis le
Grand did gently lull asleep the King of England, together with an imaginary
shower of Gold, which was to drop from the Spanish Indies.

But how great soever a Corruption is at Court, there are still some good; and
the soundest part of the Kingdom of England, could not relish that straight
Union which was betwixt their Prince and France, it clearly did see, that on
its side the design was to Change the Religion, to Subvert the Laws, Establish
an Arbitrary Power, and a Despotick Government, which tended to the loss of
their Liberties and Privileges, and to depend one Day on France, which gave
them suspicion of every step which the Ambassador Barillon, and the Queen did
make in that respect; but their Zeal did so far transport them, that at last
the People, the Lords, the Protestant Clergy opened their Eyes, and thought of
delivering themselves, and with them all Europe, from those shackles which were
forging for them; and the Heavens granting the Petition of all Christendom, and
in particular of the English Nation, it sent them a Deliverer, of whom
Providence has so miraculously seconded the Enterprise, so as to prevent them
from falling under an hard Bondage, and under the Government of a supposed
Prince, a Foundling, whose Father and Mother remain still unknown, which was to
be preferred to the Lawful Heirs of the Crown; such a black and unheard of
Supplanting, did oblige the Princess of Orange, as the next Heir to the
Kingdom, to entreat the Prince her Husband, to second the just Request of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the most sound part of the Kingdom. Thus
the Prince, by an Admirable Conduct and a Divine Dispensation, did bring things
about according to the Hearts desire of the Nation, without effusion of Blood,
and set Succession in its due and right Channel, which was to have been
interrupted by the means of that supposed Child; for the Princess having been
Crowned Queen by Succession, and the Prince King by Acknowledgment, after the
Throne had been declared Vacant through King James the II's Desertion; it
happened very luckily for the Deliverance of Europe, which I shall prove in
what follows, as being the Subject of this small Book.

In the first place, I lay down for an indisputable Truth, That if Lewis the
XIV. and James the II. had compassed their Designs and Ends, the United
Provinces had been entirely lost, through the breaking down of their Banks; for
that way did he design to begin, to take away all means from the Inhabitants of
ever recovering from that Dissolution in which he designed to Reduce them,
after they had made themselves Masters of the Spanish Netherlands; after which,
I cannot perceive how Europe could have prevented falling under the Yoke of the
French Dominion, having had the King of England for Second, and Invading the 17
United Provinces, and rendering Tributary in imitation of the Grand Seignior,
the most remote of those Provinces, which he could not conveniently Govern.

I have already given to observe, that the Empire alone could not hinder him,
by reason of the great number of heads, all of different and distinct
Interests, of those Princes that Compose it: On the other hand, Spain being not
in a Condition to raise Forces sufficient to oppose it, nor all of them
together capable to resist the rapid motion with which France would invade them
after its First Conquests.

For to represent to us what France can do, and what it has been able to do in
all times, we need but to frame to our selves a right Idea of things, from
Francis the First, to Charles the Fifth, we shall easily judge that it has
always been dreaded; this last was both Emperor and King of Spain together; he
was Master of the 17 United Provinces, while they were entire, he had Burgundy
and the French County, as well as Alsatia; he had an absolute power over the
Princes of Germany, and of Italy. This Monarch was without dispute, one of the
Greatest Princes, not only of his Time, but of his Age; a Great Commander,
undaunted in all his Enterprises, daring Perils and Dangers, in which he had
frequently been, and add to all that his Personal Valor, a good Headpiece,
and fit for Counsel, encouraging his Armies by his Presence, having under him
the most Experienced Captains, and the best Generals of his Time, and such
Armies that had been tried in all parts of Germany, Italy, and in the
Low Countries, besides Fleets on the Mediterranian, and on the Ocean.

With all those Forces, his Courage and his Treasures, though he had to do but
with Francis the First, who alone was his Capital Enemy, and who was nothing
near so powerful as his Successors have been (and as Lewis the XIVth. is at
this time, or at least as he has been of late years,) having no other Revenue,
but about thirty, or thirty five French Millions, whereas this present has four
times as much.

Mean time, with all this disproportion of Forces and of Wealth, this Emperor
durst not attack him, 'till first he had joined himself with Henry the VIIIth
of England, and with the most considerable Princes of Italy.

By this we find that even from that time the Emperoor did highly consider the
Kings of England, and that if Francis the First, King of France, had first
secured Henry the VIIIth's Alliance, Charles the Fifth had not dared to attack
him; and with all the advantages that the Emperor had of his side, Francis the
first stood out against him, and without the Misfortune that befell him at the
Seige of Pavia, where he was made Prisoner, he had given work enough to his
Enemy.

I pass from Francis the First to Lewis the XIVth, much more powerful in
Forces, in Treasures, and in Demains, than his Predecessors, seconded, as he
believed by a strict alliance with England, having no more to manage nor to
fear from the United Provinces, I leave to guess what he had, and might have
done, and how far he had pushed on his Ambition; I maintain that then, the Pope
with all Italy, the Emperor with the whole Empire, and Spain with all the
Riches of the Indies, had not been of power to hinder him from making himself
Master of all Europe.

There is but England alone then that is Capable to make the most Christian
King alter his Designs; and that could not happen, but by such a lucky
Catastrophe, and so unexpected as that which has lately happened there, under
the Reign of William the IIId. For there was required to be Sitting on the
Throne, in order to such a Change, a Disinterested Prince, Zealous of the Glory
of God, and the good of Christendom: Jealous of the Usurpation which Lewis the
XIVth had made in Europe, Incorruptible, Magnanimous, a Man of Counsel and
Execution, understanding well his own Interest, and who had been highly
provoked by France; that he might not hearken to any accommodation, nor yield
any thing, to the prejudice of his Allies. This is what we find entirely in
that Prince who has newly Ascended the British Throne; wherefore so soon as
this Hero had passed over into England, and that a happy Success had seconded
his Great Designs; we have seen Lewis the XIVth become motionless on the
sudden, as formerly did Atlas, at the sight of the Medusa's head, which was
showed him by that Generous Perseus.

The Foundation on which the French King had built his Grand Design, (the
strict Alliance which he had with James the Second) having once given way, all
the rest of the Fabric is fallen to the ground, and his Castles in the Air
have gone into Smoke, having no hopes to take any Measures in his Designs with
this his present Britanick Majesty, who, to cut off all his Hopes, and stop all
his Proceedings, has driven out of England all the French Emissaries, resolved
never to hearken any more to them, in the Design he has to restore the quiet
and tranquillity of Christendom, and to maintain Europe in that Deliverance
which He has lately procured to it, by his only Elevation to the Throne. I
prove my Axiom by that which follows; When a Town is Besieged, and that at the
approach of its Deliverer, its Enemies abandon it, and their Designs miscarry,
they retire, and though the Hero which has caused its deliverance, be not yet
entered that Place, it is published abroad that the Place is Relieved, as
really it is. So Lewis the XIVth having a Design of Conquering Europe, to
Depose the Lawful Sovereigns thereof, and to Sacrifice all Christendom to his
Ambition, as it is no longer doubted; it being a Truth but too well averred and
known. That Usurper has no sooner seen William the IIId Proclaimed King, but
that he has abandoned his Enterprise, and changed his Design; and in lieu of
destroying the Powers of Europe, has had no other thoughts but of preserving
himself, and his Kingdom. I join to the coming of William the IIId to the Crown
of England, the strict Alliance there is between his Majesty of Great Britain,
and the States of the United Provinces, as also the Union of the Emperor with
all the Princes of the Empire.

I confess, that it has been a great Business to have freed Europe from the
danger which threatened it, to have dispersed in a Moment all the great and
pernicious Designs of an Ambitious Prince, that on all occasions made no
scruple to break his Faith when that Crime agreed with his Ambition and
Interest, who, notwithstanding his Word given to the Contrary, backed with his
Oath, has neither spared the blood nor the ruin of so many Thousands of
Christians, in the bare Opinion, that he ought to do it for his Interest's
sake, and to weaken his Enemies; having not spared even his own Subjects. And
if we return to the Primary Cause, we cannot but believe, that the Heavens
wearied with so much Injustice, with so much Cruelty, and enormous Crimes, and
with so much bloodshed, which Cries for Vengeance, has at last raised William
and Mary on the Throne, and suggested a good Union amongst the Princes of
Christendom, to stop the Barbarous Course of Lewis the XIVth.

But it is not enough to have reduced the Lion that Sacked Europe, to get into
his Den, his Claws must be paired also, and his Teeth pulled out, that
hereafter he may do no more harm, and that his Power may be limited, that he
may no longer Desolate our Countries, that he devour no more the Innocent, and
that the most Christian, Oppress no more the Christians. Lewis the XIVth's
Policy and Interest in the Condition he is at present reduced, is to gain time,
to see whether any Change would not happen in England, nor no Contestation in
Germany; wherefore he offers in all places he can a Neutrality, that he might
find in those Princes that should not declare themselves some Mediators, or to
speak more properly, Intercessors near the Emperor and the King of England, as
well as near the United Provinces, in the fear he is of a total downfall, if
England, and the Empire continue as they have began, and as it is to be
believed they will do, according to all appearance, if they love their quiet,
their preservation, and their own Interests, as well as the good of their
People.

I confess that much has been done, especially by the King of England, to have
delivered Europe* at present without drawing his Sword, but the future must be
thought on, and the means must be taken from France, of any more threatening
Europe, to set it in a right Balance with the House of Austria, or at least in
a Condition of having need of its Allies, and not put an end to this present
War which is kindling in all places, 'till that be performed.

To succeed the better in it, and to animate the more all the Princes of
Europe, they ought to cast up what France has Usurped from them, the damage
they have received by it, and that which they may receive hereafter; and never
lay down their Arms, 'till they all have had full satisfaction, for the more it
shall be forced to restore, the more will its Sovereign be weakened.

I set in the first Rank the Pope, who by all the Catholics is considered as
the head of the Church, Christ's Vicar on Earth, St. Peter's Successor, the
Common Father of all Christians, the Dispencer of Celestial Graces, and who
being considered as such, ought to be feared, respected, revered, honored and
obeyed; as to the Spiritual, (laying aside the Contest which is among the
Catholics themselves concerning the Temporal) and not withstanding that Lewis
the XIVth names himself the Eldest Son of the Church, and the most devout Son
of the Sovereign Pontif, what Mortification has not the good Father received
from him, since his coming to the Pontificate, either in his own Person, or in
that of his Legates, even upon the dead Corpse of one of them. The extinction of
the Regalia in France, is also a great grief to the Holy See, as well as the
violence used against diverse Convents, for having addressed themselves to the
Pope, and taking advice of his Holiness. The change of diverse Abbeys into
Commanderies by the King's own and proper motion, is also a Contempt, which he
has aggravated by the forbiddance he has made to the Bishops not to Consult the
Holy See, even in Cases of Conscience, and in such businesses as wholly concern
Religion: but the most sensible of all, was that blow given to the Pope's
Authority, in the Year 1682. by the Clergy Assembled at the King's Command,
that being with the Infallibility the finest Flowers of the Triple Crown. The
Insolent Discourses held in a Plea by Monsieur Talon, by which he accused Pope
Innocent the XIth (the most worthy that has for diverse years been seated in St.
Peter's Chair) of being a Schismatic, and a Supporter of Heretics. And this,
for not having received Monsieur Lavardin as Ambassador at Rome, who made his
Entry into that City in such an offensive and proud manner, that no
Ambassadors of Obedience durst ever have done the like; having caused himself
to be accompanied by a small Army rather than a Retinue, as if he would have
Besieged the Vatican. And though this Marquess is at full Liberty at Rome, the
Nuncio Ranucci is detained in a place called St. Lazarus, for fear he should
retire from Paris incognito. Finally, the unjust seizure of the City and County
of Avignon, threatening besides all this, to send some Troops into the
Ecclesiastic State, to oblige the Pope to revoke the Bull for the abolition of
Quarters, and that for his Confirmation of Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria to
the Archbishopric of Cologne.

After so much insulting which the Pope had received, of which one might make a
whole Volum, either in his own Person, his Authority, or in the Person of his
Legates, the Pope has judiciously done, to show his Resentment against Lewis
the XIV. not to relinquish any of his Rights, but maintain the Rank which he
has in the Church, and in the World, by that Spiritual and Temporal Power,
which God has put into his Hands, and in having till now so generously and
justly opposed himself to all the French Violences, by which he has acquired a
Glory which shall last as long as the World, amongst all Parties, and his
Memory will be Revered even after his Death: He ought to go on in those right
Paths which he has begun, and as Common Father, Exhort all Catholic Princes,
to put themselves in a Condition to abate the Pride of the French King, as a
means to bring him into a way of Salvation. To this purpose, the Pope ought
with all his Power to Assist the Catholic Princes, that he may cooperate in
so good a Work, as his Holiness has done to the Empire against the Turks; and
to solicit the Switz-Cantons, of the same Religion, by his Legates, to Join
themselves to the Emperor and Empire, to confirm that Deliverance which Europe
begins to enjoy: Thus the Pope being restored to his former Dignities,
Veneration, and Authority, let the King, his most devout Son, make him some
Reparations and Attonements, for those Faults he has committed, and be so
humbled, that for the future he may be Wiser, and out of Power of doing the
like again, nor of Insulting over the Popes and Sovereign Pontifs of the
Catholic Church; and in case the Pope found no amendment in that King, nor no
likelihood of bringing him back to his Duty, he ought, while he is busy in a
War, to lance forth his Excommunications against him, and to give his Kingdoms
over to the Spoil of his Enemies; the male-contented Ecclesiastics, with which
his Kingdom is filled, will reduce him by Reason, and will make him repent
having ever meddled with the Rights of the Church.

The Emperor and the Princes of the Empire, have more Reason than all the other
Powers of Europe, to keep the French King in such a condition, that he may no
more annoy them, nor aspire to the Imperial Crown. Lewis the XIV. has a long
time endeavored to turn the Empire into the French Family, as in the time of
Charlemain, it being a great step for him to rise to that of all Europe; that
is the Reason why, since Francis the First, the French Kings have always
crossed the Emperors Elections. But Lewis the Great could find no way to that
Conquest, but by the total Ruin of the United Provinces, to which he could not
attain, but by the assistance of England; thus his Imperial Majesty, and all
the Princes of the Empire, being fully satisfied of this Truth, and that
nothing but that Revolution which has lately happened on the British Throne,
could cause the rash Designs of the French King to Miscarry. The Emperor ought
no longer to remain in suspense, nor put off to another time, those Advantages
which the Heavens present to him at this time, to recover all that France has
Usurped from him.

To this purpose, his Imperial Majesty should begin by a Truce, which he ought,
without delay, to conclude with the Port, seeing that they offer it on very
honorable and advantageous Conditions; and let the Emperor hold as suspicious
Persons, all such as shall Advise him to the contrary, they are Persons that
sin either through Ignorance, or Malice, who understand not the true Interests
of the Empire, or too much those of France; he is not to doubt, but that all
the Princes of the Empire will concur to the same Design, of abasing the
Greatness of the French Monarch, of which there are but very few Powers in the
Empire that have not great cause of complaint, and just pretensions to frame,
and perhaps, more to pretend to than ever to recover again, if France be not
kept in a condition of never offending them more; of domineering any longer,
nor of boasting any more that it can give Peace to Europe when ever it pleases.
This last War, by the rupture of a Truce, which the French King had sought
after, with so much earnestness, because it confirmed Luxemburg to him, and a
part of Flanders during Twenty Years, and which he has infringed without any
Cause, than his desire to come to the Assistance of the Grand Seignior, who was
going to ruin, by the vast Conquests which the Emperor made on that Infidel:
His Most Christian Majesty, was going hand over head to his Assistance, finding
himself supported with a close Alliance with James the II. formerly King of
Great Britain; this Rupture has given new pretensions of War to all the Princes
of Germany, by the most barbarous and inhumane proceedings which the French
Troops have done there; and I doubt much, whether a just Parallel could be
drawn from the Cruelties and Desolations that this King has caused to be
committed in the Palatinate, with those that the Grand Seignior has made in
Hungary; and though this last place has been for a long time the Seat of War,
yet at the Retreat of the Infidels, they have not committed any thing near the
like Extortions, nor used the same violence, that the French have done in those
places that they have abandoned in the Palatinate, and in the Country of
Juliers, and of Cologne; and if there were no other cause but this, though
there are but too many more, there would need, in my Opinion, nothing but the
sad spectacle of the French barbarousness, to animate all the Princes and
Members of Europe, to a good and firm Union with the Emperor, which will be the
only means to preserve themselves, and to prevent France from doing the like
hereafter.

Though France is brought low, through the opposition of England, in all its
Designs, yet has it not forgot its ancient Maxims; which have formerly
succeeded so well; it will not fail to put into practice all the ways
imaginable to corrupt some Member of the Empire, and to break that Chain of
Unity there is amongst them, to endeavor thereby, to put a stop to the Success
of their Arms, as it frequently happens, that a broken or rotten Pin, disorders
a whole Carriage, and hinders its March.

France's Crafts and Deceits being already so well fore-known, it is requisite
that the Princes of Europe should provide against that plague of Corruption,
which has so freequently infected diverse Courts of Christendom; diverse are to
expect, that not only Presents will be offered to them, as well as Pensions,
but equivalents also to their Pretensions, only to remain Neuter: But the
Example of the Archbishop of Mentz is yet so fresh before our Eyes, that it
ought to be a fair Mirror for the Princes of the Empire, to Represent to them
to the Life, the Character of France; and of its Sovereign, which all that
proceeding represents in Lively Colors, with the breaches of Faith of that
Prince, even to those that Side with him. If ever any Sovereign did Act against
his true Interest, and that of the whole Empire, it was that Prelate; but then
again, never was Prince worse rewarded, nor had greater cause to repent of his
Fault, by the ill usage he has had in his Estate; which had reached to his
Person also, if he had not sheltered himself from the Threats of the French
Envoy.

But he is not the only Living and Speaking Example; the whole Series of time
that has passed since the Peace of the Pireneans, is but a continued Thread of
the falsehood of France. So, that whoever shall catch at the Golden Bait which
the King lays for them, will have time to Repent themselves, as the Elector of
Mentz has done, and diverse others, who have fair'd no better.

But if, by a Fatal Chance, it should so happen, that some Member of the Empire
were so unadvised, as to be Corrupted by France, and separated from that Union
which is its true Interest, though it is not to be expected now that those
Princes are so well enlightened; that Person ought to be considered as a rotten
Member, Discarded, and Treated as an Enemy, though he would remain Neuter, on
this ground drawn from the Holy Gospel, Qui non est pro nobis est contra nos.

Of Truth the Union of the Empire is of great Importance, and I must confess,
that all its United Forces may be very powerful, but they would be much more,
if the Emperor could resolve to grant a Peace to the Grand Seignior; that so
having no longer any thing to fear from that Part, his Imperial Majesty may
have his Hands at liberty against the Second, which has been much more
formidable and more dangerous than the First, and consequently cause all his
Forces to Advance toward the Rhine, which would produce Two Effects; the one,
that such considerable Armies would increase that Terror in which France is
already. Secondly, it would by that means much better maintain that Union which
is already in Europe, with their Allies.

Besides, it is a general Rule, which the Emperor ought always to observe;
never to have Two Wars to maintain at the same time, especially when he can
avoid one of them, as it is in his power to do at this present, with great
Advantage and Glory.

It is not to be doubted, but that the French King does highly dread such a
Truce; that he will openly and most powerfully Act with the Turk, and the King
of Poland, and that he will have his Emissaries, concealed, at the Court of
Vienna, that will labor underhand, and on deceitful Pretenses, to prevent the
Imperial Council from concluding any thing with the Turks Envoy, at this
present at Vienna. To be sure, he will neither spare Money nor Religion to
attain his end therein.

To the Grand Seignior, he Promises to enter into Germany with a Powerful Army,
to Ransack there, as he has done already, thereby to draw the Emperors Forces
on that side, and give the Great Turk the means and leisure to breathe again,
and to Assemble new Forces to endeavor to regain what he has lost.

To Teckeley, and the Princes of Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia, without
enquiring of what Religion they are, he assures considerable Sums to continue
the War begun; he has frequenly sent some to the First, and if the others would
break off with the Emperor, and join with the Grand Seignior, he would furnish
them wherewith to Pay their Forces.

As for Poland, that will perform enough for France, if its King will but
remain quiet, and not attempt any thing, as he has done since the two last
Campaigns, and prevent by great pretensions the Conclusion of a Truce with the
Port. Lewis the XIVth has Springs that are sufficiently strong to detain him,
and to obtain what he pleases of that Crown, persuading it that it is not
suitable to her Interest, to have the Emperor prosper so much, etc.

At the Court of Vienna, the French Emissaries Labor through indirect means,
to persuade the Emperor's Counselors, that his Imperial Majesty may with ease
maintain the War against the Turk and France, and that it concerns his Glory
not to slacken in so fair a Course, that he ought to go and plant the Cross of
Christ on the very Battlements of the Seraglio at Constantinople; but such
pretenses are at great distance from their Masters thoughts, for it is very
certain, that the French King had rather see once more the Crescent on St.
Stephen's Church at Vienna, than the Cross on St. Sophia at Constantinople.

Lewis the XIVth at this time, is like to a Man in great extremity of danger,
that is ready to sink, he makes Vows, and promises all things, to get out
again, and takes hold of all that comes in his way, to keep himself some
moments longer above water. Thus this Monarch has turned himself all manner of
ways to find out a Mediator that would assist him to get out of the danger he
is in. He has addressed himself to the Elector of Brandenburg, the King of
Spain, and to the Pope; but at this present, knowing of no better shift, and
finding, that all the Christian Princes do abandon him, he has applied himself
to the Turk. And finding that no Christians will any longer confide in him, he
covers himself with a false Mask of Hypocrisy; he Remonstrates to the House of
Austria, that the Roman Catholic Religion is in danger, and that it perishes
with him, that it has been through his Care and Zeal so many Conversions have
been made in his Kingdom, and that he was ready to have done as much in
England, if there had not been a League made against him. But with all these
sugared words, he at the same time Leagues himself with the Enemy of
Christendom, at that very time he enters the Palatinate, and puts all to the
Fire and Sword, he offers to the Grand Seignior to join himself with him on the
defensive part, and not to lay down his Arms, 'till the Sultan has recovered
Hungary. At the same time he offers to the Pope, that if the Emperor will agree
with him, he will lend him forty Galleys to aid him to Conquer Constantinople;
and offers to Re-establish King James in his Kingdoms, provided that the
Emperor and the Empire will Conclude a Peace with him. All these are fair
Flowers that conceal a Serpent under them, who will certainly sting the hand of
him that will but touch them.

These are the French King's Deceits, which he has Inherited from Mazarine, to
try whether by such fair Offers he might not break the Union of the Empire.

But Flanders, the Palatinate, the Countries of Juliers, and of Ments, Treves
and Colen, remain unreprochable Testimonies of his Breaches of Faith, and of
his Hypocrisy; he having nothing less in his thoughts than the Christian
Religion. For those Offers which his Ambassador Guichardin has made to the
Port, ought once for all, to undeceive all Christendom of that Catholic Faith
of which he makes so great a show.

But not to rest any longer on the Illusions and Deceitful Offers of France,
which ought to be suspicious to all the Princes of Europe. I say that the
Emperor and the Empire ought not to stop in the very beginning of so fair an
Opportunity which England offers them, nor lay down their Arms, 'till they have
recovered Burgundy, the French County, Alsace, but particulary Strasbourg,
Philipsburg, Fribourg, Brisack, and all that France has Usurped on that side of
Europe. Moreover, Reseated the Electors Palatine, of Mentz, Treves and Colen,
in their Territories and Rights, with an entire reparation of all those Wrongs
and Damages which he has done them by his Forces and Incendiaries. Resign
Cardinal Fustenberg into the hands of the Emperor, or of the Pope, to answer to
those things that shall be alleged against him, and that he is already accused
of.

But that which is most just and necessary, is to restore the Duke of Lorain to
his Dukedom, which ought to be restituted in the same Condition that it was in
the time of his Predecessors. Policy requires that this Dukedom should be
separated from France, because that would be a means to weaken France. It would
be to fix a Thorn in its foot, thus to Re-establish the Successor of the
Ancient Sovereigns, to support and uphold it, that it might no longer be liable
to fall under the Forces of France, nor to acquiesce to any Treaty
prejudiciable to it, nor so much as to have any great Communication with them,
because that the Duke of Lorain being once restored to his Estates, neither he,
nor his Sucessors ought never more to trust to the French Kings; but ought
daily to set before their Eyes, with what perfideousness his Predecessor has
been Treated.

Those Great Victories which that Prince has gained with such great Success and
Glory over the Turks, the reunion of Hungary to the Empire, which is due to
his sole Valor, does well deserve that all Christian Princes should Conserve
themselves for this Great Hero; Join to that the Obligation which his Imperial
Majesty has with that Duke, by his Marriage with the Queen of Poland.

It is not to be doubted, but that William the IIId. King of Great Britain,
will Contribute with all his Power to so Just and Laudable an Enterprise, even
necessary for the quiet of Europe; and that his Britanick Majesty will impose
it as a Law on Himself to bring it about, if he once undertakes it. But to
Compass this with more ease, The Duke of Lorain ought before all things else to
propose a Liberty of Conscience in all his Dominion, and free Exercise to all
Protestants, in all the Cities and Borroughs where there are any. That will be
a means to draw on his side, the Assistance of all those of that Religion, as
well as that of the Allies, and of their Subjects, in laying aside the Counsels
of a Company of Monks, which continually beat over and over in diverse Catholic
Princes Ears, to make them act the contrary, and to push them forward to a
Persecution, which will ever prove hurtful to their Persons and Sates.

The Duke of Lorrain ought not to let slip so fair and so favorable an
occasion, which perhaps will never offer it self again in all his Life time,
nor that of his Successors; his Interest and that of his Family obliges him to
embrace it, and to soliciate the King of England as well as the Emperor; and
those Princes who Compose the Diet of Ratisbone, who are already inclined to
it, by the barbarous Proceedings of the French, they, doubtless, will not fail
to espouse the Interest of that Prince, in consideration of those Services
which he has rendered to Christendom; and to labor in his Re-establishment, as
well as in that of others, the rather, because that Lorrain being in that
Duke's Hands, will serve as a Bar to the Empire; but as I have already said,
that Prince ought to Labor particularly to bring the Emperor and his Council
to grant a Truce to the Grand Seignior; without which, I cannot see his own
Concerns can have any good Success. This he ought to consider, before sending
back the Turks Envoy, lest he should slip the Occasion; for after that every
one will take new Measures.

The Emperor never had, nor never will have a fairer Occasion to entirely
Master France, than that which at this present he is furnished with, by the
coming of William the III. to the Crown of England; which seems as if God had
produced that Effect, during the time of that great Union o^ the Princes of the
Empire, to give an Opportunity to his Imperial Majesty to Subdue France; being
thereunto excited by the ill Usage they have all received from the French King,
and the barbarous Proceeding which he has used of late in Germany, which has
been but a continuation of those Cruelties which his Dragoons have exercised in
his own Kingdom; which has not only alienated from him the Heart^ of his
Subjects, but has struck an Horror in all Christendom; he has deprived the Most
Christian King of all his Alliances, and ha^ reduced him, to see himself
obliged to have recourse to the Sworn Enemy of Christianity, the Turk*

All these Advantages are foun^ in this present juncture; more over, Lewis the
XIV. the bor^ Enemy to the House of Austria is now at Wars with all
Christendom. If his Imperial Majesty takes not advantage of those Conveniences
which the Heavens seem to present him with, he ought not to expect any
Acknowledgments from France for it, nor that the King will think he has done
him a kindness in sparing him; for as he has the gift of Usurpation by
Inheritance, if he can but raise himself up again from that Mortal Wound he has
received, he will come, as did the Grand Vizier, (after he has, if he can,
disunited and ruined the Empire) and Encamp his Army before Vienna. That Itch
has held him a long time, and Lewis the XIV. has Inherited it from his
Predecessors; for since the Death of Ferdinando the III. those Kings that have
Reigned in France, have always endeavored to possess the place of Charlemain,
and in 1683, His Most Christian Majesty, who was very well Instructed of
Mahomet the IV's Designs, and who had instigated Teckeley to Rebellion, did
think then, that he had obtained his Hearts Desires, and that he had got the
Wind of the Emperor, for he thought it impossible but that Vienna should fall
under the Power of the Grand Visier's Forces. The King had Forty Thousand Men
ready on the Borders of Germany, in the Design to put himself at the Head of
them, and to enter into the Empire, to have himself Proclaimed Emperor, as the
ancient Romans did, at the Head of his Army. His pretense had been, That his
Imperial Majesty, not being in condition to preserve Christendom, he was come
to supply his Place; and as the Deliverer of Europe, free it from the
Oppression of the Infidels, though he himself had Invited them in, and had
designed to put it in Irons. To make good the Truth of what I allege, I must
say, that this Monarch, who thought himself assured of the taking of the City
Vienna by the Turks, and himself, consequently, of the Imperial Crown, had
already caused the Imperial Eagle to be placed over his Effigy, in his own
Coin, publicly declaring before his whole Court, That the Empire had remained
already long enough in the House of Austria, and that it was high time it
should return into his Family. The French Mercenary Pens, and the French
Flatterers, had already set forth diverse Pieces in that Kingdom, which tended
to that purpose; some were Entitled, The just Pretensions of the King on the
Empire; others, The Decay of the Empire. These were the forerunners of what
the King designed to do, that when it should come to pass, Europe should not be
surpiz'd at it, and the Blow not so much felt by the House of Austria. It is a
Maxim that has been practiced in France during this Reign, when the Council had
a design of Oppressing the Subjects by any Imposition, or to tread them down by
any Declaration, the noise of it was spread abroad Six Months before, that when
the Blow should fall, the People might be prepared for it, and so found not the
Evil so great as it really was, because it was expected.

All the French Kings Pretensions derive from Charlemain, who, though King of
France, was Elected Emperor, but Charles being Dead, the Electors were in right
of Electing another capable to Govern the Empire, and to Defend Christendom,
without being obliged or wedded to the Person of the French King.

But I find, without Dispute, that the Emperors have much more Right to the
Kingdom of France, and that it is better grounded than that of the French Kings
on the Empire, of which the Three Bishoprics of Thoul, Metz, and Verdun, are
dependences which France has Usurped, and to obtain peace and quiet the Emperor
has been forced to bid them an eternal Farewell.

All Histories show us, that formerly the Gauls did depend of the Empire, and
was looked upon by the Emperors of the West, as an Imperial Dependency, and
feudatory to it; in effect, the Archbishops of Treves did take upon them the
Quality of Imperial Chancellors in that part; and Charles the VIII. King of all
France, as he was, was not ashamed to take upon him the Quality of Vicar
General and Perpetual of the holy Empire.

Moreover, Conrad being come to Paris, caused himself to be received there as
Superior, by King Charles, Sir-named the Simple, and the Emperor Sigismond, in
the Reign of Lewis the XI. made his Entry in that Capital City, with all the
Marks of Sovereignty, preceded at Noon Day (in imitation of the ancient Roman
Emporors) by a great number of Torches of White Wax Lighted, took his Seat in
the Presence of the King, in the Parliament, Created Knights, and there it was
that he Erected the County of Savoy into a Duchy, and acknowledged that Duke
as Prince of the Empire* The Emperors, no more than the Crown of France, ever
lose their Right; and I think they should have the same Prerogatives as such
Kings, who always own themselves Pupils, and can never lose any thing,
alienate, engage, nor sell.

But we are not here to rake up the Ashes of the Empire's ancient Rights, but
only to prevent the French King from making new ones, and afterward to possess
them, seeing that his Generals do publicly declare, That they know no other
Right but Power, and the only pleasure and good-liking of their Monarch, of
whom they make a God on Earth, Viro immortali.

At this present, the French King beholds all Europe in Arms against him, and
he finds he cannot well parry that Blow; that England's lifted up Arm threatens
him with a total Ruin, and because he cannot easily withstand all those Powers
that are United against him, he endeavors, at least, if he cannot win them to
his Party, to divide them from the other, by that Neutrality which he proposes
to them, in design of accomplishing two things, if he obtains it.

The First is, to diminish the number of his Enemies, and the second, that by
that means he may gain a free access near to those separated Powers, flattering
himself with the hopes to draw them afterward to his Party, through
advantageous Offers, but much sooner, if he can but never so little rouse
himself up again, from that Apoplexy in which he is fallen.

But the Emperor and his Allies, to break his Measures and destroy his Designs,
ought not to allow of any Neutrality to any Prince, State, nor City of the
Empire, but to hinder him, if possible, from soliciting the Switz-Cantons; on
the contrary to get them to join to the Empire, and if they cannot be prevailed
with so to do, oblige them to call home those Forces which they have in the
French Service, or at least permit the raising in their Territories a like
number of Men by the Emperor and his Allies; it being pre-suppos'd, that a
State can never be counted Neuter, so long as it furnishes Forces to one of the
Parties that are in Wars together; besides, such a Neutrality is of evil
consequence to the others that pretend to the same: There are but very few
States that are not glad to see their Neighbors weakened, that they may draw
advantage from their Disorders, and get to themselves the Trade, and to see
them from a secure place ruin one another, while their Neuter Subjects enrich
themselves, and improve by the spoil, as the Archbishop of Mentz did think to
do, if he had not been cheated by France; to his great sorrow he has made trial
of Lewis the XIVth's Maxims, who has no sooner laid his finger on a place, but
that he endeavors to thrust in his whole body, and to drive from thenee the
Lawful Lord. Though all has known this, yet diverse hitherto have been surprised
with it, they call out for help, when they thiink themselves lost, as we have
seen in diverse little States which he has appropriated to himself; and he had
done the like to Geneva, had not the Laudable Cantons opposed themselves to it.
The Switz perceiving that his most Christian Majesty did by that design to
smooth a Path for himself into their Country, and into the States of the Duke
of Savoy, if they durst but have stirred never so little after that Conquest.

I now pass to the Cantons of the Switzers, by reason of their Proximity to the
Empire, and Alliance with the Emperor; they have no cause of being better
satisfied than many others are of Lewis the Great, if they would but return
from that blindness wherein they are, and make some Reflections on what has
passed, only since his Reign; how that he amuses them on the one side, while he
is undermining of their Union on the other, together with their Liberty, and
their Power; incompassing them so close on all sides, as if he would so girt
them in, that they should not be able to stir themselves. His Design is to make
them Tributary, not of Money, but of diverse thousands of Men, when he has
occasion for them, and when they should be of most use to him: to that
particularly tends the Usurpation of the French County, which was formerly
their Bar, the Fortresses of Hunning, and of Crensack, and so many other Forts
and Bridges which the King has caused of late to be built round their Country.

It is that way do the Lewis d'Ors tend, which the French Ambassador does so
freely scatter about in the Cantons, and so many fair promises, and French
Compliments, with which the Lords are fed, to rock them asleep; but in the mean
time, I humbly desire that those Gentlemen would make a serious Reflection on
the ill Treatment and Contempt lately put on their Ambassadors, and by that
they shall judge, whether they have any great cause to reckon on, and to trust
to the Friendship and Promises of that King; and let them not flatter
themselves, if the King could have made them submit to the French Yoke, long
since had he done that business, because he well knows the need he has of them,
that the Cantons can supply him with a great number of good Soldiers, and that
he can build and reckon on their Alliance. I know that in Switzerland, as well
as elsewhere, there are Mercenary Spirits, that would willingly Sacrifice their
Country to their proper Interests; who promise much to France, without
considering well what they do; and if the King had entered into Germany as he
had purposed to do, as I have before mentioned, the Cantons had had great cause
to fear, that diverse Towns whose Magistrates had been bribed, had followed the
fatal Example of Strasbourg. To this purpose the King has always endeavored to
divide them in their hearts, as well as in their Religion.

But some will say, that Things have not happened so, and that they are still
in a good Condition. I grant that, and I answer that the passed danger ought to
render us wise for the future; the Swallows know their times, why should Men
neglect theirs? Wherefore above all, the Switzers ought not to let slip so fair
an Occasion, by which they may set themselves at rest for ever. I Conjure them
to it, by that which they hold most dear in the World, their Liberty, Religion,
their Children, and their own Preservation; let them remember they are born
free, that they depend but on God alone, and on their Valor, and that they
ought to maintain themselves in those fair Privileges, which their Ancestors
have acquired to them by their Swords, and their blood; being arrived at the
moment in which they may preserve them; they ought not to fall asleep at the
sound of the French Gold, it is not with this as with the Tide, which returns
every day; and it may be that England shall never again be Governed by a King
replenished with such good Sentiments, and that shall be so well fixed to the
General Interests of all Christendom, as is that Prince who Reigns there at
this present. It is a good fortune, which must be taken hold of by the foretop,
for fear she flies away. It is not to be doubted, but that at this very
present, the French Ambassador does indefatigably Labor with the Cantons, and
that he offers much more than his Master designs to perform: and he fails not
to tender also the Arrears due to them, provided the Cantons will permit the
raising of new Forces, or only accept of a Neutrality. As if the King did offer
them any thing more than their own, which he ought to have paid them long
since. I very well know that diverse Persons, whose eyes this Reimbursement
causes to be open, would willingly grant what the King requires of them, in the
belief that they might observe a Neutrality with that; just as if the Emperor
had granted it, and at the same time permit Forces should be given to his
Enemy; which would be two things very incompatible, and which no Monarch would
ever endure, if he were in any Condition to prevent it. Wherefore I once more
repeat, that the Cantons ought to make serious Reflections on the present State
of France in particular, and on that of Europe in general; and rouse up from
that dullness and Mercenary humor in which they are kept, in the fear the
French King has, that the Switzers should awaken on the sudden, and open their
eyes to their true Interest. It lies at present but on a strong and generous
Resolution, to get out of all dangers, prevent ever relapsing into them again,
and set themselves in a Condition to depend on none but themselves. To this
purpose, they ought to join themselves to the Empire; and then require from the
King that he should demolish those Fortresses which he has caused to be built,
contrary to former Treaties, and in case of a refusal, by an authentic and
general Decree, recall their Forces, and with those very Troops that are so
well Disciplined, and those they have already, go themselves and execute that
which France refuses them, and pull down those stone Tables which he has set
up. Besides, let the Lords of that Republic consider that the more Soldiers
they lend to France, the more Men they lose; whose hearts are insensibly
alienated from their own Country, by Death, by Offices, by Pensions, by
Marriages, and some by the Change of Religion; and these last are young Vipers,
which will one day gnaw their own Mothers bowels.

I know that the Switzers with diverse others, have some years since feared the
Forces which France has (to make it self dreaded) allways kept in readiness,
after Peace and after the Truce also; which Forces made it to speak with
Confidence, and required nothing but with threatenings; being the only Prince in
Europe that did see himself in a Condition to Undertake, and to Act, before
others were in a Condition to Defend themselves, which made him to be feared by
his Neighbors, and procured him Alliances, but particularly that of King
James, with which he thought himself sufficiently strong to overcome all
Europe, beginning as I have already said, by the United Provinces.

I doubt not but all these Considerations might have a great influence over the
Cantons, and oblige the Switzers to grant to France that which perhaps they had
not done at any other time, but now the storm is blown over, the Cause of that
Pride with which the King did threaten, being vanished into smoke, the fear
ought to cease also, and there ought not to remain any consideration capable to
retain the Switzers under the Rod of Lewis the XIVth. Let them return to their
pristine Liberty, and to their right Interest. Let those Gentlemen know, that
Kings are Great no longer than they are happy, and that they are feared no
longer than their good fortune lasts. I therefore maintain, that that
Imperiousness (with which France was used to draw advantages from the Cantons)
is at an end, now that it finds it self overwhelmed from all sides, that all
its Alliances on which it founded all its new Usurpations, are vanished, and
that at this present he has almost as many Enemies, as there are Princes in
Europe. If they have not yet all declared, they will not stay long, they only
wait to see the Dance begin, to join themselves with the Allies, as we have
lately seen the Republic of Liege, which has scorned its threatenings, and
embraced that Party which it apprehended to be the most advantageous, and the
most necessary for its State. Which sufficiently shows the small regard that it
had at present for the French King, who is no longer in a Condition of doing
any great Damage in an open War, since England has turned the Muzzle of her
Cannons against him, and that the Prince on whose Alliance he so strongly built
his hopes, is no longer in a Condition to do any good or hurt to Europe; for in
lieu of succouring his Allie, he himself stands in need of him: he drains
France; the Calf in time will kill the Cow, with drawing her too hard; it is a
new Charge to Lewis the XIV, and that Unfortunate Prince sees himself on the
brink of a Precipice, which by a special Grace from Heaven he may yet avoid, by
retiring into some Convent.

The Laudable Cantons ought to make other Reflections, and have other
Considerations at present, than they formerly had; they should too lift up
their Eyes toward England, and behold His Britanick Majesty William the IIId
as their Friend and Allie, professing the same Religion, and who, during His
Reign, will make it a point of Generosity, and of Honor, to Succor them
against all the Assaults of the French King. If they declare themselves, both
through the Tie of Communion, and that of Esteem, which that Great Prince has
for them, even His great and generous Designs ought to serve to make them
return to their ancient Rights and Liberties, cause their aincent Limits to be
made good again for greater security; but then they ought not to remain quiet
all the while, with their arms folded, but labor with all their power, and
assist to bring about so great a good, and advantange, which the Heavens offers
them. To that purpose, they should Exemplarily punish all those Mercinary
Persons, whose hands, and their Honors have been defiled with the French
Money. Incessantly cause their Forces to return, which are in the French
Service; in case of disobedience, declare them Rebels, and Confiscate their
Means; oblige those Fathers who have Children there, to call them home on great
Mulcts, never to admit to any Employ nor Dignity either in Church or State, all
such as shall contradict these Orders, and never cease 'till the Fortresses are
demolished, and Burgundy, the French County, Alsace, and Lorain restored to
their ancient Masters and Sovereigns, that they may be as so many Bulwarks to
the Cantons: all which they can easily do in this Conjuncture, which at this
present so favorably offers it self, and which they ought not to let slip,
seeing there is at this present, between the Protestant and the Catholic
Cantons so good a Harmony, and firm Union, that the Pope is wholly inclined to
cause those of his Party to keep it strictly as a neecessary good for the quiet
of Christendom, and the safety of Europe, as well as to abate the Pride of
France: All this will happen, in Declaring for the Emperor and Empire.

I come now to Spain, formerly their Sovereigns Governed from within their
Closets, a good part of the World, but since Philip the IId its great Power has
began to decay; and that of the Kings of France to increase, at the same time
that that of the Catholic Kings decreased. I shall not seek after the Causes
of it, because that is beside my Subject; I shall only say by the by, that the
Liberty of Conscience in France has much contributed to its Elevation; and that
contrary-wise, the privation of it in Spain, has caused there great Evils, and
the loss of Trade, which is the Soul of States and Kingdoms.

The Marriages which the Kings of Spain have Contracted with France, have been
so many Levens of Discord, and of War, which have always proved very hurtful to
Spain; and not to go back any further than to the late Queen, who was a French
Woman as much by inclination, as she was by Birth, who by the subtle and
dextrous Counsel of the King her Uncle's Ambassadors, had always some new
business to propose to the King her Husband, who most tenderly loved her. By
those means, that Princess had acquired a great ascendent over the King's mind,
sometimes prejudicial to the good of his Kingdom; for whose prosperity she had
not all the Consideration she ought to have had; for having no Children to
Succeed to it, and still in fears, that remaining Barren, after some
considerable time she might be Divorced, according to the Laws and Statutes of
that Kingdom.

All the study of the said Queen was (but most particularly a little before her
death) to labor hard for the advantage of France; and at the last, her
greatest business was, to intercede with the King for that Money which was come
to Cadiz, on the French Account, in the last Fleet that was come from the
Indies. And we have seen that contrary to the right Policy, and the true
Interest of Spain, the Queen succeeded in it, for that Money ought to have been
sequestered under the King's Seal, 'till the Council had seen what Course the
Affairs of Europe had taken in these present Conjunctures. Spain had no want of
pretenses, it had just cause to have kept back, without blame, those 14
Millions, which of truth were Counterbands, seeing that no strangers have the
liberty to negotiate in the Spanish Indies, under pain of Confiscation, 'till
his Catholic Majesty had seen what satisfaction he should receive from France,
on all his other Demands and Pretensions; and in case he received none, he then
might have been his own Play Master, as it is frequently practiced, even amongst
private Persons; but what I say here, is, after Death the Physician, seeing the
Birds are flown, there is no remedy for this time, but for the future, the
Persons concerned, will consider better.

Another of the late Queens application, was to bring the Catholic King to
accept of a Neutrality which France offered him; that joined to the recovering
of the Money we lastly mentioned, was the only business of the Ambassador
Rebenac: But while they were thus acting against the Interests of Spain, God
has taken that Queen away in the prime of her Age, before she could render that
last piece of service to her Uncle the French King, which was so necessary to
him at this present. How can it be helped? I confess that it is a very great
loss for France, but it must comfort it self, as Spain has done, for parting
with the 14 Millions. France, ever slye and cunning, made use of a specious
pretense to oblige the King of Spain to accept of the Neutrality, endeavoring
to persuade him, that by that means he should become a Mediator betwixt France
and the Empire, as if the Most Christian King did not know the strict Union
there is betwixt those two Monarchs, which make but one House, and Family. Thus
their interest being but one, and that of the Emperor being the same with that
of the King of Spain, which is well known to his Christian Majesty; let any
judge, whether France being certain of that Truth (which is not to be doubted)
had a desire to referr her Concerns into the hands of the Catholic King,
except she were at the very last gasp, not knowing what Saint to Pray to. But
the most probable, and the most received Opinion is, that the French King makes
his last Efforts to diminish the number of its Enemies: and though Spain should
be so weak, as the French Partisans would make us believe it is, and that at
most it could but stand on the Defensive part: The French must have two Armies
on foot, to prevent the Spaniards from advancing. The one in Catalonia, and the
other in Flanders, and peradventure a third in Navarre, which might take him up
at least Fifty Thousand Men, which he might have employed elsewhere. If Spain
had accepted of that Neutrality, and if Lewis the Great, mean time had overcame
the Empire, what would have become of Spain afterward? after all what
assurance has it that France would more religiously observe the Neutrality than
it has the Peace, and the Truce, and who had been its Caution, that when the
French King had had an opportunity, he had not fallen on some place of the
Netherlands, and it may be, on Navarre, and Mentz all at one time, when the
Governors were fallen asleep in the arms of a Neutrality, as in a deep
Lethargy, as they did presently after the Peace of Nimeguen; in which the
Marquess of Grana was reposing at ease, filling his Purse, by sparing the
entertaining of a number of Forces, which were so necessary to him, while he
had to do with so dangerous a Neighbor, who no longer remembered Treaties,
than while he Signed them, because they were at that time of use to him, he
never wanting afterward Pretenses, when he would break them.

A Neutrality in this juncture of time, is very hurtful to Spain, and to its
Allies; but above all to the Emperor and to the Empire, Spain would do, as if
when Two Brothers were Attacked, one should look on his Companion with foulded
Arms, while he was divested of all, expecting his turn to be next; whereas, if
they both defended themselves at once, they might either overcome their Enemy,
or drive him away. What assurances has Spain, that if the French King could
overcome the Empire, he would not Attack it next, as he would doubtless do?
Wherefore, his Catholic Majesty ought to make a last Effort; in this present
Conjuncture, he ought to consider that France has taken from him Lisle,
Valiencienne, Cambray, St. Omer, Err, and many other places in the Provinces
of Flanders, Namur, Hainau, Luxembourg, and in fine, the City of Luxembourg,
which was as a Bullwork to the rest of Flanders and of Brabant, as well as to
the other Provinces, while England remained with folded Arms against its own
proper Interest, having been bribed to let France do what it pleased. King
James, as zealous a Catholic as he was, did consent that Lewis the XIV. should
seize on the remainder of the Netherlands, while he should fit himself with the
Spanish Indies, as his Ally had promised him he should; thus did they, without
any scruple, divest their Catholic Neighbors of their Rights, and shared them
amongst them, without casting of Lots. If that Prince had not abandoned the
Throne, that Neutrality might have been very considerable; but now the Case is
altered, in quitting of the Crown, he has Disarmed himself, he is now but like
a Wasp without a Sting, which buzzes about, but cannot sting. Spain has lost in
him a concealed Enemy, and a false Ally, who sold to France that which belonged
not to him, and that consented to the seizing on Goods wherein he had no share;
but God, who laughs at the design of Men, would not permit that those of James
the II. should come to perfection. Providence, for the safety of Europe, has
bestowed his place to another Prince, and has conducted, as 'twere by the hand;
William the III. to the Throne; he, according to all appearance, is to be the
Instrument through which God will give rest to Christendom. Thus Spain, in lieu
of an Enemy which it had in James the II. late King of England, recovers in his
Successor a good Friend and Ally, faithful to his Word, and who being joined to
his Allies, may all together labor effectually to establish the King of Spain
in his ancient Rights and Dominions, and cause France to Restore what it had
Usurped from it.

This Foundation being as firm as it is certain, Spain ought to join with those
who labor for its rest and quiet, by that of all Europe, to put in a readiness
all its Forces, in Catalonia, Navarre, and above all in the Netherlands, where
the People must copiously bleed their Purses, toward the Entertainment of an
Army, capable to defend it self against the French Assaults; let them consider
the barbarousness and inhumanity with which they have Treated those Towns that
have submitted to them, under good Capitulations, and such Conditions as had
been made by the Dauphin himself; let them make Reflections on the cruelty with
which the French King has treated his own Subjects, against the promised Faith,
and if after that, the humor takes them to submit to the French Yoke, it may
then be said of them, as it is said of certain People, that they are born to
slavery.

Let Spain further consider, the great pretensions the Dauphin thinks to have
on the Netherlands, on a material Right, notwithstanding all the Oaths and
Renunciations which the King his Father made of them at the Pirenean Peace, and
at the time of his Marriage with the Infanta, on the Isle of the Phesants, at
the foot of the Altar, communicating at the greatest and sublimest Mystery that
is in the Catholic Church, which he has afterward slighted; and if he defers
taking Possession of what he pretends to, it is not that he renounces it, time
deprives him of none of his Rights, it is only for want of an opportunity which
has not yet been favorable enough to him, and that his Neighbors, the States
of the United Provinces, are a stumbling block to him, and a perpetual
Obstacle, which he could never so well manage as he did James the II. because
those Lords know better their Interest, than that poor Prince ever did. We know
that Flanders has always been a bone to pick for the French Kings, and so long
as they will find something to gnaw on, they will not think of going to Spain;
but if they had once made an end of that bit, and well digested it, if that
which employs them on that side was over, what would hinder them from pouring
all their Forces into Catalonia and Navarr, and from entering with a powerful
Army into Spain, and even March to Madrid? wherefore, the Spanish Interest is,
to strongly unite it self at this present with the Empire, with England, and
with the United Provinces, to solicit them, not to lay down their Arms, till
they have recovered Burgundy, the French County, all the Usurped Cities in
Flanders, Hainau, Namur, and Luxembourg; without which, it will in success of
time, relapse again into the same Straits as it has been in the Reigns of
Charles the II. and James the II. of Great Britain; if once for all, it
delivers not it self at this present from that danger, whence it seems already
to revive and recover, by the sudden change of Affairs in England. Mean time,
let the Spanish Council be wary not to be deceived by the French Illusions, who
promises all when troubled, and stands in need of help, who ruins it self with
Promises, but restores it self again with performing none of them, more
abounding in Crafts than in Integrity; the danger passed, a Fig for the Saint;
let the same Council hold for certain, that when ever the French King has any
regard for Spain, it is a sign he is at the last gasp, and that he knows not
whither else to go: If that Council can be fully persuaded of this Truth, it
will not fail to advise his Catholic Majesty, to make all his Efforts, and to
send all the Money he can possible to the Governor of the Netherlands, to put
themselves in a condition to sustain the first fury of the French, after which
there is nothing more to fear, for the Allies will give it so much Diversion,
even in France it self, that its King will no longer think of going to attack
others, for so soon as the Germans and the Hollanders shall have cleared the
Countries of Colen, Juliers, and Treves, the Governor of the Netherlands shall
not want Men, as he has already experienced by that Succor which has been sent
him: But the Marquess of Guastanaga ought not to grow supine upon this, he
ought to put himself in a condition to help himself, he may by that acquire a
great deal of Glory, in the condition those Provinces which depend of his
Government are in; above all, he ought very well to supply the Town of Namur,
its Neighbor has Courted it long, because it opens to him a fair and large way
all along the River Meuse.

I add to what I have said before, concerning the Death of the Queen of Spain,
that seeing she has left no Successor, through her Barrenness, to the Crown of
Spain, so necessary for the good of the Kingdom, and for the quiet of
Christendom, it appeared as a kind of necessity for the one and the other, that
the King should forthwith think of entering into a second Marriage with some
Princess of a fruitful Family; I know that policy (to endeavor to recover
Portugal) would advise to look on that Infanta, but the sterility of the Queen
of England her Aunt, has made the Council of Spain to fear falling into the
same accident again; if France had had more Princesses to Marry that had been
worthy of his Catholic Majesty's Choice, (as Spain may thank God it had not)
it had not failed to propose them, to make up a match, in the hopes thereby to
have obtained a Neutrality, because all those Marriages have always produced
some advantages to France. But having nothing to fear that way, Spain has been
obliged to turn toward Germany, and to fix in the Family of the Prince Palatin
Nienbourg, there was still remaining there a beautiful Princess, Sister to the
Empress, and to the Queen of Portugal; though elder than this last, she had no
mind to go to Portugal, by some certain foreknowledge she had, such a Marriage
would have contracted a more strict Allianee betwixt those Powers and Portugal;
the German Ladies are usually fruitful, that Princess comes not from a House,
whose Interest should make them to desire Barrenness, there being therefore
nothing to fear on that side, there is no question but that the Queen Mother
has used all her Power, as well as the Empeperor, to accomplish it; and that on
the contrary, the French Emissaries have labored with all their subtleties to
prevent it; but their ill fortune has been such, that their Credit has been
very inconsiderable in those Courts; they are like those petty Saints, who no
longer work Miracles, and whose Feasts are over; their falsehood is but too
well known already all over Europe, wherefore now they begin to take their
March into tke new World, to the Kingdoms of China and of Siam, where those
good People believe that all Persons are as honest as themselves, so that it
will not be difficult for the French to impose upon them; but as to Europe, we
are now in a time that no Prince will have any Alliance with France, much less
with any of its Princesses as Wives, seeing there is general complaint of them,
for having caused Disorders in all the States they came to.

The United Provinces are highly concerned to keep low the French King, to take
from him all desires of molesting them, nor to go so far toward them, as the
Conquest of the Netherlands of Spain. It was always the aim of Lewis the Great,
according to the advice of Mounsieur de Sulli, formerly Ambassador of France
into England, in the time of Henry the IV. who gave him to observe, that the
conjunction of the United Provinces with France, was the only means to restore
it to its ancient Grandeur, and to render it Superior to all the rest of
Christendom. Formerly the French Kings had their folly fixed on Italy,
believing, in imitation of the ancient Romans, that it was the Gate they were
to pass through to attain to the Universal Monarchy, but having found that way
too Thorny, and that Country having frequently been the Churchyard of the
French, they have grown weary of it, and have turned themselves toward the
Low Countries, where hitherto Lewis the XIV. has succeeded better, and he had
found out a means to continue there his Progress, if the Heavens had not
prevented it, by the change in England. I know that the United Provinces had
had nothing to fear, if the Netherlands of Spain had been in a condition to
maintain themselves with their own strength, or if the late Kings of England
had had the same Sentiments which Queen Elizabeth had, and if Charles and James
the Seconds had said to Monsieur Barillon, that which that Queen said to
Monsieur of Sulli, That neither France nor England, nor any other Prince, had
any thing to pretend to the Netherlands, that she should not suffer that the
King his Master should have any thoughts that way. Perhaps the Lewis D'Ors were
not current in those Days in that Great Princesses Court, as they have since
been, and that that Princess did better understand her own true Interest, than
diverse Kings who have succeeded her have done. But thanks to Heaven, those
Kings are passed, and God has at this present seated on the Throne a King who
understands very well his Interest, and that of the Nation, much better than
did his Predecessor, and who following the Traces of that Great Princess) was
no sooner got to the Government, but he sent back Monsieur Barillon, to tell
his Master, that he had nothing to do in the Netherlands, and that he would
prevent him from any further Usurpation in those parts. The Elevation of that
Great Prince on the Throne of England, is a fatal Blow to the greatness of
Lewis the XIV. (we must have so much Charity as to confess it) but at the same
time it produces the Quiet and Repose of all Europe; it is a Bit clapped in the
French Kings Mouth, which retains him from a running so far as to the United
Provinces, and that shelters them from all his Insultations, and from all his
Threatenings, and furnishes them at the same time with Means to resist him
vigorously, and to clip his Wings so short, that he may not fly any more beyond
his just bounds; it is a bitter Pill which he is forced to swallow, and which
will make him to disgorge, and to re-establish those bounds which he had
removed during his Neighbors weaknesses, in a profound and universal Peace.

The United Provinces, as well as diverse other States, find themselves
delivered now from that danger that threatened them, and it is now their turn to
speak aloud, finding themselves assisted by so powerful an Allie as England;
they may demand the Restitution of all the Places of the Spanish Netherlands,
which have been taken from them since the Peace of the Pireneans, because those
places serve to preserve them, and as bars that puts a large Territory betwixt
them, and so dangerous a Prince; besides that, the damage they have sustained
in their Trade is very considerable, and gives them cause of great pretensions.
France has supplanted and deceived them in diverse occasions, and it has
endeavored to lull them asleep, especially in the last place, by the Count
d'Avaux its Ambassador; through vain promises (which Father Limojou the French
King's Almoner, called Illusory) and in which there was no sincerity nor good
Faith, as we have seen in all his Proceedings after the Peace of Nimeguen, and
that it has been but a continual Usurpation. That this King might the longer
and with more safety enjoy those Places that he had Usurped, a Truce was
patched up for Twenty Years, during a full Peace, which he likewise broke in
few Years after. After he had Fortified those Conquered Places, made his
Alliance with James the II. and destroyed (by an unheard of Cruelty which is
natural to him) the Protestants in his own Kingdom, as he assures by his
Declaration of the revocation of the Edict of Nants, that he had made that
Truce but in order to destroy them, notwithstanding all the Protestations to
the contrary, which the Count d'Avaux had made to obtain it; and to deceive
with more ease, in the opinion, that after he had made an end with those
Protestants, whom he accused of having Dutch Hearts, and Intelligences with
them, 'twas to that end that the seizure tended, which was made of all the
Books and Papers belonging to their Consistories, throughout the whole Kingdom,
to know the Sums they had sent into Holland during the War; and seconded by the
King of England (then Reigning) he should overrun the United Provinces, and
(leave for a time those of the Spaniards) considering them always the only ones
that could cross his Designs, and hinder him from making his great Conquests
over Europe. But now Fortune has turned her back to him, and by the event, we
find that he has not cast up right, and that his Most Christian Majesty had not
reckoned on the Elevation of the Prince of Orange to the Crown of England, by
that fall of his Ally; who has broken all his Measures, and destroyed his
Alliances, opened a way to the States to attack him in his own Hold, and to
reduce him to Guard his own Kingdom, no longer to think, but to defend himself;
it is no longer now the time of the Peace of Nimeguen, which was made upon its
consideration, but through the Treachery of France, as the baseness with which
it has observed it, as well as the Treatises of Trade, show us sufficiently;
and that the King had quite another aim than the States General had proposed to
themselves at the conclusion of that Peace, and afterward of the Truce. Seeing
that the King has violated all Trading, and declared War to the United
Provinces, on the frivolous pretense, and on the account of a sorry Priest, the
Cardinal of Furstemburg, a Rebel to his Lawful Sovereign the Emperor, and to
his Superior the Pope; who during his whole Life, in lieu of adhering to the
Service of the Church, to which he had designed himself, has made it his
business to disturb Christendom, and to give occasion to spill blood in Europe,
and notwithstanding all that, the French King has preferred the Interest and
Friendship of that Man, odious to God and Men, to that of their high and mighty
Powers, and to their Alliances, which he had sought after with so much
earnestness and protestations, by the Peace in 1678. Thus France having first
broke, the States ought to make use of the means which God puts in their hands,
by the assistance of the revolution of England, which has not only produced
them a strict Alliance and sincere Union, but a considerable Assistance also,
that by that Union and that mutual Assistance, they may oblige the French King
to repent of his unjust Proceedings, of all those barbarous Actions and
Oppressions which he has committed in Europe, to bring him back to Reason and
Justice, and to put him in a condition to make no Innovations for the future,
so long as that happy time shall last for those Two Nations; they both ought
therefore to make a last Effort to maintain themselves in that precious
liberty, which they at present enjoy, by a special favor of Heaven, that is
that inestimable Gem which France has endeavored to Ravish from those happy
Provinces; but God having delivered them from all the Threatenings of Lewis the
Great, and from the design he had projected to entirely destroy them, he must
be frighted in his turn, and his Court must be filled with such a terror as he
never has had since his coming to the Crown, which may surpass that which he
had at the Baricado of Paris, since he has no longer in his Kingdom those that
delivered him from it, and who he has since so ill rewarded.

There needs but a descent on his Coasts to give it him in good earnest, and
that is therefore what he apprehends the most, and that unhinges him before
hand, finding the heart of his Kingdom tainted, and the Enemy at home, who
waits but for an opportunity to declare. It is not a Sampson who is no longer
tied with such new Cords as never were strong enough to retain him, and to stop
him; but a Sampson whose Locks are cut, and whose Eyes are put out, who turns
and winds on all sides, to find out some body to lead him out of the Precipice
wherein he finds himself; he has given the hand of Association to the Grand
Seignior, he will soon find a pretense for it, it is doubtless, he will say in
his Manifest, to endeavor to Convert him to the Catholic Faith, for that is
the wet sheet with which he covers himself at present against the storm which
is going to fall on his head, which grows giddy so soon as he thinks on that
descent; five hundred leagues of Coast confound him, not knowing where his
Enemies will Land; there needs but some false allarm, and at the same time a
real descent, to set all those Troops he has along the Coasts in disorder. Join
to that the attack at the same time of his Enemies by Land, he must undoubtedly
bow under those pressures, and much more yet, if ever the Allies are so happy
as to enter into the heart of his Kingdom, then he may pack up his tools, and
go seek in Poland that which King James has found with him; for to follow him
to Rome, he would not be better welcome there than the Marquess Lavardin. It Is
his own Concern, let him look to it betimes, that King knows that it is
impossible for him to prevent a descent, let him keep never so good a Guard by
Land, and though he be never so strong at Sea, he has too much of shore to
keep, wherefore he has ordered his Generals to burn his own Country ten Miles
round, when ever the English set footing on it, and to his Fleet to retire into
the Mediterranian, where he pretends to be the Lord of the Sea.

But it is likely that his Reign will be but short there, for the English and
Dutch having sufficiency of Ships, it will be easy for them to drive it into
the Port of Tholon, where yet it will not be absolutely secure, thirty good
Vessels will make them fly to it, having no longer any place of retreat in
Spain, and the Italians not being able to endure them since the business of
Genoua. England, and Holland need not to strain very hard to fit out together
120 Sail of Ships, yet that number will be sufficient to overcome France by
Sea, and to set that Kingdom into the highest Consternation. In the Year 1673.
De Ruiter (that great Sea Hero, whose Memory, and Valor shall last as long as
the World) with a much less number of Forces did beat the French and English
joined together against that State; but now that the English Fleet shall be
joined to that of the United Provinces, France will be extremely put to it, and
Monsieur of Segnelai will have as much need of good Counsel as of Money; but
say the French, if we can do nothing in Europe, we will preserve our selves for
America; where they think they will do much in ruining some Plantations of the
English and Dutch that have settled themselves there, during the time that the
Cities and Provinces of France will be ruining; mean time that fear that he
shall cause to the Savages, will not Cure him of his.

The good disposition in which all Europe is, and the Revolution of England,
ought highly to encourage the States of the United Provinces, now that they
find themselves supported by all Christian Princes, who have with their High
and Mightinesses but one and the same Design, which is to pull down the Pride
of France, and that in destroying their Common Enemies, they may find
themselves delivered from future danger, by the sole motion of England. It is
another advantage to the said Provinces, to find themselves in good
Intelligence with their nearest Neighbors, who are at their door, and that the
Archbishops, and Bishops of Colen, Munster, and Liege, are all Unanimously
bent to embrace their Interest, and that France can no longer do in regard to
those Prelates, that which she did in the year 1672. But on the contrary, they
join now with the good party, to oppose themselves, as do their Allies, to the
French King's Insultations, who endeavors to make us believe that he has still
very great Ties with Denmark, seeing that in his Declaration of the 12th. of
last March, he grants to all those Refuged Persons that have left his Kingdom,
half of those Revenues they left there behind them, yet with that Proviso, that
the Officers shall go and serve in the Troops of the King of Denmark. But
because that Kingdom cannot do well without a Trade with Holland, it seems that
it would be a good piece of Policy to make him expound himself, for it would be
a breach which his Danish Majesty would make to the Alliances, and he would be
failing in his Faith in the Treaties, to consent that Officers should be drawn
out of the Troops of his Allies; besides it seems as if the Affairs of Europe
could not permit at this time any Neutrality to any Prince under what pretense
soever: that being granted, Denmark ought to make his Choice, and in his
Choice, to consider well the advantage he draws from the United Provinces, the
Trade and Profit that results from it to his Subjects, and the advantage that
the King's Treasure receives by the Entries and Exportations, (and let them
take care not to fall again in the same Consternation, in which they were the
last year, for scarce would the Affairs settle again a second time) on the
contrary, he can draw no Succor from France in the present Condition it is,
and though it promises to keep it in the possession of Holstein, that can be
but a Chymerical Promise, seeing Lewis the XIVth can no longer preserve his own
Provinces, nor keep his Cities, part of which he undermines, through a
foresight he has, to be obliged to abandon them at the approach of so many
Enemies. Thus ought Denmark Inviolably to join it self to that which is sollid,
which is Uniting with the United Provinces, have never any thing to unravel
which may break the Alliance, nor give occasion to come to a Rupture, and
follow their Interest, as the Shadow follows the Body, and generously contemn
some pitiful Pension, ill paid at the best, which France offers; it is a
broken Reed which will hurt his hand, and a Will'oth' Wisp, which leads to a
Precipice. Let his Danish Majesty but represent to himself the advantage of
being free, and that a King ought to depend but of God, and of his own Sword:
it is good being in a Condition of making Choice, and of following ones true
Interest, without being tied by Pensions, which are but gilded Shackles, that
are not the lighter for it. Sweed, which the King of Denmark has continually at
his heels, and who has no Cause, no more than many others, of praising Lewis
the XIVth, nor to have any Consideration for those Powers that shall Allie
themselves with that Monarch, who detains from him the Duchy of Deux-Pont, and
considerable Sums of Arrears due to him, which he would never pay in spite,
because his Sweedish Majesty would not continue with him the Alliances which
had been Contracted. The same will happen to Denmark, if they take not care
beforehand; But when it once finds it self deceived, then will it have recourse
to the States of the United Provinces; and to the Emperor, but perhaps a little
too late; mean time, it cannot be thought that the Emperor, and the Princes of
the Empire will look with a quiet temper on the Alliances of the King of
Denmark with their common Enemies, nor even that he should remain Neuter, for
still that is the way to serve him indirectly, and to give the People the means
to carry into France all the Provision that it will stand in want of, their
Merchants growing Rich by the Spoil of those that Fight. I would gladly see how
the King of Denmark would defend himself, when his Allie Lewis the XIVth shall
ask him for Powder, and Salt peter for his Money, which is that he has most
need of at present. Mean time it is easy to judge that that would be a great
prejudice to the Enemies of France, and that it would deprive them from a great
advantage, which it is likely they might obtain by their Enemies want of
Ammunitions; wherefore in such a favorable juncture, the Allies will not
endure any thing to their prejudice, nor that can impead their Enterprises. It
is much better for Denmark, immediately to embrace that party, as being its
true Interest, than to deferr doing so, 'till France has had a blow.

The Most Christian King reckons much on the King of Poland his Allie, there is
betwixt them a very great Commerce of Money, and of Letters, that is no News,
every body knows it, though one should not make it ones business to prye into
it; those Messengers which so frequently pass to and fro shows it sufficiently,
and no body is ignorant that the French Interest is entirely predominant in
that Court, That King Employs for the most part French Men for his Ministers in
the Foreign Courts. The Queen is still French in her inclinations and heart, as
well as by Birth; (that is a quality which all the Princesses of France carry
along with them, when they are Married out of the Kingdom) they meddle with
Affairs; and that which she understands not well how to manage, she is
informed in by Monsieur the Marquess of Bethune her Brother. The Grand Seignior
has been infinitely obliged to him during the late Campaigns; and though that
War would not produce any great advantage to the King of Poland, yet he is for
no Truce, he has his particular Reasons, which he is not obliged to tell: If
that Prince after the deliverance of Vienna had gone forwards with his
Victories, long since had the important Fortress of Caminieck been in his
hands. France flatters him with words that are but wind, assuring him that it
shall be put into his hands by agreement, but who knows whether it will in a
little time be in a Condition of keeping that promise. It is an unhappiness for
Christendom, that Lewis the XIVth has found so much Credit in that Court, and
that the French Coin is so well known in those parts. It were well for Prince
Jacob, if the King his Father did cleave more closely to the Emperor, than he
has done since Vienna, and that preferring the General interest of Christendom
to that of France, he should give his helping hand toward a Truce, to prevent
by that means Europe from falling into a greater Mischief than it is lately got
out of. But let us turn our selves toward its Deliverer.

Though the English are a Nation which is naturally Warlike, Undaunted, and
whose Courage frequently runs even to rashness, they loving that Liberty in
which they are Born: yet it may be said, that England, during the Reign of its
two last Kings, has Conrributed to the downfall of Europe into Slavery, when it
could have prevented it with one word, through a deceitful hope, that it could
save it self from ruin, either by the Situation of the Country, and by its
Forces or by the Illusory promises of France. All the Princes of Europe have
always pris'd very highly the Alliance with England, even in the time of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, (as we have seen before) those Kings have held the
Balance in Europe, so long as they have not swerved from their true tnterests,
and that they have not sold their freedom to France, Henry the VIIIth did
compare Spain and France to the two boles of a pair of Scales, that that side
weighed it down on which he leaned. He spoke justly, for the Monarchs of that
Kingdom being well united with their Parliaments, may style themselves the
Arbitrators of Christendom: It is not without reason then that France has
flattered them, during the two Reigns that have preceded this, and Lewis the
XIVth thought himself at the top of all his Designs, when he did see James the
IId on the Throne, making open profession of the Roman Catholic Religion,
perhaps with a little more passion than became a King; but that was the weak
side by which the French King would catch him, and detain him in his Bonds; for
that Prince, ever subtle and crafty, did hit him on that side on which he was
most sensible, to the prejudice of his Honor, and against the inclination of
the Nation, and the Parliaments expectations. Mean time Lewis the XIVth had so
well managed his Allie, that it may be said, he already Triumphed over him; and
that through all his Managements, Intreagues, and Lewis D'Ors, he was become
Master of King James his Fortune, by the subtlety of his Ministers, who lulled
him asleep on specious Offers of Sixty Millions, and of 60000 Men, to support
him against his Enemies, and even against his own People, if they would have
resisted, and set themselves free; France little caring for the evil
consequences that this Commerce could not but produce, so it did its own
Business, and rendered that Prince odious to his Allies, and to his Neighbors,
as well as to his own Subjects, who began to feel the smart of a pernicious
Council, either in their Liberties, Laws, or Religion; and seeing themselves
pressed down by a Tirannical Authority, and Despotick Power of an obseded and
gained King, by France, and wholly devoted to its Interests, the English have
found themselves constrained to prevent their falling into the same Predicament
their Neighbors were in, to have recourse to their Liberator, that in being
themselves delivered, they might deliver all Europe also from that slavery in
which it was going to fall, and to that purpose offer the Throne to the Prince
of Orange, and to the Princess his Spouse, as the lawful Heirs to the Three
Kingdoms; and God having granted the Nations Vows and Petition, he has so well
conducted that Great Prince's Enterprise, that it may be said, he has led him
by the Hand, and seated him on that Throne that was designed for him without
any effusion of Blood. This Miracle we have seen, but our Offsprings will
scarce believe it; it is an happy and more than happy change, seeing that it
will render a calm and quiet to all Christendom, and that he restores to Europe
its Liberty. It was William the III. that Providence had designed, through the
Assistance of the States of the United Provinces, to be the glorious Instrument
of so great a Work, capable to cause once more the dumb Son of Cressus to
speak, if he were yet living. But in the place of that Prince, Europe, that was
become in a manner Dumb, through those great Evils that it suffered
beforehand, has set up the Standard of Liberty and of Deliverance. Since that
Prince and Princess of Orange have been Seated on the Throne, all Christendom
begins, as it were, to revive again; Catholics and Protestants, all raise up
their Heads against their Oppressor, as when a Tree is fallen, every body runs
to take their share of the Bows. But to accomplish the Work, Two Things are
required; First, a good and firm League amongst the Christian Princes, who have
under-gone, and who still fear to fall under the French Kings Usurpation,
should he get off of this present danger, so that nothing may be able to
dissolve that Union, and that no private Interest, nor Eldership, should
prevail over the general Good, and that he who shall separate from that Union,
so necessary to Christendom, should be looked upon as a Perturbator, and a
common Enemy, and set in the number of the Turks, and the French, to be set
upon as a Deserter, and Traitor to the general Good of Europe. That Neutrality
have no Place in Christendom; that he who is not for us is against us.
Assuredly that League being so well Cemented, all the offers of France, nor the
satisfaction that it might give to some of the Pretenders, not being able to
break the Union, it is most certain that all will bow to the Allies; that they
shall enter. Drums beating and Colors flying, into their Enemies Country,
where they ought by all means to take up their Winter Quarters the next Season,
to prevent Lewis the XIV's Forces from entering into the Country of the Allies,
as he designs, and to give him at Home so much Business, that he may not go
seek for some elsewhere. For if they enter not into France, but that the Allies
content themselves with taking some Places which he has formerly seized on,
with a design to amuse them to get time, as Mentz, Bonn, Keiserwaert, and
others, that are about his Kingdom; that would be doing nothing at all, seeing
the King has still his end, and that he holds those Places but to busy the
Allies during this first Campaign, either to tire them, or to drain them
through length of time, or to Alienate some. That is Lewis the XIV's chief end,
and the best Advice that he could take in such a pressing juncture, in which he
finds himself at present. But if that for his good, and for the ill of Europe,
he can break down the Dike, though the Breach be never so small, he will drown
all Christendom, and the last evil would be worse than the first. To avoid this
mischief, no Prince of the League ought to suffer any French Emissary in his
Territories, they ought to be Banished as Infected Persons, and not Pardon the
very first that shall be found, not sparing even the Church Men; those are
flying Plagues, who like stinking flesh Flies, infect all places they light on;
it is a dangerous Seed, which is to be rooted quite up.

The Allies ought not to be concerned at the great number of Men there is in
France, they are young Vipers that will eat a Passage through their Mothers
Belly to get at Liberty: Nor the Tenth Part of that great People have cause to
be contented, and the most sound part waits but for its Deliverance, on what
Side soever; and it may be said that Lewis the XIV. is not better beloved in
his Kingdom than James the II. was in his. It is certain, that when the Prince
of Lorrain shall appear before his own Subjects, they will receive him with the
same Joy that the English have received the Prince of Orange: I say the same of
Burgundy, and of the French County, and of diverse other People, who wait but
for the happy Moment of their Liberty.

The Second thing to be done, is a powerful Fleet, which the King of England is
to keep continually at Sea, that in conjunction with that of the
States General, he may be Master of the Sea, and not only give an Allarm on the
Coasts of France, but make a descent also in Two different places, so soon as
possible it can be done; then will that Kingdom be in a Combustion, and the
King of it will lose the North, not knowing what place first to Succor, as a
City that the Fire seizes in all Places; and those that shall Land there may be
assured to be Seconded by a great number of the Inhabitants, all along that
Coast, and from the Neighboring Provinces. William the III. now Reigning,
ought to be certain that his Predecessors have not for nothing preserved that
Title of King of France; the Rights of Kings never grow out of Date, they are
always Pupils, and at liberty to claim what has wrongfully been taken from
them. So long as England shall subsist, the Kings will have a double Right to
France, which will never be lost so long as Henry the V. shall have any
Successors to the Crown of England; he was Son to Margarite of France, and she
Daughter to Philip le Bell, whose Sons deceased without Successors to the Crown
of France, and that Henry, as a further Right, Married the Daughter of Charles
the VI. Being come to France, it was decreed by the States of the Kindom, that
he should be their King after the Death of Charles the VI. and in that Quality
the Queen his Mother in Law, made him Heir of all her Means, and of the Crown
of France. I am persuaded, that there would not need any thing near so much to
Lewis the XIV. to frame an irrevocable Pretension on England, and that the
Royal Chamber of Metz would very readily confirm it without the least trouble,
but there is no such thing; on the contrary, there has happened a time, in
which all the deceits and subtleties of France begin very much to unstitch, and
to be threadbare. William the III. has overturned the Bankers Tables, which
the French King's Emissaries had set up in all places; their false Coin is no
longer current; their Money is cried down, their Lewis D'Ors, which were
Worshipped as the Heathen do their Puppets, are grown odious to honest People,
at least the occasion of their Distribution; and they are no more capable to
corrupt at this time, than is the Copper of Sweede.

Thus France beginning to be cried down by all Christendom, and to be slighted
in all the Courts of the Princes of Europe, it has changed its Game, and
endeavors to imitate those ancient Curtisans, who being grown old and
withered, are cast off, and abandoned by every body, who alter the Passion once
had for them, which obliges them also to an alteration, in turning Biggots and
Superstitious, endeavoring to counterfeit Mary-Magdalen, thereby to regain
that esteem of the People which they had lost by their debauched Lives. Thus
Lewis the XIV. to draw on new Friends and Allies, the better to oppose himself
to the King of Great Britain; and perceiving that all his Credit with the
Catholic Princes is at an end, that none will any longer confide in him, and
that his Maxims are cried down, he has taken in hand other Means, much more
subtle than the precedent were; he no longer speaks to them of his own
Interests, but he now Proclaims to them, That they must come to the Assistance
of the Catholic Religion. That it was aimed at, when King James his Ally was
Attacked; and that he has no other design of making War, but for the support of
that dear Religion, especially by the re-establishment of that Prince on his
Throne; that if all the Catholics would but join with him, or remain Neuter,
that he alone will undertake to Re-establish him, and at the same time the
Catholic Religion, in England and Scotland, and after that, beat down Heresy
in its very Center. But all this while, Lewis the XIV. is far from telling what
he conceals under those specious Pretenses, which would be that after he had
pulled down William the III. overcome the Protestant Princes, he would do the
like to all the Roman Catholics, one after another, and thus become Master of
Europe.

It is certain, that the diversity of Religion has always been as a large and
vast Abiss, betwixt the Catholic and the Protestant Princes, but the Cruelty
and Perfidiousness of the French, has filled up that Abiss, and levelled the
way between them, and all difficulties are at present laid aside. Even the
French King himself, unknowingly, has given a help in hand to the Business,
with all his Power; for while he endeavors to persuade all the World, that he
has no other aim than to promote the Catholic Faith, and that he Preaches in
all places his Conversions, that he importunes the Pope to join with him for
the Defense of the Church, and just in the height of such a fair Mission, in
all appearance, he orders his Troops to enter into the Territories of the
Catholic Princes, to Attack those of the Prelates of the Church, and even to
insult the Pope, though Head of that Religion which he protests he would
defend, burning and destroying all over Germany, where his Troops but set their
Foot, without exception of Religion, nor of Persons, Sacrificing to their Rage
the most Sacred Places, their Insolence not sparing so much as the Monasteries
of the Virgins, devoted to the Service of God, nor their impiety the Image of
our Savior, and that of the holy Virgin his Mother, which they have Treated
with the greatest Indignation and irreverence that any Atheist could have been
guilty of, acting in all places like Men that had no Faith, and that
acknowledged no God; and all this too, as the whole World knows, against the
promised Faith of Treaties, and Capitulations, which they own they have agreed
to, but to enter the further, and with more ease into Places, and to put in
Execution their Wicked and Pernicious Designs; the King threatening to Cashier
those Officers that should not execute with all barbarousness, and exactly with
the last extremity, the Orders of the Court; as if they had been sent to put an
end to the World by Fire, before the appointed time by Divine Providence.

After all this, how can so cruel and so inhumane a Prince take upon him the
Title of Most Christian, and while that by an overplus of Crimes he joins with
the Turks to exterminate and ruin Christendom, assuring those Infidels, that
he has not taken up Arms but to come to their Assistance, and to procure them
the means to recover what they have lost in Hungary, and to return before
Vienna. It is no small trouble to that Most Christian King to have mist his
opportunity, during the last Siege of Vienna, not to have advanced with his Army
(which was ready at hand) into Germany, without expecting as he did the taking
of Vienna; but he then believing the loss of it inevitable, he thought he
should deferr his March but a few days, and the better conceal his wicked
Design, and that then the pretense would not only be plausible, but just also,
to all appearance, because it had been to prevent the Turks from entering any
further; but at the same time to render himself Master of the rest of Germany,
and of all the Empire also; which should have been his share toward the
defraying of the Wars; so he had divided with Mahomet the IVth all the
Territories, both Catholic and Protestant, of Germany. If after all these
Contrivances, one may style ones self a Zealot to the Catholic Religion, I
referr it to the Judgment of the Pope; let us then say rather, that he is a
Wolf in Sheeps Cloathings, covered with a false Piety, to devour the Christian
Princes one after another; That was Cardinal Richlieu's Maxim, Not to value
what he Promised, nor his Faith in the observation of Treaties, so he but
served the French Interest: And doubtless it is from those rare Lessons, that
this Zealous French King has so well improved, and which he endeavors to
imitate so exactly, before those of the Gospel, which forbid us to do to
others, that which we would not have done to our selves.

But if we look on Businesses nearer at hand, we shall not wonder at the King's
pressing for the Re-establishment of James the Second, and that he leaves no
stone unmoved, to reseat him on the Throne: We shall find at last that it is
not so much Religion as Interest that moves him to it, and that the return of
that Prince to his Kingdom, is most necessary for him, much more than the
Establishment of the Cardinal of Fustemberg, in the Archbishopric of Colen.
It cannot be believed that it is the natural affection which he has for those
two Princes that make him act, or the Zeal to Religion, as he publishes, but
his Ambition, and the Preservation of his Kingdom. For if Prince Joseph
Clement, and the present King of England, would but embrace the Party of
France, and Unite themselves with that Monarch, he would send the Cardinal to
Strasbourg, and King James where he was in Cromwell's time, or into some corner
of the State of Modena; and if the Town of Algier would now send Ships into the
Channel, he would not only harbor them with their Prizes in his Ports, but
would give them Liberty also to build a Mosque there, if that Town should
require it. I see no greater difficulty nor Crime in that, than in lending his
Forces to Re-build some in Hungary, and to pull down the Christian Churches.
These are then the fruits of this great Zeal, of which the French boasted in
Rome, and at Madrid. Now let us turn our faces toward Truth. It is not
Religion that pushes the French King, but he has the Shepherd at his heels, the
Nets are spread on all parts for him, and he has no prospect of escaping; and
in that dread he is, he would embrace the Alcoran, if he saw it would shelter
him from the new King of England's Resentments, whom he has reason to fear, as
the most dreadful and most powerful Enemy that he has at present, or ever had;
with whom there is no Composition to be made, though Lewis the XIVth should
return four times as much as he has Usurped from him, when he was yet but
Prince of Orange. Perceiving then, that by the means of William the Third he
has all Europe on his hands, and that he must leave some Fleeces behind him, no
wonder he extends his hands (though in vain,) toward the one, and the other,
to find out a Mediator, to draw him out of that Danger in which he finds
himself: But he, having taken his Eternal farewell of all Faith and Honesty, and
it having abandoned him, every body does the same, daring no longer to trust to
him, 'till first he has been deprived of his Savageness, of his Ambition, of
his Pride, and of his insatiable desire of Usurping the Goods of his
Neighbors; and that is what will not happen, 'till he has first been humbled
by Losses, either in his Armies, or of some of his Provinces; and that he has
been obliged to restore to every one that which he has stolen from them; and
that is what may be advantageous, and necessary for his poor People, and to all
Europe. In vain he Flatters himself with an accommodation with some of the
Allies, whom he pretends to divide from the Union in which we see them at
present, and by that means to draw himself out of the Briers.

This King has been inexorable to the Cries of the Poor, whom he has Ruined and
Tormented; of the Widows and Orphans, whom he has stripped Naked; the Heavens
will return it upon him, as well as all his Enemies; who will return him double
the Evil which he has done, and will force him to swallow down the bitter
Fruits of his Ambition, and breach of Faith, and to Disgorge all his
Usurpations which he has Baptized with the specious Title of Conquests; and
return to his Subjects that Liberty of Conscience, and places of Hostages which
he has forced from them, against the Faith of Edicts, under the pretense of
Conversions; restore to all his People in general the General States, for the
surety of their Persons, and Means, whereas they now groan under the heavy
pressure of the Intendants these are Monsters, which our new Hercules must
vanquish; which God has given to free Europe from that slavery in which part of
it was already reduced, and wherein the rest was going to fall, the Irons being
already set in the Fire for it, by the means of James the II. who abandoning
his own Interest, and that of his Nation, had given his Consent and Assistance
to the ruin of Europe; and had entered into a League with the Usurper, to make
it to fall under the slavery with more ease and greater expedition. But the
Heavens, who have granted the Vows and Petions of all Europe, has broken those
Chains by the means of a Republic, of which he had made his Prey; for it may
be said, without exageration, that the States of the United Provinces have
given the first blow to break those Shackles, through the Assistance they have
given of Money, of Forces, and of Ships, to the King of England, when he was
yet but Prince of Orange. Wherefore Europe ought to consider them as the Cause
of its Deliverance, and the Restorer of its Liberty, the Refuge of all the
Afflicted, the Retreat of those whom Lewis the XIVth had Persecuted, and
stripped; and the Azilum of all good People, who ought in gratitude to hazard
their Lives for the Support of a State, who has freed them from the Lyon's
jaws, and has received them with so much Humanity and Charity, which doubtless
shall be the Cannons with which they shall destroy their Enemies, and the
Heavens will render them Victorious, and their Names shall last to the last of
Ages.

FINIS.

