The TERMS of PEACE and RECONCILIATION Betwixt all Divided Parties.

A SERMON PREACHED at the ASSIZES HELD FOR THE COUNTY of BVCKINGHAM, AT THE
TOWN of WICOMB, JVLY the 1. 1684.

By LVKE BEAVLIEV. Divinity-Reader of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal at Windsor,
and Chaplain to the Right Honorable Sir George Jeffreys, Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
'TWas the desire of Sir Denis Hampson, High Sheriff of the County of
Buckingham, that I should Preach and Print the ensuing Sermon, wherein I very
plainly acquainted the Honorable Audience that heard it, with my thoughts of a
Sacred Text, and a Christian Duty.

Likely that worthy Gentleman judged it might be somewhat useful to promote in
others that affectionate Loyalty, wherein he is so Eminent and so Exemplary:
And I design it should; being fully convinced, that an humble Obedience, and a
hearty Love to the King, is under our duty to God, the best and strongest Link
to join us together in that Peace I here recommend.

Recommend it indeed I may, Curats of Souls can do no more, the honor of the
Success is due to the Divine Grace, and to the Care and Vigilance of Civil
Magistrates. They are the true and the most persuasive Preachers of the Public
Peace: for their Words have a strong efficacy by that Power and Interest which
they have in the World: And now, as the Case lies, People want more to be
Governed than to be Instructed, for what concerns their faithfulness and
submission to their Rulers.

More has been said for Loyalty within these last Hundred Years, by the Clergy
of this Church, than can be found in all former Ages united together. The
Jesuits and the Sectaries made it necessary, by all sorts of Arguments and
Reasons, to assert and press that Duty, which Natural and Christian Religion
had fully taught our Forefathers. Now the matter is Exhausted, and where
Demonstration and Exhortations cannot prevail, Authority must work; They that
will not be persuaded to be peaceable and good Subjects, must be Chastis'd, and
restrained by Laws and Magistrates.

If they that are trusted with the administration of Public Justice, have
courage and honesty enough to be Impartial, we see, thanks be to God, that they
can better work on turbulent Spirits, then the best of Books or Sermons which
are neither heard nor heeded by them that love and abett Contentions. True
Religion alone makes them Obedient and Peaceable, that are the true Sons of the
Church: Others must be dealt with by Fear and Government. Such Magistrates as
have so stout and strong a Zeal, for their Prince and Country, as to encourage
Loyalty, and to proceed as far as the Law goes, against ungovernable and
seditious Spirits, will make more Proselytes than all our Discourses and
Persuasions can do. So that I say, under the Divine Providence, the success of
all endeavors for Peace, is due to them that are in places of Authority, and
earnestly use their power for reducing all Men to Peace and Obedience.

Not that I would make Clergymen give over exhorting the People to live in
Peace and Christian Subjection; it is their indispensable Duty, and part of
their Office, as Saint Paul appointed. Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject
to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good
Work, to speak evil of no Man, to be no brawlers but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men. Neither do I count their labor in this to be vain, and
to no purpose. Though scoffers and profane and foolish men deride Religion,
yet it will ever have a very great influence upon the Affairs of this World.
There is, by our very Nature, a Sense of it impressed upon the minds of men; and
they are often led even to desperate attempts, by the mere show, or the
pretense of it.

So we found it by woeful experience, in the late Rebellion: And since, the last
Critical times made it too manifest, that Clamours about Religion could soon
inflame the Multitude. By them, our Schismatical Guides had disposed their
party ready, once more to fight out the Lords Battles: and the major part of
the People might have been hurried on to very unchristian and mischievous
Enterprises, had our Clergy either incited them, or but let them alone, without
restraining them with the sense of the fear of God, and other proper Arguments.

It Is true, the same Clergy were more earnest in preaching against. Popery,
after the sudden affrightment which the news of a Popish Plot brought upon the
Nation: But that was no derogation to their Peaceableness, and their most
faithful Allegiance, and it became them so to do, persuaded as they are, that
dangerous Innovations and Errors have been brought by the Church of Rome in the
Christian Doctrine and Worship. Knowing withal, that the Bishop of that Church
claims a Jurisdiction over all Kings and all Christians, and has condemned
them as Rebels that will not submit to his Yoke. This makes it their duty, at
some times to instruct their Charge, in the principal points of the
Controversy, and to alledg their reasons why the Communion of our Church is
much to be preferred to that of Rome: And the discovery of a Popish design for
our Ruin, attested, as it was, by the highest Authority of this Realm, made it
seasonable and very requisite no be more earnest at that time, against Roman
Errors and Encroachments.

We know that all the Dissenters, who make us Popishly affected, would blast
our Credit with the People: And then the duties of Loyal and quiet subjection,
and of asserting the just Descent of the Crown, in that order which God and
Nature, and our Fundamental Laws have prescribed, these would never have been
heeded nor received from us, had we not then declared our real aversion to
Papal Superstitions and Usurpations.

The same desires of Peace and of Obedience to the King and the Laws under
which we live, engage us equally against Papists and Dissenters. It Is not their
private Opinions, however absurd in themselves, that are to be chiefly feared:
but the tendency of their Principles, and endeavors to alter the frame of our
Government, and to bring our Sovereign under Presbyterian Synods, or Pontifical
Chairs. Our constant Loyalty and peaceable disposition oblige us to oppose
either of them most earnestly, who most presses upon the State, and is most
formidable and dangerous for the present.

Our truly Primitive and Christian Religion does all possible ways oblige and
engage us, to be true, affectionate and subject, to those great Officers whom
God has appointed to be his Vicegerents, to preserve the peace of the World;
we have in our public Prayers frequent Mementoes and Endearments of this Duty,
in our most solemn and devout Addresses to the Throne of Grace: And a true
Member of this Church, can never be an ill Subject. Therefore, as duty and
interest oblige Ministers of Religion, to assert and defend the Magistrates
Power: So, without doubt, the same reasons oblige the Magistrates to uphold and
maintain a Religion, which besides its guidance to Life everlasting, is so
proper and serviceable to preserve the peace of the World, and to make Men
obedient and happy, whilst they remain in it.

I know that Christian Religion was at first established and continued without
the help of Civil Magistrates. When Miracles were wrought for its Confirmation,
and Persecutions against it detered the looser sort from its profession, then
very few came in, but such as were true Believers, and such as would submit
themselves to the Discipline of the Church. But since Christianity became the
Religion of the Empire, and there were outward inducements to make even bad Men
to become Professors, still to trust even pretenders to vent what Opinions they
please, under notion of Preaching the Gospel: Now that we have so many Baptized
Heathen, who aim only at obtaining as much of this World, right or wrong, as
ever they can, still to let them cloak their designs under the name of
Christian Religion, is of dangerous consequence.

The rewards of Eternity will ever strongly affect humane minds, and must not
be suffered to be played with, to serve secular ends. When a crafty and factious
Demagogue shall terribly preach Damnation, or in a milder tone make Saints of
his party; he to be sure, will lead them where he will, and make them fight
with zeal, for what he calls Gospel, and Godliness. We have more than once in
this Age had experience of this, to some purpose. So that besides the Duty of
Princes, who under God govern the World, it is highly their Interest to
tolerate no Religion but such as teaches and disposes their Subjects to be
Peaceable and Obedient, and to submit themselves, according to the Example and
absolute Precepts of our Savior and his Apostles.

It might as well be asked, What need Laws and severe Inflictiens to maintain
Justice and Virtue, as what need they, to preserve Religion? A sense of both,
it is true, is impressed on the Mind, and by their own excellency they recommend
themselves: But Humane Nature is depraved, there are evil passions and
affections which will dispose some men to call Justice and Religion what ever
they would have, though destructive and contrary to both. So that every man in
these things, must not be his own Judge. After having seen our Royal Martyr
taken and destroyed in this snare; after having our selves lately escapt it
narrowly, I can find no reason, why any Friend to what is Established, should
still countenance Dissenters, and endeavor to shelter them from being reduced
to Obedience: Except he would have a Backdoor for a retreat in case of
Discontent: And find a party ready-made wherein he may be formidable, if he
happens to be angered.

When the Execution of our mildest Laws against Separatists, would easily bring
them into a Church against which they have but a few frivolous exceptions, and
into which they can come of themselves upon design or occasion; when in that
Church they would be taught to love their Governors, and be peaceable and good
Subjects, and their separation from it is seen to be so dangerous, and of so
ill a consequence, as sad experience has taught us: I cannot think, that any
man who truly loves the King, and would have us quiet and united under his
gracious Government, would either help to perpetuate our Divisions, or refuse
to do his utmost to bring us all to comply with the Laws.

It is for our good in this World, and if Christianity be true, it is infinitely
our concern in the next, that we should live in Peace and Subjection, under our
Magistrates: Consequently whatever names they take, they that act or speak
against this, are so far enemies to man's Duty and Happiness. It can be neither
a good, nor a tender Conscience, nor any thing of Religion that makes men
Contentious, and alienates their minds from that affectionate submission and
respect, which God has commanded to be paid to Princes.

I would have this noted, to vindicate our Blessed Lords humble and peaceable
Institution; for the bottom of most of our Disputes, and of all our oppositions
and murmurings against our Governors, is really a faction and a wordly design.
There Is nothing of Christianity, nothing but what is against it, in all the
Noises and Clamours, the Lies and the Libels, and all the bustle and
proceedings of those seeming Zealots, who lately affrighted and almost
destroyed us. Plainly, all this tends in no wise to the design of Christian
Religion, which is to make men here like the God of Goodness, and to bring them
to live with him for ever.

But all men have not Faith. There are many who will be called Christians, who
believe not that our Lord Jesus Christ shall Judge the World in Righteousness,
and shall sentence all men to Joys or Sorrows eternal, according as they here
observed or disobeyed his Laws. Such incredulous men make use of Religion to
compass their worldly designs: and are seldom so ingenuous, as to declare that
they intend only to be great and rich in this World, and that they regard not
what our Savior has revealed of the retributions of the Day of Judgment. So
the Gospel comes to be charged with the miscarriage of such as believe none of
it, but are rather its greatest Enemies.

Christianity disposes men for Peace, makes them humble and lowly, meek and
obedient to their Superiors; it is Irreligion and corrupt Nature makes them
otherwise. He that suffers as a turbulent or undutiful Subject, as an evil doer
or a busie-body in other men's Matters, suffers rather as an Unbeliever, than as
a Disciple of Jesus.

I do believe that the discouragements and the sufferings which Religion and
good Men that love it, must struggle with here in this World, conduce to the
good of the Church, and to the glory of God. That opposition they meet with,
who fear God and honor the King, from Hypocrites and turbulent Spirits, gives
them an occasion to exercise many Christian graces, shows their sincerity, and
makes them more zealous for their duty. But yet fain would we see Jerusalem in
Prosperity, all our life long! a good and pleasant thing it is, Brethren to
dwell together in Unity! Truth and Peace are secured and highly promoted, by
being countenanced and protected by Magistrates: So that, as we wish and
endeavor to have their Power reverenced and submitted to: we also wish and
pray, and count it a mighty Blessing, to have it used for our defense, whilst
we do our Duty, and for the advancement of true Religion and Virtue.

And may they never want the hearty Prayers and Affections of good Men, who
under God and our gracious Sovereign, are useful and instrumental, by the
execution of our wholesome Laws, to keep us in that happy quietness we now
enjoy: That we may live and die, and afterward rest in Peace for ever.

A SERMON On
ROMANS xii. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with
all Men.


NO wonder if by Peace the Hebrews understood all sorts of Blessings, and by
wishing Peace one to another, meant all Prosperity and Happiness: For the very
notion which Men have of it, includes a freedom from Molestation, and a
satisfaction and acquiescence of desires; that no Assault or Vexation should
come upon us from abroad, and that Content should dwell within.

Accordingly we find that all Men seek and desire Peace, even the most
turbulent and restless earnestly covet it; those Wars and Contentions, and that
mighty Bustle that is in the World, is all to obtain Peace.

But men generally are in a great mistake about this, they would have every
thing comply with their own will; if they might command all the World, then
they would proclaim Peace to it, and by receiving a tribute of Obedience, they
would release others from the trouble of Contention. Their great labor for the
most part, is to carry it in every thing, to have their Humor pleased, and to
bring under subjection whatever crosses their designs.

As to the thing it self, the worth and desireableness of Peace all Men are
agreed, only as to the methods and ways how to obtain it, most of them are
wrong. They all know it deserves their utmost endeavors; but how it is to be
had, and wherein it consists, few only understand.

Of this then, I shall assay to give some account, and to explain the Text, by
answering first some Questions about the Sense of it. And then making
Inferences, for our better understanding and observing of the Duty, If it be
possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably mith all Men.

To apprehend rightly the design of this Exhortation, these three things may be
enquired into. 1. What peace it is this World is capable of? 2. What it is thus
to live peaceably with all Men? And lastly, How far it lies in every one so to
do?

For the first, The meaning of this Apostolic Precept, is not that in all
things there should be the closest union, and the most tender endearments
betwixt our selves and the rest of Mankind. We must not aim at this, we should
lose our labor, the World is not capable of such a Peace.

Our Savior said, That his Doctrine would occasion great Divisions, and that
he came to send a Sword. Meeting with the depravations of Humane Nature, and
opposing of them, even the Gospel of Peace causes many Contentions, and what
should unite Men together, makes them fall out and become Enemies. As long as
there are disorders in Humane Affections, men must fall short of peace.

Our peace here below, is rather a disposition and a tendency toward it, than
its full enjoyment: And it consists properly, in the submission of our selves
to God, and a serious care to comply with our Duty. The foundation of our peace
is Self-denial; the being humble and subject, as becomes such dependent and
weak Creatures to be. It Is not to command all, and have others resign
themselves to us; peace never was, never can be obtained this way, by any
mortal Man, except he could become omnipotent. For if he owes his being and his
preservation to a Power above him, if he has a Lord in Heaven, then his
submission and obedience are the conditions of his peace, with God, with
himself, and with other Men.

So peace with God, is the result of a good Conscience, when a Man reflects
upon his hearty desires and endeavors to please him, and to approve himself to
the Searcher of Hearts, by a sincere observance of his holy Laws. Peace with a
man's self, includes mortified Affections kept within due bounds; the taking up
the Yoke of Christ, and the Consciousness of a good and upright intention. And
peace with our Neighbors, depends upon the justice and ch^rity of our
Intercourse with them; to love them as our selves, and do by them as we would
be done by; to give to every Man his due, and what we can, wish and promote his
happiness and well-being. Any swerving, or prevarication from these Rules
prescribed by God, disturbs or breaks our peace; it is grounded upon a careful
attendance upon our Duty: And it is always imperfect, because our performance
of it is always defective.

That peace of which this World is capable, or a good Man whilst he remains in
it, is not sit to above others, and have things at wish, without trouble or
molestation; the aiming at this, is the cause of all Wars and Disorders here
below. Peace here consists in obedience to God, in seeking and ensuing after
it, by eschewing evil and doing good, as we are commanded: As men are more or
less zealous and intent upon this, so they have more or less of that threefold
peace I mentioned,

As for the perfection of Peace, it is only for Just men made perfect; it is the
felicity and proper enjoyment of the heavenly Jerusalem. Here as much of peace
as comes to our share, consists in aspiring and endeavoring after it; in
following those ways of Virtue and Holiness, which lead to Heaven; and in
bearing, by true goodness, the Image of the God of Peace, in whom alone we can
obtain perfect rest and satisfaction. The true peace of which this World is
capable, is the submitting our selves to the Will of God, and making it the
Rule of ours.

And this will help us to answer the second Enquiry, What it is to live
peaceably with all Men? That it is not to awe the World into a subjection to
us, and make them say as we say: As some Conquerors, who could make the very
Oracles give such Responses as they pleased. The measures of Public Peace must
not, cannot be our own will, nor our own desires.

Neither also is peace to be obtained by complying with every Man. To make our
selves all things to all, without restriction, would rather engage us into the
Quarrels of every one that dissents from others, than beget Concord and Union.
What a miserable Changeling or Dissembler must he be, that would take part with
all he meets, in their several Designs and Opinions, which are so opposite and
contrary to each other! to be of one mind in one place, of another in the next
Company! This would mightily multiply the Follies and Inconstancies of Men,
without preventing their Contests, or their Divisions.

Saint Paul did not design these Christian Proselytes whom he exhorts to live
in peace with all men, should with the Gentiles Sacrifice to the Idols, or with
the Jews be Circumcised, or any way comply with sinful Practices, to be at
Unity with the rest of Mankind. He no doubt intended, they should without
changing, remain steadfast in the Christian Doctrine, and own the Truth as it is
in Jesus, without denying or dissembling any part of it. We may say that his
meaning was, 1. That they should be careful to observe those laws of Justice
and Charity, which regulate the Intercourse and Societies of Mankind. And, 2.
That where they were free, they should so condescend and comply with each
other, as to endeavor to prevent Fewds and Contentions.

First, I say, to live peaceably with all men, includes the careful observance
of those Laws which secure the just rights of every man, and provide a supply
for their Necessities. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another; discharge
all Obligations with Care and Conscience. It is the violation of Justice, the
not giving to others what is theirs, that begets Clamours and Contests, and all
the consequent Mischiefs. Render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. This is
a good foundation for a solid peace, for a man thus diligently to acquit
himself with others; to deprive them of nothing to which they have a good
Title. When they have no ground to challenge any thing from you, it will go a
great way to secure you from their Molestations.

And if with this, you have a due regard to the duties of Charity, to do men
Kindnesses, and to relieve their Wants, as far as lies in your power. By your
Prayers, your good Advice, your Credit in the World, or your bountiful Alms, to
promote here their well-being, and their Eternal Happiness; then you are come
up to those terms on which depends the Amity, and fair Correspondence of Men;
making thus the dictates of Reason and Religion the measure of your Intercourse
with others, you may be said to live peaceably with all Men.

Only add this further, which I said might be included in this Apostolic
Precept, that where Men are free and left to themselves, they should condescend
and comply.

Very manny Quarrels proceed from inconsiderable Trifles, things of no moment,
but as they are much stood upon by perverse and unreasonable Passions, the
foolishness of a proud, an angry, or a stubborn Spirit; a little Prudence, or
Humility, or Charity would prevent such Disputes: and the spirit and temper of
true Christian Religion, would soon compose and make an end of them.

If where Men are not tied by Laws and Duties, they would be willing to recede
from their Right; not always to consult the utmost of what is lawful, but also
what is expedient; every man to please his Neighbor for good to Edification;
go as far with others as they can without Sin; condesend to their innocent
Weaknesses and Humors: And show forth, out of a good Conversation their works
with meekness of Wisdom; as St. James speaks, That Wisdom which is from above,
and is pure and peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits. This, no doubt, would prevent, or at least terminate many of our
Wranglings and Contentions. And he that will live peaceably, must also resolve
upon this, where it will interfer with no other Duty, to yield for Peace sake,
what others cannot claim as due: and to forgive and forbear as well as to do
Justice.

The doing of this, is properly the living peaceably with all Men. He that
seriously resolves, and sincerely endeavors, to observe what God and Nature
require in order to Mutual Quietness, has done his part. Of his side he is
ready to embrace others on those terms to which he is tied by Duty; to go as
far to meet with them, as lawfully he may; he entertains no dividing
Principles; he is at peace with all the World, as far as in him lies. A man can
do no more, and this is the Duty of the Text. Not actually to have peace with
every man, though never so unreasonable or unjust, that is impossible: But to be
of this peaceable disposition; to own and discharge those Obligations which lie
upon all Men, in order to Mutual Agreement.

And this makes the resolution of the last Enquiry very plain and easy: How
far it lies in a Christian to live peaceably with all Men?

He cannot force them to what he would, nor to what they should; He may not
part with God's Right, nor any man's Right to comply with them: He can only do
his Duty, and offer them peace upon the Terms of his obedience to the Laws of
God, and the lawful Commands of his Superiors.

For those Laws must not be infringed to please Men. I may abridg my self of my
Liberty, and even put up some Wrongs, and where I alone am concerned, I ought
to do so, in many Cases: But where I am tied by a just Authority, I must not
break the bonds of my Subjection to please my Fellow Subjects; I may not any
ways disobey God to buy peace with Men.

Where St. Paul says, If it be possible, live peaceably with all Men; he means
Morally possible. Possumus quod jure possumus. Where we may without
transgressing our Duty, without prejudice to our Obligations to God and man,
there it is in our power, and we must do what we can to have Peace.

Indeed that may not procure it. When we have done our best, and all that
lawfully we may, still Divisions and Quarrels may remain. The word Peace is a
Relative, and implies a Mutual Correspondency; that there are fixed, and known,
and standing Terms in which Men of all Sides should agree. So that where so
many are concerned, one alone can no more make Peace and Union, than one single
Note of Music can make an Harmony.

But it is not our fault, if others will not comply with those Laws of Mutual
Agreement, prescribed by Reason and Religion. Actual Peace is a Blessing, and a
great Felicity, but not a Duty; it is too Divine an enjoyment for this state of
Imperfection: It is reserved to Crown our thirst and pursuits after it. Here
our Obligation is only to peaceableness; to be just and ready to do good; to
induce others what we can to join with us in the Methods and the Measures of
Peace; to oppose and mortify those Inclinations in us, which are Selfish and
Partial, and provoking to others. Thus to rule our Conversation, and to dispose
our Hearts, is the Duty of the Text. And is as much as lies in a Christian to
do, that he may live peaceably with all men.

Now these three Queries satisfied, and the Text thus far explained, we may
ground upon what has been said, these three Propositions, to be briefly Stated
and Discoursed upon, for the further pressing of this Exhortation; to do as
much as possibly we can, to live peaceably with all Men. 1. That Public Laws
are the true Terms of peace amongst Men. 2. That they are the peaceable Men who
Maintain and Obey those Laws. And, 3. That if the Laws command what is sinful,
there a good man must suffer meekly, and still preserve Peace.

1. That Public Laws are the Terms of peace amongst Men. The Laws of Nature
and of Nations amongst Mankind in general: and the Laws of each Kingdom amongst
the Subjects of it. And to this last I restrain my Discourse.

Were there not public standards for Weights and Measures, the intercourse of
Trading would be Impracticable, and Extortions not to be prevented: And if the
variable and inconstant Wills of Men were not restrained and limited, Humane
Society would of necessity be dissolved, and all Order banished out of the
World.

God Almighty himself in the Government of the Universe, appointed Laws
according to which Nature moves. That there might be in that infinite variety
of Creatures and Changes here below, such Rules and Uniformities, as that he
should not need do things by a particular Will; except in the case of Miracles:
But leave the Material World under the guidance of his own wise Constitutions,
to go in ways Determinate and Constant, without uncertainty and without
Confusion.

So besides his own Appointment, we have also his own Example, that Laws and
Prescriptions are the best means of Peace. And experience confirms the same,
that if Men were not determined in their principal Concerns and Actions, their
Passions and Apprehensions being so uncertain, and oftentimes so opposite, they
would be in a worse state than the Brutes. Some must choose for others and
confine their Freedom, otherwise Men would come upon the Stage of the World,
like the offspring of the Dragons Teeth, only to Fight and Destroy one another.

I may not (it seems) take, nor do what I would, nor have mine own will; and I
would not yield to my Neighbor in all things. Each of us would command, and
has the same claims and pretentions. Here then commenceth a Quarrel never to
be decided, except a third Person, with power does enterpose, and Judge, and
determine betwixt us. This is the use of Laws and Magistrates. Single Persons
may be brought to agree in their submission to Authority, who for ever would be
at odds among themselves, were they left to their liberty.

And so, to make an Agreement, it is not to give every man his own Humor;
That Is the very ground of all Dissension: But to make them all yield to a
Common Master, who shall be Umpire betwixt them. God Almighty therefore made
but one Man at first, that he might be Sovereign over all his Posterity, as
long as he lived; that from him the Elder of each Tribe, might be a Prince over
all his Kindred: and that no two Men might ever be found in the World, Free,
and equal Competitors, without a Superior to decide betwixt them. Government is
not the product of Experience, and an after-invention of Man's Wit, upon a Pact
and Covenant: but it is the express and primary Institution of God, by whom
Mankind were bound to Obedience, by their very coming into the World.

Indeed, if there were no Laws, there would be no Transgression properly so
called: but then, neither would there be any peace. The worst, the strongest,
the most violent, would soon Tyrannize, for men left to themselves will no more
be just, than be of one mind. And the Dispute is not really, whether or no
there must be Laws, but who shall make them? Most men will claim that
privilege; and that leads back to Confusion, as much as having none at all.

So that I say, what is stated and already in force, must determine our
Actions, and receive our Obedience: except we would bring our Communities to
the state of the first Matter, to be a Caos without form.

That the standing Laws under which we live, are the Principle and the Measure
of our peace; that in them we may meet and rest, when in our own Notions and
Inclinations we cannot, we have (blessed be God) besides other Reasons, a fair
Instance of it in the happy Change in the state of things, amongst us, since
Laws have resumed their Vigor, and been more carefully put in Execution. Those
endless Fears, and Jealousies, and Complaints, and endeavors for a Change,
which so much disturbed the Nation, are in great measure quelled: And men are
returned more calmly to mind their own Business, and, I hope, to serve God
better, since Obedience to Government has been more strictly Exacted.

This late Experiment, confirms strongly what I Plead for, and Demonstrates
clearly, that it is not by indulging to Peoples Humors, by Tolerations, and
leaving the Bridle loose upon their Necks, that they are to be united. If
thousands of Soldiers were to be brought to the same place, and to join in the
same Design, they are not to be Disbanded. They would soon be dispersed, and go
straggling about, were they left to their liberty: but if they are under
Command, they are united in their Ways and Works, who never would be so, in
their Choice, or their Opinions.

We see that where there are fewer things determined by Law, and Men enjoy but
the empty name of Republican Liberty, there is generally a standing armed Force
to awe them into Subjection and Quietness. And we cannot but remember, that
they that Buz'd it here, into Peoples Ears that they were Freeborn, when they
were got into Power, did keep it with the terror of the Sword, and allowed
leave to none any ways to dissent from them; well knowing, that had the People
indeed been left to their Freedom, their own dominion and booty would soon have
been snatched out of their hands.

Men may Confederate to oppose Government, for that in its Dissolution they
hope for a Prey, and to Scramble for some share of it: But they must be forced
together into Peace and Order; they never of themselves conspire into that. And
if the present Laws were but Obeyed quietly, till others could be made by
general Consent, and all were Agreed: they would be as Firm and Unmovable, as
the Foundations of the Earth.

If we would have peace, it must not be by living without Control, and having
every one his Will: but by submitting that Will to Authority, and yielding to
the Wisdom and Decrees of public Constitutions. It Is not in the Enlarging of
Peoples freedom, but in the Abridgment of it, in which consists the nature and
essence of Peace. The Terms of it are Laws; Humane Laws for our Intercourse one
with another, and many of our outward Actions: And where we are free from
these, the Laws of Christian Prudence and Charity. Bound we are in every thing;
Bound even to make a right use of our Liberty: And it is our Obedience either to
God or man, that can alone keep us in Peace.

This brings us to the Second thing I laid down as a Consequent, of what was
said for the Explaining of the Text. That they are the true peaceable Men, who
Maintain and Obey the Laws.

It Is not a demure Countenance, nor a grave and formal Deportment, nor yet
speaking softly, nor pretending friendliness to the World, that makes a man a
Peacemaker. It Is not the assuming fine Titles, nor the charging others with
having Arbitrary Designs. These things look plausible, and may beguile some:
but they are no establishment for Peace. They rather unhinge what is
Established; they leave every petulent Man to his own distinct Will, and his
own distinct Interest: And that is the spring of Wars and Confusions. A man by
Nature may be unactive, and seem very quiet; yet if he holds or abets Dividing
Principles, if he lessens the Reverence of the Authority of Laws, he does
weaken the bonds of our Common Union, and he really disturbs the Public Peace.

If we should see Officers of Justice pursue a Criminal, break up Doors, and
ransack Houses, whilst the guilty Wretch lurks silent and without motion; if
when he is taken, and they hale him before a Magistrate, we should hear him
declare how he desires to be quiet, if they would but let him alone; charge
them with being Rude and Violent, and with disturbing Persons that meddle not
with them: This might be thought specious enough, and the Malefactor outwardly
would appear more liker a Man of peace, than those that seize and arrest him.
Yet all this while it is most certain, that they are the Preservers of the
common Tranquillity, and he the Disturber of it, notwithstanding his soft
Language. So that I say, It Is not the outward show, nor the Complaints of such
as break the Laws: but the Dispositions and the Principles of the Mind, that
make good Men to be truly peaceable.

If a Christian has enough of Humility, and of Gods fear upon his Heart, to
make him deny his own conceits and his own desires to submit to Authority, and
square himself, not by his own Humor, but by that Rule which is prescribed to
all, then he has in him the true principles of Peace: And by his Obedience, he
joins with his fellow Subjects in the same Laws and Orders, when perhaps, by
his own Will and private Judgment, he might be at unity and peace with no Man.

And this gives us the Character, as of a peaceable, so of a moderate Man,
truly so called. That it is not he that halts betwixt two, and pretends
friendship to the Law, and to the Transgressors of it, and would not oppose nor
disoblige any man, in vindication of his Superiors, nor endanger himself to
assert the Justice of their Cause, when it is like to be oppressed. He that goes
half way with the Government, to show he is not so stubborn as some, and then
stops and goes no further, to show he is not so rigid and high-flown as
others: He that complies so far with his Rule, as to hold as fair
correspondence with the Conforming Side; and so far complies with those that
Dissent, as to have their Friendship also; such a one is by some esteemed a
quiet and moderate Man, who would be in neither Extreme.

But I say, it appears clearly, that Moderation consists rather in Submitting
our selves to those whom God has placed over us. For the Lords sake, and for
Conscience sake, as the Scripture commands, to obey every Ordinance of Man: And
in all things that are not against God, to yield meekly to their Determinations.

There is naturally so much of Pride in every Man, that he would be glad to be
uppermost. And who would not rather have his own Will, if he might without Sin,
than be overruled by a Superior Command? I know not how it is with others, but
for my part, I should count it a fine thing to depend upon no Body, to do what
I list my self: And amongst all the Rules and Prescriptions of Government, to
pick and choose what I like best.

But certainly there is more of Self-denial and Moderation, to act contrary
perhaps to my own Wisdom and Desires, in yielding Reverence and Obedience to
Laws and Magistrates, and restraining my own Inclinations to choose the
Injunctions of my Governors for the rule of my Actions.

But that it should be called Moderation, for a Subject to Obey but by halves,
and to do his Duty very untowardly; to make it a matter of Commendation that a
man has no great regard to the Laws, nor no great affection to his Prince: To
say that a Child is moderate in his concerns for his Parents, and in doing what
they bid him, this is an odd way of speaking. That a man transported with
passion when any ways injured; fierce and troublesome before Humane Tribunals,
for a few Pence of his: That such a one should be called Moderate, because he
cares not whether the Government sinks or swims, and he will not engage himself
to vindicate and defend it; I say, this is an odd way of speaking, and begets
in the Minds of men a strange notion of a Christian Virtue.

It is in their private concerns, in bearing and forbearing out of Charity to
others, in showing a contented Spirit, in receding from their Rights and their
Opinions to buy peace: It is in these, that good men may approve their
Moderation. Submit your selves one to another, and be clothed with Humility.
This submitting our selves to our Equals, where no Law requires it, is indeed
one part of Moderation: But then no doubt, the other is, Submission to our
Superiors. The making our own Interest and our own Passions stoop to the Laws
of those Higher Powers under which we live; the appearing in defense of their
Rights and their Persons, and espousing their Quarrels with more Zeal than our
own. This shows that a Man is concerned for his Duty more than for his own
Will: And this gives a much better account of the virtue of Moderation, than
the being but coldly affected toward our Governors, and the being partial and
defective in our Obedience to their Laws.

He certainly is the great Peacemaker, who by his Example and Persuasion, and
Power and Interest in the World, brings others as much as he can to the known
and standing terms of Public peace; That is, to comply with the Laws. A good
Man that has Prudence and Temper may compose some little Differences in the
Neighborhood, and it is very well so to do: But he prevents greater Mischiefs,
and is a more public Benefactor that endeavors to Unite a Nation, by bringing
them to make the Laws, the Rule of their Actions.

In order to make things even, and fit to be joined, it is not to bend the Rule
according to the Obliquity of each one, that would leave-them as they are, as
crooked and as unfit for Union: But it is the bending the things themselves, and
bringing them to the streightness of the Rule. So the Laws which are the
public measure of Actions, must not be made to yield to every one, whose Will
or Opinion makes him dissent from them; that would make no Agreement nor no
Settlement; that would leave all things loose and uncertain, as contrary to
each other, as men's Tempers or Notions are. Whereas making Men yield
themselves, and fit their Actions to the prescript Rule, and so far deny their
own Will as to order their outward deportment by the public Standard: That
makes Uniformity and Order, in things material and of public Interest; and in
others, Men must govern themselves by Discretion and Charity.

A due regard indeed is to be had to our Brothers, to be tender and
Compassionate toward them, to give them, and to forgive them of our own: But
that must not abate of our Obedience where it is due; we must not rob our
Rulers to give our Fellow Subjects.

Suppose we for Example, that a Family be so divided, as that some of the
Children rise up against the Parents, and whilst they make them Contemptible,
and raise loud Clamours against them, seek, as is usual, to propagate their
Discontents, and to ingratiate themselves with the rest of the Family, by
pleading the common Liberties of all. What shall they do now, that are not
engaged in this undutiful Quarrel? The rest of the Brothers that are willing to
be subject to Paternal power, must they excuse or favor this Mutiny? or remain
indifferent out of Moderation and Brotherly Kindness? No, doubtless. In other
Cases they might be neuter, or offer to arbitrate the Dispute: But here, God
and Nature have engaged them on their Parents side; they are to maintain their
power, and by all lawful means, to reduce their undutiful Brothers to the same
Obedience. They are freely to blame their proceedings, and to show them the
iniquity of the mischief of them.

What usage must we expect from our Fellow Servants, should they shake off the
yoke and become Masters, when we see them contend against their Governors, and
refuse to yield where their Duty requires it? If they have so much of Pride, or
stubborn ill Nature, as not to bend their Will, and submit their Humor to that
Authority God has placed over them, they must be looked upon as common Enemies,
and the Disturbers of the Peace. Undutiful Children must be plainly told so,
even by their Brothers, be they never so kind, where such Contentions do arise.

And this is a more likely means to make up the breach of a Family, than to
hold in some things with one, and in some things with the other, and so
perpetuate the Quarrel, out of tenderness not to disoblige either side. Union
can only be had by the Concentring of many different Wills into subjection to
one, whom God has set above the rest. Then if the Children fall out among
themselves, the Father decides the matter: But if any of them fall out with
him, who shall judge betwixt them? Nothing remains but Confusion, where the
means and bonds of Order are rejected.

And so clearly he is the peaceable Man, and the true Peacemaker, not that
holds in some things for Obedience, and in some thing for the Disobedient: But
he that Conforms himself to the Laws, and asserts their Authority; subdues his
own Spirit to the Determinations of his Governors, and does what he can, bring
others to the same Submission; that there may be one common Rule for all, which
is that which we call Order and Unity.

But then Thirdly, What shall they do that cannot comply with some Laws, not
because their Will or their Interest is against them, but because their
Persuasions are not satisfied, and they have Objections and Scruples unremoved?
Must they act against their Conscience, and Obey where they firmly believe they
ought not to do it? No, by no means. They must suffer meekly what the Sanction
inflicts.

This is my last Proposition, and a thing absolutely requisite in order to
public Peace. That where the Laws enjoin what is Sinful, there a good Man
without breaking or endangering the common Tranquillity, must Submit himself to
the Punishment.

Blessed be God, this is far from our Case. The very stating such Suppositions,
implies something of Ingratitude against God, and the just and easy Government
of our Gracious Sovereign: But I speak it only to prevent the Objection of such
of our Fellow Subjects as complain and are uneasy, and would insinuate that
this is our Case.

I say then, If it be clear and evident to a Man, that the Declarations of
Humane Authority are against some plain and express Commandment of God, there
he must choose God's Will rather than Man's: And yet submit to that Power God
has Ordained over him. The same Conscience, the same Duty to God, requires his
patient Subjection; and that he should never resist: as that he should
transgress an impious humane Injunction: As Daniel did; Dan. 6.10. Acts 4.18.
and the Apostles; and all they that have endured Persecution for
Righteousness. That is, he must Suffer for Well-doing; and thus still remain
dutiful to God and to his Prince.

This is not in the case of Doubts, much less of Ignorance, where Men sometimes
entertain Aversions and Dislikes, and know not for why. Nor yet in the case of
Wisdom or Expediency, where a Man might censure the public Constitutions as
inconvenient, and fancy he could appoint better. Though many upon these
accounts are forward enough to be Factious and Clamorous, yet few will be
willing to Suffer peaceably. It must be where we cannot obey Humane Laws
without disobedience to God: Then for Conscience toward God, to endure Grief
suffering wrongfully, this is a good proof that a Man is truly persuaded he
cannot Conform without Sin; This is highly acceptable to God, and he will
reward it. And however, this Patience and Resignation of him that Suffers,
preserves the peace of the Community: and no doubt, does also preserve the
peace of his own Mind.

The Conditions of Peace and War, are the highest Prerogatives of Kings and
Supreme Magistrates. They may appoint the common Terms of Union and Agreement
for a whole Nation, and by what Rules Men shall Govern themselves: But a
private Person judges for none but for himself only. So that when he Dissents
from the Laws Established, he may not by Noise and Complaints make Parties
against them, nor excite Discontents, nor Resistance against those Higher
Powers that have Imposed them. That would be to make his private Judgment
superior to that of public Authority. That would put it in the power of every
one that pretends Conscience for not Obeying, to null Laws, and to be very
troublesome.

A Man must take great care that his Conscience be well informed, and always
guided by God's Will: And then in following of it, when it leads him against
public Decrees, he must do it with so much Humility, and so much Meekness,
that it may plainly appear it is upon God's account, he disobeys and Suffers
patiently; he must Conform and Comply, as far as ever he can, without sinning
against God; and he must be passive where he may not proceed further. For still
he is but a Subject, who must be overruled by the Will of his Superiors; still
the Government remains in full Force, and he is bound to preserve Peace, and
therefore passively to Submit himself to the Laws, which are the known and fixed
Measures and Conditions of it.

Saint Paul here and elsewhere, recommending peace with all Men, intended not
to bind Christians to observe all the Laws of the Roman Empire, of which some
were against Christianity, and others for Idolatry: He rather obliged them to
meek and patient Subjection, to undergo the Infllictions of those evil Laws,
without disturbance to the Commonwealth. That they should not be provoked to
any Rebellion or Undutifulness against their Governors, by their grievous
Sufferings: but still for Conscience sake, to bear what Laws and Providence had
imposed upon them; and still to be faithful and peaceable Subjects.

There are no other Terms of peace with Magistrates, but either to obey the
Laws, or to undergo the penalty of their Transgression: So that where their
duty to God kept them from Active Obedience, there the Apostle would have them
so to dissent from their Rulers, as not to trouble the Order and the
Tranquillity of the place where they Lived. That is, as he tells them plainly
in the following Chapter, Romans 13.
absolutely to be Subject, and never to Resist, under the pain of Damnation.
That they might be acquitted from any Stubbornness, or Pride, or Rebellious
Principles, by their free Obedience in all that was lawful; and their humble
patience under all sinful Injunctions. By this 'twas to be manifest, that they
were disposed to render every Man his due; to give Caesar the things that were
Cesar's; to be Friends to all Men, and to live peaceably with them, as long as
it engaged them in no Rebellion against God.

Answerable to this, was ever the Behavior of Primitive Christians, under
those tedious and cruel Persecutions they endured for Three Hundred Years. And
had the Temper and Principles of such as pretend to be the best of Christians,
in these latter Times, been the same; we should have had more peace. And those
Excellent Laws under which we Live, and which oblige us, to Fear and Worship
God, and to Honor the King, and to be Just and Charitable to all Men; these
would have been better obeyed.

I wonder for my part, how they can so delude the People, as to get the names
of Godly, and good Patriots, who under such an equitable and gracious
Government as is here Established, yet are Discontented, and Restless, and
Clamorous, and always dissatisfied with public Constitutions: And very busy,
sometimes very fierce against those Laws which keep us in peace, and make us
very happy, if we knew our own Happiness. When besides our present Interest,
our whole Religion, the very Spirit of Christianity is so directly contrary to
all Murmuring, and Faction, and Unpeaceableness, it is very strange they should
take such good Names, that do things so ill, and so very mischievous.

But no more can be done from this place, than to show People their Duty. That
the Laws are the Measure of our public Peace, and the Foundation of it. That
they are most peaceable who make those Laws, in things lawful, the Rules of
their Actions; and who by their Power and their Interest in the World, maintain
their just Authority. And that if a good Man should live under such wicked
Laws, as should be contrary to his Christian Duty, there he must be patient,
and suffer for his Allegiance to God: expecting a reward from him that has
bound him to be Subject: still preserving the Reverence and Submission due to
his Governors; and showing himself desirous of peace, and ready to embrace it
upon any terms that are not an offense against God.

In these a Man must show his peaceable Disposition, if he be really a
professor of the Gospel of Peace: As also in receding from his Right in lesser
matters; in making allowance for Humane Infirmities, in being Gentle and
Charitable, as well as Just to every Man.

These are apt to win Men, and to prevent or compose Contentions: Or however,
public Peace, which may be called Peace with all Men, is secured by yielding
to Authority, and being subject to those Laws, which are the common Bonds and
standing Conditions of peace.

As certainly, Christians, as that we must one day give an account for what we
do here upon Earth, it will be one of the great Enquiries, when we shall all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and there receive according to our
Works, whether or no we preserved that Order and Subordination which God
appointed amongst Men; whether we moved in our own Spheres, and minded the
proper Duties of our several places: And sad will be their Doom that were here
Contentious, and caused Murmurings and Confusions in the World.

There all such workers of Iniquity, who by their power or Hypocrisy escaped
here the hands of Justice, shall meet with a severe Vengeance; and have their
portion for ever, with those proud and rebellious Spirits who would not be
content with that station, wherein God had placed them. None but Meek and Just,
Loyal and Peaceable Men, shall be numbered among the Saints of God, and enjoy
for ever that Rest he has prepared for his People.

We are all going to the Grave, where we must be quiet. After all the Bustle
and Hurry, and Clamurs and Contentions of this World, we must dwell in Silence,
and one by one go to receive that Irreversible Sentence, upon which depends an
eternity of Bliss or Misery. Let us then becalm our Passions; and compose our
Spirits; and by Lowliness and Humility, and Obedience to God, and Subjection to
those that Reign by him, secure a lasting peace to our Immortal Souls.

Fear and Terrors seize upon evil Minds; There is is no peace to the Wicked.
They that disturb the World, and are mischievous to Mankind, are themselves
like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, they live in a perpetual Storm.
Where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil Work. But
blessed be the Peacemakers, for they are the Children of God; Peace and
Felicity shall be their portion for ever.

There is no need I should Tire you further, with laying before you the many
Obligations which Nature, and Reason, and Religion, have laid upon us, thus to
endeavor after Peace: And how much our prosperity in this World, and our
happiness in the next, are concerned in this our Duty. We cannot look into our
Consciences, nor into our Bibles, but we find declarations of this. We all know
it to be true; I pray God we may find it seriously, and practice accordingly.
That he that came to teach us to deny our selves, to mortify our Pride, and
our stubborn Humors, and so make a Reconciliation betwixt God and us, and
Unite us together; that he may now so guide our Feet into the ways of Peace,
that we may here enjoy that blessed Legacy he left his Servants; as an earnest
of that Eternal peace which makes the Bliss of Saints above, and the earnest
desire and endeavor of good Men here below:

Amen, Peace upon Earth, Glory to God on High.
FINIS.

