IMPRIMATUR.

September. 19. 1687.

JO. BATTELY, Rmo in Pri. ac Domino Wilhelmo Archiepiscop. Cantuar. a Sacris.
domesticis.

A DISCOURSE SHOWING That Protestants are on the Safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; AND That THEIR RELIGION is the
Surest Way to Heaven.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

The PREFACE.
COming accidentally into a Family always frequented, and of late much
disturbed by some Roman Catholics, who by fulminating Damnation against all
Protestants, had terrified some Friends, I applied my self to clear their
Doubts, and to remove those Fears wherewith the Noise and Threats of Hellfire
had affected their Minds; This engaged me into a long Debate with one of the
Parties who was very positive and earnest in maintaining the utter
Impossibility of being saved out of the Church of Rome. And upon that it came
to be enquired, Whether it be their Relation to Rome, or their Relation to
Christ, that Men are to be saved by? Whether our State of Eternity depends upon
the Talk, or Confidence, or hard Censures of Men, or or upon the Truth of our
Religion, and our Sincerity in professing of it? Whether it be the ever-living
God, or any mortal Men that make true Religion? Whether that be not the Best
which best agrees with the Divine Revelation? And, whether our Savior had
referred us to Rome, and the Papal Authority, for the knowledge of Saving Truth;
or plainly taught by Himself, and by his Apostles, all that is requisite and
sufficient to Salvation?

About these we differed: but yet agreed upon the whole, that the great odds in
point of safety, which they apprehend to be betwixt them and us, must be
grounded upon the Excellency of their Religion above ours; and must therefore
appear in their Faith, Worship, and Morals, which are the essential parts of
Religion, and make it right or wrong, according as they are themselves.

The Talk I then had about this Subject, and the occasion of it, put me upon
writing the ensuing Discourse. Wherein my chiefest Aim has been to fix my
Reader upon that which is positive with us, and is maintained on all sides,
that being altogether requisite, and of it self sufficient to make a Man a good
Christian: And then to consider those Points in belief and practice, about
which we differ, and to show on which side lies the Advantage for means of
Grace, and certainty of Salvation.

The INTRODUCTION.
THE Church of Rome would not only have all her Dictates received as Divine and
true, but would likewise have nothing received as such, but what she delivers;
insomuch that her Writers would persuade us that we can have no Assurance of
the Truth of our common Christianity, because we receive it not from the
Infallible Chair, and rely not on its Authority for the proving of it. As if a
Man could not know, and firmly believe that Jesus Christ came into the World to
save Sinners, without so much as having heard any thing of a Roman Church and
her Infallibility. And as if those great Truths which God has revealed were
not to be embraced and assented to, because they are his, but depended upon the
good Pleasure of a Party of Men, who can no more add greater Authority to what
God has declared, than they can make their own Sayings of an equal Authority
with God's.

We can admit that Church for a joint Witness with other Christian Churches,
that the Bible is the Word of God, and that the Christian Creed is the
Catholic Faith: But there is no reason to think, that any thing is the more
true, or the more necessary, merely because she says it. That which is equally
attested by all Christian Churches, who were all Depositories of the Divine
Oracles, and of the Christian Religion, has a cogent and a clear Evidence: But
that wherein she stands divided from all the rest, and bears witness only to
her own Prerogatives, is either true, because she asserts it (which none will
dare to say) or ought to be proved by the Testimony of the whole Christian
Church, and of Divine Revelation, which she can never do.

So we have this great Advantage in those things which we assert as Points of
Saving Faith, that we have the plain and express Words of Holy Scripture, and
the Concurrence of the whole Church: whereas those things which we reject, are
made a Creed only by one particular Church, not above one hundred Years agone,
and have no Ground in Holy Writ.

Some may dispute with us about our Rites or Discipline, or some abstruse and
disputable Points: But for that Faith whereon we ground our Hopes of Salvation,
nothing can be objected against it. It is the same wherein every Christian is
baptized, the same which was before the Reformation, and before the Want of it;
in Times of greatest Purity the same Faith was professed, and in the worst of
Times, under the greatest Corruptions it was still preserved: and that not in
one Kingdom, or only here in the West, but in all Patriarchates, and in all
Christian Churches in the World. We have neither added nor diminished, nor made
any Alteration in that Rule of Faith, which is the Badge and the Ground of
Christianity. So that as to this Point, our Religion is now as it was long
before Luther: We have no other Creed than that which was universally professed
all along. Our Dispute with the Church of Rome is about their new one, made
since Luther, and professed no where else but in her Communion; that we cannot
embrace. It has neither the same Authority from God nor from Men, as has the
Catholic Belief.

To make this plain here, I set the two Creeds at large, to be consulted as the
Reader finds occasion.

The Catholic and Apostolic Creed, explained by the Nicene and the
Athanasian, in what concerns our Savior's Divinity, but never enlarged until
the Council of Trent.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.

He descended into Hell: the third Day he arose again from the Dead.

He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand of God the Father
Almighty.

From thence he shall come to judge the Duick and the Dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost,

The Holy Catholic Church,

The Communion of Saints,

The Forgiveness of Sins,

The Resurrection of the Body,

And the Life everlasting.

The Roman Creed.
I Most steadfastly admit and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, with the rest of the Constitutions and Observations of the Roman
Church.

I also receive the Holy Scripture according to that sense which the Holy
Mother Church (whose it is to interpret it) has held and does hold; nor will
ever understand or interpret it otherwise than acccording to the unanimous
Consent of the Fathers.

I profess also that there are seven true and proper Sacraments of the new
Covenant instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary to the Salvation of
Mankind (tho not all of them necessary to every Man) viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony,
all which do confer Grace; and whereof Baptism, Confirmation and Orders cannot
be repeated without Sacriledg.

I likewise receive and admit all the received and approved Rites of the
Catholic Church in the solemn Administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments.

All and every thing which was defined and declared about Original Sin and
Justification by the most holy Council of Trent, I embrace and receive.

I profess likewise that in the Mass is offered to God a true, proper and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead; and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is really and substantially the Body and
Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ: And that
there is a Conversion made of the whole Substance of Bread into his Body, and
of the whole Substance of Wine into his Blood, which Conversion the Catholic
Church calls Transubstantiation.

I also confess that under either Kind or Species only, whole and entire Christ
and the true Sacrament is received.

I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory; and that the Souls there detained
are helped by the Suffrages of the Faithful.

As also that the Saints, who reign together with Christ, are to be worshipped,
and prayed to, and their Relics to be venerated.

I most firmly assert that the Images of Christ, of the Blessed Virgin, and of
the other Saints, are to be had and retained, and that due Honor and Worship
is to be imparted to them.

I also affirm that the Power of Indulgences was left by Christ to his Church,
and that the Use of them is most salutary to Christian People.

I acknowledge the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church to be the Mother
and Mistress of all Churches: And I promise and swear true Obedience to the
Pope of Rome, who is Christ's Vicar, and Successor to St. Peter the Prince of
the Apostles.

I also without doubt receive and profess all other things delivered, defined
and declared by the sacred Canons and Occumenical Councils, especially by the
most holy Synod of Trent; and all things contrary to them, with all Heresies
whatsoever, condemned, rejected and cursed by the Church, I likewise reject,
and condemn and curse.

This true Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be saved, which at present
I freely hold and profess, I will (by God's help) constantly retain and confess
entire and inviolable to my last Breath, and take care to the utmost of my
Power, that the same shall be taught, held and professed by all under me, and
whose Care shall belong to me in my Office. I the aforesaid N. promise, vow and
swear it: So help me God, and these holy Evangils.

This Roman Creed it is about which we differ: for as to the Christian Creed
there is no Dispute betwixt us; only that we account it sufficient, and will
profess none else.

This is the State of the Difference betwixt the Church of Rome and ours. We
stand for that Faith which is confessed of all sides to be truly Catholic and
Apostolic; and disown that Roman which they would impose upon us.

I know that they seek to retort this Objection of making of new Creeds, and
would make the distinct Denial of the several Points of theirs to be in like
manner so many Articles of ours; as if it were with us as fundamental a Truth,
that there is no Roman Purgatory, as that the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all Sins: Whereas it is most apparent that the Negative of false
Opinions does in no wise become a Part of the Christian Doctrine, nor of the
Christian Creed.

True Religion is not to swell in Proportion to the Increase of Errors, for
then every new Addition to Christianity would make a new necessary Article for
the rejecting of it, and it would be in the Power of every Heresiarch to
enlarge the Rule of Faith against him. Whereas the Christian Faith was once
delivered to the Saints, and must ever remain the same, whatever Heresies some
Men are pleased to broach. That Saints and Images are to be worshipped, is a
Point of the Roman Faith; that they are not, is not a Point of mine; it is only
a Declaration of my disowning this Roman Doctrine, as being neither in the
Christian Creed, nor in the Word of God. The refusing of Men's Errors, whether
they be Pagans, or any Heretics, is not a Part of our Belief, but rather of
our Disbelief. Our denying that Jupiter, or Great Diana, or any Creature,
though never so solemnly canonized, are to receive Religious Honors, is only a
renouncing of Men's Devices, but does not constitute so many new Doctrines; only
what God has commanded in this case, is Part of our Religion, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Our Creed and Religion therefore is still universal, and truly Primitive,
although our rejecting some Points which they have made Part of theirs in the
Church of Rome, can be neither so Primitive nor so Universal. What our Church
owns for her Saving Belief, is owned, and ever was, by all Christian Churches;
what she rejects from being such, is of a later Date, and was never so general.
So that instead of asking us, Where was our Religion before our Forefathers
were forced to leave the Roman Church? it should rather be enquired, why they
threw off those several Tenets contained in the Roman Creed? and then the
Question would be plain and fairly stated, and might from every Man that has
but read the Bible, receive a clear Answer. But it is very unreasonable to
demand such Authorities for refusing of any new and absurd humane Inventions,
as for the receiving those Truths which God has expressly revealed, and his
Church received all along.

As for the Vices or Virtues of King Henry the 8th, or any others, who were
engaged to struggle with the Papal Power and Usurpations, they signify nothing
to us. The enormous Faults of such as are reputed Supreme and Infallible Guides
of a Party may well reproach them: But our Religion has no dependence on
Historical Passages of any Men's Doings. God's Veracity and Revelation is the
Ground we depend upon; Him we worship, and in Him we believe, as is to be seen
in our Public Liturgies: For that we claim the Warrant of his Word, and the
Suffrage of all Christian Churches, than which no better Ground, nor no higher
Authority is ever to be had. If the Roman Creed had the same, we would embrace
it heartily, for the well-being of our Souls; or if it were less repugnant to
the Christian Institution, we might be persuaded to comply, or to be silent,
for the Peace and Tranquillity of our present Welfare.

But my Design is only to settle and to pacify them that are staggered and
disturbed with the ruder Noise of Damnation dashing against them; and therefore
I will pursue things no further than to show, That neither the Judgment of our
Adversaries, nor any thing wherein both Churches disagree, any ways endangers
our future Happiness: But that as to the securing the eternal Welfare of our
immortal Souls, ours is to be preferred before the Roman Communion.

A DISCOURSE showing, etc.
THE Concerns of Eternity being so tremendous, and many not so well instructed
as they should, it is no wonder if some Men are frighted with the fearful
Sentence pronounced against them by the Zealots of the Roman Party. To any Man
serious or timorous, Threats of Damnation are terrible, even in the Mouth of a
Mortal Creature: Though it only betrays the Presumption of any sinful Man that
dares sit on the Tribunal of his Almighty Judge; yet because some are so tender
and so weak in this Point, as to be much disordered and dismayed to see
themselves adjudged to Hell, though it were but a Dream or a melancholy Fancy;
therefore it may be worth the while, briefly to state the Case, and consider on
what Grounds they proceed that so freely pronounce our Doom. And I doubt not
but to make it appear that we want only their good Word, or also their good
Will, when for Safety and a sure Foundation we are at least as well as they. It
may surprise and startle to see one stare, and with great Confidence denounce
that you are a dead Man that cannot live an Hour; but having recovered your
self, and reflected upon it, you pass by without further Harm, and smile at the
Humor. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. Who art
thou that judge another?

Our entire dependence is upon God, as well for the state of Eternity as for
the present. We do not fall, when we go hence, under a new or an unknown Power,
neither are left to Men's Mercy: but the same God by whom we were taken out of
our Mother's Womb, and to whom we were left, when we hanged yet upon her
Breasts; he that took care of us, and provided for us here upon Earth, is still
to dispose of us in our future State: And we shall be judged by him, by whom we
were made and redeemed.

This God whom we now serve, and under whose Almighty Dominion we must ever
remain, is infinitely good, He would have all Men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the Truth. Therefore he does not seek Advantages against them,
nor lay Snares in their Way, nor wrap up his Saving Light in Obscurity, but
deals with them in much Mercy, making that Grace of his which brings
Salvation appear unto all Men, that they may know the Way to Life, and clearly
see what they must do to obtain Eternal Happiness. This, God shows Men by that
Revelation he has made of his blessed Will, how they ought to walk and to
please him: Therein all things necessary are very plainly expressed, that they
may be understood of all. And for a further Help and a greater Security to Men
of all Capacities, a Summary of Divine Truths, such as are fundamental and
needful, was by times made and propagated, together with the Christian
Religion, over all the World. So that we have the Word of God, and the
Apostolic Creed, both of them always attested by the whole Christian Church,
as two firm Pillars, whereon to repose our selves. That we might be strong and
immovable in the Faith, assured that we are not imposed upon by our Guides,
and that length of Time has made no Alteration, but that we hold now the same
things which were taught by Christ, and received of his Church; and that we
make nothing necessary to Salvation, which from the Beginning was not so.

First, then, The Word of God contained in the Holy Bible is, by Consent of
all, that Saving Truth of God by which we must live, and by which we shall be
judged; so that whatsoever is there written, is to be embraced as certain, and
as coming from God. Whether it relates to the Creation and the Government of
the World, or to the many Wonders which God wrought in former Ages, to deliver
his People, and to confirm and attest his Revelation; or to the Fall of Man and
the Promise of a Savior; or to his Mission into the World, and his
accomplishing the great Work of our Redemption; or to the Gospel-Promises, and
Doctrines and Mysteries; or to Laws and Rules of Righteousness, and
Institutions of Divine Worship; whatsoever it relates to, it is to be embraced
with an humble and obedient Faith. Nothing is to be questioned that is
contained in the Bible; all humane Authorities and humane Reasonings must
submit to it, for the Bible is the Word of God.

Go into all the World, and you shall find all Churches every where assert the
same as well as we. The Jews concur with us in the Divine Authority of the
ancient Oracles, before our blessed Lord's Coming: But all Christians in every
Part, and in every Age of the Church, embrace and reverence both the Old and
New Testament, as the Book of God, wherein are contained the Declarations of
his Will, and the Words of eternal Life. If you enquire what they thought of
it, in the first or second Ages after our Savior, or at any other time; or if
you go to the Eastern or African Churches, or any the most remote Place where
Christianity is professed, you shall find all agreed in this, that the Bible
contains the Doctrine of eternal Salvation, and is the Word of God. This is not
a thing wherein the Greeks differ from the Latins, or Protestants from the
Papists; but is the firm Belief of all. This is a most constant and invariable
Tradition, which for Extent of Time and Place is universal, and therefore of
the greatest Credit, altogether unquestionable.

So here is a very great Number of Divine and undoubted Truths agreed upon by
all the Christian World; even all the plain and clear Propositions contained in
Holy Scripture. Although they be of things not seen, that are past or to come;
yet being there revealed, they are assented to by all. And he that should deny
any of them, would be condemned by Christians of all Communions; his refusing
to acknowledge the Truth of any Contents of the Bible, would be interpreted a
Denial of God's Veracity, because they are all persuaded, that the Bible is the
Word of God, written by the Guidance and the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit.

He that rejects this Foundation on which all Christians are grounded, ought
never to concern himself in the Differences among them, nor pretend to be of
any Church; for by his denying the Truth of that Revelation which they all own
to be Divine, and whereon they rely, he makes himself an Infidel, and a Party
against them all. And yet if we could see to the bottom of Things, I doubt not
but it would appear, that the Disputes and Contentions which are among
Christians, are most eagerly promoted by such as deride those great Truths
which they all own to be fundamental. They that jointly believe the Truth and
the Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture, are set to wrangling among
themselves about some of its most obscure and unnecessary Places, by them that
believe none of it; and for not mutually embracing and practicing upon those
most important Points whereon we are agreed, we expose those Doctrines of our
common Salvation, which we all profess, to the Contempt of the profane and
incredulous World.

Secondly, The other Pillar which together with the Holy Scripture, strongly
Supports of our Faith, is the Christian Creed. We find also for this the same
Consent of all Christian Churches, they are unanimous in the Belief and
Profession of it, and hold all its Articles to be those great and necessary
Truths without which none can be saved. Whereas the several Contents of the
Bible, although equally true, yet are not of an equal Concern, and are too
numerous to be carried in mind: There was a Collection of those principal
Points which are necessary to all, drawn and appointed from the Beginning, as a
Form of sound Words, or a Summary of the Christian Saving Faith. This we call
the Apostles Creed, and this, I say, in all Ages of the Church, and in the full
Extent of it, has been received as a Confession of that Faith, without which
none can be saved. Go to Rome, or to Geneva, or among the Lutherans, or the
Moscovites, or the Greeks, or Ethiopians, as many as call on the Saving Name of
Jesus, do thus make Confession of their Faith in him. Besides that each Article
is very expressly and in many Places revealed in the Holy Bible, here is the
unanimous Agreement of the whole Church from first to last, in every Nation,
and every Period of Time from the Days of Christ, that this is the Badge and
Cognizance of a Christian Believer, and that the Profession of this Belief is
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, which shall endure to the End of the
World. Into this Faith, and none other, all Christians are baptized, in all
Communions, thereby to be made Members of Christ's Catholic Church, and Heirs
of everlasting Life, if they keep it unto the End whole and undefiled.

Thus for the believing any of those Points contained in the Apostles Creed, or
any of the Histories, Promises or Commands delivered in Holy Scripture, a
Christian has the best Warrant he can have for the Belief of any thing upon
Earth, even the joint Attestation of the whole Church of every Age, who
testified publicly, and sometimes sealed their Testimony with their Blood,
that the Bible is the Word of God, and the Creed is the Faith of Christ.
However Christians have fallen out about other things, as to these they are at
one. The Belief of this engages you into no Dispute with any. Here is a very
great Number of most mavelous Transactions, and gracious Promises, and
righteous Laws, and important Predictions which are owned by all to be Divine
and infallibly true. Your Belief and Profession of these depend not upon your
Fancy, or the Opinions of private Guides, or the Tradition of your Country, or
of your Party, but upon the unanimous Witness of millions of wise and good Men,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all those numerous Christian Societies
dispersed over the World, which make up the universal Church.

Here is enough owned of all sides to make up an happy Agreement betwixt all
Churches; The having the same Bible, and the same Creed, is a very firm and
large and lasting Foundation for Peace. Here are all things that are of the
greatest Moment for Faith and a good Life, for the Service of God and the
Salvation of our Souls, every where received and professed. He that should weigh
the Importance of each of those Truths which are acknowledged by all, would
wonder what it is that can divide Christians, and make them so fierce and
uncharitable one against another. We see Bigots of different Communions damn
and destroy one another, as if they were not Partakers of the same Nature, and
joined together by owning the same God and the same Savior, and all the
chiefest Articles of the same Religion. Besides Men's Ignorance and Malice and
intemperate Zeal, no account can be given of the unbeseeming Contentions of
Christians among themselves; but that the things wherein they differ are of a
present Concernment, for Wealth or Dominion. Secular Interest and humane
Passions no doubt have made the Breach, and they that secretly laugh at all
Religion, and neither regard the Creed nor the Word of God, set on the Zealots
to dispute, and for their own Ends make use of the Contention; when all this
while there is a vast Collection of Truths for Comfort and Contempt of the
World, for Meekness and mutual Love, professed to be firmly believed by all
Parties engaged.

But as Men are always craving and pursuing new things, rather than they will
make an Estimat of what they have received, because they love to extend their
Desires, rather than to be satified, and to be thankful; so they rather choose
to wrangle and dispute about the meanest Punctilios wherein they are at odds,
than to rest in the greater things wherein they are agreed, because they love
to talk and to contend, better than to practice and embrace each other.

This unsettles some Men that they know not what to believe, and gives great
occasion to the profane to despise Religion, as if all the Talk about it were
arbitrary and uncertain; they magnify the Variety of Opinions, and make as if
the whole were matter of Contest, when they see the Contenders act as if they
were agreed about nothing. Whereas I say, all the great Articles have always
been unquestioned, notwithstanding the Peevishness of some, and the ill Designs
of others, still the same Rules of Holiness, and the same Points of Belief,
have remained constant and embraced by all: The same Divine Revelation and the
same Christian Faith have every where prevailed, and in the midst of all
Disputes been preserved and acknowledged. So that the whole Substance, and all
the necessary Parts of Religion, have always been sacred, confessed and
reverenced by all Christian Churches.

The twelve Articles of our Creed, and all the uncontroverted. Truths revealed
in Holy Scripture, make up a Body of Divinity, so full, so excellent, and so
comprehensive, that if we compare it with the Uncertainties and Dissentions
that were every where in the Heathen World, at the first preaching of
Christianity, we shall look on its Professors as very harmonious and very well
agreed. There were never so many things so Great, so Wonderful, of so infinite
a Concern to Mankind, so strongly attested, or so firmly believed by such
infinite Multitudes of civilized and knowing Men in all Parts of the World, for
so many Ages together.

Here is a Foundation whereon every good Christian may build Peace and Charity
toward all his Brethren, of whatever Countries or Communions they be, and may
establish a sure Hope of eternal Happiness to his own Soul: if he does heartily
profess and obey those undoubted Truths which are embraced and acknowledged by
all Christian Churches. He that is fully persuaded of the Truth of
Christianity, and willing to depend for his Salvation upon that plain and
essential Part of it, which is confessed by all, and to lay the great Stress of
his Hopes and of his Obedience upon his Creed, rather than upon controverted
Points; he has what will comfort his Soul, and encourage him to live well; and
he is safe, peaceable and unmovable in the midst of all Divisions: he may be
doomed, and called Names by them that would impose their Opinions as Articles
of Faith; but it does him no harm, whilst he stands firm upon the Rock of the
Christian Creed, and the Christian Life together.

These two are acknowledged of all sides, to be both requisite and sufficient
to Salvation: Faith and Works together making up the whole Condition of that
Gospel Covenant, to which is annexed the Promise of eternal Life. Therefore in
enquiring why they are all condemned as Reprobates, that are not of the Roman
Communion, we must consider what are the Advantages peculiar to that Party.

I. Whether their Faith be more ancient and Catholic.

II. Whether their Worship be purer, more conformable to God's Word.

III. And whether their Righteousness exceeds that of all others.

I. I begin with that Faith which is peculiar to Rome, and is at large set down
in the Introduction. It indeed contains more Articles than that of any other
Church, and it may still receive further Increase, whilst their Popes and
Councils can make and impose new Definitions as necessary; but we believe that
Saving Truths are neither made by Men's Authority, nor evidenced by Number. We
are contented with that Faith once delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and
from the Beginning received by the whole Church, and for this are declared
Heretics, and adjudged to Perdition.

That Roman Faith about which we differ, is made so essential and so necessary,
that their Converts are appointed by the Roman Pontifical, in answer to the
Bishops Questions, that reconciles him to make an express Profession of it; and
if he were a noted Heretic, even to swear to it; condemning all to Damnation
that embrace not the same; and promising that if ever he acts or believes any
thing contrary to that Oath he takes with both his Hands on the holy Evangils,
he will submit himself to the Severity of the Canons.

Although we be so far agreed with the Church of Rome (as has been seen
before) yet they lay so great a Stress upon their new Creed, and derive so much
of their Devotions from it, That it is an astonishing and formidable Change to
pass from our Church into theirs. Besides the Surprise of their public
Worship, which by a great Variety of Ceremonies, Images, and the Latin Tongue
appears very strange: They have a prescribed Form of reconciling Heretics, to
which none can submit, but they that are fully persuaded that those Opinions,
which became a Creed since the Council of Trent, are Part of that Saving Truth
of God, which must be believed and professed under Pain of eternal Damnation.

It is not, as some may fancy or perhaps are told when solicited to change,
that they shall find it very easy, and be received upon what Terms they please:
But the Church of Rome, as all other wise Societies, has its fixed Rules and
Forms, and follows them without taking Notice of the Talk or Thoughts of
private Persons. There is nothing can justify the Change, or make it tolerable
to a Man of Conscience, but the being convinced of the Truth and Necessity of
these Roman Doctrines, which thitherto were no Part of his Creed. When he has
searched and used all proper means to understand the Points in Dispute, and to
satisfy himself, and finds himself thoroughly persuaded that there is no
Salvation in our Church, and that the Belief and Worship peculiar to the Church
of Rome are truly Christian, and the necessary Terms of our Acceptance with
God, then is he obliged to follow his Light, and to make Profession of what he
believes to be Truth. But till a Man be thus convinced, his forsaking ours to
join with the Church of Rome is a great Prevarication against God and Men, that
will make him odious to both, and be inexcusable here and hereafter. The formal
Abjuration of all that the Roman Church does condemn, and the solemn Profession
with a sacred Oath of all her Religious Doctrines and Practices in their full
Latitude, (as is pretended in the Roman Pontifical) should make every doubting
Person amonst us very serious and very inquisitive, clearly to know what he
does leave, and what he must embrace, if he resolves to forsake ours, and
embrace the Roman Communion.

The case will be much more tolerable with them that were born and educated in
that Persuasion, if they are in a Mistake; they having never professed, nor
perhaps had means to know any thing else, is a Plea of which they are not
capable, who grown to Years of Discretion, turn from one Church to another.
These had need take great Care that they deal uprightly, and examine to the
Bottom of things, otherwise they mock God and Men, and must expect to fare
accordingly.

I do not deny, but that Persons of Understanding and Sincerity may be
prevailed upon to pass from ours into the Roman Church, for whilst Men are
mortal they may err and be imposed upon: And may they all obtain Mercy that
truly fear God, and embrace what they judge to be his Truth, (though they be
mistaken) I only say, that no Man educated amongst us that really believes his
Christian Creed, and would not throw his Soul away, can make Profession of the
Roman Faith, till he becomes fully convinced of its Truth and Necessity. For
now it is not as it was before the Council of Trent, when the Church of Rome it
self had no other Confession of Faith, but only the Christian which is common
to all Churches, and those Opinions which have since become Articles of the
Roman Faith, needed not be explicitly professed, if they were but let alone and
not disputed against: Whereas now since Pius the 4th, Heretics so called, that
become Proselytes, must make a solemn and express Declaration, that they
believe every thing that the Church of Rome does either teach or practice, and
that they will submit and conform entirely to all that she prescribes either
for Faith or for Divine Worship. This I say no Man of Conscience or Honor can
do, till he become equally persuaded of the Truth and Necessity of the Roman,
as of the Christian Creed.

Confidence proves nothing, and makes nothing to be really Divine, and we all
know that Religion is not what some Men will call so: neither can we believe as
we would, or as we are bid; we must have sufficient Reasons that those things
are from God, which are proposed to our Faith; so that persuaded, as we are, we
might for Temporal Designs play the Hypocrites and dissemble, but we can never
become Proselytes to the Church of Rome. And whilst we have reason to believe
that those Articles of Faith, which are peculiar to that Church, are rather
contrary to God's Revelation than contained in it, and so think it our Duty to
disown their Roman Creed: We are so far from apprehending our selves to be in
danger of Damnation for so doing, that we rather believe we should incur that
Danger, if against our Persuasion and Conscience we should solemnly protest and
declare those things to be our Belief and our Faith, which indeed are not so.

How just and material are our Objections against each particular Doctrine
which Rome would impose upon us, is to be seen in many of the late Treatises
upon those Subjects: So here I shall give no further Account why we reject the
Roman Creed, than by making upon it these three general Reflections, which
alone might be sufficient to prove that it can in no wise be necessary to
Salvation.

1. That the Roman Creed seems to be calculated for the Meridian of This World,
rather than for the obtaining the Happiness of That which is to come. The
Christian Creed does make no Man greater or richer here on Earth; it is a
Profession of our Faith in God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which unites us to
him, engages us to love and to serve him, and to confess Christ before Men,
and obey his Gospel; the end of it is to make us hope well and live well, to
give us Comfort against all Sorrows, and Strength against all Temptations. But
the Roman Creed makes the Roman Court very great and very rich, and makes Men
have a great dependence upon it. It establishes those Opinions which much
advance the Roman Dominion, making Rome to be the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches; engaging Men to submit entirely to her, in embracing all her
Traditions and Constitutions; and obliging all hers that have any Power, to use
it to the utmost, to bring all Men, as they are able, under her Obedience.

Then for Gain you have several Articles, the Doctrine of Purgatory, and of
Indulgences, the Worship of Saints and Images, which does not exclude Gifts and
Oblations to them; and the Sacrifice of the Mass offered, as they are paid for
it, for the living or for the dead; besides all the Appeals to Rome and the
Bulls and Expeditions from it: Read their whole Creed over again, and you will
clearly see that it all makes for the Empire, or the Profit of Rome. It Is a
shrewd Suspicion that they that have made it, and imposed it upon the World,
did therein regard their own Advantage more than the Truth of Christian
Religion. When the old universal Christian Creed makes all for the Honor of
God, and for the Sanctification and Salvation of human Souls, and this new
particular Creed is all for the Glory and the Power of Rome; who that has not
resigned up his reason, but will be forced to think, that the one is to bring
Men to Heaven, and the other to bring Profit to Rome.

2. A Man will be so much the more confirmed in this Opinion, when he shall
observe that the Roman Zeal is all turned this Way. The Endeavors of their
Zealots are much greater to make Men of the Roman Persuasion, as to the
controverted Points, than to make Christians in what we are all agreed: and
amongst them a Man that believes the Bible and the ancient Creeds is as much
damned and hated as if he were a mere Turk or Heathen. Their Proceedings
against them whom they call Heretics, have been more bloody and violent than
against mere Unbelievers; as if owning the same God and Savior, and the same
Articles of Hope and Redemption were nothing, except we also own the same
Submission to Rome.

It may be reckoned as an Instance of their great Earnestness to progagate
their Creed, that their later Miracles, for more than these five hundred Years,
are all in the behalf of it. The Faith once delivered to the Saints, was
evidenced by those ancient Miracles recorded in the Bible: But this Growing
Faith of Rome is recommended to Peoples Belief by later Wonders, such as their
Legends and Breviaries, and many Books of Devotion contain. I need not say that
many of those Miracles here in the Western Church are so dubious and
ill-contriv'd, that they make little for the Credit of those Doctrines which
they are designed to vouch: I only note that they are all intended for to make
credible those Points of the Roman Faith which are destitute of the Testimony
of God's Word, and of the Universal Church: and that if we had not better
Miracles, and much better attested, for the Proof of that Religion that came
from Jerusalem, than they have for that which came from Rome, Libertines would
not want an advantageous Plea to justify their Infidelity.

And, 3. We may add, that this Roman Creed is both new and confined, whereas
the Christian is as Catholic as the Church it self; that is, is equally
extended to all Times and Places, was ever every where received, and is now
professed in all Churches, and in all Parts of the World. Instead of this
Universality for Ages and Extension, the Roman Creed bears date, 1564, and
being dated from Rome, is professed by none but those of that Communion, which
are but few, in comparison with the rest of the Christian World. So that if you
pass into the African, or Greek, or Eastern Churches, which are vast and
numerous, you shall find no other Creed but that of the Apostles, explained by
the Nicene and the Athanasian; if in some of these Places they have some of the
Roman Opinions, or some of their own as doubtful and new, yet they have no
other Confession of Faith, than as we have in our Reformed Churches in the West.

Nay even in the Church of Rome, in the third Session of the Tridentine
Council, 1546, they made a Decree, that according to the Example of the
Fathers, they would make a Confession of that Faith which in ancient times had
been an impenetrable Shield against all Heresies, which alone had been used for
the Conversion of Unbelievers, for the Confusion of Heretics, and for the
Confirmation of the Faithful; and then repeated the Nicene Creed and no more;
declaring, That that was the express and formal Faith of the Church of Rome,
that Faith which is the Principle of Christian Unity, and the sure and only
Foundation against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail.

Happy had it been for the Christian World, if this matter had so remained; and
the Roman Articles under Pius 4. eighteen Years after, had not been made a
necessary and essential Part of the Catholic Faith. However it is to be
observed further, that even now in the Roman Church, when they baptize Children
or grown Persons, they use none but the Apostles Creed; and to make them
Members of Christ and of his Church, and Heirs of his Kingdom, oblige them to
the Profession of no other Articles, but those that are the ancient Confession
of Faith common to all Christian Churches. Nay, more, whilst they live in that
Communion in all Acts of Worship, and when they die in it, and are to make the
last Confession of that Saving Faith, of which they soon expect the End and
Consummation, they use none but the three Catholic Creeds; the Roman serves
only to tie all Power and Government to St. Peter's Chair, and to persecute
Heretics withal. So that this Roman Creed being for Temporal Advantages, being
not contained in the Word of God, nor proved by the Testimony nor by the
Miracles of the Primitive Church, nor received by former Ages, nor by any
Church but the Roman, nor by that but very lately, and only in some cases
professed: we have great reason to believe, that it is in no wise necessary to
Salvation. The Christian and universal Creed having been esteemed sufficient
without any other, for more than fifteen hundred Years, ought to be so esteemed
still, without this Addition, which is proved but by very unlikely and
uncertain Miracles, and by the Attestation of but that one particular, Church
for whose Wealth and Grandeur it so entirely makes.

These things considered, we ought no ways to be dismayed with the frightful
Words or Countenance of any that pronounce us accursed and damned, because we
hold not, nor can believe what Pius the 4th did lately declare to be de Fide
requisite to Salvation. We shall find saving Instructions and Comfort enough in
the Christian Creed, which God's Word expressly confirms, and the whole Church
has ever owned, if we embrace and study more and more the Divine and
invariable Truths it contains, and sincerely endeavor to lead our Lives
accordingly.

II. What I have affirmed of the Roman Faith, is to be understood also of the
Roman Worship: That Part of it which is not approved by us is very bad;
palliated or reproved by the cunningest or wisest of their Church; or however
no ways necessary, which is all I am at present concerned in.

Indeed as to the Essentials of Divine Worship all Christians are agreed, That
God should have our Prayers and Praises, in the Name of Jesus Christ our
Mediator; even the matter of our Requests is fixed and uniform amongst all that
own the Lord's Prayer; so far the Church of Rome has many excellent and
ancient Composures, very unlike those new ones we reject. That part of their
public or private Worship which is grounded upon the Christian Creed, is very
good: and if they went no further, we might as lawfully join with them, as they
might with us. We have inserted nothing doubtful or controverted in our Offices
of Religion, nothing but what as to the sense is used and approved by all
Churches. Had they done so, and extended their Worship no further than could be
justified by that Christian Belief which is common to all, the Differences
betwixt them and other Christians had been much less, and more reconcilable.
But they have turned all the Points of their new Creed into Exercises of
public Religion: and these we do not think to be acceptable to God, nor
requisite to acquit us of that Adoration and Service which we ow to his Divine
Majesty.

We are persuaded that without making or worshipping Images of God, we may pay
him that Homage which he requires of us; that if we devoutly commemorate our
Savior's Passion, and with thankful Hearts put our Trust in the Merits of it,
we shall not need to worship the Figure of his Cross; and that if we lift up
our Hearts to Heaven, to adore him on the Right Hand of God, we need not
worship the Host here on Earth, which many Christians believe to be only the
Sacrament of his Death, and none can be sure to be the Substance of his natural
Body; no not according to the Tenants of the Church of Rome.

Likewise that Part of their Worship which relates to Creatures; the solemn
Blessing or consecrating Images, that being hallowed, they may be fit to be set
up to receive Incense and Oblations and many Honors, and to excite their
Devotion to Saints and Angels: their manifold Pilgrimages and Prayers to those
beatified Creatures; The great dependence they express to have upon their
Intercession, their Merit and their Power; The many Miracles and Mercies they
are said to receive from them; And the high Celebrations and Returns of
religious Gratitude which they render to them: All these which make too great a
Part of their public and private Devotions, we have great reason to believe to
be inconsistent with God's revealed Will, and with our Duty and Obligations to
him; or however, no ways necessary.

I appeal to them that have either read the New Testament, or learned the
Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the ten Commandments, which all Churches teach to
be the Principles of the Christian Religion, whether our calling upon him in
whom we believe, and serving him alone that has declared himself jealous of
his Honor, and using no Images in our Addresses to him that has forbid them,
and approaching to God by that one Mediator whom he has appointed, and who
died and merited all for us, and bad us come to him, and use his Name alone in
all our Requests; Whether this Worship which is paid to God amongst us, be not
more conformable to his holy Word, and to the Grounds of our common
Christianity, than that which is established in the Church of Rome? Whatever
they may think of us where the Inquisition reigns, and under it blind
Ignorance, and a terrible Aversion against them that are called Heretics; yet
elsewhere Men of better Sense and greater Instruction, though of the same
Church, can hardly pronounce us to be God's Enemies, and the Objects of his
Wrath, because we are afraid to give his Glory to others, and to transgress his
Laws: or however their Thoughts will not alter the case, and can do us no Harm,
we having a Rule of God's own prescribing to believe and to worship by, and
whilst we render to God the things that are God's, we need not fear the rash
Censures of uncharitable Men.

We have the Warrant of Holy Scripture, and the Concurrence and Approbation of
all Christian Churches for the Worship established in our Church: if
accordingly we serve God with Sincerity and Devotion, we shall have the Reward
of them that diligently seek him; however we transgress no Law of his, and we
run no Risk: But if the worshipping of Saints and Images should prove
unacceptable, the Papists run a great Danger, they having neither Antiquity nor
Scripture for the same, whilst the Admonitions of their Fellow Christians, and
some Divine Prohibitions are point blank against it.

III. As for the Necessity of a good Life, our Church recommends it at least as
much as the Roman. All Christians believe a Judgment to come, and a Retribution
to Men according to their Works; so we have all the same Promises of God, and
the same Rewards propounded to encourage us to do good; we believe the same
Threats and the same Punishments to deter us from Evil; we all think our selves
obliged to Morality, and to be truly virtuous, knowing that without Holiness no
Man shall see God: and I make no doubt but that in other Christian Communions
as well as in ours, there are many who truly fear God and work Righteousness.
The Difference betwixt us and the Roman Church, is not whether or no we ought
to be good; but every one in either Church, according to his Sincerity and his
firm Persuasion of the Truth of Christianity, endeavors to approve himself to
the Searcher of Hearts; so far we are agreed. They have many things in their
Roman Creed, and in their Worship, which we cannot approve; but we have the
same Rules of Life, the same Divine Laws to direct our Obedience.

And I would to God we did all join in those things which admit of no Dispute,
and wherein we are all agreed, and did lay the great Stress of our Hopes and of
our Endeavors on them, viz. the hearty Profession of the same Christian Creed,
the sincere Worship of the same God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and a serious
Earnestness to follow the Example and the Precepts of our common Savior, and
to live in this present World soberly, righteously and godly: These that are
the great things of God, and the Foundations of Christian Religion, and of true
Goodness being owned on both sides, if they were minded as our Interest in
them, and their Certainty do require, would go near to compose our Differences
in other things, and to restrain that uncharitable Zeal which has doomed to
Damnation Millions of good Christians.

However, they that truly believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and
worship God according to his Will, and our Savior's Institutions, and are
careful to live like Christians worthy of the Gospel, need not regard those
Devices, nor fear those Judgments which proceed only from Men; they may be true
and happy Saints both here and hereafter, that have for Faith, and the Service
of God, and for a Holy Life all that is of Divine Appointment, without the
Roman Additions. Our rejecting what the Church of Rome has for her Interest
imposed, where her Power does reach, will in no wise exclude us from Heaven, if
we be true to what we own. If by our Life and Profession we confess Christ here
before Men, and are not ashamed of him, nor of his Words, we need not fear he
should hereafter disown us, because of their Anger that would have us take for
Gospel whatever they dictate. Damnation shall not be inflicted according to
Men's Passions and Uncharitableness; we ought to run from the Danger of it, as
far as is possible, by preserving that Faith, we were baptized into, pure and
undefiled, and by living according to it: But had the Promises of Mercy and
Salvation been annexed to our Submission to Rome, either the unversal Church
would have clearly expressed it in making Men Members of Christ, and Heirs of
his Kingdom, or to be sure God would have revealed it. And seeing none of these
is done, it does plainly demonstrate that such a Submission is designed for
Temporal Power, but no ways requisite to bring Men to Heaven, and that
consequently the hard Sentence of Roman Bigots against us, may be prejudicial
to them, but can do us no Harm.

This might suffice to show that we are safe notwithstanding their Outcries of
Damnation against us, that Part of their Religion which is called Popery, being
no Part of God's revealed Will and Saving Truth, nor of the Primitive and
Catholic Christianity embraced by the whole Christian Church.

In point of Faith, or of Divine Worship what is peculiar to them is far enough
from being necessary: and for Rules of Conversation we have the same Precepts,
and believe the same Promises and the same Punishments. So that though we
reject many of their own Inventions, yet still we want nothing necessary to
Salvation, and in order to it, they have no Advantage over us.

But I may not stay here. The Interest of Truth and human Souls obliges me to
say farther, that we are safer in our Church, and have several Advantages for
the obtaining Comfort and eternal Happiness, of which they are destitute in the
Church of Rome.

First, I say that we are safer. What we believe as an Article of Faith, is
undoubtedly true, owned by all Christians in all Ages of the World, and plainly
revealed in God's Word; whereas those Traditions which the Church of Rome has
tacked to the ancient Faith, are newly coined, yet more newly made a Creed, are
not warranted by Divine Revelation, nor embraced by Christians of other
Communions. And what a Presumption is it to change the Terms of Salvation, and
make those things necessary which God has not prescribed, and the Christian
Church for many hundred Years has not owned as a Part of her Saving Faith?

This is so like adding to the Book of God, preaching another Gospel, and
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; that we think our selves much
safer within the ancient Boundaries, and look upon it as a very dangerous
Attempt, to make new Creeds and impose them upon Men's Consciences, especially
when those Additions are not only beyond what is written, but also of another
Nature, and even contrary. The Christian Creed is for Life everlasting, the
Roman for the Roman Greatness; the Christian expresses our Obligations to God,
and our dependence upon him, the Roman is a Profession of Subjection to Rome;
the Christian engages Men to serve God only, the Roman to worship Creatures
also; the Christian makes our Blessed Redeemer to be our only Mediator, the
Roman joins to him the blessed Saints and the Blessed Virgin. There are so many
things in all Appearance very irreconcilable betwixt these two Confessions of
Faith, that the Roman cannot be safe; and that we may conclude without
Uncharitableness, that they of that Persuasion that shall attain to Heaven,
shall not come thither by the Help of the Roman Doctrines, but by discharging
their Baptismal Engagements which are the same with ours, and by professing the
ancient common Creed of all Christians.

The Points of their own Creed are so far from conducing to Men's Salvation,
that they rather will prove great Hindrances to it. They engage Men in a
Worship very unlike to what we read in the Apostolical Writings, or the ancient
Fathers. Besides the unknown Tongue, and the maimed Communion, there is so much
of it that is merely humane and ceremonious, so much of it that relates to the
Souls in Purgatory or the Saints in Heaven, that we wish it may meet with
Pardon, but cannot think it should find Acceptance. There are so many strange
Exorcisms and Consecrations in their Rituals and Pontifical, that after having
read the Bible, a Man can never think theirs to be that Worship in Spirit and
in Truth, which the Gospel appoints. We dare not offer to Almighty God what is
so like to be injurious to him, and so unlike his own Institutions; and have
much greater Assurance to have our Sacrifice of Prayers and Praises accepted,
when according to Divine Appointment we offer it to God, in the Name of his
blessed Son.

The same holds also for virtuous living and Improvement in Goodness, that
their new Doctrines are rather Obstacles to, than Helps toward it. The great
dependence upon Rome and the Papal Power, has made many of that Communion very
ill Subjects, and many more very cruel and uncharitable to all other
Christians. The making a whole State of Sin, although known and persisted in,
yet to be a State of Pardon and Safety, consistent with the Love of God; the
buying and Imputation of other Men's Merits and good Works; the easy Purchase of
many Indulgences, the customary and frequent Absolutions for mortal Sins; the
Patronage of the greatest Saints to the greatest Sinners, when they are their
particular Votaries: such prevailing Opinions as these abate much of the
Necessity of a serious and speedy Repentance and earnest Pursuits after
Sanctification, and too much gratify the Corruptions of Men that are desirous
to enjoy their Lusts, and not lose the Hopes of Heaven. So if Mixture of false
and uncertain Propositions with their Faith; if a Worship very corrupt, and
very superstitious; and if Doctrines apt to betray Men to a careless and
vicious Life: if these can endanger humane Souls, we cannot think them safe in
the Church of Rome. So far as they differ from us, in their Additions to the
Primitive Faith, so far they are in danger. We pronounce no Sentence, and we
pray Divine Mercy to pardon them that err in the Simplicity of their Heart: But
their Errors and suitable Practices may be the Ruin of many, and our Charity
can save none. Blessed be God, we are safer, and have many Advantages for
Comfort and for Holiness, of which they are destitute.

Men of a timorous and a tender Conscience amongst them, can never have a
comfortable Knowledge and Assurance of their having confessed all their Mortal
Sins, or all those Circumstances that alter the kind: nor of the Intention of
the Priest, which is necessary to make effectual his Absolutions; nor of the
Validity of any Sacerdotal Ministrations and Consecrations, all which depend
upon sceret Intentions or Irregularities, which may be incurred many ways, and
may proceed so far as to be irremediable; of these which according to their
Principles, so much concerns their Happiness, a thoughtful Man (I say) can
never be so sure as to make him rejoice in Hope, and have a solid Peace. And
what a sad Prospect is it to them that think the Sufferings of this present
Life so very grievous, that after all their Pains and Charges to gain Pardons
and Indulgences, and Prayers for their Souls, they can have no Assurance
without a Miracle, but that they shall lie hundred of Years in scorching
Flames, paying the Score of those temporal Punishments which were due to their
Sins.

Besides the Uncomfortableness of these Roman Tenants, they want in that
Communion the Benefit of those Divine Instructions which were written for our
Learning; that we through Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope. That holy
Word of God which gives Light and Understanding to the Simple, and is able to
make us wise unto Salvation, and to save our Souls, if we believe the Blessed
Author of it: That Word in the Church of Rome is kept from the People, lest it
should make the Ways of God plain before their Faces, and show them what a
mighty Change in the Christian Religion has been made amongst them. And that
keeps the Vulgar in a State of Darkness and timorous Superstition, and deprives
them of those Spiritual Joys and Improvements, which Divine Revelation would
afford.

If any Book in the World can be truly pleasant and comfortable, it is the Holy
Bible; wherein we see the infinite Wisdom and Power and Providence of God, in
the Creation and Government of the World, and particularly in his Care for them
that love and serve him: The sacred History is so full of Comfort in all
Changes of Humane Life; the infinite Goodness and other Perfections of God are
so clearly revealed in it, that by reading thereof, an attentive Christian in
all his Afflictions is inspired with wise and good Thoughts, and Courage, and
Firmness of Mind, and a joyful dependence upon God. Then the Mercies and
Mysteries of our Redemption, the Life and Death of our Blessed Savior, the
Excellency of his Precepts, and of the Sermons and Writings of his Apostles,
and the infinite Graciousness of his Promises: These are so ravishing and so
wonderful, so apt to support our Spirits, and to nourish our Hopes, to give a
good Man a fore-Taste of the Joys of Heaven, and to bring us to the Likeness
and the Sense of God's Love, that nothing can give equal Comforts to
Christians, or any ways supply the Want of these. It would be the greatest
Wonder why any Church that believes the Old and New Testament to be the Book of
God, should forbid the reading of it: but that the Contrariety betwixt their
Traditions and those Divine Writings is very apparent to them that can consult
and compare both. That, or nothing, must excuse their Uncharitableness in
taking the Divine Oracles from them, for whose Consolation and Guidance they
were appointed.

Again, they want the Comfort and Instruction of God's public Worship. What
Scriptures are read in the public Assemblies of the Roman Communion, are in
the Latin Tongue, by which the Understanding of the People is rendered
unfruitful. What Prayers and Supplications are put up to God, are in the same
Language; they know not what is said, and therefore cannot assent with their
Hearts, nor excite such devout Affections in their Souls as would recommend
their common Requests to the Throne of Grace. Neither are the Celebrations of
the Divine Goodness understood, they praise not God with joyful Lips: And that
pious Intercourse they should have with him, in paying their Homage, and
presenting their Thanks and Petitions to his Divine Majesty, being thus
interrupted by their not understanding what is said, they are deprived of one
of the principal Means of Edification. It Is strange it should ever enter into
the Hearts of Men, to offer to God for a reasonable Service, Words of which
they know not the Signification. And it renders ineffectual those Acts of
Religion which should most affect and better the Hearts of Christian
Worshippers, and raise up their Thoughts and their Affections to Heaven.

From hence it is, that we have more knowledge of God, and more Understanding of
the Christian Religion. They amongst us that really believe Christianity, and
would make sure of the Happiness it offers, by searching and meditating of the
Holy Scriptures, and by joining with the public Worship; whilst they attend
and understand what the Church says to God, and what he says to us, are much
improved in those great Principles of Religion which they learned in their
Catechism, and are made to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord. They
have in these two, what perpetually informs their Judgment, and excites their
Will to cleave to God and Goodness; and after their best Endeavors to rely
upon those infinite Mercies of God in Christ our Redeemer, on which the
greatest of Roman Champions confessed that it is most safe to repose our whole
Trust and Confidence.

Answerable to those, are the public Exhortations of our Church, by the Mouth
of her Ministers, and the Books of Religious Instruction wherewith she
entertains her Children. Their Time and Zeal and Attention are not taken up in
Sprinklings, Kissings of Relics, going in Pilgrimage, visiting of Shrines,
paying devout Veneration to Saints and Images, and reciting Beads and Rosaries,
and the Offices of St. Bridget, or the like. Neither these things, nor any of
this Nature, which can neither instruct nor reform the World, nor give Comfort
to Christian Souls, are recommended to our People: They are clearly taught
wherein true Religion and substantial Goodness consist, and exhorted to lay on
them the great Stress of their Hopes and of their Endeavors, and devoutly to
make use of those means of Grace which are of Divine Appointment, and thereby
to establish their Hearts in the Love of God, and a cheerful dependence upon
the infinite Merits and Mercies of our dear Savior.

Nothing of the whole Counsel of God is by our Church kept back from us, our
Belief is unquestionable, being truly Primitive and Universal; our Worship of
God is according to his Will, and his most blessed Nature; and our Rule of Life
and Conversation comprehends all Duties: To fear God, and honor the King, and
love one another, and continue patient in well-doing. Ours is indeed a Doctrine
according to Godliness, and of it, it may be testified in the Words of St.
Peter, that it is the true Grace of God, wherein we stand.

If we are not wanting to our selves, we want nothing that can either show us
the Way to Happiness, or help and forward us in it; we ought to express our
Charity to them that err, and want many of those Blessings and Advantages which
we have for the obtaining eternal Salvation; we should earnestly pray for them,
and what we can promote their Instruction, but by no means fear their
Threatenings and Sentences of Damnation.

He that in earnest would go to Heaven, and professes Christianity, not to
obtain Favor with Men, but to please God, and to save his immortal Soul, can
be no where safer than in our Church. Therein he professes that Faith which
all Christian Communions hold to be truly Divine, and therein he may make his
Calling and Election sure, if he will but practice answerably to his Belief,
add to his Faith Virtue, and not be unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The more he understands his Religion, the more he will love it,
and be convinced that he is in the right: And the more carefully he lives
according to his Profession, with a Conscience void of Offense toward God and
toward Men, the more assurance will he have that he shall be happy.

All other Grounds of Hope besides Truth and Righteousness will prove vain. But
he that stands upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone: He that studies and minds his Duty, and
earnestly begs for the Divine Assistance that he may live to God, and remain
faithful unto Death: he shall receive the Crown of Life, though some
presumptuous Men dare condemn him to Death.

Whatever Confidence or high Pretenses some may have, whatever Ways and Devices
they invent for to gain Heaven: Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life; no
Man comes unto the Father, but by him; there is no other Name under Heaven
given unto Men, whereby they can be saved, but only the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; He that calls and believes on him shall not be confounded. Here let
us fix, and not regard what Men say, nor what they can do: But look unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, firmly relying on his Almighty Goodness,
who is able to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him, being ever
living to make Intercession for them.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 15. 4o.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted. 4o.

A Short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs.] 4o.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4o.

The Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined and
confuted. 4o.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29, 1687,
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tennison, D. D. as also of that which led
to it, and followed after it. 4o.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 4o.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.


