A LETTER OF ADVICE Concerning Marriage.

By A. B.



LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-Door. MDCLXXVI.

(...) Opinion have rendered them unfit or unseemly for Husbands, are yet for
Wives not only decent but commendable; and to common welfare so necessary, that
the neglect of them is seldom without decay: Hence that threadbare saying, If
you will thrive, look how you wive. In which single respect, the very sloth and
incapacity of most women now-adays (especially Heirs and Fondlings, bred even
to a contempt of Huswifery) is without profuseness a defect scarce to be
repaired by fortune. Wherefore to one that has already a solid Estate, not to
be acquired, but well managed and gradually improved, it is certainly upon this
account more profitable to purchase the Wife, whose thrift is it self a yearly,
nay weekly revenue; than for one to compass a lump of Money with an excessive
Rentcharge atending it: But if to such defect should be added the affectation
of our present Court and Citypomp (and what better can be there expected?) no
Bank confines such a Torrent, nor can any Pile of wealth afford Fuel for such
a Flame; the quantity serving only to accelerate the Consumption.

For doubtless to that Sex an Expense belongs, which though never so demurely
carried, far exceeds that of Men; but meeting with Quality and Vanity, knows no
measure. Maids, I confess, acting purely for themselves, and for the most part
making a Virtue of Necessity, may perhaps with their singular affected
Parsimony, with other notable shifts, smother and palliate this expensive
humor: inded it is their Masterpiece so to do. But then in the change of
their condition (and withal concernment, it should seem, by Marriage) like an
unnatural restraint, without extraordinary discretion and kindness to their
Husbands, it breaks forth with double violence: their Train is much longer,
their Visits and Collations more sumptuous and frequent, their Dresses more
curious and elaborate than ours; their Journeys infinitely cumbersome and
expensive: Not to mention there Childbeds and Gossipping, to the due equipage
whereof all Trades must conspire: yet where are the men that consider this? Can
we then expect it from Women? Their partiality is such, that though they cause
double the Charge, yet if they bring but half the Estate, they reckon, that as
purchasers they have right to spend: a prejudice with our Gallants so general,
but withal dangerous, that were it duly weighed, it would strike at the very
root of Marriage. Suitors therefore we see are obliged by no means to consult
their Reason, much less their Arithmetic; Ignorance may well be styled the
Mother of their Devotion.

Howbeit I would not be construed herein to declaim against Marriage: one may I
hope blame the Corruptions of Lawyers without irreverence to the Law. Error is
but a Foil to Truth, and by redressing abuses, the regular use is best
established. Marriage we know is a state necessary both to the Conservation and
Comfort of Mankind, consecrated by God himself, who would never have instituted
and so recommended it, were it not most consistent with our well-being; but the
best perverted, proves the worst: and in nothing has there been a greater
departure from primitive intention than in Marriage, to the bane and scandal of
Society.

The root of this, as of all other evils, is Covetousness; but by the fate of
irregular Appetites so dazzled, that it shoots at random very wide of the mark.
To such as observe the shrewdness of Covetous men in all other pursuits, it may
seem a miracle, that herein they should act with so little foresight; and might
perhaps be referred to divine Justice, thus arraigning their ill-gotten
Estates. But alas, their Example, with the fame they carry for wisdom, has
misguided persons of better Principles; whom to reclaim were methinks a public
service: Wherefore leaving those to their incorrigible vice and delusion, I
frame my discourse to you, who may communicate it to some honest Gentlemen of
your acquaintance, where you judge it needful or useful.

Our Gentry may now be considered under four Conditions or Capacities; viz.
Such as have little or nothing to trust to; such as have bare Competencies;
such as have fair Estates, but encumbred or expectant; and such as have ample
and clear Fortunes.

How needless it is for the first of these to marry needs no proof; yet if some
favorable opportunity should tempt them so to endeavor the improving their
condition, which they can hardly much impair, they are partly excusable: only
let them not too much triumph in their purchase, nor be surprised if they mend
not by their change of Climate, for some that have tried will inform them,
there is no Villainage to the Apron-tenure. If in any case such Matches have
success, it is with Cadets of the Nobility, whose high Birth serves to balance
the Wealth, and bridle the arrogance of women.

The second rate of Gentlemen in former times were observed frequently to
advance their Estates by Marriage; but it was in the Golden age of
Female-innocence, ere they had tasted the Tree of Knowledge; whilst their
Breeding was strict, their Appetites regular, their Wills governable, and even
Heirs were not therefore the worse Wives: The Scene is dangerously altered;
those Pleasure* boats now adays carrying such Sail, as without skilful and
happy Steerage must needs overset in our Seas. Hence with Gentlemen of
indifferent Estates, when they go a Fortune-catching, it commonly fares as with
the Dog in the Fable; their prizes in the upshot proving worse to them than
Blanks: our Politicians therefore recommend to them Marriage Alamode; Yet not
to flatter the Vice and Prejudice of the Age, I dare maintain, That prudent
Wedlock is even for such the more thriving state, and no such Bugbear as some
of our Wits represent it; there being instances enough of our best Gentry with
moderate Estates, both living honorably and providing well for Posterity: and
nothing now more familiar than to see some rich with 500 l. a year, to the envy
and reproach of others that are poor with their Thousands: For as Citizens say
of their Shops, Home seldom fails to keep those that keep home.

To Gentlemen of the Third Rank, viz. whose Estates are expectant or encumbered,
it is indeed more expedient to marry for Riches, yet is not such obligation
equal to all; neither indeed seems it requisite but in particular cases, where
discretion perhaps would rather dictate the preferring of single Life, or at
least the deferring of Marriage; for Instance; If to a certain fair expectance
there be for the present only a bare pension.

I know it is a Maxim authorized by current practice, That encumbred Estates
are best cleared with Marriage-portions; but it proves a treacherous Cure,
neither indeed is it a proper expedient: For if the Estate be great and the
Encumbrance comparatively small, an easy sale would best discharge it, leaving
the Patrimony sound and the Owner free. And one who having thus settled his
Affairs, and afterward weds to his best Choice, shall sooner thrive and
purchase than the most prosperous Fortune-catcher. But if the Debt be a
dangerous Sum, the payment of it by Marriage is next to desperate; it faring
with such Adventurers as with Privateers, who, betwixt the charge of Rigging,
hazard of missing and triumph of getting Booties are in all Events destined to
be Bankrupts. Like cold Drink in a Fever, it cools the mouth, but inflames the
blood; and at best helps no otherwise to patch up an encumbred and declining
Condition, than does an outward Prop to support a crazie Building. Much might
however be alleged in excuse for those, whose exigencies so stimulate and
perplex them, that they neither freely act nor clearly judge; whereas our
Gentlemen of large and entire Estates, when they wrack upon that Coast, are
purely to thank themselves.

You will tell me, Marriage now lies under great obloquy, as a Phlegmatic
state of Life, yielding no variety but of trouble; fit only for the blew or
Leathern-apron, but uneasy for men of generous Minds and free Fortunes,
presumed not to brook such restraint of their Conversations and Appetites: It Is
represented as the Purgatory of Persons and Canker of Estates; nay, the Rules
of the King's Bench (if some of our Wits may be credited) have more Elbow-rom:
for often methinks it proves so, the greater their reproach, who so fondly
abandon their true interest, and disparage it; there being certainly no real
inconvenience which well-advised Marriage imposes, no honest freedom which it
denies to men of plentiful Estates; rather many advantages peculiar to it, it
being their great Prerogative, that their Choice is in effect unconfined: For
we daily see* that the owner of a fair and plentiful Revenue, dispensing but
with Portion, needs not despair of success almost in any other pursuit; and
it is no less certain, that to persons of such Fortune Portions are superfluous.

The most common and plausible excuse of our ignoble Matches, is the same
Scarecrow which frights so many from marrying at all, forsooth, the
apprehension of being overcharged with Children, to the clogging of their
Estates, or at least abridging of their Pomp: A consideration at best
otherwise: For since by singular Providence, even Families of ordinary Rank and
Estate, in stead of being burdened, are notably supported by numerous
Posterity. How secure from that danger must our eminent Landlords be! rather
what Latitude have they for Bounty, with allowance for some Vanity!

But there is one mistake common to great Landlords and great Princes, or
rather Parallel between them. Great* Princes were ever noted to place all their
Glory in Conquest, supposing, that if with infinite Charge and Hazard, to the
oppression of their subjects and neighbors, they added one little Province of
their own acquiring to their vast Dominions and Titles, they gave a sufficient
account of their Sceptres: Whereas they then pursue the real Interest of
Empire, when by due execution of good Laws, and careful obedience of their
People, they govern more securely, nay, more absolutely than the Sultan does
with his Scemitar; rendering small Territories equivalent to Monarchies. With
like prejudice great Landlords, even those that carry the fame of Wisdom, amuse
and perplex themselves in pursuit of somewhat to be acquired by Marriage or
purchase, no doubt as a Trophy of their good conduct; forsaking in the mean
time their more noble and solid advantage, which consists in the generous
Fruition and gradual Improvement of what they already possess. It Is one of the
sorest evils under the Sun, the very Canker of wealth, like the Worm in the
Gourd, that one already seized of a vast estate (more perhaps than he has
heart to use or Brain to manage) should harass or but disease himself in the
acquest of some little accession: more brutish herein than Beasts* who being in
rich Pastures, break no Fences, nor look any further. How happy were it, could
such but be acquainted with the goodly privileges and improvements of their
Estates by discreet enjoyment; so at least, as not to seek what they have, and
dearly buy, or rather sell and betray their own Fortunes! To see a Gentleman of
Estate, out of the Usurer's reach, and without color of Exigence, not rashly,
but industriously and with great ostentation of wisdom, for sorry pelf and
lucre, expose himself, with all his hopes and advantages, to the venture
(indeed certain mischief) of an unworthy Match; what is it but to be suborned
to his own manifest wrong, and hired as it were to destroy himself? such error
being every way surrounded with repentance.

In the first place, it is an authentic Observation, That great Portions are
commonly attended with great disappointments and frauds; however, that Land is
rarely therewith purchased or Estates improved, almost as seldom as with Moneys
won at play; they serving for the most part rather like Sawces to humor the
palate and whet the appetite, than food to nourish; dangerous Fuel, and Decoys
of vanity and expense. I grant that such as have little or no other fund
oft-times speed better with them; partly by reason of the thrift to which they
have been obliged, little being from such expected; chiefly for that great
kindness on the Woman's side, being the groundwork of such Matches, disposes
them to cheerful compliance: Much like Offices and Court-employments, which
though commodious for Cadets, yet with great Landlords we find scarce turn to
account. When the Bills of Wooing, Wedding, and Honey-year are desraid, the
Baste I doubt proves more than the Roast.

Yet in pursuit thereof, the Fortune* catcher disclaims all those nobler
Considerations and Attractives, most of which are singly without comparison to
be preferred, but some inestimable, for that by Nature, Precept or Example they
are propagated, ( viz.) lovely Feature and Shape, graceful Motion, sound
Constitution, Gayety of Humor, Quickness of Wit, discreet Behavior, approved
Huswifery, etc. In lieu whereof he oft-times both stifles his Affections and
buries his Family, by marrying certain Barrenness or Infirmity, courting
imperfections which carry with them an Attainder of Blood. At best, he blindly
subjects even his present Fortune to the discretion of a woman taken at random
from the Lottery of a licentious Age. For with what Arms shall he defend
himself from her Wantonness, Malice, or but Folly? Some indeed oppose the
Husband's Authority as a sufficient Target; but alas! our Prisons, I doubt may
now afford a full Regiment of such Martyrs: so dangerous a Privilege has it
proved of late for our fair Ladies to be unconcerned in Debts of their own
contracting, and so make their Husband's Mittimus at their pleasure. Stay,
there is yet (if possible) a sharper Sting in the tail of this Miscarriage; for
to win those unprofitable Trophies, vast Joyntures, and even Liquid Rents are
often extorted, Conveyances and Trusts are multiplied to dangerous* Expense,
but far more dangerous Encumbrance; indeed the endless perplexing of Claims and
Titles, a fruitful S^dolet of pernicious Suits and Discords in after* times.
Troth, if the Husband henceforth write Philip and Mary, it is all he can hope
for: She reckons his Estate her Purchase, and disputes his Property; not to lie
admonished without Sullenness, nor controlled without the menace of a final
Breach, and intimation of worse, the danger of Elopment being fairly provided
for by suitable Alimony of course presumed: toward which, and for the perfect
binding of foolish Jealousy to its good behavior, on the same worthy
Consideration whole Patrimonies are likewise settled; whereby at one dash the
sheepish Owner, forfeiting as it were his Inheritance becomes a sorry
Pensioner, divested of all Authority, unable to serve his Prince or Friend, or
help himself in case of any Exigent unforeseen. His eldest Son he makes his
Landlord of an interest wholly foreign and independent, able to borrow more
pounds than himself can fairly shillings; and claiming not by descent, much
less by his Father's bounty, but by even his own or his Mothers purchase, or at
least the wise provision of his Parents on that side. No marvel then if his
Obedience prove answerable, since without some preternatural Obligation, it is
daily seen what becomes of filial Duty and Reverence. His younger Children,
like Estrich's Eggs, he exposes to pity, that is, contempt, and the miseries
that attend poverty and quality in conjunction; oft-times disabling himself so
much as to countenance them in a Mechanic Course, with such manifest hardship,
that he can never look clearly on them, nor almost challenge their observance.
Thus it happens to his Family, as where Dung lies still unspread; the whole
Farm is Barren, and the Maxine noisome. But besides all this, to me methinks it
is not a little strange, that in the very Bargain such Fallacies should be
obtruded on men endued with Number and Sense. First the Portion is computed to
yield an Income answerable to the Current Rate of Interest, and measures for
Settlement accordingly taken; whereas, though it came clearly to account (as
scarce ever it does) yet with Gentlemen of noble and free Estate, whose stock
seldom runs in that Channel, it is fair if it turn to half that profit; and then
it is admitted as a Revenue proportioned to the present Maintenance and Port of
Wives: when, alas, were it fairly examined, not grossly swallowed like a Dutch
Reckoning Al^meale, it would but too plainly appear, the Pomp of such Women is
rarely defrayed at double the charge: For so great is their overweening, so
little their tenderness or Justice to their Husbands (into whose Families they
are not kindly engraffed) that those who at their Parents allowance were proud
enough of keeping their Maid, and gloried in the Managery of a sorry Stipend,
do, on their Marriage, even challenge an exorbitant Train and boundless
Expense, little caring what becomes of their Husbands, so they hold fast their
Joyntures.

On the other side, a generous and prudent match, is further improved with
diverse Felicities naturally attending it; which I shall endeavor by way of
Antithesis to exemplify in many pregnant Instances.

To those golden Idols of course belongs a superstitious worship, with such
tedious and frivolous addresses and pursuit for the most part, as, besides the
present Excess, lays a foundation for future unthrift, (a Torrent which is
scarce to be suddenly checked;) so driving men upon all accounts to a scurvy
After-game. For though the Oaths of Suitors are become a Byword (as for their
Vanity they deserve) yet at best they are dangerous impertinencies, scarce
consistent with Wisdom or Honor. To vow a Talent with meaning a Drachme, to
flatter egregiously without ground of Truth, how vile and abject is it! And if
such as use it meet with the success they merit, by being taken at their words,
are they not paid in their own Coin? For how can they worthily assert that
Authority which they have so prostrated? And with what Forehead can they
challenge that Duty, where they have sworn such Fealty and done such Homage? He
at once cuts off all this Pageantry, who appay'd in his Self-sufficiency
without other regard, gratifies his inclinations, makes his own Conditions, and
is courted to his real advantage: he breaks not his word, in keeping and using
his power, nor renders himself Usurper to his own Right; but finds her indeed a
Wife whom he never made a Mistress, nor furnished with any pretense of aspiring
to it. How little soever she brings, I dare profess, that at seven years end,
on this account, he shall boast of his Bargain.

It has been noted as the fatal Error of our common Economy to begin at the
wrong end, by indulging present Excess, and projecting future Thrift: We see
goodly Vessels daily split upon that Rock; where at none will marvel that
consider how preposterous and almost impracticable it is, from the difficulty
of playing the After-game of Fortune and reforming evil (but especially
voluptuous) Habits; from the daily growing charge of Children and their
Education, as also from the disrepute attending such Retrenchments. Besides, of
what consequence in it self considered must it be to save or spend at first?
Since a stock timely saved, may by easy improvement in some years double its
Capital; but a Sum early borrowed shall within the same period quadruple its
Debt: whereby the perpetual plenty or penury of Families, with all the ensuing
benefits or mischiefs seem chiefly hereon to depend. Hence that homely but
useful Proverb, of taking her down in her Wedding-shooes; which to Wives not
intoxicated with Fortune is familiar enough: whereas those Courting stocks,
from the Cradle cockered, and only wedded to their Wills, are not to be
convinced but by late Experience, the cursed Schoolmistress of Fools.

No man is so unvers'd in household or worldly affairs, but must observe how
good Families are preserved, and both interest and repute advanced by the
honorable Residence of Landlords upon their Demesnes, by constant absence or
frequent motion undermined and eclipsed: Insomuch as some stick not to averr,
that before the common use of Coaches, few but Traitors or Felons made
shipwreck of their Freeholds. Indeed if the Husband should be forth by
occasions or on public Service, yet what has the Wife to do, but stay at
home, and as a trusty Deputy act for his interest by his order in his stead?
Her House is her proper Sphere, her best Title that of Huswifery; which if she
merit not, she is so far from being a help meet for him, as she is certainly
his great encumbrance. But is this the practice of our Female-sparks? are these
the Maxims of such as by the false measures, and with the natural arrogance of
rich Wives, ever fancy they have over-bought their Husbands and under-sold
themselves? Do they espouse their Husbands welfare, or but consider it in
competition with their own ease, appetite or humor? What noise is heard but
the loud Eccho's of their Fortune, with challenge of Equipage and Expense in
their Judgment suitable, that is, vastly exceeding it, and such as few Estates
can support? Is not Home their banishment, and London indeed their home? If
their Lot be not to live in that or some other good Town or place of like
charge and divertisement, what exceptions are taken! what objections and delays
contrived! The Air is either too moist or too cold, too thick or too thin; the
ways thereabouts to be sure are either dirty or stony; the House too solitary
or too near a Street, not of modern Fabric, or modish Furniture: The Gentry of
those parts not Courtly; not a man it should seem within ken qualified for a
Gallant; the Commonalty rude, etc. Possibly they are at length haled to their
homes as to Prisons, but hired, forsooth, with the Donative of a Child's
portion or two, to purchase Toys for the Wife, and therewith quiet for the
Husband. Being placed at the Helm of a good Family, like a Monkey at the
Steerage of a ship, their first care is to solicit acquaintance, and their main
business consists in the Ceremony of receiving and returning visits; their
Entertainments finding work for three or four Servants, their very Salutations
and Appointments too for almost as many: so that here to act the part of good
Husbands in the Vulgar notion both to Wives and Estates, to gratify the one
and preserve the other is perhaps next door to impossible.

The good Nature of Children singly considered is of greater moment and
advantage than wealth, the improvements of it being far more excellent, and the
miscarriages less reparable. For what recompense of Fortune to a Creeple, a
diseased Body, an uncomely person, above all, a crooked Mind? and what Portion
equal to those personal Endowments, the propriety whereof neither Fortune nor
malice can invade? To this eminent Duty the true Huswife dedicates her time and
pains: her Children are her Garden, her Park, nay her Court. In their tender
years her business is to protect them from disasters and injuries, to secure
their health and growth, to observe their Genius, to instruct them in their
best Capacities, yet rather leading than driving them, and supplying their
defects with her skill and diligence; in all which her thrift is suitable to her
tenderness. Her Sons she early resigns to their Father's Discipline, never
interrupting it with pernicious fondness: In their riper years, she insensibly
trains them to laudable Qualities* (yet for use not ostentation) her Lectures
and Charms chiefly tending to the banishment of pride and sloth. Having thus
seasoned them with Principles of Thrift and Content, she scrapes not for
portions, nor is solicitous of their preferment, which she trusts may succeed
to her wish, as commonly it does; however she acquits and satisfies her self
with this reasonable confidence, that if they prove not fortunate, they can
scarce be miserable; which yet to our delicate and shiftless Dames frequently
happens. But will our She-gallant now adays admit any such vulgar duty as the
tendance of her Children; surely, that she leaves for Mechanics, assigning the
drudgery thereof to Hirelings, who accordingly perform it to treble Charge and
Expense* as needless, as fruitless: she hears not their complaints or wants,
much less sees them, but in their sad effects, incurable lameness or sickness,
to the sudden expiring even of fruitful Families; no, the importance of her
Dresses or Treatments affords not leisure for such trifles; or if to
supererogate she mind them by fits, yet through her partiality or uneven
Temper, such regard proves worse than neglect. On her Sons (especially the
eldest) of course she dotes* underhand fomenting their stubbornness to the
overthrow of whatsoever their Father with his Wisdom builds. In fine, her chief
care is to cultivate their pride, the rankest Weed of our Nature, by good
parents so industriously subdued: To her own Idea she frames them, for indeed
better Principles or Manners than she has how should she infuse? so that
people in the Streets scarce forbear to proclaim them Chips of the old Block;
and at last in despite of their Father's provision, it is great odds, they marry
either to his disparagement or their Husbands undoing.

The exact survey of their own Estates is a skill and employment more worthy of
prudent Landlords, than some other their Entertainments, plausible indeed but
not practicable; were it more in request, good Families would not so fast
decline. It would impartially discover to them their strength or weakness, and
acquaint them what indeed they have to spend; which I dare pronounce is seldom
half so much as Fame and Opinion suggest unto them: For computing Revenues now
adays with their manifold losses and Reprises, they prove in effect like some
fruits, little more than Shells and Parage; which how generally soever
discoursed, is seldom rightly stated, save by such as have smarted for their
Experience of it. But how harsh a note is this to our Damsels, enured to reckon
by thousands! Can they disgorge what they have so well digested, or patiently
hear, that in the estimate of their Husband's Income, there happened, forsooth,
an unlucky mistake of Pounds instead of Nobles? Alas! that might endanger the
gilding of their next Coach, the reducement of their Equipage, their
forbearance of London, etc. No, there is a trick worth two of that, even to set
the best foot forward; not to brook such unsavory Truths, but rather to their
own and their Husband's Credit, to admit the popular Cry, and with it conspire
to his Bane.

Of like necessary use is it to be versed in the Rates and Measures of household
Expense, which in wellgovern'd Families should be almost as regular as the
victualling of Fleets; to have the faculty of handsome, but withal provident
Housekeeping and Entertainment; of procuring Equipage and Furniture of all
sorts at the best hand, likewise of adjusting, preserving and repairing it: for
want whereof our English Ladies are said to have contracted such obloquy in
Holland, where by reason of the constant dearness of Provisions, and endless
Payments, no man of what Estate soever without great frugality can thrive or
well subsist, that a Dutch man scarce marries one of them without the loss of
his Tradingcredit. Some of these Qualities the right-bred Huswife sucked in
with her Mothers milk, others she learned with her A B C, and for the rest
proves no Truant, her Genius being active, and fixed on the Idea of Huswifery
as its proper object; wherein her defects, if any, are of course supplied by
her Husbands Experience, whose Advice, whether directory or monitory, finds her
ear always open to it. But what hope of enammelling a mere Flint? what thought
of instructing persons too dull to apprehend of themselves, too froward to
learn? Offer our Female Libertines any Counsel that trenches on their Vanity,
or pinches their Sloth, it is at best durus sermo, and accordingly with them it
speeds; reckoning or contrivance, it should seem, are as much below their
breeding as Thrift: Rather they have conferred notes with the good Fellows,
whose generous Maxim, they say, is to drink as long as the Cup will ramn; the
utmost extent of their Husband's credit (if they can carry it by hook or by
crook) being the only limit of their Expense: otherwise Estates could not be so
commonly blown up without noise, and as it were with white Powder, nor mouldred
away by good, that is, demure and well-meaning Wives, faster, methinks, than
even bad Husbands dispatch them.

Of Wives advisedly taken from a frugal Stock, the same proof may resonably be
expected as of Trees chosen out of a Nursery, the Glebe wereof is sound but
barren, and removed into a richer Soil; or like a Rhenish Grape transplanted
into a Southern Climate, the Race whereof is said to be our right Canary. Such
are commonly unacquainted with delicacy or sloth, and early seasoned with this
Principle, That their esteem for Virtue and Huswifery is their best Portion: so
as the improvement of their Condition by Marriage to their Native Qualities,
must needs add that of Content and Complacence, than which nothing is in Wives
more amiable. The Restraint of others proves their Manumission, and they are
apt to err on the safer hand; Retirement: or if their sprightly Genius with
their Youth should incline them to the Gayety of Towns and Treatments, yet not
being naturalized thereto by Custom, they are by the sense of their Duty or
personal Engagement without violence reclaimed. Nor is this happy Temper only
considerable in it self, but in the sovereign influence it has on their
Husbands, thereby often weaned from their Extravagancies: whereas there is no
Purgatory to the unquiet Conversation of some Wives, when their boundless
appetites or lofty expectations are not gratified. The turbulency of such, if
Solomon may be credited, turns a Palace into a Cottage, or, if we will trust
Experience, into Bridewel or Bedlam. Nay though it be but the common Chagrin,
and little moods of our peevish and affected Dames, the endless impertinence of
them too often so disturbs men of better Principles and Humor, that finding
themselves uneasy sojourners in their Houses, under pretense of Civil
Inclination, have courted their divertisement in the freedom of Lodgings at
London, or welcome of Inns and Taverns which their Purses command. But then
whilst the Lawless freedom of these Planets by inviting Courtship, if it betray
them not, yet seldom fails of exposing even the best of them to their Husband's
just resentment, nay to Lampoons and Vulgar Censures, with indelible stains of
Honor; the wise and decent Reservedness of these fixed Orbs, as it worthily
endears them to their Husbands, so it preserves no less their Fame than their
Virtue, and perfumes their Memory.

And as there is nothing more fulsom than the pride of these goodly Ciphers at
the Springtide of prosperity, so in any ebb of Fortune, by their drooping and
whining they at best discover their dross. Take from these Birds of Juno their
Train, and is there ought so vulgar, indeed so despicable? But though their
Spirits sink, it is great odds their Spleens rise; and then whether the decay
proceed from public Calamity, private misfortune, or, as too often it happens,
through their own fault, Reason and Patience give place to Fury and Clamor:
the portions they brought are aloud objected, and their Husbands (though indeed
the chief, if not the only sufferers) arraigned for betraying their innocent
wives to the distress of missing their Coaches and Liveries: the noise and
anguish whereof is to ingenuous Natures so sensible, that it drives them as it
were in their own defense to purchase their present quiet with ruinous
compliance and concealment of their Exigencies; it being observed that our
Domestic breaches (now so familiar) have generally their rise from the first
visible decay of Husbands in their Estates, and their necessary abridging the
superfluity of such Wives: for they are mere Summer-friends, and a sort of
Legal Concubines; their love depends on their fare, and no Penny, no Pater
noster, is their Principle. What a Cordial is this to men in affliction! such a
female Comfort for all the world had Job. Much happier is the Omen of generous
Matches, Desert being the woman's Dowry: To such the vicissitudes of Fortune are
no surprisals. The Virtue of their Education qualifies even their prosperity,
and for the most part secures it: but if the same wings of wealth which brought
it to them, should carry it from their Husbands, they retreat in order, and
easily renew their old acquintance with Thrift; nay, with less reluctance can
they go, if need be, to America, than most Wives are drawn from London into
some neighboring County; as owning their Husbands welfare for their only
interest, and that for their Country whither his occasions call them; whose
very Eclipse by such cheerful aid and compliance proves to him a state rather
of Temperance and Retirement than want.

But lastly and chiefly, great Portions (as before was hinted) are dearly
purchased with answerable Joyntures to the exceeding detriment of good
Families, by keeping the Heirs almost in perpetual Nonage: whereas by
dispensing in point of Fortune, all such pretenses vanish, and moderate
provisions (consistent with the well-being thereof) are cheerfully embraced;
which being accordingly made in in Bar of Dower, and (for the greater share)
limited to continue only during Widowhood, are likewise the best, perhaps only
sufficient Fences against those fatal Trespasses and Disseisins, which commonly
ensue from the rashness of young wantons in the choice of their second Beds:
the Fortune-catcher through his silly purchase and groundless confidence,
proving in the mean time little better than a Pimp to his ignoble successor,
and a Butcher to his posterity, exposed almost as a certain prey to the
Intruder. For daily experience acquaints us, that as Widows (so continuing, and
honorably retaining the name and memory of their first Affections) are of all
others the most faithful and happy Guardians and Executors; so there is no
hostility to the unnaturalness of Mothers, when forsaking as it were their
Colors, and betaking themselves to the adverse party, they become a kind of
Stepdames to their own Brood.

I foresee you will meet with several Objections, commonly urged in excuse of
that ignoble Principle and practice, viz. the dispensing with any thing in
Marriage rather than Money, and compassing the Golden Wedge on any terms, which
with one of your Judgment must even carry little weight: however I shall
briefly examine the most material of them.

It Is alleged 1. That these Maxims and Assertions, at least diverse of them,
are obnoxious to the fair Ladies frowns. 2. If the maintenance of Wives be so
costly as is here surmised, and if there be such failour or contingency in the
Revenue of Land, the greater still the obligation of marrying for Money. 3. By
dispensing with Portion suitable to the Estate, men incurr the popular Censure
of being overreach'd in their bargain, and so forfeit the esteem for
discretion. 4. Joyntures answerable to the Quality of Husbands, and our Legal
rate of Dower seem decent if not necessary. 5. Settlement of Estates upon
Marriage has been ever reputed and found the best preservative of them from
being squandred by the profuseness, or forfeited by the precipitancy of Youth.
6. Straitness of Fortune is generally attended with meanness of Education. 7.
There are no such Qualities in women as can recompense want of Portion, nor any
such defects as to counterpoise a vast Dowry, and therefore those surmises
vain. 8. Such is the Lottery of Marriage through the disguises of women, that
the whole Advice seems fantastical; true worth having no outward Mark. 9. It Is
confined to Gentlemen of great and clear Estates who are few, and therefore at
best of little use. 10. Even of such the greatet part marry at an age scarce
capable of those Counsels, being swayed by their amorous inclinations; and
whatever caution is used in the Bargain, yet by the insinuation of crafty Wives
'twill be afterward easily defeated. 11. To redress even abuses of such
prescription is a frivolous Enterprise, neither will men be so dazeled with
mere flourishes, as not to see and pursue their solid Interests.

To the first it is readily answered, That all fair and deserving Ladies will, I
doubt not, take me for their Advocate; and if they smile, the frowns of others
shall the less concern me: under that Imperial Banner I assure my self both of
safety and victory.

To the second I cannot better reply, than by referring to the several
Antitheses betwixt Huswives and Gallants; which, together with the notorious
fallacy and encumbrance of great Portions stop the mouth of this Objection. To
say the truth, it is with women as with Fire and Water; nothing so destructive
where they prevail or exceed, nothing so innocent and useful in their proper
limits.

To the third; Men should act with Reason, not regarding popular Censure, their
real welfare being of greater consequence to them, than the verdict of that
incompetent Jury. As to their being overreach'd, may not the retaining the
Dominion of their Estates abundantly salve their Credit? Surely they will be so
far from fearing the Censure of wise men, as rather to win their applause, and
perhaps invite their imitation.

The fourth might better have been urged formerly, when Widows were indeed
such. But if in moderate and limited Joyntures there be Error, it is at least a
safe one, reparable at pleasure, in case of special confidence or desert; the
other mischief in case of demerit, being irretrievable: nay, the very
reservation of Power in the Husband to oblige or resent is perhaps the life of
his Authority.

To the fifth, Though no humane Providence be entire and complete; yet the
absolute dependence of eldest Sons on their Father's bounty is the likeliest
means to secure their Duty, and curb their Perverseness and Extravagance:
however let them at least own their ruin to their own, not their Father's
folly; and if perish they must, die rather like men than beasts, ordained to be
innocently sacrificed.

The sixth reflects untowardly on our Gentry, who though disabled to raise
Mountains for their Daughters, yet oft-times recompense that want with generous
and useful Breeding, such as Money perhaps cannot compass, and will therefore
disdain that Vulgar scandal.

The seventh bids defiance to common Experience, which affords frequent
Examples of Wives, by whose Huswifery, without advantage of Dowry, weak and
encumbred Estates, even in adverse times, have been notably rescued and
improved: but of eminent Landlords by hundreds, without any visible
improvidence of their own, strangely undone through the Vanity of women. Nay,
there is scarce any numerous Brood, which presents not this variety even among
Sisters; some whereof were born for the support of Husbands, others for their
downfall: so considerable is that Sex to the Luster or Eclipse of Families.
Indeed were Wives but so just or goodnatur'd as to continue their Maiden-thrift
in their married State, Husbands would grow but too rich.

The eighth reduces the matter to blind Chance, disabling not only Reason but
Sense. Much I allow to the Artifice of Women in appearing to advantage, and
with such outsides forbid Minds are affected, like greedy Vermin caught with
slight Baits; there would not otherwise be such Devotions paid to such sorry
Saints: But men of noble Intention are not so enchanted; Real worth being to
such as discernible from Affectation, as fine Silver from Alchymy* or true
Beauty from Dawbing.

For the ninth, I admit Gentlemen of entire Estates to be herein concerned, but
not exclusively to persons of all degrees having any solid Fund of Revenue;
these Maxims being proportionably Universal.

The tenth is grounded on the presumption of inexcusable Fondness in most that
marry. Truly I have not of late observed that amorous humor to be very
predominant in our Matches; the other and worse Extreme of preferring a
Licentious Celibate, or marrying with a vicious intent, being, methinks, in far
more request. Some there will ever be, in whom Fortune and Folly conspire to
their ruin: These I abandon as Strays and Forfeits to the Lord of the Manor
where they first light; but they are comparatively fools. The danger of
defeating Conditional Settlements seems yet more remote, there being little
fear of such dotage in those Husbands who had once the Prudence to make them;
and less encouragement, one would think, for Wives, by such plain dealing, to
proclaim their design of Second Marriage.

The last were indeed a just Exception, if herein I pretended to more than the
advising my Friend: The subject I confess is copious enough; one might without
straining argue the importance of it to the public, what price, and
consequently what life it would give to the languishing Virtues of Women; what
a Curb it would prove, not only to that Sexes Vanity, but to Luxury in general,
it being notorious that in effect all our ruinous Pomp may be charged on women's
account, as being either by them, or for them incurred. What a sumptuary Law it
would prove, if the extravagance of Wooings and Weddings were reduced to their
simple Decorum; How it would restore the Luster of our Gentry; how it would
check the pride of our Money-monger, chiefly founded in their greedy swallowing
of his treacherous Baits; How it would advance the noble interest of Land, by
rescuing it from the snare of cheap and prostitute Encumbrances, etc. But you
see I trouble not the Policks, leaving our Wits to dispute, whether the general
disallowing or limiting of Marriage* portions were profitable or practicable:
Let others use their discretion, and take their fortune, you, I dare say, are
neither Votary nor slave to Custom.

To conclude this tedious Epistle, Marry in God's name; your Ancestors deserve
and require it of you, who both by their Virtue raised a Family worthy to be
continued, and by their providence left you an Estate sufficient to continue,
nay, to enlarge it. Let no licentious Principle of the Age divert, nor Vulgar
Prejudice deter you from a state of Life for you so expedient; and which for
Gentlemen of your condition, (what ever may be surmised) has no Fetters but of
their own forging: Marry, I say, but generously and circumspectly, even the
most worthy or lovely person you can meet with or hear of. It Is a debt due to
your Posterity that you propagate the best you can; nay you owe it most of all
to your self and your own welfare: if somewhat must be dispensed with (as in
all worldly matters there certainly must) let it be money, since that to my
knowledge you least want: but for the propriety of your Estate, let nothing
wrest it from you, and scorn that all the Bags in London should decoy you to
settle it: reckon it to you as sacred and essential, as to Princes their
Militia or Negative Vote; and part no more with it, than, were you a Sovereign,
you would be bought or cajoled tamely to resign your Scepter. For matter of
Jointure use your own Latitude; but limit the main of it to Widowhood, or the
Heir's Minority, as you see cause. Be not so supine as to make no provision
against Power; above all beware of Liquid Rents: Be Captain of your own Pinnace
whatever it cost you; what you lose in the Hundred, you will abundantly recover
in the County; and though you finger not a Token, know it is the best bargain
you will ever drive. For your general and final direction take that of the
Roman Poet, -- Veniunt a Dote Sagittae: With this of the famous Epigrammatist,

Inferior Matrona suo sit, Prisce, Marito,
Haud aliter fiunt foemina virque pares.
And thus heartily wishing prosperity to your noble Resolutions, I always
continue,

SIR, Your Faithful Kinsman and Servant A. B.

Books Printed for and Sold by William Miller.
CRadock's Knowledge and Practice, Quarto. His Principles, Octavo.

Richard Ward, his two very useful and compendious Theological Treatises: the
first showing the nature of Wit, Wisdom and Folly; the second describing the
Nature, Use, and Abuse of the Tongue and Speech, whereby principally Wisdom and
Folly are expressed; wherein also are diverse Texts of Scripture touching the
respective heads explained. Octavo.

Fettiplace's Christian Monitor, earnestly and compassionately persuading
sinners unto true and timely Repentance, by the serious view of seven weighty
Considerations. Twelves.

Complete Bone-setter. Octavo.

The famous Game of Chess-play. Octavo.

Shelton's Tachygraphia, Latin. Octavo.

Emblems, Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical, expressed in Sculpture, and
applied to these veral Ages, Occasions and Conditions of man, by a person of
Quality. Octavo.

A brief Remembrancer, or the right improvement of Christ's Birthday.

A second Sheet of old Mr. Dod's Sayings, or another Posie gathered out of Mr.
Dod's Garden.

Hunting for Money, the first part.

The Hunting-match for Money, the second part.

Bishop Hall's Sayings concerning Travelers, to prevent Popish and debauched
Principles.

The whole Duty of Man, containing a practical Table of the ten Commandments,
wherein the sins forbidden, and the Duties commanded or implied, are clearly
discovered by famous Mr. William Perkins.

The Muses Fireworks on the fifth of November, or the Protestant's
Remembrancer of the bloody Designs of the Papists in the never-to-be-forgotten
Powder Plot.

By the said William Miller you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or
stitched Books; as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations,
Letters, Orders, Commissions, Articles, with other State Matters; likewise
Books of Divinity, Church Government, Sermons, and most sorts of Histories,
Poetry, Plays and such like; as also Tickets for Funerals ready fitted.

FINIS.

