A GENERAL EPISTLE TO ALL FRIENDS, Who are called and gathered of God, called
QVAKERS.
FRIENDS,
LIve in the life and power and wisdom of God every where, then you live in
Christ the Savior, the Redeemer, the leader of his people Israel the Son of
God, who came not to do his own will; for nothing but life and power, and
wisdom shall stand and be a hiding place in the terrible day at hand;
Therefore feel it, possess it, enjoy it all ye who profess your selves to be
followers of Christ, and remember that a name to live is not enough or to be
counted a follower of the Lamb; but feel and possess the Lambs life which takes
away the sin, that bears the Iniquity, for God is raising his own seed into
dominion and victory over all, and his kingdom which has no end, which shall
abolish all other Kingdoms; feel him born whose right it is to reign upon
whose shoulders the Government must be, Christ the power of God and the wisdom
of God, the leader and preserver of his people, know him all people, who
profess his name in words and appearance in you, or else you are Reprobates,
foolish Virgins, cast-awaies, without life, without power, without wisdom from
above, that is pure and peaceable: so dwell in the dread and power, life and
wisdom of God, that you may be found in Christ Jesus the Savior, in whom the
Father is well pleased, that by him you may be lead, guided and preserved to
Gods glory, and be the wise Virgins possessing the Oil, which makes glad the
soul, the substance, the Light, life and power of God, in which alone is
salvation and not in another, for the day of trial is come, that nothing will
stand but life it self, Therefore every one to his Tent, dwelling in the
retiredness, in the stilness, in the Patience, feeling the life of God, the
undaunted spirit that lifts up a standard when the enemy comes like a Flood,
and be not deceived with dreams or a spirit of slumber, but be awakened and
feel the power that raises the dead and quickneth up to God, and keeps in the
awakenedness, your hearts open unto him your understandings cleared by the
thundering power of the Lord God, which cleares all, which drives away the
Clouds and causes the showers to descend, to the refreshing of the seed
immortal; in which alone the blessing is, to whom the mercyes are, and with
whom the Covenant is and promises are Amen for ever.

So all feel and possess the pure power of the eternal God, then you feel the
Covenant and live in the Covenant, then you live with God as Enoch did, in the
new and living way which abides for ever to all Generations; Christ the seed
which bruiseth the Serpents head, and reconciles to God the Father of it: So
all friends who feel the power of God, live in it, dwell in it, then you dwell
in Gods Covenant which he made with Abraham and his seed for ever, then you
know the words of God in the mouth of the seed, which never goes out, but is in
the Covenant, in the power Christ for ever, who is come to destroy the works of
the Devil, to smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and to slay the wicked
with the breath of his lips, to whom all judgment is committed in Heaven and
Earth, to whom every knee must bow, of things in Heaven and things in earth,
this is the higher power let every soul be subject to it, guided by it, possess
it, live in it, then you know Christ as the Wife the Husband, then you know the
Church that is in God the pillar and ground of truth; but who are from the
power of God in themselves are from Christ are from the new Covenant, are from
the wisdom of God, are from the leader are from the Redeemer and Savior, and
not Members of his body, such know not the Redeemer to live, such know not the
Bride the Lambs Wife, the Kings daughter which is All glorious within, such
know not the Cross of Christ, for the Cross of Christ is the power of God,
which croseth, binds and limiteth the self will and wandering desires of the
earthly man, such are the foolish Virgins, with the Lamps, a form, without the
Oil, the power the anointing which makes the face to shine, gives boldness,
strength, joy, peace, courage and dominion over all the contrary

Now is the day come which shall manifest all things; who are in the power and
who are out of the power, for who are in the power are in Christ the Savior,
the Covenant of God, and who are out of the power are out of Gods Covenant, in
which all things are good and blessed, and so are yet in the fall, not raised
by the power, but in the Curse and the ground of it, so read within, with the
light of Gods witness and see the ground in which ye now stand, whether it be
in Gods Covenant the power and life and wisdom from above, or whether out of
it, in the alienation in the lower power the fall, out of Gods Covenant and
life, which gives dominion over all the world, death, hell and the Grave, and
the darkness and powers of it.

So all who dwell in Gods Covenant, you dwell in that which he has remembered,
which was with Abraham his friend, (who rejoiced to see his day) and with Isack
and Jacob in whom the seed was called, for whose sake he will plead with all
flesh, and work wonderful things for the deliverance of his chosen remnant; so
feel that which makes you valiant for the truth upon earth, read within, upon
the earth let the truth be, and you in it valiant and bold, giving up all in
the will of the eternal God for he loves a cheerful giver, and in so doing you
will feel (in the stilness) blessings and rest with him in the midst of trials
and Tribulations, for by his outstretched Arm is he gathering his seed from
the four corners of the earth, and will bring them into the holy land which is
prepared a rest for them that love him: So all friends dwell in the truth it
self, in Gods power and wisdom and fear which will keep the mind staid and
stable, in dominion over all the fear and threats of men, and out of all the
snares and temptations of the Devil, and the world, in him which was before the
fears, the snares, the world, the Devil and the persecuting spirit was and will
be when it shall be no more for ever, in which your souls will rejoice and
praise the Lord who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light
in which is no occasion of stumbling, but keeps in the pure feeling and
discerning moderation and setlednesse, above the dark Mountains where we feel
him daily Gods delight, before the Hills, the Mountains or the foundations of
the earth were laid, in whom are all the treasures of life, wisdom and
knowledge, so all friends dwell in him, and lie down in him where none can make
you afraid.

And keep your meetings every where, and wait in the dread of God, and be
zealous for his name and truth, and live in the retiredness in which his
terrible power arises in his lambs and babes, to guide and preserve them in
Dominion and life over all, to his glory and their comfort and pure
refreshment, in his everlasting Covenant which changes not, and keep out of
all extremes to the right hand or left, but judge it, and rule and reign with
Christ the unchangeable Covenant of God, whose kingdom is not of this world,
whose Throne is Heaven and the earth his footstool, here you dwell in the elect
which cannot be deceived nor overcome.

So all live in the power the love of God, out of all rents, strife, prejudice
and contentions in Christ the Covenant, the holy Mountain where there is no
hurting nor destroying, but dominion over all changeables known in the free
life and seed which has no end, of which God is Father which changes not, and
out of covetousness which is Idolatry and slavish fears of trials and want
therein, and out of carelessness and excess in the moderation and wisdom of
God, and fashion not your selves like unto them that know not God, but know and
follow him that is not of this world, whose garment is without seam or rent,
woven from the top to the bottom, whose life and wisdom and doctrine the
world cannot receive: So hears the Cross known to the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the^^y, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father but of the
world, so all in the Cross dwell (which crucifies to the world and the nature,
spirit and ways of it) in which the saints glory is, and peace which gives to
feel over all the earth and unclean spirits in Gods kingdom for ever to reign.

So in his eternal power and dominion, life wisdom and peace, the Lord God
Almighty keep and preserve all his upright hearted and tender Lambs unto
himself pure and spotless unto the end Amen.

This i^ a faithful Testimony and visitation of Gods spirit unto all who
profess his name in this notable day of trial, in which he will make a final
separation between the two seeds, in which none shall abide covered but such as
are covered with the spirit of the Lord.

By one whose soul travels for Sion sake, W. B.....
From the White Lion Prison in Southwark the 9th Month 62.
Printed for W. M.


