A Grievous LAMENTATION OVER THEE O ENGLAND, OR, The greatest part of thy
Inhabitants, who have withstood the Day of their Visitation.

With the WORD of the LORD to thy Rulers and Teachers, who continue persecuting
and oppressing the dear Children and People of the Most High, whom he has
raised in thee, and sent to warn thee, that thou might have repented and
been saved from the wrath to come, which now shall speedily overtake thee.

Through one born within thy borders, William Bailey.

And he spread it before me, and it was written within and without, and there
was written therein, Lamentations, and Mourning, and Woe.

Read Ezekiel. chap. 2. throughout. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, (thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee) how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and ye would not, Behold your House is left unto you desolate; verily I
say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation, Matt. 23.36, 37.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A grievous Lamentation over thee Oh England, etc.
OH! England! England? Is it thy Lot to be the hissing and the astonishment of
Nations? Has 7. days past over thee, and thou yet remainest (as the Beasts of
the field) without understanding? Must it needs be that many of my Children
must shake of the dust of their feet against thy Rulers and Teachers, and turn
to other Nations, who shall rise up in judgment against thee, because in thee
mighty works have been done, which if the same had been done in Tire and Sidon,
Sodom and Gomorrah, they would have repented? Niniveh shall rise up in
judgment against thee, who repented at the preaching of Jonas; for behold a
greater then Jonas has preached in thy streets. But what shall I say? must the
day of thy visitation pass over thy head, and the Summer be ended, and thou not
saved? Must thou be made an example, Oh England, to the whole earth? Must the
noise of thy fall and ruin make the Nations afar off tremble: and to be
awakened, and fear before the Lord, and seek after his salvation? Must the
report come from thee, that must strike the earth with amazement, and cause the
ears of them that hear it to tingle? Oh England! England! what shall I do for
thee? My bowels! my bowels! My heart is pained within me, and I am in sorrow
and distress for thee, as a woman in Travel. How often has the Lord of Hosts
of late sounded in mine ears that thy visitation is nigh over? Thy visitation
is nigh over, or else I must say (as Jeromiah did,) the Lord has deceived me.

Oh England how often have the pleasant showers of the visitations from on high
descended upon thee but where, and amongst whom does the fruits appear to the
praise and glory of the dresser? Is not thy heaven brass, and thy earth become
iron? Are not the clouds returning after the rain in thee? Is not the Sun, and
the Moon, and the Light darkened in thee? And is not thy golden bowl broken?
and the wheel at the Cistern? and art not thou going to thy long home, and the
mourners about the streets? Must thou die without knowledge and be buried in
the sea of misery? Must thy name become a Proverb? and thy remembrance an
astonishment? what nation was like to thee, in the days that are gone? what
oportunities have thou had of being made the praise of the whole earth. But now
thou art become hardened, as if thou were raised up, that God's power and
wonders might be made known upon thee. Must thou indeed be destroyed, as God
overthrew Egypt? Is Sodom thy sister? Must the plagues and the judgments that
are written, come upon thee? Must thou fall as the handful after the
Harvest-man, and to be cut down as the grass before the Mower? Must not just
Lot, whose soul is vexed with thy unlawful deeds, be first delivered? Must not
Noah be in the Ark before the flood comes? Then shall the destroyer pass
through thee as a Giant to run his race, and thou shall be destroyed with a
sore destruction* what Lamentation shall I take up for thee, O England? How
have my bones bin as shattered, and my sinews as torn in the remembrance of thy
day? How does my belly tremble, and my lips quiver at the feeling of the sense
of the burden that is coming upon thee? Oh that I had in the wilderness a
lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might go from this People, and leave
them. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night! then should I be eased. How deep is the sense of thy
Calamity entered into my soul, which makes me stagger like a drunken man, and as
a reed shaken with the wind? Oh my soul, why art thou so disquieted for this
people? why do thou not cast off their burden, and be still? Why do thou
meditate their terror in the night seasons? Why art thou as as a bird ready to
hasten into nations a far off? Why does thy life draw as with a cart-rope into
the uttermost-parts of the earth.

Is thy native Country become a strange Land? Or do thou love strangers more
then these? Oh that I might know why thou weepest thus in secret, and art
become as a sorrowful woman? Have thou lost a son, or do thou desire a son
like Hannah? What aileth thee, Oh my soul! that thou thus travellest night and
day in sorrow, as a mother to bring forth, or as a child that cries for its
mother? Do none of thy brethen partake of thy burdens, and do not their bowels
feel they distresses? yes surely; Is it not because I did once love thee, O
England! and because I now pity thee, seeing thy dreadful Doom, that I thus
weep over thee? How art thou fallen, O Land, by thine iniquity! Even thy Kings
and thy Rulers, thy Teachers and thy Leaders, thy Judges and thy Captains, thy
Mighty men and thy Mean men, the Master and the Scholar, the Mistress and her
Maid, the Buyer and the Seller? O the Darkness, such as was in Egypt, which may
be felt! O the hardness of heart, like an Adamant harder then flint! O the
blindness, the born-blindness that is in thee, and covering thee as a garment!
O the Pride and fullness, lifted-upness, impudency, and height of Ambition that
is in he! Can it be higher? or can it be uttered by the tongue of man? O thou
Lucifer, that thus dwell, actest and reignest in thy Children! God's eternal
judgments shall be upon thee, and his vengeance shall consume thee, and the day
is at hand. O the wantonness, Stubbornness profaneness, lewdness, crookedness,
cruelty, hypocrisy, deceit and oppression that is in thee, O thou England!
Thou have killed the Prophets of the Lord, and stoned and persecuted them that
he has sent unto thee. O that thou were not blinder then the Sodomites, and
darker then Egypt, and deafer then the Adders, and more brutish then the
Beasts of the field; then might thou hear or see something of thy
Visitations. What is persecution and cruelty about Religion and Worship yet
found in thee? Are thy Teachers yet like Briars, and thy Rulers like Thorns in
the sides of the tender Lambs of the most High? Be advised, O Land, what thou
do against his people; For God has yet a small Remnant to be gathered out of
thy bowels, whose cries and groans he has heard, and will plead their Cause
against all their oppressors by the fire of his jealousy, which shall consume
the Briars and Thorns in one day.

O thou England, my native Country! Art thou become a wilderness? Is the
Remnant of the Lord in thee like the Apple tree in the midst of the trees of
the forest, and as a Lilly among Thorns? Are the Tearers, Devourers,
Scratchers and Prickers yet found in thee? Is not the Land cursed that brings
forth these, after so much rain and fruitful seasons? And is not their end
burning? Yea everlasting burning.

What! is preaching the Gospel of Christ Jesus freely and publicly in
Villages, Towns and Cities become a transgressions? What! Must the meetings of
the dear children and Servants of God be called unlawful, and be broken up by
the lewd drunkards, swearers and profane persons, scoffers and scorners in
thee, as mine Eyes have seen, and trickled down with Tears to behold it, with
an heart breaking Lamentation over thee? O England! England! that I could plead
with thee, as with one man face to face. Did thou ever persecute me and my
Brethren before we turn our faces toward the Paradise of God, from whence we
were driven in Adam by transgression? Did thou ever abuse, beat, or imprison
me? did thou ever reproach or revile me, when I walked in vanity, wantonness
and pride, and in the foolish fashions and gestures of this World? Nay, did
thou not say well of me, when Gods witness in my own Conscience did reprove and
condemn me? Did thou ever cast me into Prison for breaking Gods Laws, for
lying, or for swearing, or any other kind of profaneness? But how soon did
thou lay hold on my innocent throat, when I began to turn my face toward Sion,
and to speak the language of Canaan? How often have thou dragged me upon the
stones of thy streets, and smitten me on the cheek-bone, and plucked off mine
hair which God has numbered? How often have thy Priests, Teachers, and chiefest
professors abused me? How often have thy soldiers mocked and beaten me, with
the rude people shouting and renting my garments? How often have I been
imprisoned since my heart was turned with brokenness and desires to seek the
living God in truth and righteousness? Surely above these ten times as unjustly
as a child from its Mothers breast. Yet for all this I never sought revenge
against thee, but often wept in secret to my God for thee, who did still quiet
my heart in the contentedness of his own life and will, seeing his Counsel and
end through all these things. And I am yet so far from seeking revenge, though
now again in bonds, through the unjust dealing of some of thy Priests and
Rulers, that I have said in my heart with tears unto God, O that I might lay
down my life for England, that I might dye for England; which the Lord knows,
I could freely do, that she might yet repent and be saved. In whose presence I
have freely forgiven all mine enemies that have thus dealt with me, and can say
to Richard Brown, the greatest amongst many called Aldermen of London, as my
dearly beloved Brother E. B. did on his death bed, the Lord forgive thee, if it
be yet possible; whose prisoner he died, and yet lives in my bosom, and the
rest of my brethrens, as he is a Martyr of Jesus. Oh thou England! Have not we
the witness of Heaven and Earth, that we are the Children of the most High,
whom thou have thus abused and persecuted, robbed and spoiled? and do thou
think to prosper, by persevering in these things against them? Nay, let me once
more tell thee from the everlasting God, That it shall be thy ruin. What can
thou do with us, who fear not man, who can but kill the body, and after that
has power to do no more? We have given up our lives freely to live and to die
unto our God, and to hold fast his Name which is truth and righteousness, and
to confess him before men while we have a being; and thou shall never overcome
us though thou should kill or imprison to death all our persons or bodies, if
it were possible; thy Fathers have not overcome the Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs of Christ Jesus in the days past; neither have thou overcome them, whom
thou have beaten and imprisoned to death among us in these days; but they have
overcome thee, and their Life is risen again; of which we are witnesses; and
its with us, and remains with us for ever; whose blood cries loud in the Ears
of the Lord Almighty, who will avenge and plead their Innocent cause. O
England! are thy Rulers yet again saying, that the Quakers will spread and
overrun the Land? Have not I heard them say, we must prevent them, least they
become very Numerous, or more then we* and have not thy teachers run and
complained to them, that they might be suppressed, yes surely in my sight and
hearing. And was not this the language of Egypt, their Magicians, wisemen, and
Rulers? let us deal wisely with them, least they multiply and become great in
Number, etc. And were not the plagues poured forth upon that Land till Pharioh
and his Host were destroyed? and is not God the same, and his seed and
children the same, for ever?

Hear, O England! and all thy Rulers and teachers, and all the Inhabitants of
spiritual Egypt and Sodom, thus says the Lord God, Your Counsel shall come to
naught, your purposes shall be abolished and made void, your rage is in vain,
your subtilty and wisdom shall be confounded, my dread shall fall upon you, ye
light and vain rulers, who have taken upon you to sit in Judgment against my
people. Behold you shall sit in the dust, and you shall gnaw your tongues for
pain and vexation, the day of your howling is at hand, in which you shall cry
to the Rocks and Mountain, to hide you from my presence. Ye hypocrites, ye
wanton ones, will ye not tremble at my presence? have not I set bounds to the
Sea? that though it toss and mount up? roar and swell, it cannot pass my
decree. Will you strive with your Maker, ye potsheards? will ye fight against
God. Are you stronger then he that made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all
things therein by his Power? Am not I he that overthrew Sodom, and cut Rahah,
and wounded the Dragon, and drowned the Egyptians in the Sea. Behold I will put
my hook in your nose, and my Bridle in your Jaws, and turn you backwards ye
devourers, ye beasts of the field, and my people shall spread, and my seed
shall increase, and be as the sand, and as the stars of Heaven; and the Earth
shall be filled with the knowledge of my Glory, as the waters covers the sea.
And you shall not prevail against them. Nay, though the whole earth should be
gathered together against my people, they shall not prosper, but be confounded
and broken to pieces, and become as the chafe before the wind, and as stubble
before a consuming fire; I the Lord have spoken it.

When they heard that, they were cut to the heart and took counsel to slay
them; then stood there up one in the counsel, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a
Doctor, of Law etc. And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to your
selves what ye intend to do as touching these men, etc.

And now I say unto you, refrain from these men and let them alone for if this
work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot everthrow
it, least happily ye he found even to fight against God. Read Acts. 5.27. to
the end, and consider it.


From my prison Chamber at Hartford the 3d. Month. 1663.
THE END.

