A Testimony of Truth AGAINST All the Sowers of Dissension, Strife and Discord,
amongst the People of God, by what Practice, or under what Pretense soever.

Being intended principally for Wales, yet elsewhere to be disposed by
Friends, as in the Counsel of the Lord they shall be directed; that wheresoever
any have made use of my Name upon such an account, it may be ordered to do its
service.

Also its desired, that all they whom it chiefly concerns, into whose hands it
may come, that they would read it through with Patience and Moderation, and
judge of it in the righteous Judgment of Truth.

Did thou not sow good Seed in thy field? from whence then has it Tares? He
said unto them, An Enemy has done this, Mat. 13.27, 28.

And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art
cursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the field. Genesis 3.14.

Here you may see who is the Father of all the Sowers of evil Seeds.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

A Testimony of Truth AGAINST All the Sowers of Dissension, Strife and Discord,
amongst the People of God, by what Practice, or under what Pretense soever, etc.
My dear Friends,
WHereas I understand (by a Letter from Wales, which came to my hand) that some
bad People in those parts (who are led by a contrary spirit, of prejudice and
enmity, into marks and distinctions of Separation, from the faithful Friends
and People of God, in pursuance of J. P's Law, and Curse, by keeping on the Hat
in Prayer, and the like, in opposition to the pure Truth, and them that live
and walk in it) have lately made use of my name, as if they had some
encouragement or strength through me, to carry on a design of Division,
Separation, and Opposition, against the faithful People and Servants of the
Lord. The which being mentioned (or as it were laid to my charge) more then
once, I could do no less (in the behalf of the Truth, and my own Innocence
herein) but bear a faithful and public Testimony against all such things,
expressions or practices whatsoever, tending to division amongst the Lords
People, and also against that unruly spirit from whence any such fruits and
effects proceed, as having no Unity with it. For the Lord knows (and I doubt
not but many hundreds can testify) that I am not a man of strife, or one
causing division or discord among the People of God, but on the contrary,
greatly delighting in Peace and Unity. And for this cause do I labor and
travel in soul and body, that true Love, Mercy and Peace, may daily increase
and abound in, among them, that the Dominion of the righteous Seed all may
witness, (that have any true breathings begotten in them after the living God,
and the knowledge of his Salvation) whose Garment is without Seam or Rent from
the top to the bottom. For I can truly say in the uprightness of my heart, That
I have no greater Joy, than to see and feel my Unity in the pure Truth and
unfaigned Love of God, with them that walk therein, and that Strife and Discord
is an Abomination to me.

Therefore, far be it from me (for ever) to Join hands with such, or any way
encourage them that delight to sow discord among brethren, by any such practice
(as before mentioned) or under any pretense whatsoever; but I do deny, and
testify against all whomsoever, or wheresoever, that shall at any time mention
me, or make use of my Name upon such an account. For the Lord knows (who
searches my heart) That it is the Innocent Seed (in whom guile was never
found, which has long suffered, and been oppressed under the bondage of
corruption) that my Soul daily travels for, that it might be raised up into
dominion, over all the contrary to reign, whose right alone it is, and for the
refreshing and strengthening thereof in the least babe; and not at all to
encourage or strengthen that in any, which does it oppress. For I know right
well, the Lord has determined (and already begun) to break the Oppressor of
his Seed in pieces, in the particular and in the general. And he that gathers
not with Christ the Seed, (and to him who is the Life and the Truth) scatters
abroad, from the Truth and from the Life, and so from the Unity of it, which is
kept in the Bond of Peace.

And therefore I further testify, that if at any time, either from my Words,
Declaration or Writing, any have so wrested or taken them, as to strengthen the
wrong part (in which lodges the prejudice) as to oppose (or make a party
against) the Truth, and them that walk in it (as I perceive some have done)
that such a thing was not at all the intent of them, nor in the thoughts of my
heart, as the Lord knows: Though I do acknowledge, that about five years ago,
in the Prison at Newgate, I did speak some words unseasonable, as in the behalf
of J. P. and unadvised, not so clearly understanding the difference between
Friends and him, (who kept many things from our knowledge, in tenderness to
Truth, and in hope to have recovered him out of the Snares of the Enemy) which
words I spoke in reply, and (indeed, at that instant) in opposition to some
words of J. B. but I soon after saw I had not done well, in so doing, and I
consented to the Judgment of the Lord in my heart against them, and that hasty
inconsiderate part from whence they did proceed, though it was as in a kind of
tenderness to him, upon the account of his Sufferings, which I (and many more)
did judge had been very great. But J. B's. words are fulfilled, That he had
made a Division amongst the Lords people or to that effect; and time, and the
effects has made it manifest; which has been so great and wide, through him,
among them that profess the same Truth, and the burden thereof felt so heavy,
through the stumbling of so many people; that I have said in my heart, in the
true and living sense of the presence of the Lord, That it had been good for
him (and many more) that he had hever been born; and this I write not in the
least tincture of prejudice, or enmity against any person whatsoever, but in
the true Love and Life of God, who is blessed for ever: Though I am sensible,
that some may say, (as I once thought) that this is a hard saying, concerning
one that suffered so much, and bore such a Testimony upon the account of Truth,
and especially from thee, who have been tender toward him, and never appeared
in such a sharp manner as this against him, and his practices before, to speak
so of him (now he is dead and gone, and cannot answer for himself) as Christ
did of Judas, which betrayed him, and went and hanged himself.

As in Answer to this, I never did delight to upbraid any man, or to lay open
the nakedness of any, if with safety, in a clear conscience, I could possibly
cover it; but rather (if I may so speak) have been too favorable in that
respect; but the Lord knows my end and aim in all things (to whom I do
appeal.) And as for that which is dead, I have little to say, one way or other;
I look not at the person of any, either dead or living, in that respect; though
I know there are vessels of Honor, and of Dishonor, which are different; but
its that which lives in them makes the difference. And Judas (people may say)
is dead, and Cain, and Nimrod, and Esau; and why do we mention them now they
are dead and gone, and rake them up out of their Graves, as I. P. said;
foreseeing by the Witness of God what would follow, though he was gone from it:
And I testify, in the Fear, holy Power, Name and Authority of the Lord, that
Judas, nor Cain, never did so much hurt and mischief amongst the Lords people,
as he has done, as to the divertting of the minds of many from the Truth, and
laying stumblingblocks in the way of others, which would have been easily
gathered into the Love of the Truth, and Fellowship of his Children. And Judas
had part of the Ministy, and eat in the same Dish with the Disciples, who were
the true Ministers of Christ, and yet he lifted up his heel against them; as he
has done, in a greater measure: And as for his Sufferings, I leave it, as not
worth mentioning, in comparison of the unrighteousness which has proceeded
from him, and the wickedness which was in his heart: for I can produce a Letter
of his, which I lately found by accident (which I never saw before) which I do
believe, that Judas (nor his brethren, before mentioned) did ever write the
like, which is Abominable, and a shame to mention; yea, the very Heathen (that
know not God) would blush to hear it; against which (at the reading and
consideration of the ground, and effects it would produce, if such a thing
should be received, as a Principle among people) the dreadful power, and holy
zeal of the Lord, did arise in my heart, beyond expression, even against the
Root that bore it, as an unclean depth of Atheism, and Ranterism, as ever I
heard of in all my days; the which had I formerly known that such a thing
would have proceeded from him, I could have done no less then have bo^n a
public testimony against him long ago: But however, its not to late to obey
the motion of the Pure God, when he does require it, for the Truths sake, and
the sakes of some, who have ignorantly followed him in that character of
division before mentioned, who may happily loath, and detest it, and testify
against him, and it, in their heart and practice, when they shall hear,
consider, and believe these things concerning the Author of it; who gave it
forth as a Law, under the penalty of a curse. Though some there are, so far
given up to the spirit of Enmity, that it will be very hard (if ever) for them
to come into the one holy peaceable Spirit of Truth, and Love unfeigned, in
which the Saints Fellowship is, (and ever was) which, if they repent not in
time, will perish for ever in their gainsaying.

And therefore I exhort all, who have any tenderness in them toward God and
his Truth, to beware of letting in Prejudice, or Enmity against any, or to
slight such as God has blessed with his Everlasting spiritual Blessings; but
rather look well to their own goings, and keep clean hands, and shut their eyes
from seeing of evil, that they may dwell with the Everlasting Burnings; for
there is a Generation, that would be plucking out (or at least espying) a Mote
in their brothers Eye, even while there remains a Beam in their own; and such
the Son of God calls Hypocrites, whose hearts assuredly Fearfulness will
surprise in a Day of Trial. And therefore, I say again, in the Love and Fear of
the Lord, take heed of entertaining the least thought of that Root of
Bitterness, which will defile, and has defiled many, but judge it out, in its
first appearance; for it tends first to separate from the feeling and enjoyment
of the blessed presence of the Lord, by which the Soul is refreshed, and
nourished, and has dominion over its Enemies; and so from that Life in which
the Saints Unity stands; and so from having Fellowship with them; and so
professing the same Truth, without the enjoyment of it, and acceptance with it,
makes such, like Cain, who envied his Brother; and therefore said John, Let us
love one another, not as Cain, who slew his Brother; here he mentions Cain, in
that day, upon such an occasion, as an example, knowing that a little prejudice
would eat like a Canker; and said James, What a great matter a little fire
kindles? and will yet kindle, if it be not quenched, by the Water of the Life
of the Lamb, which was slain from the Foundation of the World, (that lies in
wickedness) in which Life is our Fellowship, which gives us dominion over all
the Beasts of the Field, and Raging Waves of the Sea, which cast up mire and
dirt, and cannot rest: But in Christ, the Everlasting Seed, all the upright in
heart have Peace, which God, by his mighty Hand and Arm is exalting over all,
that Truth and Righteousness may have the Dominion, and Kingdom in the hearts
of people, that he may Reign whose Right it is, and all the contrary be subdued
and trodden under foot for ever, and every imagination, that would rise in
opposition against him, be confounded; and every Weapon that is formed, and
every Tongue that rises up against him, may be destroyed for ever, that his
Government may be from Sea to Sea, and the knowledge of his Glory cover the
Earth: This is the work which the Lord has begun, and he will accomplish it,
and bring it to pass, that Everlasting Praises, Honor, and Glory, may be given
to his Great and Glorious Name, over all, for ever and ever, for he is worthy.

So this short Testimony in the Truth, and for its sake, was on me to give
forth, and to clear my own Innocence, that the Truth may appear, to the
satisfaction of all faithful Friends, and tender People, where any such Report
shall come, concerning me, in this Particular; and also to discourage that part
or spirit in any, that lusts to Envy and Prejudice, against the Truth, and
them that walk in it.

This 7th month, 1667. William Bailey.

THE END.

