THE Reformed Monastery; OR, The LOVE Of JESUS.

A sure and short, pleasant and easy way to HEAVEN.

IN Meditations, Directions, and Resolutions to Love and Obey JESUS unto Death.

In two Parts.

The second Edition Revised and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, the
West End. MDCLXXVIII.

depiction of the crucifixion of Christ INRI

Hereby perceive the the Love of God because he laid down his life for us. 1.
John 3.16. Amor meus Crucifixus est -- S. Ignatius The Love of Christ
constrains us. 2. Cor. 5 and 14 F. H. Van. Hou^^ ^^


Imprimatur.

Antonius Saunders, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino GILBERTO
Archiepiscop^ Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex. Aed. Lambeth. Febr. 16. 1675/6.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God JOHN, Lord Bishop of Oxford.
My LORD,
It Is not in regard of my Obligations to you, though I own them with grateful
acknowledgments; it is not in regard of your late most deserved advancement,
though I heartily rejoice at it: It Is in regard of your intrinsic Goodness,
that this Dedication begs your acceptance, and humbly offers it self to you.
Before Lordship and Paternity were added to your Honorable Titles, you was
entitled to this book: your Dignities being dignified by you. I considered not
their eminency, but the eminency of your Virtue and Piety. I know, My Lord,
that you aim at a better reward than this World can give; but that a great
light set on a high place cannot be hid from the eyes of Men, Angels alone
should rejoice in the brightness of yours: you shun praise as much as you
deserve it: you neither desire nor want any thing of Fame. But, My Lord, I
wanted a living example of a sincere and devout lover of JESUS to exemplify my
Discourse: and though (God be praised) many more might be found in this Church,
yet you are one of the fairest and most attractive: insomuch that though it be
easier to write than to do well, yet a better Pattern of a Religious Life might
be drawn from your actions than from my directions.

My Lord, I have just cause to fear that I have indulged my genius too far, and
perhaps some will think that I would have Godliness to be Shorn, and Devotion a
Recluse from the World, which is far from my thoughts or desires: though I must
confess that at first I intended a much different and less defective Treatise
on this so good a subject had not other necessary helps as well as abilities
been wanting. However at the best I could have added nothing to such persons as
your Lordship. The Holy flames of Divine Love that burn in your heart have too
much light and fervency to have received any increase from me: and therefore I
have not aimed at any thing higher than only to assist the weak and fix the
inconsiderate. But, My Lord; though I cannot in the least profit you by this my
poor labor, yet its being owned by you may be very advantageous to me. Your
Reverend and much Honored name will not only credit and recommend my Book, but
also promote its design of winning affectionate Servants and Lovers to JESUS.
This I know you will rejoice to do: Wherefore in presenting my Book to your
Lordship, I humbly beg your blessing on it and its Author, Who is with due
respect and affection,

Your Lordships most dutiful and most humble Servant L. B.

THE PREFACE.
It Is probable that they, who these many years, have cried out Popery (till
they made way for it to come) upon every thing they liked or understood not,
will start and think that their fears are come upon them, at the sight of the
first Title Page: and possibly our Lay-Abbots will also be frighted at it, as
though the dispossessed Coenobites were coming again to lay claim to their old
Mansions and fat Indowments. For my part I wish that theirs may be but pannick
terrors: yet withal, I wish they might so far affect them, as to make the first
have a greater value for that Reformed Religion, and purer worship which then
they would certainly lose; and the last pay Tithes Conscienciously out of those
estates, which then they would be forced to resign. And yet I may, and do
assure them, that if they will read not only the Title, but the Book also, it
will certainly cure them of their fears, if it works no better change upon
them: for its design is not to alter the established Religion, but to make us
more devout and sincere in the profession thereof; nor yet to enrich any
persons with temporal estates, but to make us gather treasures in heaven, and
set our affections on things above.

That the age we live in, is greatly depraved, is no observation of mine; there
are almost as many that complain of it, as there are that contribute to the
increasing of its wickedness. It Is in every man's mouth that virtue being
disgraced, vice is countenanced, and that the numerousness of its votaries,
makes it now impudent, as well as fashionable. Therefore it should be no
difficult matter, to persuade those that have any sense of Religion, or longing
after its rewards, that they ought not to conform themselves to this present
evil world, but choose a better pattern to live by. And the truth is, it matters
not much, whether these be worse than the former times; for the way to life
has all along been straight and narrow, and found and followed but by few: as
that to destruction wide and spacious, and yet crowded by the many. Good men
have always lived in a perverse and crooked generation: So that if it be now,
as it has ever been, those that will enter into life, must follow the narrow
path, though they have but few fellow-travellers: and if it be worse, they must
walk with the greater care and wariness. However it be, the difference must
needs be very great, betwixt the lives and works of those, whose reward and
condition will be so vastly different at last. And therefore whoever will go to
heaven, had need keep at a great distance from that world which lies in
wickedness, and take a much contrary course, to those many who go to
destruction.

But how then? Must we retire into Thebais, with the Fathers of the desert?
Must we confine our selves to the solitude of a Monastic Cell? Or shall we
become Quakers, and profess the sullenness of Melancholy Fanatics? Why, truly
in Popish Countries, the Cloister has engrossed the name of Religion, and they
that would be, or be thought to be devout beyond others, do usually put on a
Friars hood, and embrace the Rule of some Religious Order: and amongst us
Puritanism has usurped the Name of Godliness; and some who, in truth or in
pretense, abhor looseness, or are reclaimed from a vicious life, will too often
forsake not the World, but the Church; as it were to preserve the strictness of
a severer virtue, in the Society of a Separated Brother hood, It Is not to be
doubted but that long before S. Augustine, and even from the beginning, there
has been Civitas dei, and Civitas mundi, children of light, and children of
this world: or to use the modern distinctions the Godly, and the Wicked,
Regular and Secular persons. Not because some have made new vows, wore distinct
habits, or chosen new guides, and separated from the Church: but because some
have lived after the flesh; some after the Spirit; that is, some have followed
Gods revealed will, some only their own, some have obeyed the precepts of
Christ, and too many their own lusts and humors. However I would not make any
exprobrations against either Monks or Schismatics by disobliging truths:
rather commend what is praise worthy in them; because I would have, and it is
every Christians duty, to be really devout, mortified and precise, without
entering the Cloister or the Conventicle.

For indeed I am somewhat jealous, and not without reason, that the engaging
men to be Religious and Virtuous, by other considerations besides their
Christian duty, has done some prejudice to Religion; because now there be some
that fancy self-denial and contempt of the world to belong only to Friars, and
others, that to abstain from swearing and drunkenness, is only the part of a
Puritan: Whereas Christianity binds those duties on all its Professors, and
every one, by his Baptismal vow is bound to perform them; though he does not
submit himself to the Rule of S. Francis, or the dictates of the Assembly.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things, says the Apostle, they are all parts of our duty.
Whatever is good in it self, or any ways a means to make us good, is commanded
or recommended in holy Scripture, is contained in the Christian Rule: wherefore
I say the Christian Professor designing to attain higher degrees of holiness,
the highest pitch of Christian perfection attainable in this life, needs not
separate from the Church, nor make new vows nor wear distinct habits: but only
mind seriously, and sincerely discharge the obligations which he lies under, in
being a Disciple, and a Servant of the Holy JESUS.

My design therefore is not to Incloister particular persons, Vellem universos
Christianos ita vivere, ut qui nunc soli Religiosi vocantur, parum Religiosi
viderentur.
but to make a large Monastery of the whole Commonwealth, at least to make
every family a School of Virtue and Piety, and every man an Ascetick and strict
liver: wishing heartily with Erasmus that they, who hitherto, have been called
Precise and Religious, by way of appropriation, might justly lose that name, by
the more exemplary lives of all other Christians.

But though it be my wish, it is not my hope in the least, to see any such
thing come to pass, by means of this little volume. Many much bigger and better
have not been able to effect it. They that will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, nay, Christ the Lord himself, will be far enough from being persuaded
by the meanest of his servants: And where the Text it self is not regarded, no
Comment can signify much. I mean that if the Holy Religion we own, be not able
to reform our lives; if the Gospel which is here preached and professed in
purity, does not make us holy, it is in vain to expect any other instruments
should prevail. But yet our endeavors ought not to be wanting; it may not be
in vain to diversifie Christian instructions; several ways of persuasion may
affect several persons: and perhaps that which to day is slighted, will to
morrow make a deep impression. However it is more or less the duty of every one
of us, with great S. Paul to try all means that by any means we may save some:
at least that we may save our selves; that if those arguments which we think
most forcible cannot convince others, they may may at least move us to take the
better heed, that after we have preached to others, we our selves be not
cast-aways.

Now to this end (having observed how much in all cases, men will do and suffer
for love) I have thought nothing would more conduce, than to make a Christian
love God with a sincere and devout affection: a devout love being undoubtedly
not only the best part, but also the best instrument of true Religion; an
irreconcilable enemy to sin; a friend, or rather a nurse to all holy virtues.

No enticement could have drawn penitent Magdalen to any of her former sins,
whilst in the fervency of her love, she washed her Saviors feet with her
tears: and it is known by experience that when reading, meditation, the sight of
a dying friend, or any such thing, has softened a man's heart into a religious
temper, temptations will be then so far from prevailing, that they durst not so
much as appear before him. But when he returns to mind earthly things, and has
his thoughts taken up again with the concerns of this present life, he finds
that his spiritual strength decays, by the same proportions that his love
becomes cold, and he grows indevout again.

Love is the Queen, if not the fountain of passions, the great mover and
governor of actions and affections: could we keep the fire of Divine Love
always burning in our breasts, it would be the most powerful and best
instrument of Holy-living; it would make self-denial and the yoke of Christ
easy, it would make acts of virtue and Religion pleasant; and it would make us
delight in pleasing God, as much as we naturally do in pleasing our selves.
Therefore I have made it my aim and design in the following Pages, to seize
upon the affections: to inkindle in the hearts of Christians the heavenly
flames of the love of God. To that end, I have represented the more general
benefits of God to mankind, and especially that of Redemption, by the greatest
demonstration of love that ever was given, the death of the Blessed JESUS:
which, if duly considered, would be an irresistible motive to love him. I have
showed the power, the pleasure, and the great advantages of love; and I have
used devout meditations and ejaculations, as it were to transport our souls to
heaven by love, for to adore that God, whom love brought down from thence to
save us. It Is certain that most of them that perish, perish for want of
consideration; and I have heard dying men wonder at themselves, how they could
be so stupid, as not to mind those things which are of an infinite concern, and
should rather take up all our thoughts and our cares, than be neglected or
forgot one only moment. Israel does not understand, my people does not sider,
Isa. 1.3.

Love may be said to be that fire which God would have always to burn upon his
Altar, Lev. 6.12. that is, in our hearts, which are his Temple, where the
sacrifices of good works and the incense of devotion should always be offered
to him: now that sacred fire must have fuel to entertain it; it must be
nourished by reading good books, and especially by frequent and pious
meditations. Wherefore I have endeavored as much as I could to feed those holy
flames, by representing things as they are; and I would have every Christian,
seriously and often to consider, what God is, what he has done, what he does,
and what he will do for us, if we love him sincerely: as also, what we are,
whence we come, whither we go, and how easy it is for us to be eternally
happy, if we will set our affections upon God, who deserves them so infinitely.
Doubtless inconsideration is the cause why God is not loved! It is not possible
men could resist the charms of his love, if they would open the eyes of their
mind and of their faith to view them!

But how few is there that mind attentively their obligations to love God? how
few that seriously ponder how much it is their duty and their interest to love
him heartily, who is infinitely lovely in himself, and infinitely good to us?
or rather, how fully is the prophecy fulfilled, Iniquity shall abound and the
love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 24.12. To how many Christians might our
Blessed Savior now say, as once to the Jews, I know you, that you have not the
love of God in you, John 5.42. How justly might now S. Paul complain, all men
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21. And how
justly might our Blessed Lord, the great lover of men, complain in the words of
his Apostle, I will gladly spend and be spent for you; (or rather, I have
gladly spent, and been spent for you) though the more abundantly I love you,
the less I be loved, 2 Cor. 12.15.

This want of Divine Charity, is a very sad and general evil amongst us
Christians, in these worst of times: and I have observed, that even amongst
them that hope for heaven, the major part go no farther in their love, than
only to desire pardon and salvation, without seeking to make any returns
suitable to those undeserved and incomprehensible mercies. Against so much
stupidity and ingratitude, I have opposed the following Treatise of Divine
Love, or the Love of JESUS, which I hope will help to reinkindle or at least
stir up the holy fire in some Christian souls, by the argument it self, if by
no other means. Whilst my Reader fixes his mind on this most excellent and
delightful subject, his own thoughts will improve my considerations, and many
better may be suggested to him. And if any ways, I can occasion his spiritual
advantage, and the glory of my Blessed Lord, I have attained my aim. And now
have no more to say by way of Preface, but that if I have been so unhappy as to
write any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Church; I disown and retract it
before hand, and would blot it out with my blood: as for particular persons,
who may find fault with any thing herein, I desire them to pass it by. It
matters not much, if they like not every passage and expression; if they do but
follow what they judge to be good, and approve my design, and love Jesus with
all their hearts; it will be enough for their profit and my satisfaction.

He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love, 1 John 4.9.

THE Reformed Monastery; Or, the Love of JESUS.
The Introduction.
IT were as easy to find out the bottomless depth of the inexhaustible
fountain of the Divine Bounty, as to tell the Streams which run from it; Gods
mercies are over all his works, and all things that are made, are a
demonstration as much of his goodness as of his being. I will not therefore
undertake to number what is innumerable, or to express what we cannot so much
as comprehend: but only insist briefly upon some of the most general benefits
of God to mankind, and in the representing of them, endeavor to make us read
our duty, and to inflame our hearts with love.

CHAP. I. Of the general Benefits of God to mankind, and first of Creation.
1. IT is God that has made us and not we our selves, we owe him our very
being; thine hands have made and fashioned me: (says David) thine eyes did see
my substance being yet imperfect, and in thy book were all my members written.
Psalm. 119.73. Let us say therefore with the same Prophet, I will praise thee,
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: Psalm. 134.16. and let us with him,
fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker. You know that by the Laws of God
and of all Nations, there is an indispensable obligation upon all children to
love and honor their Parents because they brought them into the world: now
certainly the obligation doubles upon every man, in respect to his Father which
is in heaven; for our natural parents were but second causes under him, his own
power it was that formed and created us: they engendered our mortal bodies only,
he is the Father of spirits, he himself gave being to our immortal souls.
Therefore let every man pay to his Maker those duties he would expect from his
child: If I am a Father (says God) where is mine honor? Mal. 1.6. If from our
heavenly Father we have received our life and being, let us pay that respect,
and love and obedience to him, which thereby are become his due.

But there is yet more in this; Creation is not a transient act; the same power
that once gave us our being, does still exert it self in the continuation
thereof. When a child is born, he subsists by himself, his parents need not
take aay care, that he returns not to his pristine condition: but we have the
same dependence upon God in our preservation as we had in our creation; should
he withdraw his Almighty hand, we should return to our first nothing; in him we
live and move, and have our being; Therefore we are the more bound to serve and
love him, that he not only made us to be; but gives us, as it were, a new being
every moment, by continuing our life and durati n by that Almighty will,
whereby he effected our first production

Now if we consider further, not only that God made us, but what he made us,
it will yet enforce those bonds of duty, which Creation tied upon us. For it
was in our Makers power, either to make us vile and abject as the vilest of
beasts, or to deny us those faculties and abilities, which are most honorable
and most useful to our nature: but he made us Men, the most wonderful of his
creatures? in us he joined what heaven and earth had most excellent, an
immortal Spirit, created after his image, with the most elaborated, the most
perfect of material things: Take a view of the mavelous organs of thy senses,
of the curious contrivance of those joints and ligaments which unite thy
several members, of those various and delicate channels which contain thy blood
and spirits; in a word of all the parts and passions of thy body, which are all
made for necessity and comeliness; and then admire the great goodness, as well
as wisdom of thy Creator; and say with the Psalmist, that thou art fearfully
and wonderfully made, and that Gods works are very mavelous.

After this let thy thoughts dive deeper and consider thine interior senses;
the mysterious union of thy soul and body, with the beauty of that Divine Light
which we call Reason; thy memory, thy will thine understanding, which are the
faculties of thy precious soul, which is not only created after Gods image; but
is capable and desirous to enjoy him: and then see how numerous, or rather
innumerable are the benefits which God has bestowed upon us in our creation,
and how just it is that we should love him, that we should glorify God, in our
Body and in our Spirits, which are Gods.

CHAP. II. How much we are obliged to God for our Preservation.
PReservation comes next to be considered; a benefit of very large extent, and
well deserving that rank, the Church has placed it in, in making it the
subject of our daily thanksgiving; for ever since man changed the impenetrable
armor of Original Righteousness, for a thin covering of fig leaves, he became
so defensless, and yet exposed to so many sharp and wounding arrows, that
should not Divine Protection interpose for to shelter and secure him, his
temporal Life would be a true and a sad Emblem of Eternal Death. It appears by
the history of patient Job, that if we were not fenced about with the hedge of
a gracious providence, we should find that all creatures conspire our vexation
and ruin. God had no sooner broke the enclosure; but afflictions crowded in so
fast upon that happy man, that in a short time there remained nothing of his
former prosperity, but a bare and bitter remembrance, to make the sense of his
present misery more grievous. There is no man but is exposed to all the
greatest Calamities that ever befell any of the Sons of Adam: and there is none
able by his own power, to defend himself against the least of them. Fortune and
accidents sport themselves (if I may so speak) with our goods and estates;
Moths fret our garments, rust cankers our metals, thieves break through and
steal our riches or else they make to themselves wings and fly away. Besides
their own corruptibility which of it self would consume them, they are exposed
to so many hazards, that it would be as impertinent, as it is impossible to
number all the ways and means, whereby men are afflicted with losses, and
brought to poverty: only from hence we may justly infer, that the same God who
gives us all things richly to enjoy, must als secure them in our possession, or
else we certainly lose them.

If we look on our selves, we shall like the Prophets man in Dothan, 2 Kings 6.
see armed enemies on all sides of us; our spiritual enemies are many, strong,
and full of rage and malice; and yet we have no defense against them: but that
God makes his heavenly host, to wait on our safety, incamps his Angels about
us, to be an invisible guard against our invisible enemies, and not only so,
but to secure us also from thousands of sudden and sad accidents, which might
every moment befall us. All creatures are now furnished with a sting wherewith
they may either vex or kill us. The elements and all compounded bodies, the air
we breath, and the food that nourishes us, all things in nature, and all
things in chance, may become our tormentors or murderers. Nay, we carry swords
and daggers in our own bosoms; we have within our selves the matter of all
sorts of distempers; not one joint in our bodies but may be afflicted with the
gout; Not one humor, but may overflow its banks, and quench the light of
Reason, or the fire of Life; Not one pore or part within or without, but may
unexpectedly, at all times, and in all places, become an entrance to death and
sorrow. In the midst of so many and great dangers, it were impossible for us to
stand one moment, but that God defends us under his wings and keeps us safe
under his feathers, Psalm. 90. as the Psalmist speaks, and so the blessings of
immunity, which most men slight, or overlook, are never enough to be
acknowledged, but deserve the thanks of a whole life. We dwell under the
defense of the most high, and abide under the shadow of the Almighty: therefore
let us set our love upon him and glorify him.

CHAP. III. Of the positive Blessings of this life.
THe Positive Blessings of this life, are now to be exposed to view; but of
them, I may use the words of the Psalmist, If I would reckon and speak of them,
they are more in number than can be numbered, Psalm. 40. Health and strength, and
comeliness, with industry and learning, are shared among the sons of men in
several proportions: and so are good friends and a good name, peace, plenty and
pleasures; any one of those single, might make a rich portion for one man, for
each, within it self contains many rich and precious blessings: yet oftentimes,
God unites all, or most of these together, to crown us with loving kindness and
tender mercies, Psalm. 103. The works of creation, and the works of providence
are not more numerous, than the graces and gifts of God to mankind; any one
that should seriously meditate upon this subject, would find it multiply and
increase almost to immensity, and would be forced to break off with the
exclamation of David; Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the
son of many that thou so regardest him? Psalm. 8.4. God renews his mercies to us
every day together with our lives; every hour, we eat of the fatness of his
house, drink of the river of his pleasure, Psalm. 36. and receive the sweet
emanations that flow continually from the fountain of life.

But of those benefits which God pours open hands upon us, how many are there
that pass unregarded! we usually mind, not what we receive, but what we desire.
Let heaven rain Manna never so thick upon us, if we wish for Quails, Angels
food shall be unsavory, and perhaps distastful. They that long for great and
well covered tables, find no relish in their daily bread; they that pursue
after wealth, look not on the blessings of competency; they that aspire to
honor, receive health, food and raiment, rather with a disdainful anger, than
with thankfulness; all the favors we receive from God, are unobserved or
slighted as long as he does not gratify our humor with what we desire, and
even those gifts whereof we are most sensible, are soon laid in oblivion; an
hours pain will cause many longer pleasures to be forgotten; and if God sends
evil upon us only for one day, it makes us forget the many good things, which
we for many years received from him. This I say, because many men's
unsatiableness and ingratitude makes them overlook most of Gods blessings;
despise what they have, and value only what they have not; and so murmur and
complain when they should give thanks. But whoever shall diligently observe all
the gracious distributions of that God, who always gives to all men, being
debtor to none; all the supplies and comforts we receive from him, will
heartily say with the Psalmist, O love the Lord all ye his Saints; and, O that
men would therefore praise the Lord, for his goodness, and declare the wonders
that he does for the children of men; that they would exalt him in the
congregation of the people, and praise him in the seat of the elders, Psalm.
31.107.

CHAP. IV. What returns we should make for temporal Blessings.
THose Benefits we have hitherto mentioned, we receive as we are men, and that,
from the free goodness of our gracious God, we are his people, and the sheep of
his pasture; we are, and we have nothing that is good, but it comes from him;
he made us, he preserves us, and he provides for us: therefore, O go your way
into his gates with thansgiving and into his courts with praise, be thankful
unto him, and speak good of his name. It was Jacob's vow, that if God would
keep him, and give him food and raiment, whilst he sojourned in Haran, then the
Lord should be his God: Now what was his vow should be our resolution and
practice; God feeds, and clothes, and defends us, therefore ought he to be our
God; That is, we ought to own him for such by faithful service and hearty
obedience. Therefore, 1. Let us pay our bounteous Benefactor, the just and
easy tribute of Praise and Thansgiving, for our creation, preservation, and
all the blessings of this life. 2. Let us set apart daily, some of that time
which he gives us, for acts of Worship and Religion. 3. Let us honor the Lord
with our substance; either in secret charities or public offerings, paying him
an acknowledgment, that he is our Landlord; and lastly, let us apply our
selves to observe his Laws, to do what pleases him; because we are not our
own, we owe our selves to him, we are his, he gave us our being. These are acts
of natural Religion, and them we owe to God, as he is our Creator and
Benefactor.

CHAP. V. Of the mercies of Redemption, and first, a consideration of the
infinite miseries we were redeemed from.
NOw are to be considered the benefits we receive from God as we are sinners;
the mercies of our Redemption; how God our Creator is become JESUS, our
Savior; how after having given us many good things, he at last gave himself
for us. And that we may the better understand the greatness of this unspeakable
and Divine Mercy, let our meditation descend a while into that bottomless gulf
of perdition, wherein we were plunged by nature, in this plain manner.
Represent to thy self a man in Job's condition, having added to his ulcers and
poverty all the saddest calamities that ever afflicted any man upon earth,
especially the remorses and horrors of a guilty and tormented conscience,
crying out of impatience and despair with Cain, my pain is greater than I can
bear. This unhappy creature having for many years born the uneasy weight of
his miseries, lingered out a tedious and disconsolate life, is at last struck
to the heart with a mortal wound and dies, and so passes from temporal to
eternal sorrows; he falls into a lake of fire and brimstone, a place where
there is nothing but woe and darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth; where
there is no company but of tormented and tormentors; nothing to be seen but
what is frightful, no voices to be heard but curses, shrieks and lamentations,
where there is the absence of all good, and the presence of all evil; where men
desire to die, and death flees away from them.

This is the fullness of his misery, that it shall have no end, that he must
dwell with everlasting burnings; their fire is not quenched, and their worm
dies not. If weeping but one tear every day, he might expect to be releast,
after he had wept as much as would make an ocean, it would be some comfort! but
at the end of so many millions of years as would suffice to weep a Sea, his
torments will be as far from ending as the first day they began: and if after
this manner in process of time, he should shed tears enough to make many more
seas, yet still it might be truly said, this is but the beginning of sorrows;
still there is an intolerable Eternity to come; for after as many thousands of
millions of years as tongue can express or heart comprehend; Eternity is
nothing lessened; still it is what it was before, an abyss of duration that can
have no end; this excludes all comfort, this fills his soul with a woeful
despair, this is another hell in the midst of hell, which inrageth him, and
perpetually tortures his mind, to think that there will be no end of his
sufferings, that he can conceive no hope of being delivered: but that he must
bear to all Eternity, what every moment is intolerable! O dreadful eternity,
who can seriously think of thee and not tremble!

Now if thou do ask for what reason this wretched creature is thus tormented,
know that it is for sin; because his first parents broke the Law of their
Creation, and he followed their footsteps; they involved him first in the guilt
of a wicked rebellion against God, and afterward by his own acts he made
himself yet more criminal; by nature he was a child of wrath, and then he
became so, yet more by his own transgressions; he was sold under sin, and then
he became a willing slave to it; his own thoughts, words and works being evil,
and that continually, he forsook God, and dishonored him, and professed enmity
against him, and opposed his depraved will to Gods Holy Will, and so became
obnoxious to the infinite justice of God, which therefore justly inflicts this
deserved punishment upon him.

And now, if knowing the reason, thou do inquire after the person, who by
being so unholy, is become so extremely unhappy; I could say with the Prophet,
thou art the man, this is thy patrimony, as thou art a child of Adam; this thou
art by nature: but the divine mercy has rescued thee from this misery, and
therefore I must say, thou were the man, this must have been thy case, had not
the Holy JESUS workt thy Redemption by means as wonderful, as was his pity and
charity.

But before I proceed, I must also propound one question. Two men are equally
indebted, and equally unable to pay; the one is patiently forborne and at last
freely acquitted, the other is cast into the dungeon, and a while after
compassionately releast and set at liberty; I demand, is not he that never
entered the prison, as much bound to love his generous creditor, as he that was
delivered out of it? yes, doubtless, or rather more: because his debt is also
forgiven, and yet he is freed from that trouble and sorrow, which his fellow
debtor underwent. Why then, thy gracious Redeemer, by saving thee from the
horrors and torments of Hell, has laid on thee, at least as great obligations
to love him, as if he had brought thee out of it, after thou had been long
detained therein. Therefore I desire, thou would bring thy thoughts back
again to that unpleasant abode, and consider thy self as if thou were shut up
in that dismal dungeon, and then express what thou would give to be releast,
what thou would do for him that should bring thee out of that horrible and
bottomless pit.

I know that they that are afflicted with sharp pains and grievous sicknesses,
would purchase health with all the wealth they have; and I believe no reward
would hire a man to hold his hand in the fire but for one hours time: therefore
I doubt not but that, if it were in a man's power, he would give this, and a
thousand more worlds, to be brought out of an ever burning furnace: and I am
persuaded, that if thou will suffer thy fancy to be active in framing the black
and dreadful scene of hellish horrors about thee, thou will then heartily say:
Were I owner of the whole universe, I would joyfully give it, to come out of
these ever-burning flames which torment my body, and to be freed from this
never dying worm, the remorses of my guilty conscience, which torture my soul:
but because I have nothing, freely would I give my self to him, that should
bring me out of this woeful place. O I would follow him any where, do any thing
that he should command me, embrace his feet, kiss the ground they tread on, and
give him all the demonstrations of a sincere and passionate Love!

Well, thy petition is granted, before 'twas presented; the Love and Mercy of
JESUS has prevented thy request, and distress: Now make good thy vows and
resolutions; Love and Serve JESUS thy Redeemer, and give thy self up wholly to
him. I know that many may be good Christians, without being snatched out of the
fire, without these terrors and affrightments: but I am showing what our
condition had been without a Savior, what is that gulf of perdition, whence
JESUS has saved us, if we will be saved by him: and I mention these
affrighting truths to persuade men; to be motives of an active and a vehement
Love. For it is too observable, that few men seriously consider what Redemption
means, what it was we were redeemed from, else they could not be so indevout,
so disobedient, so unthankful to their Savior. S. Paul supposing, as I do
here, that without Christ we were already dead and perished, makes it the reason
of that Constraining Love which enabled him and other Primitive Christians, to
suffer so patiently, and act so zealously for JESUS; The love of Christ (says
he) constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were
all dead; as if he should say, we were certainly dead, irrecoverably lost, had
not Christ died, to purchase life and salvation for us: therefore we cannot
choose but love him, and it is no wonder if that love be strong, and if we are
governed and acted by it. That thou may therefore love affectionately and
live religiously, consider seriously that death, the misery of that condition
wherein thou were, and ever must have been, had thou not a JESUS, a merciful
Savior and Redeemer. I might add, that we were delivered from the power and
slavery, as well as from the condemnation of sin: but this is included in the
other, it being impossible to be saved from the wrath to come, without bringing
forth fruits meet for repentance: and as it is mercy and grace on Gods part, so
on ours, it is matter of duty and earnest endeavor, and must be the result and
effect of our love, first that we offend not, and then that we serve
diligently, and faithfully him that redeemed us from our vain conversation, and
gave himself for us, that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness.

CHAP. VI. How graciously and wonderfully we were redeemed.
A Further engagement to love and obey will be to consider the manner how our
redemption was effected, and the price that was paid for it, thus. The Blessed
Son of God, the Second Person of the Ever glorious Trinity undertook that work
himself which none else could perform: for us men, and for our salvation, he
came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary,
and was made man. In this act of his, miracles and mercies seem to vie one with
another; In praesepe jacet, sed mundum continet, ubera sugit, sed angelos
pascit. Aug. Ser. de purific. 2.
that the God of eternity should be born in time, that the Creator of all
things should be the Son of a Creature; that the most highest should abase
himself to the low condition of a servant; that God should become an infant, is
a miracle of Love, which we can admire and adore, but never fully comprehend.
The greatness of God is unsearchable, his excellencies and perfections are
incomprehensible, he is infinitely good, powerful, wise, and holy: Man
contrariwise, is in himself wicked and weak, ignorant, impure and miserable,
there is so great a disproportion betwixt God and man, so wide, so immense a
distance, Haec est mensura amoris, non solum quantum fecit nos, quanta fecit
pro nobis, sed and quantillus factus est pro nobis.
that nothing less than an infinite love could have filled up the gulf betwixt
those two so different natures, and united them into one person. 'Twas never
seen that a shepherd would creep upon all four, and cover himself with a sheep
skin, to call his flock out of danger, and to expose himself for it: but the
good shepherd did much more! When he came to lay down his life for his lost and
wandering sheep, and gather them into his fold; he took on him, not only the
likeness, but the very nature of them: he became the Lamb of God, that he might
be the shepherd of mankind. Though he was infinitely more above man, then men
are above beasts, yet he became the Son of man, that he might become the
Savior of men. 'Twas never seen that a Sovereign Prince would seek to reduce
to loyalty the most abject of his rebellious subjects, by mixing blooud with
them, uniting their families together: but behold the Supreme Monarch of heaven
and earth contracts a near affinity with his ungrateful rebels, who are as vile
and miserable, as they are criminal, that he may free them from their guilt,
and win them to their duty and their happiness. Proud and wretched sinner! thou
would be so far from entering into the kindred of meaner persons, those that
are much thine inferiors, that thou can hardly endure to be in their company:
and behold, the most Glorious and Holy God, thine offended Sovereign, is become
thy near relation, is become thy Brother, that he may win thine affections and
become thy Savior.

His life, all along, was a continuation of his great mercy and humility, he
went about doing good, healing all manner of diseases Corporal and Spiritual,
giving excellent instructions and great examples of virtue. But what we now
consider, and what should most affect us, is, that for our sakes he was a man
of sorrows and acquainted with grief, all the time of his abode here below. At
his first entrance into the world, he was degraded, even below the condition of
the meanest infants, being born in a Stable and laid in a Manger; eight days
after he began to be numhred among the transgressors, receiving the bloody and
painful Sacrament of Circumcision, which belonged only to sinners; in his youth
he lived in poverty and obscurity, and was subject to his Parents; when he
manifested himself to the world, then he perpetually endured the contradiction
of sinners; besides that he lived upon alms, becoming poor for us, who was Lord
of all: he wanted even time to eat what the charity of pious persons afforded
him, and had not so much as a place where he might rest his head. He was
tempted of Satan, that he might succor those that are tempted, he often watched
whole nights to Prayer, and was often faint with tiresome journeys, and hunger,
and thirst: and what is yet worse, he was daily persecuted by ungrateful men,
for whom he endured all this. They slandered him with false imputations of
being a glutton and a wine-bibber; his kind and charitable affability in
conversing with noted sinners, was made matter of accusation, as if he had
consented to their evil deeds; his Divine Doctrine was derided, as if
proceeding from madness; the miracles which he wrought in their behalf, were
said to be done by sorcery, and packt with Beelzebub: and to all these
disgraces and contumelies, they would often have added violence, and stoned him
to death, had he not escaped out of their hands by a hasty flight.

Lord, thou had compassion on the multitudes, because they had followed thee
three days, and had nothing to eat, Mat. 15.32. and thou livedst above three
and thirty years, waiting upon thy base and fugitive servants, who were become
thine enemies, seeking to prevent their ruin, by the affiduity of thy care and
kindness! O sad ingratitude, that we should be so soon weary in serving thee,
when thou were so patient and indefatigable in acting and suffering for us, for
our happiness and our salvation.

CHAP. VII. A consideration of the Cross in its four dimensions.
BUt if we desire to be rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3.17. and to
comprehend with all Saints the immense charity of the Son of God, which passes
knowledge, which infinitely exceeds all Learning in profitableness and
excellency, then measure the love of Christ, by the dimensions of his Cross,
the breadth and the length, the depth and the height thereof, for therein love
appears in its full extent, so that nothing can be added to it. That the
eternal Son of God, would become our Brother, by becoming Man, and would live
in Poverty and Contempt, was very much: but that afterward he would die for
us, in that manner as he did, is the greatest wonder that ever the world saw.
And indeed, there happened more prodigies when he died, than than at all other
times of his humiliation; the Sun hid himself, darkness overspread the whole
world; the earth shook, the stones and rocks were rent, the graves were opened,
and the vail of the Temple was divided in twain; Nature seemed to be amazed to
see her God suffer and die upon a Cross: greater love has no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friend, it is true man cannot possibly
domore: I, but JESUS did much more, he was God, then he became man that he
might die for his enemies. This is it, whereof S. Paul speaks, when he says
that it was never conceived or seen, how great are the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; We speak (says he) the wisdom of God in a
mystery even the hidden wisdom which none of the Prince of this world knew, for
had they known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory: but as it
is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither is it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, but
God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. It appears that he speaks (not of
the bliss of heaven, but) of the crucifixion of our Blessed Savior, which to
the Jews was a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, and which
neither the senses nor the reason of man could ever comprehend; but, as a
hidden mystery was made known to Christians, by the revelations of the
all-knowing Spirit of God. To understand therefore as much as may be, this
never fully understood and never enough admired love of our Redeemer, in dying
for us, let us in the first place view the Breadth of his Cross; that is, the
variety of the torments he endured for us, in the last stage of his uneasy
pilgrimage.

CHAP. VIII. The Breadth of the Cross, or the manifold Sufferings of Christ for
our Redemption.
WE may begin with the manner of his apprehension; he was taken as if he had
been a public enemy to mankind a thief or a murderer, with swords and staves,
with rudeness and violence; he was betrayed by one of his Disciples, forsaken
by the rest, and then bound and dragged, from place to place by those he had
instructed and fed, and in whose behalf he had wrought miracles. He was called
an impious blasphemer, and voted guilty of death, for confessing a great and
necessary truth, that he was the only Son of God. Afterward he was exposed a
whole night to the indignities and mockeries of his insulting enemies; they
spet upon his sweet and glorious face; they veiled him, and smote his head and
buffeted him; and as if he had been a contemptible idiot, to be made sport
withal, they bad him prophecy, ghess who gave him the blows. He was accused
before the Roman Praetor, as being a lewd malefactor, a rebellious traitor who
subverted the people, and forbad to pay tribute to Caesar. From thence he was
sent to King Herod, where he was set at naught, and abused by him and his
Soldiers, and then sent back with scorn and contempt to Pilate. Afterward
Barrabbas a seditious murderer was preferred to him, and a loud clamor raised
by the people, that he might be crucified and put to death. Then was he whipped
before their eyes, tied to a post like a vile slave, and exposed to the servile
rods, whiles they plough'd furrows upon his back, as the Prophet spoke; the
Soldiers took him, platted a Crown of thorns and pressed it on his head, till
the blood run of all sides of him; they beat him with canes and clubs, and put
a reed instead of a scepter in his hand, and when he was all over spittle and
blood they brought out their mock-King, and Pilate presented him to the people,
and said, behold the man, thinking to move them to pity, by so sad a spectacle;
but nothing less than his death would satisfy their enraged cruelty: therefore
he was condemned, and then abused afresh by the Soldiers, and loaded with his
Cross and driven out of the City to Mount Golgotha. Now here begins a new scene
of sorrows; the afflicted Son of Man, having lost much blood, and suffered so
much; having been rudely haled from the garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiphas,
from Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again, and
from thence to the place of his Execution, arrives at last, faint and weary,
and sorrowful upon Mount Calvary, where he was to die; here his hands and feet
(which are most sensible parts of our bodies, by being most full of nerves)
were pierced through and nailed to the Cross; and though there was a seat where
to rest his body, as the Ancients say, yet the Cross being lift up, and put
into the hollowness of the ground to make it stand upright, his wounded body
was shaken and affected, doubtless with a most acute pain. He was exposed
naked, not only to the view of the multitudes, but also to the open air, which
was extremely cold, in that the Sun was hid; he was burnt inwardly with an
excessive heat and dryness, being tired with so many journeys, and being
exhausted of spirits and moisture, by his sorrows and bleeding, insomuch that
he complained of this above all his other sufferings, crying out, I thirst,
(though we may say, that he thirsted most our happiness, that he thirsted to
drink out the dregs of his bitter cup, that we might drink the cup of
Salvation.) He wanted the use of his hands and feet, being tied to suffer, so
that he could not so much as stir, nor wipe the blood off of his face, he was
afflicted with the sight of his afflicted Mother, who from her wounded soul
reflected sorrow upon her dying Son and Savior. His soul was also, as it were
crucified, by the sense of the Divine Anger against the sins of men, for the
which he was making expiation, insomuch that he complained, that God had
forsaken him. And lastly, his heart strings were broke, and his body deprived
of life, by a most violent and bitter death. And now, who shall not love JESUS?
and who shall not admire that love which is expressed in the breadth of the
Cross? Lord, how exceeding broad was thy Cross, which contained so many sorts
of torments! Nothing can be compared to it, but thy charity, which made thee
take it up, that we might be charged with nothing, but a pleasant and easy
yoke! But Lord, why do we, most vile and sinful creatures refuse to bear thy
light burden, when thou the Most Holy and Most Highest have born for us so sad
and intolerable a load.

CAAP. IX. The length of the Cross.
WE are now to measure the length of the Cross, that is, the time of Christ's
bitter passion, the tedious duration of his sufferings, which began with his
birth and continued to his last breath. The Life of JESUS, as we have seen,
was, as it were, a chain of miseries, every link, every connection, had
something grievous and afflictive, he was a man of sorrows: therefore we no
where read that ever he laughed or enjoyed the pleasures and the mirth of this
world: but that he suffered much and wept several times, is recorded by the
Evangelists. Every day was, in some manner the day of his Crucifixion (which to
us is Good, but to him was sad Friday:) for he knowing all along what he was to
suffer, and living in expectation of that cruel death: we may say that his
fears did, in some manner, prevent his murderers, and by anticipation, acted
upon him, while he lived, what they were to inflict on him to put him to death:
for he was pleased to assume, together with our nature, our innocent passions
and infirmities. I have a Baptism (says he) to be Baptized with, and how am I
constrained until it be accomplished* that was the Baptism of his Blood, which
he wished for, because of his love to mankind, his great desire of paying our
ransoms: but feared, because of the repugnance of his humane nature, to such
bitter sufferings; wherefore (says he) (...), I am constrained, I am in a
straight betwixt two, I wish, and yet I fear to die. But that which we most
properly call his Passion, because it exceeded the rest of his sufferings,
lasted eighteen hours, without intermission, nine of Thursday night, and nine
of Friday; from the time of his agony in the garden, about nine at night, while
three in the afternoon of the day following; all which time he suffered those
several sorts of pains and tortures, which are already mentioned; all that
time, he drank full draughts of that bitter cup, the fear whereof made him
sweat drops of blood, when he began to taste of it; all that time he suffered
what no tongue can express, but what all hearts should endeavor to feel and to
think of daily. Lord JESU, thou were tormented a long time, that we might not
be tormented to all Eternity; grant that we may endure any thing for thee, and
from thee our God, who did endure so much for men, and from men.

CHAP. X. The depth of the Cross.
WE have seen that bar of the Cross, on which the hands of our Blessed Savior
were nailed, the breadth and the length, that is, the variety and the
tediousness of the pains and sufferings, he underwent for us: Now we are to
consider the biggest piece which stood upright, whereon his body rested and his
feet were nailed; the depth and the height, that is, the pureness and the
greatness of his sorrows. If we read with attention the passion of Christ in
the four Gospels, we shall see our Blessed Redeemer, as it were, sunk into a
deep abyss of misery, by the heavy burden of our sins; he might well cry by
his Prophet, See whether there is any sorrow like unto my sorrow? for the
greatest of humane afflictions admit of many comforts, whereas he was deprived
of all; as there was no part in us but was infected with sin, there was none in
him but was affected with pain; he was all over stripes and sores, an universal
wound within and without, he suffeed in all his capacities, in his outward and
inward senses, in all the parts and faculties of his soul and body: the very
circumstances of his passion, did all concur to make it more bitter and
afflictive. He was deprived of that ordinary comfort of being assisted by his
friends, all the Disciples forsook him and fled; as the Prophet had foretold of
him, I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with
me; I looked and there was none to help, I wondered that there was none to
uphold, Isa. 63. He was like a mild and defenseless lamb in the midst of
ravenous wolves, there were none about him, but such as thirsted for his blood.
And no wonder if man forsook him, when he was in some manner forsaken even by
his Father. It pleased God to give him up to the cruelties of wicked men and
the sorrows of death; and that his Divine Nature, (though personally and
inseparably united to his humanity) should for a time suspend the effects of
its beatifying union, and leave him, suffer as a man in soul and body, the
greatest pains, without the least comforts. They that saw our crucified Savior
suffer so patiently, as not to open his mouth to complain, might have thought
that he had no sense of pain: therefore he cries out so bitterly, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Why do thou suffer me to be plunged into this
gulf of sorrow, so that I have nothing but anguish within and without? Why do
thou suffer me to be almost overwhelmed by so great a distress, and art so far
from helping me, and from the words of my complaint? Psalm. 22. Lord, we had
deserved to sink, and evermore to cry and groan in the bottomless pit: and to
rescue us, thou art pleased to descend very low: and with strong crying and
tears, to say, de profundis clamavi, out of the depths have I cried unto thee,
O Lord, hear my voice, Psalm. 130. be pleased to hear us, dearest Lord, when we
call upon thee, and make thy voice sink into our hearts, and there find a
cheerful admission, and a constant and sincere obedience.

CHAP. XI. The height of the Cross.
NOw we have only the height of the Cross to look on, that is, the sublimity,
the greatness of the torments of Christ's crucifixion; that in this sense his
Cross was very high, appears already by what has been said; and yet we may
consider further; that he being conceived by the Holy Ghost of a most pure
Virgin, was therefore of a most healthful constitution; so that his senses
being very quick and apprehensive, were sensible of pain beyond other men's:
and so all the blows and wounds he received, and his being nailed and stretched
three long hours on the Cross, as upon the Rack, must needs have been a most
exquisite torture. Also, the vigor of his nature being neither weakened nor
spent, by age or distempers, he being full of strength and in the flower of his
age, was capable to taste the smart and sharpness of his pain, to the very last
moment of his life: and so it is written by S. Luke, that he cried with a loud
voice, when he gave up the ghost, to show that he was still very strong, and
that his death was bitter and violent to extremity. There was likewise an
invisible Cross, which afflicted his soul, and made it sorrowful even unto
death; his heart was like wax, melted in the midst of his bowels, Psalm. 22. and
in the midst of so many and such intolerable pains, his murderers shook their
heads, made mouths at him, scoft at his sorrows by cruel and insulting
mockeries, and by their tongues and derisions aggravated those sufferings,
which their hands could hardly increase; but tha^ the Cross of Christ was
higher in the greatness of its pains than that of any Martyr, of any man that
ever suffered, is evident enough only by considering who it was, that was
crucified on it: for it was more that JESUS, being perfect God as well as man,
should shed one drop of blood, than that all Men and Angels should for Millions
of years bear the greatest torments. Lord, we were wonderfully made by thy
power, but we are yet more wonderfully redeemed by thy mercy! Lord, what is
man, that thou should thus be mindful of him! or rather, what is man, that he
is unmindful of thee!

CHAP. XII. What an infinite love is expressed by the Cross
NOw we have seen the whole frame of the Cross, writ all over in blood, with
characters of love, expressions of the greatest kindness, for a testimony that
JESUS loved us unto death. Not any sorrow or anguish in his soul, not any gap
or wound in his body, but are as many mouths to cry aloud in the ears of all
men, Behold what manner of love, God had for his enemies, his sinful and
unworthy creatures, to suffer such things, to die in such a manner, for to
redeem them and make them happy! Now let us, if we can, comprehend the breadth
and the length, O dilectio quam magnum est vinculum tuum quo ligari potuit
Deus. Idiot.
the height and the depth of the love of JESUS, that love which bound him much
harder than the cords of the Jews, and nailed him to his Cross much faster than
those Irons which pierced his hands and feet: for he that could, with one word,
cast his enemies to the ground, could easily have broke their bands and escaped
from them, but that his love did constrain him, and make him desirous and
willing, thus to die. What man would suffer one half of what Christ did, for
his dearest Benefactor? And then, how immense and wonderful was that charity
which he expressed in suffering the ignominy and pains of the Cross, for those
that were his enemies and had highly injured him, and from whom he could expect
no reward, but only to be loved again! Let us therefore remember it throughout
this whole book, or rather throughout our whole life, that we have been
redeemed from eternal despair and misery, and from our vain and sinful
conversation, not by any corruptible thing, as silver and gold, but by the
precious blood of Christ, shed with great pain and great ignominy.

CHAP. XIII. Of the eternal happiness merited for us by the Cross of Christ,
and measured by it.
THis Love of JESUS is more already by far, than ours can answer; Could our
hearts burn perpetually with those brightest flames of love which beatifie the
Cherubims, could they contain all the most passionate affections of all Saints,
both in heaven and earth, yet we could not love JESUS so much as he deserves,
for having died to save us from eternal death: and yet he did more: he suffered
death that we might have life, that we might have eternal life: Not only that
we might not be entirely miserable, but also that we might be perfectly happy.
Heaven is the purchase of the Blood of Christ, as well as Redemption from hell;
God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, when we
were dead in trespasses and sins, has quickened us together with Christ, and
has raised us up, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.5. Let us meditate a while, upon that far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory reserved in heaven for us, 2 Cor. 4.17. and in it consider the
same dimensions, as in the price wherewith it was bought, the Cross of our
Savior: and it will greatly press and increase our obligations to love him.

It is (...), as S. Paul calls it; each word is a part of its dimension. First,
the Breadth; it comprehends all joys and pleasures, all things that are good
and desirable, all that can yield satisfaction, and create happiness to a man:
even that incomprehensible and increated goodness, which is the inexhaustible
fountain of perfect Bliss and Felicity; in whose presence there is fullness of
joy, at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Secondly, Its
height. It is above the regions of the air, in the highest heavens; the
sublimity and greatness of its glory, is expressed, by being like the Angels of
God; by shining forth as the Sun; by a kingdom, a crown incorruptible, a crown
of life, and sitting with the Son of God in his throne. Thirdly, its Depth. It
is pure and unmingled, it admits of nothing afflictive: neither death nor
sorrow, neither hunger nor thirst, neither pain nor anguish; all tears are
wiped from their eyes. There is the absence of all evil, and the presence of
all good; therefore it is called the joy of our Lord, than which, nothing can
express a greater: for God is entirely and perfectly happy, and so incapable of
any sorrow, that the least sight of the Beatifical vision would turn hell it
self into a paradise. Fourthly and lastly, its Length, its never ceasing
duration; it admits of no end or period, it is everlasting, it is eternal, it
is for ever and ever; after as many millions of years as there is drops of
water in the sea, it will but begin: and after as many thousands of millions
more, it will be no nearer ending, than it was at first, still eternal, and
ever eternal. This is that Bliss which we had forfeited by sin, and are
reintitled to by the passion of Christ; that Bliss which if often and duly
considered, would make us despise the world, long for heaven, love
affectionately, and serve diligently that JESUS who offers it to us, and died
to purchase it: Wherefore S. Paul prays so earnestly for the Ephesians, that
God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation, the eyes of their
understanding enlightened, that they might know what is the hope of his
calling: and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
Ephesians. 1.18.

That we might once be possessed of this bliss, as well as delivered from hell,
was the Cause why JESUS descended down from heaven, became poor, took on him
the form of a Servant, and humbled himself unto death, even the death of the
Cross; for the joy that was set before him, he despised the shame and endured
the Cross, says S. Paul, Heb. 12.2. That joy, we may say, was not the
enjoyment of heavenly bliss, for himself; 'twas his without suffering; there
was no need he should bear the Cross, for to obtain it, he had a sure title to
it by nature: the joy therefore that was set before him, was the joy of saving
us, the joy of rescuing us from the jaws of death, the gulf of eternal
perdition; the joy of paying the price of our Redemption; the joy of making us
capable of eternal joys; the joy of purchasing the glories and felicities of
heaven for us, in a word, the joy of showing us his love, and expecting the
returns of ours. This was the joy, why, he despised the shame, because his
shame should raise us to glory; this was the joy, why, he endured the Cross,
because his Cross should exalt us to a happy and honorable Throne.

This meditation of the great and manifold benefits of God, and the wonderful
love and charity, he has showed us, in JESUS, we may and should prosecute much
farther, in all instances, for it is infinite; and never enough to be considered
and admired. But, Reader, if that little, I have here set down, does not affect
thee, and if being affected with it, thou do not resolve to return to God,
all possible acknowledgments and demonstrations of a grateful love, then read
no further: for, Haece via amoris est vera non ficta: via c^rdialis, non
verbalis: via fructuosa, non ociosa: via non s^lum sermonis, sed etiam operis.
Idiot
as what precedes is matter of mercy from Gods part, so what follows is matter
of duty on thine. I shall now infer that we must love God, because he first
loved us; and that if the love of JESUS to us, has made him bear our Cross,
our love to him must make us bear his yoke: if he died for us, because he loved
us, then we must live to him, to make it appear that we love him. For this is
love, says S. John, that we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. By our hearty
obedience we are to declare, that we are sensible of his love, and desirous to
requite it. This trial of our affections he himself does require; If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, and ye shall be my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I have commanded you. John 15.10.

CHAP. XIV. That the mercies of our Redemption challenge our love and hearty
obedience.
NOw then we are to consider, that God giving knowledge of salvation to men,
has also thereby proclaimed their duty: Manifesting his love, he has engaged
and required theirs; as our being called to be Chistians makes a great and real
change, as to the happiness of our condition: a great and real change it ought
also to make, as to the holiness of our conversation. Therefore S. Paul calls
the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans
2.16. and he prays for the Ephesians, that they might know the love of Christ,
that so they might be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.18. as to
say, that the knowledge of the love of Christ is exceeding powerful and
efficacious, and would replenish them with all graces and virtues; for this
cause he sets so high a value upon the excellency of this knowledge, esteeming
all the world but dung in comparison of it, Phil. 3.8. and he exhorting the
Cretians to be ready to every good work, puts them in mind that they, who were
once disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, had been delivered from that
unhappy condition by the appearance of the love of God our Savior toward man,
Tit. 3. as in other places, he exhorts Christians, to walk worthy of their
calling; worthy of the Gospel; thereby declaring that the manifestation of the
Divine Love, in the Preaching of the Gospel, was the promulgation, as of their
happiness, so of their duty: whereby they were rescued, as well from living as
from perishing in their sins. It Is the appearance of that grace of God which
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. that teaches men to live soberly, righteously
and godly: and it is the receiving and crediting that Heavenly Doctrine, that
quenches the fiery darts of Satan, that purifies the heart, and overcomes the
world; so that the bare belief of the truth of the New Testament is a strong
and indispensable obligation to a cheerful, universal, and persevering
obedience to all its precepts; the very profession of being Christians does
strictly bind us to the performance of all Christian duties. But the necessity
of a Holy faith and a holy hife has been so fully evinced and asserted, and
all things that pertain to life and godliness so clearly and learnedly
explained by Catholic Writers Ancient and Modern, especially many pious
Fathers and Sons of this Church, since the Reformation, that I need, nor can
add nothing to their learned labors. We want charity, not knowledge. Therefore
now I turn my self, as my design is, to draw inferences from known and granted
premises; to move the affections, and affect the heart; and by various arts and
meditations to kindle and nourish in our breasts the fire of a divine Love.

CHAP. XV. An invitation to enter the Cloister of Love.
I Ask therefore; have thou conceived a fair Idea of Christianity? have thou
observed the glory and greatness of its Mysteries, the holiness of it is
Doctrine, and the perfection of its precepts and counsels? have thou considered
and admired the great exemplar of all virtues, the Holy JESUS, author of this
Holy Institution? have thou read his life with an observing eye, and have thou
viewed the fair copies of this perfect Original, which have been drawn by many
of his Saints, in the imitation of his example? have thou weighed the
excellency of his promises, the great immunities, and the invaluable advantages
which belong to his followers? have thou seriously pondered the great
obligations which the love of JESUS has laid upon thee? and art thou desirous
to be happy by loving again, and being grateful? if so, enter this Cloister of
love. Love JESUS, and thou shall reign with him.

The Cloister I mean is not the precinct of a particular Abbey, or the
confinement of a narrow Cell, but as to the place, it is the Catholic Church,
whose enclosure is large enough to entertain all the Religions in the world,
all that are of the Christian Order: And the Rule I would have thee follow, is
not not that of any Founders, nor even that of Pachomius, said to have been
brought down by Angels: but that which the Son of God himself delivered, the
Gospel-rule, the Christian Laws, which were bound upon us, by him that is our
Lord and our Judge, and to whom gratitude, duty and interest obliges us all to
be obedient. Has not God given his beloved Son, the heathen for his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession? Cur sic
arctamus Christi professionem quam ille latissime voluit patere and ego certe
sic optarim Evangelicam Religionem sic omnibus esse cordi, etc. Ench.
Psalm. 2. Why then (says Erasmus) Should we confine the excellency and
perfection of Christianity to particular places; Why should we make that short
and narrow, which Christ would have to be of an universal extent? If it be
words we affect, is not a City a great Monastery, the Abbot whereof is the
Bishop, set over it by Christ? Would to God the Christian Rule were so well
beloved and observed that no man might seek or desire the Benedictin or
Franciscan. I say so too, all this is true and to be wished: yet the universal
comprehends many particular Churches, and the Christian Rule has also many
several interpretations: therefore to be plain and positive; the Church of
England (as the purest part, or member of the Catholic; which has repurged
corrupt innovations, maintaining still a due conformity with Antiquity) is that
which I recommend to thee above all others: and for the best interpretation of
the Sacred Canon, the Doctrine and Worship of this Church is that, which I
would have thee prefer to all the rest.

CHAP. XVI. The Vow to be taken at the entrance of Loves Monastery.
BUt (because I speak not to dissenters, nor intend to dispute with them) thou will say, that thou have entered this Cloister already, and have undertaken its
Rule; and so far it is well. But there is this difference betwixt what thou have
already done in this matter, and what now I wish thee to do: that thou did
not come of thy self, but were brought into this society; that it was by proxy
thou promisedst to observe the orders of it; and that what was done at that
time is never to be repeated. Whereas now, by an after election, by free and
considerate acts of thine own will, I would have thee often renew thy holy vows
and protestations, and to do it with a great sense of love, and gratitude.
Ratify then thy former engagements by being confirmed, if thou art not, and if
thou art, by a hearty and sincere endeavor to perform thy vows and promises,
which are as follows. First, To renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps
and vanities rf this wicked world, with all covetous desires of the same, and
the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, To believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And Thirdly, To keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and walk
in the same all the days of thy life.

This vow contains all thy duty, the highest pitch of Christian perfection,
Quod summum est id omnibus est enitendum ut saltem mediocria assequamur, nec
est quod ullum vitae genus ab hoc scopo submoveamus, etc. Eras.
rules for the most Regular and Spiritual Life; let thy serious application,
and earnest endeavor to observe it, discriminate and sever thee from the
profane and less religious world: Thou need no distinct enclosure, no
distinct habits, no distinct patrons or offices, thy sincere Study, thy
Religious care to discharge this obligation, In Vestimentis non est contritio
mentis;

Ni men's sit pura, nihil confert regula dura.


will sufficiently cloister thee in, from the looser society and conversation
of men, and will make a difference great enough betwixt thee and them.

But though thou do remain in the civil society of the world, and the
neighborhood of thy neighbor: yet various are the ways that lead through the
world to heaven, and here I undertake to teach thee a sure and short one,
through which all glorified Saints have past. Some persons here are eminent in
one virtue, In Coelo videbimus and amabimus, hic amandum ut videamus.
some in another: some are guided by hope, and some by fear: Many different are
the considerations and helps whereby men are brought to make themselves happy
in doing their duty: but the motive, the guide, the way, Dilectio est via
rectissima absque devio: via bevis absque taedio: via plana absque tumulo: via
clara absque nubilo: via secura absque periculo, etc. Idiot. Cont.
the instrument I recommend thee above all others, is Love. Love is the
strongest motive, the surest guide, the safest way, the best instrument in the
world: to live well, to keep thee from wandering, to bring thee to heaven, to
conquer all oppositions, and do the work of God thoroughly. Love is by far the
best Monastery; it will both secure thee from the world, and yet enable thee to
do much good in it. Love has a general intendance over all virtues and duties,
and makes them pleasant to us, and acceptable to God. Love is the fulfilling of
the Law. Love, and thou can never do amiss; love, and thou can never
miscarry.

CHAP. XVII. Considerations of the nature of Love, and first of Self Love.
LOve is the common Prince and parent of other passions, as they all take their
Laws, so they take their Origin from it: Or, to speak more properly, love it
self is all passions, and it obtains several different names, according to its
several acts and objects. Love (says S. Aug.) is called desire, Amor inhians
habere quod amatur, cupiditu est, idem habens eoque fruens, laetitia est,
fugiens quod ei adversatur, timor est, idque cum acciderit sentiens, tristitis
est. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 14. c. 7.
when it gasps after its beloved object; when it is possessed of it, it takes
another denomination, and is called joy or pleasure, when it flies from what it
abhors, it has the name of fear; and it is called sorrow, when what it feared
overtakes it. But still love is the only passion: desire, anger, joy and
sorrow, hope and fear are either the motions or acts, or else the accidents of
it. This clearly shows the great power and activity of this noble passion: for
it is well known that the greatest, and indeed all humane actions that are free,
proceed from these natural affections, and so are the effects of love. There is
no need, to distinguish the several sorts thereof, declaring that love is,
either natural or supernatural, sensual or spiritual, of friendship or of
interest; for all these are the same faculty, or passion in man, differing in
their principles or objects only: neither would it much avail to give and
explain accurate and studied definitions of love, which is much better felt
than expressed, and much better declared by actions than words: it will be more
useful to consider, that, as love is the principle of all passions, so it is of
all virtues and vices. This fountain sends forth the clearest and the foulest
streams; and like all other things, the greater its excellency, the worse is
its abuse: so that it should be our greatest care, to use it well, and set it
upon the right object.

No joy in enjoyment without love, without it no pleasure in fruition: it is
the great instrument of happiness, if we place it aright, and it brings the
greatest infelicities if we misplace it. It Is a misguided love that makes men
vicious, that causes all the disorders in the world: because men love
themselves more than God; and so would be Gods to themselves, the Authors of
their own happiness, expecting their greatest felicities, either from their
bodies as the sensual Epicures, or from their minds, as the proud Stoics.
Hence it is, that in the head of a long catalogue of the blackest sins, S. Paul
sets self-love as the cause, and origin of all the rest: saying, that in the
worst and most perilous times, Men should be lovers of their own selves, 2 Timothy
3.2, 4. and again, that they should be lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of
God; which, being the greatest depravation of the understanding and of the will
of men, plungeth them into the greatest sins, and thence into the greatest
miseries. Certain it is that piety or true goodness consists in willingly
submitting one self to the Divine Pleasure, either to suffer or obey: and
certain it is that self-love will admit of neither, it makes a man incapable of
Religion, the Essence whereof is to deny our own, to comply with God's Will:
and so instead of that Godliness, Justice and Sobriety, which are the three
Generals comprehensive of all religious duties, this muddy head-spring
self-love sends forth three muddy streams, which cause the overflowing of
ungodliness, and almost drown the world under a deluge of wickedness. These be
the love of sensual pleasures, called Voluptuousness; the love of riches,
called Covetousness, and the vainglorious love of honor, called Pride or
Ambition. These three are disclaimed and renounced by all Christians in the
first part of their Baptismal vow: for the love of them confounds the world and
all Religion; makes men criminal in souls, bodies, and estates, and is the
great enemy to their rest and salvation. Therefore S. John who calls these the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, gives us this
necessary cauti n; love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, 1 John
2.15. that is, as our Blessed Savior says, no man can serve two masters, for
either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the
one and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. There is
no halting betwixt God and Baal, the one or the other must be acknowledged for
Lord; there cannot be two contrary Sovereigns together; and the same thing
cannot be granted to two several competitors; if we love the world it reigns in
our hearts and God is excluded: if we give our love to the world, Amor motus
est cordis qui cum se inordinate movet, cupiditas dicitur: cum vero ordinatus
est charitas appellatur. Aug. de subst. dil. c. 2.
we cannot possibly give it to God also; so then the love of our selves is
Concupiscence, the mother of all sin and impurity, and the love of God is Grace
or charity, the fountain of all holiness and virtue: and these two, according
as they are predominant in men, make here the distinction betwixt the penitent
and the impenitent, betwixt the just and the unjust: and will make the great
difference hereafter, betwixt those that shall dwell in the embraces of the God
of Love to eternity, and those that shall dwell with everlasting burning; for
every man is what he loves, Talis est quisque, qualis est dilectio ejus, terram
diligis, terra es, etc. Aug. Tract. 2. in 1 John
(as S. Augustine says) the irresistible power of that mighty passion does in
some manner transform him into that which his love embraces: and therefore to
know whether a man be good or bad, we inquire not what he knows or what he
believes, but what he does love; being sure that his morals are of the same
nature as his love; because his desires and actions are all guided by it.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Love of JESUS requires we should mortify Self-love.
THis makes it our greatest duty, as it is our greatest interest, to rule by
Reason and Religion that passion which certainly will rule over us, to set our
love upon the right object, upon God, not upon our selves. Not that we should,
or can be our own enemies, and seek our own ruin; no man ever yet hated his
own flesh, says S. Paul, Ephesians. 29. the worst enemies to mankind are kind to
themselves: and we may as soon lose our being, as the desire of our well being.

But we must understand that our supreme happiness consists in the enjoyment
of God, who is that infinite increated Goodness, that can alone fully beatifie
us. God is infinitely happy and has the possession of his infinite perfections
by loving himself, and we also become happy by loving him with all our hearts
and souls, it was so in the state of innocence, and so it is still and ever
shall be, and Angels and men became miserable only by departing from the love
of God, which was then as it is now to be expressed by obedience: So that when man
prefers any thing to God, he not only departs from his duty, but also from his
sovereign bliss.

In the time of man's integrity, God was to be regarded and loved first and most
of all, so it must be still: the difference is, that then man did it naturally,
and now by a supernatural assistance: he did it then by the grace of his
Original Righteousness, and now by the grace of the Gospel; he did it then
without reluctance, now he has sinful appetites and passions which he must
deny and mortify, before he can do it. Therefore our blessed Savior requires
it, at the very entrance of his School, as a necessary qualification to all
that will be his Disciples, that they should deny themselves and hate all
things in comparison of him: If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross daily and follow me: and again, if any man come
to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers
and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 9.23.14.26.
that is, he that will own JESUS, and be owned by him, must in all things give
him the preeminence; must relinquish his natural desires, deny his own will,
that he may yield an humble obedience to God; he must forsake all things that
come in competition with him; and even part with his dearest relations and his
own life, (as though he hated them) rather than commit what God has forbidden,
or disclaim what he would have us profess; this self-abnegation, Ille satis se
diligit qui sedulo agit ut summo fruatur bono.
this daily self crucifixion is no act of self-hatred, as the world might
think: but the greatest kindness we can show to our selves or others: for it is
the only way whereby to make our lives comfortable here, and eternally happy
in the world to come: and in many cases more hard and less advantageous we
practice self-denial, of our free choice. As he therefore that cuts off one of
his limbs, hates not himself, but seeks the preservation of his body; and he
that casts his goods overboard, hates them not, but prefers his safety to
them: so in this case, he that parts with his earthly enjoyments, hates them
not, but prefers heaven to this earth; he that loses this present life, hates
it not, but loves eternal life beyond it; and he that forsakes his friends or
parents to follow his Savior in the discharge of a good conscience, hates them
not, but seeks to win them to their happiness, by preferring his God and his
Salvation to their unjust desires. In this case the promise is verified, that
he that parts with any thing for Christ's sake, receives an hundred fold in
compensation: and he that loses his life, certainly finds it; therefore hating
our kindred and our own lives, is otherwise expressed in S. Matthew; he that
loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, etc. Mat. 10.37. As
much as to say, that it is only required, that the love of God should be
predominant; that JESUS should be dearer to us, than all persons whatever; and
that in the first place, we should love God, with all our minds, with all our
strength, and with all our souls: for then afterward, the love of our selves,
Recte novit vivere, qui recte novit amare. Aug.
and others being subordinate would become regular and innocent.

CHAP. XIX. How great a Virtue is Divine Charity, or the Love of God.
NOw as all sins and miseries proceed from a misplaced love; so all virtues and
felicities are the product of love well guided, and placed on the right object;
this is as beneficial and advantageous, as the other is pernicious: that is,
Sicut radix omnium malerum est cupiditas: ita radix omium bonorum est charitas.
Sermon. de Charit.
(as S. Augustine says) that as self-love is the root of all evil, so the love
of God is the root of all good, the stock whence all virtues do grow. The
excellency of Divine Love is so great, so transcendent, Sine charitate fides
potest esse, sed non prodesse. Aug. 1 Cor. 13.
that it alone is accepted on its own account, and all other things for its
sake; a faith strong enough to work miracles, alms the most expensive, and even
the flames of Martyrdom profit nothing without love, as S. Paul teaches; love
it is that makes all good works meritorious in the best sense; love it is that
gives a value to all other virtues; or rather, it is love that produces all
good works and virtues, as they are so indeed. Love is the discharge of our
whole duty, the fulfilling of the law, says S. Paul, Romans 13.10. love is that
grace which renews and sanctifies our natures and abides for ever; it is the
greatest, the most excellent gift of God; it is even the Divine Spirit, Vnitas
Spiritus continet omnia. Sermon. Pont.

Donum est Spiritus San tus in quo nobis omnia bona dantur.


who unites all things within the bonds of love and unity, says S. Aug. and
with whom all good things are ever given. Divines teach that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son, by way of love; wherefore he is called,
nexus amoris quo conjungitur Pater cum Filio, and Filius cum Patre; that is, in
the Language of the Church, that in the Unity of the same Spirit, Charitas qua
Pater diligit Filium and Filius Pa rem, quae est Spiritus Sanctus, ineffabilem
communionem amborum demonstrat. De Trin. l. 15.
the Father and the Son live and reign evermore; or, as S. Augustine expresses
it, The love wherewith the Father and the Son love mutually is the Holy Spirit,
and represents best the Mystery of their Incomprehensible Union.

Now that Divine Spirit, which is the eternal love of God to himself, is given
to us, in the grace of love or charity (which are one and the same) whereby we
are all joined together into one body, and all united to God; therefore in our
holding Communion with the Church, we are commanded to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. and we are taught, that the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given to us, Rom,
5.5. and that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost are all one, 2 Cor. 13.14. so that to come to the
highest pitch, and finish the elogium of love, we we may say with S. John, that
God is love, and then we have said all. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. that is, God is an abyss of
love and goodness; by love he gives himself to us, and by love we give up our
selves to him, and are transformed into him. Wonder not therefore, if the
effects of love are so glorious and wonderful, Deus charitas est; brevis laus
sed magna laus: brevis in ser none and magna in intellectu, etc. Aug. Tract. 9.
in Ep. Johan.
when it proceeds immediately from God, and is the communication of himself to
us; when it is the grace of Jesus Christ, and the most precious gift of the
Divine Spirit; when it is the Sanctification of our natures, and the bettering
and perfecting of the noblest of humane affections, natural love, that powerful
passion whereby all things and all men are governed.

CHAP. XX. That love always pursues what it thinks good: and is never satisfied
till it has obtained it.
THough the properties of love in general be better known by experience than
they can be by discourse: Ineffabilem prorsus ego sentio amorem Dei; and qui
sentiri magis quam dici posset. Basil.
yet it may serve to good purpose to say something of them; the first whereof
is, that love always embraces what is good, either in truth or appearance: for
Man's inclinations are still the same, as they were in the state of innocence;
though much depraved: we still pursue after what we think will make us happy;
only we mistake. Like the bramble in the fable, which having lost a rich
freight of the finest silks, and now takes hold of the coarsest stuffs to
recover its loss; so have all men a secret sense, that they are fallen from a
state of felicity, and have lost a jewel of infinite value, which still they
esteem and love, though they know it not: and therefore now, to recover the
eminency of their first station, they are climbing upon every molehil, petty
mountains of ambition; to recover their lost jewel, they pick up every pebble
stone; where they see a glimpse of beauty, where they relish any thing of
goodness, there they set their love and affection, as if that were the summum
bonum, which is but an imperfect shadow of it; so that we are like an
unfortunate lover, who, being seized by a phrensy, forgets and forsakes his
Mistress, and dotes on her picture. We neglect God, and fall in love with those
things that have the least impress of his perfection: and then, like Idolaters;
we pay that worship to the work, which is due to the maker only.

Therefore ought we to take great heed, that we be not taken with every seeming
beauty or goodness: but that we examine whether that be the thing which will
make us entirely happy, and beyond which we shall wish for nothing. For if it
be not, we must pass it by, and seek further, and never rest, nor set our
hearts on any thing, till we have found that true and perfect good, most
obvious and easy to be found, which being loved will be certainly possessed, and
being possessed, will make us perfectly happy; and that is God alone. It is the
meditation of S. Augustine, Thou may seek after honors and not obtain them;
thou may labor for riches, and remain poor; thou may dote on pleasures,
Amaturus and honorem and forte non perventurus: -- quis me amavit and non ad me
pervenit? -- quisquis me quaerit cum ipso sum, etc. Tract. 10. in Ep. Johan.
and have many sorrows: but our God, the Supreme Goodness says, Who, ever
sought me, and found me not? who ever desired me and obtained me not? who ever
loved me, and mist of me? I am with him that seeks for me; he has me already
that wishes for me; and he that loves me is sure of me: the way to come to me
is neither long nor difficult; love makes me present to every lover.

A second property of love is; that it never rests and is never satisfied,
until it be possessed of the beloved object; This makes abused worldlings so
busy, so perpetually restless and active about the purchase of their beloved
vanities: and this makes devout Christians, like S. Paul, Phil. 3. never to
count themselves to have apprehended: but forgetting the things which are
behind, and reaching forth to those that are before, to press forward toward
the mark, the price of their high calling, the object of their love and most
passionate desires. This restlessness and activity of love found work enough
for the Fathers of the Deserts; whose indefatigable pains to mortify their
sinful appetites; whose unwearied diligence to serve God; whose swift and
violent motion heavenward is the object of our wonder, and upbraids our sloth
and negligence. They were almost wholly freed from the necessities of the body,
which is the endless task and work of other men, and yet they were always
employed; they had almost nothing to do, and yet were never idle; the love of
Eternity, the love of JESUS kept them in action; they dwelt in peace, and yet
were never at rest. Our heart, which is the seat of love, can never be quiet,
till it returns within Gods embraces, till it be possessed of that infinite good,
which all men love, though but a few know it. See the several plots and
undertakings of men in the world, it is love sets them at work: it is to obtain
what their blind affections run after, that they are so assiduous and so
laborious. See the prayers and pious exercises, the self-denials and
mortifications, the manifold acts of charity and the great patience of
Christians in the Church: it is love also has set them their task and makes
them so diligent, so watchful till they have fulfilled it. We sometimes wipe
the tears from our eyes, and our sorrows admit of joyful intervals; our anger
does not last always, and sometimes hatred is asleep: but love like the heart
wherein it dwells, can never cease to act and move till it cease to be; Habet
omnis amor vim suam, nec potest vacare amor in anima amantis. Aug.
where ever love is, it shows its life and power, and is always doing.

CHAP. XXI. That Love is strong and effective, and sweetens all labors.
IN the third place, as love is active, so it is effective; it does not spend
it self in useless and insignificant attempts; its strength is great, as well
as its endeavors. Great are the dangers and difficulties which love overcomes;
it carries the ambitious lover of honor through many uneasy perils to a
fading laurel; it carries the covetous lover of riches through the most hard
and slavish labors, to his false and treacherous Mammon; and it carries
likewise the devour lover of JESUS through obedience and self humiliation,
through briars and uneasy crosses, through patience and the greatest
sufferings to the enjoyment of his Beloved. Love can do all things, since it
brought God down from heaven to become man, and die for man. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? says S. Paul, Shall tribulation or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay, in all these
things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us; for I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35. etc. As much as to say, that the power of
love is irresistible, that it answers all objections and conquers all
obstacles: notwithstanding man's high provocations and great unworthiness, love
made the Almighty lay down the arms of his just vengeance, and open his bosom
of mercy, to give his dear and only Son to man for a Savior; God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have everlasting life, John 3.16. And likewise man is
enabled or rather forced by love to do and suffer any thing; as soon as Divine
Love enters a man's heart, of proud, it makes him humble; of lustful and
intemperate, it makes him chaste and sober; of covetous, it makes him
charitable; of dainty and effeminate, it fits him to be a Martyr. No ill habits
so deeply rooted, but love can pluck them up; no cross so heavy but love can
bear it. Many waters cannot quench love (says Soloman) neither can the floods
drown it, Cant 8.7. No, the strongest torrent of affliction is but like drops
of water sprinkled upon the fire, it increases the flames and the ardency
thereof. Love is as strong as death, verse 6. and death is very strong, Magnum
verbum fortis ut mors dilectio; magnificentius exprimi non potuit fortitudo
charitatis, quis enim morti resistat? ignibus, undis, far, regibus
resistitur, venit una mors, quis et resistit? nihil illa fortius, propterea
viribus ejus charitas comparatur, Aug. in Psalm. 121.
stronger than all visible creatures. We daily fight against death and beat it
back; by rest and food and Physic, we dispute the victory with it many years;
but it is ever victorious at last; so is love, it never gives over, till it
has conquered all oppositions; its courage increases together with its
difficulties; the more obstacles in its way, the greater its endeavors, the
more fierce its contentions. Death severs a man from himself, and disunites
what seems inseparable: love also takes the lovers soul from him, and unites it
to the beloved, so that he lives more in what he loves than in himself; love is
as strong as death; Death converts the greatest sinners, or at least keeps them
from sinning at all, any longer: so does love, it certainly mortifies all, even
the most reigning sins, it will not suffer them to sin that love God. We can
tame wild beasts by industry; overcome the barrenness of the earth by labor;
resist the angry elements by Art and Physic; no evil but has a remedy, only
death has none, there is no striving against it: so that nothing can better
express the irresistible power of love, than to say that it is as strong as
death.

The last property of love I shall now mention, is, that love sweetens bitter
things, makes our labors pleasant, and even our sufferings delightful. How
heavy is that yoke which is imposed by an ungrateful hand? The Soldier pressed
to the service can hardly bear his arms: but he that is enrolled by love thinks
them light and bears them with pleasure; the slave that works in the Mines
counts his very life a burden: the niggard that works much harder likes well
his drudgery, because the love of riches is his task-master; he that serves his
master out of fear works faintly and with a heavy heart: he that serves him out
of love, does it diligently and yet with cheerfulness; the Christian pilgrim
who is driven heavenward with fears and terrors, goes on with much
reluctance, and a sorrowful heart: he that is drawn with the cords of love,
follows with joyfulness, minds not the ruggedness of his way, and even
rejoices in his weariness, because it brings him nearer and nearer to his
beloved: he that that could say, the love of Christ constrains us, could say
also, we rejoice in tribulations. 'Twas the love of JESUS made primitive
Christians work hard and suffer much, Nullo modo sunt onerosi labores amantium,
sed etiam ipsi delectant, sicut venantium, piscantium: interest ergo quid
ametur: nam in eo quod amatur, aut non laboratur, aut labor amatur. Aug.
with comfort and unspeakable joy: and it is for want of that sweet and Divine
Love that Christians now find sorrow and great difficulty in that little they
do or suffer for JESUS. The labors of love are ever pleasant; nothing is hard
that love binds upon us.

CHAP. XXII. A farewell to all sinful desires.
THis great power of love is now to be drawn into act, and these considerations
to be reduced into practice.

Now therefore enter more seriously than ever this Cloister of love; engage thy
self further into the society of the true lovers of JESUS; enter now actually
and affectionately upon the work and labor of love.

Remember now thy Baptismal Vows, remember them I say, now that the love of
Christ constrains, binds thee to fulfill them.

Things are best preserved by that which first gave them being. And now thy
making good that stipulation, thy part of that gracious Covenant whereby thou
art related to Christ; that (according to the design of that Sign of the Cross,
which was drawn upon thee as the badge of thy profession) thou would not be
ashamed to profess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner, against sin, the world and the devil, and to continue his faithful
Soldier and Servant unto thy lives end: So now thou should accomplish this
promise by faith working by love.

Now then retire a while and enter thy Closet; sequester thy thoughts from the
world; and confer with thy Soul about thy duty and thy great interest. Call to
mind the obligations the love of JESUS has laid upon thee, and how thou have
promised to requite it, by renouncing all things that are contrary to thy love
and duty to him. By renouncing the devil and all his works; the vain pomps and
vanities of the world, and the covetous desires of the same; as also the sinful
lusts of thy flesh. Now thou art to approve thy self a true lover and servant
of JESUS, by departing from these by repentance and amendment. Leave them
therefore and forsake them, these enemies of thy Savior, of thy love, and of
thy happiness. Let thy Soul full of the love of JESUS, thus meditate, and
resolve, and express thy devout affections to him that died for thee.

The love of JESUS has prevailed; I find my heart wounded; I can no longer
resist the charms of his love; he has woed me so long, and with so much
kindness, that now my heart is his; I will love him, because he first loved me.
Now it repents me that ever I rejected his suit, that ever I was unkind to
him; it grieveth me that ever I countenanced and preferred his rivals, the
lusts of sensuality, covetousness, and pride, which I renounced in my Baptism;
I will now exclude them wholly; this is the first mark JESUS shall receive of
my sincere affection to him, that I will entertain nor caress no longer those
his enemies, with whom I have had an unhappy intelligence for too long a time;
henceforth, if they come near me, I will endeavor to drive them away; if they
come after me, I will flee; if they persevere in their attempts, they shall get
nothing else, but shame and denials. Away from me then, ye wicked spirits, with
all your tempting allurements, worldly vanities, deceitful riches, sensual
pleasures; I remember that I renounced you all, when first I gave up my name to
JESUS, when he first began to show and seal his love to me, and to engage mine
I then renounced the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the
world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the
flesh; I now remember those my engagements, and grieve that I have not kept
them: and therefore will hate you the more; that you made me forget my
promises, and break my holy vows. Now will I be revenged of you, ye proud and
ambitious designs, lustful thoughts, greedy desires of wealth; I will now kill
and crucify you. Henceforth, it shall be my honor, that I am a Servant of
JESUS; it shall be my delight and pleasure, that I am a lover of JESUS; and it
shall be my wealth, that he is mine as I am his. JESUS has done and suffered
much to declare his love and to deserve mine; he has come down from heaven,
and humbled himself to my mean and low condition; he has lived poor and
despised; he has been afflicted and persecuted; he has died for me; hereby I
know that he loves me, because he laid down his life for me, but ye his
unworthy rivals never gave me any assurance of your affection, never did, or
suffered any thing for me. JESUS exposed himself to shame, that I might become
glorious; endured pains that I might have pleasure; he became poor, that I
might be enriched: but covetousness offers me riches, to pierce me through with
many sorrows; lust enticeth me, to wound me, when I have consented to it; and
pride promises me honors, to cumber me and expose me to envy. JESUS is
infinitely lovely, he is all perfection and goodness; and he desires to be
loved, not for any advantage of his own, but to make his lovers entirely and
eternally happy: but you painted idols of abused mortals, are in your selves
ugly, and even loathsome; though at a great distance, ye may seem somewhat
fair, yet near at hand, ye are nothing but deformity; ye always prove vain and
vexatious; ye seek to enter men's hearts, only to tyrannize and torment them,
and betray them to eternal sorrows. JESUS is a true and constant lover, he ever
owns his friends: he never fails them that love him; he helps them in their
distresses; he comforts them in their sorrows; and when they die he stands by
them: but ye temporal deceitful pleasures, are false and inconstant; ye forsake
your friends in their greatest need; ye flatter them for a few Summer days,
while the Sun shines kindly upon them; but in the rigors of Winter, when an
unprosperous storm arises, you are gone, you leave them to die comfortless;
they carry nothing of you, when they go from hence, but the bitter remembrance
of your treacherousness. JESUS is a most grateful lover, he ever returns love
for love; he is ever found of them that seek him; to them that desire him he
ever gives himself; every true lover of JESUS is sure to enjoy him: but you
worldly enjoyments are generally most unkind to your most passionate lovers; ye
flee from them that run after you; ye grieve and vex your greatest admirers, ye
are ever uncertain, false and ungrateful. I will therefore never love you
again; nay, I resolve to hate and persecute you; to mortify and watch against
my lusts, my pride, and covetous desires. But JESUS shall reign in my heart;
him will I love; him will I serve; him will I endeavor to please in all
things; I will be wholly his; therefore I renounce all friendship with you that
are his enemies; there can be no agreement betwixt the Holy JESUS and this
sinful world; If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him,
1 John 2.15. Lord, we beseech thee grant thy people grace to withstand the
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and with pure hearts and
minds to follow thee, the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. That the Love of JESUS and the love of Sin can never consist
together.
FUrther, consider O my Soul, that JESUS my Blessed Master is the Prince of
purity, he will never abide in the same heart with intemperance and with
fleshly lusts. He is meek and lowly, pride cannot follow him. By works of mercy
and charity he calls us to the possession of heavenly treasures, therefore
greedy worldly mindedness can never entertain nor prefer his promise. Lust,
Pride, Covetousness can never abide with the love of Christ, they can never be
reconciled, JESUS and they are mortal enemies. Mortal I may call them, because
they were his murderers, or rather because, he died to put them to death; We
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold from our vain
conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ: JESUS shed his blood to
redeem us, as well from the practice and commission, as from the punishment and
destruction of sin. Or rather of both together, for they are not to be put
asunder; Moral and natural evil ever go hand in hand, as happiness is
inseparable from Goodness and virtue. Blessed are the the pure in heart, for
without holiness no man shall see God.

S. Paul therefore saying that Christ died unto sin, that is, to take away sin,
infers from thence, that we being baptized into Christ's death, our old man is
now crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hencenceforth we
should not serve sin, Romans 6. and S. Peter likewise makes it the purpose, why
Christ did hear our sins (their punishment) on his own body, on the tree, that
we thereby being dead unto sin might live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24.
Christ gave himself fo us, that he might redeem us from this present evil
world, Gal. 1.4. The Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works
of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Sin is that which God hates above all things: sin is
that which is most contrary to his nature, and to our happiness; and so JESUS
was crucified, that sin might be destroyed, he died that sin might live no
longer: and therefore I renounced all sin, the Devil and all his works, when
JESUS owned me for his friend, and I owned him for my Lord and Master, they are
incompatible, their inconsistency is irreconcilable; If I hold to the one, I
must despise the other; if I love one, I must hate the other. I will therefore,
as I am most bound, and as I have promised, forsake sin and follow JESUS; I
will fight against his enemies, and side with him against my own corrupt
affections; while I have a being, I will love and obey JESUS.

CHAP. XXIV. Of outward helps and instruments of love and obedience.
NOw to effect these good resolutions, we must use means to bring our hears to
a devout and Religious Temper, and so to keep them. It will not suffice that we
intend well except we perform. We may soon be diverted from our best designs,
either by temptations, or by the interruption of worldly business. Therefore
the revolutions of time which bring on us the snares and disturbances of this
life, must also bring with them the frequent returns of our pious excercises
and Christian duties.

We must often recollect our thoughts and listen to the Divine Love of our
Blessed JESUS. We must entertain our Souls with him; renew our religious
purposes; and call to mind those special considerations which use to affect us
most of all. We must often resort to those fountains of Grace which God has
opened to his Church in his public Worship, and the several dispensations of
his Word and Sacraments by his Ministers. To these we must be sure to add
Fastings, Alms and Prayers, than which we can do nothing more acceptable to
God; nothing that can better declare how much we love him, and how heartily we
devote to him our bodies, souls and estates. All these are not only means, but
duties of Religion also, not to be omitted, upon any pretense whatever.

But now the following have more of indifferency, less of necessity in them:
but yet may have a good influence upon the inner man; may move our affections
and declare or increase our devotion and our sincerity. Such are the constant
reading of good Books; set times of meditation and mental prayer; the enjoining
to our selves a strict silence for some convenient time, to bridle our tongue
and so to use it to discipline: and as it were to unsay and retract inwardly by
hearty repentance what we have said amiss.

Sometimes like Hezechiah to turn our selves to the wall to mourn in secret; I
mean, to retire from the world, and enter our closet, there to confer with God
and our own souls, about Eternity and the way to a blessed one.

Every day, or at least once a week to cast our eyes back, and take an account
of our lives, especially of what we have done since our last examen: that we
may repent and rectify our follies, renew our good resolutions, and increase
our diligence and our care.

In our adorations and penitential prayers, to cast our selve on the ground
with the humblest prostration; to hold our hands like criminals bound,
supplicating before their judge; to look up to heaven; to smite our breasts,
and so excite our zeal and contrition.

Some are much affected with watching; with visible representations; the sight
of a dying man, and such instructions and mementoes as enter the Soul by the
eyes, which being the quickest and most apprehensive sense we have, Segnius
irritant animos demissa per aures, Quam quo sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus and
quae Ipse sibi tradit spectator --
conveys its objects to the mind with the greater force, and makes the deeper
impression.

Here in my first Edition I had mentioned the making on our selves the sign of
the Cross, which could not escape being taxt of Popery by some, that call by
that name every thing they dislike. I should not be much concerned at the
charge, but that I find Popery is made a thing too ancient and too innocent,
and so mistaken. It has indeed abused that primitive Ceremony and made it
subservient to superstition: but the right use of it is not therefore unlawful.
Those zealous and holy Christians in the first ages who frequently signed
themselves with that Sacred Sign, intended it as a tacit invocation of the name
of Christ; as an outward profession that they owned him for their Lord and
Savior; and as a signature to themselves that they were devoted to his
service, and ready to die for his sake.

I might produce and plead their reasons and example; the Custom of our Church,
and its 30th Cannon, but that I would persuade no man to a rite so indifferent.
If any will reiterate it on themselves, where they give no offense, to the same
purpose as it was intended, when they were made Christians, In token that they
will not be ashamed to profess the faith of Christ crucified, etc. I shall not
condemn him: and I shall in no wise quarrel with them that omit it. If we
sincerely love our Divine Master, and are faithful and obedient to him, it is
no great matter what outward means and instruments we use.

But yet experience and the approbation of the best of men, have recommended
these I have now mentioned, as many ways useful and profitable. They and others
of the like nature, and Church ceremonies, are said by Calvin, to assist our
infirmities, to increase our devotion, and to make Religion more solemn and
more venerable. Inst. l. 4. c. 10.. 28. and 31.

So the great duties be secured, these are indifferent, and may vary according
to circumstances: but yet they are not useless, nor totally to be rejected.
Those outward rites and actions have an influence upon our hearts; they not
only express our inward piety, but they increase it. Though they proceed from
the affections, Nescio quomodo, cum hi motus corporis fieri, nisi motu animi
praecedente non possint, iisdem rursus exterius visibiliter factis, ille
interior invisibilis qui eos fecit, augeatur. Aug.
they re-act upon them, (as S. Augustine says) they augment that fervor which
at first produced them.

And so said a Blessed Martyr of our Church, that the true inward worship of
God while we live in the Body, needs external helps, and all little enough to
keep it in any vigor.

These voluntary observations should not lead them to scruple or censoriousness
that are pleased to use them; and should not be clamoured against by others
indiscreetly and uncharitably: for in themselves they are adminicula pietatis,
handmaids to devotion and holy contrition. And they that know themselves are
sensible that they want all possible helps to stir them up and relieve their
dullness. When our understandings are convinced we have not quite done, means
must be used also to affect the fancy and to engage the affections. And he had
need be very sure of his strength, that refuses the assistance of all
auxiliaries.

CHAP. XXV. A passionate Meditation on the Passion of our Blessed Savior.
MY love is crucified, said that loving and holy Martyr Ignatius, declaring how
earnestly he wished to die for JESUS: and so, (...).
considering the passion of JESUS, I meditate with him; My love is crucified,
my dearest Savior dies in most bitter pains; he has been rudely bound and
dragged from place to place; he has been stripped, tied to a post, and whipped like
a vile slave; he has been buffeted and caned, and abused with all manner of
contumelies; and now I see him crowned with thorns, all over spittle and blood.
I see him stretched upon the Cross, where his hands and his feet are nailed;
his head hangs down; I read in his pale face and his weeping eyes, the
extremity of his pain, the anguish of his wounded soul. Lord art thou he whom
my soul loves? O Domine Jesu Christ, si intelligentia quam mihi dedisti uti
vellem sicut deberem, cernerem manifest, quo modo, ^^o quam sine modo, a me
creatura tua amari merueris, qui prior dilexisti me; tantus and tantum, and
gratis tantillum, and talem, and ingratum. Idiot.
art thou my dearest JESUS! were it my father, my brother, my friend, or my
benefactor that should suffer this undeservedly, how would I pity them! but
should they suffer this upon my account, Lord, I could not outlive such a
sight! if nothing else, love would certainly wound my soul to death. But behold
it is so; this crucified, this dying man is my father, he gave me my being; he
is my brother, he came down from heaven and took humane flesh, that he might
have that relation to me; he is my friend, he lays down his life to save mine;
he is my greatest benefactor, from him I receive all I have; all the blessings,
the good things I enjoy I owe to his kindness.

But now my soul, suppose that from his Cross thou should hear him, thus
expressing his love, and bespeaking thine. Christian, dearest Christian, for
whom here I die; consider seriously, imprint it it thine heart, what in my
words, what in my mysteries, thou read of my suffering for thee; consider
who I am, what I endure, and to what end. I am the eternal Son of God whom the
Angels adore: I became Man to make thee partaker of the Divine Nature; I am
infinitely rich, the whole universe is mine: I became thus destitute of all
things to purchase true riches for thee; I am of an Almighty Power, the whole
world was made and subsists by me: I am now weak to make thee strong, I am
overcome of mine enemies to make thee conquer thine; I am crowned with glory,
and clothed with Majesty: I now were these thorns, and am become naked, to
cloth thee with robes of righteousness, and Crown thee with a Royal Diadem; I
am the inexhaustible fountain of joy and happiness: I now endure sorrows and
miseries, to make thee joyful and happy; I am infinitely pure and innocent: I
am become a sacrifice for sin, to merit thy pardon, and to sanctify and make
the holy; I am the Author of life, the first and the last: I now die to make
thee live for ever: nothing but love moves me thus, to suffer for thee, and
nothing but love I require for it. Dearest soul, thy sins are more grievous to
me than my wounds; Aspice serve Dei, sic me posuere Judei.
Aspice mortalis, pro te datur hostia talis.
Aspice devote, quoniam sic pendeo pro te.
Introitum vitae reddo tibi, read mihi te.
In cruce sum pro te, qui peccas desine pro me.
Desine do veniam, dic culpam, corrige vitam.

add not sorrow to my sorrow by remaining impenitent; deny not this request to
thy dying bleeding Savior, that thou would mortify thy lusts and forsake
thy sins; all that is past I heartily forgive, if thou becomest true penitent.
I freely give my self for thee, and beg that thou would give thy self to me.

To this, O my Soul, with the greatest love and wonder thou may thus reply.
What shall I say now, dearest Lord? Words cannot answer thee. I am amazed, I am
astonished, I know not how to speak, my tongue cannot express what my heart
feels. Lord, I will say nothing! I will answer with sighs and tears, with
devout affections, by resigning and giving up my body and soul to thee. I will
answer by obedience, by actions; by now falling to work to reform my life, to
mortify my sinful lusts, to cut off the members of the body of sin. Sweetest
JESU, I will love thee with all the affections my heart can entertain; no
bosom sin shall be so dear to me; but for thy sake I will heartily part with
it; no lust shall be so pleasing, but I will kill it, at thy request and
command; even my natural desires and inclinations will I gladly deny, when they
come in competition with that duty and love I owe, and ever will pay my dearest
JESUS. Sweetest Lord it was I, had deserved to be smitten, to be covered with
shame, to be deprived of life: and thou suffer all these for me; for me vile
wretch; for me my Lord; was it for me? O where shall I find such another
friend? or rather what shall I do, to requite thy kindness and mercy? I can
give thee nothing but love and thanks; and that will I do. O my Blessed Lord
who wast spet upon; I humbly worship thee. Thou wast reviled like a vile slave;
I praise thee, and own my self thy servant. The Jews refused thee for their
King; but thou art mine, thou art my Blessed Master. I care not what becomes of
me here, so I may come to bless and adore thee for ever! Lord, if there is a
place where thou art not loved and magnified, let me never come into it. Assist
me dearest Lord, let no pleasure or pain, no fear or hope, no profit or loss,
no temptations within or without, ever make me to offend thee. O ye Spirits and
Souls of the Righteous, praise ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever! O that I could but join with you, to express worthily my thanks and
gratitude! O that all the world would join with me to praise and glorify the
Lord that died for us! Blessed JESU, cleanst the thoughts of our hearts, by the
inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily
magnify thy holy name, now and for evermore. Amen.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a sincere amendment which must be wrought by proper means.
BUT fickle and unhappy creatures, that we are, we often promise well, but
seldom stand to our engagements; our resolutions are good and our performances
very defective; The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. I must not
therefore, O my Soul, rest in generals, but I must resolve more especially
against those sins I am inclined to: and not only against them, but also upon
the means whereby I may overcome and mortify them; as avoiding the occasions
and inticements, inflicting on my self such severities, as may be proper
remedies, and tying my self to such pious exercises, as I know will drive away
the temptation. To forsake my sins, is not to forbear drunkenness, when perhaps
I am not inclined to it; or to avoid swearing, when I look upon it as an
unpleasing and unprofitable sin; or to hate covetousness, when by nature I am
liberal: but, knowing what sin pleases me most, what vice my temper inclines
me to, and what temptation is most strong and importunate upon me, by my
calling or my company, against that to fortify my self, and employ the utmost
of my strength; against that to watch and pray, and use sincere and earnest
endeavors. To forsake my sins, is not to say, I will forsake them. Some men,
when they are called upon by fear, adversity, or the secret voice of God within
them, are forward enough to engage with the Elder Brother in the Gospel, Lord,
I will go and work in thy vineyard: but their hot zeal and hasty promise, soon
decays into negligence, and at last into a cold denial. Though I resolve
against my natural corruptions never so seriously, that will not subdue them,
without I use proper means for it; to take up my cross and follow Christ, to
forsake all for him, to deny my self, to take the kingdom of heaven by force,
to cut off my right hand, and pluck out my eyes when they offend, is more than
barely to resolve, and promise high and proceed no further. They that are
Christ's have, not only verbally renounced, but actually crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. therefore now, I have given up my
self to Christ, and desire ever to be his, I must pray heartily, and watch
diligently against my sins, those especially that are most pleasing and
customary to me; I must, like S. Paul, not not fight in the air against
generals, but keep under my body, be temperate in all things, and strive to the
utmost for the incorruptible crown; I must use that violence to my self, such
harsh applications, acts of penance and mortification, of my own or the
Spiritual Physicians appointment, as are fit and requisite to cure my
distemper, to expel or reform that evil inclination which is inconsistent with
my love to JESUS.

To that end it will be very useful frequently to meditate on the passion of
Christ, the day of our change, our appearance in judgment, the joys of heaven,
the torments of hell, and the amazing consideration of Eternity: and I am
persuaded that it would be an excellent instrument of Reformation, and very
useful in many cases, to acquaint the Spiritual Judge and Physician with the
distempers of our Souls and the state of our conscience. But what ever means we
use for our amendment, we must be sure that they be effectual. And as he that
would cure a natural evil, applies a stronger remedy where a weaker is found
insufficient: so must he that would cure the spiritual diseases of his soul,
still use stronger applications; boggle at nothing that may be requisite to
escape his danger and recover his health. But be sure we really desire to be
healed, for then all things conducing to that end, will be welcome and
acceptable. Si desideras, via brevis est and swavis: si negligis, longa est and
laboriosa. Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things;
now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible: He that
would vanquish his antagonist, was in the first place to vanquish himself, to
endure hardship and severity, and use all endeavors for the victory, for a
fading garland: so he that will overcome his lusts, and master himself, and
obtain that heavenly crown which never sadeth, must use great industry, many
arts, all means that can conduce to that end.

CHAP. XXVII. Love the best instrument of Self-Reformation and true penitence,
with an act of hearty contrition.
BUT the voluminous directions of Casuists and Confessionists cannot reach all
cases and all particulars: to shorten our labor therefore, let the love of
JESUS do the work of self-reformation and it will be soonest and best done.
Love will find out the most effectual means for the extermination of our sins,
and love will use them to the best purpose. Certain it is, that love in all
instances, sets men upon acts of self-denial; as great Generals and many more,
who forego the peaceable enjoyment of the comforts they might have at home, and
expose themselves to dangers, because they love honor; merchants who forsake
their dearest relations, and run through many great troubles and perils,
because they love gain; and the more generous love of friendship, which has
caused many to choose great incoveniences and even death to serve their friends:
and therefore certain it is also that the love of JESUS will make his yoke and
even his Cross easy; will make us deny our selves and forbear what displeases
him, though otherwise pleasing to us. That men might be without excuse, God
has made a short work upon the earth: Vt nemo habet excusationem in die
judicii veluit Deus, sicut scriptum est, consummare and abbreviare verbum super
terram. Aug. de Doct. Christiana. l. 1. c. 1.
(says S. Aug.) by contracting his immensity into the narrow dimensions of
man, he has abbreviated his doctrine and our task. JESUS is the Center and the
sum of our Faith and Religion, and the love of JESUS is the content of our
duty. I have determined, (says S. Paul) not to know any thing among you save
Jesus Christ and him crucified, and we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness: but to them that are called,
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.2. and 1.24. that is,
in whom God fully reveals his will, and gives us full power to fulfill it.
Therefore (says the Apostle) God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross
of Jesus Christ my Lord; by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. Gal. 6.14. The knowledge and love of JESUS, our Crucified Savior, is
the most proper means to teach us our duty, the greatest motive to undertake
it, and the best instrument to perform and effect it withal; it will kill our
lusts, crucify the members of the body of sin, and carry us through the
labors and difficulties of penitence and sincere amendment: it will be the
fulfilling of repentance, as it is the fulfilling of the law.

For, as love is strong to overcome strong enemies, to kill the greatest sins:
so is it wise and quicksighted to see and to find out the least. A loving
friend will not only not slander and defame his friend, not rob, or strike, or
murder him: but will forbear all words and actions which might bring him the
least grief or inconvenience; love will not only not give the greatest
provocations; but even not disoblige or displease in the least instances.

And now my soul, I must apply this home, and thereby examine how true are my
resolves and protestations, if my love to JESUS my Lord be sincere, it will not
only keep me from confederation with his professed and greatest enemies, but even
make me shun and forsake the most secret and contemptible of them: I mean that
the love of JESUS will never suffer me to entertain any the least sin; and
whenever I find that I have been unhappily seduced to commit any, it will cause
me to grieve and sadly to repent, that I have displeased my dearest Savior,
and wounded that tender love I owe him, and profess ever to have for him. And
indeed, it is reported of many devout persons, great lovers of JESUS, that they
would sorrow and weep for ordinary failings, for small omissions, more than
others would, for much greater sins. Divine Love, like a bright burning flame,
will feel a commotion and disturbance by the least drop of water that falls
upon it: a small irregularity will be more grievous to a pious lover of JESUS,
than great crimes to another. Therefore he that could say, the love of Christ
constrains us, would also highly complain, and groan under the sense of our
unavoidable imperfection; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? Romans 7.24. Nothing will make us more sensible of our
least and most common sins, than the love of JESUS; it will make us angry at,
and impatient of them, and earnest and severe in reforming of them.

Now therefore as I profess my self a sincere and affectionate lover of JESUS,
I am obliged to undo, as much as may be, what I have done amiss, and to do it
no more: this earnestly and vigorously I must now resolve, and beg the divine
grace an assistance to perform it. I must make amends and restitution to those
I have any ways damnified in body, goods, or name, and even ask their pardon
for the injury: and then bewail my sins, grieve that I have offended my Divine
and loving Master, and beg his forgiveness,, and endeavor by tears and
contrition to wash away the stain: and spots wherewith my soul is polluted, and
displeases the holy eyes of the Holy JESUS. And so to own and to love JESUS my
Master, binds upon me all the duties of holy penitence; repentance must now be
my my work; and I must live like a true penitent. Especially on Lent, Fridays,
and such other times as the Church appointed, and devout Christians use for
mortification, and more solemn devotion. I must then, and even every night call
my ways to remembrance. And (besides those greater provocations wherewith I
have offended my Lord, in the days of my folly and inconsideration) I ought
also to take notice of those sins of daily incursion I last committed; and weep
over them all, and beg for pardon: and this I say, especially on penitential
days. For though true contrition should always abide in the heart of every one
that truly loves JESUS, yet there are occasions and proper times to bring it
forth; when we are to make it our business to soften our hearts, and make them
melt into penitent tears. Which must be done by religious exercises, pious
meditations, and such acts of contrition as this.

My dearest JESUS, I owe to thy kindest goodness, my being and all the
blessings I enjoy; and I know that thou did come down from heaven to die on
the Cross, that I might not die in hell to eternity; to suffer a bitter and
shameful death, that I might live in eternal joys. I hope to see thy glorious
face, one day; I hope to receive a crown from thy gracious hands; I hope to
dwell in thy blissful society for ever. Dearest Savior, if thou were upon
earth, I would go all the world over to prostrate my self before thee, to kiss
the ground thy Holy Feet should tread, to serve thee to show my love and
gratitude to thee. Dearest Lord, I would now joyfully give up my life for thee;
I would lose the last drop of my blood to please and glorify thee; I would die
rather than deny thee. Why then, unhappy wretch that I am, do I offend thee, to
whom I owe my self, and all that I have? Why do I wound thee by my
transgressions, who wast wounded for them, by thy love? Why do I grieve thee,
who purchasest eternal joys for me? Why do I displease thee, with whom I hope
to live and dwell, and from whom I expect mercy and salvation? Why do I sin
against thee, whom I love with all my soul? and why do not I live to thee, for
whom I would die. Lord, if what thou have done and suffered for me, be not able
to win my heart, what can thou do more? but O break and yield sinful heart of
mine; open the way to tears and grief; and let the love of thy dearest Savior,
enter, and fill, and ever possess thee.

CHAP. XXVIII. That Love will sweeten as well as produce the truest penitence:
and that true wisdom, not melancholy is the guide of sincere penitents.
SUch considerations and soliloquies as these will produce not only lacrymas
doloris, tears of grief, but also lacrymas amoris, tears of love and true
contrition; and moreover will make pleasant all the severities of repentance
which are so unacceptable and so repugnant to nature: those things that would
be ungrateful, as acts of justice on our selves, or obedience and submission to
a severe Master, will become delightful as acts of love to a gracious, beloved
Lord. In amore nihil amari, in love all things are sweet that are done or
suffered, for the sake of the beloved. I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake,
says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.10. that great lover of JESUS; not that those things
are of their own nature pleasant, whether inflicted by our selves or others;
'twas for Christ's sake that he liked them. He likewise that by self-denial, and
revenge on himself, expressing his sorrow for his sins, shows his love to
JESUS, is certainly delighted with the most afflictive of those voluntary
sufferings, as they are expressions of his love. Accordingly it is said of some
Religious persons, that their watchings, and fastings, and all the severities
to which they had tied themselves as exercises of true repentance, became in
process of time, so pleasant to them by the devoutness of their affections,
that they were afraid of having their Paradise here in this world, and
consulted their Spiritual guide about it. And certainly nothing but love could
carry the primitive Solitaries and Coenobites through that uneasiness and
hardship they willingly undertook, and endured many years, and rejoiced in, and
would not have exchanged for all the pleasures in the world; they being
persuaded that thereby they recovered and secured the favor of JESUS whom they
loved, and whose love they esteemed more than all worldly enjoyments.

Perhaps it will be said by some, that such things are the effect of
melancholy, or a forward and misguided zeal, not of true piety. But let it be
considered, that natural love it self has done, and still does wonderful
things. The love of friendship, the love of lust, the love of riches and
ambition have set men upon difficult attempts, have made them despise great
dangers, have carried them through many labors and sufferings, and perhaps as
great as the most mortified Christian ever undertook for JESUS and Eternity.
This has been and is still the effect of Natural Love, and sure Divine Love,
whose object is so infinitely more excellent, may do at least as much.

Besides, things temporal seem great at a distance; but near at hand, they
appear as they are indeed, mean and contemptible: whereas contrariwise, things
eternal, as they seem small and despicable afar off, so near at hand they
appear great and immense, they overwhelm the mind. Hence it is, that dying men
who are on the brink of eternity, are amazed at the thoughts and near prospect
of it, and express great regret for their past inconsideration, and promise
great things for the future, if they might live longer: looking upon the world,
as an empty nothing, not to be regarded where eternity appears; and hence it is
also, that they, who approach things eternal, and view them by meditation and
contemplation are of the same mind, have the same apprehensions of them, and
act accordingly: doing those things which dying men repent they have not done.
For indeed, it is no illusion or deceit, but a great and real truth, that the
world and all its concerns are nothing, compared to eternity: and that we can
never be too careful to obtain eternal joys, and avoid eternal sorrows.

How much the blessed Apostles and primitive Christians were acted by this
consideration, S. Paul gives us to understand, saying, that whilst they
looktnot on things visi-and transitory, but on things invisible and eternal,
then their afflictions were light and but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.16, etc.
though they lasted many years, and were so great, that the very thoughts of
them can make us tremble, yet they were light and momentary, whilst they looked
on eternity: and they fainted not, though their outward man decayed daily, by
their great mortifications, and their laborious zeal to serve God; and all
this, whilst we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal. So that it is the effect of a wise and most rational
consideration, to value and love him above all things, who by dying for us,
has rescued us from eternal ruin, and obtained eternal happiness for us: and
to make it appear by all means possible, doing or suffering any thing that may
manifest our love to JESUS, and assure us of a blessed eternity. It may justly
be feared that the indevotion and luke-warmness of very many, not the worst of
Christians, will not make them acceptable to God, who declares that he will
spue them out of his mouth that are neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.16. and that
their carelessness and indifferency in religious duties, will hardly secure
their eternal interest. However I think that it is a shame, to see Benedictins,
Franciscans, Carthusians, and others, forsake the merriments, pleasures and
honors of the world, rise up early, and late go to rest, wear nothing but
Cilices and coarse cloth, feed poorly and lie hard: and all this, and much more
to observe the Rule of S. Bruno, S. Francis, or some other fanciful or
melancholy Devoto, who obliged them to some absurd, some needless, and many
uneasy observations: from whom they never received any benefit, and from whom
they can expect no kind of remuneration: and at the same time to see Christians
nice and dainty, unwilling to deprive themselves of any pleasure, or to undergo
any thing of hardship, for to observe the most reasonable, holy and
advantageous Rule of Christ; from whom they have received the greatest favors,
from whom they expect the greatest rewards, and to whose service and obedience
they have devoted themselves, by a solemn vow, in holy Baptism.

CHAP. XXIX. That severities and mortifications well regulated, are subservient
to Repentance and the Love of JESUS.
I Know that some put too great a stress on such outward observations and
corporal austerities, and whilst they pervert the right use of them, greatly
abuse themselves, and it may be deceive others also: but withal it must be
granted, that others, in the other extreme, as unadvisedly reject and condemn
them as unprofitable and superstitious; and as unreasonably count themselves
Religious because they despise, as other because they are fond of them. I shall
not determine which of the two are in the worst error. Both certainly are
mistaken; and the truth I apprehend to be this. The example of our Blessed
Savior, which is our best pattern and most profitable lesson, plainly declares
that such exercises are of great use, if not necessity, in our spiritual
warfare against sin and temptations. So likewise the precepts of cutting off
our right hand or foot, when they make us offend; of denying our selves, and
taking up the Cross; and many more to the same purpose, make it our duty to use
the proper and appointed means of mortification. And that they are acceptable
to God, we are assured by Christ himself; When ye fast, be not as the
hypocrites, but anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto
men to fast, but to thy Father which sees in secret: and thy Father which sees
in secret shall reward thee openly, Mat. 6.18. Here fasting stands for all acts
of self-denial, as being the most afflictive: and though the measures thereof
be not described, yet that God has a great respect and recompense for it, as
well as for prayers, and alms, is clearly affirmed by our Blessed Lord. So that
their remains no doubt, but that all corporal austerities prudently undertaken
and managed, whether of our free susception, or appointed to us by our
Spiritual Guide, or the Governors of Christ's Church, to whom we are bound to
submit our selves, (they being in his stead to us;) there is no doubt I say,
but that these, especially the last, are generally very profitable; in some
cases absolutely necessary; and always well pleasing to God. They are
instruments of Religion whereby our lusts are subdued; the body kept under; and
the Spirit it self mortified. They are marks of the sincerity of our sorrows,
and our regret to have offended God. And they are testimonials of our love to
JESUS, and our earnest desire to secure our duty to him for the future. All
this is attested and proved true, not only by holy Scripture, and the
injunctions of the Christian Church: but also by the practice and experience of
all devout persons, affectionate lovers of the Blessed JESUS.

CHAP. XXX. A short Meditation for penitential days.
REmember that Fasting and Alms are the two wings of Prayer: and that all three
must unite their strength to raise our heavy hearts from this earth, and lift
them up to the regions of Love. All three together ascended as a memorial
before God, to plead for Cornelius. And our Blessed Savior in one Sermon, Mat.
6. joined them all three, and assigned to them one reward.

Thus therefore meditate O my Soul, on thy days of humiliation.

My Blessed Lord, I know that I have been too much addicted to sensual
pleasures: and now to speak my grief for it, here I mourn and afflict my self;
judging my self unworthy even of those refreshments, thou have allowed me. I
have too much served Mammon, and been too greedy of the world: and now I devote
all I have to thee; giving this as an earnest that all I have is thine, and
that now I will use it for my self with more moderation, and spend it on others
with greater charity; that thou may be acknowledged and glorified for thy
gracious gifts, and I may speak my dependence on thee. My heart has been too
far from thee, and for my negligence in thy service, thou might justly blot
my name out of the list of thy Servants, but here I return to thee with tears
and prayers, begging that still thou would be my Lord and Master, and I may
be more faithful and active in waiting upon thee. I pour out my soul before
thee, desiring it may evermore cleave unto thee most affectionately: and that
no creature whatever may ever be able to draw me from that love and duty I owe
thee.

Lord, had I offended any earthly Prince, that had power on me, in that
grievous manner as I have offended thy Divine Majesty, I should be loaded with
irons, cast into a dungeon, and never admitted to see his face, and to beg his
pardon. But thou give me liberty and invitest me to plead for my self; to
come and prostrate my self at thy feet, to implore thy mercy, to retract my
folly, and show how much I am grieved for it; and if I am sincere in this, I am
assured of thy pardon, and that thou will receive me to favor again.

Lord, I beseech thee, as it is written in thy Book that I have sinned, so
therein let it be registered that I truly repent; that I judge and punish my
self; and endeavor what I can to undo and recall it again. Let the penance I
here perform, my sighs and tears, my prayers and bitter sorrows, entitle me to
the merits of thy precious blood; let them stand on record, that I may be
justified at the last day, to have been a true penitent; that here the
judgments I have deserved may be turned from me; that having been here numbered
among thy Servants, who duly own thee before men; I may hereafter be numbered
among thy Saints, in glory everlasting. And Lord, let my love to thee be
proportionable to my sins and thy great mercies, that I also may hear that
blessed voice, much is forgiven thee, because thou lovedst much: and I may go
and sin no more.

CHAP. XXXI. That repentance must loook forward, to the securing of our duty
for the time to come. With instances and resolutions to that effect.
BUT one great half of repentance is yet behind; that which is most to be
attended to, that which I must chiefly design in all acts of mortification is,
that I return no more to those sins for the which I grieve and afflict my self.
I must not only grieve that I have not forsaken those lusts and vanities I
renounced when I became a Christian: but I must now actually f rsake them and
perform my vows. Except I do this, my repentance is vain, and my love not
sincere. True contrition does include love, and love includes an hearty
obedience. But here lies the difficulty. The occasions and inticements of sin
will doubtless come again; my thoughts will now always be fixed upon Divine
Objects, my mind will return to the world; my passions will be disorderly and
my appetite unruly again: how shall I stand and resist, and be safe, in the
time of danger, in the hour of trial and temptation? this I must do, this I
resolve to do; devoutly to lift up my Soul to JESUS my Master, and beg his
assistance; to remember my engagements and my protestations, and consider how
much I am bound to love and obey my Lord and Savior rather than my lusts, and
how infinitely much I shall gain by it; to summon all the strength and all the
powers of devout Love to my aid; and to use all those means I have before
resolved upon, for the resisting of temptations and doing my duty.

Thus, when a provocation to anger is given, and I find my heart rise, and my
spirits take fire and grow turbulent; instead of giving way to the mischievous
passion, or suffering that it should proceed to hatred and revenge; I will turn
aside and check my self with the remembrance of my meekest Savior, who was led
as a Lamb to the slaughter and opened not his mouth, who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered the greatest injuries, yet used no
threatening, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. I will
remember how ill it becomes me to be angry with others, who have so much reason
to be angry with my self for having so highly and frequently, provoked my God
to anger; I will consider how ill it becomes me to be revengeful and severe to
others, when all my hopes, and all my happiness depend upon forbearance and
mercy; I will think of, and fear that just exprobration of my Lord against the
revengeful, thou wicked servant, should not thou have had compassion on thy
fellow servant, as I had pity on thee; and I will remember that it is JESUS who
died for me, JESUS for whom I would die, who intercedes for mine enemies; and
so will rather rejoice that I have some of that kind of love to repay to my
dearest Savior, which he showed to me when I was his enemy. If lust enticeth
me to acts of impurity, I will call to mind the corruption and dissolution of
this vile body of sin; I will think on my last account, the day of judgment,
and the dreadful flames of hell; and I will remember him, who for me was
crucified, and with whom my love has crucified me; and that now is the time to
make it appear that I love him, and to justify the sincerity of my
protestations. And so, for covetousness, pride, intemperance, and all such
temptations, I will reject their attempts and proffers, with indignation, as a
true friend would scorn the solicitations to betray his friend, thus saying to
my self, What, shall I be false to him I love, to him that loves me, who has
shed his blood for me, and to whom I have often protested that I would even die
for him? shall I break the sacred bonds of love, and my most sacred vows, and
put my soul into a state of regret, unquietness, shame and sorrow for this vile
transitory profit or pleasure? O my dearest JESUS, thou know that I love
thee; I beseech thee, make that love victorious against thine enemies and mine.
I would rather die than deny thee, for any interest in the world: and I hope,
thou will not deny me at the last day, but own me among thy faithful servants.
Lord, I serve thee not for nothing; great are the reasons why I should obey
thee: thou have done much for me, and from thee I still expect much; infinite
rewards for such due and poor services; Lord, let me die before I deliberately
over sin against thee, and forfeit thy love by falling from mine.

Thus, by love I resolve to conquer my self, to deny and mortify my lusts; by
love, I will strive to overcome all unlawful desires, all sinful motions: and
then I shall rejoice in the victory. It shall not make me either proud or
peevish, or severe to others: but rather humble and meek, cheerful and
contented; so that it shall be seen by my outward deportment, how much pleasure
and tranquillity my soul has inwardly: that I rejoice in what I do for Christ;
that it is delicious to me to deny my self for his sake, to oblige so great, so
true, so generous a lover as JESUS, who has done all acts of friendship for
me, and owns me for his friend. I call you not servants but friends, ye are my
friends indeed, if ye do whatsoever I have commanded you, Joh. 13.14. Those
that are accounted gallant men in the world will venture their lives to second
a friend in an idle, an unchristian quarrel: and their wound they bear with
courage and count them honorable, 'T was to serve a friend; how much more
should I rejoice in that violence I offer to my appetites and unruly desires;
in what I do or suffer for to please and serve my heavenly, my best, my dearest
friend, whom I can never love so much as he deserves: and in loving of whom, I
am infinitely happier than if I should enjoy all the pleasures of sin, as long
as I live. I only grieve and am displeased that I can do so little for him,
that I can requite his love no better. I know that many persons have done far
more for their less deserving friends, than I do, or can do for my Savior
JESUS.

CHAP. XXXII. A singular example of humane Love, with a short reflection upon
it.
IT is reported by Greek historians of two loving sisters, Eudoxia and Irenea
daughters to the last unhappy Prince of Morea, Niceph. Gregor. Chalcondys.
who with his life lost his Crown and Country; that an uncle saved them from
the general desolation and captivity which soon succeeded the lost battle, and
carried them to old Andronicus their kinsman, then Emperor of Constantinople.
There, with pity, they found a kind welcome, and as great respects as they
could wish. Their beauty, their virtues and accomplishment surpast their
princely birth, and were as eminent as their fortune was low: so that young
Andronicus who was to succeed in the Empire, was in process of time taken with
Eudoxia, loved her passionately, and obtained the Emperors consent to marry
her. This caused great troubles to Irenea, who liked it well as she loved her
sister, but could not but grieve at it, as she loved the Prince (for unhappily
she had settled her affections on him.) Upon this she fell sick, and almost to
death: and it being observed that some distemper in her mind caused the
distemper of her body, her sister, protesting of her love to her, assuring her
that Eudoxia should have only the title and the trouble, but Irenea the
privileges and the power of an Empress, conjured her to declare what caused
her discontent. Having understood what it was, and grieving that she should be
the occasion of her sisters danger and sorrow, she presently took from her head
a jewel the Prince had given her, in form like a half moon; and with it she so
wounded and disfigured her face, that she cured the Prince of his love, as she
designed: and afterward retired to Galliopoli, where she entered a Cloister,
and devoted the rest of her life to God. The Prince finding in Irenea what he
had lost in Eudoxia, soon after entertained the same passion for her, he had
for her sister: but Irenea, remembering her sisters generosity, forgot her
affection to the Prince; considering what Eudoxia had voluntarily suffered for
her, how great, how tender a love she had expressed in what she had done,
resolves to forsake Andronicus, to forgo her ease and pleasure, and what she
had so earnestly desired, rather than be ungrateful. Whereupon she steals away
from the Court, goes to Galliopoli, enters her sisters Cloister, and having
expressed to her her love and acknowledgments, she takes the same vows, and
resolves to live and die to God, and with her beloved sister.

This story makes me grieve and blush, that so little gratitude should be paid
to JESUS for greater benefits, for that incomparable love he has showed men in
dying for them; that I my self should so ill requite his much greater kindness,
so poorly and imperfectly return his most wonderful love. What, shall I think
it much to refrain my intemperance for his sake, who, for mine, fasted long and
often, and tasted vinegar and gall? shall I think it much to mortify my pride
and anger for him, who, for my sake despised the shame of the Cross, and
returned nothing but meekness to the greatest provocations? shall I think it
much to refrain my worldly, covetous desires for him, who, for me, became poor,
naked, destitute of all things, though he were Lord of all; shall I think it
much, to deny my self some momentary sensual pleasures, for him who carried my
sorrows, who shed his blood and was crucified to save me; No, my dearest JESUS,
thy love has overcome my heart, I will be no more what I have been, henceforth
it shall be my wealth, my delight, my glory and ambition to serve and obey
thee, give thee all possible demonstrations of a devout, a most passionate love.

CHAP. XXXIII. Some Scriptures to show the necessity of departing from Sin,
according to our Baptismal Vow. With some protestations to conclude this first
Part.
THis Repentance and Reformation is what our Religion requires; The Scripture
supposes it in all that have embraced Christianity, and is earnest and
pressing in its exhortations to it. We beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by
the Lord JESUS, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to
please God, so ye would abound more and more: for ye know what commandments we
gave you by the Lord JESUS, for this is the will of God, even your
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2. Again, but ye have not so learned Christ (as
to follow the greediness and lusts of the Gentiles) If so be that ye have heard
of him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in JESUS, that ye put off,
concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put
on the new man, which, after God, is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.20 21. etc. And in another place, this change, being
absolutely necessary, is absolutely supposed to be wrought in us by our
embracing the Christian Faith. If ye are risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above -- for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
-- Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which
is idolatry -- in the which ye walked sometime when ye lived in them, but now,
you also put off these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, evil communication out
of your mouth; lie not one to another, seeing that you have put off the old man
with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him. Col. 3.1, 2, etc. In these and many
more places to the same purpose, it is plainly employed, that true Christians
are mindful and careful to fulfill their baptismal promises; to renounce the
devil and all his works, etc. It is not love alone that binds this duty upon
us: our profession absolutely requires it of all that have given their name to
Christ, and expect Salvation from him. Love may enforce the obligation, and
assist us to discharge it: but it is the design and the tenor of Christianity
it self, to reclaim us from sin; to sanctify our affections, that our lives
and actions may be holy as becomes the Gospel. The grace of God which brings
salvation, teaches us that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should
live in this present world soberly, righteously, and godly. Tit. 2.11.12. This
is the sum of our duty: that we should be temperate in our bodies and minds,
just and charitable in our intercourse with other men, and pious in our minds,
devout in acts of Religion and worship to God, the learning and practicing this
lesson is that whereby the offered salvation is obtained and laid hold on; that
whereby we must make it appear, that we indeed own Christ for our Lord and
Savior, and that we do truly love him with all our hearts and souls.

Now therefore I must remember that I am not mine own, I am his that made and
redeemed me; I am his to whom I have given my self, when I undertook manfully
to fight under his banner against sin, the world and the devil. To me is
addressed that exhortation, Thou, O man of God, flee these things (strifes,
disputes and covetousness, before mentioned) and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, fight the good fight of faith, lay
hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. I am become a Soldier of JESUS; to me
S. Paul speaks, as well as to Timothy, Thou therefore endure hardness as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth intangles himself with the
affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a
Soldier, 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4. If I were in the Militia of any other Prince, I might
endure hardness enough, before I could obtain his favor, or indeed be taken
notice of; heat and cold, hunger, thirst and weariness, sleepless nights and
perpetual dangers; all this, and much more I might endure many years, and not
be looked on; here my General has prevented me with his kindness; he first
fought against mine enemies; he first loved me, and endured hardship for me;
and he notes every thing I suffer for him, sets it down, and assigns a reward
to it. Under another Commander I might do brave actions, behave my self
valiantly, and yet not be seen: here my General has always his eyes upon me,
he incourageth me; and rejoiceth to see my fortitude; he is always ready to help
me, and is most delighted, when he sees me zealous and diligent. I might fight
long enough for an earthly King, I could only get a poor subsistence or an
empty fame, but never so much as one province of his dominions: here, fighting
for my heavenly King, I shall get unvaluable treasures, immortal glory, and a
Kingdom which shall have no end, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my throne, Rev. 3.21. I will therefore, never again, fight against
the captain of my salvation, and I will never forsake him; I will often renew
my vows, often swear allegiance to him, upon that sacred blood which he shed
for me, and which he gives me to comfort and strengthen my heart; I will daily
think on those things that may increase my zeal and diligence, and help me to
resist temptations; and I will suffer any thing, use all means possible to
perform these resolutions, and approve my self unto death, a lover of JESUS. If
any man loves not the Lord JESUS, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

FINIS.
THE Reformed Monastery; OR, The LOVE Of JESUS.

The Second Part.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, the
West End. MDCLXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
I Have now gone through the greater half of my task, the negative part of our
Baptismal Vow, and of our Duty. The greater half I call it, because our Nature
stands not in aequilibrio, in an indifference betwixt good and evil, but is
depraved and ill inclined: and the way to virtue will be smooth and pleasant,
when once by grace and love we have renounced our sins, and our vicious
propensities are both subdued and rectified.

If therefore thou have entered and liked this Cloister so far, thou may
safely advance further, and go through what remains; if thou have approved and
observed its Rules hitherto, the rest cannot but be acceptable and easy to
thee. As a Traveller in a strange Enemy-Country meets with many hardships and
dangers, but at home amongst friends delights in journeying: So the Love of
JESUS among the works of the devil, the sinful lusts and vanities of this
world, might meet with difficulties and a rugged way; but now conversing with
faith and good works, the holy will of God and his glorious rewards, it will
proceed with joy, and a pleasant speedy progress.

I have called the Love of JESUS The Reformed Monastery, partly to work upon
thy fancy, that by thy Christian profession thou might think thy self as
entered into a new state of life, and cloistered in from loose company and
sinful enjoyments: and also to give thee to understand that though thou be
not under any severe monastic engagements, yet by thy being a Disciple and
servant of JESUS thou art bound to be strict and watchful over thy self; to use
those remedies against sins and temptations, and those proper helps to
devotion, which are useful and subservient to Virtue and Religion, and will
assist thee to secure thy duty and thy happiness. Old heresies we know often
revive and appear under a new dress: and it may serve the ends of true goodness
and piety to diversifie Christian instructions, and to bring them forth under
new and different forms. What one is not moved withal, may affect another; and
the very novelty of a name or method may make that to be looked upon, which
otherwise would pass unregarded.

I know that I have fallen very short of what my Subject could bear; and
perhaps some will think that I have not been full enough in my particulars and
in my directions: but my only design was to beget and entertain Divine Love in
our Souls, well knowing that that love afterward, would soon enlarge our
hearts and our knowledge, and guide us right in all cases. If I can but teach
thee, Reader, to love JESUS with all thy heart, I am sure I have brought thee
into the easiest and the only safe way to Heaven. He has taught the best part
of Religion and to the best purpose, Praecipuam Christianae pietatis portionem
docuit, quisquis ad hujus inflamavit amorem. Eras.
who has taught others to love it. And they certainly love it, and obey it
too, that truly love its Author the Blessed JESUS. If we truly love him we
shall afterward refuse him nothing. Where a man gives his heart, he will
neither refuse his hand nor his knee, neither service nor worship; where he
gives his Soul and affections, he will willingly bestow all the rest. God shall
certainly command us, and all that we can dispose of, without any reservation,
if we secure our love to him. Therefore Love is called the bond of perfectness.
It is the only qualification can make us true Christians. Alia virtus cum
peccato, sed dilectio tua omni peccato contrariatur, omni temptationi resistit.
No other virtue but may consist with some sin, love alone is contrary to all;
no other grace can resist all temptations, love alone has that unlimited
power. Nothing but love can enable us to discharge all obligations, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. All other gifts and virtues without love cannot fit a
man for heaven, nor make him dear to God: but love can do it of it self. Love
JESUS sincerely and affectionately, and then you shall be sure to live here to
him, and hereafter with him to eternity.

As there are Dragons that are bright and glittering, and have precious stones
in their heads; as there are Comets that have the light and the elevation of
stars: so there are vicious persons, false Christians that are endowed with
excellent parts, and are eminent in some virtues; but it profits nothing
without love; If I speak the tongues of Men and Angels; (says S. Paul, 1 Cor.
13.1, etc.) If I have the gift of prophecy and understand all mysteries; If I
have all faith, so that I remove mountains; if I give my goods to the poor, and
even my body to be burned, and have not charity, I am nothing, and it profits
me nothing, 1 Cor. 8.1. Of all other gifts and abilities it may be said, as of
knowledge, that they all puff up, but charity alone edifieth. Among those
creatures which stand and worship before God, there is not only a Man and an
Eagle, which may represent persons of great learning, fitted for high
speculation, but also* a Lion and an Ox, whereby Christians of meaner parts and
knowledge are signified: for these are capable of love as much as the others,
and it is love alone qualifies men to dwell for ever in the embraces of the God
of love; for God is love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him, 1 John 4.16.

God loves men, that they may love him, Amat Deus ut ametur, nil aliud vult
quam amari, etc. Aug.
and he only requires that they would love him, knowing that that love is, of
it self, sufficient to make them eternally happy. I have therefore all along
fitted my discourse and meditations to every man's capacity and opportunities,
as much as I could: because all may love, and all must that will be happy. And
though I may have recommended some things as means and instruments: yet I have
prescribed nothing as a duty, but the great obligations which were laid upon
us, when we were baptized into Christ. So that in this Monastery all must enter
and live, that would live in heaven: and the Rules and Orders of it, should be
observed by all that desire to own Christ before men, and to be owned by him at
the last day. I might indeed have here inserted many, perhaps, not unuseful
directions, given by Ancient Fathers and Spiritual Guides, to such as made
profession of greater piety and stricter lives than others: but they could not
have suited with all conditions and callings: therefore I have appointed no
other rule to those that shall enter this Cloister, but the love of JESUS in a
sincere obedience to his holy precept, or a voluntary compliance with his
Divine Counsels.

Not that I would deny that places for Religious Retirement might afford many
great advantages, in order to greater devotion and heavenly mindedness: for I
bewail their loss, and heartily wish that the piety and charity of the present
age might in a just and primitive measure restore to this Nation the useful
convenience of them. Necessary Reformations might have repurg'd Monasteries as
well as the Church, without abolishing of them: Multi sunt qui possunt
Religiosam vitam etiam cum saeculari habitu ducere, and plerique sunt qui nisi
omnia reliquerint, salvari apud Deum nullatenus possunt. Greg. M. Ep. ad Maur.
Imp.
and they might have been still houses of Religion without having any
dependence upon Rome. All men are not inclining to, nor fitted for an active
life; some would be glad to find a place of rest and retirement for
contemplation: some who, by melancholy or by the terrors of the Lord, are
frighted from their sins and from the civilized world into Quakerism, into an
unhappy sullenness and Apostasy, would perhaps exchange their silks and laces
for the coarser garments of mortified professors of a Monastic life: and find,
among them, that happiness and peace of the soul, which they vainly seek for,
in their wretched and deluded Brotherhood. Some who, upon great afflictions and
sudden changes of fortune, fall into a state of sorrow and tedious sadness, and
are left in the world to struggle with the temptations of a discontented mind,
would perhaps take Sanctuary in a Religious house; and give themselves up
wholly to JESUS, and forget their temporal sorrow, by heavenly joys and
meditations: and at last bless that storm and shipwreck which cast them into
that unknown land of rest and safety. Some, that are forward and ready to
promise well and take good resolutions, have not strength enough to keep them,
but are prevailed upon, by the importunity of those temptations they meet
withal in the converse of men; they perhaps being fled from those occasions of
sin, might, by the good example and good instructions of a Religious Society,
secure themselves, and stand to their holy engagements. Some who never loved
the world, or that are grown weary of it, or have passionate longings for
heaven, would willingly free themselves of the cumbrances and distractions of
worldly business, to enjoy the leisure and opportunities of meditations,
devotion, and other spiritual exercises. And some that are much taken with the
strict lives, and beads and orisons of Papist-Friers, would look home and spend
their commendations on the purer Religion, and better ordered lives and
devotions of those, in this Church, that should wholly devote themselves to
God. However it is not to be denied, but that men are much affected and
influenced by the place, the company, the way of living, and the outward
circumstances wherein they are engaged: and, I believe, it might be now as true
a proverb as ever, Been vixit qui been latuit, he lives best and most safe, who
is least acquainted with the world, and lives farthest from it.

I might add further, that such pious foundations or restitutions, might be so
ordeoed as to afford a very great advantage to our Church and Religion. For
thence persons of good parts and great piety, devoted to the advancement of the
true Christian Faith, and free from those cares and cumbrances that are upon
others, might be sent as Missionaries, to make it their business to reclaim
persons of all sorts from schism, errors, and heresies, and even from looseness,
and irreligion.

Not but that we have an abundant supply of persons very well fitted for that
blessed employment, from our great Seminaries of Learning. But their necessary
attendance upon their Ministry and particular Cures, besides other avocations,
deprive them of the leisure and opportunities of running after their strayed
sheep. They can well guide and feed such as duly keep within their folds: but
such as break out and wander, they have not time to seek after. And yet great
is the number of these, especially about great Towns; where small
encouragements, and stiff opposition are a great hindrance to the gaining of
Converts; This excellent and charitable work, could be best done by them that
should have nothing else to do. But first let every one work out his own
salvation, and make sure work for himself, that will best enable him to work
upon others.

But though we want some conveniences for withdrawing from temporal affairs, to
mind eternity and our souls the better: yet we must go to heaven; wherever we
live, we must live to God, that we may live with God; therefore if we cannot
have a material, Claustrum ubique portate interius. Norb. ab. praemonst.
we must have a Spiritual cloister, which may defend us against temptations,
and guide and assist us in doing our duty. Such a one is the love of Jesus; it
will protect us against all dangers and spiritual enemies, better than the
strongest walls of any Abbey: and will make us devout and zealous in Gods
service, beyond what the exhortations of the wisest Abbot could do. Dum crescit
fortitudo amoris interni, infirmatur fortitudo carnis, whilst love is strong
the flesh is mortified, and its lusts are subdued. Greg. Mag. Amanti nihil est
difficile, nihil impossible, love can do all things of its self, it passes
over all difficulties, and there is no obstacle which it overcomes not. August.
Love can supply the want of all outward helps and advantages; let it but be our
care, to secure love and it will secure us. Let us therefore feed and entertain
it by reading and meditation, by frequent prayers and acts of love, Coelum and
terra and omnia quae in eis sunt non cessant mihi dicere ut a mem Dominum Deum
meum. Aug.
and by observing and tasting how gracious the Lord is in all his works; all
things in heaven and earth do incessantly cry to us, that we should love God.
God draws us after him, Hos. 4.11. with cords of a man, with bands of love,
therefore, by love, we can best follow him, 1 John 3.18. But, let us not love
in word or in tongue, but in deed and in truth: and hereby we shall know that
we are of the truth, and we shall assure our hearts before him.

THE Reformed Monastery; Or, the Love of JESUS.
CHAP. I. That Love obliges us also to fulfill the positive part of our
Baptismal Vow; with a protestation of obedience to it.
MY former disobedience and rebellions against my Blessed Lord and dearest
Master, I have examined and bewailed; I have considered that by sin I wound and
crucify him afresh, and therefore have resolved to sin no more, never to lift
up hand or heart against him. But will love, be satisfied with this; is it a
sufficient demonstration of love, not to abuse, not to injure a friend? No
sure, I must proceed further; love requires more than this. I must not only
abstain from what would anger him I love: but I should further do that that
will please him. It Is part of my duty, as it was of my vow, not only to
renounce the Devil and all his works; but also to believe all the articles of
the Christian Faith, and to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my life.

As for the Articles of the Christian Faith, I believe them from my heart, and
resolve to own and confess them whilst I live; I never will dispute or object
against them, and I hope, I should choose to die, before I would renounce any of
them; as for other less necessary doctrines, I will be guided by my Spiritual
Governors; in controversies, I will submit to the judgment of that Holy Church,
in whose Communion I live; and so I will read and ponder Gods Holy Word,
especially the new Testament, that I may know my Masters will, and be
encouraged to do it: not that I may find out new mysteries and maintain the
private opinions of a party. It remains then only, that I should keep Gods Holy
Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life. And this I
also undertake; it shall be my daily and constant study and endeavor; I
resolve to obey to the utmost of my power: and I also promise further to
manifest my love by free-will-offerings, as God shall enable me.

But first my love is to appear by doing what is commanded; This is the love of
God that we keep his Commandments (says S John, 1 John 5.3.) and he that has
my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, (says our Blessed
Savior, John 14.21.) There can be no love without obedience, this is its first
and chiefest Trial; if a man love me, he will keep my words, ver. 23. Now then,
should my beloved Lord ask me, as once he did S. Peter, N. N. do thou love
me? would not my heart answer, with his zealous Apostle, Yes Lord, thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee; -- I would lay-down my life for
thee, John 21.15. and 13.37. Now, to this he replies again, if thou love me,
keep my Commandments, John 14.15. Every time we tell him, Lord I love thee,
thou know that I love thee. He does answer again, if thou love me, keep my
Commandments: So that, without we observe this, we can no ways pretend to love
him.

I am therefore to take notice of, and to amend sins of omission, which too too
many among Christians mind little, or not at all. In the matter of sobriety I
am commanded, whether I eat or drink, to do it, as all things else, to the
glory of God; and to be contented, whatsoever state I am in; for chastity I am
commanded to know how to keep my vessel in sanctification and honor; for acts
of corporal and spiritual mercy, I am commanded to be merciful, as my heavenly
Father is merciful, and to forgive injuries as I desire my self to be forgiven;
for reverence to my betters, I am commanded to honor and obey my superiors
Ecclesiastical and Civil; in what concerns Divine Worship, I am bound to read
and pray, and meditate, to instruct my self and family, to receive the Blessed
Sacrament, to have a veneration and respect for all things that belong or
relate to God, and him to love and fear, and trust and adore evermore. All
these, with the particulars included in them; and all other duties, and the
special precepts of the New Testament, is the task I cheerfully undertake, and
in the performance whereof, I will approve my self a sincere lover of JESUS.

CHAP. II. How great a happiness in Eternity follows our love and obedience.
HIS yoke is easy and his burden light, his Commandments are not grievous,
and yet in keeping of them there is great reward: a temporal happiness, than
which none is greater in this world, and an eternal happiness, infinitely
greater than any this world can afford. Do not I see what pains most men are at
to get a subsistence for this world? how they run and sweat and spend
themselves to provide for this perishing life; which yet is miserable, short
and uncertain? and shall I not labor for the meat which abides to eternal
life? shall I be at no pains to secure that life which has no end, and knows
no misery? O that I could duly understand the difference betwixt this life and
the life to come! how would I slight the one, and desire the other! or rather
how cheerfully would I employ this present, to obtain that which is to come! Is
not there servants that work hard day by day, a whole year together for small
wages; who are almost perpetually employed about their masters business: and
yet have sometimes no thanks, and often but a sorry reward; and am not I one of
those laborers whom my Lord has hired to work in his vineyard? Mat. 21. Am
not I one of those servants, whom he has entrusted with his goods, to whom he
has entrusted talents to improve for him; and do not I desire he should tell
me one day, well done, thou good and faithful servant? Mat. 21. Is not my
salary great, greater than any Prince on earth could make it, greater than I
could wish, greater than I can comprehend; eternal rest, eternal joys, eternal
happiness, eternal glories; eternity it self, he himself will be my reward.
Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! Blessed Eternity. Eternity never enough to be
considered, Eternity never enough to be valued, shall I obtain thee by what I
do here for my Lord? shall I obtain thee by that imperfect service I pay to my
gracious Master? O God who have prepared for them that love thee, Sixth Sund.
after Trin.
such good things as pass man's understanding, pour into our hearts such love
toward thee, that we loving thee above all things, may obtain thy promises
which exceed all that we can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Lord,
I am not worthy to be called thy Son; I have often begged to be one of thy
hired servants, the meanest, so I love and obey best. O let me, like thy
servant Moses, ever have a respect to the recompense of the reward, ever
consider what I shall get by serving thee, that I may be diligent, persevering
and cheerful in doing my duty. O my soul, blush to consider how laborious men
are for the unsatisfying acquests of this earth; how eager thou have been thy
self in pursuing of them; how slothful, how unactive and heavy thou art in
working for eternal rest, for the treasures of eternity, for the glories of
heaven, for those Divine Pleasures which are at the right hand of God for
evermore. Whence comes this, unhappy soul, is it not from inconsideration?
because thou do not lift up thine eyes to see whither the way of love and
obedience will bring thee; because thou do not look beyond the world, upon
things eternal; because thou do not often enough meditate upon heaven and
eternity; that unvaluable, infinite recompense which awaits thee, as soon thy
work is finished. Resolve therefore to amend this, and daily, once at least, to
consider what are thy wages, what thou shall get by serving God. As the Apostle
says of afflictions, that they are light and but for a moment, whilst we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: the
same we may say of the most difficult of Christian duties, that they are light
and but for a moment, that they are easy and soon done; that there is no
tediousness, no hardship in them, whilst we look upon things eternal, whilst we
have a respect unto the recompense of the reward.

CHAP. III. That to win our hearts and duty God propounds great rewards to us.
THis consideration doubtless, would be powerful and effectual, would wake and
stir us up, and make us active and lively, if we had it often in our minds.
Therefore our Blessed Savior, to encourage his followers and make them
diligent in his service, does often give them to understand, what by parables
and what by plain declarations, that they should not serve him for naught, and
that they should be no losers by him; that he would consider them for their
time, for their expenses, for their sufferings, and for their labors; that he
would take notice of the least thing they should do for him; so that even a cup
of water given for his sake should not go unrewarded; and that their reward
would be great, bountiful and most excellent, far above their deserts, and even
above their wishes and apprehensions: an angelick nature, a glory bright as the
Sun it self, an eternal life, an heavenly, an endless kingdom, his own joys
should be their portion and their recompense. And we find also the Holy
Apostles, assuring those whom they brought to work in their Lords vineyard,
that they should certainly have their hire, and be paid most generously for
their work. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality
shall be rendered eternal life, Romans 2.6.7. Every man shall receive his own
reward according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8 And S. Paul, to encourage the
Corinthians, tells them that we Christians are entered into a race, at the end
whereof we may see the Laurel, palmam in stadio positam, a glorious prize, an
incorruptible crown, if we will run and strive for it, 1 Cor. 9.24. and he
likewise tells the Ephesians, that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same
shall be receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6.8. S. Peter
also teaches that we should be moved and encouraged, by the greatness of the
promised reward, to forsake our lusts and wholly devote our selves to God;
exceeding great and glorious promises are given unto (...), that by these you
might be partakers of the Diviae Nature, having escaped the pollution that is
in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. Christ is become the author of eternal
salvation to themt obey him, Heb. 5.9. And so the result of all these may be
comprehended in the exhortation of S. Paul: My beloved Brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. In this sense
good works are meritorious, in that they procure us a reward, a reward
infinitely greater than their own desert. Let us not therefore, as the Apostle
exhorts, be weary in well-doing, for we shall reap in due season if we faint
not, Gal. 6.9. Let us compare together the returns of vice and virtue, how
unlike are the fruits of them: and let us bear this short saying in our minds;
if we do ill, the pleasure is soon past; the grief and punishment abide long
upon us: if we do well, the trouble is soon ended, the joy and reward of it,
remain for ever. Let us pray with S. Paul, the Lord direct our hearts into the
love of God, and the patient waiting for Christ, 2 These. 3.5. who when he
comes, brings his reward with him: and to this let us add this Collect of the
Church. Grant us grace, O Lord, so to follow thy blessed Saints, in all
virtuous and godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys, which
thou have prepared for them that unfeinedly love thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

CAAP. IV. That Love has a secret pleasure, and reward in it self; with a
meditation to that purpose.
BUT, Though it may encourage us to love that gracious God who gives so very
much for that little we are able to do, yet Love it self is not mercenary;
charity does not seek her own, (says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.5.) we may desire our
promised reward and set our affections upon it, as it is a demonstration of
Gods infinite love and goodness: or because it will be the expressing of our
duty and thankfulness, when we shall love and glorify and adore God perfectly
and for ever: or rather because the reward is God himself, who will be to every
faithful servant, his exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.4. as well as to faithful
Abraham: rewarding sincere obedience with the fruition of himself, being all in
all to his Saints. But still I say, Love is not selfish, but free and generous,
if nothing were to be gained by it, it would have great satisfaction in showing
it self: the work and labor of love is a noble pleasure to a pious heart. When
he thus reflects on his obedience and thinks with himself. By the performance
of this duty, by this act of virtue, I serve my dearest Lord, I oblige my best
friend; I express my love to him whose infinite kindness to me has conquered
my heart, whom I love as my own soul, to whom I wholly give my self, and for
whom I desire both to live and die.

O happy soul, who feel what an exceeding joy it is to love JESUS! or rather
unhappy soul, who can show so little love to JESUS! Unhappy necessities of a
frail body, unhappy distractions of a troublesome world! Why am I, by you
deprived of the continual pleasure of waiting continually on my Divine and most
loving Master? But blessed be my gracious Lord, that I might have more
opportunities of pleasing him, and expressing my affections to him, he has
made virtues of necessities, he has turned nature into grace, and of humane
duties he has made acts of Religion. In relieving mine own and others wants,
if I observe the rules of sobriety and charity, he takes occasion thence to
bless and reward me, as if he were thereby glorified. In discharging the duties
of my place and calling, if I am diligent and faithful; though my work be never
so mean, he owns it as a service done to him. Servants (says S. Paul) obey
your masters in all things, and do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye
serve the Lord Christ. Col. 3.22, 23. If I am conscientious in all my ways and
works, he takes it as a mark of my love and part of my duty to him. O that the
constant course of my conversation might speak the sincerity of my affection to
my blessed Lord. Dearest JESUS, the Cross thou did bear for me was heavy and
painful to extremity: but thy yoke is light and pleasant, thy service is
perfect freedom. O let it be my delight and daily employment as it is my duty,
to serve and obey thee, to follow thy blessed example, and be instrumental in
winning hearts to thee: let me love thee so entirely that I may love nothing
but thee, nothing but for thy sake; Fac precor Domine, me gustare per amorem
quod gusto per cognitionem, sentiam per affectum, B. Ansel.
quod sentio per intellectum. Amen.

CHAP. V. Reflections on the vanity of temporal things; with some holy resolves
and ejaculations.
COnsider O my soul, how deceitful, how vain is this present world; how
inconstant and unsatisfying; how vexatious and troublesome. Does not thine
experience tell thee, that the more thou love the best of earthly thing, the
more crosses and sorrows befall thee? the more thou enjoyest of them, the more
weary thou art, the farther from happiness and true contentment? I have
observed that the dead are soon forgotten, and that the world neither can nor
indeed takes care, to do any thing for its greatest slaves and admirers after
they are gone: and yet our greatest toil and vexation is to live here, so as to
please the world. We are not pleased to have our wants supplied and to be free
from pain, except the world be pleased also. That imaginary life which we live
in the account of others, is by far the more troublesome and the more
uncertain; for we are never well except others will think us to be so. But O my
soul, why do thou cumber thy self with so many things; even with things that
have no existence but in thine, and other men's fancy? one thing is necessary;
love God, and seek his heavenly Kingdom, and thou art rich and happy to the
full.

Let thy thoughts wait one while on the most prosperous sinners in the world;
how empty is their soul; how distracted their mind; how restless their
conscience? Do they not live in a storm and hurry? and at last sink into the
grave, with the greatest regret and bitterness? and what would they not give in
the day of vengeance, that they might pass from the left to the right hand of
their Judge. Consider and tremble, with what amazement and impotent rage they
will struggle to change their place, that they might change their doom! But now
turn and follow the just. See their inward peace and their secret joy; what
comfort they have in their afflictions; what hope in their lives; what
undaunted assurance in their death! but who can express those endless
pleasures, those ravishing joys wherein they enter, when they come to enjoy and
see him face to face, whom here they loved and sought after? O my deluded
heart, be not deceived by vain appearances; that is certainly true, which shall
be true at last, and shall remain unchangeable to eternity!

If it be so, that indeed thou must die, and one of those two states must be
thy portion for ever; then put on now those affections, which thou shall
certainly entertain when thou shall be near to expire; look upon things now, as
thou shall at last, and it will make thee wise; and make thee see the Truth
naked; For that is certainly true which is true at last: and all other
appearancces are but varnish and illusion.

Dwell seriously upon this consideration, and it will make thee clearly see,
that true wisdom is to love and fear God: and the greatest happiness, to live
under his protection; to be in his favor, whose loving kindness is better than
life.

That one consideration well weighed, will make thee understand, that there is
no great worth or pleasure in those lusts and vanities thou did renounce,
when thou becamest a Christian; that thy vow was only the renouncing of thy
greatest misery. 'Twill make thee understand, that it was no great hardship
thou did undertake, when thou promisest to serve God, and be a Soldier of
JESUS under the Banner of the Cross; That 'twas only the obliging thy self to
be truly happy, and to enjoy perfect Freedom.

And now my soul, considering that of necessity thou must either by sin serve
the Devil, and destroy thy self: or by virtue and piety serve God, and gain
eternal bliss; what should thou do, but entirely devore thy self to thy
Blessed, thy best Master? Breathing out heavenward such Ejaculations as these,

My dearest Lord, I was once brought and presented to thee, when through the
waters of Baptism I past into thy Family and became thy Servant. Lord, I do
here repeat the same oblation, and now again yield my self to be thine. Here I
do from my heart disown and bewail all those acts of mine, whereby at any time
I have disowned or displeased thee; could the shedding of my blood recall or
expiate them, I could freely pour it out and die.

Wherein soever I have behaved my self as if I were not thine, I here, what I
can retract it with regret and sorrow. Lord, pity my weakness and pardon my
folly, and let me be received again into the number of thy Servants. I am ready
to do or suffer any thing thou shall please, so I may still belong to thee. O
let our first contract, my Baptismal engagement stand, notwithstanding my
breach of it. I resolve now to mind and observe it better; assist me sweet
JESU, and let me ever live to thee.

Lord, now I as heartily yield up my self to thee, that I may love and obey
thee: as I shall when I die, that thou may save me. I had rather serve thee
than be the greatest Prince on earth. I had rather obey thee, than command all
mankind. I prefer thy favor to all the riches of this world. I had rather
suffer, and even die for thee, than without thee to have all the pleasures and
the joys of this life. Lord, I will love, and serve thee for ever.

CHAP. VI. That Christ having bought us, has now a just title to our love and
service.
LOVE regards not so much what is commanded, as who it is that commands it; if
it be the Beloved requires any thing, love does it cheerfully without
reluctance; another with earnest begging should not have that granted, which
the least word of a friend shall obtain. The commands of Christianity are easy
and most rational, in keeping of them consists our present and future
happiness: Yet the true lover of JESUS looks farther, he considess that it is
his Lord and Savior who would have him obey; he to whom he belongs, to whom he
owes himself, and infinitely more: for every Christian-owes JESUS to JESUS, who
gave himself for him. The old saying was emendus cui imperes, buy your slaves;
buy those that will be commanded by you; none of us can say so to the God whom
we serve, for he has indeed bought us; Ye are not your own (says S. Paul) ye
are bought with a price, thence it is strongly inferred, therefore glorify God
in your body and in your spirit which are Gods. We are not at our own dispose,
our Divine Master has a most just propriety in us; we are wholly his: and
would to God, we were his as much by affection and resignation, as by right:
the price he has paid for us, is no less than himself; he has given his life
that ours might be his; We were redeemed from our vain conversation by the
precious blood of Christ, who died for us, that we might live to him. He could
get nothing by that dear purchase, but our love only, for we were his before,
it is he that made us: only we had estranged our selves from him, and placed
our love on other things, and he could not count us his own while we loved him
not.

CHAP. VII. How much we are engaged to serve our Blessed Lord, with renewed
promises to do it faithfully.
I Must therefore consider whose I am; I am Christ's by a strong and
incontestable title; while I serve hfm I do that proper work which belongs to
me; whilst I obey what he has commanded, I do what is infinitely my duty, what
his love to me challenges, and what my love to him desires to return. Had I
ten thousand years to live, and could I serve him all that while and do nothing
else, I could not repay him for the least part of that great ransom he has
paid for me, neither could I deserve any thing of those great wages which he
will give me: but my life is but short and he allows me time for other things,
even for pleasure and recreation. I have therefore a most gracious Master, and
therefore I resolve and promise to do what he requires of me; I will except at
nothing he commands, it shall be my joy to pay my duty to him; I will make it
appear that I serve out of love and affection. O my dearest JESUS, would my
heart did feel what it should; Qui viget affectu, non gem^t imperie.
would I could express what it feels; and would I could perform as much as I
express: But O my Blessed Lord, how frequently and unhappily do I forget that
thou art my Master, and I thy servant; that my chiefest business is to do thy
will; and that my greatest happiness as well as duty is to obey thee? Is it not
because I also forget that thou did redeem me from a most wretched slavery?
that thou did pay an immense price for me; that thou becamest a servant for
me, before thou requiredst any service from me; and that thou did first love
me before thou did entreat my love? O thou great Lover and Savior of men, I
wholly give my self to thee body and soul, heart and affections; I desire to be
thine; I pray that thou would make me to be thine, and that thou would own
me for thine, that so thou may be mine to eternity. Would thou know (says
S. Aug.) what thou must give for heaven? give thy self, Aliud non quaerit
precium nisi te ipsum; tantum valet quantum es, te du and habebis illud. Manual.
that is the price; nothing less will serve, that alone is accounted
sufficient: heaven is worth just what thou art, give thy self and thou shall
certainly have it.

Do not men seek to serve and oblige great persons expecting to be by them
gratified? are they not ambitious to wait upon Princes in regard of an
honorable stipend? and why should I not count it the greatest Honor and
preferment to serve the King of Kings and Lord of Lords; the salary he pays his
servants is infinitely greater than any the greatest Monarch can give; they
oftentimes cast off with disgrace their most faithful officers: my Lord is so
far from so doing, that he bears with the faults of his meanest servants, and
never turns out any that will live with him. It Is highly difficult to become a
Prince his favorite, many spend their time, their wealth and themselves, and
never can get the least share in his affections; but I am sure my heavenly
Master loves me; I know it by what he has done, by what he daily does, and by
what he has declared he would do for me: Although he has bought me, and so
might well require the utmost I can do, without any reward: yet he hires me and
gives me more, infinitely more than I can earn or claim. I will therefore be
diligent, faithful and zealous in fulfilling the work he has appointed me. I
will often say to my self; I am a servant and a lover of JESUS; a servant and a
lover of the Blessed JESUS. I will every morning consider; what can I do this
day of what my Lord has commanded me? what duties of sobriety, righteousness
or godliness can I discharge to make it appear that JESUS is the Master I own
and obey? None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself, for whether
we live we live unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord: Whether
we live therefore or die, we are the Lords; for to this end Christ both died,
and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.

CHAP. IX. Meditation to excite us to a sincere and fervent love.
O MY Soul, whither can thou fly, for to be secure and at rest? thou do
converse with snares and temptations; thou art taken up with cares and concerns
that come to nothing! whither can thou retire, to be free from dangers? what
place of leisure can thou find, wherein thou may* secure thy duty and thy
happiness?

The Love of JESUS must be thy refuge; thy Claustrum Animae, a Cloister or
shelter for thee to dwell in, and be safe. Thither retire under the banner of
love, Cant. 2.4. and there thou shall want neither protection nor
encouragement. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; he preserves the Souls of his
Saints: he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked. Light is sown for the
Righteous: and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.10.

Consider what love has done for thee: and thou shall easily believe that it
can do much upon thee. Love like active fire, Omne agens and omne amans vult
sibi passum and amatum assimilare.
turns all things into its likeness. It vested the most perfect God, with thy
flesh and infirmities. Because resemblance begets love, Ne etiam similitudo
deesset amori, ecce immortalis, mortalis factus est.
God would become like thee, that thou might love him. And if thou will
entertain and follow the Love of JESUS, it will make the become like him; if
thou will walk in love as he walked, Ephesians. 5.2. it will make thee easily follow
his footsteps, and arrive to his perfect happiness. (...). Clem. Romans
Behold how great, how wonderful a thing is Love. Its power and perfection can
not be uttered; we want words for to express them.

In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9. He
made thee with a word, Qui te totum and semel dicendo fecit, in reficiendo and
dixit multa and pertulit dura. Bern.
but to save thee, he wrought many wonders, and suffered many pains.

The Jews, when they saw him weep for dead Lazarus; behold, said they, how he
loved him! when thou see him shed, not only tears, but his blood also, dying
that thou may live: will thou not say, behold how he loved me! and then my
soul, what can thou do, but return love for love! It is easy, and it is
profitable, and it affords the greatest of pleasures, to love him who thus
loved thee.

If by a hearty sincere love, thou can dwell in the bosom, and approach the
heart of thy dearest Lord, there thou shall find the sweetest rest, the purest
joy, the best of instructions, and the greatest helps and encouragements, to
perfect holiness, till thy happiness be perfect. If with an unfeigned affection
thou can daily repeat these few words, which have been frequently in the
mouth of some devout persons, I love thee dear JESUS, I love thee dear JESUS!
thou have learned that which will teach thee both to live and die well. Then
thou will value nothing, not life it self: but so far as it is subservient to
love; and thou shall be so far from being afraid of death, that thou shall wish
with a primitive Saint, (...). God. in S. Basil.
it were in thy power to die many times for JESUS.

A devout love for him, will make thee find that true peace and satisfaction,
which the world with endless labor vainly seeks in earthly enjoyments. It will
make thee say (but without fear of change or disappointment) with the rich man
in the Gospel; Soul eat and drink, be merry, take thine ease, thou have much
goods laid up for many years, Luke 12. yea for eternity.

Worldly men, as though they had a dropsy, the more they drink out of their
broken Cisterns, the more they thirst, the more unsatisfied they remain: but
they that love and fear God, lack nothing; they drink living waters out of that
fountain, which is never dry; they have him in their souls, with whom true
peace and felicity is ever enjoyed. O fortunanatissime, cui quod amas, domi
est! O happy soul, that art possessed of that which thou love! thou have enough
at home to make thee entirely happy, without ever seeking abroad.

O my soul entertain that blessed guest, which instead of being chargeable,
will discharge thee of all thy wants and fears, and troublesome burdens. Love
will strengthen thee against temptations, Poterant leges delicta punire cons
ientiam munire non poterant. Lact.
and secure thee from sin. It will deliver thee from the terrors and bondage of
the Law, and bring thee to the rest, Brevis differentia inter legem, and
Evangelium, timor and amor. Aug.
and freedom of the Gospel-yoke. As it self grows on toward perfection, So
will it still increase thy hapiness till its consummation.

But my Soul, suffer not thy love to be fantastic, and to spend it self in
thoughts and wishes; the expressions of love are obedience and submission, with
a devout life. Whosoever keeps his word, in him is the love of God perfected:
hereby know we that we are in him, 1 John 2.5.

Princes have many flatterers, and but a few friends: JESUS also has many
pretenders and but a few lovers. Multitudes will wait upon him, in Mount
Gerizim, to receive his blessing; in Sinai where he gives his Law, he has but
a few attendants; and fewer yet in Golgotha, where he himself suffers, and
calls us to take up his Cross. Therefore my Soul, by obedience, self-denial,
and an humble patience, justify the sincerity of thy love and protestations.
Follow now thy Savior by love and a sincere imitation, and thou shall
certainly come to see his face, and to dwell with him in glory, for where he
is, there shall his servant be, John 12.26. They that be faithful in love shall
abide with him, Wisd. 3.9.

CHAP. IX. Christianity absolutely requires our love and strictest obedience.
THis double duty of dying unto sin and living unto righteousness, abstaining
from that which is evil and doing that which is good, I am obliged to perform
by strong and indispensable obligations: If I do not, I certainly perish. When
we say, in common speaking, that we do things out of love, we mean that we are
free, and may choose whether we do them or no, we are not bound to it: but here
all along where I undertake to discharge the duties of Religion out of love; I
do not in the least mean so. I acknowledge my self under the greatest necessity
of discharging my Baptismal Vow, of living according to the Gospel Rule,
otherwise my neglect of (...) would be my ruin, I should perish in my
disobedience. Love it self is a duty, the first and greatest commandment: thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, Mat. 22.37. I recommend love therefore ^s the noblest, the most
powerful mo^ive to a religious obedience; Meliores quos dirigit amor, plures
quos corrigit timor. Aug.
as that which makes our duty easy and pleasant, and gives a value to what we
do or suffer ^or God. I know there is those who teach that, by our well doing
we must not seek for salvation, and that our obedience is not required to our
justification, but may be a mark or an effect of it, faith having done the work
before; but this groundless and mischievous opinion is contradicted by
thousands of plain express Scriptures; He that hears these sayings of mine
and does them not, is like the man that built his house upon the sand. Not
every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. If thou will
enter life, keep the Commandments: and innumerable others, with all those that
affirm, that God shall judge and reward every man according as his works have
been.

No, the holy Religion we profess requires a conformity betwixt the Holy JESUS
and his followers; that by a devout imitation we should copy his example: that
we should be fruitful in good works, and by a sincere and universal obedience
serve God all the days of our life; For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a full recompense
of reward: how shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation, Heb. 2.2,
3. by being disobedient to our Lord JESUS, who having wrought and revealed it,
offers it to us, on the condition of an affectionate obedience to his Gospel?
The earth which drinks the rain that comes upon it -- and bears thorns and
briers, is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt; such is their condition
who receiving the heavenly dew of Divine Grace, in their admission into, and
profession of Christianity, yet still remain barren, or bring forth evil fruit:
But beloved (says the Apostle) we are persuaded, better things of you, and
things that accompany salvation: for God is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labor of love which ye have showed toward his name; and we desire that
every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto
the end, Heb. 6. 7, etc. He says not, we desire that you may be confident and
persuaded of your salvation, but that, by love and diligent obedience, ye may
ascertain your hope, make your calling and election sure, as S. Peter speaks, 1
Pet. 1.10. for indeed, God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us that whether We wake or
sleep we should live together with him, 1 These. 5.9.10. in holiness of life,
worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4.1. for we are Gods
workmanshep created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. This then is the way wherein of
necessity we must walk, that as we engaged and promised when we were baptized
into Christ, so we should live ever after: which S. Paul expresses thus, As ye
have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Col. 2.6. and again,
walk worthy of the Lord, being fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10. This is
the rule whereby we must order the course of our lives, that our conversation
be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; that our conversateon be in heaven, whence
we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.27. and 3.20. that
whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, any
virtue, any thing praiseworthy, Phil. 4* 8. may be our constant study and
practice. We must labor that whether present or absent we may be accepted of
our Lord, because we shall all appear before him and receive according as we
obey him, now in his absence. 2 Cor. 5.9.

CHAP. X. Considerations to encourage us in the discharge of our Christian
duty; with a caution to the Reader.
ALL this, and much more to the same purpose, which I have read and observed in
the Sacred Books of the new Testament, has convinced me that it is the design
of Christian Religion to make me meek and humble, sober and contented, just and
charitable, devout and religious, virtuous and holy: this I own to be my duty,
and I will endeavor my self heartily to perform the same. And that I may do it
with cheerfulness and affection, I will stir and quicken the holy fire of love
in my heart, by pious considerations. When any duty to God or man calls upon me
for action and performance, and I find in my soul too much of dullness or
reluctance, I will again by meditation suppose my dying Savior present,
telling me, how much he has done and suffered for me, and desiring me, as I
love him, to do that duty which lies before me. Christian, if thou do
understand the greatness of my love which brought me here to die for thee; if
thou art sensible of it, and would make any return for it, do this, obey this
command; this may be the last thing thou shall ever do for me, this may be the
last trial of thy love: sure it would grieve thee to have denied this small
request to him that gives his life, that gives himself for thee. Or else I will
suppose my self in the presence of my Divine Master sitting on his heavenly
Throne with his glorified servants about him, showing me the crown he has
assigned to me, and saying; N. N. will thou deny to do this at my earnest
request? wiit thou be so unkind to me? Sure I have deserved better at thy
hands; sure I, who am much above thee, have done much more for thee, than that
comes to; but besides, I would highly recompense thee. These my friends I have
rewarded with the bliss and glory they enjoy, for having done such things for
me: and I would reward thee as bountifully: here is eternal life, eternal rest,
eternal glory for thy recompense: as thou love me, as thou love thy self,
obey, that thou may be happy. To this, what answer could I make, but such as
this? Lord not only this, but any thing else thou have commanded, I am willing
to fulfill and obey. I bewail my dullness and depraved nature that makes me so
unready, so unactive in thy service: but Lord thou know that I love thee. I
would undertake any labor, any trouble to make it appear; I would die to
justify it. Yet, sweetest JESU, I beg of thee to increase my love; to increase
it to such a degree that, like thy heavenly attendants, I may burn with that
Divine fire, and be all love to thee: that so I may be always prepared and
desirous to do thy will. Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, Sund. 25. after Trin.
the wills of thy faithful people, that they plenteously bringing forth the
fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Christian, I would here advise thee, before I pass further. That thou would
not judge of several things in this Book, by thy present liking of them.
Devotional things are discerned more by the affections than by the judgment;
the relish of them does depend upon the temper of the Soul. And so those
resolves and meditations which now, it may be, please thee not, may hereafter
be very acceptable, when thou art otherwise disposed; to be sure when thou art
ready to leave the world, and enter thy portion of Eternity. If now therefore
thou will bring thy mind to such a frame as then it will be in, I need not fear
but that what I have writ, thou will also read and repeat heartily in the first
Person: for to that end I have thus contrived it to engage thine affections, to
make thee speak, as of thy self, these soliloquies, acts of love, and acts of
resolution which run throughout the whole discourse. It may affect thee much,
and to good purpose, frequently to confer with thy Soul and with thy Savior,
about thy duty and thy happiness. However be sure thou be serious and
sincere. For certain it is, that for thee N. N. by name, JESUS was crucified
and died; and certain it is, that thou thy self shall die and be judged, and
rise again to an intolerable eternity, if by carelessness and inconsideration
thou have been unmindful of thy Lord and thy soul: or else rise again to
eternal joys, if thou have sincerely loved and served JESUS. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love, John 15.10.

CHAP. XI. That Love will prompt us to free will offerings, and things it never
does enough.
THus much of necessity must be done; my duty as well as my love constrains me
to it. Not to break negative precepts and to obey positive ones, (that is, to
cease from sin and to work righteousness,) is required of me; if I do it by
love, I have made my task pleasant: but yet a task it is, which must be
fulfilled. Not but that there is mercy for sins against the New Covenant, for
the transgression of Gospel precepts; there is joy in heaven at the conversion
of a sinner, whatever his sins have been; and it ought greatly to indear God to
us, that he is so willing to forgive, so desirous to have us repent, that we
may be capable of his pardon: but whether soon or late, whether after crying
guilts or ordinary sins, still I say, there must be a true contrition, a sorrow
and repentance for our sins, proceeding from the love of God, and a sincere
endeavor to please and obey him for the future; and so thus far we are drawn
by a moral necessity, by the desire of our own happiness, which is not to be
obtained any other way. But shall we stay just here, and not go one step
further than is required? it is well indeed when we are safe, and that must be
secured first of all, and with the greatest care; but shall our love proceed no
further? Sure that Christian who is best assured of his salvation, will love
God most of all, and make to him the greatest and most hearty returns. When a
man is qualified for heaven and enjoys the greatest happiness this world is
capable of; that is, a sense of Gods favor and a well grounded assurance of a
future bliss, his soul cannot but melt into the most affectionate love for that
gracious God, whose mercy and loving kindness has brought him into that happy
condition, and fitted him by his grace for a much happier; they, I say, that
are in such a case (for they only can be capable of what I now treat of may
well do something more, than what needs they must; may well enlarge their
affections to God, beyond the bounds of prescribed duties. It is a good sign, a
sign of a sincere and a pious heart, when a man is forward to undertake for
God: when he does not weigh grains and scruples, lest he should part with any
of his right and liberty: but affords God a full measure and running over, and
thinks he never gives enough, and still desires that he might do infinitely
more for him. It Is true that properly speaking, all is due to God: and the more
any, the best Christian returns, the more he has received, and so the more he
is indebted; but yet, God is pleased not to require all that he gives, nor all
that we may give, that we may have wherewith to make a free-will-offering; that
we may have something to give him, that he requires not, tokens of our greateer
love and gratitude. It was foretold that under the Gospel in the day of Christ's
power, his people should offer him free-will-offerings with an holy worship.
Psalm. 110.3. And David himself, under the Law, was at his quid retribuam, What
shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto me?
Psalm. 116. Though the benefits which God vouchsafed his people then, were much
inferior to them he has since bestowed upon us; ( for eye had not then seen,
nor ear heard, neither was it entered into the heart of man, what great things
God would do for them that love him, as he has now declared in the revelations
of his Gospel,) though he had tied them to a burdensome and most expensive
service: yet he accepted their voluntary vows and engagements, and was well
pleased with them: yet he would receive their freewill offerings, and delight
in them. And sure we are more obliged than the Jews to let our love and
gratitude break forth beyond the limits of commands and express injunctions:
and now that God has opened to us his rarest treasures, his own bosom, for to
give us his beloved Son, he will not reject our free oblations, the voluntary
acknowledgments of his undeserved and unspeakable mercies. It Is not to be
denied (without giving the lie to the learning and piety of the best Christians
in all ages) but that there is in the New Testament counsels as well as
precepts, some things recommended, though not commanded. He that sells all that
he has for to buy the pearl of great price, and they that make themselves
Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven, were not injoined so to do, but are well
approved of: and that God who gives a plentiful harvest to him that sows
bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. is doubtless well pleased with his open handedness and
charitable profusion. And as it is the best indication of a devout and loving
soul, cheerfully to exceed what is strictly required: it is also the best sense
to immure and secure our duty; for then when we slack and abate, we may be
still within our due bounds. Nay more, I am confident that as it is best and
safest, it is also easier, to give free will offerings, than only, just to pay
the daily commanded sacrifice, because those proceed from affection, these
perhaps only from injunction. A friend desired to go one mile, goes two or ten,
and finds his way pleasant, because love leads him: but he that is pressed to the
same journey, and is acted by fear and compulsion, while he resolves not to go
one foot farther than needs he must, will easily be tempted to stay one short
of what he should.

But this is better understood by the devout lovers JESUS than I can express
it. Precepts are given to all men as tributes are exacted of all: (...). Beat.
Doroth. Doct. 1.
(says an Ancient guide of souls) but as in the world, great persons and
favorites not only pay the tax, but also offer presents and gifts to the
Prince: so in the Church, the most Religious observe not only the precepts, but
also intimations and counsels, and give to God, not only what he exacts, but
also free oblations, all that they are able. How many thousands of Saints, now
in heaven, have taken this course? how many that now wear the bright crown of
virginity, might have enjoied the comforts of marriage, had not the love of
JESUS prevailed over their natural desires? how many who might have possessed
great estates, enjoy now the greater treasures of eternity, for having made
themselves poor, to relieve the needy members of JESUS? how many who now sit on
thrones of glory, have chosen here to follow JESUS in meanness and humility,
when honors and worldly pomps were at their command? how many are now rewarded
with high degrees of everlasting bliss, for having devoted their whole time
upon earth to the service of the Blessed JESUS; when they might have spent more
of it upon their profit or pleasure? and how many now living, aspire to the
same felicities and recompenses, by cheerfully following the same ways, and
expressing a sincere and unbounded love, by such free oblations?

Cur non possum quod isti and istae? S. Aug. Why cannot I do what these my
Christian Brothers and Sisters have done, and do still? has not God done as
great things for me as for them? has he not given me the same promises as they
had? do not I hope to be their companion and fellow citizen in heaven? And why
then cannot I love as much as they did? I should therefore, and do resolve to
make no reservations; JESUS shall have the command of all he has given me, of
all he has enabled me to do; I shall keep nothing from him which may express
my love and gratitude, and do him service*

Dearest JESUS, I know I can never do for thee so much as I should, and I know
that I shall never do so much as I would; thou gave thy self for me, and thou will give thy self to me: and Lord, what am I worth, and what is the worth of
all I can do? It is a great favor that thou will accept of me and my weak
endeavors. I know that if heaven were capable of any grief, it would be only
that we have not loved thee enough upon earth; when thou fillest our souls with
thy divine ravishing joys, we shall wish we had done nothing here, but serve
and love thee. O give me grace now whilst I live, to do what I shall wish to
have done when I die; let me do now I am absent from thee, what I shall wish to
have done when I dwell with thee; let me love thee infinitely and without
measure. Modus amandi Deum sine modo. S. Bern.
An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name, O Lord,
because it is so comfortable, Psalm. 54.6.

CHAP. XII. That our obedience to the Church, is an excellent expression of our
love to Christ.
THE first instance of our love in this way of free will offerings should be a
pious obedience to our Mother the Church; not but that it is many ways
required, but because it is almost wholly neglected. What by pride and
refractoriness, what by ignorance and indevotion, and what by looseness and
ireligion, that obedience which ought to be paid to those that have the rule
over us in the Lord, to the standing rules and orders of our Spiritual
Governors, is so generally laid aside, that many that would, yet dare not
press it upon the people; and that, even they that obey do it secretly, and,
as, though 'twere dishonorable, are in a manner ashamed to own it; Hence comes
that great neglect of Confirmation, that most necessary and ancient, if not
Apostolic constitution; hence the desuetude of fasting upon appointed days,
and even of bidding of them: and the non-observance of Holy days, and times of
solemn devotion; hence the slight regard had to the public worship of God, and
the seldom receiving of the Lords Supper; hence the reservedness and unhappy
secrecy or most people in not acquainting their spiritual guides with the state
of their conscience when it needs, and not receiving their comforts and
directions; hence the not sending for the Elders of the Church to do their
office upon sick persons, and the seldom desiring their absolution; and hence
even in too many of the Clergy, the neglect of daily saying Divine Offices, as
they are commanded, and observing other injunctions peculiar to them. I may say
that it fares with our Church as with some Princes, who have their due
sovereignty denied them because they are Christians: (as if by becoming members
and defenders of the Church, they were become subject to Pontifical Chairs and
Puritan Synods) for so, many would not have this Church obeyed because it is
Reformed; they would not have its laws observed, because it makes them inferior
to Gods; as though, by not imposing a blind superstitious and over severe
obedience, as Rome does, this Church were become incapable of exercising any
authority over her children and requiring any duty from them. But I say, let
those that love JESUS amend this, for his sake: for the Church is his spouse
and has received her power from him; let them yield a free and religious
obedience to Ecclesiastical injunctions, for his sake who has said, he that
receives you receives me. It is doubtless our duty so to do: and I am sure it
will be a good token of a pious heart, when we shall obey them in the Lord,
whom the Lord has set over us. We shall make it appear that we own the
Authority of our heavenly King, when we are subject to those his officers, by
whom he now reigns over us: to whom he has given the keys of his kingdom, and
whom he has appointed Stewards of his saving Mysteries: we shall have a right,
and a share in the Mysterious representation of of the great expiatory
sacrifice, which by the Church is celebrated in the Eucharist, and in those
Divine Services and solemn Prayers which the Church offers to God daily: and we
shall receive the full benefit of being members of the Church and holding
communion with it. If this were not absolutely required, yet I am sure it will
be a very acceptable free will offering, if we do it devoutly and joyfully,
because we love JESUS; and this Christian obedience to the known, rational, and
pious orders of the Church, will answer the best part of that ancient and so
much magnified self-abnegation, vowed by the Coenobites, when they gave up
themselves to be in all things ruled and commanded by their superiors: and it
will exercise those two heavenly graces, meekness and humility, which the world
despises, but all true Christians own to be most Divine: as they that bring
rest to the soul, Mat. 11.29. and make us most conformable to the meek and
humble JESUS. Solomon knew the true mother by her love to the child: and the
true child of God, may be known by his love and duty to his Mother the Church.

CHAP. XIII. Of several voluntary Oblations.
AS for corporal austerities commanded or uncommanded, I have said something of
them already: and the chiefest use and design of them is to mortify sensual
lusts, and to keep under the body that the spirit may rule and be obeyed; yet,
as they are exercises of repentance, marks of the just indignation we conceive
against our selves for having displeased God; as they may effect or express a
disrelish of temporal pleasures, a longing for heavenly joys, and an endeavor
to take up our cross and follow JESUS; they may be the matter of a free will
offering, and they may find a gracious reward and acceptance insomuch as they
proceed from a sincere love to JESUS. Prayer also, thanksgiving, reading,
meditation, acts of Religion; though, as to the substance, they be the
discharge of the greatest duty God requires of us, the worship and adoration of
his Divine Majesty: yet as to the quantity, they may become free oblations, the
expressions of a greater love. He that with devout affections enlarges his
offices, or counts the frequency of them by Canonical hours and wished for
opportunities: and he that sets apart large portions for religious exercises,
or in the following of his necessary business, does often lift up his heart and
thoughts to heaven and heavenly things, makes a voluntary offering of some of
his time, to him of whose eternity he hopes to be partaker. He that defalks
some hours from the refreshment of his body, to bestow them upon his soul; he
that chooses a meaner condition and employment, that having fewer avocations he
may spend more time upon Religion; and he that bears with some wrongs and
injuries, that being free from the distractions of quarrels and law suits, he
may be the better disposed to serve God, has bought the blessed opportunity of
attending JESUS and indearing himself to him. Charity likewise, whether
Spiritual or Corporal, whether in giving or in forgiving may be carried further
than is absolutely required, and so become a free oblation. He that takes great
pains to instruct the ignorant, to convert sinners, by all means to win souls
to JESUS, may manifest a greater love than was absolutely necessary to his own
salvation; and he that makes it his business and delight to prevent quarrels or
make reconciliations; to comfort and defend the afflicted and oppressed, to
visit hospitals and relieve the poor; and to spend all his substance in pious
uses, for the honor of God, and Religion, and for the present and future
happiness of men, may exceed what God would have rewarded, and by showing so
great a love enrich his crown of glory and recompense. I only mark the
head-springs or storehouses of those arbitrary gifts wherewith men may honor
God and enrich themselves: the several emanations and offerings which may
proceed from them, being free and innumerable, cannot be specified, and should
not be imposed. Where there is love there is a willing mind: and 2 Cor. 8.12.
where there is a willing mind a man (in other cases as well as in charity) is
accepted, according to what he has, and not according to what he has not.
Some husbandmen sow that they may have wherewith to pay their debts, (...),
etc. S. Johan. Clim. Grad. 26.. 43.
(which marks the labors and offerings of penitents, who endeavor to make
what satisfaction they can for their injuries to God or man.) Some sow that by
the expected crop they may increase their wealth; (which represents the good
works of more innocent persons, who aspire to a great reward and a glorious
crown.) Some sow that they may have something wherewith to express their
gratitude, and make presents to their kind landlord or benefactor; (whereby is
signified the best of Christians, who in all things seek and design the glory
of their Lord.) And others sow that they may be thought diligent, and receive
commendations from the passers by; (these are an emblem of the most imperfect
Christians, who in Gods service seek their own glory, and of whom our Blessed
Savior says that they have their reward.) However all must sow; and every one
as he does it, sparingly or bountifully, so shall he reap at last. But heaven
is a cheap purchase, give we never so dear for it. The Gospel reveals and
offers a glorious kingdom, great and eternal felicities: Decay of Christian
Piety.
but he that expects their possession because he reads and believes them, is
like him that should fancy the whole world shall be his, because he has the
History or the Map thereof.

CHAP. XIV. The true notion of Free Will Offerings vindicated, with an
Exhortation to abound in the work of the Lord.
HEre it may be proper, to insert the caution of an ancient Rule. Be sure thou
first observe that which is commanded, Cupiens divinum adimplere consilium,
ante omnia serva mandatum. Athan.
before thou do aim at Counsels. Neglect not a duty because thou do offer
freely, and art over-zealous in other things. Thus the covetous worldling
gripes and niggardly detains, because he designs to build almshouses at last:
and thus the factious zealot breaks the second, with the first Table of the
Divine Law; making Religion an excuse for his uncharitableness and
disobedience. But if we love JESUS with hearty affection, we shall be far
enough from thus mocking God, and deceiving our selves; for love that doubles
upon us all obligations of duty, does also oblige us to these free will
offerings. They are not amends for our omissions* or exchanges in lieu of our
obedience: but they are the fulfilling of that law of Gratitude we now live
under. The infinite mercies of the Gospel, put upon us infinite obligations to
do in requital, for God, all that possibly we are able. But the Gospel is a Law
of liberty, all its extent and measures are not in all particulars, minutely
and expressly defined.

So then by these free will offerings, we must not understand any thing like
supererogations; or things to which we are no ways obliged: or that exceed what
God has done for us, or what he will reward: or that are done without his
help, without whom we can do nothing; any of these notions is impious, and
implies a contradiction. But by them is to be understood, the expression of our
acknowledgments, and of that love we owe infinitely, in things not expressly
commanded, and not under necessity. Of such (says the Apostle) I speak not by
commandment, but by occasion, and to prove the sincerity of your love, 2 Cor.
8.8. They that like the Macedonians have first given themselves to the Lord,
may well with them be willing to offer to God, to their power, and beyond their
power. To this purpose S. Paul says of himself, that his preaching the Gospel
of Christ, was altogether his duty, and woe unto him if he fulfilled it not: but
his doing it willingly for nothing, in the Regions of Achaia; for that he had a
reward, and that was his boasting and his glorying, of which no man should rob
him. To this purpose also, the ancient Fathers have said many things. That some
good works we do verius virtutis amore, liberaque electione, quam ulla omnino
legis coactione, rather by a free choice and love, than by precept. That thus
to do things for God beyond express commandments was highly acceptable and
highly rewarded. (...). Chrysostom.
That to abstain from that which is evil, In licitis cavere jugum necessitatis
est, permissa vincere munus arbitrii.
is absolutely required: and farther to deny our selves for Religions sake, is
a free oblation. And much more to the same purpose is frequently to be met
with, in those true and devout lovers of the Blessed JESUS, whose affection and
gratitude to him, nothing could fully express or confine.

And now by these, and first by holy Scripture, it manifestly appears, that the
true notion of Free Will offerings, in nothing favors humane pride, or
derogates from Gods Glory. Can the Beggar merit or presume anythng, if he
throws away the dirt in his hand, for to receive Gold? and if with David, we
pour out to God, that water we thirsted and might lawfully have drunk, that we
may more largely drink the water of life, which God freely gives us, shall we
therefore exalt our selves?

Let us then endeavor, by all means to make it appear that we are sensible how
infinitely we are obliged to love and serve JESUS. Let us not, as the Son of
Sirach advises, consult with a coward in matters of war; consult with an
irreligious age, in matters of Piety and Religion: and let us not think it
enough to do as the most do. When first the Christian Faith was preached in the
world, and men understood what Christ had done for them, and what he had
promised, they thought nothing too much, nor too good for him. They cheerfully
parted with temporal pleasures, honors, and riches; with their liberties,
their limbs, their blood, their very lives, that they might be faithful to
JESUS, and come to reign with him. They made it appear by their patient,
cheerful, and magnanimous sufferings, that they valued nothing but JESUS and
Eternity. We are not now exposed to the same dangers for the profession and
belief of Christianity: but we may make our love and zeal appear, by our
contempt of the world and aspiring after heaven; by our charity to men, and
abounding in the work of the Lord; by keeping the Commandments, as well as
dying for the Creed; the same Lord and Savior that requires our Faith to the
one, demands our obedience to the other. And now, if we spend our time in the
hearty observance of our Lords Precepts and intimations, in doing and enlarging
our duty to the utmost of our power; if we thus confess him before men by
living to him: then are we prepared to die for him, and he will certainly own
us as much as if we had. Our Crown now this way, may be enriched, and our love
shown and perfected, as well as by the flames of Martyrdom. And O happy we!
that we can come, and more happy yet if we do come, to sing Allelujah, and
eternally praise our gracious Redeemer with the noble Army of Martyrs; where
the love we had here shall fill our hearts with divine joy, Vbi tota virtus
erit, O anima videre quod amas, and summa felicitas amare quod vedes. Aug.
and be increased to the proportions of our endless and unspeakable Bliss. The
Lord direct our hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for
JESUS our Master, 2 These. 3.3.

I need not here insert cautions against vain glory and self complacency after
we have done the most we are able: for if it proceeds not from the love of God,
it is nothing worth; and if it does, it will never bring pride nor vanity.
Charity vaunteth not it self, and is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13.4. Only in the
words of a pious Saint, If we had died a thousand times for JESUS, (...), etc.
S. Johan. Clim. Grad. 23. 11.
yet we should not have repaid him the least part of what we owe his infinite
mercy and condescension: for vast is the difference betwixt the blood of God,
and the blood of his creatures and servants, if we judge according to the
dignity, and not to the substance of it. What have thou that thou have not
received? remember what JESUS says to all Christians, He that loves father or
mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37. and whosoever he be of you that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple, Luke 14.33. We can
never do too much for JESUS: but we may easily do too little; though the most
we can do will never merit heaven, yet the least shall not obtain it: it is safe
and impossible to exceed, but it is easy and dangerous to be defective.

O God, who have prepared for them that love thee such good things as pass man's
understanding, Sixth Sund. after Trin.
pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving thee above all
things, may obtain thy promises which exceed all that we can desire, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

I have now assigned Love its full task; to repent and mortify our lusts, to
serve and obey God, and to abound in good works even free will offerings. I
have no more for it to do; I would only have it to increase, to grow toward
perfection, to be constant, and to endure unto the end. To help this forward, I
have here added a meditation on the exaltation of our Blessed Savior; some
useful directions for the ordering of our lives; and four concluding
Considerations, whereby to assist, direct and encourage the sincere lover of
JESUS, in the discharge of this great and blessed duty, the work and labor of
Love.

Let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and to good works, Heb.
10.24.

CHAP. XV. Meditation on the Exaltation of the Blessed JESUS.
LIve and reign sweetest JESU, for ever! My dearest Lord, I heartily ^ejoice in
that great power and glory to which now thou art exalted. When I con^^der what
thou did do, to rescue us from Misery and to make us happy; how thou did
lay by thy glories to entitle us to them; becamest poor, to pay our debt;
becamest weak, to die, and to vanquish our enemies. When I consider this, Ita
ne summus omnium, unus factus est omnium, quis hoc fecit? amor, dignitatis
nescius, dignatione dives, affectu potens suasu efficax: quid violentius?
triumphat de Deo amor. Bern.
I cannot but admire the greatness of thy charity, whereby thou were moved thus
to relieve and succor us, in suffering, and abasing thy self. I cannot also
but be transported with joy, that in thy conflict with our enemies, thou did
obtain the victory, and thereby a Kingdom that shall have no end.

Lord, if thou had perished in our quarrel, if death had still detained thee,
what grief! what remediless anguish had it been to our souls; not only to see
our hopes frustrated: but also to see him oppressed and overcome who with so much
pity and generosity engaged for our deliverance! But thou live, dearest Lord,
thou art triumphant, thou have got the keys of death and of hell. Thou art the
head and Savior of the Church. Thou art the Judge of all men. Thou art the
King of Kings and the Lord of Lords. Thou sit at the right hand of the
Majesty on high, above all principalities and powers. All power is given to
thee in heaven and in earth. At thy Name, O Blessed JESU, every knee must bow:
and that we do most willingly; gladly acknowledging that thy name is exalted
above every name. Thou alone have redeemed, and have power to save us. Thou
alone have the might and right to command us. Unhappy they that will not
worship thee, and submit to thy government. Unhappy they that impart thine
honor to created beings, and will not wholly depend upon thee.

Blessed be God that we have a Savior whom without idolatry we may love and
worship; to whom we may offer our humble petitions, and at whose feet we may
prostrate our selves. Blessed be God that he himself would become our Savior.
Had an Angel or man, been able and deputed to work our Redemption, our love and
gratitude might have been excessive, and provoked God to jealousy. But now
Blessed JESU, we cannot humble our selves too low before thee; we cannot exalt
thee too high; we can never exceed in paying our acknowledgments to thee.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Unto him therefore that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God, and his Father: to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen. Rev. 5.12. and 1.6.

Blessed Lord, I rejoice that thou have the disposal of me; I willingly submit
my self to thy good pleasure, both to obey and to suffer; I desire that my
heart and all my affections may wholly be subject to thee.

O why is thy name dishonored? thy Church persecuted? thy holy Religion
despised, or perverted? and thou thy self rejected and rebelled against, even
by many of them that have sworn allegiance to thee?

O that it were in my power to advance thy Kingdom here, among my
Fellow Servants; to bring all men in subjection to thee. But first, my Blessed
Lord, let me sincerely submit to thy will, in all things. Let never one of my
words or actions send thee that impious message of the rebellious Citizens; We
will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. but now thou art absent, I
beseech thee, let me observe thy laws and own and reverence thy power, in them
to whom thou have imparted it; thy Church and Ministers. Thou art my King,
dearest JESU, let me never see that hour, that I shall not heartily love, and
humbly obey thee.

Consider, O my Soul, how great is the happiness and honor, to be one of the
retinue of so great, so good a Master. Let nothing cast thee down; thou shall
certainly reign above, if thou art faithful here below.

Jacob and his sons were in fear to perish with hunger, because they knew not
that Joseph did reign in Egypt: but my timorous heart, why should thou fear
any thing, when thou know that JESUS does reign in heaven? God has given
him power over all flesh, that he might give eternal life, to all that will
sincerely give themselves to him. If thou art his, thou can not want to be
protected, and provided for. All his servants are certainly preferred; all his
soldiers come to be Kings; the Crown of life, the Kingdom of heaven, the
glories of eternity, are the recompenses laid up for his humble subjects.

Live and Reign, sweetest JESU, for ever. When I do consider that Legions of
Angels, millions of blessed Souls, perpetually adore thee with the greatest
ecstasy of love and divine joy; that all pious men throughout all the world,
express their love and gratitude, by daily worshipping and obeying of thee;
that all thy wicked enemies are seized with fear and trembling before thee.
When thus I see thee, blessed Lord, with the eyes of my faith, on the Throne of
highest Majesty, encircled with glory and power: I then disdain the world, and
am raised above my self, transported with pleasure, to see thy labors and
sufferings thus justly rewarded; to think that mine for thee, shall have the
same reward, according to the utmost of my capacity.

And now my gracious Lord, this I make my request; if I can add nothing to thy
highest glory: yet let me enter in, and partake of thy joy; for they that love
thy name shall be joyful in thee, Psalm. 5.12.

CHAP. XVI. Two general directions about the manifesting of our love to God.
IT is a Maxim in Morals, quod cor non facit, non fit, what the heart does not,
is reputed as not done; it can deserve neither praise nor reward; and it can
signify nothing to any purpose of virtue. Now the heart is the fountain of
humane affections, and the seat of love: so that the meaning is, that what is
not done out of love, is insignificant and wholly unacceptable. Which truth
holds in Religion also; God earnestly requires the heart of all his
worshippers, and without it, he does accept neither their services, nor their
oblations. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart and with all
thy soul; and these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart,
Deuteronomy. 6.6.

Love therefore must carry us through the whole course of our lives, through
all our duty; that our actions bearing its stamp, and signature, may be
pleasing to God, and to us profitable. So that in the discharge of our several
callings; in our intercourse with others, at home or abroad; and in the most
common actions of our lives, still we must act, as being acted by a sincere
love to God. It is one of the best of those ancient Rules which were given to
ascetick persons; Let charity which abides for ever, In omnibus quibus utitur
transitura necessitas, superemineat quae permanet charitas. Reg. Aug.
influence and govern the use we make of time, and other transitory things; let
it go along with us in all our ways, and we shall certainly go right. But this,
like other general Rules, will signify nothing, except it be applied to
particulars. My love to JESUS must appear in what I do this day, and what I
shall do to morrow. The justice and charity of the words I speak, and the work
I am about, must justify it, that indeed I own JESUS for my Lord, his Gospel
for my Rule; and his love, for my comfort and encouragements. Let charity which
abides for ever, direct us in our use of transitory things.

It is the advice of some spiritual directors, that we would single out some
one eminent Christian virtue, to the study whereof we should more particularly
addict our selves, and examine our growth in grace, by our proficiency in it.
This may be much for our ease and for our advantage. For the Duties and Graces
of our Religion are very numerous, not to be attained and attended to, all at
once, and as they stand together: whereas if we make choice of any one single,
which leads us to all the rest, and includes them all, our Christian
advancement will be with greater speed and less difficulty, and we shall be
masters of all other virtues, by having bent our strength and endeavors on the
practice of one. Such a one, I am sure, is the love of God, the love of the
Blessed JESUS, which if well followed and attended to, will bring us to the
highest perfection, to which any Christian can arrive in this life. Let it
therefore be our chiefest care to beget and entertain in our hearts that most
blessed love; and then, to express and perfect it, by these two general Rules.

1. In all our actions to have respect to Gods will, and to seek to fulfill it,
rather than our own. This is recommended to us by the Example of our Blessed
Savior, who professed that he came not to do his own will, but the will of him
that sent him: and this was his great demonstration of love to the Father. That
the world may know that I love the Father, Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est
operis. Greg.
and as the Father gave me Commandment even so I do: arise, let us go hence,
Joh. 14.31. He would go and deliver himself into the hands of his crucifies,
rather than not comply with that order he had received from God his Father. And
thus if we choose Gods will where it is most contradictory to our own desires,
we shall make it appear that indeed we love him. Abraham was called the Friend
of God; and God bare him witness that he indeed feared God, when in obedience
to the divine commandment he would have sacrificed his beloved Isaak: and if we
sacrifice our will to God, to act in all things according to what he has
revealed; to square our actions, great or small, according to the Rules he has
prescribed to us, then God will be certified that we indeed love him; our
readiness to obey his pleasure, will speak the heartiness of our affection.

We see how readily Courtiers conform themselves to the humor and pleasure of
their Prince: and shall we think it hard to conform to what God has required
of us: our obedience being our greatest profit here, and our infinite happiness
in the world to come? Sure it is no difficult matter to say with that great
lover of JESUS; Lord what will thou have me to do? Act. 9.6. and if love has
disposed us to say it, 'twill be easy enough to do it afterward.

In the second place, as we must set our hand to that prayer we ought to say
daily; Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, so must we also submit our
necks to it. I mean, that in compliance to the will of God, we must give up our
selves, as well to patient sufferance, as to cheerful obedience.

One of the great advantages the Coenobites had in their communities, was the
casting out those two words, which are the seeds of contention and the
disturbers of the world, mine, and thine: and if we resign all, to God, who is
indeed the true proprietor, we shall bear the loss of any thing, without
repining against him; we shall never differ with him, about that which is not
our own; we shall have peace with him, whatever we suffer. God is the judge, he
sets up one, and brings down another. All things that happen are ordered
by his infinite power and wisdom; therefore in all, let us rejoice in his
Government, and with a cheerful submission humbly bow and worship, and say with
his Saints; Allelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns; let us be glad and
rejoice, and give honor to him, Rev. 19.6.

If we truly love God, we shall as willingly suffer any thing from him, as we
would for him, persuaded that it is for our good, we shall not only remain
satisfied, but thankful also. I am sure, it is much more reasonable we should
follow Gods will, Aequius est ut nos ejus, quam ut ille nostram sequatur
voluntatem. Aug.
than he ours. And some have said, that it is better and more acceptable to
God, Perfectius est adversa tolerare patienter, quam bonis operibus insudare.
to suffer afflictions patiently, than in prosperity to do the best of things.

Let us therefore in all our sorrows, humble our selves and look up to heaven,
and say; Calicem quem dedit Pater; The Cup that my heavenly Father gives me,
shall I not drink it? we shall always prosper, and have all things at wish, and
command all events, as one did the winds and weather, In vit. Patr. if we by
love adhere to God, and make his will our own, He that has, and sees all
things in one, may always remain satisfied, and have true peace in God.

Magna res est amor; magnum omnino bonum, quod solum leve facit omne onerosum,
and sert aequaliter omne inaequale: nam onus sine onere portat, and omne amarum
dalce ac sapidum efficit. Thom. de Kemp. The guilty prisoner dreads every
noise, and trembles when the door opens, for fear of his deserved doom; when on
the same accounts, the innocent is both calm and joyful, expecting to be
delivered. Now, guilt and the highest treason before God, is to love any thing
better than him, and to oppose our will to his, he that does so, may well be
dismayed and troubled, and full of sad apprehensions: and he that sincerely
loves God and chooses his will in all things, is safe and undaunted, always
pleased and happy.

CHAP. XVII. The two former Rules explained and enlarged.
ACTS beget and perfect habits, and thus to make our actions and passions so
many acts and demonstrations of our love to God, will speedily increase that
love, and soon bring us to perfect peace and happiness.

But commonly it is thought, that to make it appear that we love God, we must
do great and extraordinary things, fly up above other men's pitch, and always be
as it were gazing and sighing heavenward. This has frighted many from a
religious life, from devoting themselves to the love of JESUS: But the truth
is, that love is best expressed by doing well our ordinary actions, that which is
our proper duty and employment.

Our greatest perfection here, is contained in these two. 1. To do what God
requires of us, and 2. to do it well. The first is to discharge the duties of
that station wherein God has placed us; That every man wherein he is called,
therein he should abide with God, and do his own business. This is our task as
we are men, and as we are Christians. Not to do things wonderful and
inimitable: but faithfully to discharge what our place requires from us, to pay
to all, that love and obedience, which nature and Religion appoint; to follow
our work, whatever it be, even the most servile labors, as to the Lord and not
to men: knowing that whatever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

Some enter a dark cell, Graeci studia transmarina sect untur, sed regnum Dei
intra vos est. S. Athan.
and some go long pilgrimages, but wherever providence had placed them, there
they might best have wrought their Salvation. To do what we should do in a mean
place, Nemo fugit adversarium de loco ad locum sed de vitio ad virtutem. Faust.
Sermon.
is much better, than to undertake greater things, which we were not obliged
to. The first frees us from, and the other does engage us into temptation. The
commandment I gi^e thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far
off, it is not in in heaven, neither is it beyond the sea: but the word is very
nigh thee, in thy month and in thy heart, that thou may do it, Deuteronomy. 30.11.
It makes some Quakers, some fantastical, and some mad, the seeking to profess
and to do strange things, things out of the road. And even in the best of all
religious institutes, there is nothing good, except it be this, that they are
particular applications of the general Gospel-Rules; which particular
applications to times, persons, and places, are best made by the designation of
divine providence, which to every man appoints that sphere, wherein he is bound
to move regularly. Let us therefore humbly acquiesce to Gods wise disposal,
making that to be our study and work, which our state and condition does
require from us: and let our next care be, in the second place to be intent
upon that, and to do it well.

In what appears before the world, commonly men put a varnish upon their
actions and their behavior; when oftentimes at home they are loose tyranical,
and unjust. But act in private and every where, tanquam sub alicujus boni viri,
ac semper praesentis oculis, said Seneca; as always in the sight of God; in the
most public view. For your actions at home, in your closet and in your family
are noted and registered before God: and it is by the doing them well, that you
advance forward, toward perfection and glory.

Hoc age, hoc age, was often cried by a herald whilst the heathen worshipped
their Gods. Mind your business, mind that you are about. That we must do in all
actions, even them that relate only to this life, diligently and faithfully to
do them as well as we can. The praise of an actor on the stage of this world,
is to act his part well and decently, whatever it be; and that must be our
care, to be just and exact, in being a good servant or master; artist, or
whatever it be. In so being consists our perfection, and the demonstration of
our love to God.

So likewise in things that pertain to a better life; when you pray, read or
meditate, do it with a serious attention, and the greatest application your
mind is capable of. Do it as if you were now to die, and that were the last
thing you shall ever do for God, and for your own soul; for if you be in haste,
in a hurry, and in a distraction, you wholly lose your time and your reward.

It is storied in some of the legends, that at prayers, S. Bernard saw diverse
Angels, noting down the behavior of the assistants; some in golden letters,
some in ink, and some in water only, according to the devotion or negligence of
them that prayed. Though the relation looks much like a fable, yet there is
this truth in it; that they certainly weary themselves to no purpose who serve
God without attention and without fervor: and do the business of their soul in
a careless and trifling way.

As Mathematicians consider an abstract quantity, not regarding whether of Gold
or clay: so it is not so much the matter of our actions, as the manner of doing
them, that most recommends them to God, and makes them expressions of our love
to JESUS.

As for the second Rule of bearing patiently what ever happens. It must be also
extended to the meanest sorrows and vexations.

In all things let us be content that Gods will should take place. Let us
carefully secure our duty, and afterward let us care for no more; leave the
event to God, and let him choose for us.

It is to no purpose to resolve to bear evenly great calamities, which perhaps
shall never happen; to gather a stock of patience against violent persecutions
and the flames of martyrdom: and mean while to be fretful and angry, for every
loss and trifling accident that crosses our humor. This is but self deceit,
and an imaginary patience, stoutly to resolve upon great evils when they are
far off, and yield to lesser when present. We are rather to remember the words
of our Blessed Lord, to take up our cross daily and follow him. The word daily
imports, that the evils of every day are to be born with patience and a
composed mind. And that the wrongs and vexations we meet withal in our
intercourse with others, as well as great calamity, are our own proper cross,
which our Christian profession, and love to JESUS, obliges us to bear and
submit to.

When a rough-hewn plank is to be join^ to one that is even, it must be plained
and made smooth by great or smaller strokes, at the workmans discretion: our
deform soul, or crooked will is to be close united to God who is most equal and
perfect, therein consists our happiness; we must therefore let him (who is
pleased to undertake that work) polish and rectify our soul, and make them
conformable to his blessed will, by what means he pleases; by great or lesser
blows, according as he knows to be expedient. Let us follow the Prince of
sufferings by love and imitation, cheerfully bearing our cross, whatever it be;
mindful of this profitable advice of the son of Sirach. My son, if thou come to
serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation; set thy heart aright and
constantly endure, and make not haste in time of trouble. Whatsoever is brought
unto thee take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art changed to a low estate
They that fear the Lord will not disobey his word, and they that love him, will
keep his ways.

CHAP. XVIII. Some more particular directions how to order our lives by the
love of JESUS.
FROM the happy and safe cloister of love, wherein thou art entered, look not
abroad upon that world that lies in wickedness; Follow not the multitude to do
evil; for men take hand in hand, Vae tibi slumen moris humani. Aug.
and betray one another to folly and ruin. Gods benefits are lost upon the
major part of them; they have no sense of the divine mercies; ungratitude is
their proper character and their greatest guilt. Rarae fumant felicibus arae;
all might easily be happy, if they would love and be thankful.

Read the lives of primitive Saints, and consider them that are now truly
religious and good men. Converse with them, and with them learn to spend thy
time carefully and well. Time is short and precious, spend it upon that that
will turn to account when time shall be no more. It leads to an endless
eternity, and it is given thee, to make that eternity infinite in happiness, as
in duration. Indulge not then to idleness, for it will bring temptations upon
thee, and make them prevailing. Labor, watchfulness, and prayer, make us
victorious over sin, and win the incorruptible crown.

Use all means whereby thou may be advanced in thy way to heaven; thou can
never work out thy salvation with too much care and diligence. It Is good to
make sure work in so great a concern; Malo cautior esse quam fortior; fortis
enim saepe captus est, cautus rarissime.
for multitudes perish through carelessness and presumption; and the way to
eternal life is straight and narrow. But in the use of such means as I
recommend, take heed of deceiving thy self, and resting in outward
observations, making that the end, which is only a way to lead thee to virtue.

Thou may carry thy Bible about, (...).
and read the Gospel, and yet not be a good Christian. Thou may go up to the
Temple to pray, fast and give alms, and profess the greatest strictness with
the Pharisee, Non Hierosolymis fuisse; sed Hierosolymis been vixisse laudandum.
Hieron.
and yet still be an hypocrite except thou do truly love God.

Love therefore, and often think that thou shall die; for that will much
increase thy diligence and thy sincerity. Many in the Church of Rome, put on
when they die a Friars habit, and much confide therein: do thou put on by times
thy dying thoughts; consider seriously; and steal time as often as thou can,
to sequester thy self from the world. Gods secret voice is not heard in the
crowd, and no man meditates in the Market. Retire and think of death, and put
on the affections of a penitent; humility, shame, and sorrow for thy past
follies; care and watchfulness for that rest of time which God gives thee to
destroy thy sins, Deus dat spatium ut pereant crimina non homines. Prosp. Aquit.
and to save thy soul. S. Austin on his death bed, would always have the
penitential Psalms, saying that every Christian must die a penitent. Nominem
Christianum absque poenitentia mori oportere.
So must he live, that would live well; for contrition and mortification will
make thee charitable and contented; will make thee despise the world, and choose
the best and safest course of life, Optimam vitae rationem deligendam, and
brevi consuetudine fiet jucunda.
which if some thing hard at the first, will soon by use become easy.

When men have an opportunity to eat and drink, to obtain profit or pleasure,
they seldom neglect it, and put it off to uncertain delays: Now thou can, if
thou will, serve God, show thy love to JESUS, and make sure of heaven, defer it
not till time be past, or be worse. Think what thou would advise thy friend
to do, and do thou act accordingly.

Often think upon thy reward, and look up to heaven; hope sets the world at
work. Jacob's drudgery fourteen years, seemed but a few days to him, because he
had Rachel before his eyes, and loved her affectionately, Genesis 29.30.

All is not to be done to day, go on in the way of love and duty. Our life is a
course, not a leap; therefore faint not, and be not displeased with thy self,
Nunc paululum laborando manibus; nunc genibus flexis orando deinde corpus
reficiendo, post quiescendo, and rursus iterum operando; Anthoni, sic fac tu,
and salvus eris.
if thou have not yet done what must not be finished, till thy life be so. S.
Anthony's impatience was thus reproved and cured by an Angel, work now,
afterward pray, then refresh thy wearied nature: and after that, return again
to thy labor and devotion. Let this be thy course all thy way, and salvation
shall be thy end.

Thus, betwixt grace and nature, betwixt labor and Religion distribute thy
time: and in all these, let the love of JESUS accompany and direct thee, and it
will certainly bring thee to his glory; after thou have in this manner, lived
in his favor, thou shall enter into his joy.

I love them that love me, (says the Lord) and they that seek me early shall
find me, Prove. 8.17.

CHAP. XIX. That upon all accounts, God should be loved above all things.
THE first Consideration is, that it is most unjust and unreasonable to love
any creature to the prejudice of the Creator. As all things hare their being
from God, so they have from him all the goodness and beauty which makes them
lovely to us, and God drawing upon visible objects fair copies of his invisible
perfections, designed to be loved in them: or that they should be loved in him,
and for his sake. If men being delighted with the beauty of the heavenly host
took them to be gods, let them know how much better the Lord of them is, for
the first Author of beauty has created them: for by the beauty and greatness
of the creatures proportionably the maker of them is seen, Wisd. 13.3. Beauty
and goodness are the proper object of love: and therefore, God who is the first
and supreme beauty and goodness, should be loved before all things.

We indeed reverence Princes in their seals and arms, in their meanest servants
clothed with their livery: but should a subject set up these in the royal
Throne, and transfer to them, or even to the greatest Favorite, those special
honors which belong to the Prince only; he should justly be deemed a Rebel,
and his proceedings would be as unjustifiable, as the disloyal distinction of
taking arms by the Kings Authority against his Person. Yet such are the
proceedings of all disorderly lovers, I mean of all sinners: who setting more
of their affections upon the creatures, than upon God the Creator, pay them
afterward a greater veneration than they do to him; having exalted honors,
pleasures and riches into the Imperial chair, they do more for them than for
the Sovereign himself: nay they obey them to their prejudice, and against his
express command. Thus vicious unreasonable men burn in the shade, and freeze
where the Sun shines; they dote upon inferior beauties, and neglect the highest
and most perfect; they take fire at dark shadows, and find no heat in the
brightest light. Great men have a respect paid them, in their degenerating
posterity: great Artists are respected in their liveless children; we highly
honor unhappy Pagans in those labors of theirs which adorn our closets and
libraries: God only is dishonored in his works, the more perfect he has made
them, the more injurious they prove to him. Phidias and Apelles are remembered
with veneration, in a fine picture or Statue: God only is ingratefully
forgotten in a lovely creature whereof he is Maker. An absurd impiety this is,
Absurdum est genu posito simulacra adorare, and suspicere, fabros vero qui ea
fece^unt contemnere.
which Seneca reproved in his fellow heathen, to worship and deifie the carved
image, and to take no notice of the Carver that made it.

God has done like a loving father, who jealous of his sons affection, would
have none to attend him but such as wear his livery; would have the picture of
himself hang in every room; and all the goods in the house marked with his name
and cipher: So God, who loves men tenderly, and desires to be by them loved
again, has put something of himself in all the creatures he has appointed to
serve us; that, which way soever we turn our eyes, we might be put in mind of
him, he has stamped his name in more or less legible Characters, upon all the
goods and utensils of this his great house, the world, wherein he has placed
us. And now shall we do like a simple child, who turning his back upon his
father, should look and smile on his picture, and caress it, and wait upon it,
and ask it blessing, while he slights the original? So absurd a thing would be
counted madness, and move pity or laughter: but when we act the same folly, in
loving the world while we despise God, we are highly criminal, and we highly
provoke our heavenly Father, thus to return to him contempt and disobedience
for the gracious tokens of his love.

From hence it follows, that, as we should love God above all, and all things,
things in him and for him; we should also love those things most, which have
most of his impress and likeness. Therefore, man who is created after Gods
image, should be by us loved above all other creatures: and that part of man
which is chiefly adorned with the likeness of God, should have the greater
share of our affection. God himself values humane souls at a high rate, because
they are like him; as appears by what he has done and suffered to save them.
And for the same reason also, we should pay to the souls of men the best part
of that kindness we owe them: and if we do not, we give our friends no greater
love than children do their puppets; for they dress them fine, and lay them
soft, and kiss and embrace them: Just as they who aim at nothing more, than to
make their friends merry, to wish them toys and gaudy things and to see them at
ease. A fondness inexcusable in rational creatures, especially in Christians,
who know the worth of an immortal soul and the great concern of Eternity: and
yet seek only to gratify the material part of their friends which is subject
to corruption, and to engage their affections to the world which passes away
and they must soon leave. As if when King Edward the first was hastening out of
the Holy Land hither to receive the Crown which expected him, his friends had
staid him by the way, and invited him to rest and ease, and provided for him
all Princely delights, and entertainments, and retarded his coming so long,
till he had forgot or lost his right and his Kingdom. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole word and lose his soul? and what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?

We are indeed much commanded to love one another, and in this consists one
great half of our Religion, all justice and charity, and all the duties of the
second Table. To love our brother as we ought, is the best demonstration of our
love to God, for he that says he loves God, and hates his brother, is a liar,
says S. John, 1 John 4.20. and love works no ill to his neighbor, and is
therefore the fulfilling of the law, says S. Paul, Romans 13.10. but a man is to
love his neighbor as himself, Mat. 19.19. and therefore as he is most obliged
to seek for himself the kingdom of God and its righteousness: so should he in
the first place endeavor to procure it to his friend. Or else we are to love
one another as Christ has loved us, Joh. 13.33. and that was in redeeming our
souls and purchasing for us heavenly joys and eternal life: not in providing
ease and sensual pleasures to our bodies here in this world. The result of this
is, that in the first place we should love God infinitely and for his own sake:
and that in the next, we should love those things most which have a nearest
relation to God; Grace and Virtue, Religion, Holiness and Men; especially their
Souls, which are an image of the Deity; especially sanctified souls which are
most like God. Afterward our lesser love for less Divine Objects, may be
reasonable and innocent: and however we have secured a great duty and a great
happiness. To love God with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as
himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices, Mar. 13.33.

CHAP. XX. That as it is most just, so it is most easy to love God.
A Second consideration may be, that it is most just and easy to love God.
That it is most just, is shown all along this discourse, wherein I have
represented the more general and most excellent benefits of God to mankind: all
the which challenge and deserve the greatest love our hearts are capable of.
God had required of his people that the first born and the first fruits should
be consecrated to him, thereby to acknowledge him the author of all their
blessings and the giver of all their increase: Now the firstborn of our souls,
the first fruits of our hearts is love, which God, who gives us all things,
demands as an acknowledgment from us, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart and with all thy soul. We therefore commit a greater sacrilege, if
we deny him so just a tribute, than if a Jew had robbed him of his first grapes
or his first ears of corn. But it is so much the more just, in that it is most
easy to love God. Infinite perfections, an abyss of goodness whence rivers and
oceans of good things do perpetually flow, one would think should swallow up
the hearts and affections of men: as indeed it does, of all that duly consider
it. And more perfectly of beatified Saints, and of those blessed spirits who
minister before his throne and are all flame for him. Besides, it is natural for
men to love what is theirs, propriety begets or increases love: Now God is our
God; he has given himself for us, he does now, and will more entirely
hereafter give himself to us; he made us for the enjoyment of himself, and for
that purpose he has redeemed us: and that we might all say, with David, O God,
thou art my God, that God might show his kindness and indear himself to us, and
assert our right to him, he has assumed the names of those relations who love
us best, whom we love most tenderly, and whom we count most ours. God the
Father is pleased to be called our Father, God the Son, our Brother, and God
the Holy Ghost our Comforter, as it were our Friend: thereby to express that
affection which he has for us, and the propriety which we may claim in him.
Sure it is an easy thing to love them that love us: Nimis durus est animus, qui
amorem etsi u^tro non impendat, n^lit tamen rependere. Aug.
and where God has expressed so much love, it is strangely unnatural if we are
not affected with it.

Every man is a friend to him that gives gifts, says the Wise man, Prove.
19.6. Now what gifts has our God given us! or rather, what gifts has he not
given us! and what perverse violence do they offer nature, that seek to confute
Solomon's saying, in this instance where it should be most true. Certainly it is
an easy thing to love infinite perfections, an infinite goodness; one that
ever did, and ever does us g^od; from whom we daily receive favors, so great
and so many that we can tell neither their worth nor number: Wherefore S. Aug.
says, that to love G d is so natural, Potes mihi dicere, non habeo quod
tribuam egenti, non possum jejunare, non possum fl re. Numquid pot^s mihi
di^ere charita^em habere non possum, etc.
so easy, so infinitely just, and so much our duty, that to omit it can admit
of no plea nor pretense, and is inexcusable, and criminal in the highest
degree. Perhaps thou will say, I cannot fast, I cannot weep, I I have not what
to give to the poor, but can thou say, I cannot love God? is there any
obstacle in thy way? do thou want inducements or a heart to do it? No,
doubtless it is the easiest thing in the world to love him that is most lovely,
to love our greatest benefactor, to love him who is infinitely kind and loving
to us. Some virtues require opportunities and cannot be exercised for want of
them: but whether thou be sickly or healthy, whether thy condition be high
or low, whether thy leisure be much or little, whether thy calling be easy or
laborious, Facilis res est, Domine JESV CHRIST superamande, dilectio tua, a
qua nullus cujuscunque status, gradus, aut conditionis existat excusari potest,
etc. Idiot.
thou may love; love does not pinch the belly, wearies not the hands, makes
not the head ache, empties not the purse: for love is neither grief nor pain;
it is easy to all men, none can plead any excuse against it.

CHAP. XIX. An Objection answered, which might be raised against this Book and
its Subject.
NOW here I will digress a little to answer two Objections which possibly might
be made against what I have said of Divine Love. The first, that I have
humanized it too much; that whereas it is supernatural and should be spiritual,
I have made it almost palpable and sensible. To this I say, that whether we set
our love upon earthly or heavenly things, upon God or upon the world, still it
is the same passion, which resides in the same humane faculty. The will of man,
and the effects thereof are alike evident and real. He that truly loves God,
has that same hearty affection for him, as to the kind, as one friend has for
another: only being joined with greater reverence and submission to so glorious
a Majesty, it is called Religious and devout. But a sincere lover of JESUS will
seek to please him, and to be with him, and to enjoy him, and do all that for
him, which men would do for those whom they love heartily: all the difference
is, that Divine Love has its proper expressions, can never be too great, and
is in all respects infinitely more excellent than the love of any creature.
Therefore, if in some places I have represented things plainly, and made that,
in some manner to be touched by sense which is only the object of faith, my
design was thereby to move the affections, and to bring down the notions of
Religion, from the head into the heart. Faith should be the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. We should consider
things of faith, whether past or to come, as if they had now a real
subsistence, as if they were present before our eyes; their greatness then,
would be better viewed, and have the greater power upon us: as Moses, who, by
consideration, seeing him who is invisible, ver. 27. was thereby enabled to
prefer the afflictions of Gods people to the pleasures and dignities of the
Courts of Pharaoh. I believe it was a great advantage to the Piety of Primitive
ages, that they lived near the time when those things were acted, which we now
believe at a greater distance: for then the Revelations of the New Testament
were every Christians discourse and admiration; the proximity of the times made
them almost visible, and the recent footsteps of those great transactions gave
them a kind of sensibility, whereby their thoughts and considerations were
drawn and retained, and made serious and efficacious. And I believe it may be a
great cause of the degeneracy of these after ages, that faith is become too
notional, too metaphysical and abstracted, a matter of dispute and science,
rather than of practice and conscience: whereas we should vest the great
objects of our faith with material circumstances, to make them in some manner
the object of sense, that to us it might be said as S. Paul to the Galatians,
Before your eyes JESUS CHRIST has been evidenly set forth, crucified among
you, Gal. 3.1. and that, in all other instances, our faith might be to us, the
evidence of things not seen. When we look upon the things of revelation as far
distant from us, they appear hardly credible, and not much to be regarded: but
a closer viewing of them, by a nearer and almost sensible consideration would
make them appear great and wonderful, would make deep and lasting impressions
on our minds, and cause us to cry out with grief and wonder; Lord, what is man,
that thou art thus mindful of him! or rather, what is man, that he is unmindful
of thee! However, I have the warrant, and do claim the privilege of them that
write meditations, and make contemplations palpable and to be seen: to suppose
dialogues, to describe what was past long ago, as now in doing, and to
represent things as present and visible; and well we may, especially when we
treat of the love of God showed to mankind in JESUS: for that love became
palpable, and converst among men, and was manifested to sense, in the birth,
the actions, and the sufferings of our Blessed Savior: who by becoming man,
seemed to comply with that unjust and yet general desire which men had, of
worshipping humane creatures, and having things visible and material for the
object of their devotion and Religious love.

CHAP. XXII. The second Objection concerning the love of JESUS, answered.
THE other Objection would perhaps be made by them who scruple and refuse to
bow at the Holy name of JESUS, and who might say that I have mentioned it too
often, and too often called divine charity, The love of JESUS: and that in so
doing I have been either superstitious or injurious to God. To this I answer,
That as our Blessed Savior says, He that hates me, hates my father also,
Joh. 15.23. so we may say, that he that loves him loves his father also. For
the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost are one and the same God blessed for ever;
he that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten, and so
reciprocally. The Divine Essence is but one, it admits of no division:
therefore whatever honor is paid to one of the Divine Persons, is paid to all
Three; the Ever-glorious Trinity is honored by it. But then it must be
considered that JESUS the second Person of that Blessed and Glorious Trinity is
not only God, but also Man, and so Mediator betwixt God and Man: so that by,
and through him we pray, we worship, we love God. This is the great, the most
excellent benefit of God to his Church, that he gave JESUS CHRIST his Blessed
Son to be the head of it; who prays for us, Qui orat pro nobis; orat in nobis;
and oratur a nobis.
and prays in us, and is prayed to by us; as S. Aug. says. As God manifested
his love to men in JESUS: so in JESUS men offer the returns of their love to
God; In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9.
and in this is manifested our love toward God, that we receive, and love, and
obey that Son. With this, God is in no wise offended, but rather infinitely
well pleased; he that loves me shall be loved of my father; says our Blessed
Savior, Joh. 14.21 If a man love me, he will keep my word, and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, ver. 23. and
again, If any man serve me, him will my father honor, Joh. 12.26. nay, he
expressly tells his disciples, that the Father loved them, because they loved
him, whom the Father had sent; The Father himself loves you, because ye have
loved me, John 16.27. For though we owe our redemption to the infinite mercies
of God Father, Son and Holy Ghost: yet in a more especial manner we are engaged
to the Son, who personally came down from heaven, for us men and for our
salvation. JESUS is the Author and finisher of our faith, he is the Founder of
our Holy Religion; it is he has revealed those doctrines we are to believe; it
is he has given us those laws and precepts whereby we are to live; it is he
from whom we are called Christians; it is he who for us despised the shame and
endured the Cross, who has shed his blood and given his life a ransom for
ours; it is he who by contracting a near relation with us, becoming our
brother, has caused us to be adopted Sons of God, and heirs with him of an
eternal kingdom; it is he who can save them to the uttermost that come to God
by him; it is he who is the head of the Church, Caput positum in coelesti^us
corpus suum guberna^, separatum quidem visione sed annexum charitate. Aug.
to whom we must be united by Love, that we may be his members, and derive life
from him; it is he who is our Lord and Master, and will be our judge and our
rewarder, if we be faithful to him. For this end Christ died and rose again,
that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, says S. Paul, Romans 14.9.
God has made that same JESUS whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, him
God has exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Savior, says S.
Peter, Act. 2.36. and 5.31. All power is given him in heaven and earth: and he
must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. Hence the frequent and
urgent exhortations to follow and imitate, to serve and obey JESUS; Hence those
pathetick words of S. Paul, The love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14.
and again, what things were gain to me I counted loss for Christ: yea doubtless
and I count all things loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge of JESUS
CHRIST my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8. It Is JESUS has won our
hearts to God; it is he has reconciled us from a state of enmity to a state of
love. Besides that God was justly angry for our rebellions, his glories are so
bright, so amazing, his Divine Majesty so high, that to love a being so
infinitely above us might have been thought profaneness or presumption; Non
been convenient nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and amor.
respect, not friendship, is the affection of subjects to Princes. PHthoner THe
was an ordinary Epithete for the heathen gods, who were thought to be envious
rather than loving to men; and even the Israelites were amazed and terrified at
the sight of a heavenly messenger, crying we shall die for we have seen God.
It Is the great humiliation of JESUS, has procured and established an
everlasting reconciliation and friendship betwixt God and man. God commended
his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinnerr Christ died for us, Romans
5.8. and now there is neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor any other
creature can separate us from the love of God which is in CHRIST JESUS our
LORD, Romans 8.39.

Therefore for a reward of the great sufferings and abasement of JESUS, God
has given him a supreme authority over all the world, Men and Angels being
made subject unto him; because he made himself of no reputation, and took on
him the form of a servant, and humbled himself, and became obedi- unto death,
even the death of the Cross, therefore God has highly exalted him, and given
him a name which is above every name: that at the name of JESUS every thing
should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the
earth: and every tongue should confess, that JESUS CHRIST is the Lord, to the
glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.7, 8, etc. Our love and obedience to JESUS
derogates nothing from, but belongs to God: It Is to the glory of God the
Father. God has highly exalted JESUS for his humiliation, and for the same
cause we ought also to love and exalt him, as much as possibly we can, because
it was for us; not only bow at his name, but even kneel and kiss the ground,
when he only sees us; no fear of exceeding here, no fear of superstition: we
can never show him too much love or respect: Psalm. 72. All Kings shall fall
down before him, all nations shall do him service: prayer shall be made unto
him, and daily shall he be praised. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. That it is most pleasant and safe to love God.
A Third consideration will be, that it is most pleasant and safe to love God.
Love may cause trouble, but it certainly is the spring or parent of all joy and
satisfaction. He that has an affection to nothing has pleasure in nothing:
could the imaginary insensibleness of the Stoics really seize upon any man: if
he could never be miserable, he would also be incapable of all happiness. It Is
true indeed that the love of worldly things in that they are vain and
perishing, is it self vanity and vexation: qui multum amat plus dolet, is
certainly true of all but the Divine Love. He that has many friends has many
sorrows; he that loves many things has many things to fear for: It Is only God
that has those infinite excellencies which can fully replenish our minds and
desires: It Is only God that admits of no variableness, neither shadow of
turning: and therefore it is the love of God alone that can make us eternally
and entirely happy. It is reported of a person of great sanctity, that an evil
spirit confessed to him, that were it possible for one who loves God to come into
hell; yet were it impossible he should be miserable, but that it would rather
sink hell it self and make it disappear, or else make it a paradise for him.
Though the relation may be fabulous, yet I believe the thing it self is true:
he that is joined to God by love, and so possessed of him, who is the fountain of
all joy, and bliss, it is not possible he can be miserable; despair the hell of
the damned can never seize his soul. However, I am confident that the love of
God would sweeten all the bitterness of our innocent miseries, and that it is
only the imperfection of a Christians love that exposes his mind to the
vexation of humane sorrows. I am not (to my grief) a competent witness to this
truth: but there have been many Saints and devout persons who, in the fervency
of their love to God, have found those joys, those ravishments of joy which are
ineffable, Nihil crus sentit in nervo, dum animus est in Coelo.
and which made them, in some manner insensible and incapable of any great
sorrow. And even the lesser love of more imperfect, though sincere, Christians,
does in a great measure take away the sense of humane calamities, and brings to
their minds the greatest contentment and delight this world is capable of.

A man's heart is more where it loves than where it lives; Magis est ubi amat
quam ubi animat.
he that loves dwells in God and God in him, 1 John 4.16. and what greater,
Deus Charitas est, quid pretiosius? and qui manet in Charitate, in Deo manet,
quid securius? and Deus in eo, quid jucundius? Bern.
what more excellent bliss can we imagine or desire? what stronger expression
could one find to express the highest felicities? to dwell in God! to be
swallowed up in an abyss of infinite goodness! to be overwhelmed in the
immensity of Divine Joys and perfection! as an atom in the air, as a drop of
water in the Ocean: so so he that dwells in love dwells in God. Nothing can
better represent those transcendent and delicious raptures wherewith the soul
is inebriated and raised above it self. Extasim facit amor, amatores suo statu
demovet, sui juris esse non sinit. Dionys. de divin. nom.
This was it made the Holy Martyrs shout and rejoice in the midst of the
flames: they dwelt in God; no sorrow, no harm could approach them. Happy are
they that can say with S. Paul, Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
and I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. The love of God fits
us for the joys of heaven, and is an anticipation of them; it powerfullly
governs the will, and it sweetly overflows the mind; it is the perfection of
grace, and will be the consummation of glory: but it is much easier and happier
to feel than to express it. How much better is thy love than wine, and the
smell of thine ointment than all spices! Cant. 4.10.

One thing that adds much to the worth and the pleasure of Divine Love, is that
it never fails: it is of the nature of its object, eternal, as God is; whether
there be prophecies, they shall fail: whether there be tongues, they shall
cease: whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away: but charity never
fails. 1 Cor. 13.8. Faith and hope may accompany us as far as heaven-gate,
but there they for sake us; the one is turned into sight and the other into
enjoyment; love alone enters and abides with us to eternity. Our greatest
safety therefore as well as pleasure consists in loving God affectionately; for
that love which never fails secures our duty here and our happiness
hereafter. We are sure never to live, and never to perish in sin, if we love
JESUS sincerely: He that dwells in love dwells in God: and there neither
sin nor misery can come to hurt him.

Quid refert natura esse quod potes effici voluntate? Chrysostom.
What matters it then, to be by nature, what we may be by choice and affection?
If of our selves we are not holy and happy, we may be so by love; the love of
God will transform us into his nature, and make us partakers of his holiness
and happiness. Love kills us in our selves, that we may live in God, Occidit
quod fuimus, ut simus quod non eramus. Aug. It makes such a change in us, that
we are no longer what we were, as to the sinfulness and wretchedness of our
condition. Mandato novo facit hominem novum, homines amando Deum dii
efficiuntur. Aug.
The New Commandment makes the New Creature; men become Gods by loving God.
Love considers and discharges all the duties of Religion: it allows of no
omission nor transgression: Love is the fulfilling of the law: this is love
that we keep his Commandments, 2 John 6. Ille sancte and just agit qui sanctam
habet dilectionem. Aug. He is a Holy Man whose love is holy, Non faciunt bonos
vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores. Aug.
for love having the rule and direction of all man's passions and affections,
they become either good or bad according to the nature of what they love.
Therefore to know whether a man be virtuous or no, we inquire not what his
condition is, or what are his parts and learning: but what he delights in, what
he loves: for if he loves the world and himself, he is certainly vain and
vicious, but if he loves God, he is pious and good, and of a certainty he can
never perish.

If natural love be so powerful and active, as we know it is: how much more
when it is set upon God and by him assisted? This therefore does greatly
manifest how secure and well guarded they are that love God, in that their holy
love masters and mortifies their unholy affections. What is it that hurries men
to sin and hell and destruction, but their masterless and unruly passion? now
love can not only subdue them, but even makes them useful and subservient to
virtue; the love of God sanctifies all passions and makes them serviceable. If
it cannot make him meek who is of an angry nature; it will make him angry
against sin, and against himself a sinner: if it does not make him bold and
generous whose temper inclines him to timorousness; it will turn his fear into
prudence, and make him not dare to offend God: if it makes him not cheerful who
naturally is melancholy; it will turn his sadness into penitent sorrow, and
make him a blessed mourner. And so all other passions, love will make them
instruments of virtue, Amor ubi venerit, caeteros in se traducit and captivat
affectus. S. Bern.
or occasions of a greater reward: that is, it will either fight and conquer
them, or else put them to a good use. Love is obeyed wherever it appears, and
Divine Love is irresistible: it overcomes all difficulties, nay, Nomen
difficultatis erubescit.
it scorns the name of difficulty, says S. Augustine; it is as strong and
victorious as death.

Happy and safe are they that love JESUS: Charitas est donum Dei quo nullum est
excellentius: solum est quod dividit inter filios regni aeterni, and filios
perditionis. Aug. de Trin. lib. 15. cap. 18.
for that love it is makes the difference betwixt sincere and false Christians,
betwixt those that shall be heirs of salvation and those that shall go to
perdition, betwixt heaven and hell. Many privileges may belong to the tares
while they grow in the same field with the wheat; many Sunshiny days they may
have, and many drops of dew and rain may fall upon them: but they are not
rooted and grounded in love, therefore they are plucked up and withered and
burned. Many gifts of the Divine Spirit wicked men may receive; they may
prophecy and do miracles in Christ's name, they may excel in some virtues: but
the grace of Charity they never receive, the love of God never dwells in their
hearts. Habere Baptismum and malus esse po^es; habere, etc. Tract. 7. in Epist.
Johan.
Thou may be Baptized, (says S. Aug.) and yet not be good; thou may have
knowledge and remain vicious; thou may be called a Christian, and be none:
but thou can not love God and be wicked; thou can not love God, but thou
must be holy and happy. Thus we see, love affords the greatest pleasure, and
the greatest safety this world is capable of. The love of JESUS is a precious
jewel, precious beyond gold and the best of pearls: Charitas est amor rerum
quas nonnisi volentes amittimus. Aug.
he that has it, has an infinite treasure, and it is so much the more to be
valued, because we may acquiesce in its possession: we can never lose it except
we will. We may lose our riches and we may lose our health; we may lose our
learning and our eloquence; we may lose our friends and our lives: but the love
of God we can never lose without our consent; no time, no fortune, Verum bonum
illud est quod non potes invitus amittere. Aug.
no Tyrant can snatch it by force out of our hearts; as it is never given
against our will, so against our will it can never be taken away. Charity never
fails. Quinquagesima Sunday.
O Lord who have taught us, that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee: grant this for thine only Son JESUS Christ's
sake. Amen.

CHAP. XXIV. That love brings the most lasting joy and satisfaction to the soul.
THE fourth and last consideration is, that the love of God is the solid joy
and lasting Tranquillity of the Soul. No tormenting fear or sadness can harbor
in a heart that loves God; the Motto of love might well be that of a late order
of Knighthood at Mantua, meant of the Holy Chalice, Nihil isto triste recepto;
grief and the love of God are incompatible: no sadness should enter that breast
wherein dwells Divine Love. I need not treat at large of those many doubts and
terrors concerning future happiness which grieve and almost distract the hearts
of many Christians, to prove that it is a happy thing to be freed from them:
there are few, but are so far acquainted with them as readily to assent to it;
it will be more to purpose to show that the love of God is the best remedy
against them, the best balsam to heal a wound^^ spirit. Some persons from their
povert^* bodily pains, or other afflictions draw th^^ most afflictive
inference, that God is no^ their friend, and that therefore their condition is
dangerous, and very bad, if no^ quite desperate: and this adds such weight to
their cross, that they have a strength to bear it, but are ready to sink
whereas the love of God has enable^ thousands to bear a heavier with patienc^*
with fortitude, and even with cheerfulnes^* I take pleasure in infirmities, and
distresses and necessities for Christ's sake, said S. Pau^ that great lover of
JESUS. He th^^ would suffer for God, will suffer from God* he that would die
and be crucified for JESUS, will willingly bear that cross which JESUS lays
upon his shoulders. An^ indeed it is a greater virtue, meekly, an^ thankfully to
accept of that correction wherewith God visits us, than voluntaril^ to inflict
the greatest sufferings on ou^ selves: what proceeds from God is eve^ best for
us, and most pleasing to him. No Patient will question the love of that
Physician who is his intimate friend, for that he makes incisions, and applies
causticks upon him, and makes him drink bitter potions; all this he takes to be
for his own good, as proceeding from his friends affection* after this manner,
he that loves God will receive afflictions from him; and gratefully acknowledge
with David, I know that of very faithfulness thou have caused me to be
^roubled. Knowing that all things work together for the good of them that love
God, he will harbor no thoughts of diffidence, nor question Gods loving
kindness to him: but rests satisfied, that while he loves God nothing can hurt
him, and that whatever happens is certainly for his greater advantage.

But it is not always the storms of adversity that bring those dark and dismal
clouds on the minds of men: they come sometimes in fair weather, in the
greatest prosperity. Whence it is in vain to examine: better it is to drive them
away, for they are as mischievous as black. They cast a damp upon men's spirits;
and freeze their hearts in such a manner that they can receive no spiritual
joy; they so weaken their hands and feet, that they can hardly work for God, or
walk in his ways: so that their condition is sad indeed, not because God is
their enemy: but because they being unreasonably afraid of it, are thereby
hindered from being his friends. To this evil none can prescribe a better remedy
than love: let such persons love God heartily, and all these terrors will
vanish way like the vain images of a terrible dream; when one awaketh. Love
begets love, therefore we should love God, beca^^e he first loved us, and love
begets a confide^^e of being loved again: so that if we love G^d we shall not
long doubt but that we are ^^ved by him: and then all is well. An^ ^f at first,
our hearts do not melt into dev^^^ affections, and are not replenished with ^^e
sweetness and comfort of love, let us not (...) dismayed at it, nor too much
study our o^^ disturbed thoughts and apprehensions: (...) let us continue to
give God demonstrati^^^ of love, to abstain from what he forbi^^, and to do
that which he commands, or (...) which will please him, though uncomma^^ed: and
then either holy joys and exta^^^s will come, or it will be as well without
th^^. No man is afraid of his friends, nor of th^^ whom he serves and obliges;
we ea^^ly suppose that they love us, whom we lo^^, and that they to whom we do
good will (...) kind to us: therefore let us show to God (...) the love we can,
and by words and actio^^ protest that we seek to please him, and (...) hearts
will soon be possessed with a blessed a^surance that we are dear to him, and that
(...) will never be cruel and severe to us. 'Ti^ reported of a Religious Person
whose so^^ was grieved and wounded with doubts and fears, and with sadness,
that while he (...) one day weeping and praying thus; O tha^ I were sure that I
shall persevere and never fall from God; O that I were sure tha^ God loves me,
and that I shall one day see his blessed Face: how zealous then would I be in
mortifying my sins and doing my duty! how cheerfully would I serve God every
day, and take pleasure in suffering for him! how would I despise the world and
its vanities, and fix my thoughts and affections on things above! while he was
thus expressing the sorrows of his troubled mind, he heard the whispers of a
secret voice, which told him, fac quod faceres, do now what thou would do if
thou had all those assurances. With this he found himself so affected and
refreshed, that he took it as an Oracle from heaven, and in obeying of it found
those comforts he begged. Better counsel I cannot give thee; fac quod faceres,
do what thou would do, if thy diffident timorousness and jealousies were
confuted by a voice from heaven, and they will soon be removed. Let thy meek
submission, thy sincere obedience, and thy free will offerings speak thy love
to God: and thou shall soon find thy self persuaded that God loves thee dearly,
and that thy condition is safe and happy. Other assurance we are not to expect
in this world* and this is not to be obtained any other way; should thy comfort
proceed from any thing else but thy humble and devout love to God, it would be
fancy and presumption; whereas so, it is well grounded and never can deceive
thee. There is no fear in love (says Divine S. John, 1 Ep. 4.18.) but perfect
love casts out fear; it is never otherwise: grace and nature join together to
make the effect infallible, that a Holy Love should ever produce a Holy Peace;
if we love indeed and in truth, thereby (not by new and secret revelations) we
shall know that we are of the truth, and we shall assure our hearts before God,
1 John 3.18. Love may well work confidence and joy in our souls, for it enjoys
already what it loves: it is affectuosa unitas, and unitiva affectio, love is
inseparable from its object, and the essence thereof consists in their union,
and in some manner unity; as our Blessed Savior praid for his; that they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us, Joh. 17.21. and that this is effected by love, he adds ver. 26. that the
love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Though God be
exalted infinitely above all things, in a sphere of Glory and Majesty so high
that the Cherubims with their many wings cannot fly up to it; Qui mente
integro Deum desiderat profecto jam habet quem amat. Greg. Mag.
yet thither love soars up and takes God, and holds him as his own: so that
every one that loves God is already possessed of him, and may say with the
spouse, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3.

We come to God by love, amando non ambulando: and to him we are united by by
love; amore Deo conjungimur: Magna res est amor quo anima per semet^ ipsam
fiducialiter accedit ad Deum, etc. S. Aug.
therefore love is a great thing, (says that devout father) it brings the soul
to God with an holy confidence, and makes it trust in him, and cleave
steadfastly to him, and rejoice in him, and represent her needs and beg his
mercies with fiducial and devout affections. And this is so great a truth, that
death it self with its pains and sorrows alters nothing of it; even then in the
last agonies, the love of God sweetens the bitter cup, and still entertains the
soul with joy and holy comforts. It was the saying of S. Aug. that because the
soul has willingly forsaken God whom she should love infinitely, she is forced
therefore with grief and regret to forsake her body which she loves too much:
and that because she voluntarily departed from God who is her life, she
therefore departs from the body whose life she is, with sadness and much
reluctance. Aug. de Trin. lib. 4. cap. 13. Now we may say, Charitas libertatem
donat, timorem pellit, etc. S. Bern.
that when the soul returns to God by love, she is freed from this punishment
and restored to her first liberty, she is willing to die for to be with Christ:
and then comes a cheerful cupio dissolvi, O when shall I come and appear before
God. Happy is he who living does so manifest his love to God by Piety and
Charity, that dying he can say with Theodosius, Dilexi; love has been the
business and delight of my life I have daily endeavored by my actions to
declare the sincerity of my love to God: he is doubtless of the number of those
that love the appearing of JESUS: and so he goes out to meet him with joy and
confidence, expecting a kind reception from him, whom having not seen yet he
loved, Nemo se amari diffidat qui jam amat: libenter Dei amor nostrum quem
praevenit subsequitur, etc. Bern.
and worshipped and served affectionately. Let no man that loves God doubt of
Gods Love to him: for he that loved us when we were his enemies, so as to die
for us, will much more love us when we have for him the hearty affections of
friends. It is the joy of heaven, the joy of the Holy JESUS when his loving
kindness has won and conquered our hearts, and it is our greatest joy, it is for
us a heaven upon earth, when we love him faithfully and fervently, with all our
souls and affections. The love of God brings that peace to the soul, which the
world can neither give nor take away. O sweet JESU, O look thou upon me, and be
merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name, Psalm.
119.132.

CHAP. XXV. The Conclusion.
NOW who can refuse to love God, when it is a thing so just and reasonable, so
pleasant and easy, so safe and advantageous, something of necessity we must
love, every man's heart is full of that passion, and every man's life is governed
by it? it is but considering who has done most for us, and whom we are most
obliged to love; who is most lovely, and who will best reward our love: and we
shall soon understand that God is to be loved above all things, infinitely,
without measure: and if we love our selves as we should, we shall easily remove
our affections from the world to set them upon God and Eternity, upon JESUS and
his Kingdom. Love, as we have seen, will make it easy and delightful to do our
duty, will make the yoke of Christ light, and enable us with strength and
courage to bear our cross cheerfully like Christians: it will lead us the
shortest and the safest way to heaven, and make our journey pleasant: it will
make us dear to God, and to his Saints and blessed Angels, and fill our hearts
with peace and comforts: it will abide with us, when we are forsaken by the
world, and all our friends can do us no good: it will accompany us when we go
from hence, and open heavens gate, and enter in with us; there to perfect our
happiness which it here began: to be there our reward, as it was here our work
and our duty.

I may now upon too too just an account, use the words of S. Bernard; Non quod
ego ista faciam dico, sed quod facere vellem, etc. Ber. Med.
what I have written is not what I do, but what I should do, what I grieve that
I do not, what I endeavor to do, and what I wish all others might do. But
withal I shall plead for my self the advice of a Greek Father; not to judge
too severely of those who teach excellent lessons, (...), etc. Joh. Clim. grad.
26., 18.
great and profitable truths which they themselves learn and practice but very
imperfectly: because the usefulness of their instructions may make some amends
for the defects of their performance. Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that
love our LORD JESUS CHRIST in sincerity. Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
THe Introduction Page 1. CHAP. I. Of the general Benefits of God to mankind,
and first of Creation. Page 2 CHAP. II. How much we are obliged to God for our
Preservation. Page 5 CHAP. III. Of the positive Blessings of this life. Page 8
CHAP. IV. What returns we should make for temporal Blessings. Page 10 CHAP. V.
Of the mercies of Redemption, and first, a consideration of the infinite
miseries we were redeemed from. Page 12 CHAP. VI. How graciously and
wonderfully we were redeemed. Page 19 CHAP. VII. A consideration of the Cross
in its four dimensions. Page 23 CHAP. VIII. The breadth of the Cross, or the
manifold Sufferings of Christ for our Redemption. Page 25 CHAP. IX. The length
of the Cross. Page 29 CHAP. X. The depth of the Cross. Page 31 CHAP. XI. The
height of the Cross. Page 33 CHAP. XII. What an infinite love is expressed by the
Cross. Page 35 CHAP. XIII. Of the eternal happiness merited for us by the Cross
of Christ, and measured by it. Page 37 CHAP. XIV. That the mercies of our
Redemption challenge our love and hearty obedience. Page 42 CHAP. XV. An
invitation to enter the Cloister of Love. Page 44 CHAP. XVI. The Vow to be
taken at the entrance of Loves Monastery. Page 47 CHAP. XVII. Considerations of
the nature of Love, and first of Self-love. Page 50 CHAP. XVIII. That the Love
of JESUS requires we should mortify self-love. Page 55 CHAP. XIX. How great a
virtue is Divine Charity, or the Love of God. Page 58 CHAP. XX. That love
always pursues what it thinks good, and is never satisfied till it has
obtained it. Page 62 CHAP. XXI. That Love is strong and effective, and sweetens
all labors. Page 66 CHAP. XXII. A farewell to all sinful desires. Page 70 CHAP.
XXIII. That the love of JESUS and the love of Sin can never consist together.
Page 76 CHAP. XXIV. Of outward helps and instruments of love and obedience.
Page 78 CHAP. XXV. A passionate Meditation on the Passion of our Blessed
Savior. Page 83 CHAP. XXVI. Of a sincere amendment which must be wrought by
proper means. Page 88 CHAP. XXVII. Love the best instrument of Self-Reformation
and true penitence, with an act of hearty contrition. Page 92 CHAP. XXVIII.
That Love will sweeten as well as produce the truest penitence: and that true
wisdom, not melancholy is the guide of sincere penitents. Page 98 CHAP. XXIX.
That severities and mortifications well regulated, are subservient to
Repentance, and the Love of JESUS. Page 103 CHAP. XXX. A short Meditation for
penitential days. Page 105 CHAP. XXXI. That repentance must look forward, to
the securing of our duty for the time to come. With instances and resolutions
to that effect. Page 108 CHAP. XXXII. A singular example of humane Love, with a
short reflection upon it. Page 113 CHAP. XXXIII. Some Scriptures to show the
necessity of departing from Sin, according to our Baptismal Vow. With some
protestations to conclude this first Part. Page 116
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. THat Love obliges us also to fulfill the positive part of our
Baptismal Vow; with a protestation of obedience to it. Page 1 CHAP. II. How
great a happiness in Eternity follows our love and obedience. Page 5 CHAP. III.
That to win our hearts and duty, God propounds great rewards to us. Page 8
CHAP. IV. That Love has a secret pleasure, and reward in it self; with a
meditation to that purpose. Page 11 CHAP. V. Reflections on the vanity of
temporal things; with some holy resolves and ejaculations. Page 14 CHAP. VI.
That Christ having bought us, has now a just title to our love and service.
Page 18 CHAP. VII. How much we are engaged to serve our Blessed Lord; with
renewed promises to do it faithfully. Page 20 CHAP. VIII. Meditation to excite
us to a sincere and fervent love. Page 23 CHAP. IX. Christianity absolutely
requires our love and strictest obedience. Page 28 CHAP. X. Considerations to
encourage us in the discharge of our Christian duty; with a caution to the
Reader. Page 32 CHAP. XI. That Love will prompt us to free will offerings, and
thinks it never does enough. Page 36 CHAP. XII. That our obedience to the
Church, is an excellent expression of our love to Christ. Page 43 CHAP. XIII.
Of several voluntary Oblations. Page 46 CHAP. XIV. The true notion of Free Will
Offerings vindicated, with an Exhortation to abound in the work of the Lord.
Page 50 CHAP. XV. Meditation on the Exaltation of the Blessed JESUS. Page 57
CHAP. XVI. Two general directions about the manifesting of our love to God.
Page 62 CHAP. XVII. The two former Rules explained and enlarged. Page 68 CHAP.
XVIII. Some more particular directions how to order our lives by the love of
JESUS. Page 74 CHAP. XIX. That upon all accounts, God should be loved above all
things. Page 78 CHAP. XX. That as it is most just, so it is most easy to love
God. Page 84 CHAP. XXI. An Objection answered, which might be raised against
this Book and its Subject. Page 88 CHAP. XXII. The second Objection concerning
the love of JESUS, answered. Page 91 CHAP. XXIII. That it is most pleasant and
safe to love God. Page 97 CHAP. XXIV. That love brings the most lasting joy and
satisfaction to the soul. Page 105 CHAP. XXV. The Conclusion. Page 113
Books printed for Henry Brom.
Bishop Wilkins Natural Religion. Dr. Comber on the Common Prayer in 4 Vol.
Guide to Eternity. Precepts and Practices for Christian Life. Christianity no
Enthusiasm, or the several kinds of Inspirations and Revelations pretended to
by the Quakers, tried, and found destructive to Holy Scripture and true
Religion: In Answer to Thomas Elwood's defense thereof in his Tract, miscalled
Truth prevailing, etc. Dr. Glanvill of Preaching. Help to Prayer, etc. An
Historical Account of the Reforma- here in England. Everlasting Fire no Fancy.
Dr. Ford in Gods Judgments. Mr. Camfield's Discourse of Angels. Dr. Woodford's
Paraphrase on the Psalms. -- his Divine Poems.

