AN ARROW SHOT AGAINST BABYLON OUT OF Joseph's Bow,

Which grew up from the stem of Jesse, the Root and Offspring of David, (and
was bent by the Archer of Israel, which has struck at Cains mark, from
Paradise into the Land of Nod, and has lighted in the skirts of the great
Whore, to the discovering the Mother (or original) of Harlots and all
Abominations of the Earth; tracing her in her footsteps (with all her
Companions and Merchants, the Beast, Dragon and false Prophet) by the blood of
the Prophets and Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth

And also pursuing her from her birth (or the Serpents hole) out of which she
came, to her latter end, which is the bottomless pit, or Lake of Fire into
which she must return.

And this is a Visitation and Warning (once more) from God, unto all such
Rulers, Teachers and people in England who are, or may be persecutors about
Religion and Worship, that they may yet flee out of Babylon (mystery Babylon)
the great Whore (which has set upon Nations, and reigned over the King of the
earth) that they may partake no longer of her sins, lest they partake of her
perpetual plagues, which comes swiftly upon her in one day.

With a few questions concerning the Devil, and Cain, and the Whore, and the
Dragon, and the Beast, and false Prophet, whence they came, and where they are,
and how they may be known, and whither they must all go together in the end.

And this may serve as a Glass for all false Christendom to behold themselves,
and try their ways, and see what Spirit and Church they are of, and whose
children they are; if ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of
Abraham.

By WILLIAM BAILEY.

Put your selves in array against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the
Bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows for she has sinned against the Lord,

Jer 50.14. For thy Merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy
sorceries were all Nations deceived, and in her was found the blood of the
Prophets and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth,

Rev. 18.23, 24. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

An Arrow shot against Babylon, etc.
IN the beginning (before transgression) man was in Paradise, the Garden of
God, made in his own image and likeness, and was in unity and peace with him,
in the innocent, meek, tender, holy, upright life, in which he was formed; in
which state he stood with God, as a Child with a Father, or as a Wife with a
Husband, without variance, distance or enmity between them, and God's blessings
was upon them in this their innocent, lowly, obedient state, till at length
another spirit got an entrance by desiring (or letting the desire go out after
the eye) to be more knowing and wise in the mysteries of the outward Creation
and visible things, etc. which soon captivated the tender, simple, upright
mind, and beguiled it from its own proper life and being, in which it was made
a living soul; for they did not only taste, but eat, and that brought the death
over them, as it is written Genesis 2.17. for they entered into a secret false joy
of what they had attained to, and a satisfaction they got in the sensual wisdom
and knowledge of things, and so grew conceited that they were as Gods, knowing
good and evil, etc. And so through this aspiring spirit (or motion) which began
to spring up in their minds, a secret strife or enmity began to arise between
the innocent life and it; for there was a contrariety between them; but they
eat of the Tree of Knowledge, which beguiled them from the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Paradise of God. This was Adam's fall, going outward with his mind
from the guidance, rule and dominion of the innocent, upright Life, by which he
was made a living soul, feeding in the aspectings and viewings of the visible
things, the mystery and secrets of which was hid (from him) in that Life from
which he was departed, and he only could retain but strong imaginations of
them, which pust him up; so now he became a griever and an oppressor of God's
good Spirit, and it became a reprover and troubler of him by reason of his
disobedience against it, and departure from it, and he was now afraid of God's
voice, having done that which was contrary to him; and then to get peace, he
sewed fig leaves to make themselves coverings, but all would not do while the
Tree of knowledge is fed upon, (which was good in its place, but forbidden to
feed upon) because it beguiled from the Tree of Life, being pleasant to the
eye, and desirable to make one wise, etc. (and the World by Wisdom knows not
God) so by it they lost the knowledge, and unity, and peace of God, and were
driven into the Earth, and shut out of the Paradise of God, and became veiled
in the enmity, pride and pleasures of the Earthly or sensual part; which
followed that aspiring motion of the subtle Serpent or Adulterer that led out
from God, like the Harlot Solomon speaks of, that was subtle of heart, whom the
young man followed, as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction
of the Stocks, and knew not that it was for his life, and that her paths led to
the Chambers of death, and her steps take hold of Hell; this is the thing: Adam
was very young, and the Harlot subtle, so was deceived; for the one enticed,
and the other consented and followed, not knowing it was for his life, though
God had said he should surely dye; but this Tempter led out the mind from the
sense of the good man of the House, with her Bed of pleasures and delights, and
with enticing words she forced him, but the end was bitter as Wormwood, as
has been known by woeful experience; for here was the first carrying away
captive into Babylon, the Mystery (of which the outward was but a figure) and
the first draught of the Whores Cup of Fornication was now drunk, by which
the just innocent life suffered (as one might say) even in the Womb, and in
Cain and Abel the two Seeds or Spirits were clearly manifest, the one in
pride, fury, enmity, murder, drinking his brothers blood; and the other the
sufferer by him (in the patience) whose blood had a voice that cried unto God
from the ground; and yet it is said of Babylon, that in her is found the blood
of the Martyrs and Prophets, and of all the Saints that have been slain upon
the Earth (then Cain was in Babylon) which is now called the Great Whore; and
the controversy between Cain and Abel was about Sacrifice and Worship; this
has spread (even the Spirit of Whoredoms, Enmity and Wickedness) over the
World, and Cains Mark has been apparent among multitudes, peoples, tongues and
languages, killing and persecuting about Religion and Worship: This is the
[great] Whore which has sat upon [many] Waters, and reigned over the Kings of
the Earth, over multitudes, tongues, people's and languages, they are the
Waters, Rev. 17.15. on which the Whore sits, the unstable people, in the
unstable state, tossing up and down in confusion, restless, full of stirs (a
tumulcuous City) these are the Waters, the swelling, the roaring, the foaming,
the tossing; the [Wicked] are like the troubled [Sea] which cannot rest, whose
Waves cast up mire and dirt; and there is no peace to the [Wicked] says my
God; these are the [Waters] on which the [Whore] sits; this was Cains state
(who had drunk the Whores Cup, and killed the Just about sacrifice) drove from
God, a Vagabond, no peace, but great punishment, greater than he could bear;
and the Wicked foam out their own shame, like the raging sea, drunk with the
Cup of the Mother of Harlots and all abominations of the Earth; then mad upon
their idols (as the Prophet said) persecuting and killing about Worship and
Sacrifice: This has been the state of the Drunkards of Ephraim in all ages;
this is Cains way, and the Whores way, which is become great, and have reigned
over Nations, Tongues, Multitudes and Peoples, and Kings of the Earth; Babylon
[Mysterie Babylon] the original of All Abominations, and Mother of Harlots,
riding upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, decked with
Gold and Purple, Pearls and precious stones, having a golden Cup in her hand,
but its full of abominations and filthiness, and she is drunken with the blood
of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and the beast is scarlet colored which
carries her, having horns, [mark that] the Powers of the Earth, Kings and
Rulers have been made drunk with her Cup, and have committed fornication with
her, and she has sat and reigned over them, and the beast has carried the
Whore, and they have made war with the Lamb and the Saints, and killed them;
this is Cains way, vagabond from God, in wrath and envy, whored from God,
killing about Worship and Sacrifice, killing just Abel, killing the Prophets,
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. This Whore has sat and reigned upon Tongues
Multitudes, Peoples and Kings of the Earth. This is the great Whore that has
glorified her self in her abominations, sitting as a Queen, saying in her
heart, she shall never see sorrow, etc.

But this is the Vine of Sodom, her grapes are grapes of abominations; through
the spreading of her boughs, the whole earth has been corrupted, and by her
dominion the Lamb has been slain, blood has cried against her from the
foundation of the World, even from Abel to this day, the Land of uprightness
has mourned while the wicked have born rule, and lamentation has dwelt upon
the Tabernacle of the righteous, darkness has covered the earth, and gross
darkness the people; death and destruction has reigned, the Devil (the
Murderer from the beginning) has been the God of the World for ages and
generations, and the true God has been unknown, and his appearances a Mystery
hid from them, and a Covenant has been made with death, and an agreement with
Hell, and man has been separated and driven from God as far as the East is
from the West, and the abomination which makes desolate has stood where it
ought not; iniquity has abounded, and love has waxt cold; the whole World
has been like a Wilderness, wickedness has sat in the Ephah, and
unrighteousness in the Judgment Seat; the adulterated spirit from God (the
great Whore) has sat and reigned over all Nations and Kings of the Earth,
which has oppressed the Creation, and grieved the good Spirit of God, and made
war against every appearance of the righteous Seed, and the Lamb has been
slain from the foundation of the World; the Dragon has cast out his Floods of
persecution after the true woman in all ages, which brings forth the Man-Child
(the Heir) whose right alone it is to rule the Nations; but the Nations of the
Earth have been angry (and the great men and chief Captains) at the birth of
this Child, and have always sought its life, even when it was young, as in the
days of Herod; and the Beast, Whore and false Prophet has made War with the
Saints, and persecuted, imprisoned and killed them, and the Scriptures are
fulfilled, The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, and you shall have
tribulation ten days; The Kings of the Earth have set themselves, and the
Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed,
saying, Let us break their Bands (or Meetings) and cast away their Cords from
us: If you have ears, hear O ye sons of Adam, and his firstborn in
transgression, killers about Worship and Sacrifice) the Lord has you in
derision, and he will vex you in his sore displeasure, and break you as with an
Iron Rod, and dash you like a potters Vessel: Be wise therefore now, and fear
and tremble before the Lord God.

These things have been, and have overspread the Earth, and darkened the Air;
the Whore has sat as Queen, and the true Woman has fled and been hid in the
Wilderness, and been in great sorrow, and has brought forth in sorrow and
great tribulations in all ages; for the Dragon was always ready to devour her
child as soon as it was born; yea, every appearance of God and of his Truth and
Way of Righteousness, have been opposed, as you may read from Cain to this day;
but still the Child was caught up to God, and they mist their end, when they
said, This is the Heir, let us kill him, and the Inheritance will be ours; and
in the days of Pharoahs persecution of Israel (which was, lest they should
multiply and become great in number) the Midwives feared God, and Moses was
born and hid from them, who was appointed to lead Israel out of Egypt; and in
the days of Herod, when so many young children were killed, he was hid from
them, till He was dead that sought the young child's life. How great was the
Whores and the Devils rage in those Rulers to destroy so many innocent babes!
(the thoughts of which will make our bowels to move that fear the Lord) and in
the days of the other Herod, chief Priests and Rulers, Scribes, Pharisees and
Elders, Herod and his Men of War set him at naught, and mocked him, because he
answered him not a word to his many Questions (and are not we mocked so now,
when we are become fools for his sake whom the Princes of this world never
knew?) Consider these things, for God will not belong mocked by Cain nor Herod
neither, but will give every one a reward according to his doings: And when
they had crucied him and put him to death, he rose again, and is yet hid from
them; but to his Disciples he is manifest, and is come the second time to
salvation, and the grave cannot hold him, nor never could, nor never shall; for
he was before the grave, death or persecution was, and shall reign over it all
for ever and ever; and the Whore, Beast and false Prophet shall be cast into
the Lake, and be tormented day and night for ever and ever, and the Lamb and
the Saints shall rejoice over her with songs of triumph, and Halelujahs for
evermore, Amen. Rev. 19.2, 3.

So now you may read and see, that the seed of evildoers, the birth of the
flesh, or spirit of Whoredoms, did always persecute the birth that was born of
the Spirit, after Gods Image in all ages: And here is now no new thing happened
under the Sun, but the same controversy as was between Cain and Abel, though
greater shall the Work be (then ever) in these last days: But this is Cains and
the Whores Mark in all ages, and the Beasts, that God and man takes notice of,
or knows them by, ( Persecution about Religion, Worship and Sacrifice, etc.) as
Christ said of the false prophets, By their fruits ye shall know them, Do men
gather grapes of Thorns, (prickers) or figs of thistles, Read these things in
the fear of the Lord God, for they will add to the weight of the Millstone when
Babylon sinks, which day hastens as a Woman in travel, and the woe must come
upon all you who are found in Cains way, and Balaams way, and the Whores way,
as you may read Jude 11. ver.

But what will ye now do, O ye sons and firstborn of Adam in transgression?
God is raising a thousand Abels, and Enoch is born again, and Moses and Elias
is come, and the hearts of the children are turned toward their Father, and
the hearts of the Father toward the children, and many are leaving the World
and the Earth, and traveling toward Paradise the garden of God again, where
Mount Sion is known, and the King sitting upon his holy Hill: Therefore let not
the Heathen rage, nor the people imagine a vain thing, for it is so; God is
gathering his Seed from the four corners and quarters of the earth, and his
sheep from off all the barren Mountains, where they have been scattered in the
dark and cloudy day, without a shepherd, and he will feed them himself, and the
false shepherds shall no more make a prey upon them, who have fed themselves,
and clothed with the wool, and eat the fat, and pusht with shoulder and horns
till they have scattered (and not strengthened) the diseased. Read Ezekiel. 34.
And who shall disannul his Decree, or make void his promise and purpose? The
dry bones must be raised, and become an exceeding great Army, and Babylon must
full; and this is now doing with great noise and shaking; Read Ezekiel. 37 7, 8,
9, 10. And by the lightning the Earth with the power and glory of God, Rev.
18.1, 2. Which day is come, and more and more approaching, though you see it
not who are in the night; it comes like a thief upon you, and will overtake you
as a snare; for so is the day of the Lord come upon all them that dwell in the
Earth, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3, 4.

Therefore in vain do you strive against God, O ye Rulers and Teachers of the
Earth, who are in Cains way, and Balaams way; for his mavelous Work and
Wonder must be brought to pass, prosper and be perfected through the whole
Earth in these last days. It is not your Prisons, Courts, killings,
banishments or Inquisitions shall hinder or make void God's Eternal Decree,
which is established in the very Heavens: Don't you remember how the grave
could not hold him under whom your Fathers crucified, and had from Prison to
Judgment in the days past, who is now again risen among us, and is in the midst
of us who gather together in his Name: And this is the Word of the Lord unto
you, he is risen among us called Quakers, and is come and coming in ten
thousands of his Saints, to convince the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds and
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, and to execute his
Judgments upon them, (Read Jude throughout) and this the whole Earth shall
know in the day at hand; for our God is risen to deliver his people, and to lay
low the haughtiness of the terrible ones, and to scatter the proud in their
imaginations, and to make the Whore nake and desolate, as a Widow without
children and to exalt Truth and Righteousness, Justice and true Judgment in
the Earth, that Judgment and mercy may meet together, and Righteousness and
Peace may kiss each other, this is God doing; this has been wanting, mercy and
justice have not been found in the Judgement-seats, but false judgment,
respect of persons, injustice and oppression has met together there; pride,
rage, cruelty, vanity, wantonness and hypocrisy has kissed each other there;
the poor has been oppressed of his Neighbor, and the rich has had many
friends; this the evils under the sun has prospered and spread like a
bay tree, and equity has been the low tree, and unrighteousness the high tree,
exalted over all; the great Whore has reigned, with the Beast and false
Prophet; the true Woman has been in sorrow, the Lamb and the Saints in great
tribulations in all ages; but now she is coming up out of the Wilderness,
leaning upon her beloved, (and not her own understanding) and the Lamb and the
Saints must get the victory, and all coverings and veils will God rent off from
the face of all people, and there shall be no place of darkness nor shadow of
death wherein the worker of iniquity shall hide himself; but death and hell
must be naked, and give up the slain that is in them; the Dragon must be
chained, and the Beast, Whore and false Prophet must be taken, and cast alive
into the Pit or Lake that burns for ever and ever.

This will be a woeful day for you persecutors, false worshippers, idolaters,
whoremongers, hypocrites, unbelievers, fearful and abominable, Merchants of
Babylon, and all you Seamen of Babylon, (who has strengthened her Mast, and
spread her Sail, and traded with her) when she shall lie as a wrack in the
midst of the Sea, and sink like a Millstone, and be found no more at all; you
that have gone so often aboard her in the boat of deceit, and drank the Wine of
her Fornications (in the mysterious sealed Cabines of her VVhoredoms) which she
has set cht from the Land of Witchcrafts, and gathered from the Vine of Sodom,
and pressed in the Fat of Confusion, and held forth in the Cup of Hypocrisy;
howling and lamentation will come upon you, fears and amazements will possess
you, when you behold the smoke of her torment; Alas! alas! standing aloof off
for fear) will be your song, when you shall see this great City in one hour
brought to naught.

No fig leaves will hide in this day, no sheeps clothing will cover the false
Prophet, but you must all appear in your own likeness and image, before him
that sees in secret, and be ripped up, and seen as you are before God, Angels
and Men, no vizard of Profession shall excuse you from receiving a just
recompense of reward according to your deeds done in your bodies.

And this dreadful day is hastening upon all flesh, which has corrupted its
way before the Lord; for his own Name sake, and for his Elect seed sake, (will
he cut it short in righteousness) which has long groaned and cried unto him
under the heavy burdens and cruel oppressions of the ungodly, to be delivered
from the bondage of corruption which has long overspread the whole Earth, and
to be set free in the Paradise of God, in the glorious liberty which is at his
right hand, where is joy and pleasures for evermore, yea durable riches and
righteousness, from whence Adam was driven into the Earth by disobedience, and
so into darkness, ignorance and confusion, having eaten that which was
forbidden, and drank of the flattering Harlots Cup, which has since become a
great Whore, and made all Nations drunk, and sat upon them, and reigned over
them, even Kings of the Earth, multitudes, tongues and languages; and the
Garden of the Sluggard (or sloathful, wicked, drunken servant) has been all
grown over with thorns and thistles, and Nettles have covered the face thereof,
and the best have been as a briar, and the most upright as a thorn hedge,
pricking, stinging, tearing, killing, and warring against the Lilly and the
Apple Tree, as it sprung up in all Ages, as it is written, They all have lain
in wait for blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net: Thus it was in
Micahs days Read Mic. 7.1, 2, 3, 4. and the Sacrament of the Altar in the
Martyrs days, and the Oath of Allegiance in these days, and see if the net be
not found, and the mischievous desire wrapped up now among the briars and thorns,
whose end is burning.
, which caused sorrow to come upon him in the consideration and sense thereof;
and in Jeremiah's days, Jer. 5.26. etc. And thus it has been from Cain unto
this day, persecuting about Religion, Worship and Sacrifice; but for the Elect
sake (as I said before) these days shall be shortened (and this is the Word of
the Lord unto you all) Mat. 24.22.

Therefore hearken diligently, and hear all ye Rulers, Governors and People of
the Earth, who are the sons of Adam in transgression, the fall, and consider
well in what state you now are, and what knowledge of God your Creator you
have, and see whether you are not shut out of the Paradise of God, in which man
was made a living soul, and whether you are not drove into the Earth, even as
Adam in transgression, afraid of God, and hiding your selves from his presence;
in which state you have no true rest but are separated from the enjoyment of
the Life and Unity with the Eternal God (in whose presence no worker of
iniquity can endure;) therefore does God in his eternal love call unto you to
come out of Babylon; and he has appointed a day of visitation unto the
children of men in all ages, that in it they should seek and meet him, by
returning every one from his evil ways, and look unto him from whom they have
gone a whoring, who is the alone salvation and Savior of all them that repent
and turn to him with their whole heart, and that is the sacrifice which he
requires of all that make mention of his Name; for it is not a talk or
profession of Christianity and godliness, that will stand in stead in the day
of death, or in this day, in which the great deeps of the mystery, root and
ground of all things (which have been since the foundation of the World) are
manifest, even unto Babes in Christ Jesus, who is the Wisdom of God, and the
Power of God, which none of the Princes of this World knew: I say, the secrets
of the Most High are with them that fear him, whose dwelling is in him that
has given them a measure of that pure discerning Life in which Adam gave Names
unto Creatures and Things according to their natures, while he was in Paradise,
before transgression was, even in this Life, and through this Life is the
living God bringing many sons and daughters to that glory which was with him
before the World began, and is drawing with the Cords of his Love (which is
stronger then death) many followers after him, who cannot be satisfied in the
Earth, into which they were driven by transgression and polution, which is not
their true resting place, as it is written Micah 2.10. Therefore we (being
awakened) are returning toward our Native Country, in which we were created in
Adam before transgression or separation was; and we have given up our hearts,
minds and spirits, bodies and souls, to wait upon our God to receive from him
strength and power to be translated into his own image and likeness, wherein
our salvation is wrought out with fear and trembling.

Therefore ye Rulers and people of the Earth, do you ponderously weigh, and
deeply consider what you are doing by endeavoring to hinder us in the narrow
way of our passage to the Heavenly Holy Land, or Paradise of God's rest, which
he has prepared for the poor in spirit, and tremblers at his Word, who are not
satisfied with an outward profession or name to live, whilst not enjoying the
eternal inheritance and possession of the Life and Substance which is at the
right hand of God for evermore. In which passage we resist no man, or fight
with carnal Weapons (for our Warfare is spiritual) but are calling to those who
are our Brethren in Adam, to turn their minds and affections with us to seek
after our Native Country, where our Father is again found and known, and his
voice heard, that so the Spirit of enmity which came of the Serpent and the
Whore, might no longer remain in God's Creation (from whence the strife and
contentions, wars and fightings comes) but be cast into the Lake for ever.

Why should you thus abuse your Brethren? or what reason can you show to hinder
us in the way of our passage to our own Native rest of our weary souls, seeing
we have no other end or aim in our eye, but the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus, who is gone before us into Paradise, from whence we were
driven by transgression, the cloud of separation. Read Isa. 59, throughout.

And though you should yet more grievously oppress us, and smite us, and even
put heavier yokes upon our tender necks, or cause us to make brick without
straw, as our brethren did, yet we cannot but sigh and groan, and cry to our
God (whom we delight to worship, though it be in the Wilderness) under the
grievous burdens of our oppressors: For we being awakened and quickened from the
deep sleep of sin and death (which has covered mankind) cannot but look to the
Rock from whence we were hewn, and press forward (in the patient sufferings
through the strait gate and the daily Cross) into the Heavenly Kingdom and
Dominion of the holy God, into which no worker of iniquity or unclean thing can
enter. So (whatever you judge of us) we have no other end in all our meetings
together, but to wait upon our God, that we might know his Will, and be guided
and directed into all truth by his Spirit which he has sent into our hearts,
and in it to worship and serve him all the days of our life; and here we find
the narrow way and strair Gate which leads into the Paradise of God, (even to
the eternal life; but broad is the way, and wide is the Gate that leads to
destruction) according to the words of our dear elder Brother Christ Jesus; for
we having but turned our faces from the Earth toward the Garden of God our true
resting place, but immediately our Brethren (the firstborn of Adam in
transgression) like Cain, do rise up in wrath to smite us, by whom we are
greatly abused, imprisoned and oppressed, who will not go in this narrow
passage themselves, nor suffer them that would; and in as much as in them
lies, they strive to hide the key of true knowledge from their Brethren, and
would not have them seek that City which has foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God, in which only is the eternal salvation, peace and quietness of
the souls of the children of men, Heb. 11.10.

Surely this must needs be of the old Serpent, the beguiler, oppressor and
destroyer of Mankind, and of the great Whore the Mother of Harlots, even the
same which beguiled and deceived, tempted and led them out of the Paradise (of
God's counsel and presence, in which is joy and peace for evermore) even the
Murderer from the beginning, which killed the just, and let the mind into the
Earth, and its delights, pleasures and vanities, which comes to an end:
Therefore the Cross must be taken up (which the second Adam taught us) daily to
the earthly affections and things of this World, in which the Prince of
darkness rules; for it is but a Cross, (not of Wood, Stone, Gold or Silver,
but the pure Power of God) by which the World and the things thereof are become
dead and crucified unto us, and we unto them; even such a Cross that the
earthly minded are enemies to, who can set up and wear the Cross of Wood,
Silver and Gold, which is of the Earth, like them that make them and wear them;
but this crucifies the World (and all that is in the World is the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life) and the whole World lies in
wickedness; so this crucifies the wickedness, slays the enmity, which your
Crosses of Wood and Stone never did, but you have been in enmity about them,
and such things, and yet are in the lust and pride, enmity and wickedness,
stumbling at the Cross in which the Saints glory is; for by this are the Kings
bound in Chains, and the nobles in fetters of iron, even Lord Esau, and all the
Princes of Ishmael, and Dukes of Edom, Esau's stock; and the Devil is King over
all the Children of Pride: Read this, and tremble all you whose state this is;
for it is not your talk of God and Christ, and of his Cross, that will at all
avail you, while you stick fast in the driven-out-state, in which you are
separated from the enjoyment of his life and presence, and not returning to the
Rock from whence we were hewn, the tried everlasting foundation which is laid
in Sion, by which every man's Works, Words, Professions and Religions must be
tried and made manifest of what sort it is; For by this Line of true
Judgment, he that says he worships God, or loves God, and yet hates his
Brother, is found a liar; and we know that all liars are shut out of his
Heavenly Kingdom, and must have their portion in the Luke that burns with
the heavy displeasure of God, Rev. 21 8.

Therefore I pray you brethren, be you now well advised in what you do, act,
or speak, and consider the end of these things, and your own state as to
God-vvard; for as for us, we are but strangers in the Earth (as our Fathers
were) now we are awake, and the glory of it is but like a dream, without
substance or satisfaction to the immortal soul; and we now perceive what the
captivity of Babylon is, and the Whore which has sat and reigned over all
Nations and Kings of the Earth, and what that night and sleep was in which
the Enemy came and sowed tares among the good Seed in the field; for we being
returned toward the Land of the living (following the Light of Israel) the
promises of our heavenly Father are fulfilling unto us, where he said, They
shall return and discern between the precious and the vile, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not; between him that swears, and him
that fears an Oath, etc. and I will return unto them a pure Language, and
they shall worship me with one consent: This the Lord is fulfilling among us,
whom he has gathered out of the many unclean Languages and false Worships, and
vain Religions (the Whores Dommions) to worship him in the Spirit and in the
Truth, for such only he seeks, and they are the true Worshippers, John 4.23,
24.

Now I question not but you have heard how Cain offered sacrifie, and yet smote
and slew his brother Abel, whose blood cried from the ground against him for
vengeance; (may you not read this somewhat near? consider it) and God had no
respect to his offering, who slew his brother, but unto his offering who was
the sufferer, God had respect, as he has at this day, who says, To this man
will I look, who is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my word:
These things, and the ground of them you might perceive, if you were but truly
awakened from the deep sleep of sin and death, and the pleasures thereof, which
are but for a season; however the Trump of God is sounding, which shall ere
long awaken you to judgment; then shall you see how you have striven against
the love and mercies of God, and slighted the day of your visitation from on
high, and have fought against God's Witness and Witnesses, to keep them in the
perpetual Babylonish captivity, and Egyptian bondage and darkness: Be not
deceived any longer, neither flatter with your selves, for we are not blind nor
mad, or in ignorance and error, as you have supposed, believed and reported
(through which you have reproached and greatly abused us, and strengthened the
hands of evildoers, and cruelty against us without cause) but we are truly
awakened by the voice of the Son of God, who has opened our ears and
understandings, and that eye, which the Serpent (the god of the World) had
blinded; and now we see and know, that if any man love the World, or the things
of the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, let him profess what he
will. The Scribes and Pharisees could say much, could say, We have one Father,
even God, and we are Abraham's Seed, and never were in bondage, etc. and kept
strict the Sabbath, and fasted, and made long prayers, and paid tithe, and gave
Alms, and read Moses and the Prophets words very exactly, etc. and yet the love
of God was not in them, as you may read John 8.33, 37, 39, 44. but they were of
their Father the Devil, because his Works they did (notwithstanding their fair
covering) and what was that? they persecuted and killed about Religion and
Worship, as may be read at large in the Scriptures of truth, of the proceedings
(in that age) of the Rulers, chief Priests, Elders and great Professors, etc.

Therefore take heed to your selves, and to your own standing, and do not so
hastily judge amiss of us, nor thus speak evil of us, nor abuse and persecute
us, nor so grievously and cruelly afflict and oppress us any more about these
things, or because we are not altogether like (or conformable) unto you in your
ways and traditions, for God will plead with you about it: but rather judge
your selves, that you are not hastening with us as Lot out of Sodom, because of
the wrath and vengeance which is swiftly coming upon the World of the ungodly,
which they shall not escape; for I tell you, and that from the mouth of the
living God, That a terrible storm, and dreadful hour is at hand, and except you
run our race toward Zoar, you will be taken and destroyed, being found in
spiritual Sodom and Egypt, and in the Babylonish Marketplace (of confusion,
ungodliness, ignorance and unrighteousness) out of which the Lord of the
Harvest has called and gathered us into his Vinyard, where after our faithful
labor therein, we receive, enjoy and rest in the joy of our Lord: And if you
are found smiting your fellow servants or brethren (like Cain) about these
things, and eat and drink with the drunken (who are drunk with the Whores Cup)
and say in your hearts, The Lord delayeth his coming, he will come unawares upon
you, and in an hour when you look not for him, and will cut you assunder, and
give you your portion with unbelievers, abominable, ungodly and hypocrites, who
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

Therefore remember to do as you would be done unto, for that is the Law and
the Prophets; and as for Christ and his followers, they are not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them; and let us alone in our journey or passage toward
the City or Paradise of the living God, who has called and awakened us, and
raised up our affections and desires, which cannot be satisfied with dreams,
husks and painted things, likenesses or vain shows; for the Spirit of a man we
are now come to know, which goes upward, and are leaving the Beastial Spirit
that descends downward into the Earth; and now we also know that none can learn
our song but they whose minds through the patient sufferings are redeemed from
the Earth; for it is the song of the Lamband of Moses, which chused rather to
suffer affliction, then to embrace the Treasures of Egypt, or the pleasures of
sin, which are but for a season; against whose brethren generation, seed and
offspring, the Beast, the Whore and the Dragon, the false Prophet, Death and
Hell, the powers of darkness and ungodliness make War, who shall be cast into
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, even under the sense and feeling
of the Eternal Vengeance of the Almighty God) there to be tormented day and
night for ever and ever.

But blessed are they who follovv the Lamb, (in whose mouth is found no guile)
vvhithersoever he goes or leads, through the patient sufferings, in the love
unfeigned, they shall rest in the Land of the Paradise of the Fountain of
pleasures at the right hand of God for evermore, Amen: Halelujah.

And now hear, O ye Rulers and Teachers (by what flattering title soever you
are called in this Land) of England, your nakedness is seen, as in the day in
which you were born, and your hypocrisy and deceit God has found out and
discovered; therefore be ashamed and blush, and stand guilty before him, and
repent if there be yet a minute or place left you, and do not strive any longer
against God, and to cover your selves any more with the Name of Christianity,
while you are in the nature of Heathens, and in the way of Cain, persecuting
and imprisoning about Religion and Worship; for it is Cain's mark in all ages,
and the Heathens that knovvs not God, as it is written, and you may read it,
Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? (and its in vain
for you to strive against the Decree and Work of God which he is bringing to
pass) Mark, the Ragers are the Heathen that know not God; and these are the
persecutors in all ages; these are in Cains way, as it is written Woe unto them,
for they have gore in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of
Balaam, (mark, woe is their portion;) and is not this your state, ye Rulers and
Teachers of England? consider it in the cool of the day, and let God's Witness
in your Consciences answer.

For I tell you from God, and proclaim it this day amongst you, that woe and
misery will be your end (if ye proceed in these things) which is already
stealing upon you, and will overtake you as an armed man, and as a woman in
travel, and you shall not escape: For do you think to prosper, or set up your
selves by striving against God and his mavelous Work and Will, which is to be
done in Earth as it is done in Heaven? Do you imagine that your Laws or Decrees
shall hinder or frustrate God's eternal and unchangeable Decree and Purpose,
which is to finish transgression, destroy the Works of the Devil, and make an
end of sin; and exalt truth and righteousness, the Mountain of his own House
and Holiness, and to establish it a top of all Hills, and over all Mountains,
which was before the Mountains and Hills were brought forth, over which it must
be established; and to fulfill his promise made to Abraham and to his Seed,
which must be as the stars of Heaven, and as the sands by the seashore for
multitude? And will you yet strive to hinder the increase of God's decreed
number? or will you limit his Seed that it might not spread and replenish the
Earth, whose right it is to inherit the uttermost part thereof, and a multitude
of the sea shall be converted unto him? Must not this be done which was spoken
of by holy men of God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? Shall the wicked
(which are like the chaff, and makes a mock at the movings of the Holy Ghost,
or Spirit) disannul God's determinate Counsel? Can you hinder the course of the
Stars, or cause them to withdraw their shining? or number the sands by the
seashore, or stop the ebbings or flowing of the Ocean? Or can you stop the
rain, or cause it to rain by your power? Will the ice and the snow melt at your
command? Will the fierce Winds obey your voice when it issues forth of its
treasury, and whirleth up and down the Earth? Or do you know whence it comes,
or whither it goes? Will the thunder and lightnings be staid, and the noise and
brightness thereof cease at your command? If these things (and the like) you
can do, then will I confess unto you, that you may go on and prosper, and
prevail against the Heritage of the Most High, whom he has blessed with
everlasting blessings: But if you are not able to do these things, then in vain
do you strive to set briars and thorns in battle against a consuming fire.

For I tell you again in the Name and Authority of the Almighty God (the
Jehovah of Israel) That if you still proceed in persecuting his people and dear
children, as you have done, he will dash you in pieces like a potters vessel,
and confound and scatter you with destruction upon destruction, till you are
become as the chaff of the Summer-threshing-floor, and as the ashes of the
Dunghill, which the Wind drives away, and your place shall be no more found,
and your remembrance shall be a hissing and abhorring to Nations: This is God's
Word of Life and Truth unto you,

Remember Cain, the Pharisees, Egyptians and Sodomites, whose Works you are
doing; your Name of Christianity stinks before God and men, and is even a
proverb of reproach among Nations afar off. The Pharisees (who were
persecutors) said they were Abraham's Seed, and had one Father, even God, etc.
and yet were doing the Works of the Devil (who was their Father) ye hypocrites
(whose state this is) shall not God's dread fall upon you? Will ye not tremble
before his pure eye of jealousy, which beholds all your doings, thoughts and
words, though never so secret? Will you still say, is not the Lord among us, no
evil can come upon us? Will you untempered-Morter-daubers, promise the Wall
shall stand, and the daubers thereof be established, when God has said, The
Wall shall be no more, nor them that daub it? is there not a lying spirit, and
deceitful tongue in the mouth of all these Prophets whom the Lord never sent?
And are they not crying peace to the wicked (to whom is no peace from God) and
preparing war against the just that cannot put into their mouths? And are not
these the greedy dumb dogs that never have enough, and cannot bark to awaken
the Witness of God in peoples consciences, that they may arise from the dead,
and stand up that Christ may give them light and life, in which they may see
the thief, and be able to withstand the Robber.

Did ever Christ Jesus or his Ministers, Apostles or Disciples, persecute about
Religion or Worship, or run to the Priests of the Earth to uphold their
Ministry? Or east men into Prisons for their bellies? or went to Law for
tithes, or took treble damages (as you call them) and rob people that did
refuse to hear them, as you have done? Mention one example in all the
Scripture, or else be confounded for ever, and your tongues cleave to the roof
of your mouths for ever: Or were not the Prophets. Apostles and Disciples of
Christ always sufferers, and persecuted and imprisoned for their Testimony, and
for righteousness sake by the Powers of the Earth, chief Priests and Rulers in
all ages? Were they not haled out of the Synagogues, and brought before Rulers
and Governors, and sometimes beaten and stoned, whipped, and charged to speak no
more in the Name of Jesus? Was not this their portion from the great men and
chief Priests and Counsels? And yet did not they learn in all Estates to be
content? But are not you discontented who cast such into prisons for fear of
losing your belly-god? And were not they unlearned and ignorant men in the Laws
and Languages of the Rulers, chief Priests and Doctors? etc. And had not they
Latin, Greek and Hebrew, that persecuted and crucified the just? And did not
Christ say to his Apostles or Disciples when he sent them forth to Minister,
Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves; be ye therefore wise
as Serpents, and harmless as Doves; and take no thought what ye shall eat, etc,
and what is set before you, eat, asking no question, etc. (then not to go to
law about the in bellies, if not ask a question about such things.) And did not
the Apostle say, such were enemies to the Cross who minded earthly things,
whose God was their belly? which caused him even to tell of it weeping among the
people, and said their and was destruction, etc. and that grievous Wolves would
enter in, not sparing the people, after his decease; and has it not been so
these sixteen hundred years? Have not the people been grieved, robbed and
spoiled by those Wolves that soon got the sheeps clothing (the Apostles and
Disciples words) and turned against the life and the sheep, and grieved them;
and these Christ prophesied of before his departure, saying, False Prophets
shall rise and deceive many (and love would wax cold, and iniquity abound, etc.
by their fruits ye shall know them; they have the sheeps clothing, but inwardly
ravening Wolves: Here is the true character of the false Prophets and false
Apostles, and by this ye shall know them; Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? Can you expect a harmless Life in a grievous Wolf? though he
have the sheeps clothing, is not his nature greedy, and ravening, and
devouring among the sheep and lambs? Do his covering change his nature? Hear
this, O ye Priests and Prelates, Bishops, and the rest of your Brood, and
consider and see who are the Thorns, and the Wolves, and the greedy Dogs that
have never enough, the biters and devourers, tearers and renders of the sheep,
and look about you, and behold your selves, and see if you live in the life of
what you speak, whether your inside agrees with the sheeps covering, the Saints
words, of which you make Merchandise; for God is renting off all deceitful
coverings, and you shall appear as you are to the view of Nations, and no
hiding place shall be found for the worker of iniquity; though he profess and
say, Lord, Lord, yet he is cursed.

Now if you say you are of Christ's sending, let it appear by abiding in his
Commands and Doctrine; let us see you are sheep indeed, by your harmless life,
and your contentedness in all Estates, not seeking the peoples goods and money,
but the good of their souls, and the glory of God, by bringing forth good
fruits in the sight of men, by which (your Light so shining) they may glorify
the Lord of Heaven, and leave grieving the people by minding your bellies, what
you shall eat and drink, and wherewith you shall be clothed, etc: I say, eat
of that bread which comes down from Heaven, and don't so much mind the earth,
but be clothed with humility, and walk in love; for he that loves not,
knows not God: For the Apostles (of Christ's sending) were harmless, We seek
not yours, but you; I have coveted no man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel; and we
have the Spirit of Love, and of a sound mind; (then not an earthly, but
redeemed from it unto God, as Kings and Priests to reign over it) so if you be
not found in this inwardly, as well as talk of these good things with the mouth
and tongue outwardly, we shall judge you in the infallible judgment of Christ,
that you are not sent of him, but are the contrary, against him, of Antichrist,
the grievers, the thorns the raveners, of the stock of Cain, and lineage of the
great Whore, Mystery Babylon, the false Prophets, by your fruits you are and
shall be manifested.

So consider these things ye Rulers and Teachers of England, and tremble and
quake before the Lord God, and put your mouths in the dust, and be silent; for
your covering are too narrow, and your bed too short, and God is stretching the
line of true Judgment over you, which shall dash you as with an iron Rod, if
you will not be humbled and confess you have sinned in all these things, and
repent speedily, and do so no more: And this is the Word of the Lord unto you,
which will shortly be fulfilled.

Here follows some Questions to be answered by the Persecutors, about
Religion and Worship, who are usurping Authority over men's Consciences in such
things which only belongs to God, and are neglecting their own duty and place
(in not relieving the oppressed, and doing Justice, and ex cuting true and
righteous Judgment between man and man) but are making it their work to
ensnare the righteous, and oppress the innocent, and to strengthen the hands of
the wicked, and encourage the evildoers, for which things sake God will rebuke
them, Psalm. 82 and 83.

Qu 1. PErsecutor, What is the Devil, of whom the Scripture speaks, that he is
a Murderer from the beginning? John 8.44. And where is he now? And how was he
a Murderer from the beginning? And about what did he murder from the
beginning? And how does he work in the hearts of the children of disobedience?
And what are his works, and where are they which are manifest, which the Son of
God was manifested to destroy? Ephesians. 2.2. 1 John. 3.8.

2. What was Cain, of which the Scripture speaks, that he was of the wicked
one? 1 John 3.12. And what was the wicked one of which Cain was, if it be not
the Devil? And how was Cain of the wicked one (or the Devil) if it were not
because he persecuted and slew his Brother about Sacrifice and Worship? Genesis
4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. What is the great Whore (which is called Mystery Babylon) of which the
Scripture declares, that she has reigned over Nations, Kindreds, Peoples,
Tongues and Languages and Kings of the Earth, seeing she is called the Mother
(or original) of all Abominations of the Earth, and that in her is found the
blood of the Prophets and Saints, and of all that were slain on the Earth? What
is the Mother of all abominations, if not that Spirit that led out from God,
and persecuted, killed and murdered about Religion and Worship? Whether all
abominations did not proceed from this Spirit? And whether the Legions be not
in that Vessel where this Murderer dwells, who is King over all the children
of pride? Read Rev. 17. and 18. chap. Job. 41.34. Isa. 27.1.

4. Whether the Devil was not Cain's Father, and the great Whore his Mother,
seeing the Scripture says, he was of the wicked one; and the Pharisees who
persecuted to death about Worship and Sacrifice, were of their Father the
Devil? John 8.44. And in the Whore (Mystery Babylon) was found the blood of
all the Prophets and Saints, etc. and if all the blood of the Saints was found
in her, then whether any can be found out of her, (when dilgent inquisition is
made by the Spirit of the righteous God?) but if none of the righteous blood be
found out of her, but all found in her, then whether Cain and the Devil were
not of, and in this Mystery Babylon, the great Whore, who were Murderers
from the beginning about Sacrifice and Worship; by whom righteous Abel was
killed from the beginning, Genesis 4.

5. What is Cains Mark, and Cains way, of which it is written in the
Scripture, God set a Mark upon Cain, (or takes notice of him by something by
which he may be known) and woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain,
etc. Now what is Cains Mark and his Way (can thou answer me?) if it be not
persecution and murdering about Religion and Sacrifice, in the wrath and envy,
seeing the Scripture says his countenance fell, and he was wrath, and slew his
brother; and wherefore slew he him? because his own Works were evil, and his
brothers righteous Mark ye that swear and compel to swear, and imprison the
harmless for not swearing; your works are evil, for ye transgress the commands
of Christ Jesus, whom all are to hear and obey, who says, Swear not at all;
and they that obey him, their works are righteous, and God does and will put a
difference between them and you about these things, as it is written, even as
between Cain and Abel.
: Mark the occasion of persecution, and who are the persecuted, and of whom are
the persecutors, seeing Cain was of that wicked one, who slew his brother about
Sacrifice (a matter of Conscience toward God.)

6. What is the Beast (and his mark or image) which carries the great Whore
which all the World has wondered after and worshipped, or bowed down to,
seeing the Scripture says the Whore sat upon many Waters, and the Waters were
Nations, Tongues, Peoples, Multitudes and Languages, and she reigns over the
Kings of the Earth, who were made drunk with the Cup of her Fornications, and
her Merchants were the great men of the Earth, etc. Rev. 18.

7. And whether this Beast be not the great red Dragon which carries the great
Whore, which stands ready to devour the Man-child of the true Woman which was
fled into the Wilderness for a time, times and a half, into a place appointed?
And whether this Child which the Dragon would devour, be not that Seed of the
Woman which was promised should bruise the Serpents head? And whether this
Dragon be not the old Serpent the Devil and Satan, which rules in the hearts of
the children of disobedience, whose Head must be bruised by the Woman's seed?
And whether the Devil do not know he has but a short time when this seed comes
forth to reign whose right it is, Rev. 12.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

8. Whether this Seed or Child of the Woman (which must bruise the Serpents
head) be not Christ, or the appearance of God manifest in flesh among and in
his despised and afflicted people in all ages? And whether the Dragon that
would devour it, be not the Devil that rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience (the false Christians) stirring them up to persecute and murder
about Religion and Worship, seeing Cain that did so, was of the wicked one, the
Murderer from the beginning, and the blood of all the Prophets and Saints is
found in the Mother of all abominations, which is carried (or upheld) by a
Scarlet colored Beast; Mark that: Rev. 17.3.

9. And whether the spirit of this Beast (which carries this great Whore) do
not go downward to the Earth, and feed upon the earth, and the things of the
Earth, and minds the earth, its pleasures, pride, covetousness and ambition,
and is pushing with its horns like the false Prophets, Ezekiel. 34. ruling with
oppression and cruelty, and persecuting and afflicting about Religion and
Worship, minding honor below, storming and raging for fear of losing the Devils
Kingdom and his works, which the Son of God the true Woman's Seed is come to
destroy (in whom is known the Spirit of a Man which goes upward) but dust is
the Serpents meat, and upon his belly he goes all the days of his life, and no
higher; there he feeds, and out of his dark holes he creeps, spitting forth his
poison and venom against that which is always caught up to God out of his
reach, though he cast out his fiery-like Floods after the Woman and her Child,
and makes war with the remnant of her Seed (which are this day in being) which
keep the Commandments (and have the Testimony) of Jesus: Mark, the Child whose
Life the Dragon, Beast, Whore and false Prophet seek to destroy, is caught up
to God out of their reach, and ever was, and ever will be: And this is the Word
of the Lord God unto all persecutors and Earth (both Teachers and Rulers) about
Religion, Sacrifice and Worship, you tread the outward Court; the Serpent
bruiseth the heel (mark that) and not the Head; the Head is in the holy City,
where the dogs, (the biters) whoremongers and murderers cannot come; but
beware how you sport with the Vessels of the Lord, for they are holy that bear
them, left the handwriting on the Wall appear against you, and you be smitten
with a final destruction; Dan. 5. throughout, and fear before the God of
Daniel, who is persecuted for worshipping his God at this day among his
Brethren, for he was a trembler at God's Word, Dan. 10.11.

So remember you are once more warned, as God's Witness shall answer on your
deathbed; if you go on in Cains way, you shall have Cains portion, banished
from God's peace and rest, with greater punishments then you will be able to
bear; and if you are in the Whores way, in which the Pharisees was, professing
of Religion, and making long prayers, and yet persecuting about it, you must
partake of their woes and judgments; and if you are in the Beasts, Dragon, and
false Prophets way (and Balaams way) minding earthly things, greedy of filthy
lucre, casting into prisons (for your bellies, pride, covetousness and Earthly
Honors sake) the innocent followers of the Lamb (the true Woman's Seed) that
keeps Christ's commands, you must be cast into the Lake of fire in Gods wrath
and vengeance to be tormented for ever and ever, as it is written, Rev. 19.19:
20. and 20.10. and 14.19, 20. etc.

Therefore try your selves of what birth you are, whether you are of Cain or
Abel; of God or the Devil, of the true woman (or Church of Christ) in deed and
in truth, walking in his steps, in the self-denial, bearing witness for the
truth, led from prison to judgment for the Testimony which you hold, and for
the word of patience; for this declares his generation, Isa. 53.8.

Or whether you are the Seed of the Adulterers and the Whore, which Isaiah
speaks of, chap. 57.3. and John in the Revelations, which drunk the blood of
the Saints. Read your state, and see who is your Father and Mother, for there
is no daubing in God's sight with untempered mortar; you must be of the one, or
the other; of Jerusalem the holy City, or of Babylon the great Whore; the
false Church or the true you are of; therefore let no man deceive you with
flatteries and smooth things, for this Testimony will stand before God, Angels
and men, and J am thus far clear of all your blood, and you will be left
without excuse whether you hear or forbear.

W. B.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Behold the Devil shall cast
some of you into prison that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days. But be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,
Rev. 2.10.

Have respect unto the Covenant, for the dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74.20.

Matt. 7.15, 16. Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves; ye shall know them by their fruits.

Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seat, etc. Jam.
2.6, 7.

He that loves his brother, abides in the Light, and there is none occasion
of stumbling in him; but he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks
in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has
blinded his eyes, 1. John 2.11.

For this is the Message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love
one another, not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother; and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous. Marvel not my brethren, if the world hate you, we know that we have
passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: He that loves not his
brother, abides in death; Whosoever hates his brother, is a Murderer, and ye
know that no murderer has eternal life, etc. 1 John 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.


THE END.

