A Breife DECLARATION To all the WORLD From the Innocent people of God, called
QVAKERS Of our Principle and belief concerning Plottings and Fightings with
Carnal Weapons against any people, Men or Nations upon the Earth, to take away
the Reproach or any Iealousies out of the minds of all People, concerning us in
this particular, and to answer that common objection whether we would not fight
if the Spirit moved us.
AS for us, our Kingdom is not of this world, and our warfare is not for
earthly Crowns, honors or glory, but its spiritual and for a Kingdom without
end; and our weapons are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God
against spiritual wickedness in high places, and all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and not against their persons or estates outward, (and
we are them of whom Enock prophesied (the Saints) in whom the Lord God would
come to convince all the ungodly of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches, and
to execute his Judgments upon them, not by outward Sword to destroy Creatures;
but by the Sword of the spirit of the Living God, who is come to destroy the
works of the Devil.

And as for our Principle it is everlasting and Universal, without beginning or
end, it is the foundation of God and all the holy Prophets, Apostles and
Saints, since the Word began; on which our Faith, hope and belief is sounded,
as upon a Rock steadfast and unmovable, against which the gates of Hell and
Death cannot prevail, for it is the same that was in the beginning, before
Death, Hell, Strife and Wa^s (or enmity the ground of it) we see, or before
disobedience transgression, confusion, or the hardness of heart we see even
Christ Jesus the everlasting Covenant of Life and Peace, the Son of the living
God, who is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, and he being come
to us (and dwells in us) has given us an understanding, that we know him that
is true, and are in him that is true, and we know what spi it we are of, for
being joined unto him (the Lord) we are one spirit with him, even the Lamb of
God that takes away the sin, and destroys the works of the Devil, the Author
and ground of strife and mischief, or Plottings, Murders, Wars and confusion;
and reconciles men unto God again and one unto another in true love and peace,
(Mark) he destroys the Devil and his works, he takes away the sin, takes away
the Nature, destroys the ground of enmity in men, kills the contrary Seed in
the Root from whom the Wars and Fightings comes, breaks the Cockatrice in the
Egg least it should become a Serpent; This is our Savior, and our everlasting
principle, that does these things in us and for us, even Christ the power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, the Savior and not the destroyer of men's lives,
who gives his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that pluck off the
hair in all ages, in whom or what persons soever he was made manifest, so that
we perfectly know what spirit we are of, and are not in doubt whether this be
the Savior, or whether we should look for another; But we know and are assured
that this is the son of God, and we are in him that is true (as we have said)
who works all our good works in us and for us, this is the true God and eternal
life, which was in the beginning before emnity was, who has brought us and is
bringing many (through the daily Cross to the will of man) before strife was,
or that Spirit that is afraid that every one that finds him will kill him,
(which was in Cain the killer and persecutor about Sacrifice and Offerings) but
we fear not their fear of killing or of Death (the fling thereof being taken
away) which is sin (the emnity) the ground of the fear, of murder, of strife,
and plottings of mischief, and violence against Creatures, being redeemed up to
God the Creator of all, who has made all Nations of men of one blood, that
dwell upon the face of the whole Earth, who will rebuke them (even the spirit
of Enmity and Pride the ground of strife and Wars.) That they shall beat their
Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning hooks, and not Learn War
any more Isa. 2.4.

This has the Lord God by his eternal power, through his Righteous Judgments,
and everlasting mercys begun among us, who are a poor and afflicted people,
whose trust is only in his name, and arm of salvation, and not in the arm of
Flesh, for that which trusts in man and makes flesh his arm is a cursed as
it is written; And this we do faithfully and impartially in singleness of heart
declare unto the whole world, that God by his Son in us, which is his power,
has taken away the nature and ground of Wars, strife and violence, and subdued
it, which stood in times past between him and us, which hindered the good
things, and hid his face from us, even peace, joy and comfort to our immortal
souls, and has created in us a new heart, and renewed a right spirit, in which
we are justified in his sight and presence, and in which we bear good will to
all people, and seeks the peace and well being of the bodies and souls of all
people upon Earth, Jew and Gentile, bond and free, Barbarians, Turks, Indians,
Greeks, Romans, English or any other, God has made us all of one blood to
dwell upon the face of the earth, (Mark) we are all of one blood, all the
workmanship of one Creator, who has appointed them times and seasons that they
should all seek him, (though he be not far from every one of us, as it is
written, Acts 17.26, 27. Amos 4.13, And says the Prophet, he that formed the
Mountains and created the Hills shows unto man his thoughts, and they that
seeks God, seeks him that searches the heart, and tries the Reigns, who
rebukes the people and strong Nations that their Swords may be beaten into
Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning hooks, (Mark) he rebuks the strong
Nations that are in the strife, enmity, and Wars, which is of the Devil the
Author of strife, the Murderer and Liar from the beginning, the destroyer of
souls.

From whence came wars, and fightings (let Gods witness answer) came they not
from the emnity, Lusts, Pride and ambition, which wars against the immortal
Soul, and is not he his own souls enemy, that lives in the Spirit of enmity
against God, and them of his flesh and blood; and is he not in the disobedience
to Christ Jesus, who says Love your Enemies, do good to them that despitefully
use you and persecute you; And does not Gods wrath abide upon the disobedient
and rebellious, who obeys not his Commandments? Let all people upon Earth
consider these things, who profess Christianity, and see if you obey and follow
him whom you profess in words, who is not come to destroy men's lives, but the
Devil and his works, the Author and ground of Strife, Wars and Confusion, and
to guide the feet of all people in the way of peace.

So this is our principle, not as an Opinion or Judgment which may fail us,
or in which may be mistaks or doubts, but its the infallible ground and
unchangeable foundation of our Religion (that is to say) Christ Jesus the Lord,
that spirit, Divine Nature, of way of Life, which God has raised and renewed
in us, in which we walk, and in whom we delight to dwell, and cannot but
worship, and yield obedience unto, even him which destroys all enmity, and
reconciles to himself and in himself all things in Heaven and Earth, who by his
power brings down the high looks, lays low the haughtiness of men (in which
is the ground of strife and wars,) and exalts truth and Righteousness in the
Earth, even his Kingdom over all, which is an everlasting Kingdom of peace,
into which no unclean thing, Dogs, Sorcerers, unbeleivers, or Hipocrites can
enter, but only them whose minds are redeemed from the Earth, and the spirit of
Enmity and wickedness whose Robes are washed white in the blood of the Lamb.

So that if any be yet doubtful concerning us, or our principle in this
particular, whether we have any secret intents or private reservations that if
we had opportunity we would fight or raise outward force of the arm of flesh
for our defense or preservation, and not any longer suffer such grievous
oppressions and cruel provocations as these many years past we have undergone
with patience, etc.

This we do declare, and that in and by the spirit of the Lord, that we are in
our measures redeemed by the precious blood of his Son Jesus Christ (the Lamb
of God (that takes away the sin, and reconciles unto him and to all men) from
that nature and spirit of enmity from whence the wars and fightings comes, and
we are taught, led, and guided by (and are possessors of a measure of the same
spirit of Grace and Truth, that was in that person Christ our Elder Brother,
that suffered patiently (the contradictions and false accusations of sinners)
as a Lamb without the Gates of Jerusalem, of whose Resurrection and life we are
eye witnesses) even of his Majesty and glory, and the coming of his Kingdom
with power (full of grace and truth) so that the tree being now made good the
fruit is the same also; and a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit (to wit)
wickedness, enmity, mischief, or violence against any of the children of men
upon the face of the earth: so we have not only the name or outward profession
of Christ in words (as it is in the world) but we are made partakers of a
measure of the same divine nature, and we are now (being regenerated raised and
renewed into his own image of truth and love, righteousness and peace) his
offspring, and he is our God and Father, who rebukes the strong nations, and
makes wars to cease to the ends of the earth; Glory and honor be to him in the
highest over all for ever.

And now as concerning the objection which sometimes has been asked as a
question, some thinking thereby to ensnare us, (viz,) Whether or no we would
fight if the spirit should move us, (etc.) To which we answer in the fear of
God in the truth and simplicity of our hearts as it is in Jesus, that we do
really and confidently believe that the Lord our God (who is that good spirit
that guids us in all Truth) will never move us to do that or those things again
for which he has rebuked us, and smitten us by his righteous Judgments, (and
for which he will smite and rebuke the strong Nations) and not only so, but
has redeemed us from the very root, Nature, Spirit, and ground of the Enmity
and curse from whence the wars and the fightings comes; So that to us, it
seems as impossible for us to be found in such things (plottings fightings
and violence) as for a good tree to bring forth evil fruit, or for one Fountain
to yield salt water and fresh, for we have felt Gods rebukes because of that
strong nature that dwelt in us, from whence envy, pride, wrath, malice and
hart-burnings one against another sprang, and all manner of evil thoughts which
defiles men proceeded; the which rebukes, reproves and just judgments of God,
have melted and broken our hearts, and taken out the stone (the hardness) and
made them soft and tender toward God, and toward all people, and that love is
now felt, shed abroad in our hearts which thinks no evil, much less can we act
evil or mischief against any.

So that our kingdom and glory, delight, joy and peace is not of this world
(but we are as strangers in it, as all our Fathers were) for if it had been so,
we would long ere this have plotted and contrived to defend and preserve our
selves from these many, great and cruel sufferings, which we these many years
with patience have borne and endured, and shall yet bear and endure all
things, in the measure of the love and charity which the holy God of all power
has endued us with, and made us partakers of, committing our cause and all
things concerning us to him that judges righteously, who will plead for his
seed with all flesh, in his own due time and season, even in the hearts and
consciences of all his enemies that wrong and abuse his children; and what is
done to us, is done to him, for we are his; and he cares for us.

And now if any subtilty of the Serpent should arise in any, and boast it self
over us, because we have declared the nakedness of our hearts, in simplicity
and truth in Gods sight, and in the sight of all people in this particular, and
say now they have declared that their principle is not (or leads not to fight)
or to destroy men's lives, or to resist or strive with flesh and blood with
carnal weapons, etc. But to be patient in whatsoever is laid upon them without
plotting, mischief, or doing violence against any, though it be done to them;
Therefore we now may use them as we list without fear of oposition or violence
again from them for they are engaged by their everlasting Principle, not to do
violence or plot mischief, or shed any man's blood, but to endure all in
patience whatsoever is said or done against them etc.

To which we reply, and that from the spirit of the Eternal all powerful God of
truth; Woe be to that man, people or Nation that shall seek advantage against us
hereby, or take occasion to harm us, because of our harmeless principle,
(which is of God and for his sake) and of our good will to all people; No
prosperity from God shall be to that people, man or Nation (in that state,) and
it were better for that man or people, that they had never been born, or that a
Millstone were hanged about their necks, and cast into the depth of the Sea,
that should thus contrive and act against us, to offend his little ones the
Lord has said it. But they shall prosper that favor this Sions cause which
God has redeemed through Judgment, for the Eternal God has sworn by himself
and will perform it, that this people only shall prosper of all the Familys of
the Earth, (who fear his name and tremble at his word) and he will gather unto
them (in one) thousands of thousands from the four quarters of the Earth and
they that bless them shall be blessed, and they that curse them shall be
cursed, for the Lord of Hosts is with us, and the God of Jacob is our refuge,
which breaks the Bow and snapeth the Spear assunder, and burns the
Chariots in the fire, that makes disolation (and will make disolations) in the
Earth for his Elects sake; Therefore be still all ye sons of men, and know that
he is God, for he will be exalted in the Earth (and over all flesh,) who makes
the wars to cease unto the ends of the World: This is our God whom we serve and
worship in the spirit and in the truth, before whom all things are open, naked
and bear, who searches the heart and tries the Reigns, from whose sight,
knowledge, presence and righteous Judgmen^s, the ungodly cannot hide, but shall
be fully rewarded for all their doings, in that day which the eye lids of the
morning light, will be unto them as the shadow of death.

For our unchangeable principle is the Royal Law which God has written in the
heart, and is an everlasting light (the truth) which lights every man that
comes into the World, which reproves for sin and transgression and the ground
of it, and all that live in it (in their own Consciences,) which lets them see
their thoughts, words, and Actions, whether they are good or evil, setting
before all people life and death, and the ways of it, and its their
condemnation that dispises the reproofs and are disobedient unto it, but to
them that take heed unto it, love and obey it, it leads them in the ways of
righteousness truth and uprightness, through the midst of the paths of
Judgments to the Fountain of life and love, in which there is no enmity, but
everlasting salvation and peace, where the holy Mountain of the Lord is felt
known and witnessed, in which there is no hurting nor destroying, into which
God Almighty is gathering his Seed, out of every Nation kindred, people, and
language upon the earth, that all his people may sit and live under their own
Vine, where none can make them afraid. This is the highway of holiness, which
God has prepared before the face of all people, into which all that are saved
must walk, (as it is written) in the light of the Lord, Isa. 2.5. and in every
Nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him, but to
the wicked (that despise his Counsel) God says, What have thou to do to take
my words into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed.

And now if any that has been at our meetings, o have come at any time (as
many do) to see our manner, or that may be by some called a Quaker should be
(which we have never yet known among us) found in any plotting against any men
or people whatsoever, to contrive mischief, danger or hurt either to body soul
or estate, any way under any pretense whatsoever, we do utterly (in the Spirit
of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior) deny that part or spirit in all men upon
the earth, as that which our prin^iple (the everlasting foundation of God) and
our spirit have no fellowship or unity with, but is judged of God and of us his
people, to be of the seed of enmity unreconciled to God and man, or at best a
blind zeal, and not according to the true knowledge of the living God or of
their own spi^its. Luke, 9.55, 56.

So we being clear in the sight of God concerning these things, (and many other
false accusations and evil surmisings, reproaches and aspertions) do freely
commit our cause and all that we are and have, body soul and spirit, into the
hands of our God to whom alone vengeance belongs, who will repay it to all his
adversaries, and will not at all acquit the wicked nor condemn the innocent,
but will reward every man according to his words and works, in whose will and
power we rest and remain in patience, which is our sanctification, wherein we
are satisfied, having that joy and peace (in the land of the living) where none
can make us afraid, Halelujah Amen.

POSTSCRIPT,
BEfore this general Declaration of our Principle concerning these things came
forth into public view, there has been several times (and some months ago)
mention made by particular persons to the same effect, which was seen meet in
the light of our God, to prevent the joining of the minds of any that are weak
to the temptations of the Enemy of man's peace, (which goes about seeking whom
he may devour) (and to satisfy such as are doubtful in this particular) for
our Vine have tender Grapes, that though the wild Boares of the Forest cannot
so much hurt them, yet the subtle Foxes of the Desert may (if not prevented by
the wisdom of God) spoil their resting place, which all the faithful have in
God, and in the spirit of the Lamb in whom is found no guile (which must get
the victory, Amen.

Given forth from the Royal Seed of God, in the behalf of the numberless
number, or the whole body of the Elect wheresoever gathered or scattered upon
the face of the whole earth called Quakers. London the 11th. month, 1662.
PRINTED for W. M. 1662.


