A WORD From the LORD To the PRIESTS OF ENGLAND In General that teach for HIRE.
HEar O ye Priests of England the word of the Lord God as it came unto me in
the year, 1659. the sixth month, the twenty fifth clay of the month; saying,

Thus says the Lord God, I Will make you a terror to your selves, and one to
another, and I Will strike you with amazements and fears, and bring everlasting
shame upon you, and you shall be a hilling, and a bye word to Nations, and a
dirision to Generations, for as much as you have refused and rejected the day
of your visitation, my witness in you shall condemn you, and my power shall
shake you, and make your hearts to melt and tremble at my dreadful presence, ye
that have been a terror to others, and a burden, and oppressors of my dear
Children and Servants, which in my pure power was moved to warn you to flee
from the wrath to come, you shall be oppressed, burdened, and terrified, and
there will be none to deliver you, for he that should be your deliverer, will
be your eternal condemnation, therefore woe be to you, O ye proud profane
hirelings of England, your day is hastening, wherein your perpetual shame,
contempt and misery shall be made manifest to thousands; have you not been long
leaders of the people, and called your selves Ministers of the Gospel? but the
Gospel which is my power says the Lord God shall grind you to powder, and
have you not caused the people to err from the knowledge of my way (the light
in every man's conscience, which shows them sin and evil?) and have you not
risen up with an open mouth against my Son, Christ, the Light, which lights
every man that comes into the World? and have you not blasphemed my Holy Name,
and caused many of my dear and tender children to suffer grievous burdens and
reproaches, persecutions, and long imprisonments, by crying out errors,
deceivers, seducers, and blasphemy against them? but as I live says the Lord
God, these things which you have swallowed down, shall you vomit up again, and
if none of you will yet bow down to my witness the Light in you, which lets
you see the evil of your ways, you shall become the apparentest example of my
wrath and indignation, as has not been known in many ages; therefore if any of
you shall yet consider the end of your ways, and speedily repent and turn from
your evil deeds and words, and confess to my Son, the true Light which you
have so long done despite unto, it may be such may be hid in the terrible day
at hand; for thus says the Lord God, even the Lord of hosts, my determination
is to break to pieces, confound, root up, and overturn, destroy, and utterlie
consume the very savor of your root, and that earth (or earthly power) which
strives to uphold you, shall partake of your plagues, I the Lord have spoken
it, and in mine eternal Council it shall be accomplished.

Therefore O ye Priests, consider; Was not their madness and folly made
manifest, that withstood the truth in ages past? Or did ever any weapon formed
(or Law, plot or decree) against it and them that were in it, prosper? and is
not Christ Jesus the truth, who lights every man that comes into the world?
and are not they in the truth which be in the light which he has enlightened
them withal? and have you not withstood this truth, and them that be in it by
reproaches, revilings, persecutions, spoiling of goods, and imprisonments, more
cruel and violent then Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses? Let Gods witness
answer, which lets you see your ungodly deeds, and hard speeches, and
convinces you secretly of them, when you are alone and heeds it; but you are
filling up the measures of your Fathers, that upon you may be powered down the
vengeance for all the righteous blood shed from Zacharias to this day, and you
shall not proceed any further, for then shall your folly, madness, and
wickedness, be manifest to all men as theirs was; Therefore thus says the
Lord God of power, howl, howl, and lament, O ye Idol shepherds, and be ashamed
of your work O ye slothful vinedressers, my fury is exceedingly kindled against
you, and I am even weary with forbearing; is not your flocks like the wild
beasts of the forest, and your grapes of the vine of Sodom, and your gardens
grown over with thorns, histles, and nettles? who of my Lambs and children can
come among you, and not be torn, pusht or rent? Who of my Servants have I sent
in my power among you that have not suffered violence by you, either by your
bloody hands, or by your arrows shot at them, even bitter and reproachful
words? let my witness search you and bow down speedily before it, least ye
utterly fall into my Almighty dreadful hands where you will be plagued and
tormented day and night for ever and ever without end; for my decree is gone
forth concerning you, (and its revealed to babes) that night is come upon you
(who have withstood the pure day of light and life in which the Son of man is
come as a thief, and so you like Judas and his company are risen against him
with swords and staves, he that reads, let him understand.

Again, hear the word of the Lord, O ye treacherous Priests, double minded,
unstable, ungodly, truce breakers, heady, high-minded, who have long loved
pleasures, and ease in the flesh more then the pure God or his righteous way of
life, your day of perplexity and woe is at hand, and you shall not escape.

For thus says the Lord God, your horses nature within, nor your horses
without, shall not deliver you from my decreed purpose, your sword within and
without, shall be your snare, and you shall fall like the handful after the
harvest man, and be driven like chafe before the wind, for blood-thirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, hear and understand; no
murderers have eternal life, and the wickeds sword shall enter into his own
bowels, hear ye Priests of England, this I charge upon you, to whom it is, who
have taken my Servants words into your profane lips, saying, some trust in
horses, and some in chariots, but we will trust in the Name of the Lord our
God; are ye not here found deceitful, and with a lie in your right hand,
children of falsehood, and a seed of evil doers, who trust in the arm of flesh,
and to it still have fled for your maintenance, and been found fighters against
the true and living God, and his Children, for your God which now is manifest
to be your bellies to thousands, for upon your bellies have you still gone, and
dust have you eat, and with it have you fed the people, and not with life, nor
understanding in my Council (the light which they be lighted withal) neither
have you awakned my witness in the hearts of them, but in ignorance, ease, and
unrighteousness have you loved to lie down to sleep and slumber with them; and
are the blind dumb dogs that have not barked (to wit spoke in my pure power) to
awaken and answer my own the just in every one, whereby the thief and robber
might have been seen in the light the eye, which none sees you all to be
thieves, murderers, and robbers, that have climbed up another way then by the
door Christ (who lights every man that comes into the world) and have built
upon the sand, but the storms are rising apace, that will shake you off the
earth, wherein great will be your fall, and you shall never rise again says
the Lord God Almighty.

Written by a Servant of the Lord at Wellingborrow in Northampton-sh^re, W.
Baily.

THE END.

