THE Holy Inquisition, Wherein is Represented What is the RELIGION OF THE
CHURCH OF ROME: And how they are dealt with that Dissent from It.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.

TO THE Right Honorable AND Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON; One of the Lords of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THough with great zeal and prudence, you use all the power which your Birth
and Dignities have given you, for the defense of the true Christian Religion,
as it is amongst us professed, and established: yet I hope this short account
of what is most contrary and most destructive to it, will not displease you. I
know your Lordship understands what is here treated of far better than I do,
but so does not the Common People: they may receive information from these
Papers, and will likely do it the more freely, if you shall permit them to go
abroad under your Name; For it is generally acknowledged that we owe much of
our preservation to your Care and Christian Courage: and that you did stand in
the gap, when our Enemies were pressing to come in upon us.

My Lord, the watchfulness and labors of your Sacred Order, to preserve the
face of a Church, and as much Order and Discipline among us, as the iniquity of
the times can permit, is a greater service to the Protestant Interest than many
are apt to believe: For our Adversaries expect not to prevail, but by breaking
of us, and dissolving those bonds of Government, which keep us united: well
knowing that those sheep are an easy prey, when scattered abroad, which under
the guidance of their proper Pastors are safe and impregnable.

I have therefore endeavored by what I have said of the Superstitions and
cruelties of Rome, to persuade such as are averse to them, that their duty and
interest oblige them to join with our Church: which professing nothing but the
pure and Primitive Religion of our blessed Redeemer, makes use of none of those
bloody and violent Methods, wherewith the Papal Religion and Authority, are
preserved: and whose dangers and persecutions on both hands, are for the best
Cause in the world, even for her faithful Allegiance to God and the King.

I shall rejoice, if what I have designed for the common good, be beneficial to
any. And if the humble offer I make of it to your Lordship, be favorably
accepted. However I shall ever pray for the peace and prosperity of our
Jerusalem. And that God would long preserve you, to advance his glory, and be
an Ornament and Support to this Church: Remaining,

My Lord, Your Lordships most dutiful and obedient Servant L. B.

THE PREFACE.
IT cannot but grieve every Lover of peace, that is, every good man to see our
distractions. We fear many things, and have reason to fear yet many more;
especially when we consider how grievously God is provoked to bring upon us the
worst of evils. I design not to represent those crying sins that call for
destroying vengeance upon us, or to make declamations against them: but it is
for my purpose to note, that the deforming a most pure and pious Reformation;
and the disturbing and weakening an equitable and happy frame of Government,
does not only call for ruin, but actually brings it; breaks down the fence of
our safety, and so makes way for those Erroneous and Tyranical impositions we
fear and foresee.

There is cause enough to believe, that the Romish Party has all along, since
the Reformation, and does still continue to widen our breaches, and to foment
our divisions; there are many instances of it related by several credible
Witnesses, and some of them sworn too: but that which most of all confirms it,
is, that it is much their interest to keep us from ever having a happy,
peaceable, and well-setled Church, a constant and beautiful Order amongst us:
and that they certainly will not s^^ck at dissembling and acting the part of
zealous and sc^^pulous Dissenters, to promote the ruin of them, whom they would
out right massa^r^e and burn, had they power so to do.

Some of our Seperatists are so ungrounded, and have so poor an interest in the
w^rld, that they must of necessity yield and fall, were they not supported by
the power and policy of a stronger Party: and the moderate sort of them are so
near us, that we could not but join and unite together, were it not for their
interposition, whose great concern it is to keep us asunder, that they may have
room to come in, at the void, urguarded space betwixt both.

Whether or no it shall succeed as they would, God alone knows; they have great
hopes, and we cannot but have a dread upon us: but however by breaking us to
pieces, they revenge our breaking of Communion with them; and they likely tempt
some to believe, that we separated from the Church of Rome upon the same
grounds, as the Separatists have, to leave the Church of England. They will now
and then draw a parellel betwixt both Cases, and confidently assert that we can
urge nothing against our Schismatic, but what they may urge with as much
reason against our Reformers.

It is no small advantage to their Cause, if they can work in Dissenters as
great an abhorrence for our Liturgy and Divine Service, as for the Latin Mass:
and so bring them to an indifference, as though there were hardly any choice
betwixt both. This will lessen the Odium under which they lie, deriving part of
it upon our Church, and withal is a preity sure way to bring men bach again to
Rome. So that if I were a Jesuit, I would, as Lewis Moulin, and some such as
he, so cry out upon the Superstitions, bloody Persecutions, and Idolatries of
the Church of England, and by that means drive men so far from it, that when
things tend toward a change, the people might either be undetermined what
Party to take, or even prefer Popery to so deform a Reformation, as they should
believe ours to be. And accordingly it is easy to observe, that those
Sectaries are not far from Rome, which are farthest from the Church of England.

The Jesuits Schools abroad, are full of our Youth, in the Low Countries, in
France, in Spain, and at Rome, the English Seminaries are perpetually fitting
up young men to carry on the great work of reducing this potent Island to the Sea of Rome. Once every year they are sent over in numerous Sholes from those
Colleges, not directly and openly to preach Popery, (they are too wise to go
that way to work) but by other means to promote its restoration; acting such
parts barefaced or in a disguise, as they are enabled by their Genius and
interest; such to be sure, as shall conduce to the disturbance and destruction
of that Church and Government, which now keeps them out.

Hence, I make no question, proceeds the beginning, or the continuance of our
divisions; and the frequent insulting over us upon this account, and upbraiding
us with our many Sects, shows that Rominists are not a little proud of their
success in begetting or maintaining of them. A man in a Vizard robs his
Neighbor, and having pulled it off, reproacheth him for his beggarliness: this
is very disingenuous. But very strange it is, that the same man should yield
himself a prey, every time the Thief shall put on his mask.

The mischief is, that Faction, not Conscience, makes the great differences in
the Christian Church. Opinions are embraced and asserted, upon design, to
promote worldly interests. Those Doctrines in the Romish Church we say and
prove to be Innovations, are such as tend to advance the power and greatness of
those that brought them in, and now impose them on others. And it is not to be
denied, but that some are enemies to the Tyranny of that Church, because they
themselves would govern, or be under no Government at all. Factions, like
errors and sins may clash and fight one against another: but it is not the
property of true Religion to multiply Controversies, or to be fierce in lesser
contentions.

But then there are some things so bad in themselves, so much against Divine
Commandments, and the duty every man ows to God, that there he may not, and
must not comply. Let who will enjoin what is dishonorable to God, or forbidden
by him, the first and greatest Obligation ought to take place, God must be
obeyed above all, though in the discharge of that obedience we expose our
selves to great dangers and sufferings. Glad should I be that Popery were the
true Religion, that our Blessed Lord had constituted the Pope his Vicar, and
made him infallible, and commanded us to believe and obey all he should speak
from his Chair. It would supersede all our enquiries, and the pai^s we are at,
to examine whether Papal Decrees agree well with our Masters w^ll; It would
have spared the blood of Millions of Christians, who rather chose to die in
flames and tortures, than comply with those Injunctions which they judged
contrary to their Saviors Laws. And it would free all meek good men, (who
would buy peace, and submit to any thing that were not sinful) from the dread
of Massacres and Inquisitions, and what else may be feared from the formidable
Principles and Persecutions of the Sea of Rome.

We are abundantly satisfied that the Bishop of that City has no just right to
that Power and Dominion he claims over all Crowns and Miters; nay, we clearly
see by the Records of ancient times, that every where he used very ill means to
usurp that Authority. Yet I believe most Protestants would easily be brought to
recede from their right, and for peace sake to give him more than is his due.
Precedence, Honor, even Money to maintain his Greatness, I could afford him,
if that engaged me to nothing contrary to the duty I owe my God and Savior:
But if yielding so far, must oblige me to embrace a new Creed and false, and to
practice an unlawful Worship, then I am bound to assert my liberty, und to bear
faith and allegiance to God, whatever I suffer for it; we might if we would
part with our freedom, but we may not give up Gods truth and honor.

The Case is this; we may not live in the Communion of Rome but as the Popes
Subjects, and that would make us in many things rebels against God. We are not
obliged to live in that Communion, and we dare not do it, for then, except we
yield in all things, we are proceeded against as Heretics, as accursed
Traitors to God and the Pope, and the greatest severities are inflicted on us.
So that, as we would preserve our Consciences and our lives, we must withdraw
from Rome, and live asunder. All Christians are obliged to worship God alone,
and in all things to obey their Savior; and all men would live and enjoy their
own. Now I shall make it appear that if we are in the Communion, or in the
power of the Roman Church, we can do neither. We must believe and worship
otherwise than Gods Word has commanded, or we must live under infamy and
persecutions, and expire in flames.

Whilst I give an account of these two things, it will appear that there is a
very great difference betwixt the case of the Reformation, and the case of them
that separate from the Church of England. That, as necessary and Just as that
was, this is as needless and unjust: and that, as much as Religion and
self-preservation obliges us to break communion with the Church of Rome, so
much the same bonds tie all Dissenters to unite with the Church of England, and
to live quietly, like good Christian, and loyal Subjects, in its Communion.

A Prayer to be said by them that are solemnly admitted into the Fraternity of
the holy Virgin Mary, wherein the devout Officers of the Inquisition are
Commonly listed.
SAncta Maria Matter Dei and Virgo, ego N. N. te hodie in Dominam patronam and
advocatam eligo, firmiterque statuo atque propono, me nunquam te derelicturum,
neque contra to aliquid unquam dicturum aut facturum, neque permissurum ut a
meis subditis aliquid contra tuum honorem unquum agatur. Obsecro te igitur,
suscipe me in servum perpetuum, adsis mihi in omnibus actionibus meis, nec me
deseras in hora mortis. Amen.

Holy Mary, Mother of God and Virgin, I N. N. choose thee this day for my Lady,
Patroness, and Advocate, firmly resolving and engaging my self that I will
never forsake thee, nor yet ever say or do any thing against thee, nor suffer
any thing to be done against thine honor, by any that are subject to me. I
beseech thee therefore let me be thy Servant for ever, and own me for such,
assist me in all my actions, and forsake me not at the hour of death. Amen.

The Holy Inquisition.
IF the Church of Rome had kept to the Primitive Creeds, and still retained the
Ancient purity of Divine Worship, and used her strength and policy only to
maintain true Christianity, it might have been said that too great a Zeal had
transported her, and made her too fierce against erroneus opinions. That might
have made some abatement of the censure she lies under of being too cruel, but
withal it had been a prejudice against that Religion that had occasioned the
shedding so much blood, and destroying so many lives; and it would have been
thought that the Christian Faith had disposed its Professors to be merciless
and unnatural. Now if in both cases it be quite otherwise; if Christianity
inspires and recommends nothing but meekness and the greatest charity; and if
it has not been to maintain the Doctrines of our Blessed Lord, or the Worship
of the True God that Rome has persecuted and slain so many. Nay, if the Gospel
forbids nothing more than to be hard and severe, to take away men's lives, or
the comforts of them: And if Rome by flames and tortures has sought to impose
on the Christian World only false Doctrines and superstitions; if the case be
so, it will wholly clear the Institution of our Blessed Redeemer, and make
their guilt most heinous and crying, who under pretense of preserving the
purity of Christ's holy Religion have destroyed millions of its Professors.

CHAPTER I. Of the Roman Faith, as distinct from the Christian and truly
Catholic. And first of the New-Creed.
I Shall not in this place represent how distant from all cruelties, how averse
to them is the Christian Religion: But first I shall give some account of those
Doctrines and that Worship, peculiar to the Church of Rome, which for being
opposed, or not received, in whole or in part, have oceasioned those
persecutions of which we complain. I shall begin with the Doctrines as they are
contained in the New Creed of Pope Pius IV. who, as was appointed by the
Council of Trent, framed and imposed a Profession, or Confession of Faith to be
taken as an Oath by all the Secular Clergy, by all Military Orders, by all
sorts of Friars, all that should be required, and all that should come to their
Communion, in this wise:

Ego N. firma fide credo and profiteor omnia and singula quae continentur in
symbolo fidei quo Sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur, videlicet.

Credo in unum Deum patrem omnipotentem, etc. I N. steadfastly believe and
profess all things contained in that Confession of Faith which is received in
the holy Roman Church, as follows: I believe in one God the Father Almighty,
etc. So the Nicen Creed thoroughout; and then follow the new Articles of the
Roman Faith.

Apostolicas and Ecclesiasticas Traditiones, reliquasque ejusdem Ecclesiae
observationes and constitutiones firmissime admitto, and amplector, etc.

In English thus.

I most steadfastly embrace and admit the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, with the Constitutions, and all other things used in the Roman
Church.

I also receive the holy Scriptures according to that sense, which our holy
Mother the Church (whose it is to interpret it) has held, and still holds,
neither will I ever understand or explain otherwise than according to the
unanimous consent of the Fathers.

I also profess that there are seven true and proper Sacraments of the New
Covenant, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, necessary to men's salvation,
(though not each Sacrament to every singular person.) These are Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Peance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony,
all which do confer grace, and whereof Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders;
cannot be repeated without Sacrilege.

I likewise own and admit all the approved and customary Rites which the
Catholic Church uses in the solemn administration of all the foresaid
Sacraments.

All and every particular defined and declared by the most holy Council of
Trent, about Justification and original sin, I receive and embrace.

Likewise I profess that in the Mass a true and proper propitiatory Sacrifice
for the living and the dead, is offered to God, and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is really and substantially the Body and
Blood, with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there is a
conversion made of the whole substance of the Bread into his Body, and of the
whole substance of the Wine into his Blood, which conversion the Catholic
Church calls Transubstantiation.

I also confess that under either kind or species, whole Christ is entirely
contained, and the true Sacrament received.

I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls therein
detained are helped by the good Works and Prayers of the Faithful.

As also that the Saints which reign with Christ pray for us, and are to be
worshipped and prayed to, and their Relics to be venerated.

I most firmly assert that the Images of Christ, of the Blessed Virgin, and of
the other Saints are to be had and retained, and that due honor and worship is
to be imparted to them.

Also I affirm that the power of granting Indulgences, was left by Christ to
his Church, and that the use of them is most salutary to Christian people.

I acknowledge that the holy Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church is the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and I promise and swear true obedience to
the Pope of Rome, who is Christ's Vicar, and Successor to St. Peter the Prince
of the Apostles.

I also without doubt or scruple receive and profess all other things,
delivered, defined, and declared by the sacred Canons, and General Councils,
especially by the most holy Council of Trent, and all things contrary to them,
with all heresies whatever condemned, rejected, and cursed by the Church, I
likewise reject, and condemn, and curse.

This holy Catholic Faith which I now truly hold and profess, and without
which no man can be saved, I shall (by Gods help) constantly keep and confess,
whole and undefiled, until my last breath, and to the utmost of my power shall
in my Place and Calling endeavor that the same shall be taught, preached, and
professed by all my Subjects, and all under my care. I the foresaid N. promise,
vow, and swear it, so help me God, and these holy Evangills.

The Bull which appointed and framed this new Oath or Confession of Faith is
dated from St. Peter's in Rome the (...) of November, in the year of our Lord
1564. and is concluded in the usual manner. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat,
etc.

Let no man whatever dare to infringe this written Declaration of Our Will and
Command, or by a temerarious Presumption any ways oppose it; which if any one
shall attempt, he must know that he shall incur the indignation of Almighty
God, and of his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

SECT. II. General Reflections on this Roman Creed.
IT seems they that framed and imposed these new Articles, were afraid they
should not hold fast enough the Consciences of men, and therefore Pope Pius
obliged them to swear; a simple Profession would not be sufficient to enslave
the Minds of Christians, and bind upon them this heavy Burden, a formal Oath,
as we see is contrived, and so the Bull calls it, forma juramenti. And whereas
men make Confession of the Christian Faith freely and out of choice, as that
that will be infinitely beneficial to them: They must swear to the Roman Faith
to secure themselves from persecution.

I know that some of the opinions of this Roman Creed were pressed before upon
the Western World by Inquisition and Fire and Sword, and that most of them had
been gaining ground upon the persecuted opposers, about five or six hundred
years: But they never became a Creed imposed with an Oath, necessary to all
men's salvation, till this Council and Pope did make them so. And we find about
the beginning of this Council under Paul III. in the year 1546. that when the
Fathers made profession of their Faith, according to the Roman Creed as they
call it. Symbolum quo sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur. Sess. 3. that they said
nothing but the Nicen Creed, this new one not being yet hatched. Nay, even now
in their public Worship, and when they Baptize (as conscious of the Novelty of
the Tridentine Faith) they only use the three Catholic Creeds; the new one is
not mentioned, but reserved to persecute Heretics withal, that is to damn and
to destroy the Enemies of the might and grandeur of Rome.

For it is to be noted, that all these New Articles are so contrived that they
all manifestly make for the advantage of the Roman Church. They establish its
uncontrolable dominion over Men's Consciences; they stretch and assert its power
over all persons and in all cases; and they bring great profit to the Roman
Clergy. Here you find nothing that glorifies any of Gods Attributes; nothing to
magnify or explain the Mysteries of our Redemption; nothing that can engage
men to serve and love God better; nothing to increase the hopes or settle the
peace of Christian souls: All of it is nothing but the founding of the Roman
Empire, the Canonizing of those Means whereby the Pope and his Clergy should
reign and abound in wealth.

Accordingly this Faith is not propagated or maintained (as the Christian was)
by the humility, meekness, and patient sufferings of its Preachers and
Professors, but by craft and policy, by might and violence. Not by the
demonstration of a a divine power in the working of Wonders and Miracles openly
before all the world: But by such pretended feats, as many among themselves are
ashamed to mention and to own. These 500 years and upwards they have filled
their Books with wondrous Stories to back those their new devices which are
neither Primitive nor universally received, neither contained in Scripture, nor
the ancient Creeds. And these their Miracles are for the most part so ill
contrived, so absurd, so private and obscure, so ill attested, that they
confute themselves, and prove nothing but the ungroundedness of those
Doctrines, and badness of that Cause whose interest they are brought to
maintain.

SECT. III. That this New Creed makes the distinction betwixt Papists and other
Christians.
THis Creed is the unpassable Gulf fixed betwixt Popery and the Reformation, and
has widened the breach, never to be made up, betwixt the Roman Church and all
other Christian Churches. It is not now, as before the Council of Trent, when
many lived in the Roman Church, hoping and endeavoring to rectify what was
amiss, and without owning its errors; Now those errors are become Articles of
faith, declared necessary to all men's salvation, and men must make a public
profession of them, and solemnly swear to them. And it is become a common
Maxim, and a Principle on which they ground their proceedings against
Dissenters. Dubious in fide censetur haereticus, that he is counted an heretic
that doubts in matters of Faith. You may not question; not so much as hesitate
about any Point in the New Articles; neither may you interpret them, or seek to
give them a commodious sense, as the Bishop of Condom has endeavored to do,
to make them plausible; the whole Creed and Oath must go down, in the Popes
sense that imposed it, be it what it will. So that except a man truly and
thoroughly can believe all this, he cannot, with any Conscience, any ways
comply with the Church of Rome, or remain in its Communion: And all the gilded
words and promises of the Popish Clergy to them they would seduce about
tolerating different opinions, and leaving them to themselves; are (as appears
by this Bull and Creed) but pious Frauds, and downright lies.

Upon these New Articles of Faith is grounded the Worship now used in the
Church of Rome: Whoever believes them not, must needs look on the Mass and
other Popish devotions with great horror and abhorrency, and own it his duty
to die, rather than join with them in what is so contrary to true Religion, and
so dishonorable to his God and Savior. So that the Points of this New Creed
are the touchstone and trial of a Papist, and stand as a Partition Wall
betwixt him and a Protestant. Whence I desire it may be considered, how unjust
and injurious they are to the Church of England and its Conformable Clergy,
that charge It and Them with being Popish, and Popishly affected. Some, no
doubt, (as we have seen by experience) do it with evil designs, and will do it
in spite of all evidence to the contrary; and to them nothing is to be said,
but God convert them. Others that may be imposed upon, will perhaps be
satisfied when they consider, 1. The constancy of our Clergy in professing that
Worship and Doctrine for which our Reformers died Martyrs, even in those days
when they themselves were persecuted, exiled, and ruined for it, and had all
the provocations imaginable to pass over to Rome, if they had had any
inclination toward it. 2. Or when they acquaint themselves with the many and
most learned Writings of our Doctors of all Ranks, against Romish Errors and
Superstitions, so strong, so convincing, that none can read them with any
attention, and remain unsatisfied in any Point wherein Protestants do differ
from Rome. 3. Or lastly, If they will but compare the declared and avowed
Doctrines of our Church, as they are contained in the Common Prayer Book, and
the 39 Articles, with either the Canons of the Council of Trent, or in short
with this Roman Creed. For then they shall see, not only, that we hold none of
these Tenets, peculiar to the Church of Rome, and contrary to Gods word: But
that our Doctrines and Persuasions are directly opposed to them.

As for those that make Popery to consist in two or three Ceremonies or
indifferent Rites, they much mistake the matter; and they must be mightily in
love with Ignorance and Scruples, that cherish such thoughts, and will not read
what will inform them better. Any Reformed Church might as well be charged with
what any man shall please, for some of their Customs and Orders will be found
to resemble those of the Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, or Socinians. And where the
differences are so many, so great, so just, and material, as betwixt us and the
Church of Rome, it is strangely unreasonable to expect that we should go naked,
or walk upon our heads, for fear of doing any thing that the Papists do.

It is much more to be feared lest the want of Order and Decency, of Creeds and
Forms of Divine Worship, and administering the Holy Sacraments, should open an
easy entrance for the Roman Innovations to come in, where there is a great
confusion, and a great latitude, and nothing fixed and established in opposition
to them, than that we, who in the Conformity of our Confessions of Faith, and
of a pure and holy Worship of God alone through our Lord Jesus Christ, hold a
constant and avowed Communion with all Reformed Churches, and all Christians
that keep to the Primitive Rules, should break our ties, and break over those
bars and enclosures wherewith we have separated our selves from Popery, and
excluded it from mixing with us.

The Church of England has not made any thing necessary to Salvation, but what
God has declared so to be, and has imposed upon the People no controverted or
doubtful Doctrines, nothing but what all true Christians owned in all places,
and all times, so that it has given provocation to none, but to such as own
the New Creed of Pius IV. to separate from her Communion: But the Church of
Rome has made to be Faith absolutely necessary to Salvation, that which was
not so before, that which God no where revealed in his holy Word, and that
which is in many things contrary to it, and to the true Catholic says of all
Christians.

And who that believes Jesus Christ to be that Great Prophet who revealed to us
the whole Counsel of God, and is alone to be heard as the only Author and
finisher of our Faith, can swear an indefinite obedience to the Pope, and make
it part of his belief that he embraces all the Traditions of the Church of
Rome, (which they themselves cannot number) and receives all the definitions
and declarations of her Councils, especially that of Trent, and believes her to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, which is apparently false? Who that
believes them accursed that shall add any thing to that Faith which our Blessed
Lord and his Apostles preached, can now make part of it, that Christ is truly
sacrificed in the Mass for the Living and the Dead; that he is wholly contained
under either species in the Sacrament; that there is a Purgatory, where Souls
are relieved by what the Living do here for them; That the Saints must be
prayed to, and that due Worship must be given to their Relics and Images; and
that Christ left to his Church a power of granting salutary indulgences to such
as would purchase them, as we see by their practice? This is a Faith so new, so
strange, so different from the Christian, so contrary to it, that any man that
shall compare both, and be persuaded, that it is part of that highest honor
which belongs to God alone, that all his Dictates and Declarations should be
received with an humble submission of our understanding, and an entire faith,
will die (as Millions have) rather than make profession of this Roman Creed,
Joh. 2.9. Whosoever transgresses, (or goes beyond) and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God. The Doctrine of Christ we have in the Gospel,
of which the sum is contained in the Christian Creed. It declares the glorious
Attributes of God, his wonderful works of power and mercy; what great things he
has done for us, what more he will have us to expect from him; and all to
engage us Religiously to serve and love him alone, and own him for our Supreme
Lord by an holy Worship and Obedience. The Doctrine of Rome does only set forth
the unlimited power and dominion of the Pope and his Church over the souls and
consciences of men, and the means of seizing on their Wealth, by selling the
Mass Sacrifice, and the indulgences, by taking the Offerings of the Images and
Shrines, and drawing Souls out of Purgatory. The Popes Crown and the Monks
Belly is the sum of all, and the crime of us Heretics is the speaking against
either, or the not believing what makes for them, as much as we believe in God.

For this were the Cruelties and Inquisitions of the Roman Church invented, and
exercised against all Christians, whose knowledge and Conscience would not
permit them to profess this new and unchristian Faith: But from this it is
apparent we dissent, not out of peevishness or humor, or a stubborn temper,
but upon the account of obligations and duty to our God and Savior, whose true
Religion (I hope) we shall constantly own and profess, whatever we suffer for
it.

CHAP. II. Of several parts of the Roman Worship, and first of their Exorcisms.
IT is not to be expected that where the Doctrines are so corrupted the Worship
should be pure; Men's Actions commonly are worse than their Principles; and so
here it is to be observed that those Articles of the Roman Creed on which is
grounded any part of their Worship, are not so bad in the Notion as they are in
the Practice. Their customs, usages, and outward Acts of Religion which are the
true Interpreters of their Doctrines, make them incapable of those fine Glosses
some of their Missionaries would put upon them, and withal are so
superstistitious, so idolatrous, that all men that fear God, and are concerned
for the honor of the Blessed Jesus must needs judge themselves absolutely
obliged, rather to die, than to join and comply with the Popish Worship.

As far indeed as their Worship proceeds from that Christian Faith they have
common with us, the Apostles Creed, they may have Prayers very good, and very
devout: But as far as it proceeds from their new Roman Faith, it is a strange
Medley of conjuring, consecrating, abusing Gods holy Name, and giving to
Creatures the love and praises due to our Blessed Redeemer.

I shall give some instances of it, and first begin with their conjuring, Part.
1. chap. 2. sect. 10.
of which they have Treasures and Manuals Printed, besides what is in their
Rituals, and other Books of public use. Of the first, Bishop Tailor in his
dissuasive from Popery gives us some account how they assault the Devil with
Holy Water, Incense, Sulphur, Rue, little Papers containing holy words, Relics
of Saints, and notable Railing. How the Priest with his Stole about the Neck of
the Possessed very imperiously commands the Devil, using many names of God
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, very many signs of the Cross, adjurations in the
name of St. Ann, St. Michael, etc. especially of the Blessed Virgin, all whose
Names, Epithets, Merits, and Titles, are very effectual; the Form in the Ritual
is not much better, and all of it is a heap of things very absurd, and very
dishonorable to true Religion.

But in their daily Ministrations, there are so many of these Exorcisms for to
drive out Devils out of every thing, that one would think they are Manichees,
who believed most of the Creation to belong to those evil Spirits. In the
Office for Baptism they Exorcise the Salt which they put into the Infants
mouth, with nine signs of the Cross and a Prayer whereby they beg it may become
Salutare Sacramentum, a salutary Sacrament, and a perfect Medicine to all that
receive it. And even the Child is Exorcised with the Priests blowing three
times in his Face, and anointing it with his Spittle, saying. Exi ab eo immunde
Spiritus, and tu autem effugare diabole, appropinquabit enim judicium Dei. Come
out of him unclean Spirit; and thou Devil be gone, for the Judgment of God is
at hand. Together with this Prayer: Exorcizo te immunde spiritus in Nomine
Patris, etc. I exorcize thee unclean Spirit, in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, that thou may come out of this servant of God, and depart
from him, thou damned accursed, for so he commands that walked upon the waters,
and stretched out his hand to Peter when sinking; therefore cursed Devil own
and receive thy Sentence, and give honor to God, and come out of this his
Servant, etc.

Other Exorcizings there are for the baptizing of adult persons; so for the
baptismal water it self by blowing upon it three manner of ways, and pouring
some of it toward the four parts of the world, and a long Prayer, whereby the
Priest very imperiously commands, Omnis Spiritus immunde, omne phantasma, omne
mendacium, eradicare and effugare ab hac creatura aquae. All unclean Spirits,
phantasms, and lies to be rooted out of the water, and driven away from it.

So are their Salts, and Oils, and many other things of common use powerfully
conjured, and the lurking Devils ferretted out of them. And what is all this
but the disgracing of Christianity, and profanation of Gods Sacred name?

SECT. I. Of their many Consecrations.
THeir Consecrations are much to the same purpose, they mightily abuse the holy
duty of Prayer, and attribute to every toy they have a fancy for, as much
sacredness and virtue as to any divine Ordinance or Christian Sacrament. With
their holy Water, they sanctify every thing, and are blessed themselves
perpetually with it, living, and dying, and even after their death, when
betwixt the hands of a deceased man they put a Cross upon his breast, and every
foot dash him with holy Water, as is appointed in the Ritual. And no wonder,
for it is consecrated, to drive away devils, diseases, and all evils; to have
the virtue of divine benediction, and the effects of divine grace. And they
pray that the holy Salt, which is its great ingredient, may procure to them
that receive it, perfect health of soul and body, and freedom from the wiles
and temptations of the devil. Every thing, and more than we can expect from the
holy Communion. Vt efficiaris sal exorcizatum in salutem credentium, and sis
omnibus sumentibus te sanitas animae and corporis, etc. Their holy bread, pain
benit, they bless, to be likewise to them that taste of it the salvation of
soul and body, and a safeguard against all dangers. And even the blessed
Candles, where ever they are lighted, are to fright and expel away the Prince
of darkness and all his Angels. The same is to be done by their holy Oil and
Incense. All their holy Garments and Church-Utensils are blessed much in the same
manner, and to the same purpose.

We find them praying, that the little Boxes for Relics, or other consecrated
things, may receive the dew of heavenly grace. Also that their Bells may do
great feats, and that the dew of the Holy Spirit may be poured on them. Hoc
tintinabulum sancti spiritus rore perfunde. They also Exorcize the Chrism for
their many Unctions, and having purged it from the Devils that were bathing in
it, pray that it may become to all that are anointed therewith, the adoption of
Sons by the Holy Ghost, and that the mixture of it may be to them a sure and
salutary defense and propitiation for ever. -- Vt omnis virtus adversarii,
omnis exercitus diaboli, omnisque incursio and omne phantasma satanae
eradicetur and effugetur a te, ut fias omnibus qui ex te ungendi sunt in
adoptionem filiorum per spiritum sanctum, etc.

Much more as bad or worse might be transcribed out of their Pontificals and
Rituals, but it would be endless; and endless to show all their Ceremonies for
the Apparel and Ornaments of their Priest, Altars, Images; for their various
Postures and Motions, for all their Ablutions and Purifyings, and the
consecrated tools and toys they employ in their ministrations, all which far
exceed what was appointed by Moses in the Worship of the Jewish Tabernacle.
This is only that they who are not acquainted with their Books may see how
contrary is the Roman Worship to the simplicity and spirituality of true
Christianity; how much Gods holy Name and Religion are abused by the absurd
Prayers and impious Exorcisms and Consecrations of the Popish Liturgies; and
how thankful we ought to be that we can worship God in the beauty of holiness,
without such heaps of Superstitions.

SECT. II. Of their Mass.
THeir way of celebrating the Lords Supper is become so unlike the sacred
institution of it, and so dishonorable to its blessed Author, that Christians
of other Communions tremble, and are seized on with horror when they consider
the Blasphemies and Idolatries contained in the Doctrine and Worship of it. And
accordingly they of Rome have pressed it these four hundred years with the
greatest rigor, and made it the touchstone and gin, whereby to know and to
katch Dissenters. To have a Christ made of Bread, as their Creed and Tridentine
Canon absolutely declare, against the evasion of Bellarmine and others, who
ashamed of it, would make it to be a a Transubstantiation adductive. Contrary
to what their Church has determined, that the whole substance of the bread is
changed into the whole substance of Christ's body: is a strange account of the
Hypostatical Union and of the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, and much to
his dishonor. As also to have their Christ appear, notwithstanding all the
Pageantry of the Mass, in circumstances of the greatest weakness and
destitution. So that he must be carried, and locked, and cleansed, being in
danger of falling to the ground, of being lost, of being moldy and corrupted,
of being eaten by Dogs or Vermin, and even abused at the Devils pleasure to
Sorcery and Witchcraft. What a contempt does this reflect on the Lord of Glory,
who once indeed abased himself for us very low: But now fitteth on the right
hand of the Majesty on high.

The Consecrated Wafer, which they call the good God, their Creator, and their
Savior, they daily adore as such, and that with a most profound and solemn
Worship: both at the Altar, the Priest, and all the people; and abroad when it
is carried about, to the great terror and danger of all that are not of their
persuasion. And this they constantly do, when even according to their own
Principles, they never have any certainty that Christ by Transubstantiation is
present, under the species. For, want of Intention in the Priest that
consecrates, or in them that ordained him, marrs the efficacy of the
consecrating words, frustrates the expectation of the Worshipper, and makes
them all Idolaters.

It is further intolerable in this one part of their Worship, that they
sacrilegiously take the Sacred Cup from the People, who are put away with a sip
of the ablution Wine, wherein the Priest washes those fingers of his that
touched the Host.

And then, that their eating of Christ in the Mass they make to be a true
propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead, as is at large
asserted in the sixth Session of the Council of Trent; wherein ends the whole
design of all their impious absurd devices in this Point. They make Christ to
sacrifice him; and they sacrifice him to gain Money by it. And how much this
derogates from that all-sufficient never to be repeated Sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross, (as St. Paul shows at large in Epist. ad Hebr.) is sadly apparent.
But on these things I am not to enlarge. This is enough to show the
irreconcilableness of our conscience (persuaded as it is) with their way of
daily Worship.

SECT. III. Of their Worship to Images and Saints.
WHerein is also very offensive to us, that notwithstanding God's express
command of not worshipping any Images of any thing in heaven, or under heaven,
they publicly and confessedly render to the Cross, and to the Images of the
ever Blessed Trinity, that highest worship of Latreia, which they themselves
own to be due to God alone. And that to the Images of Saints, they give such
Religious respects and services, as that nothing more of outward Worship can be
paid to God himself. They carry them about in pomp with Hymns and high
Celebrations; they burn Candles to them, and to them make Offerings; they kiss
them, they burn Incense to them; they kneel and prostrate themselves before
them, and before them make their Vows and Prayers; going to visit them in long
Pilgrimages: and from them, and what they represent, expecting all sorts of
blessings. All this is to be seen, not only in the practice of vulgar
superstitious People: But also in their Rubricks and Liturgies, and their daily
public Worship, performed by their grave and devout Clergy. And that the evil
of this may not be seen by the common sort of people, they keep under a Bushel,
under severe restraints and prohibitions, the light of Gods Word, which in many
places would show them, how provoking and odious such a Worship is to God, who
declares Isa. xlii. 8. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not
give to another, neither my praise to graven Images. And in such Books of
instruction and devotion, as are used by the People, they take out of the Ten
Commandments the second, wherein God expressly forbids their practice,
appropriates to himself all Religious Worship, and declares himself highly
Jealous of it.

Further, Whereas God who is infinitely exalted in a Throne of Glory and
Dominion, above the highest creatures, is also infinitely good and beneficent,
and so not only requires, but also infinitely deserves all the Religious love
and services our hearts are capable of, having given us our being, and all
things that we either enjoy or hope; and even given us his own dear Son, when
no Saint sued for it in behalf of Mankind, and made him do all that was to be
done for us, even die, and bear the sorrows and shame of the Cross, that we
might say with the Apostle, Romans viii. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? When God has done all this; and his blessed Son our dear Redeemer has
merited for us all that we can want, and commanded us to bring to him all our
Requests and Petitions; Telling us, that it is by him alone we must have access
unto the Father, and that he alone can save them to the uttermost that come to
God by him, being ever living to make Intercession for them. When thus God has
done all that could be done, that we might be obliged to none but to him, and
have dependence on none else, is it not strangely ungrateful and provoking, to
see men seek for thousands of Mediators, and Friends in the Court of Heaven to
speak and plead for them? As if either God were averse to hear their Prayers,
or the Intercession and Merits of our Blessed Savior were not sufficient to
prevail, but in conjunction with those of the Saints.

For so we find in most of their public Prayers that they offer them in the
name of all, or of some particular Saints, and expect for their sakes to be
heard, confiding much in their Merits and Mediation: And very frequently
mentioning them to God, as motives why he should grant their Petitions.
Numberless are the places where these, or the like expressions are used. Vt
ejus sancti cujusdam fulti patrociniis ad coelestia regna mereamur pervenire.
Vt sanctis tuis intervenientibus, digneris, etc. ut cujus natalitia colimus,
ejusdem protectione gaudeamus, etc. Beatorum N. N. nos festa tueantur, and
little commendet oration, etc. Ejus intercedentibus meritis, ab omnibus nos
absolve peccatis, etc. The absolution of Penitents on Maundy Thursday may serve
for all. Precibus and meritis Beatae Mariae semper virginis, Beati Michaelis
Archangeli, etc. In English thus: God Almighty pity, pardon, and save you, by
the Prayers and Merits of the blessed Virgin Mary, of St. Michael the
Archangel, of St. John the Baptist, of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of
all the Saints. Amen.

And so according to these great benefits they receive (as they think) by means
of the Saints, they make to them suitable returns: having invented many ways to
requite their obligations, and making them sharers with God in all their
religious respects; of which take these instances. In their daily Masses they
make their Confession to the Saints as to Almighty God, (see their Confiteor)
they frequently mention the merits of the Saints, especially of those whose
Relics are under the Altar; they profess in the Communion to venerate the
memory of all Saints, and for their sakes, in the Post-Communion desire in
several forms, that their oblation of Christ may be acceptable to God; or
salutary to them, or the like. And whereas they declare that the honor of a
sacrifice is peculiar to God alone, and is by them reserved for him: Yet we
find that they cannot forbear to bring in the Saints for a share. In the form
of Intention, before the Mass, The Priest professes to offer that, and all
other Sacrifices, with all the good Works, Merits, Prayers, and Praises in
Heaven and Earth, in memory of our blessed Saviors Passion, and to the honor
and exultation of the blessed Virgin, and of all heavenly Angels and Saints. --
Ad laudem quoque and exultationem Beatissimae Virginis Mariae, coelestiumque
Angelorum, sanctorum atque sanctarum, and signanter, N. N. and aliorum
sanctorum. -- Nunc and semper, hoc and omnia alia sacrificia, officia,
orationes. -- Sacrificare intendo and propono, etc. And to be as good as his
word, in the Celebration it self afterward, the Priest has this Prayer:
Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam tibi offerimus in memoriam
passionis, resurrectionis and ascensionis Jesu Christi Domini nostri, and in
honor beatae Mariae semper virginis and beati Johannis Baptistae, and
sanctorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and istorum, and omnium sanctorum, ut
illis proficiat ad honorem, nobis autem ad salutem, and illi pro nobis
intercedere dignentur in coelis, quorum memoriam agimus in terris. -- Amen.

Receive, O holy Trinity, this Oblation which we offer to thee, for the
remembrance of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, of St. John the Baptist, of
the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, of these, and of all Saints, that it may
advance their honor and our salvation, and that they may vouchsafe to
intercede for us in heaven, whose memory we celebrate on earth, by the same our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. After this, their offering of Christ in honor of the
Saints, we may well think that they judge nothing is too good, or too much for
them.

And so when they bless the Images either of Christ, or of any Saint, they
serve them alike, sprinkle them with Holy Water, burn Incense to them, and pray
for all in the same manner. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, etc. O God, who do
not dislike that we should paint or carve Images or semblances of thy Saints,
we beseech thee that this Image, made for the honor or memory of thy Son, or
of such an Apostle or Martyr, may by thee be blessed and sanctified, and that
thou would grant to all that shall supplicate and serve such a Saint before
it, that they may by that Saints mediation obtain Grace here, and Glory
herafter. Amen. But to the Image of the blessed Virgin there are more Prayers,
and amongst them this is said or sung by the Bishop and assistants, whilst he
sprinkles it. Sub tuum praesidium confugimus sancta Dei Genitrix, nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera
nos semper, virgo gloriosa and benedicta. We flee to thy protection, holy
Mother of God, despise not our Prayers in our necessities: But deliver us from
all dangers at all times, O glorious and blessed Virgin.

So at all occasions, and in all parts of their public Worship, God has
nothing peculiar to himself: And every where with our blessed Savior some
Saint or other is joined. They excommunicate, and they absolve, Auctoritate Dei
omnipotentis and Beatorum Apostolorum, etc. By the authority of God and of his
Saints. And it is so in all their Ministrations while they live: And when they
are dying, Holy Water is plentifully sprinkled, and the Image of that beloved
Saint they had most devotion to, is set before them, as the Ritual appoints;
and the Soul is bid to go forth in peace in the name of Angels and Archangels,
of Patriarchs and P^ophets, of Apostles and Martyrs, of holy Monks and Eremits,
and of all the Saints. And the weak man is taught to say with heart or voice,
Sancie Angele Dei, mihi Custos assiste, omnes sancti, etc. Holy Angel that art
my Guardian, assist me, and pray for me, and succor me, all ye holy Angels and
Saints. And then to the blessed Virgin, Maria matter gratiae, matter
misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege and hora mortis suscipe: Mary Mother of
grace and of mercy, protect us from our Enemies, and receive us when we die.

And as in their Prayers, so in their Glorifications, the Saints must be
partners with Almighty God every where, as this one instance proves enough:
Sacrosanctae and individuae Trinitati, etc. Eternal praise, honor, virtue, and
glory, be by all Creatures evermore rendered to the holy and individual Trinity:
-- To the Fruitfulness and integrity of the most blessed and glorious Virgin,
and universally to all Saints. This Magnificat has an Indulgence annexed to it
by Pope Leo X. and is daily said by all that recite the Breviary.

By what has been said, and much more which is to be seen in their public and
most authorized Books, and daily practice, may appear what credit is to be
given to those Romish Emissaries, who very confidently deny their praying to
Saints, or giving them any Worship, in the Church of Rome. But that I may not
be tedious, I forbear to give any more proofs to the contrary, and conclude
with this, which is in their ordinary and allowed Manual of English devotions.
Thus, O holy and glorious Virgin Mary! I commend my soul and body into thy
blessed trust and singular custody, and this night and ever, especially in the
hour of my death, I commit to thy merciful charity all my hope and consolation,
all my distress and miseries, my life and the end thereof, that by thy most
holy Intercession all my works may be directed according to the will of thy
blessed Son. Amen.

It is now clear, that no Christian that fears to offend God, by imparting to
others that honor and worship due to him alone, can join with the Church of
Rome in their public Worship. Nor possibly live in a Communion where such a
new Creed is imposed, (as has been seen before.) But therefore they make use
of Inquisition, that where Conscience keeps men from assenting and complying
with such Errors, Superstitions, and Idolatries, there Terror may make them
submit. This is that Popish Religion, without which (as they say) no man shall
live in heaven, and without which, if they can, no man shall live upon earth.

Here it appears, that it was not a few tolerable abuses, that made a great
part of the Christian world, so long wish and attempt, and at last with great
trouble and danger, effect a happy Reformation, here in the Western Churches,
wherein the Popes Tyranny had set up and imposed his Religion. Their
indispensable duty and allegiance to their God and Savior obliged them to do
it. The terms of Communion with the Church of Rome were hardly consistent with
the profession of Christianity, and were most injurious to God, and repugnant
to that Faith and Worship revealed and appointed in the Gospel, by our blessed
Savior. God must be obeyed, rather than Man: And no compleasance, no
consideration whatever obliges any man to destroy or venture his own
Salvation. This was their warrant, and upon this they might well expose
themselves to those cruel persecutions they endured, for being counted Rebels
to the Pope.

But what is there, can oblige any man, enlightened with the knowledge of the
truth, to separate from this Church? Whereof the Faith is not a new and
disputable Creed: but that pure, Primitive and Catholic Doctrine which is
contained in the New Testament; and wherein God alone is duly worshipped, the
Sacraments of Christ rightly administered; wherein there are holy Prayers,
conformable to Gods Word, humbly offered to him in the name of his blessed Son;
wherein the Ceremonies are few, and grave, and decent, fit to express and to
increase our Reverence and Devotion; and wherein the great design appears
plainly to be, Gods glory, and men's salvation. What man that loves Goodness and
Piety, and in the profession of Christianity seeks only to serve God, and save
his own soul, can break Communion with this Church, if he be within its
Precincts? Or will not rather judge it as much his duty, to join with it, as to
separate from Rome? A Government and Order, and a Liturgy of necessity there
must be; all Christian, all Reformed Churches have and maintain them, to
prevent Confusions, Profaneness, and Innovations, such as are here amongst us
established oblige to nothing that God has forbid; under them we may be
virtuous and Religious in the highest degree, and ought therefore to be meek
and peaceable; thankful to God that he has graciously freed us from those
Romish impositions before mentioned. They that would break those Rules that are
now fixed and established, either have little value for true Christian
Religion; or are willing to make way for Popish Innovations, or will make it
appear that some tempers are so ungovernable, that nothing can hold them, but
that Yoke and Tyranny of which I am now to speak.

CHAP. III. How the Inquisition came to be established; and first of the Oaths
and Excommunications wherewith they tie the Consciences of men.
IT is not for denying any Article of the Christian Faith, that we, like our
forefathers, are bloudily persecuted, wherever the Popes power can reach:
Neither is it that we worship a False God, or are any ways impious against the
True one, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. It is for rejecting that Romish Creed
and Worship, whereof I treated before. And it was not to maintain Christianity,
but those corruptions, that Inquisition was invented, and used with so much
rigor. Any one that has read the Life and Doctrine of our blessed Lord, will
easily judge that cruelties are destructive of her Religion, and cannot be fit
Instruments to propagate or maintain it. But the maintaining of that formidable
Empire and Dominion the Pope and his Clergy have got into their hands, requires
they should proceed with that inexorable severity they practice against them
that dissent from those Doctrines, on which is grounded their power; therefore
they oblige all that have any Jurisdiction among them by a strict Oath of
Allegiance, to be the Popes Subjects, and to endeavor all possible ways to
make others be so. Thus: Ego N. electus Ecclesiae vel Monasterii N. ab hac hora
in antea, fidelis and obediens ero, Beato, etc. I N. elect of such a Church or
Monastery, from henceforth will be faithful and obedient to blessed Peter the
Apostle, and to the Holy Roman Church, and to our Lord Pope N. and to his
lawful Successors. I will give no counsel or consent that they should lose Life
or Limb, or be any way injured upon any account. I will never, to their
detriment, reveal to any what counsel they shall trust me with, by their
Nuncios, or themselves. I will help them against any man (saving my Order) to
keep and maintain the Roman Papacy, and the Regalities of St. Peter, I will
assist their Legates going and coming, and contribute to their necessities. I
will endeavor to preserve, defend, and increase the authority, rights,
honors, and privileges of the Holy Roman Church, and of our Lord the Pope,
and of his Successors, And I will no way contribute, but rather detect and
hinder any thing that should be to their prejudice. With all my strength will I
observe, and cause to be observed by others, all the Rules of the Fathers, and
all Apostolic ( i. e. Papal) Decrees and Commands, Provisions, and
Reservations. All Heretics, Schismatics, and Rebels to our said Lord the
Pope, and to his Successors, will I oppose and persecute. I will come, when
called, to Synods, and once in three years come to Rome. And I will give an
account to our Lord the Pope, of my Pastoral Office, and of all things that
pertain to the state of my Church and Clergy. All Papal Injunctions I will
humbly receive, and most diligently execute, etc. So help me God and these holy
Evangils.

Here is a good hold already, whereby all Secular and Regular Prelates are
enslaved to the Papacy, and to the Roman Doctrine and Worship. From which if
they, or any other swerve, then are the direful thunderbolts of Excommunication
lanc'd against them, with extinguishing of Candles, and, in the name of God and
of his Saints, shutting them out of the Church in heaven and in earth:
denouncing them to be cursed and anathematized, and adjudging them to be damned
in eternal fire, with the Devil and his Angels, and all Reprobates. As is to be
seen in their form of Excommunication.

All we reputed Heretics, and all others that fall under this severe doom, are
good for nothing afterward, but to be destroyed any way possible, (as will be
seen in what follows.) But if any, by terror, or hope, or any other inducement,
are brought into their Church, from among Heretics, he must climb over a high
and difficult partitionwall, and be tied so short, that he shall hardly ever
think of a return. It is not, as they represent, to deceive the simple, only
going amongst them, and be within the Pale of the Church, and do what you will:
But after they have drawn you so far that you cannot go back, then you must in
earnest be reconciled to the Church. And this is the manner of it, as is
prescribed in the Pontificale.

The penitent Schismatic or Heretic must kneel before the Church-door, and
there make a Confession of his Faith, and have the Devil Exorcised out of him.
And being brought in, and kneeling before the High Altar, renounce all
heretical pravity, and promise to live in the unity of the Roman Faith, and
have some Prayers and Grosses made over him, and then swear obedience to the
Pope, imprecating damnation to himself if ever he departs from the Communion of
his Church; and if he were a noted Heretic, he is thus kneeling, to damn all
Heresies, that especially which he leaves, and pronounce all that still hold
it, worthy of an eternal Curse, and upon his Oath profess to believe from his
heart that Faith which is taught by the Roman Church: and promise if ever he
quits it, to submit himself to the severity of the Canons.

This, one would think, should be judged sufficient by the Church of Rome, to
keep men in her obedience: But she dares not trust to it; as indeed experience
has shown, that long agon the exorbitant greatness of the Papacy had been
reduced, and a general Reformation effected, if nothing but ties of Conscience,
or Excommunications had been used; other means therefore have been found, more
violent, but more effectual. Inquisition, managed with great rigor and great
policy, has been (as Pope Sixtus Quintus called it, in a Bull I shall cite
afterward) Firmissimum Fidei Catholicae propugnaculum; The best and strongest
Supporter of the Catholic Faith. A truth which will manifestly appear when we
have seen, how it was at first established, and has proceeded ever since.

SECT. I. Of the beginning of the Inquisition.
THe origin of the Inquisition, if we may believe Lud A Paramo, is as ancient
as the World. He himself, in Sicily for many years, was employed about the Holy
Office, A Paramo de orig. etc. Matriti. 1598.
(as they commonly call the Inquisition) and was much in love with it. And he
in good earnest tells us, that God was the first Inquisitor, who when our first
Parents were fell into Heresy, came and made Inquisition about it: But finding
them disposed to repent, mitigated their punishment, and had them not racked
and burned: but only deprived them of their estates, casting them out of
Paradise: Sent them, as it were, to the Galleys, adjudging them to hard labor
and sorrow; put upon them a kind of San benit, making them Coats of skins: All
which merciful proceedings the Holy Inquisitors do now imitate toward
Penitents. Afterward (he tells us) the Patriarchs were appointed Judges in the
case of Heresy, and amongst them he puts Abraham, whom he calls praeclarum
Inquisitorem, a famous Inquisitor; though when the Jews sought to kill our
blessed Savior, he told them, they could not be his Children, for that did not
Abraham. Joh. 8.
But however (as he goes on) the Prophets afterward succeeded in the office:
and at last it came to our blessed Lord, who is now the Head of the Roman
Inquisition, but delegated it to St. Peter, from whom the Pope has it.

This my Author tells us, in very good earnest, and I make no doubt, believed
it. But the true origin of the Inquisition by delegation from the Pope, as it
is now managed, was about the year 1216. when Pope Innocent III. appointed St.
Dominic to be the first Inquisitor, to repress the growing Heresy of the
Albigenses. Before that, the Bishops were the sole Judges in the ease of
Heresy. And though before Dominic there had been, by the power or Instigation
of several Popes, many Persecutions raised against such as dissented from the
Church of Rome, and many Princes and Bishops, by interest or inclination, had
been very severe against them: yet that was not enough to uphold the Roman
Errors and Tyranny; some Princes did favor the Reputed Heretics, some Bishops
were tainted, and most of them too remiss; they generally would not exercise
such cruelties over their own Sheep, as were requisite to secure the Papal
Interest: And the Popes, who were glad to depress them as much as they could,
and draw all their power to themselves, found it necessary and expedient, to
appoint Commissioners by their own Authority, who should depend wholly upon
themselves, to punish and exterminate all that would not submit to bear the
Roman Yoke. These they called Inquisitors, and, as I said, Dominic was the
first.

Before him indeed, Charles the Great, anno 805. had appointed Judges to punish
such as turned Heathen, after they had professed Christianity: And they put
many to death, in those furthest parts of the Belgic Provinces which that
Emperor conquered: But that lasted not long, and differed much from the
now-Inquisition.

Ildefonsus also, a Spanish King, permitted by a public Edict, anno 1154. to
persecute the Waldenses throughout his Dominions, Praeter tamen laesionem
mortis, aut membrorum detruncationem; yet so, as that they should be neither
maimed, nor killed, as A Paramo himself relates it. But all this comes very
short of the Inquisition, and neither came from the same Authority, nor
proceeded by the same Methods; so that still it remains true, as my Authors
have it, that Pope Innocent III. was he that erected the Holy Tribunal, as they
call their Hellish Barbarities against poor Christians.

That Pope was he who first made Transubstantiation an Article of Faith, in a
Council he called at Lateran at Rome, or rather under the name of it, as
Matthew Paris relates, who gives such an account of this Pope, as also Platina,
as makes him a worthy Inventor of such a device as is the Holy Inquisition, His
Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness were in extreme, as those Authors have it,
and what his Kinsman and Successor Gregory IX. records of him, in his
Decretals, sufficiently detects his cruelty, and proves against those Popish
Traitors, who of late have denied it dying, That the Church of Rome maintains
and teaches the most bloody and traitorous Principles; though possibly, some
particular persons in it may not approve them.

SECT. I. Of Dominic the first Inquisitor.
THis Innocent III. the year after his Lateran Council, anno 1216. authorized
St. Dominie to be his Inquisitor at Tholosa, where he had caused the Croisadoes
to be preached against the Albigenses, as also in the Neighboring places, and
in Lombardy, for many years before; having granted the same Privileges and
Indulgences, to such as should Arm against those Heretics and destroy them, as
to those that went to the Holy Land; as is to be seen in the foresaid Council
and Decretals, cited by Grotserus the Jesuit, in his Edict of Reinerius. His
verbis, Catholici qui crucis assumpto charactere ad Haereticorum exterminium se
accinxerint, illa gaudeant indulgentia, illoque sancto privilegio sint muniti,
quae accedentibus in sanctae Terrae subsidium conceduntur. Dominic himself in
preaching and prosecuting these persecutions, which destroyed many thousands,
was very busy and very zealous.

He was born in Spain anno 1170. and his Mother Johanna Daza, sometime before
she brought him forth, dreamed that she was big of a Whelp, A Paramo. p. 95.
who when born should awake and terrify all the world with barking, and set it
all in a flame with a burning torch which he carried in his mouth; which the
event did prove a very ominous dream: For he, as many more since, got his
Saintship by teaching and exercising most inhumane cruelties against such as
would not approve the corruptions of the Church of Rome. He being yet but
young, was by the interest of his Father Felice de Gusman, made one of the
Canons of Osma. And soon after when the Bishop of St. See was sent Ambassador
into France by Alfonsus, King of Castile, Dominic accompanied him, and passing
through Tholosa, found that great and stately City and the parts adjoining
almost all infected with the Heresy (as they count it) of the Albigenses;
which mightily kindled the zeal of this great Roman Champion, and set him to
barking, and kindling with his breath (as his Mother had dreamed) that terrible
fire which burnt so long and so fiercely. Tom. 3. p. 613.
St. Antoninus says, that a very bright Star was seen upon his forehead when
he was asleep: And that he raised to life again nine persons, three whilst he
lived, and six after his desease; so brave a thing it is to be a zealous
propagator of the Roman Faith, which Faith he asserted (as A Paramo says) by
this notable Miracle: Having long disputed in vain, he got two Books in his
hands, one of them written by the Heretics, containing their Errors; another
writ by himself, containing the Doctrines of the Roman Faith: Then having
assembled great numbers of people, and caused a great Fire to be made, he threw
both the Books into it, and immediately that which contained the Heretical
Doctrines was consumed, and the other nimbly leapt out of the fire, and being
thrown in again the second and third times, did not like the warmth of it, but
still came out safe and sound out of the devouring Flames.

But this would not do, and it was found requisite to throw the Heretics
themselves into the fire, for their further conviction: Wherefore Dominic
having obtained from the Pope a power and delegation to be Inquisitor, an.
1216. fell to work in good earnest, to butcher such stray Sheep as the proper
Shepherds could not, or would not reduce. Nature seemed to be afraid of those
horrid cruelties which were now coming to be exercized at the Tremendous
Tribunal of the Inquisition, there being about this time many Prodigies seen,
to the great affrightment of many Nations; Monsters, Inundations, and
Earthquakes, in Italy, Savoy, Germany, and elsewhere, as is to be seen in the
Authors that treat of this Century: But Dominic, and the other Bigots of the
Roman Church, took it another way, and would have these to be expressions of
the wrath of God against Heretics; and so came with great zeal and fury to be
executioners of that wrath, and to destroy them.

Pope Innocent had seen a Vision, as Bzovius reports, to this purpose: Christ
appeared in great anger, ready to cast down upon wicked men the exterminating
Thunderbolts of his Indignation, but that the blessed Virgin interposed, and
assured him she had two men, two valiant Champions, who would reduce all things
to right if he would but be patient, and then showed him St. Dominic and St.
Francis, and he became pacified.

These two, whatever the Tale be, offered to God many humane Victims, as though
they had indeed designed thereby to appease his wrath; the Franciscans became
Inquisitors in Italy, in honor of their Founder, there born: And the
Dominicans had the same Office in Spain, and elsewhere.

But to return. Dominic worked very many Miracles, and had very free
intercourse with heaven, as is to be seen in Bzovius, who is very prolix upon
that subject, ( ad anno 1211. and deinceps.) But that which makes for my
purpose is his coming with Didacus Bishop of Osma, and with twelve Abbots to
preach the Croisadoes; that is, to levy Soldiers, that would engage against
the Heretics, and to make an Army of zealous men, who should have a Cross for
their Badge, and should be in perpetual War against the Enemies of Christ, as
they called the Albigenses, and other Dissenters from Rome. He himself would
carry a Cross in his hand, when she went to fight, and all the Arrows that were
thrown at him, did only pierce the Cross, but never touch him: Whereby his
Fellow Soldiers were wonderfully encouraged, (as they report it.)

SECT. II. Of the first making of Familiars, or armed Officers or Bailiffs for
the H. Tribunal.
BUt the having, as it were, a standing Army, to back and enforce the
Proceedings and Decrees of the Inquisition, was that which at length quite
destroyed his Enemies, and blotted even the name of Waldenses and Albigenses
from under heaven. This was it has preserved the Inquisition, and made it
formidable and irresistible, the having a great number of men, the most
cunning, potent, zealous, and vigorous, sworn Servants, and Officers; who have
power to bear what Arms they please, to enter where they will, who are of all
trades, and all conditions, and are always ready to execute the commands of the
Inquisitors.

This Dominic instituted, he chose out the most fierce, bloody, implacable
Zealots of his numberless Cross-bearers, and made of them a select Company or
Fraternity, which he called Christ's Familiar Soldiers. Familiares Christi
milites. Vt accerime haereticos insectarentur, and impetu quam possent maximo,
in illorum perniciem irruerent. So A Paramo words it, That they might persecute
Heretics with the greatest violence, and endeavor their destruction and
ruin, by all possible means. These Familiars, being mighty useful to the
design of the Sacred Tribunal, are highly favored by the Popes. Innocent III.
began to pour his blessings upon them, and upon all that should any ways be
aiding the newly-erected Court of Inquisition. But the Familiars had a double
share of Indulgences and Immunities. In Italy they were called Crucigeri,
Cross-bearers, and St. Petri Martyris Scholares, the Disciples of St. Peter the
Martyr, who was a holy Inquisitor. And Honorius III. and Gregory IX. made a
kind of Order of them, which they named, Fratres Militiae Jesu Christi; The
Friars of the Militia of Jesus Christ. But now, says my Author, they that
serve the Inquisition are all such Familiars as Dominic instituted. They used
to have a Cross of colored Cloth upon their breast, fastened to their upper
Garment, but now I suppose they have left it, because I find, in several
occasions, since the Reformation, that they were not known, not so much as one
to another.

CHAP. IV. Of the first that suffered the rigours of Inquisition.
DOminic having erected his Court, and got power enough, what from the Pope,
what from his Familiars, to make it so strong as to do that work it was
designed for, proceeded against Heretics with as much severity, as the bloody
Religion of Rome can inspire. He added to all the former rigours and cruelties;
and though he made use of several forms and ways of judging and punishing
Heretics found out before him, yet he tied himself to none, but with such a
certain method, which has not been much changed since; he followed no other
rules, but his own pleasure in inflicting punishments upon guilty or suspected
persons. And so it remains to this day, most dreadful and arbitrary.

Those Heretics, against whom the Pope and his Friends were so angry, have a
very ill name given by such as put them to death, and, if we may believe their
Enemies, were very vile and wicked: But when we find full as bad said of us, in
many late Writers, we have great reason to suspect that then, as now, they
painted Heretics like Devils (as they do when they burn them) to justify
their hatred and their cruelty against them.

The Beguini and Beguardi, the poor men of Lions, or Minorits de tertia regula
Sancti Francisci. The Stadingenses, and others in the twelfth and thirteenth
Century, were most likely of the same Religion, as to the substance, as the
Waldenses and Albigenses, men that sighed and endeavored for a Reformation,
and could not hold Communion with the Church of Rome, by reason of its great
corruptions, but that held the same Primitive Faith as we do. There is enough
in Reinerius, even as it is set out by Grotserus the Jesuit, to justify this.
He had been one of them, of the Waldenses, and changed, and became Inquisitor
against them: but together with the expressions of his malice, gives such an
account of them, as makes it most clear that they are highly injured, as well
in their Names as in their Persons.

What cruelties were exercised against them, by the urgent instigation of this
Pope Innocent, who by Bulls, swarms of Preachers of Croisadoes, and the bloody
and traitorous Decrees of his Lateran Council, excited and forced many Princes
to butcher in most parts of Europe those sheep appointed to be slain; what
faint resistance they made for a while, assisted by several great Princes, the
Counts of Tholosa, Foix, Beam, and others, with Peter King of Aragon; how many
lying Miracles, but truly bloody Executions were acted by Simon Monfort, and
other Generals of the Popes Gros't-Souldiers? All these are to be seen in
Petrus Valissarnensis the Monk, who then lived, and writ the History of those
Albigenses, whom he terribly hated. Spondanus also has enough of those matters
ad an. 1200. and deinceps.

I know that he makes Petrus de Castro novo, a Cistercian Monk, and Arnoldus
Abbot of that Order, to be the first Founders of the Inquisition: and observes
that that Peter, being killed by Count Raimond, blessed and consecrated that
holy Tribunal he had erected in his own blood. But A Paramo will have it that
Peter acted as the Popes Legate, and as such deputed a power to Dominic to
proceed against Heretics, many years before he had the Popes Commission. There
may be some truth of both sides: and it matters not how much, or how little;
only I will remark, that when Dominic came to Rome to have his Order confirmed,
Pope Innocent was very averse to it, till he saw in a Vision his Lateran Church
and Palace ready to fall, but that it was born up and supported by Dominic, who
indeed by his Inquisition has upheld that Popish Religion which else had
failed long agone.

SECT. I. Of the Waldenses, and the proceedings against them.
I Have been favored with the sight of a Manuscript which was in the hands of
the now Reverend Dean of St. Paul. It is the Register of the Inquisition of
Tholose, genuine and authentic, containing the proceedings of that Court for
about 80 years, against many hundred Heretics. Therein I saw that the forms of
the several sorts of Sentences against Delinquents, were much the same as they
are now. And that the account it gives of the Crimes or Heresies of the
Waldenses, agrees very well with what is found in Reinerus, and others, for the
justification of those persecuted good Christians, of whom I shall give a short
account.

These be the offenses of one that was fled. Transcribed ex Fol. 191. Culpa
unius Fugitivi, Johannes Aimonius oriundus and habitator de Alzona, etc. anno
1320. In English thus: John Aimonius of Alzona, etc. it appears by his
Confession, taken in due form of Law, that some thirty years before his said
Confession, his Mother Perotta had as it were bewitched him with certain
strangers who used to come to his Fathers house in Alzona, that he might not
reveal them to any, they being of that sort of men, who were called Waldenses,
and who in Burgundy were apprehended by the Inquisitors, and burned, as many as
could be found. She commended them to him as good men, and he promised he would
not disclose them. Also, that much about that time, Geraldus, Provincial of the
Waldenses, did often resort to his Fathers house, sometimes alone, sometimes
with a Companion, and once with Robert the Valdensis, and there lie and eat and
drink of what the house afforded; and that he heard his words and admonitions,
and amongst other things, that a mortal sin to swear, or kill a man, in or out
of judgment. Also, that he saw the said Gerardus, and others of the same Sect,
bless the Table when they dined and supt, and that he did eat with them, and
pray with them, according to their way of praying, kneeling, and bowing
themselves, and saying the Lords Prayer. Item, That some three years after, one
John de Cernone, sometimes alone, sometimes with other Waldenses, came many
times to his Fathers house, and there lay, and eat of any thing freely, and
that he heard them say grace at Dinner, and at Supper, and did eat at the same
Table, and pray with them, kneeling, and bowing himself upon a form, as their
manner is; and that three or four times he confess^d his sins to the said John
de Cernone, and from him received Penance and Absolution, although he knew that
he was not a Priest ordained by a Bishop of the Roman Church. Also, that some
twelve years before his Confession, and some three years after, he saw many
times at his Fathers house one Bartholomeus de Caiarco Valdensis, and did eat
and drink, and pray with him according to their manner, and confess his sins to
him; and from him receive Penance and Absolution, although he knew that he was
not a Priest ordained by a Bishop of the Church of Rome. And that he heard
those Waldenses teach that there is no Purgatory, and that the Prayers of the
Living do not profit the Dead. And that he did believe those Waldenses were
good men, and might be saved in their Religion, though he knew that they were
persecuted by the Church of Rome.

For these Crimes, and for his running from their Cruelties, this man must have
been burnt like a Relapse, had he been taken.

Now here is a specimen of their Sentences against such as were to be immured,
p. 14 In nomine Domini N. Jesu Christi, Amen. Quum nos, etc. In English thus:
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Whereas we, etc. appointed
Inquisitors in the Kingdom of France by the Authority of the Pope, against
heretical pravity, have found by an inquisition duly made, that you N. N etc.
have all so many ways, and so grievously offended in the crime of damned
heresies, as it has been intelligibly read and recited to you in the vulgar
tongue, you appearing here and at this time personally before us, according to
our peremptory Command, to receive Penance and definitive Sentence: and you
affirming that you will unfeinedly and heartily return to the unity of the
Church, and that you do now entirely abjure every Heresy whatsoever, and all
favor to it, and every rite and Doctrine, any ways relating to Heretical
pravity, and that you will hold, keep, and defend the Catholic Faith, and in
all things obey, according to your Oath, the Commands of the Church and our
Injunctions: We having granted you the benefit of Absolution, and released you
from those bonds of Excommunication wherewith you were bound for your faults,
if so be that you return from your heart to the unity of the Church, and truly
observe what we shall enjoin you, having set before us the most holy Evangils,
that our Sentence may come from the presence of God, and our eyes may look to
the thing that is equal, and sitting upon this Tribunal, do now decree, with
the advice of good men, and learned in the Law Civil and Canon, that you shall
be finally and perpetually imprisoned betwixt bare Walls, there to perform a
salutary Penance with Bread and Water, the bread of sorrow, and the water of
tribulation: and that you N. and you N. because you have more grievously
offended, shall be kept perpetually in Chains and Irons, in a more narrow and
uneasy place; charging and requiring every one of you, upon the Oath which you
have taken, that without delay you transport your selves to the Walls of
Tholose, which is appointed to such Criminals as you, and that therein you
descend and shut up your selves. And now if you shall neglect to fulfill what we
here appoint you, by not entering within those Walls, or by coming out of them
without our license, or the license of our Successors, in this holy Office, or
if at any time hereafter you any ways transgress against what you have sworn
and abjured, and show your selves impenitent, and that your Confession was but
fained, you shall be thenceforth taken for perjured and impenitents, and shall
return under your former Chains of guilt: And by our foresaid Apostolic
Authority, we Excommunicate you, and all them that shall knowingly receive,
defend, counsel, or favor you, decreeing by these presents, that you and they
shall for ever after be incapable of the benefit of Absolution. And we reserve
to our selves, and to our Successors in this Office, full and free power to
change what we shall think fit, in this our Sentence, by making it more
grievous or easy.

SECT. II. Of the Crimes of the Waldenses.
THe Sentences against relapsed and impenitent Heretics who were delivered to
the Secular Power to be burned, have the same form, mutatis mutandis. So have
also the Sentences against such as were to wear only the Sanbenit, a certain
kind of Coat with yellow Crosses upon it: But I do not find by what tortures
they made their Inquisitions, nor how they dealt privately with their
Prisoners: we have only in this Register what the Inquisitors did publicly in
the Cathedral Church of S. Stephen, before the general Assembly of the Clergy
and people. I shall therefore at present, out of this Manuscript observe only
that the Crimes of such as were to be put to death, or otherwise punished, were
only such wicked heresies and deeds as these.

That they were obstinate; or that they returned as the dog to their vomit; or
that they had not persecuted and detected Heretics, as they were obliged by
their Oaths, that they had been made to confess with great difficulty, or not
till they were accused by others, and taken and detained in Jail; or that when
they came to their Pastors, or went away from them, they had kneeled and craved
their blessing, Ter adorabant eos, dicentes benedicite; and to some, Rogate
Dominum pro nobis, quod perducat nos ad bonum finem, pray God to bring us to a
happy end; or that they believed those whom the Church of Rome called Heretics
to be good men, and Professors of the truth, and that they had commended their
good lives to many, believing for so many years, that they might be saved in
their way; or that they had fled or endeavored to flee into Lombardy; or that
they had concealed some that were fled from the Inquisitors; or privately
buried some Heretics in their Gardens; or that when they were sick, some
Heretics had been brought to comfort them; or else that they had comforted, or
promised to comfort some dying Heretics; or that they had heard them, or read
some of their Books, or eaten of their blessed Bread; or that they believed
themselves descended from the Apostles of Christ, and that their Pastors had
from them that power of binding and loosing which Christ gave to blessed Peter,
and afterward to the other Apostles; that they did believe there were but
three Orders in the Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; (the Church of Rome
makes seven;) That they thought the Excommunications of the Church of Rome
would not be their damnation; That they did not believe themselves to be
subject to the Pope and Prelates of the Roman Church, because they persecuted
them unjustly; or that they had attempted to flee, or had not come to confess,
lest if they came into the Inquisitors hands their Children should starve and
perish.

One, or two, or more of these were the most abominable Crimes, which with many
cruelties they made those poor Waldenses to confess, and for which they burnt,
immured, or otherwise punished them. And nothing can more clear the Innocence
of those persecuted people, than the accusations and convictions, which were
then brought against them in the Courts of the Inquisitors, their professed and
implacable enemies, wherein we see nothing of those either silly or impious
Errors, which many of the Romish Writers are pleased to impute to them.

So much I thought fit to say concerning those pretended Heretics who first
felt the merciless barbarities of the Papal Inquisition.

CHAP. V. Of the restoring of the Inquisition.
NOw I shall give you some account of the setting up, or restoring the Sacred
Tribunal in several places. The Inquisition was so successful in Tholosa, and
it so well agreed with the principles of the Popish Religion, and the genius of
the Roman Popes, that Friar Lambertus was authorized to be St. Dominic's
Coadjutor, to help him to promote that work which so well prospered in his
hands. And that holy Father Innocent III. and his Successors used all their
strength and endeavors, and watched all opportunities to erect in all places
such a Court as holy Dominic did manage. In many Cities of France, and even in
Paris it was erected, as appears by a Bull of Pope Alexander, 47. 1258. In
Hetruria, and other parts of Italy the Franciscan Friars were made Inquisitors,
and appointed to proceed, anno 1258.

Gregory IX. some twenty years before had in Navarra and the adjacent parts,
committed the judging and punishing of Heresy, by way of Inquisition, to the
Dominicans. In Lombardy also, which was the refuge of the Waldenses, Dominic
had at the very first taken care, that they should be duly prosecuted and
destroyed. In the Belgic Provinces Friar Robert and other Inquisitors did burn
very many of the Albigenses. In many parts of Germany also, the like was done
by times. In Spain and Portugal it is more uncertain when the Inquisition
began, and some are of opinion there was none in those parts before King
Ferdinand: But A Paramo tells us, that in some Cities in Castile, there are
extant Bulls of Clement IV. 1267. whereby the Provincial of the Dominicans is
empowered to appoint out of his Order Inquisitors against Heretical pravity, in
all the parts of that Kingdom which the Christians possessed: And that Boniface
IX. granted by a Bull the same power to Vincentius Lisboa, and to Tostatus
Abulensis, who in his works mentions Inquisitors among the Spaniards.

SECT. I. The erecting of the Spanish Inquisition.
BUt if Spain was free for some time of the Inquisition, it had since that its
turn to some purpose. When Clement V. commanded the Inquisitors every where, to
enquire into the Crimes and Heresies of the Knight Templars, and to destroy
them, about the year 1314. No mention, says A Paramo, is made of their
proceedings in the Kingdom of Castile. And likely it is that the Bishops
jealous of their power, had there and elsewhere much abated the credit and
authority of the holy Tribunal, which for some Ages had not much to do,
Heretics being grown less numerous, or less known, by reason of the severity
of the Inquisition at first. But about the year 1480. and so forward, the
Inquisition regained its first vigor and power, not only in Spain, but every
where else. The occasion of it is said to be this.

Alphonsus Hojeda, Prior of St. Paul, a Dominican house in Sevil, being mighty
zealous against those Jews who sought to corrupt the Christian Faith, was
informed by a noble and credible Citizen, of the Family of the Gusmans, that on
Thursday before Easter, some Jews and Apostates had met in a certain house and
uttered Blasphemies, and performed impious Rites, of all which the Prior
immediately certified their Catholic Majesty's, Ferdinand and Isabella, who
much grieved at it, appointed him and others to make what inquiries they could
into that horrid fact, by which means six of the Criminals were found out,
apprehended, and cast into Prisons. This being famed throughout that great
City, awakened the Zeal of Christians, and induced many to inform against
Apostates, and such Jews as were active in persuading Christians to observe the
Old Testament. Petrus Gonzalez a Mendoza, Archbishop of Sevil, and and Thomas a
Turre-Cremata, a Dominican, Confessor to their Majesty's, and Favorite, were
both most notorious for their zeal and fierceness. This last took great pains
to persuade their Majesty's, that to secure Religion, the Laws and and Decrees
of the Popes should be put in execution against all Heretics whatever, without
any difference or mercy, and obtained leave and power for himself and the
Archbishop to proceed, and see what they could do in that weighty matter. They
shed much blood, and tried many ways, and at last did resolve that the
restoring and better ordering of the Inquisition was that alone that could
preserve the Catholic Faith. Upon this therefore they did spend all their
Interest and their Industry, and with much ado persuaded the King and Queen to
assent to it, and to obtain of Pope Sixtus Quartus the setting up again of the
Inquisition. To this his Holiness readily assented, and by a gracious Bull
empowered their Majesty's to make Inquisitors in the Kingdoms of Castile and
Leon. But lest Inquisitors made by Royal Authority should not do their business
thoroughly, he appointed seven Censors of Faith in Sevill, elsewhere he himself
appointed Dominicans to look to the Sacred Office, and in a manner revoked that
power he had granted the King; and in the year 1484. Innocent VIII. constituted
Turre Cremata Inquisitor General, who should depute others, under him, as he
should think fit, and as appears by his Bull, subjected the Inquisitions of
Arragon, Valentia, Cathalonia, and Sicily to the supreme Inquisitor of Castile
and Leon, who is now authorized both by Pope and King.

SECT. II. The settling of the Inquisition in Portugal, and elsewhere.
THis Spanish Inquisition has a power so irresistible, and unlimited, and is
so fierce and rigorous in its proceedings, that it is altogether framed
according to the Popes liking, and is become the Model of a true Papal
Inquisition, such as his Holiness would establish every where, if he could. It
goes quite through the Spanish Dominions, and was once established even in
their Fleets at Sea under the Reign of Philip II. Pope Pius V. made Rodericus a
Mendoca Naval Inquisitor, because about the year 1571, there were found men of
several Religions, in those Galleys that assisted the Italian Princes against
the Turks.

This Inquisition thus shipped and got to Sea, was soon transported into the
Canary Islands, and into both the Indies, in all the Dominions of Spain and
Portugal. But into Portugal it self it was resetled by a crafty Knave, as is
related by some, and believed by my Author, A Paramo. p. 228.
who gives a large account of the pranks he played, to effect by his wits, what
the earnest desires and endeavors of several Popes had not been able to do.
His name was Sahabedra, an inconsiderable and daring Villain, who about the
year 1536. came into that Kingdom as being a Cardinal, Legate, and Inquisitor of
Pope Paul III. He had some Money, and borrowed more by the help of some
Confederates, and having gotten a good Retinue, and brave Ornaments, and forged
Bulls and Seals, he began to use his power in Spain, and to play the
Inquisitor. This he did so neatly, that every body took him to be one indeed:
And when he came into Portugal, well furnished with Moneys he had gotten from
Spanish Heretics, he struck a terror into the Country, as he passed along, and
by his Officers had many Jews and Heretics seized and imprisoned, whom he
several ways punished as became an Inquisitor. King John amazed and astonished
at the zeal and courage of this stout undertaker, gave way to his proceedings,
who would have done, no doubt, most memorable feats, had he not unluckily been
discovered by some that came from Rome, and apprehended, and condemned to no
severer doom than to the Galleys, though by his pretended authority he had
maimed and destroyed many persons. No death would have been too bad for such a
Villain, in any other case: But this went for a witty cheat, as long as it was
against Heretics, and proved the happy occasion of restoring the Inquisition.
Pope Paul III. interceded in his behalf, and his bowels yearned over him, and
his Successor Paul IV. did redeem him from the Galleys.

As bold an attempt, but not so successful, the same Author relates of Eight
Dominican Friars, who went into the Dominions of Presbyter John, and erected by
degrees an Inquisition among the Christian Ethiopians, but were themselves torn
to pieces, and so could only show their good, will. Such is the desperate zeal
of Roman Bigots.

CHAP. VI. Of several Tumults and Oppositions against the Inquisition.
BY thus settling the Inquisition in so many places, we may see, what a
formidable and lawless power the Popes of Rome had here in the West, for some
hundreds of years, before the Reformation. No Yoke could be heavier or more
unacceptable to Princes and People than that bloody Tribunal, and yet they were
forced to be willing to be slaves to it. In Portugal and Spain some Kings have
strugled against it, but to little purpose. Religion, in spite of all
endeavors to the contrary, will ever have a mighty influence on all humane
affairs, and the Religion of Rome being so contrived, as to make its Professors
submissive Subjects to that Court, the Impositions of it must be submitted to,
though tyrannical, unreasonable, and against the liking of such as must bear
them. A Paramo himself relates many Complaints, Tumults, and bloody scuffles
against the Inquisition, of such as either had suffered and sighed under its
intolerable oppression, or of such as trembled at the thoughts of its being
settled among them.

In Arragon, anno 1484. there were loud and pitious clamours of the People
against the Confiscations and proceedings of that dreadful Tribunal. In
Valentia and Catalonia, about the same time, there were insurrections and
mighty endeavors to have shaken off that heavy yoke. In the Baleares Insulae,
in Majorca and else where, the Holy Tribunal became most hated, it was
persecuted bitterly, many Inquisitors were driven away, and the People made
such tumultuous and violent endeavors against it, as were hardly allayed. In
Sardinia, about the year 1498. there were also many quarrels and disturbances
by reason of the Inquisition, and the King's Lieutenant, with the Archbishop of
Callary did by main force break into the Prisons of the Inquisition, to deliver
a man condemned for Herefie. In Sicily, where the Inquisition is most
formidable, there have been frequently long feuds and contests betwixt the
Inquisitors, and Secular Judges. Even at Rome, when Paul IV. was dead, anno
1559. the People gathered together, and with great fury broke into the strong
house of the Inquisitors, tore down all the doors, committed many outrages,
loaded with blows and indignities Thomas Sacotus General of the Inquisition,
and his Adjutant Seraphinus Cavalli, and almost burnt the stately Monastery of
St. Mary super Minervam, because it had expressed much respect and good will
for the Inquisition. But the worst thing of this nature did happen at Naples,
whereby it was almost destroyed. King Ferdinand had in vain endeavored to set
up again an Inquisition in that populous City, but the People so strongly
opposed it, that it took no effect, till that potent Emperor Charles V. at the
earnest solicitation of Pope Paul III. effected it with great difficulty. The
Pope gave good words and large promises to the Citizens, and assured them by a
Bull, that their own men should be the Judges of the Inquisition: but for all
that they knew and did dread what the event would be, if once that black
Tribunal were set up, therefore they bound themselves by Oaths that they would
never suffer it, but would rather choose to lose their lives, as they did also,
many of them, at several occasions: Especially when two men being carried to
Prison, by the Officers of the Inquisition, cried as they went along, that they
were apprehended by the power of the Inquisitors. and were led to die in their
Dungeons; whereat the people incensed, rise in great tumults, and filled the
Town with blood and confusion, and had their houses battered about their ears,
by the great Guns from the Castle, which played upon them. But after all they
were fain to admit what was so fearful and odious to them.

Almost the like had happened long before in the City of Parma, in the time of
Martin IV. there was a long and bloody Tumult, occasioned by the burning of a
woman for Heresy, and Florius the Inquisitor was killed by the People; as many
more have been, of those Ministers of cruelties, whom therefore the Pope has
Sainted or declared Martyrs.

But all this resistance the People made in so many places against Papal
Inquisition, could avail nothing. The Pope held them partly by the Conscience,
and partly by external force; having, as he has, numerous Armies, in all
Popish Countries, of Friars and Monks, who can handle both Swords, the
Spiritual and Temporal, and can engage many Zealots to side with him, who is
believed to be Christ's Vicar, and the infallible Head of the Church, to whom
every soul must be subject, under pain of damnation: having so great and united
a strength, he must needs carry it, at long run, against the scattered Forces,
of unheaded Multitudes. France indeed has cast off long ago the yoke of the
Inquisition, and preserved some more liberty: but it has been upon condition,
that Heretics in it should be massacred, persecuted, and destroyed by some
other means. And even the Republic of Venice, as jealous as it is of its
liberty, and apprehensive of the Popes ambitious and tyrannical designs: even
Venice with all its policy, has been fain to admit of an Inquisition. In the
year 1378. Ludovicus Donatus, a Franciscan, was there appointed by the Pope,
though with lesser power, and therefore lesser severity than elsewhere. For
there the Patriarch and some Senators, who are Venetians, always sit with the
Inquisitor. And when Pius Quintus, anno 1564. would have brought in the Spanish
Inquisition, it was so strongly opposed, that he was fain to give over.

But now by the rise of the Jesuits, whose Order Paul III. confirmed, there is
come so great an accession of Forces to the Pope, that if but this Protestant
Kingdom can be ruined, and brought under him again, it will be easy for him to
regain all the power he has lost, and to make the Inquisition of as large an
extent as his Religion. Which if God should ever permit, and by that means
punish our unquiet, ungovernable spirits, and our contempt of Religion and
Order, it is not to be doubted but the Pope with his Friars and Jesuits would
take care so to settle the Holy Tribunal, as to cut off together with our
Religion, all hope of ever being free from that Romish Tyranny.

CHAP. VII. Of the ordering of the Inquisition.
HAd the Inquisition at first been modelled and looked after, as it has been
since the times of Ferdinand, and since the Reformation, it would not have
decayed and been neglected, as it was in most places for about two hundred
years. Dominicus and his Successors for about an hundred years proceeded
vigourously, and in that time destroyed so many Millions of such as dissented
from the Church of Rome, and struck such a terror in the rest, that they were
fain to lie close and concealed; and where they appeared, the Bishops alone
could easily destroy them: or other means were used to keep them under.

They had no sure Methods at first to proceed by, and there occurred now and
then such difficulties that the Inquisitors were fain to repair to His
Holiness, to know his pleasure, which was the great Rule they went by, and mean
while the concerns of the Holy Tribunal were much hindered or neglected by
reason of their absence. Indeed Urban IV. 1260. endeavored to remove this
inconvenience, by creating a General of the Inquisition, to whom Inquisitors
from all parts might freely send for assistance or direction, as appears by the
Bulls which constituted Cardinal Caetan, who afterward was Nicolas III. the
first General, wherein the Pope tells the Inquisitors: Periculosa and gravia
Impedimenta quae praedicto negotio vobis emerserint, dilecto Fr. Joh. S.
Nicolai in Arce Juliano Diacono Cardinali quem eidem praefecimus negotio,
significare curetis, etc. That in all cases wherein they should be unable to
proceed, or doubtful what to do, they should acquaint the General, who
instructed by him, would find to every evil a proper remedy.

So far it was well, and this might have done much; but afterward Celestine V.
let it fall, and made no General, and the Office became very uncertain, many
after-Popes neglecting it, as Celestine had done, till at last Paul III. who
died in love with the Inquisition, and in commending of it, annexed the
Generalship to certain Cardinals, and so fixed and appointed it, that it has
never been discontinued since. And now in spite of all former cruelties and
oppositions, the Reformation of Religion having appeared and made great
progress, Inquisition was to stand in great stead. Heresies did spread far and
near, and even in Spain and Italy were like to prevail, wherefore it behoved
the Pope to ply hard his powerful Engine; when all lay at stake, and no other
means could prevent what he so much dreaded, the restoring of things to their
Primitive state: The Court of Rome therefore did then study to make the Holy
Tribunal as useful and serviceable as might be.

To this purpose the Canonists were set upon, to state the Case of Heresy, and
show what ways the Inquisitors might best find it out, and most severely and
compendiously punish and exterminate it. And in this they became very prolix,
and a world of them about that time in Spain and Italy writ Volumes upon this
subject. Then also came out many Bulls for the ordering and encouraging of the
Inquisition, to enlarge its power and privileges. Bariola and Pegna, famous for
their skill in those affairs, reckon above 110, for about the space of thirty
or forty years, from the time of Hadrian VI. who was Pope anno 1522. till their
own time, all which Bulls were for the welfare of the Inquisition, and the ruin
of Heretics.

To the same end it was appointed by the said Paul III. that the most important
concerns of the Inquisition should on Thursdays in every Week be debated in
presence of his Holiness, that his blessing and direction might prosper them
the better; Vt faciliorem exitum habeant negotia Inquisitionis. This continues
to this day from the year 1539. and contributes much to the great honor and
esteem of the Inquisitors, and to the quick and happy success of their
proceedings. As also, that afterward Sixtus Quintus having divided the College
of Cardinals into fifteen Congregations to expedite the various Affairs of
Christendom, assigned to the first and chiefest of those Congregations which
consists of six or seven Cardinals, one Commissary General, and a General
Assessor of the Holy Office, the care of such things as relate to it; but this
he rather restored than instituted, as appears by his Patent to this purpose,
which contains many things remarkable, and so I set it down at large.

SECT. I: The Bull of Sixtus Quintus about the new Modelling of the Inquisition.
ANno 1587. -- In primis igitur, quoniam fides, sine qua impossible est
placere Deo, totius spiritualis aedificationis fundamentum est, cupientes hoc
praeciosum depositum quod nobis potissimum a Christo Domino in Beato Petro
Apostolo est creditum, adversus omnes inferorum portas, integrum inviolatumque
custodire, Congregationem sanctae Inquisitionis Haereticae pravitatis, magna
praedecessorum nostrorum providentia, tanquam firmissimum Catholicae fidei
propugnaculum in Vrbe institutum, cui ob summam rei gravitatem Romanus Pontifex
praesidere solet: Nos quoque confirmamus and corroboramus illius omnia
instituta omnesque and singulas facultates a Romany Pontif. Praedeces.
nostris, Cardinalibus, ad eam congregationem pro tempore delectis Concessas.
Omnemque authoritatem and potestatem eis communicatam, scilicet inquirendi,
procedendi, sententiandi and definiendi in omnibus causis tam haeresim
manifestam quam schismata, Apostatiam a fide, Magiam, sortelegia, divinationes,
sacramentorum abusus and quaecunque alia quae etiam praesumptam haeresim sapere
videntur, concernentibus, non solum in Vrbe, and statu temporali nobis and huic
sanctae sedi subjecto, sed etiam in universo terrarum orb, ubi Christiana
viget Religio, super omnes Patriarchas, Primates, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos and
alios inferiores, ac Inquisitores, quocunque privilegio illi suffulti sint,
quorum ac aliorum praedictorum series his nostris literis ad verbum expressa
censeatur confirmamus: Ea denique omnia quae per eosdem praedecessores circa
candem Congregationem, illius jurisdictionem and authoritatem decreta fuerunt,
nos itidem statuimus atque decernimus: Exceptiones quoque, immunitates,
privilegia atque indulta etiam ejusdem officii ministris, vel in hunc usque
diem concessu usuque recepta, pariter approbamus, obnixe in domino hortantes,
and per viscera misericordiae Jesu Christi, and per ejusdem tremendum judicium
obtestantes charissimos in Christo filios nostros in Imperatorem electum,
omnesque Reges ac dilectos Filios Nobiles viros Rerum-publicarum, aliosque
duces, illisque regendis and administrandis praepositos, ac singulos orbis
terrarum principes and magistratus quibus gladii saecularis potestas ad malorum
vindictam a Deo est tradita, per eam ipsam quam se tueri promiserunt Catholicam
fidem, ut sic suas quisque parts, sive in praestando ministris praedictis
auxilio, sive in criminum post ecclesiae sententiam animadversione interponat
(quod eos pro eorum pietate libenter facturos confidimus) ut eorum quoque
praesidio ministri ipsi tantum munus tamque salutiferum, pro Regis aeterni
gloria ac Religionis incremento feliciter exequantur, cujus pii Christianique
obsequii principes ipsi and Magistratus amplissimum a Domino praemium recepturi
sunt in aeternae beatudinis Consortio, Catholicae Fidei assertoribus and
defensoribus praeparatum. In his autem omnibus nostra est intentio, ne in
officio sanctae Inquisitionis, in Regnis and Dominiis Hispaniarum, sedis
Apostolicae authoritate superioribus temporibus instituto, ex quo uberes in
agro Domini fructus indies prodire conspicimus, nobis aut successoribus nostris
inconsultis aliquid innovetur. --

In English thus: Sixtus Quintus, etc.

First, because that Faith, without which it is impossible to please God, is
the foundation of the whole spiritual building, we desiring to preserve entire
and inviolable against all the gates of Hell, that precious depositum which our
Lord Christ has committed chiefly to our trust, in the person of holy Peter
the Apostle, do therefore confirm and corroborate the Congregation of the Holy
Inquisition against Heretical Pravity, which Congregation, by the wisdom and
great prudence of our Predecessors has been instituted in this City, as the
strongest Bull-wark of the Catholic Faith, and over the which the Roman Popes
are to preside, by reason of the great importance of the matter: As we also
confirm and strengthen all the several rights and faculties granted by our
Predecessors to those Cardinals that are chosen for this Congregation; and
likewise all the authority and power communicated to them: viz. to enquire,
proceed, define, and give sentence not only in all causes about manifest
Heresy, Schism, Apostacy, Witchcrafts, Divinations, abuse of Sacraments, but
also in all other causes any ways suspect of Heresy: And this not only in this
City, and the Temporal state subject to this holy See, but also throughout all
the world, where ever there is any thing of Christianity, above all Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Inqusitors, and all other inferiors, as though
here expressed by name, whatever privilege they may have or pretend: And
whatever has been decreed by our Predecessors about this Congregation, and the
jurisdiction and power belonging to it, we also decree, and approve, and renew
all the Exemptions, Immunities, Privileges, and Grants, which hitherto have
been granted to the Officers of the Inquisition, or by custom enjoyed by them;
In the name of the Lord earnestly exhorting and adjuring by the bowels of the
mercies of Jesus Christ, and by his dreadful Judgment our most beloved Sons in
Christ, the Emperor Elect, and all Kings, with our beloved Sons all, Nobles,
Magistrates, Princes, and Potentates of the Earth, to whom God has given the
Sword of Secular power, to take vengeance of the wicked, by that Catholic
Faith they have promised to defend; that they would every one of them so fully
do their part, (as we hope they freely will, out of their pious disposition)
either by seeing the Sentence of the Church executed against Criminals, or in
so assisting the foresaid Officers, that by their help they may duly and
happily discharge their weighty and salutary Office, to the increase of
Religion, and to the glory of the eternal King: And of this their pious and
Christian obedience and service those Princes and Magistrates shall receive
that most ample reward, prepared to the Asserters and Defenders of the
Catholic Faith in the enjoyment of heavenly bliss. Now by these presents, it
is not our Intention, that any thing, without our special leave, should be
changed, in that Office of the Holy Inquisition, which has brought, and still
brings a most plentiful harvest in the field of the Lord, established
heretofore in Spain by the authority of this Apostolic See.

Hereby we see how well affected the Pope is toward the Holy Office, and how
firm, how well ordered, how honorable he has made it; how earnest, how
solicitous he is to have it preserved and made universal, if all Christian
Princes would but be his dutiful Children: and how in the name of God, of his
Religion, and even of the mercies of our most charitable and gracious Redeemer,
we are all devoted to the merciless cruelties of the Inquisition, of which as
we see the Pope is the Head, and the most careful Director.

CHAP. VIII. Of the proceedings of the Inquisition.
THe proceedings of this dreadful Court being terrible and odious, much
maligned by the People, and against the very propensities of humane nature, are
therefore secret and silent, there is nothing that makes a noise, or that
appears abroad, except it may be once a year, when they make a brave show and
Pageant of the act of Faith, which is the day of public execution; all the
rest is remote from witness and observation, saving what is previous to the
imprisonment.

There is, with some difference in every Kingdom or State where Inquisition is
set up, a General of it, who in his Precinct is supreme, but is accountable to
the great General of all, who resides at Rome, and to that Congregation wherein
the Pope presides, (as is before said.) This Inferior General with other
Inquisitors, deputed and authorized by the Pope, manageth all the affairs
within his District, that belong to the Cognizance of the Holy Tribunal, which
is erected but in few places, though it commands all the Country.

Here and there in the great Cities some of the Inquisitors reside, in the
Monastery of their Order, which is commonly a strong and stately House for the
purpose, half a Castle, and half a Goal, fitted with all conveniences
requisite, Dungeons, instruments of torture, Officers of all sorts, and two or
three of the Holy Fathers, Dominicans, Franciscans, or Jesuits of late, who are
the Judges of the Court, and many other Friars of the same Order.

Herein men are brought several ways; by a Citation, which they call Verbalis,
when the party has a good Estate, (which sometimes is his guilt) and being
really no Heretic, is not likely to run away. Then they send to him one of
their Officers, to tell him that the most Reverend the Inquisitors, will speak
with him, about some things that concern his soul; and this is the verbal
Citation. But if he be really tainted, or strongly suspect of Heresy, and like
to abscond, then they begin by a Citation which they call real; that is, by
seizing upon him. The Captura, or apprehension, is that which they call Realis
Citatio; as Caesar Carena, a late Author, and many others before him, tell us.

When they appear who are brought in either way, the Inquisitors, who always
look and speak grave and serious, tell them with a demure countenance, and in
soft and godly language, that they are obliged by the duty of their holy Office
to search into the Truth of some things which much concern the honor of God,
and his eternal happiness; and then after several questions, and grave
exhortations that they would examine themselves, and find out and confess
wherein they are guilty, they commit them to custody; or it may be, he that had
the Verbal Citation is sent home, and ordered to return within so many days,
and soberly admonished to look to himself, and to do what becomes a good
Catholic.

SECT. I. Of the Accusations:
IT is to be supposed, before a man be thus cited, that he has been accused,
and sometimes it is true, though by some other means he may be brought into
that evil net, out of which no man can ever wholly free himself: But
accusations are the most frequent beginnings of the Tragedy, and whether true
or false, there is no fence against them. It is not here as in the Secular
Tribunals of Princes, where you make your legal defense, and know what
witnesses and accusations are against you, and are confronted before your
Accusers, and every thing is transacted publicly: But in the Inquisition your
Judge generally is your enemy, who designs you an ill turn; your defense
signifies nothing, you can have no friend in that horrid Den, to hear or see
what is said or done; and you never know who accuses you, or of what. It is a
rule in the practice of that Court, Nunquam sunt publicandi testes. That the
Witnesses must never be published or declared. And A Paramo tells us, p. 159.
that when Charles V. yet young, was mightily pressed to enterpose his authority,
that the Witnesses in the Court of Inquisition might be known and confronted,
as elsewhere, and 800000. Pistols were offered him by the Spaniards to do it,
Cardinal Franciscus Ximenius, the then General of the Inquisition, withstood
and hindered it, because it would bring danger and discouragement to the
Witnesses, and in a great measure hinder the proceedings of the Holy Tribunal.

The accusations then, are all clancular, no man knows whence the deadly blow
comes; and there is this further mischief in it, that the Witness is not to
prove the truth of what he charge upon another, but the Judge is to make it
out, by tortures, or by what means he can; Non subit onus probandi qui
denunciat, sed judici onus remittit; so their Directories tell us, The Judge,
and not the Accuser is to make proof of the accusation. And whether proof be
made or not, still the Inquisitors may proceed, for according to one of their
Rules, any indicium, likelihood, or suspicion warrants all their prosecutions;
Non est necesse ad procedendum probari corpus delicti. And so we need not
marvel if there have been so many attempts to shake of this Tyranny, for no man
is safe under it, no not the most zealous Romanist.

The Accuser is at no trouble, nor no charge at all; if he comes by way of
Denunciation, as they call it, that is, by naming them that know the Fact. That
such and such know that N. N. said or did such heretical things. The
Inquisitors takes some of his Servants to be Witnesses of this, and then the
Denunciator has no more to do.

Or if the Accuser speaks as of his own knowledge, after his Information taken
he is free, and were it never so improbable or false, it lies in the
Inquisitors breast to proceed as he shall please afterward. And whether the
proofs be weak or strong, or none at all, as soon as a man any ways is
defferred as guilty, the Fiscalis, who is a Civil Officer, and as it were the
Kings Solicitor in the holy Office, or more properly a Confederate with the
Inquisitors, inslaved to their pleasure by Oaths and Interest, comes and
undertakes the quarrel, and petit capturam Rei, as the Canonists say, demands
that the real or pretended Criminal may be apprehended, and begins the
prosecution in this manner:

Ego N. N. Fiscalis sanctissimae Inquisitionis, coram te Revendo Inquisitore
contra Haereticam pravitatem judice delegato in causis fidei, criminaliter
accuso N.N. qui cum sit Christianus baptizatus and velut talis apud omnes
habitus, a fide Catholica recessit, and ad pestiferam haeresim Calvinistarum
vel Luther. impie accessit, praedicans, scribens, firmiterque asserens multa
dogmata haeretica, scandalos^, and valde suspecta in approbationem and laudem
praectorum Haereticorum, quos velut magistros imitatur. I N. N. Solicitor of
the most holy Inquisition, accuse before thee Reverend Inquisitor against
Heretical Pravity, judge delegat in matters of Faith one A. B. of such a place,
etc. who being a Christian baptized, and as such generally esteemed, has
receded from the Catholic Faith, to follow the pestilent Heresies of the
Calvinists or Lutherans, and has preached, writ, and asserted many Doctrines
heretical, scandalous, and very suspect, for the praise and approbation of the
foresaid Heretics, whom he owns for Leaders.

The Accusation thus put in form, and prosecuted by this Fiscalis, it is great
odds but the unhappy man is utterly undone in this world; and happy were it for
him if he could go out of it without the tedious miseries of a hard
imprisonment, and the exquisite pains of cruel tortures; for if he be indeed
infected with what they call Heresy, though he knows nothing of his being
detected, and perhaps fears it not, ^et it is ten to one but that the
Inqui^itors by their many arts and subtilties will search it out so far as to
proceed against him with the utmost rigor, One of them uses this Distich to
this ^urpose.

Sed quoniam variant animi, variabimus arts,
Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt.
SECT. II. Of proceeding by way of Inquisition.
THere is another Modus procedendi, which they call per Inquisitionem, when
there is no direct Accuser nor De^iator, Sed quis fama laborat, as they speak,
but a man has an ill fame; then ^hey enquire into the public report, and
begin the action thus:

In nomine Domini Amen, anno 1660. die etc. ad aures venerabilis and Religiosi
viri domini Fratris N. o. p. in Tali Dominio Inquisiteris haereticae pravitatis
a sancta sede specialiter delegati, pervenit pluries, fama publica referente,
quod N. de tali loco, dixit vel fecit talia contra fidem; acta sunt haec anno,
etc. in praesentia Testium vocatorum and mei notarii.

In the name of God Amen, In the year etc. it being reported by common fame,
came often to the ears of the venerable and religious Father N. Dominican,
Inquisitor against Heretical pravity by a special delegation from the holy See,
within such a Province, that A. B. said and did such things, contrary to the
Faith; in token whereof these presents were drawn in presences of Witnesses and
of my Notary.

This Record entered, the party is sure to hear of it one time or another,
except he soon dies or escapes; for now he is become suspect, he shall next
opportunity without fail receive by an unwelcom Messenger, such a Citation as
this.

Frater N. ordinis praed. In -- Inquisitor Haereticae pravitatis, Dilecto in
Christo N. N. solutem, and mandatis nostri^, imo verius apostolicis firmiter
obedire; quia de persona vestra Talia a fide dignis ad nostram notitiam sunt
deducta, quae si vera essent, de fide redderent vos suspectum, ideo ex debito
injuncti nobis officii vos monemus peremptory per presents, quatenus curetis
ante nos personaliter comparere, die, etc. and loco, etc. modo debito
responsurus. Datum, etc.

Friar N. of the Order of St. Dominic, Inquisitor against Heretical pravity in
such a place, to our Beloved in Christ A. B. we wish health, and that he may
constantly obey our Commands, or rather those of the Holy See. Because some
creditable persons have reported to us such things concerning you, which if
true would make suspect the soundness of your Faith: therefore, as we are
obliged by our Office, we admonish you peremptorily by these presents, that you
fail not to appear personally before us, such a day, in such a place, then and
there to answer duly about the premises. Given, etc.

This Summons received, the man must consider what to do, and there is great
danger in every thing he can resolve upon. The attempting to escape by Flight
is not without great difficulty, for the Inquisitors have Spies upon them, whom
they are resolved to have in their power, and if he be taken, he comes under
the notion of a Fugitive, and must expect nothing but severity. The appearing
according to the Citation exposes him to a certain ruin, if he has done or
said any thing in favor of the Modern Heresies of Luther or Calvin; for though
he should recant, yet his Estate is forfeited, and he is either condemned to
the San-benit, or to be pent up betwixt four Walls to live upon bread and
water: and if according to his persuasion he persists in the confession of the
True Faith, he must resolve upon the patience of Primitive Martyrs, and comfort
himself with the hope of a reward in heaven.

SECT. III. Of the Inquisitors Visitation.
BUt before I give an account of the farther poceedings of the Holy Tribunal
against such as are brought before it, I must say something of its
perambulations; for now and then when the Judges think fit, it takes a walk
into the Country, and visits those parts that are remote from the place of its
constant abode. This Visitation of the Inquisitors was wont to carry great
terror wherever it went, when before, and about the time of the Reformation,
there were many every where, who liked and promoted the design of Reforming,
and had secretly imparted their thoughts to such who were of the same mind. For
if but two or three were taken, and in the midst of Tortures, or for fear of
them, did speak all they knew, they caused many others to be apprehended, and
whole Monasteries and Villages were sometimes taken and destroyed, and a great
dread and consternation fell upon the whole Party: So that when the Clemency of
the Kings of Spain caused Edicts of Grace to be promulged, promising impunity
to all Heretics and Apostates that should return to the Catholic Faith within
thirty days, A Paramo tells us, that it has sometimes brought in seventeen
thousand men and women, who rather than venture to fall into the hands of the
Inquisitors, would say and do any thing, though never so contrary to their
persuasions.

Those Edicts of Grace were to be published the first time that the Inquisitors
visited any Province, whether they are still used, I am not able to tell: But
sure I am, he Pope never spoke any thing more infallibly true than when he said
that the Inquisition had brought in a plentiful Harvest, as we have seen in the
Bull of Sixtus Quintus, for indeed there were Vberes fructus, if Blood,
Confiscations, and hypocritical Converts may be called a fruitful Income.

As soon as the Inquisitors, one or more, are arrived in any place, they send
for the greatest Bigots, the most furious haters of Heretics, and ask them who
they are that are counted suspect in the Country. They send for whom they will,
and question and swear them upon what Articles they please; and they make them
that are most cunning and zealous their special Baylisss or Familiars, and
oblige them by oath to enquire and inform against all Offenders. Then they
publish their Monitories, and with dreadful formalities excommunicate and curse
all that shall not reveal whatever they know that has been said or done
against the Pope, and Church, and the Catholic Faith; and some have been so
terrified by these, that to discharge their tender Conscience they have accused
themselves for wandering thoughts or dreams that were heretical, and have done
for it a severe penance, in the Inquisitors Jailes.

In these rural Visitations the whole process against Heretics is seldom made
an end of, the judges commonly go no further in it than to what may serve to
detect the accomplices, and the Criminals are carried to that principal City
where the Inquisition is seated, there to be proceeded against according to the
grave and formal Methods of the Holy Tribunal, of which I shall proceed to give
an account.

CHAP. IX. Of the intermedial proceedings betwixt the apprehension and the
Torture.
WHen the Citation Verbal or Real, has brought a man within the doors of the
Inquisition, there is always cause for his detention, if the Friars that are
Judges think fit: and if he be indeed any ways tainted or guilty in the matter
of Heresy, he to be sure is laid up for a good while, except God in mercy
release him. Indeed Padre Paolo makes mention of some who by the Interposition
of the Republic of Venice, or of some Princes have been set at liberty: And A
Paramo brings the example of Laurentius Valla, who by the Kings command was
brought out of the Inquisition, where he had been condemned to be burnt, and
was only whipped with rods in the Dominicans Convent, at Naples. But these cases
be rare, and generally when a man goes in, he may bid adieu to the world; he
must meddle no more with the concerns of it, no friends must visit or comfort
him, nay, they may not mediate for him, where the Pope is supreme, as appears
by a Bull of Pius V. cited by Padre Poalo; so that he is left to the mercy of
them that think themselves obliged to have no mercy on him.

His fare is sufficient to make him live to feel his misery. And as Tho. del
Been, a very learned Author in these matters cites one of the Clementine
Constitutions and other Authors, the Prison must be durus and arctus, straight
and uneasy, so full of hardship and affliction, that it may serve magis ad
poenam quam ad custodiam, rather to punish than to secure the Prisoner: Yet
with this wise and most gracious caution, Vt vita incarcerati non abbrevietur
notabiliter, sed tantum aliqualiter, that the life of the Prisoner be not
notably, but only indifferently shortened. Indeed very few bodies are strong and
vigorous enough to bear long with the Calamities of those Dungeons, and most
perish in them with grief and misery, especially since so many Countries shook
off the Papal Yoke, and prudence and interest required it, that the severities
of the Inquisition should not appear barefaced, as they did do before.

SECT. I. Of the being brought to the Bar.
BUt for all this, whatever he suffers, who deprived of all his former comforts
is confined to that most grievous restraint, he can do nothing to hasten his
doom, and release by death or penance. If the Inquisitors please he shall lie
many years (if he can live so long) without being so much as examined, or
allowed to speak one word for himself. Caraena is express, and has authorities
for it, that it is, In arbitrio Inquisitorum quoties and quando reos examinent
and constituant; In the choice of the Inquisitors when and how often they shall
examine and call the Criminals before them.

When they do, the Register sets down what is said to them, and what they
answer; and the first thing the Friars do, is to swear them upon certain
insnaring Interrogations, from which if they ever recede afterward, by
forgetfulness, or sharpness of pain, they are perjured, and supposed guilty of
all that is laid to their charge.

Those Interrogations are such, that no man that is not a thorough-paced
Papist, can answer without betraying himself, and his Conscience must hold no
Laws but the Popes Will, that can clear himself by satisfying the Reverend
Inquisitors. Indeed I find that Ignatius Loyola came off with great applause,
when being brought and questioned in the Holy Office at Complutum, and at
Salamanca, he very bravely and clearly acquitted himself. It was about the year
1534. when the Reformation had prospered in many been Kingdoms, and kept out of
others, only by vigilant and stout cruelty. The Inquisitors every where were
then very sierce and very jealous, and the Founder of the Jesuits leading a
strange unusual kind of life, and preaching with great vehemence, and very
little skill, and no license at all, became suspect to them; they took him
twice, and the last time did press him so home, with about thirty inquiries,
and he answered so positively, to their hearts content, that he removed all
suspicion of his not being a dutiful and true Son of the Roman Church.

But to return, the Delinquent brought to answer, has in some cases toward
the latter end, a kind of a mock-Advocate, who excepts at formalities, and
pleads in the behalf of the Prisoner some Decretals or Canons that can do him
no great good. He himself, let him answer what he will, can neither move his
Judges with pity, nor persuade them to change their usual way of proceeding.
After they have sworn him upon those Articles that concern his Faith and
constant adherence to the Roman Church, they will question him about various
things, and without taking any notice of it, hear him sometimes deny that
stoutly of which they have sufficient proofs; such is the weakness of man, such
is the terror of that bloody Court.

Here the Friars with their composed gravity make long and religious
exhortations to the Prisoner at the Bar, protest of their good intentions
toward him, and that all they do is for the good of his soul; tell him they
have clear evidence of the whole matter he is charged withal, only that it may
profit him, they would have from his own mouth the whole truth in a full and
free confession. And when they have said what they will, and heard what his
Fears or his Conscience suggest him, they send him back to his Prison.

But if a man at first, resolved to save his Soul whatever his Body suffers,
tells them plainly he is a Protestant, and resolves to die so. Then their
promises and their threats are all used to make him change his mind, and regain
him to the Church, and as they see cause they will hasten or delay his doom,
and still so order their Methods, as to proportion their rigours to the
hainousness of the Crime of Heresy.

SECT. II. How the Prisoners Estate is seized upon.
IT is a Maxim in the Jus Pontificium, Haeretico nihil est licitum possidere,
and this is as good Law as the Pope can make it, That it is not lawful for a
Heretic to possess any thing. Accordingly when Papal Inquisitors have judged
any man to be so, his Estate is wholly forfeited. When once he is taken and
imprisoned, the Fiscalis, who prosecutes him, demands an Order for the securing
of all his Estate. If he be the Father of a Family, his Wife and Children can
claim nor detain nothing; nay, if it be the Wife that is accused, and detained
in the Inquisition, her Husband is deprived of part of what she brought, and
must be at charge to maintain her, and it is well if it does not involve him
into the suspicion or guilt of Heresy. Nay, Alphonsus de Castro, is of opinion
that a Heretic is bound in Conscience to give up all his goods to be
consiscated, before he is accused or convicted, and that he is unjust, and
sins, if he does not.

However all the Inquisitors and Canonists are agreed that the Possessions of a
Heretic are all forfeited. Carrorius, Jacob. Septim. Gundiss. de Vill. Franc.
Squil, and many more you may see cited by Gazaros, who all cite Popes Decretals
for it. Et hoc merito contra Haereticos statutum fuit, ut in egestate haeretici
laborent, and alii terreantur, etc. And this is a just Law, (says Roias an
Inquisitor) that Heretics may be beggarly, and others may be deterred from
that crime.

The Holy Office therefore sends an Order to attach the Heretical goods, and
then they become Sacred. No man, for the world dares touch any part of them;
then if a man be declared to be an Heretic, whether he recants or persists,
whether he be burnt or not, his Estate is forfeited, and that even from the
very hour that he first committed the crime of Heresy; and this breeds many
learned questions in the Canon Law. Nay, though the man have been dead many
years, and never whilst he lived questioned about his Faith, yet he may be
declared to have been an Heretic, and his Estate seized, and by the
Pontifician Law declared forfeited. Post Haeretici mortem, declarari potest eum
haereticum fuisse ad finem confiscandi. Cap. accusat. 8..

We need not seek far, to find whence some Fanatics took their Tenants of
Dominion being founded in grace, and the wicked being Usurpers of what they
possess, there is enough to this purpose among the Decretals and Extravagants.
And the Gloss, which is approved notes in utroque Jure, speaks it thus plainly;
That Heretics may justly be spoiled of what is theirs, and that it is lawful
to take from them what they have, though better it were to have it done by the
authority of a Judge. Haeretici recte possunt spoliari rebus suis, and licitum
est auferri Haereticis ea quae habent, melius tamen est si authoritate judicis
id fiat. Gl. 1. sum. 23.4.7.

This is very punctually observed by the Inquisitors, who are accountable to
none but to the Apostolic Chamber, Benedict XI. appointed it anno 1303. and
that the Bishops should have no share, and no power to demand any account of
the Inquisitors, for what they take from Heretics: yet in the Dominions of
Spain, the King has one third part, the Inquisitors one third part, and the
other third part is laid by ad usus fidei, for the depressing of Heretics, and
advancing the Popes power. This brings to him and to his Oficers an Vberes
fructus in the literal sense, a very plentiful income, and the King, for giving
way to have his Subjects plundered and destroyed, is also allowed a dividend,
though with many defalcations. When above five thousand houses in one Citiy
have been emptied of goods and inhabitants, as Hieron. Zurit. l. anal. 20. has
it, this must have been a brave booty; and this makes some say, that only
Covetousness keeps Inquisition on foot, in Popish Countries; which is as true as
that Covetousness and Ambition cause the Papacy to hate the Reformation, and to
endeavor to destroy it and all Protestants. That is, though it be so,
Inquisition is never the less formidable to us, and intended for our ruin.

SECT. III. Of the tedious and sad condition of the Prisoners.
WHoever reads those Books which give us an account of the Inquisition, will
liken it in his thoughts to nothing but hell upon earth; out of it there is no
redemption, and in it there is no comfort. We have seen before that the Prisons
are Magis ad Poenam quam ad custodiam, designed more to afflict than to secure
the poor Prisoners. If the sense of their misery can suffer their thoughts to
look out, they see what havoc is made in their Houses and Estates, what ruin,
what danger is brought upon their Families! they themselves have no
consolations but what they receive from heaven! they are absolutely in the
power of them, who in cold blood, seriously and conscienciously will use them
as barbarously as they can, and think they can never exceed in their severity!
The struglings of flesh and blood against such bitter sufferings, tempts many
to wound their Conscience, and staggers, no doubt the most resolute and the
most sincere! Those Ministers of cruelty, who look to them, and deal with them
according to the Orders of the Inquisitors, dare not favor or pity them,
though they had a heart to do it; for then they should be used as Favorers of
Heretics, and hinderers of the Holy Office: And that is very bad.

We see by Arnoldus and Julius Clarus that sometimes the Prisoners are exposed
naked to the cold airs, or hindered from sleep, and oftentimes allowed so little
bread as to be almost starved. But at the best they are in a very ill case, and
the Friars make it as long and tedious and as intolerable as they can, having
this Saying, or this Rule for it, That vexatio and calamitas carceris
frequenter aperit intellectum; The vexation and calamity of the Imprisonment,
do oftentimes open the Understanding: i. e. make them see what an ill thing it
is to be an Heretic.

A Paramo, one that was many years a Judge in that Court, where many ill and
barbaraus things are kept from coming to the knowledge of the world, who know
nothing of their doings, but what they themselves are pleased to reveal, speaks
it in the commendation of the Holy Tribunal, Odio, Favori, intercessionibus
aliisve humanis respectibus omnis aditus praecluditur, tantaque Religione,
aequitate and justitia geruntur omnia, tanto silentio and taciturnitate causae
aguntur, tacitis and occultis judiciis, ut vel summum illud silentium mirentur
-- parietes illi interiores atque tecti recessus, intra quos privata and remota
luce communi, procul a conventu and srequentia mortalium Inquisitores ipsi de
rebus querunt, ut de criminibus delatis in Judicium Inquisitionis injiciant
metum hominibus, and Religionem afferent incredibilem in illo silentio. That in
it no regard at all is had to love or hatred, to intercessions, or to any
humane respects; they cannot so much as find an entrance into that sacred
enclosure, wherein all things are transacted with the greatest Equity, Justice,
and Religion; wherein Causes are debated and judged, by occult unspeakable
ways, with so deep a silence and taciturnity, that even those interior Walls
and secret recesses wherein all is acted, wonder at such an amazing silence.
Therein the Inquisitors, in privacy far from the common light, and noise, and
observation of the world, search out the truth, and cast in the souls of men an
incredible awe and terror, about those crimes which belong to their cognizance.

By this Encomium of the Inquisition, we may in some measure understand how
they pass their time that are forced to dwell for some years in those Regions
of Horror; and that this is yet more grievous than that fourfold penalty which
the old Pontifician Law assigned to the crime of Heresy. Haereticorum poena
quadruplex, excommunicatio, depositio, bonorum ablatio and persecutio
militaris; which was to be punished in the Soul by Excommunication, in the Body
by the Sword, in the Estate by Sequestration, and in the Dignity by Deposition.

CHAP. X. Of the Tortures, and what relates to them.
THis is yet more grievous than all that has been said. If Heretics by so
being have forfeited their Lives and Estates, let them be taken away from them.
But why should the unhappy Wretches be tormented with ingenious cruelty: and
why should they that judge for God (as they say) delight themselves in the
shrieks, and groans, and contortions of humane Creatures?

Indeed I thought that here the Inquisitors vizard should have been pulled off,
and that they would have used no longer their godly, or rather canting
discourses and formalities, but would have gone about this bloody work in a
bloody furious manner. But they are still the same serious godly formal men as
before; they seem to go about this with as much freedom of thoughts, and as
good an intention, as ever the Jewish Priests went about slaying of a Calf or
Lamb. And I am persuaded many of them mean well, being commonly great Casuists,
and the most eminent, the most virtuous and religious of the Societies of
Friars or Jesuits, that have that great honor and power conferred upon them,
of being entrusted by the Pope with the management of the Holy Office.

Thus then after the Criminal has been kept as long, and examined as often as
they please, the Inquisitors send for him, and having magnified their patience
and long bearing with him, and rehearsed what pains they have taken to make him
sensible of his guilt, and to bring him to Confession, and to Conversion, they
tell him plainly, that now they are resolved to have the truth from him, and
that being he puts them to it, they must use the last means for that, and come
to extremities with him; and that let him look to it, they are resolved to put
him to the torture, such a day and hour, and so send him back. Let him have
said, or let him say what he will, it alters not the case, he must smart for
his Heresy, and no doubt he is now upon the Rack, his frighted thoughts
anticipate the cruel Officers: as no doubt his Judges design it, Laur. Arnol.
and generally those Lawyers who treat of that part of the Canon Law, and are
many of them Friars and Ecclesiastics, make it a common Rule, Judex prius
excusatori debet denunciare diem instituendae torturae; That the Judge is
obliged to let the Defendant know what day he is to be tortured. Which
torturing they commonly call the Question, and define it, Tormenta and corporis
dolor ad eruendam veritatem; Torments and pains of the Body to get out the
Truth.

SECT. I. Of some preparations previous to the Torture.
TO tell you the Truth, there must be some grounds of suspicion, according to
their Printed Rules, before they rack a man: But Th^del Been, a late voluminous
Author, whose Books are printed at Lions, with the approbation of the sacred
faculty of Paris, 1666. treating at large of the Office and Excellencies of the
Inquisition, tells us that lesser indications or suspicions of guilt will serve
in the Case of Heresy, Leviora indicia sufficient in crimine Haeresis. And yet
those indicia are so light and comprehensive, that by them hardly one man shall
escape the stretch. These six are commonly numbered in their Directories, 1.
Mala fama, an ill fame, as it is here with us to be Popishly affected, whereby
certain men would bring all that are not of their Faction under the odium of
the People. 2. Tentata fuga, if a man has attempted to flee, which any man
would, rather than come into their hands. 3. Locus suspectus, a suspected
place, to have dwelt or been born in a City or Province infected with Heresy.
4. Tempus, the time, as when there are great endeavors to oppose the Romish
Worship and Tyranny, then they are to be more cautious, and more suspicious. 5.
Conversatio prava, a depraved conversation, that is, frequenting such as are
tainted or suspect. 6. Spes commodi alicujus, the hope of some advantage, as if
a man has heretical Friends or Relations able to do him good. If a man falls
under one or more of these suspicions, then he may be proceeded against, and
urged to confess by the Rack; and that especially in the Crime of Heresy,
wherein they all agree that the Inquisitor must be more prone to torture,
because that Crime is more secret, and lies deep in his heart, or in his
understanding, and because the confession of it is mighty profitable to the
Heretic, In crimine Haeresis proniores esse debent ad torquendum, quod illud
sit occultum, and quod confessio multum prosit confitenti.

Those things duly weighed, and the Inquisitors having decreed in due form that
the man shall be put to the question, send for him, and very gravely reprove
him for his shufflings, and reservations, and abusing their patience, and
putting them to great trouble; and then they afresh exhort him to unbosome all
his secrets, and for the love of his soul and body, to keep back nothing. They
tell him how grievous is that which he must suffer, and that if he should lose
life or limb by it, he must thank himself, for their part they must do their
Office, and it is much against their will they are necessitated to use such
means to bring forth the Truth, which he will not confess. Such as this and
much more to the same purpose is to be found in their Directories.

After that they pronounce this Sentence, which their Register writes down; Nos
Fr. N. Inquisitores Haereticae pravitatis, etc. attendentes meritis processus
facti per nos contra N. N. de etc. diligenter examinat is quod tu es varius in
confessione, and quod sunt indicia multa, eapropter ut veritas ab ore proprio
habeatur and deinceps aures judicum non offendas, interloquendo declaramus,
judiciamus and sententiamus die praesenti and hora tali, te supponendum
tormentis and quaestionibus; Lata fuit haec sententia, etc. This they call,
Sententia interlocutoria ad torquendum; an interlocutory Sentence in order to
the torture.

We N. N. Friars, Inquisitors against Heretical pravity within this Kingdom of
N. duly considering the merit and circumstances of the whole process by us made
against thee such a one, of such a place, having diligently examined that thou
art various in thy confessions, and that there are many presumptions against
thee; For that reason, that truth may be had out of thine own mouth, and that
henceforth thou may be kept from offending the Judges ears, we before we
define the matter, declare, judge, and sentence thee to be put to torments and
questions, this day at such an hour. This Sentence was given such a day, in
such a place.

This done, the Prisoner is carried into a low, secret, and remote place, that
none may hear the cries, nor what is said or done, but such as are appointed;
every thing is prepared to begin the Tragedy, and then thither the Bloud-hounds
follow their prey; and fiercely fall upon it.

SECT. II. The ways of Torturing.
THe first thing that is done is the Denudatio, the stripping them naked, be
they men or women; the Holy Friars the while sitting on their Tribunal, look
and are attentive to see that every thing be done according to due course of
Law, and as they shall appoint. I find in some of their Lawbooks and
Directories mention made of fustigation, beating the Criminals with Cudgels
upon the bare flesh. Of tying their hands very straight, immittendo virgas
inter digitos, putting sticks betwixt their fingers. Of driving an Iron Peg
into a certain part of the foot very sensible, so as to go though a bone which
they call Losso Pazzo. Of putting them into a certain Instrument, wherein they
are enclosed all but the head, and wherein a sharp thing presses hard upon
their Navil. Of pouring in through their Nostrils water mixed with Lime. And of
some other kinds of cruelties which I need not mention. But the Pulley or
stretching Rack is that which is most generally and frequently used, and which
their Writers most approve. I praise God I never saw it, but in general they
describe the manner of it, thus:

After his cloths are pulled off, who is to be tortured, (which is good as they
say against incantamenta, Spells and Witchcrafts, which are very frequent in
Popish Countries, and which are pretended so to number some Criminals that they
feel not the Torture) they put afterward upon him or her a thin garment of
linen very straight to his limbs. Then with small cords they tie his hand
behind him, Wrist and Thumbs, so hard that the blood gusheth out, and put them
upon a hook, which a rope draws up, and hangs him into the air. Then they put
weights to his feet, less at first, and bigger afterward, till they almost
dismember him. Then they pull him up as high as the Judges, who sit by, are
pleased to appoint; they shake him and pull him down, as the Inquisitors
direct, and keep him thus stretched and hanging as long as they command. The
while they put questions to him, and the Register sets down his Answers. But in
the Books that treat of these matters, I find this caution inserted, that in
questioning the Tortured, they should not at all be particular, nor ever ask
him expressly what they would have him say: But insist only upon generals, that
he would speak the truth, and reveal all he knows, lest (say they) the
greatness of his pain extort from him a false confession, and his impatience
make him say any thing, that the question should prompt him to.

Jul. Clarus and Laur. Arnoldus direct that the Prisoner should neither eat nor
drink for ten hours together before he be tortured, that being more faint and
sooner tired, he may sooner confess, and that clear from fumes, he may remember
and speak his mind more plainly. For what he speaks in the Torture is a good
proof in Law against himself or others, except he presently retract it, which
as soon as he is took down they read his confession to him.

I find by cautions in several Authors that some weakly, tender Heretics, not
able to bear the pain of it, die in the torture, and some of them find great
fault with it, and in that case accuse those Tortures of cruelty. But however
they all own, that it is much worse to endure the torture, than to have both
hands, or any part of the body cut off.

SECT. III. Of repeating the Question.
IT is seldom that once serves the turn, and therefore the Judges must not be
satisfied with what the Prisoner says the first time he is racked. They have
taken great care that Heretics should not go so peaceably out of the world.
And therefore the same Rules of theirs, that appoint that in the case of
Heresy the Inquisitors should be prone and ready to use the torture: appoint
also that he should frequently repeat it. Heretical pravity is a subtle and
secret poison, which lies in the closest recesses of the Soul, and is apt to
stick, one bitter potion will not fetch it up, they must repeat the Dose.
Therefore when the man is taken down, and they are clothing him again, they
must insert this clause into the Process of what has been done, Animo tamen
illum torturae iterum subjiciendi, quatenus opus sit; that now they release him
with a design to put him again to the same torments, as long as there is need.

And so the poor Wretch, not able to move himself, is carried to his Den with
this comfort, that as soon as his disjoynted bones are knit again, and he is
capable of relishing the same pain, he shall be sure to hear of the good
Fathers, who now will let him alone, but not forget him. But I must not forget
to say, that whilst he hangs in the Sling with his weights at his feet, those
great searches of truth, the Inquisitors, Positis coram eo dirioribus
instrumentis torturae, having set before him more direful Instruments of
torture, give him to understand by this formal sentence, that they will make
use of them the next time. Nos Inquisitores, etc. assignamus tibi N.N. diem
talem, ad quaestiones continuandum, ut ex tuo ore proprio, veritas ulterior
eruatur, etc. We N. N. Inquisitors, etc. do assign to thee A.B. such a day to
continue to torture thee, that from thine own mouth we may get more of the
truth.

Indeed in some of these Sentences I find the name of the Bishop inserted: but
that is only a pro forma, for properly it is his substitute, who is, or is
supposed to be then present, and who being sworn to secrecy, and to obedience
to the Inquisitors is altogether their Servant and their Officer, as are all
the rest of them that attend the Holy Office. But for all Padre Paolo's
moderation, and his blaming the exorbitancies of that Court, I doubt not but at
Venice it self Lutherans or Calvinists would be as hardly dealt with, as any
where else, and that their mixed Inquisition half Ecclesiastical and half
Secular would be near as severe to real Heretics, though likely Roman
Catholics be not so much endangered and oppressed by it, as in other places. I
am sure that with public allowance the most bloody Directories of the
Inquisition, and the cruellest Books against Heretics are Printed at Venice.
And that for all their own Patricians be said to be empowered by the Republic
to inquire against Heresy, the Canonists on all hands make it a maxim,
Inquisitores a quocunque eligentur, semper ab Apostolica sede habent
authoritatem immediate. That whoever chooses or nominates Inquisitors, they
always have their authority immediately from the Roman See.

However where the Pope is powerful enough Inquisition is in full force, and
there he has taken care that Heretics shall find little of mercy, but that
they shall suffer as much as possibly they can. And therefore let them
acknowledge or invent what they will, still they may be tortured further, in
caput alienum, to discover other Heretics, or still to say more than they have
said. There are Decrees of Paul IV. and Pius V. Quoscunque reos, convictos, and
confessos de Haeresi, pro ulteriore veritate habenda, and super complicibus
fore torquendas, arbitrio dominorum judicum. That all that were guilty, convict
of Heresy, or had confessed it, should at the pleasure of the Judges be
tortured again and again, to reveal their Accomplices, and make a further
confession. And this is enforced and pressed by a Decree of the Congregation of
the Inquisition, July 28. 1569. And thus the misery of their unhappy Prisoners,
is prolonged as long as they please.

CHAP. XI. Of reconciling and dismissing Penitents.
BUt the comfort is, that at last there is an end of their sufferings. After
all the cruel and tedious Formalities of the Holy Office, the Process comes to
be fully formed, and the Inquisitors to be willing to determine the whole
matter, and to give a definitive sentence, and then such as have proved
themselves to be sound Catholics, and to have only been indiscreet, and failed
in lesser matters, are to be acquitted by being put to Penance. For it is
observed, that never none come out without some infliction; if they are not
tortured within, yet when they are released they must suffer something
grievous, and bear some marks of the just severity of that strickt and
inflexible Court, who must not be supposed ever to have proceeded against any,
without very good grounds. And it is hard if they should want them, when their
Repertories and Rules appoint that they shall not go without punishment, who
act or speak any thing that has a smack of Heresy, though it were by anger,
or a slip of the tongue, in a fit of drunkenness, or even in a dream. Proferens
haereticalia per iram vel ebrietatem, per somnum vel l^bricum linguae,
puniendus, etc. And A Paramo tells the Story of a melancholy Hermit, who came
and confested to the Inquisitors some Idle Heretical fancies that had come into
his head, for which they made him do a very strict Penance.

But for them that were really infected with Heretical pravity, and have been
converted by the convincing reasons of sharp Tortures, and a hard imprisonment,
the mercy showed them commonly is to immure them, sometimes send them to the
Galleys, or make them wear the San benit; But the Law is, where the Pope is
Master, Haereticus rediens ad Fidem non evadit nisi poenam mortis. That by
returning to the Catholic Faith, an Heretic avoids only the punishment of
death. All other Penalties appointed for Heretics may be laid upon him, only
he is not delivered up to the Secular power to be burnt; he is taken in again
into the Lap of the Church, and remains under the kind direction of the
Inquisitors, who will take great care that he may not relapse into Heresy.

SECT. I. Of the Cautions of the Friars when they absolve an Heretic.
WHen the day comes that the Friar Inquisitor is pleased to give decisive
sentence in favor of a Prisoner, which is commonly done at the Act of Faith,
or their public Assizes. Then is he brought forth, and an Officer of the Court
reads his charge and his conviction, which is what they please to say, for the
Prisoner must not dare to speak one word for himself. After that it is declared
how it has pleased God to bless with success the Inquisitor's endeavors in
bringing back the stray Sheep into the Fold, and how that the repenting
Heretic, who had been held in the chains of Satan, does now see and bewail the
greatness of his crime, and begs to be untied from those bonds of
Excommunication, and all other Censures, wherewith he was tied, and to be, upon
any terms readmitted to be a member of the Church, which request of his they
readily accept and grant, out of their great inclination to mercy, they never
desiring the death of a sinner, but only that he may be converted and live.

After this, or such a fine Preface, he is absolved in form, if he was not
before he came out of their Cloisters; and then they pronounce his Sentence,
and after the public solemnity ended, bring him to the Monastery back again,
that he may have his Penitential Letters, and be fully instructed how to behave
himself for the future.

For by their Popes Bulls, and by the Inquisitors Laws, a man that has once
come into their hands, is never wholly freed from them but by death, they may
still aggravate his Penance or Punishment as they please, they may at any time
take his cause in hands again, and have him brought back into their Prisons.
They may swear whom they please, to have an eye upon him, to see that he wear
his San-benit, and that he attempt not to go out of the Country.

And this they fail not to do, if they suspect the man. And however before his
dismission into the World, the Galleys, or the four Walls, they strictly swear
him to secrecy, that he will never reveal to any creature any thing he has
seen or known within the Inquisition, nor any thing that has been said or done
to him. And the Inquisitors tell him the danger of it, that if he does, he
shall be taken for a relaps and Apostate, and be dealt with accordingly.
Further they swear him to the Romish Faith, with some curses and imprecations,
and many grievous threats, if ever he swerves from it, in any one point; and
make it part of his Oath, that he shall ever discover and persecute Heretics
to the utmost of his power, and in his Sentence and Absolution insert this
conditional clause, Si de cord bono and de fide non ficta redieritis ad
Ecclesiae unitatem, and si servaveritis illa quae vobis injuncta suerint and
mandata. That they are not to receive any benefit by being absolved, except
they (the penitent Heretics) return to the unity of the Church with a good
heart, and an unfeigned faith, and obey what shall be enjoined and commanded
them.

All these Cautions and Securities duly observed and taken, out goes the
trembling Wretch, resolved to be so zealous a Roman Catholic, as never to come
there again by being suspected. But some, if before they had known the truth,
and cowardly denied it, become so perplexed and uneasy, that they relapse into
Heresy, and venture the severities of the Inquisition, and think it easier to
be racked and burnt, than to bear the accusations and reproaches of their
Consciences, and venture an eternal Hell.

SECT. II. Forms of Sentences.
THe Forms of Absolution and Reconciliation you have in the Pontificale, and of
them I have said enough already; there is only this difference, that here the
Inquisitors make more use of the Rod, they have in their hands, and that the
Penitents the day before the Act of Faith, were shaved beard and hair, and that
at the solemnity, they in Sicily are clothed in black; every where they hold
lighted Torches in their hands, and are mightily sprinkled with Holy Water,
have hanging Ropes about their Necks, and that sleeveless Coat on, with Crosses
before and behind, which they call the San-benit.

I set down before, treating of the Waldenses, a form of Sentence against such
as are immured, or laid up to live and die upon bread and water in a Dungeon
betwixt bare Walls. As for them that are enlarged, and only must wear the
San-benit, they are thus sentenced. Nos N. N. Inquisitores Haereticae
pravitatis, etc. vobis ad unitatem Ecclesiae reducere volentibus, abjurata
prius omni haeretica pravitate, imponimus and injungimus pro poenitentia duas
cruces crocei coloris, duorum palmorum in longitudinem, unam anterius, alteram
posterius, in omnes vestes praeter Camisiam, in and extra domum portandas,
renovandas si rumpantur vel desiciant; item injungimus vobis peregrinationes
and visitationes Ecclesiarum N. W. and alia quae literae poenae vestrae, quae
vobis concedentur, before continebunt, etc.

We N. N. Inquisitors against Heretical Pravity, etc. willing to reduce you N.
to the unity of the Church, you having first abjured every Heretical Pravity,
do appoint and enjoin you for penance to wear upon all your garments behind and
before two Crosses of yellow color, one foot in length, and that within or
without doors you never appear without them, that when they are worn out or
broke, you take care to renew them. That in Pilgrimages you visit such and such
Churches; and duly perform all other things contained more at large in that
Letter of Penance which we shall give you, etc. still reserving to our selves,
and to our Successors in this Office, full power to increase, to lessen or to
change the Penance here imposed to you. Given, etc.

Those Letters of Penance which are given to the reconciled Penitents, and
which they are sworn to observe, and ever to carry about with them, that they
may know what they must abstain from, and what they must do, differ according
to the several restraints or impositions which the Friars are pleased to lay
upon their Converts. Thus St. Dominic their Founder set them their Copy, which
they still follow.

Omnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenient, Fr. Dominicus
Oxoniensis Canonicus, praedicator minimus, salutem in Christo. Authoritate
Domini Ab. Cistercien^s Apost. sedis Legati, qui hoc nobis injunxit officium,
reconciliavimus praesentium latorem Pontium Rogerium, ab Haereticorum secta Deo
largiente conversum, mandantes in virtute praestiti Juramenti ut tribus
Dominieis vel festivis diebus ducatur a Sacerdote nudus infemoralibus, ab
ingressu villae usque ad ingressum Ecclesiae verberando. Injungimus etiam ei ut
a carnibus and ovis and caseo, seu omnibus quae a carn^bus trahunt originem
abstineat omni tempore, excepta die Paschae and Pentecostes, and die Natalis
Domini, in quibus ad abnegationem erroris pristini praecipimus ut eis vescatur.
Tres quadragessimas anno faciat, a piscibus abstinens; tribus diebus in
hebdomada semper a piscibus and ab oleo and vino abstineat and jejunet, nisi
corporalis i^firmitas vel aestatio laboris exegerint dispensationem. Religiosis
vestibus induatur tum in forma, tum etiam in color, quibus in directo
utriusque papillae singulae cruces parvae sint assutae. Quotidie si opportunum
fuerit Missam audiat, and diebus Festivis ad vesperas in Ecclesiam pergat;
alias horas tam diurnas quam nocturnas, ubicunque fuerit, Deo reddat, scilicet
septies in die decies Pater Noster dicat, media nocte vicesies. Castitatem
observet, and mane apud Cererim villam, chartam istam Capellano suo, per
singulos menses ostendat. Capellano etiam praecipimus ut de vita ejus curam
diligenter habeat, quod si ea observare contempserit, tanquam perjurum and
haereticum and excommunicatum ipsum habere praecipimus, etc.

Friar Dominic the least of Preachers, to all Christ's faithful people to whom
these presents shall come, greeting in the Lord. By the authority of the
Cistertian Abbot, who has appointed us this Office, we have reconcil^d the
Bearer of these presents Pontius Rogerius, converted by Gods blessing from his
Heretical Sect, charging and requiring him by the Oath which he has taken,
that three Sundays or three Festival days he be led by a Priest naked from his
Shoulders down to his Drawers, from the coming into the Town unto the
Churchdoors, being whipped all the way. We also enjoin him, that he abstain at
all time from Meat, Eggs, Cheese, and all things that proceed from Flesh,
except on the days of Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas, on which days we
command him to eat flesh for a denial of his former error. We Will that he keep
three Lents in one year, abstaining even from Fish. And that he fast three days
every Week always, refraining from Fish, Oil, and Wine, except bodily
infirmity, or hard labor in Harvest-time, require a dispensation. We will have
him wear Friars Coats with two small Crosses sown on his two breasts. Let him
every day hear Mass, if opportunity may serve, and on Holy days let him go to
Vespers to Church. He shall observe all the other Canonical hours, by day and
by night, where ever he be, and shall then say his Orisons, that is, seven
times a day he shall say ten Pater Nosters together, and twenty at Midnight.
Let him altogether abstain from his Wife, and every first day of the month, let
him show these our Letters to the Curate of his Town of Cererim, whom we also
command to observe diligently what kind of life this Bearer leads. Whom if he
should neglect to observe these our Injunctions, we declare to be perjured and
Excommunicate, and will have him taken for such, etc.

The Penitent thus dismissed, where the Popes Canons are in force, loses all
that he had, his Family is disgraced, and his blood is tainted, as though he
had committed High Treason. And if it be enquired, why they that in other cases
are so indulgent to Sinners, give them Absolution upon such easy terms, should
in this tie upon them such hard Penances, and be so severe. The answer is plain
and easy, that the Crime of Heresy goes very far beyond all others, in
hainousness and enormity, as by good authorities I shall soon make appear.

CHAP. XII. Of the Condemnation of Heretics that are to be burnt.
IF a man prosecuted by the Inquisition, or thus reconciled by it, attempts to
flee and be taken, he is a fugitive, by a great mercy they may immure him: but
if they smell out any Heretical Pravity in the case, then must he be burnt, he
is taken for obstinate or relaps. And so likewise if he lets his tongue loose,
and does tell tales out of the School; if he disobeys the Commands of the
Inquisitors; if he again by word or deed declares he has still some
inclination toward Heretical Pravity; or if, notwithstanding all their pains
to instruct him better, he still persists in the profession of what they call
Heresy; in all these cases where they judge a man Relaps or Contumace, he never
comes out of their Dungeons but to be tied to the Stake.

Nothing is more displeasing to him than the constancy of a true Christian, who
heartily makes confession of all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and
declares his resolution to die in and for that Catholic and Primitive Faith
against the errors and Innovations of the Church of Rome. After they have as
much and as long as they could exercised their cruelties against him, and end
avoured thereby to bring him to an abjuration of his Faith; then if that does
it not, his Wife and Children and nearest Friends are to be sent for, to try
whether they can move him and soften his heart, (as their Directories appoint.)
If this also be ineffectual, then he is declared convict, and must die without
redemption.

Yet says Carena and others, Promissio impunitatis Relapso, non tenet judicem
qui promisit: They may tempt him with promises of life and impunity, to make
him discover or renounce, without being obliged to performance. His present
life being forfeited, they may do and say what they will for the benefit of his
soul.

But it is a judged case, as Nich. Eimericus proves, that when a man has
persisted so long in his Heresy, he is never to be trusted, and that though he
would profess himself a Roman Catholic, yet he is to be delivered to the
Secular power. And Dell Been is very express, Nec debet ad poenitentiam admitti
qui convertitur jam prolatura sententia, etc. That he that is converted when
sentence is ready to be given, must never be admitted to any kind of Penance:
and that after his Sentence his fate is yet more irreversible. They may release
him of his Excommunication, but yet he shall burn.

All Relaps and Impenitent Heretics are excommunicated and devoted to
damnation before they be delivered up to the Secular power. And afterward,
when the great day comes, which they call the Act of Faith, and the People are
to see the sport, and to be made sensible how vile and odious Heretics are in
this world, the Prisoners are brought out into a public place, commonly into a
Cathedral Church. The Penitents bedeckt as I have said before. The Relaps and
Impenitents in a more horrid dress, with Devils painted upon them, and
blasphemous expressions writ about their head, which the crowd is to think they
have said. Their tongue is tied, that they may not say one word, and that by a
prudent provision, lest they should offend the Ears of the bystanders with
their impious Blasphemies, as their Doctors have it; Alligata lingua, ne impiis
blasphemiis offendat astantes. But we could give another reason for it, that
know what we Heretics would be apt to speak in that case.

However in those Countries, it goes down with the ignorant Vulgar, who are
taught, above all things, to have the greatest abhorrence and detestation for
what their Guides call Heresy, and to believe the worst of things of those
that are called Heretics. So that they that are brought to die find little
pity among the People, and the Inquisitors may lay to their charge what they
please, without fear of being disbelieved or disproved. One of the Inquisitors
makes a discourse, wherein is summarily rehearsed the Crimes of the Prisoners,
and the Proceedings of the Holy Tribunal, and that being ended, they are
degraded that were Priests, or of any inferior Order, according to the Form in
the Pontificale, and then Sentence comes to be pronounced; the condemned
Heretics are delivered up to the Secular Judge; and for a conclusion the
Inquisitors very bountifully give Indulgences to the good Catholic people who
assisted at the solemnity, and then return to their Monastery, to prepare sport
for the next Act of Faith.

SECT. I. A Sentence in some Relapses.
-- Tanquam Canes ad vomitum redeuntes, culpis veteribus novas superaddere non
verendo, nec divinum juramentum metuendo, and in abjuratam haeresim relabendo,
per hoc se falso and ficte conversos and impoenitentes ac de tam incorrigibili
crimine incorrigibiles se ostenderunt manifest, necnon omni gratia,
misericordia and audientia tanquam Relapsi fecerunt se indignos, ita ut
promissis and juramentis suis nulla sit de caetero fides penitus adhibenda. Nos
praefati Inquisitores N.N. etc. communicato consilio multorum bonorum virorum
peritorum tam jure Canonico quam civili, and Religiosorum plurimorum
discretorum, Deum habentes prae oculis, and orthodoxae Fidei puritatem,
sacrosanctisque Dei evangeliis positis coram nobis, ut de vultu Dei nostrum
prodeat judicium, and oculi nostri videant aequitatem, praedictos N. N. etc. in
hac die praesenti ipsis ad audiendum sententiam peremptory assignata, dicimus
and per sententiam in his scriptis declaramus Relapsos esse in Haeresim
abjuratam, and cum Ecclesia ultra non habeat quod faciat, Relinquimus eosdem N.
N. Curiae seculari, candem affectuose rogantes, prout suadent Canonicae
fanctiones, ut illis vitam and membra illibata conservet. Data, etc.

After a Rehearsal of the former Process, Reconciliation, and Penance, and the
usual formalities, then it follows, Returning like Dogs to their vomit, without
fear of their sacred Oath, or of adding new crimes to the former; falling again
into the Heresy they had abjured before, they have made it appear that their
conversion was false and feigned, and have declared themselves Impenitents,
incorrigible of the most incorrigible crime of Heresy, and have rendered
themselves unworthy of all grace and mercy, and of ever being heard, so that
henceforth no faith at all can be given to their Oaths and Promises. Wherefore
we N. N. Inquisitors, etc. with the counsel and advice of many good men learned
in the Law, and of many discreet Friars, having set before our eyes the glory
of God, and the purity of the Orthodox Faith, and having put before us the holy
Evangils, that our Sentence may come forth from the presence of God, and our
eyes may look on the thing that is equal, do say and declare by this Sentence
here written, that the foresaid N. N. (to whom we have peremptorily assigned
this day to receive their Sentence) are Relaps into Heresies abjured by them
before; and now the Church having no more what to do to them, we leave the said
N. N. to the Secular Court, begging of it affectionately, as we are directed by
the Canonical Sanctions, that it would so deal with them, as to preserve them
sound life and limb, etc.

This Sentence pronounced, the condemned Prisoners are delivered up to the
Civil Officers, who for all the hypocritical Prayer of the Inquisitors, are
obliged to burn them, and without fail ever do it. And if they should not, they
would be excommunicated, and prosecuted with the utmost rigor. Del Been, and
all their Doctors prove it even by Papal Constitutions, That the Church has
power to put obstinate Heretics to death. Sed Ecclesia non solet hanc
potestatem exequi per ministros ecclesiasticos, sed per saeculares. Nec debet
nec potest Judex saecularis Haeretico damnato poenam remittere, sed omnino
debet illi statim infer, juxta Text, etc. alias ut haereticorum fautor punire
potest. But the Church uses not to execute that power by Ecclesiastical, but
by Secular Officers. And the Secular Judge neither should nor may remit the
penalty to the condemned Heretic, but is obliged forthwith to inflict it upon
him, according to the Texts -- of the Canon Law. Else he may be punished as a
Favourer of Heretics. Nay, they ingeniously bring a Scripture Text why
Heretics should be burned, and that is because our blessed Savior said, Joh.
xv. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and is withered,
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. And
Canonists are very prolix in proving that Heretics are to be punished with
death, and not only with death, but with fire, which is the most cruel, and not
only to be burnt, but to be burnt alive.

Padre Paolo tells us whence proceeds this custom of interceding for the
condemned Heretics, when they are going to be burnt. Mean while it may be
observed how much their kindnesses and good words to Heretics are to be
trusted, who constantly pray that they may not lose blood or life, when they
are going to murder them with the greatest barbarity.

For as it appears, the Civil Magistrate is but an inferior Officer, a Hangman
to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal; he is obliged to execute the irreversible
Sentence; and accordingly when the Inquisi^ors are pronouncing it, the fires
are kindled, and all is in readiness for execution, which immediately follows.

Those Religious men and learned in the Law, whose advice is taken (as the
Sentence mentions) are some Friars of the same House, who expect to be promoted
one day to sit on the Holy Tribunal, and are trained up to it, by being
sometimes Assessors. And some Canonists that are Consultors of the Holy Office,
who by their skill in the Canon and Pontifical Law, are able to inform the
Inquisitors, how far in any case they are warranted to proceed against
Heretics, suspected or proved.

SECT. II. A form of delivering a stubborn Heretic to the Secular Power.
NOs, etc. attendentes quod tu N. fuisti nobis delatus accusatus -- quod tu in
illis Haeresibus perstiteras multis annis in tuae animae detrimentum, Nos
Inquisitores quibus ex officio incumbebat pravitatem Haereticam extirpare,
volentes prout tenebamur, in and super his certius informari, and videre an
ambulares in tenebris an in luce, diligenter inquisivimus de praedictis, teque
citantes and efficaciter interrogantes reperimus te praedictum N. infectum
Haeretica pravitate, ac eandem defensantem coram nobis animo pertinaci. Sane
cum prae cunctis mentis nostrae desiderabilibus cordi nostro insidat sidem
Sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam in Populorum praecordiis complantare, omni
eradicata haeretica pravitate, modos diversos, varios, and congruos tam per nos
quam per alios adhibuimus, quatenus resilires ab Haeresibus and erroribus
antedictis, in quibus steteras atque stabas, prout nunc stas contumaciter ac
pertinaciter animo indurato; Verum cum humani generis inimico tuis praecordiis
assistente, teque in dictis erroribus volvente and involvente, nolueris neque
velis a saepe dictis Haeresibus resilire, plus eligens mortem animae incurrere
gehennalem and corporis temporalem quam antefactas Haereses abjurare and ad
gremium Ecclesiae advolare and animam lucrari, in reprobum sensum datus:
eapropter cum sis ab Ecclesia sancta Dei excommunicationis vinculo innodatus,
and merito, imo a grege domini separatus, ac participatione bonorum Ecclesiae
privatus, and Ecclesia non habet circa te ultra quod faciat, cum ad te
convertendum fecerit juxta posse: Nos, etc. Judices in causa Fidei antedicti,
sedentes pro Tribunali more judicum judicantium, Sanctis Evangeliis positis
coram nobis, ut de vultu Dei judicium nostrum prodeat, and ut oculi provideant
aequitatem: habentes prae occulis solum Deum, and sanctae fidei veritatem ac
extirpationem Haereticae pravitatis, hac die, hora, and loco, tibi in antea
assignatis ad audiendum sententiam definitivam, condemnamus ac sententialiter
judicamus te esse veraciter Haereticum impoenitentem, and ut veraciter talem
tradendum and relinquendum brachio saeculari, and sicut Haereticum
impoenitentem per hanc nostram sententiam de foro Ecclesiastico te projicimus
and tradimus seu relinquimus brachio saeculari, ac potestati curiae saecularis;
dictam curiam saecularem efficaciter deprecantes, quod circa te citra sanguinis
effusionem and mortis periculum sententiam suam moderetur.

We, etc. considering that thou N. have been accused before us for, etc. and
that thou had for many years persisted in those Heresies to the great
detriment of thy Soul, we Inquisitors, to whom by our Office it belongs to
extirpate heretical pravity, willing, as in duty we are bound, to be more
certainly informed about the premises, and to know whether thou do walk in
the light or in darkness, have made a diligent inquisition into those matters,
and having cited thee, did find by efficacious interrogations that thou the
foresaid N. were infected with Heretical Pravity, which thou did maintain in
our presence with an obstinate mind. And also we desiring above all things,
after the eradication of all Heretical pravity, to plant in the hearts of men
the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith, have by our selves and others used,
and caused to be used diverse various and proper means to bring thee off from
those the foresaid Errors and Heresies, wherein thou were, and still continuest
to be with an obstinate, incorrigible, and hardened heart; But now whereas at
the instigation of the Devil, who possesses thy heart, and does more and more
involve and plunge thee into the said errors, thou have refused, and still do
refuse to depart from the said Heresies, choosing to endure the damnation of thy
Soul, and the temporal death of thy Body, being given up to a reprobate mind,
rather than to abjure thy Heresies, and save thy Soul by fleeing into the Lap
of the Church: for this cause, thou being justly excommunicated from the Holy
Church of God, separated from the Lords Flock, deprived from the participation
of all Church-advantages, and the Church, after all her endeavors to convert
thee, having no more what to do toward thee: We N. N. the foresaid Judges in
causes of Faith, sitting upon a Tribunal as absolute Judges, having laid before
us the Holy Evangils, that our Sentence may come forth from Gods presence, and
our eyes may look upon the thing that is equal, having also before our eyes
nothing but the glory of God, the truth of the Holy Faith, and the extirpation
of Heretical pravity, and having before appointed thee this day, hour, and
place to receive thy final doom, we now by this Sentence judge and condemn thee
to be truly an impenitent Heretic, and as truly such to be left and delivered
up to the Secular Power: and according as an impenitent Heretic, we by this
our Sentence cast thee out of the Ecclesiastical Court, and leave and deliver
thee up to the power and judicature of the Secular Court; earnestly beseeching
the said Court, so to moderate her Sentence toward thee, as that thou may
lose neither blood nor life.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Enormity and further punishment of the Crime of Heresy.
POssibly some that have frequented persons of the Communion of the Church of
Rome, and have found them courteous and obliging in their Converse, as many of
them are: or some that have traveled through some Popish Countries, and have
observed nothing of what I here relate, may be tempted to think that these
cruelties of which we complain are Fables, or were only in the days of old, and
now laid aside: and so, that our lives and fortunes would not be in such great
danger under a Popish Government, as some are apt to think.

But the answer is easy and plain; that in many persons of that party,
humanity and natural good dispositions outweigh the cruel principles of their
Religion, which are not approved or followed, not so much as known by numbers
of them. That however, here amongst us, whatever they think, and whatever they
would do, if they had power, it is not fit nor prudent they should now threaten
and tell us the worst. That abroad, their greatest cruelties are acted
secretly, or under a disguise; in some Kingdoms where the Popes have long
reigned, they cannot now find Heretics; and in others they are protected by
secular Princes from the worst prosecutions of the Papal power. And that
whatever any man may have seen or not seen, yet the decrees are fixed and in
full force, and as they themselves tell us, have been executed with the utmost
rigor, at all times and in all places, when and where the Popes have had power
and opportunity.

It is not what this or that man knows or says, that is to be heeded, where
there are Laws and standing Rules. Our danger lies in this, that by the Church
of Rome we are declared Heretics; that by the same Church, Heretics are
declared to be the greatest, the most wicked and vilest Criminals, who are
neither to be pitied nor spared. That so, that Church disposes her Members to
hate us mortally, and to effect our destruction by all possible means, nay, and
injoyns it, under severe penalties; and that it is so, still to this day, both
in her Laws, and her practice.

What has been said hitherto, of their proceedings against Heretics, is
sufficient to show that they account Heresy a most heinous and unpardonable
Crime, which they can never punish with too great severity in them that are
guilty of it, who are not only to suffer in their persons by Racks and Fire, as
has been showed before: but also in their Names, Goods, and Posterity, and all
that belonged to them. Even the Houses where they dwelt and taught, are to be
thrown down or burnt to ashes. Del Been and former Canonists are very express
in it, and have Papal Decrees for it. And their Sentences in this case are of
this tenor.

Nos Fr. -- Inquisitores, etc. attendentes constitutionem Apostolicam super hoc
editam, necnon and facti enormitatem -- habito super hoc cum sapientibus and
peritis consilio, authoritate qua fungimur, praedictas domos cum suis
appendiciis pronunciamus in his scriptis per definitivam sententiam and
mandamus funditus diruendas, and ipsarum domorum materiam, nostro arbitrio
comburendam, seu alias, piis usibus applicandam. Itaque de caetero nulla
habitatio, seu reaedificatio aut clausio ibi fiat, sed loca inhabitabilia,
inculta and inclausa semper existant, and sicut fuerunt receptacula perfidorum,
sic ex nunc sordium perpetuo loca fiant. Quoscunque autem contradictores seu
rebels, necnon eos qui reaedificare seu colere, aut claudere presumpserint
dicta loca, vel ad hoc scienter praestiterint consilium vel favorem, in his
scriptis excommunicationis vinculo innodamus, etc.

We Friars N.N. Inquisitors against Heretical pravity, etc. Considering the
Popes Constitution about this matter, and the enormity of the fact, and having
conferred about it with learned and skilful men, do now by our authority, in a
definitive Sentence, by these presents, pronounce and command that the said
houses, houses, with all their appendages, shall be utterly ruined and levelled
with the ground, and that the Materials of them shall, according to our
pleasure, either be burnt, or otherwise bestowed upon pious uses. Therefore let
henceforth no dwelling house, building, or enclosure be made there, but let
them be wild and desolate places, receptacles to the worlds end of dung and
nastiness, because they have been the Mansions of persidious persons. And here
by these presents we excommunicate all that shall oppose or infringe this our
Sentence, and all that shall presume to rebuild, inhabit, or enclose the said
places, or that shall any ways promote or advise it. Given, etc.

SECT. I. Of the vileness of Heretical pravity.
SEveral Authors have observed with Padre Paolo, who gives many instances of
it, in the first Chapter of his History of the Inquisition, that the Pope makes
a gin of the notions and definitions of Heresy, and makes his Laws and
Declarations about it serve the ends of his ambition and covetousness; giving
the name of Heretics, not where it is really due, but where he is displeased,
desirous to conquer, or to ruin his enemies. Heretical pravity in the Romish
sense, is a thing of which a man may be guilty without his will, and without
his knowledge: and yet a thing which makes him the worst of Traitors against
the Majesty of Heaven; which exposes him here (if the Popes power can reach
him) to all the misery that a human Creature can suffer, and hereafter to
damnation. It is not to be thought what Popes and Papalins have said on this
subject: and had they not declared us Heretics, we should have been tempted by
what descriptions their Writers generally make of Heretics, to believe them to
be the most horrid and pernicious Monsters in the world.

A Paramo p. 333. having rehearsed some of the wicked pranks of the Anabaptists
in Westphalia takes occasion from thence thus to describe all Protestants.
Vides plane, Lector, qualia esse soleant haereticorum opera, qui semel exuti
Catholicam fidem, omnem cum ea humanitatem, and quod proprium est hominis
rationem pariter abjecisse videntur, super induentes cum impietate saevitiam,
prae se ferentes imaginem ejus cujus afflantur spiritu, and quo geniti esse
noscuntur, diaboli. -- Praeter infinita damna quae exitiosa sta prodigia in
orbem terrarum invexerunt, illud certe haud minimum est, quod ipsam naturam
corruperunt, and laudabiles quarundam nationum mores ita perverterunt atque in
pejus permutarunt, ut multi qui ante casti and pudici erant, temperati ac pene
frigidi, ex istorum doctrina flagitiosissima atque profligatissima, sicut
quibusdam libidinis facibus inflammati. -- Enimvero sic inter Haereticos impura
libido and nequitia plerumque pervenit ad summum ut audeant per impudentiam
summam pro virtutibus vitia venditare, quod a protestantibus fieri palam
videmus, etc.

Such use to be the deeds of Heretics, who with the Catholic Faith cast off
all humanity and reason, and becoming most cruel and impious, bear the image of
the devil, of whom they are born, and by whose spirit they are acted. And this
is none of the least mischiefs which Heretics, those pernicious Monsters have
brought into the world, that they have corrupted nature it self, and so
depraved and changed for the worst the good manners of some Nations, that they
have made them infamous brutes in all lasciviousness, who before were exemplary
for their chastity and temperance. -- for generally among Heretics, impure
lusts and base villainies reign in such a degree, that by the highest impudence,
they own and commend their own vices, as virtues, as Protestants do publicly.

There is so much of this in most of their Writers, especially in them that
treat of Heresy or the Inquisition, that I need not multiply quotations. Only
I shall add from the same Author, p. 268. that upon this he grounds the mighty
usefulness and necessity of the Holy Tribunal. Quae eo magis necessaria, quo
majores calamitates atque majorem perniciem affert horrenda and detestabilis
haeresis, quae adeo funesta ac perniciosa est, ut non solum Beatitudinis jure
sieut caetera peccata lethalia, privet, sed etiam in causa sit, cur haeretici
capite and bonorum jactura plectantur, atque tam ipsi quam eorum posteri
officiis and honoribus priventur, libri ab eis compositi prohibeantur, and
infami vest a caeteris distinguantur.

The greatest of calamities and ruins brought in by that horrid and detestable
plague which we call Heresy, demonstrate how necessary Inquisition must be.
For such is the guilt of Heresy, such the funest and pernicious nature of it,
that it not only deprives men of eternal happiness, as other mortal sins, but
also is the just cause why Heretics are punished with loss of goods and life,
why their Books are forbid, they and their Children are deprived of all honors
and dignities, and they are distinguished from others, by that infamous Vest
which they call San-benit.

Now if any man should ask, what is then an Heresy, which they make so wicked
and so criminal, after all these hard words and hard usages, they will say,
that it is an error in the Understanding, with obstinacy in the Will. That is,
that a man will adhere to what he is persuaded to be truth, though others deny
it. This, one would think, should not be so heinous, nor so dreadful as they
make it: but then the matter is that which offends them most. Haeresis est
circa pertinentia ad fidem, vel contra determinationem Ecclesiae, de rebus ad
fidem vel ad mores pertinentibus. This is their usual definition of an Heresy,
That it is about matters of Faith, or against the determinations of the Church,
concerning what we should believe, or what we should do. And so here comes
their Romish Creed, which you have p. 4. And here they bring in, (as they have
strength and opportunity) all Papal Constitutions and Decrees. And their Canon
Law says, Haereticus reputatur qui statutum summi Pontificis justum,
venerabiliter non recipit; That he is reputed an Heretic who does not
reverently obey the just Laws of the Pope. And that they are all so, the Jus
Pontificium is very peremptory and plain. Papa si aliquid facit quod videtur
injustum, ubi nos non possumus rationem assignare, nihilominus justum est. And
the Gloss. Papa quod approbat, non licet alicui reprobare. That whatever the
Pope does is just, though it seems otherwise, and we can give no reason for it:
and that it is not lawful for any to reprove what he approves.

So that the great Heresy of all, is to oppose the Popes Will in any matter,
or upon any account; hence comes the great malignity of Heretical opinions and
practices. And for all they charge Heretics with such vile immoralities, that
one would think the very sight of them should create horror in the Beholders,
yet they tell us plainly, That though they live well, yet they shall be damned;
and that they are the more to be shunned and hated. Institut. Cathol. de
extirpandis Haer. p. 227. etc.

The same Author propounding a learned doubt, Jac. Simanc.
Cur non liceat haereticis tutos esse in provincia ubi crimen non admiserunt,
cum id caeteris facinorosis liceat? Why Heretics are safe no where, whereas
other Malefactors are not prosecuted in those Kingdoms where they have not
committed their crimes? gives an answer to it which fully enough declares the
pravity and deformity of the crime of Heresy: but it is too long to be
transcribed. I shall only add at present, out of him and others, how Heretics
are to be handled according to their demerits.

SECT. II. Of several Inflictions upon Heretics.
THe Wit and Invention and Policy of Rome has appeared in nothing more than in
her methods and proceedings against such as have disputed her absolute
sovereignty in all things. Nothing is left unattempted that can depress and
ruin them: and her making them Heretics, i. e. most impious Prevaricators
against Religion, has been an effectual means for the destroying of them. This
has engaged the zeal of the Vulgar, (all men counting Religion most Sacred)
and has been the white Veil, wherewith she has covered her blackest Designs.
So we find the Romish Party, when they treat of these matters, laying all
possible Aggravations upon what they call Heresy: and making it the greatest
Treason and Rebellion against Heaven, infer from thence, That it being the most
public and most heinous crime, all Christ's Subjects, who are concerned for his
honor, are bound to prosecute and revenge it. The Jus Pontificium and the
Canonists have this frequently: Illius dissimulare non debemus opprobria, qui
probra nostra delevit: and si contra homines illatae blasphemiae impune non
transeunt, multo magis qui ipsum salvatorem nostrum blasphemat, dignus est
supplicia sustinere.

Accordingly they have writ, decreed, and inflicted on those whom they have
pleased to call Heretics, that even after their death their bones should be
took up and burnt with this preamble in the Sentence, Attendentes quod crimen
haeresis propter suam immanitatem and enormitatem, non solum in vivis, sed and
in mortuis, per jura promptissima debeat vindicari, Nos N. Inquisitores, etc.
Considering that the crime of Heresy is so vast and enormous, that with the
speediest justice it ought to be punished, not only here on the living, but
even in the grave on them that are dead, We therefore N. Inquisitors, etc. As
Heretics have no shelter when dead, so living every man is bound to accuse
them. Quisquis tenetur Haereticum non tantum denunciare, sed etiam accusare;
which they prove out of Deuteronomy. Chap. 13. Ver. 6, 7, etc. without any exception
of Parents, or nearest Relations, as may be seen at large in the Authors I
shall cite; who go yet further, and prove by holy Scripture, and other
Authorities, even by Popes Constitutions. Propria authoritate cuilibet
Catholico licet haereticos capere, and bonis suis expoliare, and impune
occidere; That every Catholic may lawfully apprehend Heretics, spoil them of
their goods and kill them.

So many of them say, that a Priest may break the Seal of Confession, to reveal
an Heretic, Quia ille non agit poenitentiam, and quia tali non est fides
servanda; Because no faith is to be kept to an Heretic, and because, he
remaining impenitent there is no Sacrament of Penance.

Item, Civitas tota potest igne destrui, quando in ea plures Haeretici. That a
whole City may be burnt down, when Heretics in it are too numerous, which is
proved by Deuteronomy. 13.16.

Item, Contractum aliquem vel pactum validum Haereticus celebrare non valet,
and obligatus haeretico etiam cum juramento ipso facto liberatur. An Heretic
can make no Contract of any worth, and any engagement or promise made to him,
is void and of no force, though it were confirmed with an Oath.

Item, Haereticus, excommunicatus majori excommunicatione, and quilibet
infamis, contra haereticum admittuntur in testes, in fidei favorem. Heretics,
excommunicated persons, and the most infamous, are admitted to be Witnesses
against an Heretic, in favor to the Faith.

Item, Qui sepelit mortuum excommunicatum, in excommunicationem incidit,
ctiamsi tantum syndone tegat. He falls under Excommunication that buries an
excommunicated person, or but puts him up in a Winding Sheet.

Item, Haereticus ipso jure est excommunicatus, traditus Satanae ut ab eo
torqueatur, and eandem potestatem habet diabolus in excommunicato, quam
rusticus in pecore suo. An Heretic is excommunicate by the Law, without a
Sentence, and is delivered up to Satan to be tormented, and the devil has the
same power over him, as the Farmer over his Cattle.

Item, Haeretici sunt deterioris conditionis quam Juaedi. Heretics are in a
worse condition than Jews.

Item, Papae neutiquam obediendum si aliquid praecipiat, quod sit in favorem
Haereticorum. The Pope is not to be obeyed, where he commands any thing in
favor of Heretics.

Item, Sola voluntas vel cogitatio punitur in crimine Haeresis. The Will alone,
or but the Thoughts, without any outward Act, is punished in the Crime of
Heresy.

Item, Quamvis sit Haeresis crimen Capitale, and poenam sanguinis irroget, in
eo tamen neutiquam transigere vel pacisci licet, quod talem offensam nemo nisi
solus Deus remittere possit.

Though Heresy be a Capital Crime, which incurs the shedding of blood, yet
there is no pardoning of it, nor no treating about lessening of its punishment,
for it is such an offense as none but God can remit.

Item, Quia Haereticus est hostis communis, ideo licet cuique illum propria
authoritate occidere, a fortiori capere. An Heretic being a common enemy, it
is lawful for every one to kill him, much more to take him.

Item, Delictum Haeresis etiam ignoranter prolatum gravius est quam dolosum
homicidium. An Heretical word spoken through ignorance is a more grievous crime
than wilful murder, murder, because the Heretic sets his face against heaven.

Item, Haeretici tanquam animalia venenosa and pestifera, antequam virus
evomant sunt puniendi. Heretics, like Serpents and Toads, must be punished
before they spue their venom.

And says the Popes Extravagants, Haeretici primo sunt admonendi, post
occidendi; and Haeretici utiliter patiuntur quod Catholici utiliter inferunt.
Heretics must first be admonished, and then killed. And it is profitable for
them to suffer, what of duty Catholics inflict upon them.

Volumes of Collections might be made of this. That Heretics may enjoy nothing
of those rights and privileges that belong to human Creatures, and that they
must be afflicted and destroyed all manner of ways. But (...) shall conclude
this, with one instance o^ the mighty zeal wherewith they thu^ prosecute
Heretics. A Paramo tell^ us, that when the Inquisition destroye^ many
thousands in all parts of Spain^ some at Court represented to Ferdinan^^ and
Isabel what a great loss and weakening it was, to have so many of their Subjects
killed in that manner, and tha^ then great sums of money were offered to their
Majesty's to stop or moderate the proceedings of the Inquisition against
Heretics; But that whilst moved with pity, the King and Queen were considering
whether they should take the money and stop the Torrent of blood, Turre-Cremata
that famous Friar, who had heard of what was in agitation, came in with a
Crucifix hid under his Coat, and drawing near pulled it out, and held it to
them, with these words, Ecce Salvatoris crucifixi effigiem, quem perditissimus
Judas vendidit, etc. Here is the Image of our Crucified Savior, whom wicked
Judas sold to his Enemies for thirty Pieces of Silver; if you approve of that
Fact, do ye sell him for more, here you have him. And having said this, he laid
down the Crucifix, and went out.

SECT. III. That in the Case of Heresy Princes fare no better than Subjects.
EXcommunication in the Church of Rome, may be incurred upon so many accounts,
that there is hardly one of Ten, among the best Romanists, that is not ipso
facto, or ipso jure excommunicate. It is true, that commonly in their
Absolutions they take off those bonds indefinitely: but yet the danger is so
great of coming any ways under the direful Sentence, that it mightily exposes
Magistrates to be thus smitten like others by the Papal Fulminations. The
Council of Trent has provided Sect. ult. that whoever after admonition,
remains for a whole year excommunicate, shall be reputed Heretic, and
proceeded against as such. Here Sovereign Princes have no exemption. They may
be the Popes eldest Sons, but they must be as dutiful and obedient as others,
else they shall smart under his correction without partiality. The Council in
that last Session, Can. 5. obliges them under pain of Excommunication to back
the Church Censures with their power. In Can. 19. if they suffer Duels within
their Dominions, they are excommunicated and deprived of those places where the
offense is committed. And Pius IV. in his confirmation of that Council commands
them amongst all the Faithful to receive and obey inviolably all the
definitions and decrees of Trent.

But what then? What if they are excommunicate, and reputed Heretics? Then it
is at their peril, and the Pope will make the best use he can of these Laws
Canon and Pontificial. Papa dicitur habere coeleste arbitrium, and tenet locum
Christi in Terris. The Pope has the place of Christ upon earth, and his will
is said to be the will of heaven. Item, Papa est super omnes homines, and ei
obedire est de necessitate salutis. The Pope is above all men, and without
obedience to him there is no salvation. Item, Papa obtinet principatum totius
mundi, and habet utrumque gladium. The Pope has dominion over the whole world,
and has the power of both the spiritual and the temporal sword. Item, Papa
potest transfer imperium de gente ad gentem ex maxima causa: and potest
principes seculares dignitate privare, ex causa, vel propter eorum iniquitates.
The Pope may give the Empire from one to another: and may, when there is cause,
or when they are faulty, deprive secular Princes of their dignity. Some one of
these, or many more of the same nature, which he has in store, will reach the
highest Throne on earth, and sometimes have overthrown it.

Then the Canonists will prove and bring forth out of their Magazines of
Treasonous Principles; Pro crimine Haeresis aequaliter puniuntur omnes, nullo
habito respectu ad gradus and dignitates. That the Crime of Heresy is equally
to be punished in all men, without regard to their degrees or dignities.
Imperator puniri and deponi potest per summum Pontificem, propter crimen
Haeresis, ut fuit Imperator Fredericus. That for the crime of Heresy the
Emperor may be punished and deposed by the Pope, as was Frederick. Also, Si
parents sunt Haeretici, a filiis suis optime possunt exhaeredari, nam patria
potestas tollitur propter crimen Haeresis. That for the crime of Heresy the
Paternal power cease, and that then Children may disinherit their Parents.
And then to come home to the case, Haeretici nullam prorsus jurisdictionem
habere possunt, That Heretics can have no power nor jurisdiction at all.
Accordingly they all agree, Vassalli liberantur ab omni fidelitate and obsequio
suorum dominorum, si ipsi domini in haeresim manifestam sint Capti. That
Vassals and all Subjects are free from all allegiance and duty to their Lords
or Sovereigns, if they are fallen into manifest Heresy.

Nay, It is proved by many Authorities, and good Decretals, and Reasons, Quod
digni sunt majori supplicio Reges and Principes Haeretici quam caeteri homines.
That Kings and Princes become Heretics, deserve greater punishments than
inferior persons. And not only if they become Heretics, but also, Si domini
temporales, constitutiones Pontificias contra Haereticos latas servare
noluerint, excommunicentur, and omni honor and officio priventur. If they do
not execute the Popes Laws against Heretics, they forfeit their Crowns and
Dignities.

This is so often repeated, Si Reges and alii Principes Christiani facti sint
Haeretici, protinus subjecti and vassalli, ab eorum dominio liberantur. And
this, De Haeresi damnatus non debet vocari sub nomine dignitatis pristinae. A
King who is an Heretic, is no King, and ought not to be called by that name:
That one that has truly and fully embraced Popery, might act and intend any
thing against Charles Stuart, and all the while, in a sense which he believes
true, profess himself a loyal and obedient subject to the King of England.

SECT. IV. Of the Authorities and Authors used in this Book.
MOst of what has been said of the proceedings of the Popes and the
Inquisition against Heretics and Heretical Princes, is to be met with in so
many Authors, and with so little variation, and recurrs so often, that to bring
quotations for every particular, would have swelled and crowded my Margin to no
purpose at all: when it may do as well here to name those Books which will
prove what I have alleged. Indeed most of it is so unreasonable, so strange
and inhuman, that to men of a good temper it will look like the Fiction of a
malicious and a melancholy brain. Did many that are in the Church of Rome
believe it to be guilty of such unnatural Principles, and bloody Practices, as
are here mentioned, they would be mightily staggered in their belief of its
being the pure and only Church of Christ, and some would forsake and even
detest the communion of that merciless persecuting party, who now with a good
zeal follow it, and think to go right.

Many Protestants also would be mightily confirmed in that Profession of the
Christian Religion which is established among us, and would be more thankful
for being delivered from under the Roman yoke, if they knew how heavy and
intolerable it was to such of our Forefathers, as saw the Truth, and desired to
follow it.

I know it is objected, that we have those amongst us, who are very froward and
seditious toward their Governors, and upon Rebellious Principles have done
very vile things: But it is our unhappiness and our grief; our established
Church and Religion are hated and persecuted by them, and were by them altered
and ruined when they had power; and it is clear as the light, that they have
their ill Principles out of those very Roman Schools which they seem so much to
abhor. In them are taught at large those opinions which make Dissenters bad
Subjects, and those which countenance the usurpations of the Popes, and the
cruelties of the Inquisition.

I profess that what I have laid down as their Tenants or Practices, I have had
from their own Authors: and that in them I have consulted, there is vastly
more, and sometimes worse than what I have extracted. I shall be amply
justified, as to the faithfulness of what account I give of the Papal and
inquisitory proceedings against Heretics, be they Princes or Plebeians, by
them shall read the Canon Law, or but seek under proper Titles in the
Extravagants, Clementines, Sexte, and even in the Decretals of Gregory IX. But
in that vast Collection of the Pontificial Law, Printed at Venice, you have
many Authors inserted, who treat at large of all things relating to Heretics,
wherein a man may fully inform himself of those Writers I have but lightly
touched.

I cite some Bulls that are in the Bullarium of Laerce Cher. and other
Collections since. But to save the labor of searching into great Volumes,
Alois. Bariola and Franc. Pegna have made a Collection in quarto of above an
Hundred Bulls, since the beginning of the Reformation, to enjoin, direct, and
encourage the extirpation of Heretics, all manner of ways, but especially by
the Inquisition.

And because some might say, Who regards old Bulls or Decretals? And what do
most of them signify that have been long out of date? We must know, that every
thing is in force, that makes against Heretics. That we may not flatter our
selves, Canonists frequently tell us, Extravagantes in corpore juris non
clausae, contra haereticos editae, sunt validae, si constitutionibus in corpore
juris registratis, contra haereticos, non obvient. That is, That all those Laws
and Papal prescripts new or old, some forged, some of uncertain Authors, that
are not digested into order, and have no proper place assigned to them in the
Body of the Canon, are of force, as far as they make against Heretics, and
moderate or oppose none of the more Canonical Constitutions that are against
them. And we know how strictly they are executed where the Pope is obeyed: and
how general that execution would be if he might have his will. There is a Bull
of Pope Paul IV. anno 1558. whereby he very straightly commands, Renovari and
inviolabiliter observari omnes leges, decreta sive statuta a Romany
Pontificibus, sacris conciliis and sanctorum Patrum decretis, in haereticos and
schismaticos quovis tempore edita, etiamsi in literis Pontificum
extravagantibus contineantur, etc. That all Laws, Decrees, and Statutes, made
at any time by Roman Popes, sacred Councils, or holy Fathers, against Heretics
and Schismatics, should be renewed and inviolably observed, even such as are
among those Decretals which they call Extravagants. And he commands further,
that if they have been upon any account disused or neglected, they should now
be revived, and brought into use again; and that they should be strictly obeyed
and executed against all persons whatsoever, without regard to their greatness
or dignity. If we believe him to be in earnest, we see what would become of us,
and of Protestant Princes, had he those that could or would put his Sentence in
execution.

These public, and in the Church of Rome, highest Authorities, give greater
force and credit to those lesser ones of private Writings, which are licensed
and allowed: and are, as it were but Comments upon the Text; Declarations of
the practice of the Church, that her Laws are taught and obeyed, so that all
those Inquisitors, Fiscalis's, Consultors of the Holy Office, and Canonists,
which have written about the Crime and punishment of Heresy, are to be looked
upon as the Sentences of the supreme Roman Tribunal, or the executions of them.

Lud. A Paramo and Th. del Been will give any men sufficient information about
these matters in general. But about particular subjects, de fide, or de
Haereticis, or de indiciis, or de modo procedendi, or de quaestionibus and
Torturis, etc. there are very many Authors. Nichol. Eimericus his directorium
Jacobi Simancae Intitut. Cathol. Alvarez Guerrero Thesaurus Religionis
Christian. Caesar Carene de off. Inquisit. Repertorium Inquisitorum. Franciscus
Brunus de Tortur. and indiciis. Jacobus Arenas de quaest. Gundissalvus de villa
Diego de Haeret. Julius Clarus. Joannes Roias. Lud. Carrerius de Haeret,
Alphonsus de Castro de justa Haeret. punit. Laurent. Arnoldus. Robertus Cenalis
de compescenda Haeret. ferocia, etc. They that shall consult these Books will
be fully satisfied and tired. But numberless are the Authors that treat of
these matters, and with little variation repeat the same things over and over.

CHAP. XIV. Of several things that conduce to make the Inquisition powerful and
glorious.
Heresy being so vile, so execrable a thing, and Heretics so mischievous and
odious, accordingly the Church of Rome has mightily magnified those persons
and instruments that serve against them. The Pope who is the great keeper and
maker of their Faith is exalted above all right and Laws, and all created
things. In his quae vult, pro ratione voluntatem habet, 5. the Gloss. His Will
stands for Reason, and a sufficient one, in whatsoever he has a mind to do.
And so absolute and uncontrolable is his Dominion that he cannot be tied to any
thing, not so much as by himself. Papa non potest legem sibi imponere, a qua
sibi recedere non liceat; his own word has no power to bind him. And as for
others the Text says, Papa a nemine judicari potest, nec ulli contra eum
sententiam proferre licet. There is on earth no Judge, nor Tribunal above the
Pope.

Inquisition by the same Rule, is placed next to him, for it is, says the Law,
Inventum in augmentum fidei, d. Clem. 1. found out and set up for the
preservation and propagation of the Faith. And it is a maxim in their spiritual
Courts, Citatus ab Episcopo and Inquisitore, prius Inquisitori pareto. That the
Inquisition must be obeyed before the Bishop. But how should Prelates be
regarded, when even sovereign Princes, who under God should be Masters of the
world, are, as far as lies in the power of the Roman Court, made to truckle
under the Papal and Inquisitory Empire, in all cases wherein Faith and Heresy
are concerned.

So Spondanus ad ann. 1460. tells us, that there is a Bull of Pius II. whereby
he damns as Traitors and Heretics, all that should presume to appeal from the
Sentence of the Pope, to the next Council, though they were Kings or Emperors.
And there is a Decree of Julius III. anno 1551. against them that should any
ways hinder the proceedings of the Inquisition, or that admit Laymen to be
Judges in the Case of Heresy, which he concludes thus bravely: Quicunque
monitis his nostris non obtemperaverint, noverint se, non solum per sacras
praedecessorum nostrorum constitutiones, verumetiam per hanc nostram sanctionem
sive sententiam and declarationem perpetuo duraturam, quam auctoritate
omnipotentis Dei ac Beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, ac nostra, in ipsos
non obtemperantes, quacunque illi praefulgeant dignitate, in his scriptis
proferimus, communione Fidelium and omnium sacramentorum perceptione privatos
ac maledictionis, ac execrationis aeternae ligatos, Anathematisque and majoris
excommunicationis mucrone percussos. Whoever shall not obey these our Precepts,
whatever dignity they are of, let them know that, by the Constitutions of our
Predecessors, and by the Sanction and Sentence which we bear in these presents,
to endure for ever against all disobedients, by the Authority of Almighty God,
of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and of our own, they are deprived of
the Communion of the Faithful, and of the receiving any Sacraments, and are
bound over to eternal Curse and Execration, and struck with the piercing
Anathema's of the greater excommunication.

And Pius V. anno 1569. has a long Bull against all persons whatever that
should do any wrong or injury to any thing or person belonging to the Most Holy
Office, (as he calls it) which he mightily magnifies and strengthens, giving
this reason for it. Si de protegendis caeteris omnibus Ecclesiae Ministris --
quanto majore studio eam nos solicitudinem capessere necesse est, ut qui in
sacro Inquisitionis Haereticae pravitatis officio versantur, sub tutela
inviolatae auctoritate hujus sedis, periculorum omnium expertes quaeque munera
ad exaltationem fidei Catholicae exequantur, etc. If we are obliged to protect
all the Ministers of the Church, with how much more zeal and carefulness ought
we to endeavor, that they that belong to the Sacred Office of the Inquisition
against Heretical pravity, should be inviolably defended from all dangers under
the authority of this See, that for the exaltation of the Catholic Faith they
may execut^ freely all that belongs to their Office. They being the most expert
and valian^ Champions against Heretics, who best convert them into Catholics
or Ashes are therefore to be defended and exalted by that Faith which they
protect and advance. And therefore besides this Hectoring of the Pope in their
behalf, wherever Inquisition is set up, all Secular Officers are obliged to
swear, that they will persecute Heretics with all their power, and will be
obedient to God, to the Roman Church, and to the Inquisitors.

This is the Form in the Directorium: Nos N, etc. Tenebimus and teneri faciemus
fidem Domini nostri Jesu Christi and sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae -- haereticos,
eis credentes, fautores and receptatores eorum prosequemur and capiemus, and
capi faciemus quomodocunque poterimus, and accusabimus and denunciabimus
Ecclesiae and Inquisitoribus st alicubi noverimus cos esse, administrationes
nullas, neque officia publica alicui de praedictis personis suspectis vel
diffamatis de Haeresi committemus -- erimus obedientes Deo, Romanae Ecclesiae
and Inquisitoribus, sic nos Deus ad^uvet, etc.

We N.N etc. will hold, and cause to be held the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the holy Roman Church, we shall prosecute and apprehend, and
cause to be apprehended all Heretics and their Followers, Favorers and
Receivers, all the ways we can, we shall denounce and accuse them to the
Church, and to the Inquisitors, if we can know where they are; we shall commit
to them, or to any suspect or diffamed of Heresy, no Administrations nor
public Offices, and we shall be obedient to God, to the Roman Church, and to
the Inquisitors. So help us God, etc.

And the Canonists tell us, Quod si tale juramentum non praestiterint, eorum
sententiae irritae sunt and inanes. That the Sentences of all Judges and
Magistrates, that do not take such an Oath, are void and insignificant.

The Civil Magistrates, as we see, are made Officers of the Holy Tribunal; even
in Venice, Padre Paolo tells us, c. 6. the Inquisitors would oblige the
Assistants, who represent the State, to swear secrecy to them, making it a
great. Case of Conscience to reveal any of their proceedings without their
leave, and backing it with this Maxim, Checause di feed evono restarappo i
Giudici^ della feed. That matters that concern the Faith must remain with the
Judges of the Faith.

SECT. I. Some Privileges of the Inquisitors, and Cruelties committed or
occasioned by it.
INquisitors are called, Defensores fidei and Ecclesiae, ad gloriam Dei and
augmentum fidei deputati. Defensors of the Faith of the Church, deputed for the
glory of God, and the increase of holy Faith. They have power at any time to
grant Indulgences of forty days, and of three years to them who any ways are
assistants against Heretics. They themselves have granted by three Popes as
Aimericus in his Directorium tells us, Plenary Indulgences and a full Pardon of
all their sins both living and dying. So that if they are exorbitant in the use
of their power, and chance to wound their Consciences, here is a sure Plaster
near at hand.

They being accountable to none but to the Pope, whose Delegats they are, and
having power to proceed against all sorts of persons, even against the Secular
and Regular Clergy, notwithstanding all exemptions, as Villa-Diego cites the
Canon Law. Pro crimine Haeresis possunt procedere contra omnes etiam exemptos,
etc. have therefore a mighty influence over all Confessors, and by their means
over all people, who either living or dying, are so awed by them that can give
or deny Absolution, that where the Inquisition prevails, the Popes Edicts are
of more force, than any Civil Laws or Evangelical Precepts. Padre Paolo, chap.
26. gives an instance of it very observable. And A Paramo p. 623, etc. says,
that in their Visitations, when the Inquisitors publish their Edict of Justice,
they command all Confessors to make what inquiries they please, and forbid them
to absolve any penitents from any thing that concerns Heresy. And they enjoin
all under severe penalties, to declare who they are that have, or have read any
Bibles in the Vulgar Tongue, or any Heretical Books, or have revealed any
secret of the Inquisition, or spoken any thing against it, or not obeyed their
Injunctions. Which makes their Dominion more formidable and absolute, than that
of Turkish Emperors.

We have seen before how they have a numerous train of armed men, who have
power always and in all places to wear all sorts of Weapons, and are devoted to
their service and obedience. Now these men as well as their Masters are sacred
and inviolable, as appears by the forementioned Bull of Pius V. But Leo X. had
before that, anno 1515. ordered that whoever should kill, beat, or strike any
of them, should be delivered up to the Secular Power to be burnt as a Heretic.

It would be endless to rehearse all their privileges and powers which make
the Tribunal of a few (in outward appearance) contemptible Friars, higher, more
firm, more irresistible and dreadful, than that of any Potentate upon earth.
Their Mystic Coat of Arms represents much of this, as some make it out very
ingeniously. A green Cross in Field Sable, on the right side a green Olive
branch, on the left a naked glittering Sword and a Brier; round the Cross this
Motto, Exurge Domine, judica causam tuam, which is ver. 23. of Psalm. 74.

But Torrents of Blood and devouring Flames had been more proper, to represent
what use they make of their might. Out of their own Writings, and other
Authors, since the time of Ferdinand and Isabella, a man might gather a dismal
Catalogue of men of Fame, Learning, and Piety, whom they have by various
torments murdered in several Kingdoms for being Heretics, besides Millions
known only to themselves, whom they have likewise destroyed. A Paramo tells us
of more than thirty thousand burnt in Sicily in less than 150. years, under
pretense of being Magicians. That in Portugal, Didacus de Sylva being supreme
Inquisitor, so many, and some even of the principal men, were miserably
harassed, imprisoned, bound, tortured, condemned, that about the year 1535. the
King was mightily affected with pity, and with much ado stopped and reversed
those bloody proceedings. And the same Author cites Hieronimus Zurita to
witness that in a few years, more than one hundred thousand in Sevil alone,
were several ways put to death, and that more than five thousand houses
remained empty, for a great while.

But it would no doubt exceed much all other accounts, and be the astonishment
of the world, if the Registers of the Inquisition for the two last hundred
years should come to public view, and we could see in them the numbers of men
they have slain, and the sorts of tortures they have made them endure, that
were, or were suspected to be, such Heretics as we.

Thuanus in l. 3. giving an account of the great prevalency of the Lutheran
Doctrine, even in Italy, and how the Tyranny of the Inquisition was let loose
upon all that but looked toward it, gives this short account of that Holy
Tribunal, Ejus horror and odium ingens -- augebat horrorem perversa and
praepostera judiciorum forma, quae contra naturalem aequitatem and omnem
legitimum ordinem, in jurisdictione illa explicanda observatur; tum etiam
immanitas tormentorum, quibus plerunque contra veritatem quicquid delegatis
judicibus libebat, a miseris and innocentibus reis, ut se cruciatibus
eximerent, per vim extorquebatur. That is, That it is the object of the
greatest dread and hatred, because the method of its proceedings is against all
Order, and Justice, and natural Equity, and because by direful unnatural
tortures, the Judges make innocent Criminals suffer and say what they please.

I know there have been Massacres and bloody Executions in many places where
there is no Inquisition. In France many Towns of the poor Waldenses were
destroyed, and the Inhabitants, Men, Women, and Children most barbarously
murdered, Thuan. l. 6. The Parisian St. Bartholomeo some years after, is also
sadly remarkable; what happened since here and elsewhere upon the same account,
cannot be forgotten. The Jesuit Strada l. 2. says, that besides those that
suffered under Queen Mary, the severities she used to purge this Kingdom of
Heresy, drove away no less than thirty thousand persons out of it. How many in
lesser numbers, endured great persecutions, and died at the the Stake, for many
years, in most places of Europe where the Popish Religion and Power had the
prevalency, is known only to that God who hears the voice of Innocent blood,
and is the Revenger of it, though many Authors have transmitted to Posterity
large memorials of those cruelties, some in detestation, some in commendation
of them.

What happened in the Low Countries, where Philip II. by fire and sword and great
violence for the establishing of the Spanish Inquisition provoked the People in
their own defense to undertake that long and bloody War which cost him seven
Provinces. Thuanus.
What was done in France against the two Henry's, by that rebellious League,
which the Pope abetted, and which undertook to set up his authority,
Inquisition, and Tridentine Council: These two memorable attempts in the behalf
of Papal Inquisition against Heretical pravity, have shed so much Christian
blood, that nothing but that very power and Tribunal, they were designed to
promote, have ever made greater effusions of it. And I am of opinion, that were
all things duly considered and compared, it would clearly appear, that there
have been as great slaughters, outrages, inhumanities committed, as many
Martyrs made by Rome Papist, since Dominic and the Inquisition appeared, as was
done by Rome Pagan, in the Ten Persecutions for three hundred years. Rev. xvii.
6. And I saw the Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.

SECT. II. Of the prohibiting of Books, and the Indices expurgatorii.
AMong the many privileges of the Inquisitors, it is none of the least, that
the Censure of Books belongs to them, wherever they have a Tribunal; by which
means they keep the People in as much ignorance as they please, and furnish the
learned with none but such Books as tend to establish the Roman Faith, and
their own Authority. For these two, there being in those Popish Countries so
very many Books, so fierce and positive, and none appearing to contradict them,
it is no wonder if persons of all ranks lie under great, invincible prejudices
in those Points that are disputed betwixt us and the Church of Rome, whether
such as concern the Faith, or the Power of the Magistrates, or those common
Rights of humanity which belong to all mankind; where we and our opinions are
represented as very monstrous and pernicious, and there are public Schools and
Lectures of cruelty against us, and a great part of the learning is to know the
accurate and established methods of destroying Heretics; and men are
acquainted with nothing but what makes for the Papal Power and Dominion, and
these things are inculcated and taught with great assiduity and great industry,
and a very strict watch is had against all Persons, Books, or Opinions that
could any ways thwart or oppose those received Maxims: it must needs have a
mighty influence upon the minds and persuasions of men. The Officers of the
Inquisition, who have nothing else to do, are so numerous, powerful,
inquisitive, and diligent, that it is matter of the greatest danger and
difficulty to print or import any Books, that should savor of what they call
Heresy, or maintain the just rights of Temporal Princes against the Spiritual
Monarch.

For this last, says the Judicious Padre Paolo, When a Potentate has not the
favor of him that commands in Ecclesiastical causes, Religion is made a
pretext to oppress him. Of which he gives instances Chap. 1. and amongst them,
that when the Pope was fallen out with the Venetians, any Books that came out
in Favor of the Republic, were forbidden by the Papal Inquisitions, under
color of Heresy. It is but giving any thing hard and terrible names, and
forbidding all things that can be said in the defense of it, and then it will
be easy to impose on the People.

Relating to this I shall transcribe out of the last mentioned Author part of
Chap. 29. The matter of Books seems to be a thing of small moment, because it
treats of words; but through these words come opinions into the world, which
cause partialities, Seditions, and finally Wars; they are words, it is true,
but such, as in consequence draw after them Hosts of armed men. -- By
forbidding Books which at Rome are not liked of, although they be good and
godly, because they maintain Temporal Power, great wrong is done to Sovereign
Princes, to such especially as would rule with the Arts of Peace, who use Books
as a chief Instrument to cause people to believe as a firm truth, that the
Prince is Ordained by God, and Rules with Divine Authority, and the Subject
consequently in Conscience is bound to obey him, and not doing it offends
God, because that the Prince, by the Law of God, is above every person that is
within his Dominions, and may lay burdens on men's Estates, as public
necessities require. Where these things, which are most true, are believed, a
State may easily be governed: but where contrary opinions are held, great
disorders must needs happen. But as there was always in Gods Church, those who
made use of Religion for worldly ends, so the number of them is more full.
These under a spiritual pretense, but with an ambitious end, and desire of
worldly wealth, would free themselves of the obedience due unto the Prince, and
take away the love and reverence due to him by the people, to draw it to
themselves. To bring it to pass, they have newly invented a Doctrine, which
talks of nothing but Ecclesiastical greatness, liberty, immunity, and
jurisdiction. This Doctrine was unheard of, until about the year 1300. Neither
is there any Book concerning it, before this time, then did they begin to write
of it scatteringly in some Books, but there were not above two Books which
treated of nothing else but this, until the year 1400. and three until the year
1500. After this time the number increased a little, but it was tolerable.
After the year 1560. this Doctrine began to increase in such manner, that they
gave over writing, as they used before, of the Mysteries of the Most Holy
Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, of the Creation of the World, and other
Mysteries of the belief, and there is nothing Printed in Italy, but Books in
diminution of Secular Authority, and exaltation of the Ecclesiastical; and such
Books are not Printed by small numbers, but by thousands: Those people which
have learning, can read nothing else; the Confessors likewise know none other
Doctrine, neither need they any other Learning to be approved of. Whence comes
in a perverse opinion universally, that Princes and Magistrates are human
Inventions, yea, and Tyrannical, that they ought only by compulsion to be
obeyed; that the disobeying of Laws, and defrauding the public Revenues does
not bind unto sin, but only unto punishment. And contrariwise, that every beck
of Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be taken for a divine Precept, and binds
the Conscience; and this Doctrine is perhaps the cause of all the
inconveniences which are felt in this Age.

Here we may see (as I noted before) whence the disloyal and factious
Principles of our Dissenters come; and by whose instigation they likely have
been moved to act as they have done.

Our Author adds, That as they condemn and persecute Books that come out in the
behalf of Kingly power, so they geld the Books of ancient Authors, by new
Printing them, and taking out of them all that which might serve for Temporal
Authority.

What he says of Books that concern the Government, is most true also of them
that concern their Religion or new Creed. Not one Book, Ancient or Modern, is
suffered to speak one syllable against any thing that the Church of Rome does
teach or practice, though they be such as are acknowledged even by learned men
of their Communion to be corrupt or superstitious. And Book that might open the
eyes of the People is, without fail, either prohibited or gelded: Even the Holy
Bible, as a dangerous Book, that favors Heretics, is straightly forbidden the
People, as we have seen before in the severe Edict of the Inquisitors.

There are now great variety of those Indices, or Catalogues of Books
forbidden, or of things to be taken out of them. Every year likely their comes
out one, commanded to be admitted and obeyed in all the Christian world. Where
there are Inquisitors those Indices are sent to them, who enjoin all Confessors
to take care about them in their confessing and absolving their Penitents. And
by this means they not only keep from the people all instructive good Books:
but they so mangle and alter those Books which they cannot keep out of their
hands, that at present, in reading of a Book, a man can no more find what the
Authors meaning was, but only what is the meaning of the Court of Rome, who
has altered every thing, as famous Padre Paolo complains and shows at large.

In those Indices published first by Junius, and afterward even by authority
and license we have this acknowledgment speaking of Bertrams Book. In old
Catholic Writers, we suffer many Errors, and extenuate and excuse them, and by
some device we feign some convenient sense, when they are opposed to us.
Excogitato Commento, sensum iis affingimus. And we have these Corrections in
Indices, Text or Marginal Notes of several Authors, which were to be purged and
left out in the next Editions, as being heretical or dangerous Doctrines. Deus
solus adorandus, God alone is to be worshipped. Alienis meritis and operibus
nemo juvatur; No man is benefited by the merits or good works of another.
Habitat Jesus per fidem in cordibus nostris; Christ dwells in our hearts by
faith. Credens Christo non morietur in aeternum; He that believes in Christ
shall not die eternally. Justus coram Deo nemo; No man is just before God.
Vxorem habeat unusquisque, confitendo Deo peccata non homini, sine scriptura
divina nihil asserendum. Sancta Dei Ecclesia creaturam non adorat; The Holy
Church of God worships no Image. A Deo solo omnia petenda; every thing is to be
demanded of God alone by Prayer. These, and many the like, some whereof are in
the Authors themselves, and some in holy Writ expressly, yet are to be blotted
out, as not agreeing with Roman Catholicism.

Padre Paolo observes, that they not only take away what they like not, but
that they also add what makes for their purpose. I am sure by the Instructions
of Clement VIII. if they be duly observed, Books, that pass through the hands
of the Inquisition, must become as correct and infallible as his Holiness
himself. He directs and enjonys the Inquisitors, and those whom they should
appoint, to repurge Authors that want it, ann. 1596. Qui negotium susceperit
corrigendi atque expurgandi, circumspicere and attente notare debet, non solum
quae in cursu operis manifest se offerunt, sed si quae in scholiis, in
summariis, in marginibus, in indicibus librorum, in praefationibus, aut
Epistolis dedicatoriis, tanquam in insidiis delitescunt. That is, That they
that undertake the work, must not only look foreright, but round about on all
sides, that no Bugbears lurk and lie in ambush in any corner, in Annotations,
Summaries, Margins, in the Epistles Dedicatory, Prefaces, or Tables.

And these are some of the things which he says want a purgation of Ink.
Positiones erroneae, schismaticae, haereticae, haeresim sapientes. -- quae
contra sacramentorum ritus and ceremonias, contra receptum usum and
consuetudinem sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, novitatem aliquam inducunt. Prophanae
etiam novitates vocum ab haereticis excogitatae and ad fallendum introductae.
Verba dubia and ambigua quae legentium animos a recto Catholicoque sensu, ad
nefarias opiniones adducere possunt. Verba sacrae scripturae non fideliter
prolata, vel a pravis haereticorum versionibus deprompta, nisi forte offerentur
ad eosdem Haereticos impugnandos, and propriis telis jugulandos and
convincendos. Expungi etiam oportet verba scripturae sacrae, quae ad sensum
detorquentur abhorrentem ab unanimi sententia Catholicorum doctorum. -- itemque
Epithet a honorifica, and omnia in laudem Haereticorum dicta, deleantur. --
Expungendae sunt etiam propositiones quae sunt contra libertatem, immunitatem
and jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam. -- Explodantur exempla quae Ecclesiasticos
ritus, Religiosorum ordines, statum, dignitatem, and personas laedunt and
violant. Positions heretical, that have a smack of Heresy, erroneous,
schismatical, -- whatever is introductive of any novelty repugnant to those
Rites and Ceremonies that are used about the Sacraments, or to any of the
customs and usages of the holy Roman Church. Also new expressions and ways of
speaking, invented by Heretics to deceive others. And all such doubtful and
ambiguous words as may draw the minds of Readers from the right Catholic sense
to naughty opinions. Words of Holy Writ not well rendered, or taken from
heretical versions, except they be intended to serve against Heretics, to cut
their throats with their own weapons. Also those sacred Scriptures that are
wrested to a sense differing from the unanimous consent of Roman Doctors be
blotted out. -- All honorable Epithetes also, and whatever is said in praise
of any Heretics, must be taken away. -- As likewise those Propositions which
are any ways contrary to the Ecclesiastical liberties, immunities, and
jurisdictions. -- And let nothing remain that may hurt or violate
Ecclesiastical Rites, Religious Orders, or Persons, or their state and
dignities.

Heretical pravity must needs be mighty stubborn and incurable in those Authors
that will not be purged and made sound Roman Catholics by these and the like
Prescriptions, of which there are good store, made since by other Popes.
Whereby we may see how we are to trust the faith and ingenuity of the
infallible Church, and what credit is to be given to Writers of that Communion,
when they treat of any matters that concern Heretics.

Now in the Rules of the Sacred Congregation, anno 1667. published by the
Authority of Pope Alexander VII. the former Injunctions are confirmed, and they
expressly set down in the Index of prohibited Books, Biblia vulgari quocunque
idiomate conscripta; All Versions of the Bible in any vulgar tongue, and in the
Rules make this sanction, Qui absque facultate Episcopi aut Inquisitoris sacra
Biblia vulgari lingua habere praesumpserit, nisi prius Bibliis ordinario
redditis peccatorum absolutionem percipere non poterit. That whoever shall
presume to have the Holy Bible in the vulgar tongue, without he have obtained
for it a faculty or license in Form of the Ordinary or Inquisitor, shall never
have absolution of sins till he have returned the Bibles into the hands of his
Superiors. This License you may be sure is very sparingly granted, and
sometimes to prevent danger is recalled, as was done by Urban VIII. 1631. and
not one of ten thousand, in those Countries where the Inquisition reigns, dares
ask for it, be he never so true a Roman Catholic, or so desirous to see what
that Book can have in it, which is so kept from the People, because it is
sufficient to make a man of the Vulgar suspect of Heresy, if he but speaks of
that dangerous Book, which has made so many Heretics.

As for those Books whereof the subject is judged to be good and useful, but
that they have here and there things that border too much upon Heresy, after
the faults are amended by the Inquisitors or their Deputies, they may be
permitted to be read. So says the Eighth Rule. Libri quorum principale
argumentum bonum est, in quibus tamen obiter quaedam inserta sunt quae ad
haeresim spectant, a Catholicis Theologis Inquisitionis generalis auctoritate
expurgati, concedi possunt.

These Cautions and Edicts of Popes and Inquisitors, extend also to them that
buy or sell any forbidden Books, and where the Roman Tribunal is potent enough,
the penalties against Transgressors are exacted with great rigor. And Bzovius
himself tells us of one Casper Tauberus, 1524. who was adjudged to be burnt at
Vienna, because, after having forsworn the reading any more of Heretical
condemned Books, he transgressed again.

SECT. III. Of the Honor of being employed in the Holy Office, and the praises
of it.
WE have seen before what mighty privileges and immunities are granted to all
that belong to the Inquisition. The Bull of Pius V. October. 13. 1570. confirms
them all, and all Grants and Indulgences given by his Predecessors to all such
Societies as undertook Croisadoes, to assist against Heretics the Inquisitors
of Heretical Pravity. The Officers of the Inquisition are Heirs at Law of all
those spiritual Riches. A Paramo says, That were the Holy Office well
understood by pious Catholics, they would be so far from being frighted with
it, that they would mightily rejoice, to see the holy Catholic Faith so
stoutly and effectually defended, and to see the stray Sheep brought again to
the Fold so powerfully, p. 268.

Sixtus V. as we have seen, calls it, Firmissimum Fidei Catholicae
propugnaculum; The strongest shield and support of the Faith. And Paul IV.
would freely own, that it was praecipuum nervum and arcanum pontificatus, the
strongest nerve and deepest mystery of the Papacy. Padre Paolo, Hist. Con.
Trent. l. 5. And as my Author cites the Acts of the Creation of Pius IV. this
Paul breathed out his Soul in commending to the Cardinals about him, that holy
Tribunal, which he thought, would do more than a Council; Sanctissima
Inquisitio unum nunc remedium labenti Religioni. The most holy Inquisition is
now the only remedy to our staggering Religion. A Paramo p. 278. The same
giving some account of the burning of several great Spanish Doctors,
Constantinus, Aegidius, Cazalla Chaplain to Charles V. and many Lutherans with
them, declares to the great commendation of the Holy Office, that had it not
been for the great vigor and diligence of the Inquisitors, the Catholic faith
had been lost in Sqain, as it is in the Northern Kingdoms for lack of an
Inquisition, p. 272.

There he tells us also, how much Ignatius Loyola used to commend it, which
well became him, for he had passed through it, and know what it was. Out of a
Sermon of Lewis of Granada he cites these words, Sanctae Inquisitionis Officium
nurus est Ecclesiae, columna veritatis, fidei custodia, Christiana Religionis
Thesaurus, arma adversus Haereticos, contra omnes daemonum fallacias and
technas lumen fulgentissimum, lapis lydius ad doctrinae veritatem dignoscendam
and examinandam.

The Office of the Holy Inquisition is the Nurse of the Church, and the Pillar
of Truth; the Storehouse of Christian Religion, and the Keeper of the Faith;
the Touchstone of true Doctrine, the best Armor against Heretics, and the
clearest light whereby to discern the illusions and frauds of the Devil.

Accordingly several Writers about this subject, make great brags of the great
virtues and sanctity of many Inquisitors, and are so enamoured with the
incomparable beauty of that most sacred Function of butchering Men, and with
the exemplary goodness of them that faithfully discharge it, that they spend
upon it and them the greatest lauds and praises they can find. That many of
them have been patient Confessors for the Truth; that many others have gained
the Crown of Martyrdom; that many by their Devotions and Charity have obtained
the title of Blessed; and many been Sainted and Canonized by the Pope, Qui nunc
in aliquot provinciis, summa cum pietate coluntur, who now are in some
Provinces worshipped with the greatest piety.

Multis miraculis maximis claruerunt, A Par. 108. Many Inquisitors have become
famous for working most wonderful Miracles. Those of St. Dominic are past
number. St. Peter the Martyr, the first and fiercest Inquisitor at Milan, would
easily drive away Devils when they came to make a noise and disturb him in his
Preaching. A Boy that had cut off his foot by kicking at his Mother, he with
few words in Confession made whole; which may be Emblematical of such as had
kicked against Holy Church, and were by him converted and absolved. St. Anton.
Tom. 3. is here and there very ample upon this subject.

But what can be said more for the eternal credit of the Holy Office, than what
A Paramo relates, p. 138, etc. that about the year 1500. when many thousands of
Heretics were sent to the Galleys, as many immured, and many more burnt, that
this severity, just and holy as it was, yet having somewhat of a resemblance to
what men call cruelty, staggered a little some soft-hearted Spaniards, even
Inquisitors, and made them doubt whether that Religion and Office which reduced
so many human Creatures to so great miseries, and shed so much blood, were
acceptable to God, and whether such proceedings did please him; whereupon
having made their humble addresses to the blessed Virgin, they demanded a sign
of her, to be resolved in this matter: and behold Miracles appeared of all
sides; not an Image in Town, nor hardly an Officer of the Inquisition, but were
enabled to do wonders and feats, so great and so many that the scruple was
quite removed, and they became persuaded that the Roman Faith and severe
justice upon Heretics are most dearly beloved of God and all his Saints, and
Franciscus Sanctius de la Fuente Inquisitor and Scribe was tired with writing
down what miracles happened. So that henceforth, we may suppose, they will rest
satisfied, as to this inquiry.

And it is no small proof that the Court of Rome, as well as that of Heaven,
has great veneration for the Holy Office, when more than an hundred years ago,
more than forty Inquisitors had been made Cardinals, and five had obtained the
Treble Crown of Pope, A Paramo tells us. Nay, Franciscus Ziletus tells the
Cardinal Gambara, who was of the Congregation of the Inquisition, and makes it
the superlative degree of his commendations, Summis tuis meritis in supremum
hunc ordinem and cooptatus, in quo tam praeclare te gessisti, ut dignissimus
fueris judicatus, qui in sacro isto Magistratu Inquisitionis sederes: cujus ea
est dignitas, meritum ac auctoritas, ut summi Pontifices ex eo fere deligantur.
That his great merits having brought him him to the high honor of being a
Cardinal, he had in that station so nobly behaved himself, as to be raised to
the sacred Magistrature of the Congregation of the Inquisition, whereof such is
the dignity, merit, and power, that for the most part the high Pontifs or Popes
are chosen out of it. Than which nothing upon earth can exalt higher the honor
of the Holy Office.

CHAP. XV. The Conclusion.
A Few Reflections on what has been said, shall conclude all at present upon
this subject. And first, if those of the Communion of the Church of Rome that
live amongst us, by reading this Book, or consulting the Authorities I have
cited, remain satisfied that the faith and worship peculiar to their Church,
are such as I have described in the two first Chapters, and that such
severities, as I represent afterward, are used by her against all that dissent
from her, then I would have them consider, whether that part of their Religion
which occasions the breach betwixt them and us, depend not more on the Papal
authority, and be not more doubtful and suspicious, liable to more objections
than that common Christianity which we hold all together? They may believe
themselves to be in the Right, mankind may be abused, we see the greater part
of the world are Turks and Pagans: but they cannot that have conversed with us,
think that either our Lives or Doctrines are so abominably impious and wicked
as the Papal Decrees and proceedings of the Inquisition make them. Nay, I
expect from their Candor, that they will believe we are in earnest, when we
protest that we have no other design in professing what we do, but to please
God, and make our Souls happy; that we would with our hearts and souls be
amongst them, if we thought truth were there, but that after our best
enquiries, remaining persuaded we have it of our side, we think our selves
obliged under peril of damnation, to own and follow it, though thereby we
expose our selves to the greatest extremities.

But if we are mistaken, and they are pleased to call us Heretics, yet I would
desire them to consider further, whether such cruelties as their Church
commands and executes against us, be a likely means to make us have a better
opinion of it, and change our former persuasions? I believe many of them have
too much knowledge and humanity to approve of those violent and bloody
proceedings which we complain of: But then, what do they think of a Religion
that does enjoin, practice, and commend them, as the greatest service that can
be done to God? Can it be thought that the Institution of the merciful Savior
of the world allows of Croisadoes, and Massacrees, of Dungeons, and Fetters, of
Tortures and Flames, of all that can create horror in the minds of men, and
pain in their bodies: and that he has left his Vicar power to make use of
them, for to propagate and maintain his Faith.

If all the Bloody Laws and Edicts the Church of Rome has made against
Christians of other Communions; if all the means she has used to make them
miserable in the world, and to send them out of it; if all the Racks and
Gibbets, and Instruments of cruelty used by her Inquisitors, if all those human
Creatures she has with great inhumanities slain and burnt alive, in behalf of
her Religion, and to gain and maintain her Wealth and Power; if all these could
be seen altogether at once, it would be the saddest object of pity that ever
eyes beheld, and an Argument which few could resist, that sure Rome is not his
Church, nor holds not his Religion whose Kingdom was not of this world; who
came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; and who commanded his
Disciples to be meek and lowly, to forgive Injuries, and render good for evil:
and by all the methods of Patience, Charity, and Beneficence, to win mankind to
the belief and profession of his most merciful and heavenly Doctrine.

Here also those of the Roman Persuasion may see why now lately the belief of a
Popish Plot has been so generally entertained amongst us. Some of them seem to
take it very unkindly that we of the Church of England should believe any thing
of it, and they wonder much that we do not see, how that it was an invention of
the Dissenters to involve them and us into a common ruin. But though it must be
confessed, that the Dissenters have made a very ill use of the discovery of the
Plot: and that many particular persons of the Roman Communion, that protest of
their innocence, ignorance, and abhorrence of it, are to be credited; yet it is
most true that such a Plot there may be, and warranted by all the Laws of their
Church; they themselves may have generous and merciful dispositions, I will not
deny it: But that their Religion is very cruel, as to what concerns Heretics,
they must not deny. When their late Councils, and Popes, and Doctors have made
Declarations and Laws, that Heretics, Princes and all, may and must be
destroyed by all means possible; That no Pact, no Promise made to them, does
any ways oblige; that whatever Roman Catholics can say or do to them, in order
to their Ruin, is lawful and commendable; that what in other Cases would be
Perjury, Treachery, and Murder; when used against Heretics, is Justice, and
an holy Zeal; that the Crime of Heresy is so crying, so enormous, such a High
Treason against God, that all that love him, are authorized and ^ound to
prosecute and revenge it; that accordingly the Church, for the propagation and
defense of the Faith, has used, with great success, those methods, against
Heretics, and where she had power, erected Tribunals and Commissioned Officers
for their punishment and extirpation: When we see this in their Books, and all
the world may read it there, are we to be told there is no such thing? or may
we not believe that they that profess obedience to ^at Church, would easily
engage themselves to venture their lives for the extirpation of a Pestilent
Northern Heresy, as Coleman calls it.

Whether or no, they that are accucused, have designed and attempted such
things as has been deposed by persons from amongst them, is not mine to
determine; that belongs to Magistrates and Judges: But I am confident it is
easy to be made out more demonstrably, (if what I have said be not sufficient
to prove it) that for what is laid to their charge, they have as ample and full
encouragements and authorities as their Church in any case can give. And that
supposing they had (as is said) undertaken the Deposition or Murder of his
Sacred Majesty, and others that stood in their way, in order to bring in the
Roman Catholic Faith, it was only the executing the often repeated Sentences
of the Sovereign Tribunal of Rome, against such as are guilty of the
unpardonable crime of Heretical Pravity: Having also the same power, as well to
forswear and deny, as to act any of the Premises.

I am a Witness against none of them, and for ought I know they may be
Innocent: but it is proved that their Religion is guilty, and would countenance
and reward the destruction of Heretics, however effected. And then, it should
not be much wondered at, that we think it possible some of them may be led by
the Principles of their Church: and in compliance with the Sacred Sanctions and
Decrees of it might, consult and contrive how to do justice upon us; for so
they call in the Roman Language, what in ours is Treason, Murder, and Cruelty.

The Jesuits are charged with all these, and there are commonly loud clamours
against them, as if they alone were the cause of our miseries and dangers. But
I say, though they may be more zealous for the Papacy, and more obsequious to
it, obliged by their fourth Vow, yet the Inquisition was erected, and had done
great execution, long before their Order appeared: and most of those Canons,
Bulls, and Decretals, that devote us to destruction, were enacted, published,
and executed, before their name was heard of in the world: so that, if they
outdo others in being more active and more fierce against us, this is all can
be said; that they are most true to their Church and Religion, and best deserve
the name of downright Roman Catholics.

Lastly, Here our Neighbors of the Roman Communion, may see, why we also of
the Church of England, are so afraid of them and their Religion. They may
observe that we join not with popular factions; that we do not instigate the
Vulgar to be violent against them; that in our converse with them, they find us
courteous and kind; and that we declared, when there was danger on all hands to
do it, that if God, after that most excellent Prince under whom we live, should
suffer another of their Persuasion to succeed, we would own and obey him; and
whatever dangers and persecutions we might be exposed to, be dutiful and loyal,
as becomes true Christians. But then we know, that their Religion obliges them
to deal very ill by us, that are declared Heretics: and we know not how far
they may think themselves bound to comply with those obligations. We know that
a Prince of their Communion would have the same, and stronger ties upon him, to
endeavor the extirpation of Heresy: and we know not how far the pressing
importunity of the Roman Court and Clergy, or the fear of undergoing the Fate
of the two Henry's of France, might prevail upon him. We know that what
interest they have had here at Court, has been used for the depressing of our
Clergy; for the weakening the settlement and Constitution of our Church; for
the encouraging of the Sectaries against us; for bringing our Peace and
established Religion into confusion and contempt: and that, that we are not yet
ruined, is altogether owing to Gods infinite Mercy, and to the Kings Goodness.
And we are persuaded upon very good grounds, that if the change were brought
about, and their Church had here that Power, which it has wherever their
Religion is uppermost, that we should be in a most miserable condition; forced
to abjure what in our Conscience we believe to be the true and saving Religion
of our dear Savior; forced to embrace and practice what we believe to be
altogether false and superstitious; or forced by the prosecution of those Laws
against Heretics, which they count Sacred and Divine, to be poor, despised and
persecuted, or to lie in Goals, and burn at the Stake.

Some of these things we have had occasion to know, and the others we have very
just cause to fear: and therefore, though we would not do any thing unjust or
illegal to preserve our selves, yet we would be very glad to be more secure,
and would have been very well satisfied, and very thankful if it had pleased
the late Parliaments, to have made Laws, according to his Majesty's most
gracious offer, for the limiting the power of a Popish Successor, if ever such
a one there should be, and putting the administration of the Government into
Protestant hands, for the preserving the Established Religion without
destroying Monarchy. I say, for this we would have blessed God, and the King,
and our Representatives, had they thought fit to have done that for us: and we
would have thought our selves much safer and happier than we are, as they have
left us, exposed naked to all that may happen.

Our Consciences and Persuasions oblige us, by Reason, and Argument, and all
Christian and Equitable ways, to oppose the Papal Religion, which we believe to
be highly dishonorable to God, and prejudicial to the souls of men: therefore
though we rail not, and make not such outcries, as some are apt to do, yet by
serious Writings and Discourses, we think our selves bound to confirm our
people in the Protestant Religion.

We are not apt to start at Bugbears and shadows, nor to fill the heads of the
People with Pannick and groundless terrors: yet we have very sad apprehensions
of what we must be, if we should come under the Power of Rome, and will do what
justly we may, to preserve our Religion and Freedoms, and prevent what to us
appears, upon all accounts, most dreadful and terrible, the Roman Catholic
Faith and Inquisition.

As for them that are Protestants, I desire them to observe, how afflicted has
been the Condition of millions of our Christian Brethren, whilst they were
exposed to those severe Roman Tribunals, of which I have given some account:
and to think with pity, on the great oppressions and sufferings of many, who
still in many Countries, groan under Papal Tyranny. And then to pay their
hearty thanks and acknowledgments to God, for that liberty, those immunities,
and those great blessings we enjoy, by living according to the Rules of that
pure and holy Reformed Religion which is here established and professed among
us; by heartily joining with the Church, in offering up with devout affections
those Prayers and Praises, and acceptable Services, wherewith she worships God
daily; and by having a Reverend esteem of those Orders and Constitutions which
our Reformers established in opposition to Popery, and which cost many of them
their lives.

We see how great is our danger from the Church of Rome, that she has made
Sacred and Religious the most severe and unnatural means that can be used to
destroy us: and that therefore we must expect no quarter from them that live in
subjection to her, who the more zealous and devout they are, the more
implacable and fierce they are against us, being persuaded that by the
punishing and extirpating Heresy, they mightily endear themselves to the whole
Court of Heaven, and merit the highest rewards. We see further that, though
there were not that danger, yet we are in duty bound to avoid and oppose the
Romish Religion, which greatly wrongs the truth and honor of our God and
Savior, and puts men out of the plain Primitive and safe way to Heaven: and to
endeavor the preservation and advancement of true Christianity, as we have it,
by Gods blessing and the great sufferings of our Predecessors, restored to us.

Therefore, let me desire the good people among us, who really have a love and
value for the true Protestant Religion, to consider, that Popery is not what
every one dislikes, or is pleased to call so. We have a sort of men, who brand
with as black names the innocent Ceremonies, and necessary Decencies, and
Orders of our Church, as they can do the worst Corruptions in the Church of
Rome; nay, and all men that make Conscience of being conformable to the Laws
under which we live, and that are Friends to the Government Ecclesiastical and
Civil, are presently Popishly affected. This palpably appears to be a design of
them who once before, under the same pretense, did ruin King and Church, and
enslave their Country; for these very men upon occasion, when it is to serve a
turn, or to get an Office, will freely Conform, even receive the blessed
Sacrament in our way, which generally they had never done before, but much
slighted and spoken against: and our present Constitutions in Church and State,
are so far from favoring Popery, that they were made in opposition to it, and
have effectually kept it out above a hundred years: and it is now clear by the
Depositions upon Oath of the chief Discoverers of the Plot, and by Colemans
Letters, that Popery is to be brought in (if it can be) by means of these very
Sectaries, who now would run us down for Papists, and by weakening and
abrogating those Laws and that Establishment, which many Dissenters clamor at,
and fain would pull down.

This may suffice to show well-meaning people the Snare that is set for us; and
to induce them, as good Christians, and good Subjects, to help to maintain and
defend the Established Religion, in the profession whereof they may be as
godly, and as virtuous and good, as it is possible for men to be here below, in
our state of imperfection. Herein lies our Safety as well as our Duty, that
there may be a National Constitution, and we may be united together in
Religious Bonds, under our lawful Governors. It adds much to the strength and
credit of the Church of Rome, that the Members thereof are governable, or at
least governed, and kept under one Rule: whereas it brings disgrace, and
threatens ruin to the Reformation, to have some that would be called
Protestants, perpetually contending with their Governors, endeavoring to
shake off their Yoke, always objecting and struggling against Laws and public
Orders, and entertaining such Principles of Libertinism, as divides them into
Sects and Factions. This is so contrary to the common notion of true Godliness,
and to that meek spirit which the Gospel so much recommends, that I hope God
will open the eyes of such as truly fear him, and have no ill designs, and make
them see how much it is for the interest of their present and future happiness,
to join with our Church, to defend it, and live in it like good Christians, and
loyal Subjects, as all the ties of Religion and Conscience oblige them to do.

They that now aim at a change, brought one about, within these forty years,
most fatal and infamous to the Protestant cause; and the good people were
infinitely cheated, and paid very dear for the overturning that Government in
Church and State, under which they might have lived very innocent, and very
happy, in comparison to what they did, in that bloody and unnatural War and
Usurpation, which I hope is not yet forgot: but will ever be a caution to all
good men amongst us, to endeavor for the preservation of our peace and
settlement. That having such a truly Christian Religion as we have, and so
gracious a Government, we may not use our liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness:
nor abuse by a froward and unthankful humor, those great and special mercies
we enjoy: nor provoke God to bring upon us and our Land the Superstitions and
Cruelties of the Roman Church. From which, good Lord deliver us, and all thy
Servants for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction p. 1
CHAP. I.
Of the Roman Faith, as distinct from the Christian, and truly Catholic; and
first of the new Creed p 3 Sect. 2. General Reflections on this Roman Creed p.
9 Sect. 3. That this new Creed makes the distinction betwixt Papists and other
Christians p. 12
CHAP. II.
Of several parts of the Roman Worship, and first of their Exorcisms p. 20
Sect. 1. Of their many Consecrations p. 24 Sect. 2. Of their Mass p. 27 Sect.
3. Of their worship of Images and Saints p. 30
CHAP. III.
How the Inquisition came to be established; and first of the Oaths and
Excommunications wherewith they tie the Consciences of men p. 44 Sect. 1. Of
the beginnings of the Inquisition p. 50 Sect. 2. Of Dominic the first
Inquisitor p. 54 Sect. 3. Of the first making of Familiars, or armed Officers
or Bailiffs for the Holy Tribunal p. 59
CHAP. IV.
Of the first that suffered the Rigours of the Inquisition p. 62 Sect. 1. Of
the Waldenses, and the proceedings against them p. 66
CHAP. V.
Of the restoring of the Inquisition p. 76 Sect. 1. The erecting of the Spanish
Inquisition p. 78 Sect. 2. The settling the Inquisition in Portugal and
elsewhere p. 81
CHAP. VI.
Of several Tumults and oppositions against the Inquisition p. 84
CHAP. VII.
Of the ordering of the Inquisition p. 90 Sect. 1. The Bull of Sixtus Quintus,
about the new modelling of the Inquisition p. 95
CHAP. VIII.
Of the proceedings of the Inquisition p. 101 Sect. 1. Of the Accusations p.
104 Sect. 2. Of proceeding by way of Inquisition p. 109 Sect. 3. Of the
Inquisitors Visitation p. 113
CHAP. IX.
Of the intermedial proceedings betwixt the apprehension and the torture p. 116
Sect. 1. Of the being brought to the Bar p. 118 Sect. 2. How the Prisoners
Estate is seized upon p. 122 Sect. 3. Of the tedious and sad condition of the
Prisoner p. 126
CHAP. X.
Of the Tortures, and what relates to them p. 130 Sect. 1. Of some preparations
previous to the Torture p. 132 Sect. 2. Of the ways of Torturing p. 137 Sect.
3. Of repeating the question p. 140
CHAP. XI.
Of reconciling and dismissing Penitents p. 144 Sect. 1. Of the Cautions of the
Friars when they absolve an Heretic p. 146 Sect. 2. Forms of Sentences p. 150
CHAP. XII.
Of the condemning of Heretics that are to be burnt p. 156 Sect. 1. A Sentence
in some Relapses p. 160 Sect. 2. A form of delivering a stubborn Heretic to
the Secular Power p. 166
CHAP. XIII.
Of the Enormity and further punishment of the Crime of Heresy p. 171 Sect. 1.
Of the vileness of Heretical Pravity p. 175 Sect. 2. Of several Inflictions
upon Heretics p. 182 Sect. 3. That in the Case of Heresy Princes fare no
better than Subjects p. 189 Sect. 4. Of the Authorities and Authors cited in
this Book p. 193
CHAP. XIV.
Of several things that conduce to make the Inquisition powerful and glorious
p. 200 Sect. 1. Some Privileges of the Inquisitors, and cruelties committed or
occasioned by them p. 206 Sect. 2. Of the prohibiting of Books, and the Indices
Expurgatorii p. 213 Sect. 3. Of the honor of being employed in the Holy
Office, and the praises of it p. 227
CHAP. XV.
The Conclusion p. 133
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 6. after explain add them. p. 44. l. penult. for her read his. p.
55. l. 25. for St. r. that. p. 56. l. 13. r. decease. p. 64. l. 3. r. were. p.
64. l. 17. r. Bearn. p. 66. l. 7. for 80. r. 30. p. 67. l. 23. after that r. it
is. p. 76. for 47. r. 4th. p. 119. l. 26. been is transposed. p. 155. l. 3. r.
sowed. p. 157. for him r. them. p. 170. l. 16. r. accordingly. p. 206. in tit.
Sect. 1. for it r. them. p. 219. l. 21. for and r. any.


