THE Great and Dreadful DAY OF THE Lord God Almighty (Which is hastening as a
Flood upon the whole World of the Ungodly) Once more Proclaimed: That All
People may again be Warned to REPENT with speed, and so be left without EXCUSE.
O The Great, Terrible and Dreadful Day of the Lord God Almighty, that is at
hand, a Day of Anguish, Distress and Great Perplexity, a Day of sore Trouble
and Vexation unto the Wicked, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of
Terrors and Alarm of War, Destruction upon Destruction, even such a Day as was
never before it, nor shall ever be like it for evermore; a Day of Fears and
Amazements, Howlings and Dreadful Astonishments: Woe is me, Woe is me for you the
Inhabitants of the Earth; Alas, alas! the Day is Great, and very Terrible,
which is approaching; Who shall be able to abide it? O my Soul! be thou quiet,
and exceeding still and low in the Dread and Power of the Almighty, and very
watchful in the inward retired Place of the Most High forever, that thou may
be preserved; for the Day is exceeding Great, and very Terrible, that hastens
as a Woman in Travail; a Day of Shaking of all things that are since the
Foundation of the World, and of Quaking and Trembling through the whole Earth;
a Day of Vengeance and Indignation, of Fierce Wrath and Dreadful Judgments upon
the Ungodly. Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, the
Devil is come down among you in great Rage and Fury, knowing he has but a
short time: Repent, Repent, Repent, and fear, dread and tremble before the Lord
God Almighty, and turn ye every one from his Evil Ways; for he will dash the
Ungodly in pieces like a Porters Vessel against the Rocks. Howl, Howl, Howl all
you that live in Pleasures, Vanities and Fading Delights of this World: the Day
of your Fears, Distress and Anguish shall overtake you. All you profane Esaus,
who have sold your Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, your Day of Crying with
Tears, to seek a Place to Repent with Carefulness, is at hand; but you (who
have lost the Blessing) will be rejected. And all you wild Ishmaelites,
Mockers and Scoffers, ye will be cast out into utter Darkness, where is Wailing
and Gnashing of Teeth for evermore. And all you Oppressors and Persecutors
about Religion, Cain's generation, your Punishments will be greater then you
can bear; ye are the Vagabonds from God, and Fugitives in the Earth. And all
you Nimrods, mighty Hunters before the Lord, your Kingdom is of Babel, the
Great Whore, ye must partake of her Plagues. Howl, Howl, and Lament bitterly
all ye Idle Shepherds, greedy devouring Wolves, and all you Dumb Dogs, who have
made a Prey upon the Sheep, tearing their Fleece and Flesh from off their
Bones; your Day is at hand, of such Judgments, Plagues and Vengeance, as has
not been known in Ages: For the Terrible and Dreadful God is come to Reign in
Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients Gloriously; and he will
tread and trample you in his Fury, as one that treads upon Mortar; your Vine
is the Vine of Sodom, your Grapes are Grapes of Abominations; you must be cast
into the Wine Press of the Wrath of the Almighty God, there to be tormented Day
and Night forever and ever, except ye speedily Repent: the Mouth of the Lord
has spoken it.

Howl and be Astonished, and Tremble all ye Councils and Confederacies of
Ungodly Men, who lie upon your Beds of Mischief, and sit in the Nest of
Wickedness; you hatch Cockatrice Eggs; and he that eats of your Eggs, dies;
and that which is crushed, breaks forth into a Viper: Woe to the Crown of Pride,
and to the Drunkards of Ephraim, who feed upon the Head of the fat Valley: And
Woe to you who decree Unrighteous Decrees, and write Grievous Things, which you
have prescribed; for you have cast the Fear, Law and Counsel, Wisdom, Mercy and
true Judgment of the Righteous God behind your Backs. Therefore fear, bow and
tremble, all ye who are as Fed Horses and Fatted Beasts for the Slaughter of
his fierce Indignation; for his terrible Stroke will come upon you, and consume
you off the Earth, and ye shall not escape it.

And all you Proud, Scornful, Deceitful, Wanton Ones, and Abominable Men and
Women, who are exalted above God's Witness in you, making merry over it; weep
and howl, for your Miseries are coming upon you; your Riches shall not save
you, your Deceit and Policy (with all your Outside Profession) shall not hide
or cover you from the fierce Wrath of the Almighty.

A wake, awake, O all ye Hypocrites, Double-minded and Time-Servers, who have
the Changeable Suits of Apparel, and wear the Round Tires like the Moon, and
use the Crisping-pins; if you have Ears, hear: you have Changeable Suits, and
Round Tires like the Moon, this is your State, who know not the Woman clothed
with the Sun, with the Moon under her Feet; your Well-set Hair is become
Baldness, and instead of a Girdle there is a Rent, and Burning instead of
Beauty: Therefore dread and tremble before the Lord God, and Repent speedily,
while you have yet a Day to breathe; for ye are the unstable People, Double
minded, ye will be driven and shaken as with an East Wind by the Breath of the
Almighty; ye are the Waters on which the Whore (and Beast, at this day) sits;
ye bow down, ye worship the Beast and his Image, ye receive his Mark in the
Hand and in the Forehead; ye are of those Bondslaves of Babylon, the Fear of
Man has ensnared you; ye are the Fearful and Unbelieving, who will be shut out
among the Dogs, Persecutors and Whoremongers, Idolaters, Abominable and Liars
forever, except you speedily Repent.

Awake, Howl, Howl and Tremble, all ye Drunkards, Sporters, Players, Fiddlers,
and ye that tolerate them; the Zeal of the pure Righteous God burns like Fire
against you all, which will consume you, ye Corrupters of the Earth, ye
Ministers of the Devil, who beget and raise up Lightness, Wantonness and Vanity
in the Minds of People, whereby the Lord and his Fear is forgotten, and his
Holy Spirit grieved, and his Name dishonored, and the Righteous Souls of sober
People vexed from day to day, which cries mightily against you, and the Lord
will hear them, and answer the Cries of his Chosen Seed for his own Name sake.

And all you Cheaters, Whores and Whoremongers, Idolaters, Unclean and Ungodly
Ones, you shall be judged, condemned, plagued and tormented by that you daily
strive against and make merry over: Come down all ye Exalted, Stiff-necked and
Rebellious Ones, who are out of God's Fear; his Vengeance, as a Beesome of
Destruction, will sweep you all down into Endless Misery; your Songs shall be
turned into Howlings, and your Vain False Joy into Heaviness, the days of your
Pleasures shall be short; you who are adding Sin to Sin, and drinking down
Iniquity like Water, you are drawing down Fury upon your own Heads as with a
Cart-rope, you are filling up your Measures of Abominations, you are hastening
as a Bird to the Snare, and as an Ox to the Slaughter, and a Fool to the
Correction of the Stocks, and know not that it is for your Life, and that your
Paths lead to the dark Chambers of Death and Eternal Destruction, and your
Steps take hold of Hell; behold God's Indignation is against you, and he will
be avenged on you for his Righteous Seed's sake, which (in you) is daily
grieved and vexed, even as Lot in Sodom.

Therefore awake, all ye Drunkards (of all sorts), Rioters, Cursers, Swearers,
Blasphemers, Hypocrites, Persecutors, Scoffers, Mockers, Ragers, and all ye
Ungodly Ones every where, and dread the Living God; for he will fill your
Bowels with perpetual Sorrow, Vexation, Woe and Everlasting Burnings, if ye
proceed in these Abominations, which the Soul of the Righteous God abhors:
Stand still, stand still, be still all ye Heathen, and mind God's Witness in
your Consciences, which sometimes (like a Bridle in your Jaws) checks you; ye
who are like mad Horses, raging, rushing, ranting and vaunting in all manner of
Ungodliness, wallowing in the height and depth of Wickedness, as if you had not
room enough to vent the Strength and Substance of the Devil's Power in you.
Remember that Hell has enlarged her Mouth, and Tophet is prepared of old, and
ye will descend into it, with the Devil and his Angels, except you speedily
Repent; the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

So consider your Latter-end, and the Last Day of your Visitation; for the
Righteous God beholds you, and sees all your Doings, though never so secret,
and hears all your Blasphemies, Oaths and Cursed Speeches, ye wilful,
headstrong and stiff-necked Ones, who have despised Reproof, and abhorred Good
Counsel: But now behold the Lord is coming a swift Witness against you all, and
he will plead with you for all these things; and you shall know, that our God
is a Consuming Fire, when you feel the Vengeance and the Righteous Judgments
come upon you for all your Wickedness, which will be executed speedily.
Therefore I say again, Repent, O all ye Workers of Iniquity, and Fear the
Living God, and with speed leave off all your Evil Ways and Doings, and learn
Righteousness and Truth; for the great and terrible Day of the Lord God hastens
upon you, as a Woman in Travail, and none in Transgression shall escape it.

So this is your Warning once more to Repent with speed, and ye are all left
without Excuse; so while you have an Inch of Time, prize it.

Written in the Year 1664. By William B^yly.

The Lord tries the Righteous; but the Wicked, and him that loves Violence,
his Soul hates: Upon the Wicked he shall reign Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and
an horrible Tempest; this shall be the Portion of their Cup, Psalm. 11.5. For in
the Hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red; it is full of
Mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the Dregs thereof all the Wicked
of the Earth shall wring them out, and drink them, Psalm. 75.8.

Let this be spread to the Ends of the Earth.



