A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, AND THE Court of
Aldermen, At GVILD-HALL, December the 27th. 1685.

By LVKE BEAVLIEV, B. D. Chaplain to the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS,
Lord High Chancellor of England, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.

Licensed

Z. Isham.
Jan. 7. 1685/6.
LONDON: Printed by T. Moore, for Charles Brom at the Gun at the West End of
St. Paul's. 1686.

Geffery Major.
Curia special' tent' die Dominica, in festo Sancti Johannis Evangeliste,
xxviio. die Decembris, 1685. Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi secundi, Angl', etc.
primo.

This Court does desire Mr. Beaulieu to print his Sermon this day Preached in
the Guild-hall-Chappel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

To the Right Honorable Sr. Robert Geffery Lord Mayor of LONDON.
My Lord,
THat wrangling and violence some have used, for the Faith, as they pretended,
has been much to its prejudice; and has appeared to be rather for a Secular
Interest. Fighting for the Gospel is as preposterous, as if a man should fight,
to show his meekness and patience. It is that contention with God and our
selves, which I here recommend, that has had the approbation of the best Ages
of the Church, and been blessed with success.

The state of things as they are at present, does severely admonish us of our
former miscarriages, and our present duty. It Is seen that a furious and
ungovernable Spirit, which some have miscalled Zeal, is of pernicious
consequence. God Almighty, to keep us within the bounds of our duty, and make
us seek our safety in its performance, would not permit unlawful means any ways
to conduce to the preservation of his true Religion.

Long experience has now showed us, that to disturb the Peace in Church and
State, to break the ties of Allegiance, and disobey the Church, promotes
nothing but Licentiousness and Irreligion. So that it is to be hoped, they that
have liked and followed those methods, are now sensible of the iniquity and the
mischief of them; and that the remembrance of their mistakes and misdoings,
will make them now the more humble and quiet; and effectually persuade them to
the Union and Obedience of this Church, whose Doctrine is the Creed, or
Christianity it self; whose Government is truly Apostolic; and whose Rituals
and Devotions are most Primitive and Pious.

An understanding man would blush to own himself before the Christian World to
be of such or such a Sect, and to confess that his public Worship depends upon
the abilities and extemporary effusions of a person not inspired; besides the
mischief of such divisions, there is a shame that goes along with them. But
the Church of England, as now established, has had many cheerful Martyrs and
Confessors: Many wise and good men glory to own Her for Mother, and dare
profess and justify, that according to that way She prescribes, and some count
Heresy, so they worship the God of their Fathers. God Almighty has appointed
that devout Prayers and good Lives should at first propagate, and ever after
preserve the Religion of the Blessed Jesus: If we but double our Zeal in these,
we shall infallibly secure its Purity, and still make it flourish.

To excite us to this duty, I preached the ensuing Discourse; to the same end,
I make no doubt, Your Lordship commanded it should be made public: Your
approving the good Design, made You pass-by the defects of its management; My
Lord, I have obeyed, much pleased that we have Magistrates who so much
countenance and befriend Religion, as to accept of such mean endeavors for the
service of it.

May the succession of them still preserve Peace, and promote Truth and
Righteousness; and may Your Lordship, after a long and prosperous life in this
World, obtain the endless and perfect Bliss of a better. So prays heartily

Your Lordships Most Humble and Obedient Servant, Luke Beaulieu.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor AND Court of Aldermen,
Epist. of St. Jude, v. 3. -- And exhort you, that you should earnestly contend
for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints.


FOR the solemnity of this great Festival, the Church appointed three sorts of
Martyrs to wait on the Prince of Sufferings, who at this time was born to die
for Mankind, St. Stephen, who actually died for Christ, and made it his choice
so to do; St. John, (whose memorial the Church observes this day) who was
willing to die, and yielded up himself, but was rescued by a miracle; and the
holy Innocents, who unknown to themselves lost their lives for Christ, and
became his Martyrs without concurrence of their will.

An Exhortation therefore at this time to contend for the Faith, may very well
agree with the joyful celebration of His happy Birth, who is the Author and the
Finisher of it: Especially having before our eyes the Example and the Memorial
of those great Contenders, who resisted unto blood, and cheerfully gave up
their lives for the cause of their Christian Faith,

To this St. Jude here exhorts us. He is writing against those Heretics who
subverted the foundations of Christianity; turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: Men
that would comply with any thing, rather than expose themselves to Persecution,
and would accomodate the Profession of our Savior's Doctrine to their lusts
and to their safety.

Against these whom here the Apostle describes to be very bad and dangerous
men, he cautions those Christians who as yer adhered to the simplicity of the
Gospel, which he calls the Faith once delivered to the Saints.

Delivered first by our Blessed Savior to his Apostles, and by them preached
to the world, and committed to faithful men who should teach others. And, lest
that oral Tradition should be corrupted, written by the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, for the sure and certain instruction of after-ages.

This Faith professed by the Christian Church, the Congregation of God's Saints,
he here exhorts them to maintain pure and undefiled: Not to admit of those
mixtures which evil men had devised to serve their lusts and their worldly
designs; not to shrink from their adherence to Christ, and confessing him
before men by obedience to his Laws, and a constant profession of his true
Religion; but rather constantly own and keep the same, against all oppositions
and temptations whatever.

This is here called a contending for the Faith: and this contention, we may
say, consists as well now as in the Apostles time, in these following
particulars:

First, In making an open and constant profession of the Christian Faith.

Secondly, In conforming our lives to its Rules and Precepts.

Thirdly, In a devout performing of those acts of Worship and Piety which are
enjoined by it.

And fourthly and lastly, By giving it all that credit and establishment in the
world, of which we are capable in our several places.

Whilst I insist upon these, as briefly as I can, I shall sufficiently explain
the sense of the Text, and show its design, and reprove some mistakes about it.

First then, to contend for the Faith, includes the making an open and constant
profession of it: Not any ways to dissemble, or detain the Truth in
unrighteousness, for any advantage in the World, or for fear of Persecution;
like these false and dissembling Gnostics, who, rather than venture any thing,
would say as others said, and comply with false Religions, sooner than expose
themselves to danger. The Apostle contrariwise would have Christians own what
they were: Confess Christ before men, and not be ashamed for his Testimony; As
they believed in their hearts, so to confess with their mouth, (as St. Paul
speaks.) Or, in words of St. Peter, to be ready always, with meekness to give
an answer of the reason of the hope that was in them.

This is the duty of every man, who is serious and upright in his Religion. He
is not to model it according to conveniences, or to choose that which is most
safe and profitable: but as he is led by his conscience and his understanding,
so to act and declare himself.

For every one who does not trifle with God and his own Soul, does believe that
his Salvation depends upon his choice of the true Religion, and that he must be
faithful unto death to receive the crown of life: And then, upon this
persuasion, he never consults what is like to be the event; but it is his Duty
and his great Interest to embrace this Truth, and to make profession of it, and
accordingly he acts, and leaves the success to God.

But then hereupon we must observe these three things. First, That it should be
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, we so steadfastly adhere to. That which
has the attestation of the Universal Church from the beginning, and has been
accounted fundamental, necessary to Salvation, and so held universally; as, the
Apostles Creed, confirmed and explained by the Primitive Councils; That we
should faithfully cleave to. Rather affect to prove our selves Christians, by
our firm adherence to that Faith wherein we were baptized, and which we profess
living and dying, together with the rest of the Christian Church; I say, rather
lay the great stress upon this than upon others more uncertain and controverted
Opinions, which beget new denominations, and much uncharitableness.

It is not our humors, nor private fancies, nor the Disputes of the Schools,
the Assertions of imperious Dogmatists, nor the Decisions of latter Synods, we
are thus earnestly to maintain and to contend for: but the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, which is never to change nor to increase, and which good men
hoped to be saved by, for more than a thousand years together.

There is no new Revelation from God, no new way to Heaven to be discovered;
that which sufficed before Trent, or Lateran, or Dort, is still sufficient.
That which has been done or decreed in latter-ages, is not the Faith of our
common Salvation, and not to be contended for with the same earnestness.

There are indeed Articles of Peace and terms of Communion in every particular
Church, the needs of Religious Societies, and the Laws of Christian
Magistrates, make these useful, and of great necessity; a due regard is to be
had to them; and a good man is obliged to conform in every thing which God has
not forbidden. But yet, these are not of the same moment as Articles of Faith.
For instance: That there is no Roman Purgatory, although I firmly believe it as
it is declared by our Church, yet that cannot be so certain, nor of so great an
interest to me, as what God himself has revealed with the greatest
perspicuity, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And
accordingly I am not to be so intent nor so concerned in the denying of the
one, as in the professing and believing of the other.

Would Christians of different Communions thus distinguish between the Divine
and saving Article which is a point of Christian Faith, and the human decision
and constitution, it would much contribute to make up the breaches of
Christendom, and qualify that mischevous and persecuting Zeal, which lays a
greater weight upon difference of Opinions, than upon unity of the same Creed.

For the most part, our loudest contentions are about that which is less
material, and more disputable, contrary to St. Jude, who would have us be
earnest for what is essential, the Faith once delivered to the Saints: which is
to be contended for, not because it is ours, and so to be maintained with
anger, and impatience of contradiction, as we do those Opinions we are wedded
to; but because it is God's, delivered by our Blessed Lord to the Primitive
Saints, for the common Salvation of Mankind. Then if any deny and deprave that
Faith, they forfeit the benefits of it, which are infinite, and so are great
losers, and much to be pitied: And if we our selves embrace and keep it
steadfastly to the end, we shall obtain the end thereof, even the Salvation of
our Souls. And that is enough to engage us to make a free and constant
profession of it as long as we live.

Secondly, This contending for the Faith, by an open Profession, is so far from
including any thing of sighting or violence for the defense of Religion, that
it signifies the quite contrary, the utmost meekness and patience in suffering
for the Truth.

Many are very apt and forward to contend for their Faith, or rather their
Faction, by a Zeal of opposition, which is commonly violent, and prompts men to
clamor and rail, to persecute, and to shed blood. Hatred, Injustice, Cruelty,
even Rebellion, the most mischevous and worst of all Crimes, are pretended to
be all warranted, when undertaken upon Religious accounts; They think they may
lawfully fight for what they call God's Cause, and his quarrel.

But, I say, such men are not led by the Spirit of Christianity, they follow
the fierceness of their own, and the dictates of their angry passions: And this
sort of Zeal has ever been very pernicious to Mankind, and destructive of
Religion.

The Jews upon this Principle hated and destroyed Christians with a mighty
violence, and in the same manner rebelled against their Governors: Their
Zealots disturbed the whole world, and at last became a bloody scourge to
themselves. St Jude was too well acquainted with them, and too well knew by his
own experience the mischief of this sort of temper, and of such proceedings, to
exhort Christian Converts to contend for Christ in that manner as the Jews did
for Moses. He knew that our Blessed Savior would not let his Servants fight
for him, nor rescue him with the Sword from the hands of the Civil Magistrate;
That he told his Apostles they should not disturb nor oppose Princes, but
should be brought before Kings and Rulers for his names sake; And that his
promises of an Immortal Crown, were not to fighting and martial courage upon
his account, but to meekness and patience, and remaining faithful unto death.
He that shall lose his life for my sake, shall find it,

So here, this Apostle, who had the Example and the Words of our Savior, and
knew full well his mind in this, exhorts his afflicted Disciples not to follow
the steps of those Heretics who in time of trial fell away; and, as he says,
would deny their Savior, rather than suffer for his sake: but to persevere
unto the end, contending earnestly for the Faith they had received.

A Zeal of adherence to Christ, to confess and own him before men, which is
here recommended, does not beget fierceness or wrangling contention in the
mind; but a peaceable constancy, a resolution to be firm and unmovable in
passive Graces. As the greatest Victory of a Christian is to die for his
Savior; so the noblest contention is to suffer for him. Accordingly it is said
of those Christian Conquerours whom St. John saw with Palms in their hands,
that they loved not their lives unto the death. In the language of the Church
certamina Martyrum, the combat of Martyrs, was their enduring patiently the
pains and reproaches of their Martyrdom. They were called the Athleaes, or
Champions of Christ, and the constancy of their passions upon his account was
their Victory.

Hence the sign of the Cross came to be so venerable, and so frequently used
amongst Primitive Christians, in those days of severe trial. They would by that
token before Christ's greatest Enemies and Persecutors, own themselves to be
his Servants, who for them had died on the Cross; and declare, that they were
ready cheerfully also to lay down their lives for his sake. He must labor hard
with himself to overcome Flesh and Blood, that would arrive to this resolution:
And therefore, this is the most earnest contention a Christian can undertake
for the Faith, to lay down his life for it, and sign and confess it with his
blood.

And then, thirdly, we may observe as a consequent from this, That if this be a
duty, and here enjoined by St. Jude, much more is it an incumbent duty openly
to profess the Faith of Christ crucified, when the doing of it is not attended
with any such Persecutions or Dangers.

If under Heathen Emperors, when Christianity was opposed, and everywhere
spoken against, yet its Professors were obliged freely and sincerely to declare
themselves, and own their relation to Christ, though they died for it; much
more are they bound to this, that live under Christian Princes, under Laws that
enforce their Obligations to confess that true Catholic and Apostolic Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints.

If we are bound thus to contend for it, in a way so difficult, even by Death,
as the Moble Army of Martyrs, if God should make it our case; much more are we
to profess it, when we can do it with safety, nay and have many encouragements
and advantages in the world, in the performance of this great duty.

God of his special favor to us, has made it our Interest, even in this life.
We may now dwell in Churches, and exercise our selves to all Godliness, and be
as virtuous and as devout as ever any Christians were, without incurring any
inconvenience. We need not fear for our Faith lest it should be suppressed, if we
our selves betray it not, by our lukewarmness and indifferency for it. We are
even subject to the inflictions of our Magistrates, for neglecting the duties
of our Christian Worship. And so we lose and suffer much more for not being
faithful to Christ, than for owning relation to him.

So that, now, when Divine Providence makes it so easy and so profitable, we
ought very seriously to mind this exhortation, to contend earnestly for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, by an open and constant profession of it.

And in the second place also, by conforming our lives to its Rules and
Precepts. That mightily conduces to the establishment of the Faith, and
requires a very serious Application and Endeavor of our side.

We must hold the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, as the Scripture
says; and our hearts are to be purified by Faith. It is a very preposterous
Zeal to be earnest against the errors of other men's understandings, whilst the
depravations of our own wills are unreformed. A man shall raise loud clamours
against another mistake, not known to the person guilty of it, whilst he
himself transgresses knowingly, in things which his own conscience checks, and
which are expressly forbidden by his Religion. This looks very odd; and such
Zeal is to be suspected, not to be so much for God, as for a temporal design.

For our Faith lays the great stress of our duty and of our hopes upon our
own Works, the choice we make of doing good or evil. If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments. Neither the Unrighteous (says the Apostle) nor
Fornicaters, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
They that believe this, and remain impenitent in any of these sins, they may
dispute for their Opinions, but they contend not for the Faith; rather, as much
as in them lies, they confute it with their own works. For so St. Paul joins
together Faith and a good conscience, and tells us, that they that put away the
one, soon make shipwreck as to the other. 1 Timothy 1.19.

The seeds of Infidelity are in Vice; it corrupts the very dictates of Reason.
Vile and vicious affections raise Objections against those Divine and Holy
Truths which reprove and condemn them. An ill Life and a good Religion
sincerely professed, are inconsistent: So that in some cases it may be said of a
Christian, who grossly and wilfully prevaricates against his Rule, in the words
of St. Paul, He has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

Therefore, when a man has learned the Fundamentals of Religion, and knows his
Duty, the great stress of his endeavors must next be laid upon the performance
of it. That he should fight under Christ's Banner, against his own evil
inclinations, against all sin and immorality.

This contention St. Jude here recommends, by describing those Heretics
against whom he writes, as very impure in their lives, and factious and
ungovernable in their deportment. They walked after their own Lusts; filthy
Dreams, who defiled the flesh, despised Dominion, and spoke evil of Dignities.

By exhorting Christians to contend earnestly for the Faith, in opposition to
these, he means, not only their false Doctrines, but also their evil deeds,
against which he is most vehement.

And indeed, it requires a more earnest contention for a man to subdue his own
corruptions, than to assent to a revealed Truth. It is a thing of more
difficulty to obey the holy Commandment, than to embrace an Article of Belief.

Withal, This Obedience to Divine Precepts, is that which our primitive Faith
most of all recommends; that which is universally assented to by all sorts of
Christians; there is no controversy in this. Points of Doctrine are variously
understood and disputed about; but in the practical part of Religion, that
which concerns a good life, all men are agreed; That it shall be well with them
that fear God; That to take heed unto the thing that is right, shall bring a
man peace at the last; And that good Works shall have a good Reward.

The living by these measures, is that whereby a Christian glorifies God in the
world, justifies the sincerity of his Faith, separates himself from Hypocrites
and Unbelievers; and confirms his own heart, in the sure comfortable belief of
the Christian Doctrine; nay, and recommends it to others.

The true way to build up our selves in our most holy Faith, and to propagate
it in the World, is to show its excellency and efficacy by the fruits of it in
our lives. This way the Apostles confuted false Religions, and converted even
those that persecuted the Gospel. By their bearing the Yoke of Christ, and by
their Obedience to him, they brought under his subjection the Kingdoms of the
Earth. It was neither by false or fearful dissimulation, nor by violence, they
made Proselytes, but by approving themselves to every man's conscience in the
sight of God.

That way will ever be effectual to preserve the credit of true Religion, and
persuade men to embrace it; and will be the lasting happiness of every faithful
Believer. Tit. 3.8. This I will that thou affirm constantly, That they which
have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works: These things are
good and profitable unto men.

Thirdly, We ought to contend for the Faith, by a devout attendance upon those
acts of Worship and Piety which are enjoined by it. Nothing contributes more to
the increase and establishment of true Religion, than the earnest Devotion of
its Professors. It is the way to strive together for the Faith of the Gospel,
as St. Paul exhorts. And it is the complement of that Spiritual Armor
wherewith he would have us fight against the great Enemy of our Salvation.
Ephesians. 6. after the Shield of Faith, etc. v. 18. Praying always with all Prayer
and Supplication in the Spirit, and watchining thereunto with all perseverance,
and supplication for all Saints.

Few were the Books of Controversy, and few the Disputes of Christians amongst
themselves in the Ages of fervent Devotion, but great was their Piety. They
daily received the Blessed Sacrament, to express their thankfulness to God for
the Mercies of our Redemption, and to tie themselves to Obedience and Virtue.
And they offered to God continually the Sacrifice of Praise. They brought them
that were in error to the Worship of the true God, by their assiduousness, in
the doing of it themselves.

A Zeal against different Religions, where it is not guarded with a due care to
love and to serve God according to our own, degenerates commonly into cruelty
and uncharitableness. So it did with the zealot Jews: so with the persecuting
Heathen, and so it has proved amongst too many Christians, to the no small
prejudice of true Religion: Whereas in all Ages of the Church, there has been
always so much of substantial goodness, as there has been of true Devotion in
any hearts. Cornelius, thoug uncircumcised; Simeon and Hannah, who were Jews,
they are represented as very devout People, and great Exemplars of Virtue. But
in Contentions and Disputes, for the most part, men will speak their Passions,
more than their Piety.

It is a dangerous deceit to rest in Negatives, be they never so true, and to
make Religion consist in clamouring against errors, though never so palpable,
whilst we neglect Christian duties. So, to be very fierce against
Transubstantiation, and neglect to receive the Blessed Sacrament; to make loud
invectives against Prayers to Saints, and offer none to God, or but very cold
ones, and very seldom, as has been here too much in use amongst us: that shows
only that some men are great enemies to one Party, and to some Opinions, and no
friends to Christianity. For if it were love to the Truth they are seriously
concerned for, they would be at least as zealous in attending the true Worship
of God, as they are against the errors of some about it.

Indeed errors should be reproved, and the truth asserted by good and able men:
But the noise of others is not like to signify much, nor will demonstrations
alone. They that dissent from us, on either hand, have long enough been bafled,
by unanswerable Arguments. But these are above the leisure and the capacity of
many, who observe your deportment better; and may be warmed with the Zeal of
your Devotion, and persuaded by your Example. So that now, they that are not of
our Communion, may sooner be gained by our wrestling with God, than by our
contending with them.

Such are our Offices of public Religion, so excellent and so divine, that no
sincere Christian, though not of our Church, but must approve them, and might
join with us; The great Objection is, our own neglect of them. If we remove
that, by a more assiduous and devout attendance upon Divine Worship, we shall
find that the best way to win others to use and approve, more and more, our
form and most pious Liturgy: And if we rescue it from our own profaneness and
indevotion, we need not fear any opposition from without, should ever prevail
against it.

But thus to contend with God, in humble and earnest Supplications and Prayers,
requires a very earnest contending with our own selves. It is one of the great
Infilicities of our Nature that we are very backward to Pray. Either our sins
make a separation betwixt God and Us: Or the Cares and Solicitudes of this
World keep our Souls grovelling here below: So that, although we know that God
is ready to hear Prayers, and Commands us to ask that he may have and
Opportunity to give, yet we can hardly lift up our Hearts unto him. We are dull
and untoward, and our thoughts are apt to scatter when we come to Petition and
to Worship in his Holy Presence. And a man must have labored with himself very
seriously, to bring his Soul to a Praying temper, and to keep it in such a
frame, as to be habitually disposed to converse with God. To keep upon his
Heart a fresh and lively sense of Religious Thoughts and Affections, a man must
keep his passions in subjection to reason, and strictly watch over himself.

That fervent Prayer which St. James says avails much, can not be offered up
to God, without the utmost striving and endeavors of a Christian. It is a very
earnest and effectual contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, to
recommend it devoutly to his Blessing and Protection, who is the Author and the
Finisher of it; to be pressing with him to maintain his own Cause. To bring all
Infidels to the knowledge, and all Christians into the Unity of that saving
Faith; to make it triumph over all errors and vices that it may flourish and
bring forth fruit in all the World.

Also to beseech him to increase it in us, That Christ may dwell in our Hearts
by Faith: And by that Faith we may overcome the World and all Temptations: And
gain comfort and assurance to our immortal souls, against that day of sorrow,
when all our Friends and Enjoyments shall be useless, and we shall be refresht
and supported by nothing but our Christian hopes, and the belief of things not
seen; That, as the Apostle speaks, we may be kept by the Power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation.

To be fervent and assiduous in these requests, is a contending for the Faith,
in a way acceptable to God, and profitable to our selves; more likely to secure
us from a change, than a blind Zeal, and ignorant Declamations against the
errors of others.

That Religion can never perish which God appointed to save Souls. If we
affectionately embrace ours, which is certainly the most pure and primitive in
the World: If we use and profess it to that purpose, to make our selves
eternally happy, it will secure us from the fears and from the danger of its
being corrupted or Destroyed; and it will recommend it to the acceptance of
others, when they see it makes us the Friends and devout Worshippers of God.

A great Zeal against those that dissent from us, may proceed from ill nature
or from ill designs: But a great Zeal for our own Souls; diligent care to
endeare our selves to God and secure his mercys to us: that is liable to no
suspicion; that well becomes the nature of our excellent Religion, and is
indeed the end of it.

So that we cannot contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, nor for
our benefit, or the conversion of others, than by a devout attendance upon Acts
of Worship and Piety, and joining hertily with our Church in those Religious
dutys she requires from us.

Lastly, This contention for the Faith includes, that we should give it all
that reputation and establishment in the World, of which we are capable in our
several places.

This is the most direct meaning and design of the Text, according to some
Translations which render the words by another construction, That ye should
assist and confirm the Saints in their Faith. That is, Edify the Church; do
what ye can toward the enlarging and settlement of it.

We have had, for these last ages, much contending about the Faith, but little
has been done for it. Some have been very forward to pull down what they
thought amiss, but built up nothing. They showed a great aversion to some
Religions, but no love to any. So their contention was only for War: And the
result of it was, that the Church was neglected and spoilt, its patrimony made
a prey, its discipline destroyed: And Religion it self made contemptible, by
being deprived of its necessary maintenance and authority. And that brought in
at last Libertinism, and a sad inundation of vice and irreligion.

For plainly, all the World understands, the sure way to keep out all false
Religions, is strenuously to mantain the true one; to make it honorable and of
force to restrain dissolute looseness; and to provide it with supplies for the
necessity of its ministrations. We need not dispute and scuffle with all the
errors that are broacht and have been in every age: But embrace and assert the
truth, and support it with our might and interest in the World: That Is a good
way to show our selves in earnest in contending for the Faith, to be willing to
contribute what we can, with our credit and our substance, to make it
reverenc't and obeyed.

It was ever accounted an Act of Piety to God and Charity to human Souls, to
make pious foundations for the divine honor, for to sound the praises of God
in the Earth. To provide for his Ministers, that they may attend holy Offices
without Distraction: And to erect and adorn houses for divine worship, that it
may have as much solemnity and veneration as lies in us to procure.

Primitive Christians betimes, even under poverty and persecutions, were very
Zealous in these, and gave us a good exemple. As miracles ceased, and those
extraordinary means which supported Religion, they upheld and advanced it, in
the ordinary ways of things here below, with their abilities, and their power,
and estates. They thought no cost better spent, no labor better bestowed than
what served to promote Christianity, and recommend it to the World.

They understood that our Christian Faith is a body of Divine Science, and
several Ordinances, and administrations, which to be learnt and taught and
ministered as they should, want the help and contributions of human piety and
charity: And that the Church was instituted by our Blessed Lord, to preserve
and propagate the purity of this Faith; to be the ground and the pillar of
truth, as the Apostle speaks.

And Experience has since approved the same, that when the Church has been
exposed to rapine and violence, and trampled under foot, by profaneness and
faction, that swarms of Heresies and Schisms have sprung up, and so much
wickedness and folly and confusion, that there was hardly any face or outward
appearance of Christianity amongst us, when within the remembrance of many, God
permitted it to be our case and our grief. The purity and unity of the Faith
never suffered more in any place in this World: And in that miserable state of
things, much of our People have lost the sense of three or four of the most
important of Christian duties. Loyalty, Church Communion, Reverence in Divine
Worship, and Justice, and Charity for its maintenance.

Notwithstanding what the laws of God, and the laws of the Land command most
expressly, about our subjection and faithful obedience and service to the King:
Yet many (as we have seen too lately) think themselves at liberty to set up or
take down a Prince, as they please, and to choose whom they shall obey, or
whether they shall obey any body at all.

Many also, as appears every where, judge themselves in a state of freedom to be
under the guidance of whom they please; of such a Sect, or of their own brains,
as they think most expedient. How far and how long they shall be members of the
Church, and whether at all or no, we see how many act in this without any
scruple as their interest or fancies determine: And as if nothing were said in
holy Scripture of our submission to those that have rule over us, in the Lord,
and our obligations to live in the bonds of Unity, and incorporate our selves
with that body whereof Christ is the Head and Savior.

How unseemly is the deportment of many in the house of God; how little care is
taken to make his service venerable and becoming his Greatness we can all
witness. The public attendance upon Religion is in many places so unlike
divine Worship, so far from being the humble adoration of the Great King of
Kings, that it has not in it so much as that common respect which we pay to
our Superiors.

And so it fares with the maintenance of Gods sanctuary and those that wait in
it. The free bounty of our Ancestors made large Provisions for this, the laws
in that respect now made, cannot keep a great part of the people within any
bounds of Justice.

Although God complains of it, as a Sacriledg, ye have robbed me in Tithes and
Offerings, and requires the paying of them, as an acceptable piece of service
which he promises to reward, Honor the Lord with thy substance and with the
first fruits of thine increase, so shall thy barns be filled with Plenty, and
thy presses shall burst out with new Wines. Notwithstanding all this, we see
how many wilfully transgress as much against the lawful Right, as against the
Piety of this Duty.

The neglect of these, I have now mentioned, and many more Evils Destructive of
our Christian Faith, was the necessary consequent of the destroying our
Ecclesiastical Orders and Constitutions. So that it well becomes every man who
wishes Religion and Virtue to Flourish, to endeavor and contribute what he
can to the well being and preservation of this Church, which certainly
maintains and teaches the Primitive and truly Christian Faith, and recommends
all duties to God and the King, to our Neighbors and our selves, and leads her
Children the plainest and safest way to true Virtue and Happiness. Our
appearing concerned for such a Church, the like to which we should not find in
all all the World, should God, for our Sins suffer it to be destroyed; I say
our Affection and care for such a Church is a good demonstration of our love to
God, and a Christian contending for the Faith. To help to build up and preserve
our Jerusalem, that in her peaceable and prosperous settlement, in the use and
enjoyment of all means of grace, we may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all
Godliness and Honesty.

Christians, our Faith was once delivered to the Saints, and it was by Gods
great Mercy progagated to us, to make us Saints also; that by it we may be now
Sanctified, and Glorified hereafter. The more we do now for our Religion, in
time of health and prosperity, the more it will do for us hereafter in time of
sickness and sorrow. What we now labor or spend for our Christian Faith, is
sure to be repaid us, in Spiritual improvements, and joys and comforts. If by a
good life we justify it before men, it will justify us before God. This is a
rule will ever hold, that Faith is to be showed by works: accordingly let us
contend for ours. By an open and constant profession of it, by conforming our
lives to its rules and precepts, by devoutly attending upon those Acts of
Worship and Piety which are enjoined by it, and by giving it in the World all
that reputation and establishment of which we are capable in our several
places. That Is the way to fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold on
eternal life. According to the exhortation of our Apostle wherewith I conclude,
having told them v. 18. That there would be mockers in the last times, walking
after their own ungodly lusts; men that would scoff at believers, and deride
their credulity: Then it follows, But ye beloved build up your selves in your
most holy Faith, Praying in the Holy Ghost: Keep your selves in the love of
God, looking for the mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. To
which God of his infinite mercy bring us. To him Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One God Blessed for ever be ascribed, etc.

ERRATA. Pref. p. 1. l. 9. before selves add own. Sermon, p. 8. l. 13.
Athletes; p. 9. l. 25. before relation add our, p. 12. l. 16. after sure add
and, p. 17. l. 17. (...) d^^igent add a, ib. l. 23. for nor read more, p. 18.
l. 23. after understand (...).

FINIS.

