THE True Christ Owned, IN A few Plain Words of Truth, by way of Reply to all
such Professors or Profane, who lay to the charge of the Elect People of God,
called Quakers, That they deny the Blood of Christ, and his Body, and
Resurrection, and that they deny the Lord that bought them, and trample the
Blood of the Covenant under their feet.

This is the great Outcry in the Mouths of such as know not what they say,
nor whereof they affirm, lifting up their Voices (like the unbelieving Jews) of
Heresy and Blasphemy against us; and all this is because we answer not their
Wills, and the Imaginations of their dark mind, but according to the
Manifestation of God in every man's Conscience (as the true Apostles and
Ministers of Christ did) and according to the Scriptures of Truth, which Holy
Men of God spoke forth, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; as will plainly
appear to all whose Eye the Lord has opened; which may give much satisfaction
to such as sincerely desire to know the Truth (as it is in Jesus) and walk in
it, for whose sake and the Vindication of the Truth and People of God, is this
written,

By WILLIAM BAILEY.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

The Preface.
READER, (who ever thou art) consider seriously that the things of God and the
true knowledge of them are of deep and weighty concernment, and there are but
few (in comparison) that have attained to the true and right knowledge of the
Mysteries of his everlasting Kingdom; notwithstanding their great noise and
talk of Profession, the things that truly belong to their peace are hid from
their Eyes, and their House is desolate, and so will remain till they are
turned from the Darkness, to the Light of Christ which shines in their hearts,
as it is written: God who commanded Light to shine out of darkness, has also
shined in our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ. Mark here, what gives the true knowledge of the
things of God (which the natural man understands not, because they are
spiritually discerned) it is the Light which shines in the hearts of people,
which is the Maifestation of the Spirit of God given to every man to profit
withal; and except people be turned to this, and learn of it, they can never be
profited in the Way, and Worship, and true Knowledge of God. Therefore while
People are from th Gift of God in them, they put Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light. And so if thou would have a clear and right understanding
of these things, and be fully satisfied in thy own mind concerning them, thou
must wait in the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ for Counsel and Instruction;
for no man can know the things of God, but by the Spirit of God, who gives his
Holy Spirit to them that rightly ask it of him, to which I shall leave thee, to
be led into the right understanding hereof, that the things belonging to thy
Souls peace may not be hid from thee.

The First Query and Charge.
1. DO you Quakers own that Blood of Christ which was shed without the Gates of
Jerusalem upon the Cross, which when the Soldier thrust in his Spear,
forthwith there came Water and Blood; and they that saw it bare Record that
this was visible Blood, which came out of the side of the visible Man Christ?
Do you own Justification by this Blood, which was visible, which we do believe
you do not? For we could never hear you directly answer us to this matter, but
evade it by other terms, and shuffle it off, not daring to show your Faith and
Principle in this particular; so that we conclude, and publish, that you are
them that deny Justification alone by the visible Blood, of the visible Man
Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary. Thus said Matthew Caffen.

Answer.
As for the word [visible] Blood, and [visible] Man, which thou so much talkest
of, (in this kind) they are terms quite beside the Language of the Scriptures
of Truth, or else I am very ignorant of such Translations: But we do as really
own our Justification by the Blood of Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
God, as the Apostles and Saints of old did, (without any evasion or shuffling)
according to their very meaning, and plain Declaration; who said, If we are in
the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another,
(mark in what their fellowship was, Is yours in the Light?) and the Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. You may see here is
nothing mentioned of the word [visible.] And again, John 6.53. Then Jesus said
unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. He that eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, etc. These words of
Truth we own, and witness; but your word [visible] Flesh, and [visible] Blood,
which you would strain us up to express, to answer your wills, and dark
imaginations, we do not read from Christ, nor his Apostles in all the
Scriptures. So we desire all People to take notice of the ground these People
have to say we deny the Blood of Christ; for because I did not answer Matthew
Caffen, (in a late Discourse about these things) in the express term
[visible,] (it being not according to the form of sound words) he therefrom
concluded that we deny the Blood of Christ, that we do not own justification by
it; who might as well conclude the same of Paul, and the rest of the Apostles
and Ministers of Christ, as of us, for not using the word [visible] when they
express the Flesh and Blood of Christ; yea, of Christ himself, who leaves out
that expression which they so much contend about; and on the contrary, says,
The Flesh profits nothing, its the Spirit gives Life, John 6.62, 63. Then tell
me, O ye Professors (of Christ's and his Apostles words) who say they are your
Rule, What is that Flesh that is meat indeed? And what is that Flesh that
profits nothing, seeing both are the words of Truth?

And again, take the words of Peter, (a Minister of the Word which endures for
ever) to the Elect that were scattered throughout several Places, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Forasmuch as ye know that ye are not redeemed with corruptible things (as
Silver and Gold) from your vain conversation received by tradition from your
Fathers; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot. Why do you not here find fault with Peter for not using the
word [visible] instead of [precious?] which was my term several times to thee
and thy Companions in that Discourse, which ye would not receive as
satisfactory to you; so ye may as well be unsatisfied, and contend with Peter,
and Christ, and Paul, and the Scriptures of Truth throughout, as with us about
the word [visible,] and call them Sophisters, and Blasphemers, as thou M. C.
calledst me, when I spoke their words, without adding or diminishing, as may
appear hereafter.

And again, see the Testimony of John, a Servant of God, who bare record of the
Word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he
saw, Rev. 1.1, 2. and in chap. 7. verse. 14. And he said unto me, these are they
that came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the Blood of the Lamb; he does not say in the [visible] Blood of the
Lamb, they have washed their Robes. So though you thus exclaim against us in
these things, and brand us with Heresy, etc. yet we have (and do see, whose
eyes the Lord has opened) more for us, then are, or ever shall be against us;
for we have the Witness of God, and of all his faithful Servants and
Ministers, and the Testimony of his own Son on our side; and if ye had
understood their Words and Writings (which ye so much talk of) ye would easily
understand our Faith and Principles concerning these Matters; but as Christ
said in those days concerning the zealous outside Professors, so say I now, I
thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things
from the Wise and Prudent of the World, and have revealed them to Babes, etc.
And much more might be spoken as to this particular of the Blood of Christ, but
in the mouths of two or three Witnesses let these things be established: which
when people come to understand aright with a spiritual discerning, they will
not cry out against us, that we deny the Blood of Christ, and trample the Blood
of the Covenant under our feet, as these men have done through their ignorance,
the Lord give them Repentance, and forgive them, for they know not what they
do: for the Blood of the Covenant is that which sanctifies, and without
holiness (or sanctification) no man shall see the Lord; and this we do not
trample on, or count an unholy thing, but do praise the Lord (that bought us)
that we are made witnesses of it, and do acknowledge our Salvation, as the
Apostle Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus did, (to the Church of the
Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.) to
be through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Thus were
they chosen from the beginning to Salvation, as ye may read: And these thing we
do not count unholy, but do prize and esteem them more then all the visible
perishing things in the whole World, though you have thus belyed and reproached
us.

The second Query and Charge.
2. But do you own Salvation by the Man Christ, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and that was baptized of John in Jordan, and that preached in the World,
and was crucified, dead and buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended
into Heaven, and there sits at the Right Hand of God, and shall come again
to judge the World? (now mark, If we speak the Truth in the uprightness of our
hearts, and say yea, to all this, it does not at all satisfy them) but they
further proceed with terms beyond what is written: But do you believe in the
[visible] Man Christ, with flesh and bones, which the People fastened their eyes
on, when he read in the Book of Isaiah? So that Christ Jesus was a [visible]
Man, with Flesh and Bones, as he himself said to Thomas, A Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have; so they did see him after he was risen from
the dead, and this was [visible.] Do you Quakers own Salvation alone by this
[visible] Person Christ Jesus? for we believe you do not, because you preach up
a Light within, and not the [visible] Man Christ for Salvation, and so we
publish you to be them that deny the Lord that bought them, and so are of
Antichrist, and false Prophets.

This was the sum of Matthew Caffen's Question and Charge, in that late
Discourse against us, who makes it his work to revile the Truth, and them that
do witness it revealed in the inward parts, where God does require it, Psalm.
51.6.

Answer.
The former Part is here answered already, with a word of Truth; yea, and as to
the latter part thereof, I have this to say, That we do not deny, but own and
believe, that he was the Son of God, and the true Christ, and the Savior of
the World, that did appear to his Disciples, and did eat and drink with them,
and talk with them after he was risen from the dead, who said, A Spirit has
not Flesh and Bones, as ye see [me] have; and all that is, or was spoken and
written by the Prophets and Apostles of Christ concerning him, what he was, or
what he did or said, we do really believe, without any equivocating, (as some
of you usually charge us with, and with reservations; to which we may say, as
the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid (or reserved) it is hid to them that are
lost, whose minds the God of this World has blinded, that do not believe, lest
the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God) should
shine unto them; read 2 Cor. chap. 4. throughout, (you that talk against the
Light within,) and understand what ye read, and what ye are crying out
against, it is no less than the Son of God, if you will believe Paul, who
witnessed the Son of God revealed in him; and Christ the Son of God, said, I am
the Light of the World.

But as to your Charge, I say further, That we own Salvation by no other Christ
then him the true Apostles preached, nor no other Gospel or Name under Heaven,
by which men shall be saved, but by Jesus Christ, who is the same yesterday to
day, and for ever. And for the word [visible] its yours, and not Christ's, nor
his Apostles, nor mine; and so I leave it out, and keep to the Form of sound
words, as the Apostle exhorts, and not meddle with it, lest I add to his words,
and he reprove me; but he that took upon him the likeness of sinful Flesh, and
the form of a Servant, and was found in fashion as a Man, and made in the
likeness of Men, being in the form of God, thought it not robery to be equal
with God; this Christ Jesus we own, and witness Salvation by, and by no other,
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. And though Christ Jesus spoke at that time, and upon that
occasion, of his Flesh and Bones, that they might believe that it was he that
was risen from the dead, whom the chief Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders
had caused to be crucified, which before he had declared to them, and so
upbraided them with their unbelief in that particular; yet we need not be
upbraided with unbelief by any, as you have done, saying, We deny the
Resurrection of the Body; but we do really believe that Christ is risen from
the dead, and entered into his Glory, according to the Scriptures, who said to
his Disciples at the Supper, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; and
that after he was risen from the dead, he would go before them into Galilee. So
these things they did witness fullfilled, according as he had said, Whose Cup
of Blessing which they blessed, was it not the communion of the Blood of
Christ? etc. 1 Cor. 10.16. And did not his Blood cleanse them from all Sin, as
they walked in the Light, in which their fellowship and communion was? 1 John
1.7. read with understanding in the Fear of the Lord. And so mark your great
Argument, upon what occasion he thus appeared and spoke; A Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones, as ye see [me] have; Did he thus speak that his Disciples
should always look after Flesh and Bones to appear amongst them, and to be with
them, and comfort them for ever? Or did he not appear to them in another form?
And last of all, did he not appear to Paul (who was called Saul,) as to one
born out of due time? And how did he appear to him, (mark) When it pleased God
to reveal his Son in me, etc.

Object. But here may an Objection rise, Did not Paul see that very Person, or
Body, or [visible] Christ that the rest saw, even the [visible] Flesh and Bones
that Thomas felt, the print of the Nails, and the hole of the Spear, after he
was risen from the dead? etc.

Answ. Suppose he did, (for he showed himself so to Witnesses, and not unto
all) yet Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, and Christ, after that, did not
talk so much of Flesh and Bones, and not at all with the word [visible] as you
do; but on the contrary, as Paul himself said, (after God had revealed his Son
in him,) Henceforth know we no man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him so no more, 2 Cor. 5.16.
(Mark) he speaks as well in behalf of all them that so knew him, as of himself,
though they had been witnesses of his so appearing. Now if Christ should so
come and appear, as you say, with visible Flesh and Bones, or after the Flesh,
as you look for him, Paul would not know him, nor the rest of the Apostles of
Christ, who were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty and Glory: Would they do well
then? Would not they deny the Lord that bought them then? For he said, We know
him [no more] henceforth, (though we have known him) after the Flesh; and
speaks not so far outward, as your word [visible.] Is Paul and the rest of the
Apostles of Christ of your Judgment, or of the Quakers; let Gods Witness in
you all answer? Would ye receive such into Fellowship with you, that do say as
Christ did, The Flesh profits nothing, its the Spirit gives Life? when they
look so much at his outward Person, or Fleshly appearance in that Body. And if
the Apostles and Christ do well to speak after this manner, Why do ye then
brand the harmless Quakers (so called) with Heresy, who speak and own the same
things that they did, and not contrary? As you may read at large in the
Scriptures of Truth, how they all preached, The Kingdom of God [within] and the
word nigh [in] the heart, and in the mouth; and that none should say in their
hearts, Who shall ascend up into Heaven to bring Christ down? etc. And God who
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined [in] our hearts to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. But we have this Treasure [in] Earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us, verse 7. And said David,
Psalm. 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; And who is this King's
Daughter, but they whom God is their Father, who said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them; I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor.
6.16. And this is our Message, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at
all; and the Light within gives the Knowledge of his Glory in the Face of
Jesus Christ; and this Glorious Treasure is in Earthen Vessels: And know ye not
that Jesus Christ is [in] you, except ye be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. And I have
hid thy Word in my heart; and thy Word is a Light to my Feet, and a Lanthorn to
my Paths, said David; he did not say the Scripture, nor the visible Flesh and
Bones was a Light to his Feet, but the Word in his Heart. And, in the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word; in him was Life,
and the Life is the Light of Men, etc. And David said, The Lord is my Light,
and my Salvation, Psalm. 27.1. And Isaiah said, The Lord shall be unto thee an
Everlasting Light, Isa. 60.19. And said the Apostle, Now the Lord is that
Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty; (that is, where
he dwells and walks, as he said) and there is one Lord, and his name one; and
Jesus is Lord, who said, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me
shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; and if they have
it, it must be within them, or in them.

And again, said Christ (who is the true Light) Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me, through the Truth, that they may
all be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us: (see how this comes to pass) I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one, etc. Here is the Father and his Son in his People, as God
said, He would dwell in them; and as Christ said, My Father and I will come and
make our abode with him that keeps his sayings. And this is the Language of the
Scriptures; and he that is with you shall be in you, etc. and the same Spirit
that raised up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies: here
they all preached the Light within and Christ within, if ye can understand, and
God in his People. And manifold more might be instanced to prove their
Principles and Doctrine whom you call Blaspemers: but the World shall know,
that our Testimony is True in the day at hand, as I told some of you, when ye
so fiercely contended against, and spoke evil of the things ye understand not.

And when I spoke of Christ, who said, Before Abraham was I am, and that all
things were made by him and for him, etc. said one William Burnet, a
Baptist-Teacher, There was nothing made by Christ; then said I, By whom were
all things made in the beginning? Said he, By the Word. Now let all People see
the Darkness of these Men, whom their envy has blinded that they cannot see
the plain Scripture, how that Christ is called The Word of God, Rev. 19. and in
diverse places he is called the Word; And said the Apostle Paul, By him were all
things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible, etc. Coloss. 1.16. So its no marvel they oppose us, and revile us
about these things, when they belie the Apostle, and contradict his plain
words, who are like the unbelieving Jews, that looked at the outward age of the
Person of Christ, when he said to them, Before Abraham was I am; Is not this
the true Christ that was before Abraham? Was not he with the Father glorified
before the World began? Will ye deny these things so plainly recorded in the
Scriptures of Truth? And is not Christ Jesus the same yesterday, day, to day,
and for ever? And did not John Baptist say, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, for he was before me?

See here, Did not this Baptist-Teacher see farther then you Baptist-Teachers
do now, who cries out, the [visible] Flesh and Bones is the Savior? And
farther than the unbelieving Jews, who said, Thou art not Fifty years old, and
have thou seen Abraham? Whose answer serves for you all, [Before Abraham was, I
am,] Then took they up Stones to cast at him, John 8.59. (Can you read your
Spirit?) For ye throw the hardest things that ye can scrable up against us
about these things, except ye had the outward Power and Sword in your hands;
then, I am sure, some of you would punish the Blasphemers (as ye call them)
with a Prison, or Death, (like as your Brethren have done, for) We have a Law,
and by our Law he ought to die, said the unbelieving Jews: And the Pope has a
Law to Burn Heretics, that do not believe the Natural, Visible, Corruptible
Bread and Wine to be the Real, Natural, Substantial Body and Blood of Christ,
and so the Savior and Redeemer: And in New England, the Zealous Professors of
the Letter, (the Manslayers and Murderers) have Laws against the Quakers, and
call them A Cursed Sect, and you call them Blasphemers; So that Christ's Words
are fulfilled, Ye shall be hated of all Nations (or Opinions) for my Namesake,
who said, I am the Light of the World, and before Abraham was, I am. And
Lodowick Muggleton he curses them, and cries, They deny the Son to be a Person
in the form of a Man, which suffered death, and is risen, etc. And calls them
the Cursed Sect of Quakers: But all your Curses and Revilings, Scandals, Lies,
and Reproaches, will turn back into your own Bosoms, and shall not come nigh
the Dwelling of them whom the Lord has blessed; for we do not deny the Person
of Christ, nor the Blood of Christ, nor the Resurrection of the Body, as we are
falsely charged, but do own them all, in their Place and Office, according to
the Scriptures of Truth; and we are one with the Saints and Apostles in the
Primitive time, in all these things, and so are not a Sect, but Members of his
Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, as they were, Ephesians. 5.30. But his
Sayings are fulfilled, If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub,
much more them of his Household. If ye were of the World, the World would love
his own, but because I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you.

The third Query and Charge.
3. But do you Quakers own and believe the Resurrection of this Body, that this
very Body that is visible of Flesh and Bones, which we now see and feel and
handle; do you believe that this same Body shall rise again, said Matthew
Caffen, and his Companion Burnet, (while they were handling one hand with the
other) For we believe you do not, but deny the Resurrection of this same
visible Body of Flesh and Bones, as we have good ground to believe by your
Books, in which we cannot find that you own the visible Man Christ that is
risen and ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God; nor
the Resurrection of this same visible Body; if you do, or do not, say ay, or
no, (said M. C.) directly to the Question?

Answer.
As I told thee then (in that Discourse upon the Heath) so I tell thee again,
That the Man Christ, and his Resurrection from the Dead, I own, according to
the Scriptures, which thou said was general, and nothing to the Question: Then
said I, I own the Resurrection of the Body as Paul did, and mentioned his
words, It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body; It is sown in
Weakness, it is raised in Power; And there is a Natural Body, and there is a
Spiritual Body, etc. And whereas you cry, the self same visible Body of Flesh
and Bones you believe shall be raised, and this is your Faith and Principle; I
do not so read it (in your terms) in all the Scripture of Truth, though ye
allege that saying in Ezekiel, chap. 37. (about the dry Bones) I will lay
Sinews upon you, and will bring up Flesh upon you, and cover you with Skin, and
put breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Now
look in the 11th Verse, and see the Mystery thereof, (if it be not above your
reach, for you are very near the Earth, though ye talk so much of Heaven)
whether it was not spoken only of the Restoration of the Jews out of their
Captivated and dead state, as the Apostle said, What shall the reviving (or
returning) of them be, but life from the dead? Romans 11.15. Consider well what
ye say, and whereof ye affirm, for the Light will make all things manifest, and
the Fire must try your Works.

And we have read that Fifteenth Chapter of the First Epistle to the
Corinthians through, and find not your word [visible] in it, from the one end
to the other, which speaks as much (or more) of the Resurrection, as any place
that I know of; But I find Paul (an Apostle of our Lord Jesus) saying, Thou
Fool, to such as queried, how are the dead raised up? And with what Body do
they come? But he does not tell people (as you do,) that the same visible Body
of Flesh and Bones shall be raised up; but says, Thou sowest [not] that Body
that shall be; and in the 50th verse speaks very plainly, which might be a full
answer to your visible Flesh, and same Flesh, and to your shame; Now this I say
Brethren, (said he) that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
neither does corruption inherit incorruption: And in the 24th verse says,
Awake to Righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the Knowledge of God; I
speak this to your shame; which were such as he called Fool, that questioned
and imagined about the Resurrection of the Body, and what manner of Body it
should be, before they were awakened to Righteousness, and left off sinning, in
which state they could not discern the Lords Body, not the Resurrection; for
Sin is Darkness, and the Wages of it is Death; and what can you see in the
Dark, and when ye are Dead? What knowledge of God have them that are in the
Grave. Therefore I say Awake, and let your Eyes be opened, and contend no
longer against the Light within, for it is that which gives the knowledge of
the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus; And such as know the Power of his
Resurrection, being made conformable to his Death, have seen his Glory; To whom
be Praise and Eternal Glory, and Thanksgiving, who is the Immortal, Invisible,
the only Wise God blessed forever, Amen.

And much more might be written as to manifest your Darkness and Ignorance in
the things of God, and of the very Letter of the Scriptures; and so denying the
Light (which should give you a good Understanding) ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God, see Matthew. 22.29. which was spoken concerning
the Resurrection.

Postscript.
THe Key that opens the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, is the Spirit of God,
and without it no man can rightly understand (or judge of) them, or have any
true sight thereof; for the Natural man is blind, and so speaks by imagination,
not at all perceiving them, because they are spiritually discerned, as it is
written 1 Cor. chap. 2. And so often it happens with such to speak evil of
those things they know not; but in what they know naturally, in those things
they corrupt themselves, (mark, naturally) its an easy thing for any vain Man,
or Hypocrite to talk or dispute about a natural thing, as you may see how these
Natural Professors use the word [visible] about the Body and Blood of Christ,
which I do not find written in all the Scriptures of Truth, as to those
particulars. And so because we do not speak to answer their wills, contrary to
the Scriptures, they are highly offended with us, as Matthew Caffen was with
me, because I said God dwells in his People; and that Christ sits at the
Right Hand of God; but M. C. said with a loud voice, My Savior that I own
Salvation by, is that visible Man Christ, that is ascended up into Heaven, and
there sits at the Right Hand of God, that visible Man, with the same Flesh
and Bones which he took of the Virgin Mary. Which Heaven do thou mean, said I
to him? I mean, said he, that visible Heaven up there, (pointing over his head
toward the Sky) What, up there, where the Sun, Moon, and Sars are, said I?
Yea, said M. C. this is my Faith and my Principle, I care not who knows it,
though you Quakers hide yours, and will not deal plainly, but are ashamed of
what ye hold, etc. (That is false) Then said I, Did Paul speak Truth, and
honestly to the People, or did he mock them, and deal deceitfully with them,
when he bid them seek the things that are above, where Christ fitteth at the
Right Hand of God, etc? Or did he speak of impossibilities to them? For if he
meant up there, where the visible Sun, Moon, and Stars are, the visible Heaven;
How was it possible? Or wherein was it any way profitable for them to seek
things up there? Or what things were they there to seek? O^ did ever any of
them obey his Exhortation, to whom he thus spoke? Did any of them clime up
thither, and find Christ fitting there in a visible single Person, as M. C.
said he was there so? And what things are there to be sought, as pertaining to
Salvation, let the Witness of the living God in all People that have but the
least understanding judge and answer? And whether these men in their
imaginations have not made to themselves the likeness of things in Heaven, or
things in Earth, contrary to the command of God? For Christ does not always sit
where he is, though he mentioned sitting, signifying a place of abode; but
Stephen saw Heaven open, and Jesus [standing] at the Right Hand of God, when he
was before the Council, bearing a Testimony, That the Most-High dwells not in
Temples made with Hands, as says the Prophet; Heaven is my Throne, and Earth
is my Footstool; What House will ye build me, says the Lord? Or what is the
Place of my Rest? Has not my Hands made all these things? Acts 7.48. But
Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, looking up steadfastly [into] Heaven, and
saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the Right Hand of God, which they
that gnashed with their Teeth on him did not see, for they did always resist
the Holy Ghost (as their Fathers did) and they stopped their Ears, and ran upon
him with one accord, as all the Professors in Christendom (so called) have done
against the harmless People of God in this Age; such as resist that which is
Holy in themselves, must needs resist, and reproach, and persecute them that
are filled with it, and born of it, and so the Scripture is fulfilled, they
hated me before they hated you, John 15.18.

And so though men may be wise, and zealous, and learned, and prudent, and
great, and rich, and mighty, and be Rulers, and Teachers, etc. yet if they
resist the Holy Ghost (or Spirit of Truth) the Mysteries of God, and of his
Kingdom are still hid from them; though they profess and talk of them with
their mouth and lips, yet their foolish heart is still darkened, because they
like not to retain [God] in their knowledge, but like to retain only a kind of
outside knowledge of those things that his Children do witness the Life and
Power of within, and so they are [inwardly] ravened from that which only can
give the true and saving knowledge of God, and of his Glory, 2 Cor. 4.6.

And so from the Wise (and Prudent of the World) in that which is natural, and
visible, God has hid, and does hide the Mysteries of his Heavenly Kingdom and
Dominion, but does reveal and show them plainly to Babes, whom he forbids to
cast their Pearls before Swine, (such as feed upon the Husk) lest they trample
them under their feet, and turn again and rent them; yet are we rent with
diverse and manifold Reproaches and Persecutions, by such as pretend themselves
the Sheep of Christ, and People of God, But by their Fruits ye shall know them;
and especially from the Teachers of the Letter of all sorts do we meet with
much opposition, but (Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ)
their strength is but a Reed of Egypt, (where Death and Darkness is, which may
be felt) and the Lord is drying up the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and he will
make the Rivers Islands, and dry up all their Pools; And this shall be the
Plague of Egypt, and of all the Heathen that will not come up to Jerusalem to
worship the King the Lord of Hosts, even upon them shall be no rain, Zech. 14.
( And the true Worshippers are such as worship the Father in the Spirit, and in
the Truth,) he that has an Ear to hear, let him hear. And the Lord is making
Ways in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert, and the Wilderness shall
sing for joy, and the Desert shall blossom as a Rose, and grow as the Lilly;
and this is the Lords doing by his own Arm, that no Flesh should glory in his
Presence, who is confounding the Wisdom of the Wise, and bringing the
Understanding of the Prudent to nothing, so that Babes and Sucklings shall say,
Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer? Where is he that
can count the Towers? Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World? the
World by all their Wisdom know no God.

I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even so
Father, for so it seems good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.25.

These things I have written for the vindication of the Truth, and for the
manifesting the Darkness of them that reproach and oppose it, and them that
live in it; and for their Souls sake that have any true breathings, or sincere
desires after the true Knowledge of the True and Living God; for to know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, is Life Eternal.

Query 1. Whether there be any more Saviors of the Immortal Soul but one, that
is able to save it, or to bring Salvation to it, yea, or nay?

If you say nay, there is but one able to save and able to destroy, as the Lord
said, Beside me there is no Savior, and there is no other Name under Heaven by
which Men can be saved, but Jesus Christ.

2. Then whether the [visible] Person of Flesh and Bones be the only Savior,
seeing the Apostle says, the Ingrafted Word is able to save the Soul; and the
Grace of God that brings [Salvation] has appeared to [all] Men; And who was
Enoch's Savior, and the Prophets, who were before that visible Flesh and Bones
was?

3. Whether the visible Person of Flesh and Bones be the [Ingrafted Word?] Or
whether that Person has appeared to [all Men,] seeing that which brings
[Salvation] has, I leave it to the Witness of God in you all to consider and
judge? For if you say the visible man with visible Flesh and Bones is the alone
Savior, (as you have said) Then whether this visible man be in the hearts of
People? for the Apostle preached Christ, [the Word] nigh in the Heart, and in
the Mouth, and the [Ingrafted Word] is able to save the Soul; so be did not
preach a visible Christ with Flesh and Bones, as you do, but the Word, (which
W. B. said was not Christ.) And Paul preached God that made the World, etc.
that was not far from every one of us, (the Invisible God;) but you preach a
visible man with Flesh and Bones, at a great distance from all People, above,
where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are, as M. C. said his Savior was, which he
owned for Salvation. So let all People read with moderation, and see how
contrary these zealous Professors are to the Apostles of Christ, who desired to
know Christ no more after the Flesh. And Christ said to such, Ye worship ye
know not what, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
the Spirit and in the Truth; and God dwells and walks in his People according
to his Promise, 2 Cor. 6.16.

4. And whether the Flesh (which you call visible) be not the Vail spoken of,
Hebr. 10.20? And whether the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod that Budded, and the
Holiest of all were not within the Vail? And whether that Vail in the old time,
was not a Type of this Vail through which this New and Living Way is
consecrated for us? read Hebrews 10. and understand what ye read.

5. And whether such as were made to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus, (who would know him no more after the Flesh) were not come within the
Vail, where the true Bread was which nourishes their Souls up unto Eternal
Life, which the Manna was a Type of?

6. And whether the Bodies of the Saints did not become the Temples of the
Living God, and did not he dwell in them, and walk in them? And he that knew
not Christ in him, was not he a Stranger to the New and Living Way, and a
Reprobate? Or were the Heavenly Places in Christ, where they sat above the
Skies?

7. And when Matthew Caffen said his Savior was up in the Heaven, where the
Sun, Moon, and Stars are, which are visible without him; Did he not then ask me
where my God was that I worshipped and served? And did I not plainly tell him,
(before many People;) that he dwelt in me, according to his Promise, and that
he was my Savior: And did not thee M. C. cry out with a loud voice, O
Blasphemy! (just like the Jews against Christ, and them that stopped their Ears
against Stephen,) but did not I reply to thee, Then call the Scripture
Blasphemy; nay, thou may as well call the Lord Blasphemer, for speaking so, for
they are his Words and Promise to his People? I will dwell in them, and walk in
them; I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Here all may see the
Darkness and Blindness that is happened to these men, who do withstand the
Truth of God, and his precious Promises, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,
but their folly will be made manifest to all men as theirs was, who call such
Blasphemers who witness the Promise of the Father (which Christ bid his
Disciples wait for) fulfilled.

But some may say, If God and Christ, and Justification, and Salvation, and all
must be known within; Then, what Benefit have you by the Death and Sufferings
of Christ? And for what end came he into the World? And what advantage have any
People by these things?

Answ. Much every may; for first, he in his Birth and coming in the Flesh, was
the opening of a Door (though under a Vail to the Carnal Eye) to see into the
Mysteries of his Kingdom, which was at hand, as he told them; as his being born
of a Virgin, and then being carried into Egypt, and then being brought back
again, as also his being kept out of the Inn, which was full of Guests in the
days of Taxing; and his being wraped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a
Manger, showed his entertainment in the World, and among the Professors of all
sorts, that saw not the Invisible Life, but looked at the visible appearance,
and so his Face was more marred then any man's, and his form more then the sons
of men.

And then in his Preaching, he told for what end he was born, and came into the
World, to bear witness to the Truth; and so he fulfilled all the Types and
Shadows, and Sacrifices under the Law, by his Offering once for all, and ended
them for ever; and so a Body was prepared to do his Fathers Will, who would nor
have any more such Sacrifices and Offerings, but a New and Living Way must be
consecrated, for the People, through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, which
was offered up once for all; so here all the outward Offerings (which were
many, and often) ended; and now the Offering is in Righteousness, in that which
exceeds the Scribes and Pharisees, and the true Worship is now (as he said) in
the Spirit, and in the Truth. And so as they offered the Blood of Bulls and
Goats, and such like things, in their Sacrifices for Sin and Transgression; so
Christ at his Death and Suffering offered up a Body of Flesh and Blood, which
was prepared (as I said) to that end, of his Father: So he did his Fathers
Will, with which he was well pleased, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear ye
him; so that God is in Christ reconciled; and out of him there is no
Reconciliation, nor acceptable Sacrifice. And now all must hear him, who said,
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and I am the Light of the World; belive
in the Light, whose name is called The Word of God, which his Ministers (in his
stead) preached nigh, in the heart and in the mouth, and forbid saying who
shall ascend up into Heaven to bring him down, or descend to fetch him up, etc.
but the Word of Reconciliation they had, and this they preached, that People
might come to Christ and be reconciled to God; and their Fellowship was with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and the Blood of Christ did cleanse
them, and yet they desire to know him no more after the Flesh. But these things
are Parables to the Wise men of the World; Therefore I may conclude as the
Apostle did; Without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.
And so he is out of your sight, who deny the Light within, for that gives the
knowledge of his Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ, as ye may read 2 Cor. 4.
and 6.

THE END

