AN EPISTLE GENERAL CONTAINING Wholesome Exhortations and Good Counsel from the
Spirit of Truth, unto all such as are or may be under the Judgment or Sentence
OF BANISHMENT, FOR THE Testimony of Jesus Christ (which is held in a Tender
Conscience) throughout the Nation of England.

As also, Unto all them that are yet at Liberty (to be faithful to the Lord,
and meet often together in the fear of his Name, and not to fear Man, that
shall be made as Grass) and to all in Bonds, Prisons, and Holes everywhere
throughout the World, who are bearing (and suffering for) the same Testimony of
Truth and Righteousness, which the Lord has decreed shall prosper and spread
over all the World, till the Kingdoms thereof are become his Kingdoms, and he
shall Reign for ever and ever. Amen.

With a few Words of Advice, to all who have or may have any Message or
Business upon the account of Truth to such as are in Authority in the Nations.

By a Servant of the Churches of Christ Jesus. W. B.

Printed in the Year, 1664.

AN EPISTLE GENERAL, Containing Wholesome Exhortations and Good Counsel, from
the Spirit of Truth, unto all such as are, or may be, under the Judgment or
Sentence of BANISHMENT, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, etc.
MY dear Friends and Brethren, who for your testimony of truth (and obedience
to the God of Abraham) are or may be caused to wander (as some of our Fathers
have done) from your Native Countries, and to be exposed to the want of a
certain dwelling place in the Earth, and to forsake All for the Name of Christ,
that is near and dear in the World, and be liable to great Jeopardies and
Perils by Sea and Land, among Strangers, and in strange Countries; why, take ye
no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or
wherewith ye shall be clothed, or, for your Relations and Families, what they
shall do in your Absence, for the Lord (for whose sake ye suffer) will provide
both for you and them, as ye faithful to him abide, whose tender bowels of
compassions are open toward them that fear him, and pittieth them, even as a
Father pittieth his Children. But consider how great and weighty a Work and
Service the Lord at this time has called you unto, and how greatly the Honor
and Glory of his holy Name is concerned therein; the Lord my God give you a
clear understanding thereof, and direct you in his Counsel in all ye take in
hand, that in it ye may stand faithful, and be preserved in his pure Fear, in
meekness and wisdom, to his praise; for it is the faithfulness of his people,
in their patient sufferings, and circumspect, humble, sobe, just, wise,
upright, harmless conversation, that will answer the Principle of God in all
Nations, and preach his Kingdom come nigh unto People, among whom-soever they
may come, or be scattered for his Namesake; and by this Gospel (which is
everlasting) shall thousands be converted unto God, and multitudes be gathered
into his Name, and many through his knowledge shall be justified, which must
cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea, as was prophesied in days past.

Therefore my dear Friends, be ye not at all discouraged in your sufferings,
but look at the End for which the Lord has called you thereunto, which is the
exaltation of his Name, and the gathering of his precious Seed out of
Captivity, where they have been scattered in all quarters, in the cloudy and
dark day, that they might come to inherit rest in their own Land, and partake
of the glory which was before the world was: and consult not with flesh and
blood in any thing, for ye have need of great watchfulness this day, that no
reasoner may enter you, to the betraying the Innocent into the Sinners hands,
so that Spirit will sell the Lord that bought them, to save self and the things
of this Life: But flesh and blood must not inherit the Kingdom of God, for it is
prepared for that blessed innocent Seed only, which has no Kingdom in this
World, out is a stranger in the Earth, So let your pure breathings be manifest
unto the Lord, that ye may receive power from him, be preserved in his truth,
out of all the snares of this World, and commit your cause and all ye have,
freely and wholly unto him, and be purely resigned and subject to his heavenly
Will (eying his Glory) in all things, at all times, and in all places; for the
Work is his, and the Cause ye are engaged in is the Lords, and not your own; ye
are but as Servants or Instruments in this great Work, which the Lord has
begun, and is causing to spread and prosper throughout the Earth, that he may
get himself a great, and glorious, and dreadful Name, to the ends of the World,
who shall be made to bow down and worship at his footstool, and confess that
we are his People, and that the Everlasting God is with us, is on our side, and
sights for us, who cannot strive, nor fight for our selves, nor avenge our own
cause, but leave it to him who judges righteously; and this shall be an
evident token that our Kingdom is not of this World unto all people.

Therefore my dear Friends and Brethren, faint not in your minds, neither be ye
discouraged as concerning the greatness of the Trials ye have to undergo, but
cast your burden (in this matter) upon the Lord, for the weight of your
sufferings herein he has pondred, and it is come near unto him, and to the
hearts of his dear Children, whose secret Cries and tender Breathings are
uncessantly poured forth into his bosom, in your behalf, in the tender
yearning bowels of his everlasting compassions; that ye may stand faithful in
his counsel, and so walk, that his glorious Name may be exalted, and his Truth
glorified in you, and by you, and by all that make mention thereof; else to
what end is all our sufferings and profession of his Name in the World? Surely,
surely the Lord is choosing a Remnant to himself (to walk with him in
faithsulneses) that shall greatly honor him, and magnify, and reverence his
Holy Name, and bring praise unto him in this his day, and such only will the
Lord my God honor with everlasting dominion, and beautify with his Eternal
Salvation and Peace. Oh happy is the man, and happy will be that soul, whose
lot falls in this ground; and verily its but a little while, and he will wipe
away the reproach of this his chosen Remnant, and plead their cause with all
their Oppressors, when the measures of the iniquities of his Adversaries are
filled up, and our Faith and Patience sufficiently tried, and proved, and made
manifest to the World; for of this great controversy (now in hand) the tender
Seed of God is very sensible through Nations, which gives many People to see
and discern, an absolute difference of Spirit, and a great gulf fixed between
us and our adversaries; and this shall arise and break the hearts of thousands,
who are yet afar off, when they shall hear of your patient innocent sufferings,
only for your tender Conscience and the Worship of your God, to whose Name and
Power many shall confess (as the King in Daniels day) that he is the Living
God, and steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom that which shall never be
destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even to the end; he delivers and
rescueth, and he works signs and wonders in Heaven and in Earth. And thus is
our God (who is the same) doing at this very day (though the ungodly see it
not) as shall hereafter be confessed and published, as this was after the
beloved Daniel was tried and proved, and not before, mark that; and then woe
will be to your Persecutors (as it was to his) when the Seed shall arise in the
Nations and witness for you, and against them, who shall curse the hour in
which they were born, and the moment in which they breathed in the World, and
the womb that bare them, that ever they should be so blind to bring swift
destruction upon their own heads, for the lucre of a moment of pleasures.

Therefore my dear Friends, let your minds be stayed, and your hearts fixed on
the Lord, that ye may be always kept and preserved in the pure sense of the
weight and ponderousness of this his great and honorable Work, which he has
called you into, that so ye may be patterns, and pure examples, of
righteousness, gravity, truth and holiness to the Nations, even as Lights in a
dark place, and as a City set on the Everlasting Hill of God, above all the
fury and rage of your enemies, or their most subtillest Temptations or
provocations, which ye may meet withal in your Travails and daily exercises:
From which my God deliver you, and keep you steadfast in watchfulness, wisdom,
and fear to the end; that ye may be preserved out of all the snares of the
Enemy, to the honor of his great Name, and the comfort and peace of your own
souls; for its the endurer to the end, that shall be saved.

And dear Friends, Take heed and beware of letting in the spirit of this world
into your hearts, which naturally draws from God, into its own Center, to look
after the riches, ease, and glory thereof; for it was not in vain, that the
same Spirit that now dwells in his Children, exhorted his Disciples (in Ages
past) to take heed and beware of Covetousness, for a man's life consists not
in the abundance of the things of this world which he may possess; For
whosoever shall let forth his mind after these things, and embrace and
entertain those subtle Contrivances which may arise in the mind as
Temptations, and shall follow the whisperings thereof, and so let that be his
Guide which leads to seek self, his own honor, riches and glory, and not the
things of Jesus Christ, the Truth and its glory only, such a one will be
destroyed, and not preserved. And this I have received from my God, to warn
you of it, in tender love to your souls, and to the honor of his everlasting
Name, which must and will be exalted over all the Earth: And though a Thousand
should fall on the right hand, and ten Thousands on the left hand, yet the Lord
shall be glorified, and all people be left without just excuse.

So the Lord God of Heaven direct you, and preserve you chaste and single unto
himself, for his Name sake, and for his tender Seeds sake, which is very dear
and precious to him in every Nation. And this is the breathings of my heart and
soul for you all, in the true and living sense of the mavelous work and
wonderful things he is bringing to pass in these latter days; for its the
Life must confound Babel, (as in the days of old) and build up Zion, whose
walls is salvation and gives praises for evermore. Therefore in the retired
watchful, pure, light and life of God it self, all dwell, always eying his
eternal power, and presence to go before you (this was Moses's mind, Carry us
not hence except thy presence go with us) for that is it by which the Lord
wrought wonderful things, and preserved his people in all ages, who were
obedient thereinto; and this has preserved us, who has been led and guided
thereby to this day, and will preserve us to the end, as we are faithful to
obey its requirings, and no otherwise can any be preserved, or saved out of
Temptations, and from the wrath to come. And this I do affirm from certain
experience; For Transgression against Gods requirings, was, and is, the Ground
and cause of the separation and alienation from him, and from his Covenant of
promise, and is the breach of the peace and unity between God and man; So that
there is no peace to the wicked, neither can there, so long as the whoredoms
and witchcrafts of Jezabel remains, and disobedience is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubbornness is Iniquity and Idolatry; so that none can enjoy
perfect peace with the holy God, but them whose feet are guided by his light
and holy Spirit, in the way of peace, which all the world that lie in
wickedness (in Transgression) are ignorant of, the way of peace they know not;
But the Children of the Lord shall be all Taught of him, and great shall be the
peace of his Children.

So my dear Friends, mind the Light of the Lord, and let it be your Guide and
Teacher, and your dwelling place; for them of the Nations that are saved, must
walk in the Light; mark, though they are saved, yet they must still walk in
the Light of the Holy City; and to it shall the gathering of the people be, who
shall stock thereunto, as the doves to the windows, as was prophesied and is
now fullfiling in this our day, blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord. And
take good heed to your Ways, Words, and Carriages, amongst all people
wherever you come, as ye love the honor of God, and the peace of your own
souls, in whose Name, in bowels of love, I lay it upon you all; for many will
be the eyes; that will be sharply fixed upon you, both for good and for evil,
even to mark all your steps in every path which you shall tread with your feet:
Therefore keep your feet in the way of peace, and walk with God, as Enoch, that
ye may be more and more translated, and taken up out of the sight of all that
watch for your halting; so shall ye have the Witness in your selves, that your
Ways please the Lord, as he had, and as many of his dear children have at this
day, with whom ye will have precious Unity, as ye walk in the same steps, and
mind the same things, that are eternal. And walk in lowliness, in the fear of
God, and in love and tenderness one toward another, that men seeing your good
Works, and blameless conversation, may glorify the Name of our God (in whose
sight, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is of great price) so shall your
good and sweet savor of all virtues abound and spread through Nations, And by
these things (as leaves and fruits of the Tree of life) must the Nations be
healed and replanted. And this is Gods decree and determination, and the work
he has begun amongst us, and is about at this very day, even to make new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell for ever; and the
old shall pass and is passing away with this great noise; for the Lord is
finishing transgression, and making an end of sin, and bringing in everlasting
Righteousness. Blessed is the eye that sees and the heart that beleiveth and
understands, and waits patiently and faithfully for the accomplishment
thereof, for such only shall be kept under the shadow of the Almighty, who
abide in the secret of the Most High, where they enjoy the sure mercies of
David, and the Kingdom and Dominion which never ends: Into which the God of
Life bring you by his Eternal Power, and keep and preserve you in his pure
peaceable Wisdom, at all times and in all places, wherever you come, by Sea
and Land. The Eternal God of my Life, of Heaven and Earth, be with you, and
cause you to grow daily, as living plants to his renown and glory, and give you
favor among all people, that generations to come, may call you the blessed of
the Lord. And as in this ye walk and abide, your enemies shall be made to
confess, that you are his chosen people, and many shall take hold of your
skirts, because of these venues, of which your garments will send forth a sweet
savor among them But woe to that man, by whom the Lord shall be dishonored
among you, it had been good for him, that he had not been born.

So my dear friends and Brethren, dwell in your particular measures of the
grace of God, the light and power of his eternal Spirit of Truth, for whose
Name sake ye suffer, and resign up your own wills (in the Cross daily) to his
heavenly will and providence, and cast all your care upon him, for he cares
for his Children; only let this be your care, that his Name and Truth be kept
clean, and not be reproached or blasphemed, or suffer justly any way through
any of you, for that would bring weakness, and even a Consumption upon you,
Condemnation and Anguish upon every soul that does evil. So the eternal God
keep your minds and hearts, in the deep Consideration of the substance of these
things: For truly Friends, great is the Lord, and greatly to be feared, and
honored, by all that make mention of his Name; the weight of which my soul
does daily ponder, and yet there remains a depth beyond that the mind of man
can fathom. So unto the Lord and his faithful Witness I leave you, being
clear of what lay on me to write unto you in this matter at present, yet my
soul does daily travail, and breath to my God for you all; For the honor of
his Name is settled in my heart, daily more and more, in the sense whereof I
cannot forget his dear suffering people, who suffer so this Namesake. So the
God of Heaven be with you, and his pure lively presence fill your hearts with
everlasting joy and peace, and in this we shall daily meet together, and
embrace each other, where nothing can separate, as in it we faithful abide,
though we may be separated as to the outward vessels, through the wills of
men, never to see each others faces more: the will of the Lord be done, says
my soul,

Who am your dear Brother in the bond of love and peace, which never changes.

ANd all friends every where, who are yet at liberty, keep your meetings
together, in the Name and fear of the Lord, and be not daunted, or terrified,
in any thing, as from your Adversaries; for the Lord has permitted or suffered
them, in some measure, according to their hearts desire, to try you, and to
sift and winnow you for a season, and ye shall have Tribulation ten days; For
the Devil (who has already cast many of you into prisons) has desired to
winnow you as wheat, and not only so, but to destroy you utterly, root and
branch from off the earth: But blessed be the Lord, who has sent down the
Angel of his presence, with the great Chain in his hand, and has laid hold on
the Dragon, so that he is limited (as in the days of Job) though he cast out
his floods of rage, and fury, against the man-child, persecuting the Woman that
brings him forth, and makes war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
Commandments, and hold fast the Testimony of Jesus. But his time is but short,
of which he is sensible, that his ruin and downfall approaches, and
dreadfulness has taken hold of his heart, because the two Witnesses are risen
(which torments the Earth) the Spirit of life from God is entered into them,
and they stand upon their feet, and great fear is fallen upon their enemies,
and this is the smoke of their Torment, of the fire which is kindled in their
bowels, which will never be quenched, till the ungodly are consumed, whose
swift destruction is hastening upon them, and this way it comes to pass, even
by those very actions and contrivances by which he thinks to stand and uphold
his power and Kingdom, so blind is your Adversary, and his followers; and when
they shall cry peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them,
as pangs on a Woman in Travel, and they shall not escape.

Therefore my dear Friends, be of good courage, and stand valiant for the Truth
upon Earth, and dwell in the will of God, and be faithful to him in whatsoever
he makes manifest to you, that ye may witness perfect peace with him, in all ye
do or suffer for his Name sake. And fear not him that can but kill the body,
and has power to do no more, but fear and reverence the living God of Heaven
and Earth, and let him be your dread (and not man) and commit your selves, and
all ye have, and the Cause ye are engaged in, freely unto the Lord, who takes
care for his Children, that not one hair of their head shall perish beyond his
permission; And keep your meetings diligently, and let in no Reasoner or
Consulter with flesh and blood, to hinder you therefrom; And meet together as
exactly as ye can possible, at the time appointed, for your faithful restimony
here in is honorable in the sight of the Lord, and of his children, who suffer
bonds, or may suffer exilement, or banishment, for the same Terlin any: And in
so doing, ye will be a strength and encouragement one to another, and a good
savor in the hearts of many (that are even ready to join with you in the light
of the Lord) and a dread to your enemies, for by a foolish Nation will he anger
the mighty and wise men of the Earth, and provoke many people to jealousy; and
the Time is come that whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord (in truth)
shall be saved.

Therefore resist every appearance or thought to the contrary (in the light and
strength of God) as a Temptation of the enemy: And remember the Serpent Tempted
in Paradise, to break the Command of the Lord, and is yet near to betray the
Innocer into the sinners hands, whose mercy will be sound cruelty; for he is
not wanting at this day, to strive every way to make you fall from you:
stedfastness, neither is his subtilty abated, to beguile the simple, to draw
them into his own state of Condemnation, of which all have been, are, and ever
will be partakers, who hearken to his voice, and obey his Temptation: And this
lies on me to warn you of; For if he get you to bow a little, he will get more
strength against you, and more hold and ground in you, by his fair flourished
baits and cunning crafty allurements, whereby your faith would be weatned, and
even fail, till he cause you to make shipwreck there of and of a good
Conscience, through the tossing your minds to and fro in the Sea of
Temptations; and this would be an horrible day of Tempests unto you. The Lord
my God by his eternal power keep open your understandings, that ye may
perfectly see and discern him in all his wiles and cunning craftiness, by which
he lies in wait to deceive, both within and from without; that so ye may be
able to resist him in every appearance, and quench all his fiery darts in the
living faith, that not a place be given to him, for if ye give him place, he
will get more room and matter to work on, till he becomes a strong man armed,
to keep the house against every motion and appearance of God in you, thereby
endeavoring to dwell at peace; but all his strong (...) must be stormed, and
his piece overturned, and the league and covenant with death and hell shall be
broken, by the pure Life and Seed of God (his head bruiser) let him do what he
can, and then ye will perceive he was a false Prophet, and has deceived you.

Therefore my dear Friends, watch and pray continually, that ye enter not into
temptation, but that ye may see every appearance of evil and abstain from it;
so shall the God of Truth and Peace sanctify you wholly, in Body, Soul and
Spirit, whereby ye shall become fit habitations for the Lord to dwell and walk
in, and have his Testimony in your selves, that you are his Children, being
taught of him, and preserved by him to his praise, and your everlasting comfort
and peace. So keep your eye open in the Eternal Light, in which ye will see
over time, and all things comprehended in it, and through the end of all
temptations, and over all the storms and tempests of the wicked, who at this
day are like the troubled Sea, and cannot rest, for there is no peace to the
wicked, says my God: But he is your peace and resting place, who rebukes the
Winds, and walks upon the Sea, and calmes the Storms at his pleasure; though
in the World ye have Tribulation and Persecution for his Name sake, it is but
for a moment in respect of the Eternal Life, if it should be so all the days of
your Pilgrimage on Earth, and but Light Affliction, in comparison of the
exceeding Weight of the Glory ye shall be partakers of, as ye abide faithful to
the End.

So the Eternal God of Life and Peace be with you, and preserve you by his
Power, and keep you all valiant for his living Truth, in the pure sense and
enjoyment thereof in all your hearts, to the End.

And my dear Friends, who are in Bonds, Prisons and Holes, for the same
Testimony of Jesus Christ, where ye are oppressed and thronged, as sheep
appointed for the slaughter, without Mercy from your Adversaries; be ye not
discouraged, but lift up your Heads in the pure Life of your Testimony; for
this is a day in which the Lord will glorify himself in the eyes of all
Nations, and get himself a Name above every name, that every knee may bow to
him, and that all flesh may dread and tremble before him, and become as the
grass, and as the flower that fades away, at the majesty and glory of his
presence, who has touched the Mountains and they smoke, and the smoke of their
torment ascends night and day, because of the everlasting burnings, with which
he is melting the Hills like wax, and consuming the ungodly like the fat of
Lambs, and folding them up as thorns and stubble for the fire. Great is the
work which the Lord is doing, and cutting short in righteousness, yea, such a
day is approaching as many will not believe, though it be, and has been
declared unto them, in which the Lord will plead with all flesh, by fire and
sword, and with plague and pestilence, famine and earthquakes, in diverse
places, and dreadful storms, and fearful sights within and without, so that
all flesh shall be pained, and wax feeble before him; for the terrors of God
(within and without) shall set themselves in array against the ungodly, and
compass the wicked as with snares of fire, till they are consumed; and the very
stars in their courses shall fight against them, yea, he will make his wonders
known upon them, as in the days of Egypt. And this I am bold to proclaim, in
the Name and Authority of the Everlasting God, for I have seen the consumption
determined, and how it will come to pass, which is coming upon them as swift as
on Eagles wings, and it shall not tarry nor be prolonged, and he that will come
(to reward every man according as his work shall be) will come quickly: Blessed
are they that wait for him.

Therefore my dear Friends, seeing our God is no respecter of persons, but is
risen as a Giant to the Battle, to plead the cause of his elect Seed, and to
exalt his Name over all the Earth; and seeing we look for such things, which
will certainly come to pass, and be fulfilled in their season (which hastens)
What manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?
and what need have we of diligence, watchfulness and readiness, that we may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless? The God of all mercies
(whose long-suffering and kindness has been exceedingly manifested to usward)
keep you exceeding still, quiet, and low in your minds and spirits, fearing to
offend him in thought, word and deed, at all times and seasons. And take heed
of Discourses among your selves which are unnecessary, for the enemy has a
secret end to effect among such things, to draw out your minds from the living
sense of the precious tender Seed of God in you, which preserves the mind
joined to it, in the humbleness and watchfulness against every appearance of
evil; for he will not let slip any opportunity which tends to his advantage,
that he may thereby preserve, continue and uphold, his own Kingdom and
Interest. Now he perceives his ruin approaching, and his perpetual downfall at
hand, who will dwell as long as he can in the two men (one) possessed, but
being wholly cast our from thence, his last habitation is the herd of Swine,
whom he has caused, and will cause, to run down with violence and perish.

So my dear Friends, be very careful, and let your words be sew, and your
moderation known unto all men, and in all things, for the Lord is at hand, who
weighs the thoughts, words, and actions, intents and purposes of all people,
with a just Balance, who will not acquit the guilty, without punishment,
wheresoever it is found. And keep within the bounds of the feeling, of the Seed
of God, in all your ways, for that is the ancient Landmark, which he that
goes beyond transgresses; and take heed of loudness, forwardness, or hastiness
of speech, in all your discourses about the things of this world (and this I
lay upon you from the Lord, to whom you must give an account) but be dead and
slow to such things, and be lively in Christ Jesus the Truth, and yet moderate,
patient and cool, for God requires stilness, yea, great stilness, and
watchfulness amongst you at this day, that you may hear his Voice, and do his
Will, and stand in his pure Counsel, which the many words without knowledge and
meekness of wisdom darkeneth, for which the reproofs must come. So the Lord
guide you in his fear, and gentle peaceable wisdom, that no folly, superfluity
or unsoundness, may be found among you, but that ye may all learn of him daily,
who is meek and lowly, and be kept in his weighty and savoury Life, to the
honor of his Name, and the comfort and edification of one another. And mark
them that are unruly and walk disorderly among you, and cause divisions,
through their unsubjected wills, and exalted spirits, above the Seed of God,
which is but one in you all, and have no fellowship with them, that they may
see their shame; and yet have no prejudice or enmity rise in your hearts
against any, but let your upright Life and Conversation daily judge and condemn
them, that if possible they may be awakened, and be sensible of their state,
and repent and be saved. So let there be no strife or contentious amongst you,
no needless disputations, whereby the weak may stumble, no foolish jesting, no
vain jangling, but quietness and soberness, with gravity and godliness, in all
reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire; and if the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and transgressor appear?

So dear Friends, study to be quiet, and eat your own bread, and wait for it
daily, and be content therewith, and let all your striving be to stand still,
for herein is your strength increased; and be good examples one unto another,
and to all people that may come among you to visit you, or to behold your
order, for the holy Name of our God is greatly concerned in this matter, and we
are now the very people by whom he will be honored and greatly exalted, or
else reproached and dishonored, in this our day and generation. So grieve not
the Spirit of God in your selves, or others, neither provoke him to jealousy
against you, but dwell retired and watchful against every motion that would
exalt it self above the precious tender Seed, to hurt it; so shall ye have
peace (as ye dwell in the holy Mountain) and be justified in the sight of the
Lord, and be a good favor in the hearts of all sober people, whose eyes are
toward you for good. So mind the honor of God, and bear in remembrance the
end for which he has called you out of the world at this day, to bear your
testimony in sufferings for his Name sake; and be circumspect, humble, and wise
in all your ways, that the Lord may be honored by you, and his Witness
answered in all People; so shall his Seed be raised, and the weak be
strengthened, and your own souls comforted in him that guides his Children
(that learn of him) in the way of Peace. And for this is the daily travel of my
soul, who am one in sufferings with you for the same pure testimony, which
shall stand for ever.

And all Friends every where, who have, or may have any occasion or business to
any in Authority in the Nations, or who having done any thing in obedience to
the Lord (as your faithful Testimony to his Name) for which ye are, or may be,
brought before any of them; or, have any motion lie upon you, to go and warn
them, or, any particular of them, concerning the work they are about, or of the
day of the Lord, that is coming as a Theife upon them; or as concerning them
that suffer bonds, or the spoiling of their goods, or sentence of Banishment
for the Truth-sake, or the like; this I lay upon you, from the Lord (which has
often rise in my heart) go not in your own will, nor time, but wait upon him in
stillness, and eye his pure presence and power to go with you, before you, to
lead and carry you on in obedience to his own pure motion, in which ye will
feel strength sufficient, and receive the pure wisdom from above (as in his
Light, Dread and Counsel ye abide) so to speak, that Gods Witness in all may be
answered, and here ye will be a good savor to him, whether they hear or
forbear. So premeditate not before hand, what to speak, or answer, but singly
give up, and dwell low, and subject to the Lord, and keep within the seeling of
his eternal Power, and sink into it, and then ye will be preserved innocent,
and cool, and patient, and bold, in dominion over all fear and weakness, which
would be ready to enter; and so the Truth being kept clear in you, and by you,
in all things, the Lord will be honored, and his Name exalted over all the
contary, to whom all honor and fear belongs. And let none suit or frame
themselves to please men, but all seek to please the Lord, and seek his face,
and his glory; and let his Truth be very dear and precious to you and amongst
you all, yea, more than your own lives, and then by it ye will be preserved to
his praise, and your own eternal comfort and peace; for great has been the
sufferings for its sake, and many has sealed their testimony of it with their
blood, who have not loved their lives unto death, for the joy that was set
before them, whose faithfulness lives in an everlasting record, and can never
be blotted out of the hearts of the righteous, but is had in eternal
remembrance: the consideration whereof, shall break the hearts of Children that
are yet unborn, and the life thereof shall raise up thousands from the dead,
who shall give glory to God in their behalf. So in his Truth, the Lord God of
all mercies and everlasting blessings keep you all. Amen.

In whose blessed Will, I lie down, with all the faithful and upright in heart,
daily waiting in his pure Light (which makes all things manifest) to know more
of his counsel, and to be obedient thereunto, in whatsoever he requires of me;
in which I exhort some, that they suffer not a motion of that spirit of Core or
Eliab to rise in their hearts, lest thereby they endanger themselves; for what
was Moses? and what was Aaron? and what are all that bare a pure Testimony this
day, for the Name of the Most Holy dreadful God, but such as hazard their
Lives, and are your servants for Christ's sake? therefore let such be very
careful, and tender in this matter; for cannot we say to them (as little to
David his brethren) Is there not a cause? Do not the care and zeal for the
honor of the great and holy Name of our God daily increase in our hearts? I
Can truly say, The zeal of thine house has even eaten me up. That his living
Truth and People may be kept blameless, and spotless, in this great and notable
day of Trial, is the travel of my breathing soul, day and night; and I seek not
mine own honor, but the honor of him that has had mercy upon me, who has
opened mine eyes, and given me of his free Spirit, and eternal Power, and all I
have, I have received from him, and I have nothing to boast of, but in the
Lord, and his Mercies, which endures for ever, in whose Salvation I rejoice,
and in his fear I delight: and Lord let me never forget thy Name, nor the
multitude of thy Mercyes toward me, and toward all thy People, but let me ever
give thanks to thee in the lively remembrance of them, who is setting a Remnant
as watchmen upon the walls of Jerusalem, who cannot hold their peace, for her
sake, day nor night, till she is made the Praise of the whole Earth, and so
much the more as they see the day approaching, though their life is in great
stillness; and I could be content to be silent, but I must obey his requirings,
or I cannot be clear in his sight; And I know to this end has he preserved me
to this day and hour, in the secret of his Pavilion; blessed be his Name for
ever.

Into whose hand I freely commit my soul, and body, and all that he has given
me, and all his dear people every where, to be disposed at his good will and
pleasure, in which I feel my reward with me, and my witness is in heaven, and
the true joy of the Lord is in my heart as an open fountain, which none knows
but the redeemed from the earch; and yet I am daily a man of sorrows, and well
acquainted with griefs, for the redemption of his seed in Captivity, and for
the whole Creation, that groaneth under the bondage of corruption; but in all
estates I have learned to be content, knowing the Lord is with me, and hears,
and in due time will answer the breathings of his own, to whom be the glory,
dominion and praises, now and for evermore. Amen.

I am your dear Brother and Companion, who suffer with patience for the
everlasting Truth of God (which must spread over all the Earth, and be
established on the top of all Mountains) in which I bid you, Farewell. W. B.
From Hertford, where I remain a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
the 26 of the 6th Month. 1664.

