THE Fair Jilt: OR, THE HISTORY OF Prince Tarquin AND MIRANDA.

WRITTEN BY Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON, Printed by R. Holt, for Will. Canning, at his Shop in the
Temple-Cloysters, 1688.

TO HENRY PAIN, Esquire
SIR,
DEdications are like Love, and no Man of Wit or Eminence escapes them; early
or late, the Affliction of the Poet's Complement falls upon him; and Men are
obliged to receive 'em as they do their Wives; For better, for worse; at lest,
with a feigned Civility.

It was not Want of Respect, but Fear, that has hitherto made us keep clear of
your Judgment, too piercing to be favorable to what is not nicely valuable. We
durst not awaken your Criticism; and by begging your Protection in the Front of
a Book, give you an Occasion to find nothing to deserve it. Nor can this little
History lay a better Claim to that Honor, than those that have not pretended
to it; which has but this Merit to recommend it, That it is Truth: Truth, which
you so much admire. But it is a Truth that entertains you with so many Accidents
diverting and moving, that they will need both a Patron, and an Assertor in
this incredulous World. For however it may be imagined that Poetry (my Talent)
has so greatly the Ascendant over me, that all I write must pass for Fiction, I
now desire to have it understood, that this is Reality, and Matter of Fact, and
acted in this our latter Age: And that, in the Person of Tarquin, I bring a
Prince to kiss your Hands, who owned himself, and was received, as the last of
the Race of the Roman Kings; whom I have often seen, and you have heard of; and
whose Story is so well known to your self, and many Hundreds more: Part of
which I had from the Mouth of this unhappy great Man, and was an Eyewitness to
the rest.

It Is true, Sir, I present you with a Prince unfortunate, but still the more
noble Object for your Goodness and Pity; who never valued a brave Man the less
for being unhappy. And whither should the Afflicted flee for Refuge, but to the
Generous? Amongst all the Race, he cannot find a better Man, or more certain
Friend: Nor amongst all his Ancestors, match your greater Soul, and
Magnificence of Mind. He will behold in one English Subject, a Spirit as
illustrious, a Heart as fearless, a Wit and Eloquence as excellent, as Rome it
self could produce. Its Senate scarce boasted of a better Statesman, nor
Augustus of a more faithful Subject; as your Imprisonment and Sufferings,
through all the Course of our late National Distractions, have sufficiently
manifested: But nothing could press or deject your great Heart; you were the
same Man still, unmoved in all Turns, easy and innocent; no Persecution being
able to abate your constant good Humor, or wonted Gallantry.

If, Sir, you find here a Prince of less Fortitude and Virtue than your self,
charge his Miscarriages on Love; a Weakness of that Nature you will easily
excuse, (being so great a Friend to the Fair;) though possibly, he gave a Proof
of it too fatal to his Honor. Had I been to have formed his Character, perhaps
I had made him something more worthy of the Honor of your Protection: But I
was obliged to pursue the Matter of Fact, and give a just Relation of that part
of his Life which, possibly, was the only reproachful part of it. If he be so
happy, as to entertain a Man of Wit and Business, I shall not fear his Welcome
to the rest of the World: And it is only with your Passport he can hope to be
so.

The particular Obligations I have to your Bounty and Goodness, O noble Friend,
and Patron of the Muses! I do not so much as pretend to acknowledge in this
little Present; those being above the Poets Pay, which is a sort of Coin, not
current in this Age; though perhaps may be esteemed as Medals in the Cabinets
of Men of Wit. If this be so happy to be of that Number, I desire no more
lasting a Fame, than that it may bear this Inscription, that I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged, and Most Humble Servant, A. Behn.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THat famous Powder, called Arnum Magnum, formerly prepared by the learned
Reverius, Physi^ian Regent to the French King, and approved by most Persons of
Quality in Christendom, for preserving and beautifying the Face, even to old
Age: It cures red Faces; it takes away all Heat, Pimples, Sun-burn, and
Morphew; it prevents, and takes away superfluous Hair, growing on the Face, in
short, it adds more Luster and Beauty, than any Powder or Wash known; as many
Persons of Quality can testify, who daily use it, with the greatest
Approbation. It is prepared only by I. H. Doctor in Physic, in Great
Knight-Riders-Street, nigh Doctors-Commons-Gate, a blew Ball being over the
Door: Where it may be had for 2 s. 6 d. the Paper, with Directions for the Use.

THere is now in the Press, Oroonoko; or, The History of the Royal Slave.
Written by Madam Behn.

THE Fair Hypocrite; OR THE AMORS OF Prince Tarquin AND MIRANDA.
AS Love is the most noble and divine Passion of the Soul, so is it that to
which we may justly, attribute all the real Satisfactions of Life; and without
it, Man is unfinished, and unhappy.

There are a thousand things to be said of the Advantages this generous Passion
brings to those, whose Hearts are capable of receiving its soft Impressions:
for it is not every one that can be sensible of its tender Touches. How many
Examples, from History and Observation, could I give of its wondrous power;
nay, even to a degree of Transmigration? How many Idiots has it made wise? How
many Fools, eloquent? How many home-bread Squires, accomplished? How many
Cowards, brave? And there is no sort or Species of Mankind, on whom it cannot
work some Change and Miracle, if it be a noble, wellgrounded Passion, except on
the Fop in fashion; the hardened, incorrigible Fop; so often wounded, but never
reclaimed: For still, by a dire Mistake, conducted by vast Opinionatreism, and
a greater portion of Self-Love, than the rest of the Race of Man, he believes
that Affectation in his Mein and Dress, that Mathematical Movement, that
Formality in every Action, that Face managed with Care, and softened into
Ridicule, the languishing Turn, the Toss, and the Back shake of the Periwigg,
is the direct Way to the Heart of the fine Person he adores; and instead of
curing Love in his Soul, serves only to advance his Folly; and the more he is
enamored, the more industriously he assumes (every Hour) the Coxcomb. These
are Love's Play-things, a sort of Animals with whom he sports; and whom he
never wounds, but when he is in good humor, and always shoots laughing. It Is
the Diversion of the little God, to see what a fluttering and bustle one of
these Sparks, new-wounded, makes; to what fantastic Fooleries he has recourse:
The Glass is every moment called to Counsel, the Vallet consulted and plagued
for new Invention of Dress, the Footman and Scrutore perpetually employed;
Billetdoux and Madrigals take up all his Mornings, till Play-time in Dressing,
till Night in Gazing; still, like a Sun-flower, turned toward the Beams of the
fair Eyes of his Celia, adjusting himself in the most Amorous Posture he can
assume, his Hat under his Arm, while the other Hand is put carelessly into his
Bosom, as if laid upon his panting Heart; his Head a little bent to one side,
supported with a world of Crevat-string, which he takes mighty care not to put
into Disorder; as one may guess by a never-sailing, and horrid Stiffness in his
Neck; and if he have an occasion to look aside, his whole Body turns at the
same time, for fear the motion of the Head alone should incommode the Crevat or
Periwigg: And sometimes the Glove is well managed, and the white Hand
displayed. Thus, with a thousand other little Motions and Formalities, all in
the common Place or Rode of Foppery, he takes infinite pains to show himself to
the Pit and Boxes, a most accomplished Ass. This is he, of all Humane Kind, on
whom Love can do no Miracles; and who can no where, and upon no Occasion, quit
one Grain of his refined Foppery, unless in a Duel, or a Battle, if ever his
Stars should be so severe and ill-manner'd, to reduce him to the necessity of
either: Fear then would ruffle that fine Form he had so long preserved in
nicest Order, with grief considering, that an unlucky, Chance-Wound in his
Face, if such a dire Misfortune should befall him, would spoil the Sale of it
for ever.

Perhaps it will be urged, that since no Metamorphosis can be made in a Fop by
Love, you must consider him one of those that only talks of Love, and thinks
himself that happy thing, a Lover; and wanting fine Sense enough for the real
Passion, believes what he feels to be it. There are in the Quiver of the God a
great many different Darts; some that wound for a Day, and others for a Year;
they are all fine, painted, glittering Darts, and show as well as those made of
the noblest Metal; but the Wounds they make, reach the Desire only, and are
cured by possessing, while the short-lived Passion betrays the Cheats: But it is
that refined and illustrious Passion of the Soul, whose Aim is Virtue, and
whose End is Honor, that has the power of changing Nature, and is capable of
performing all those heroic things, of which History is full.

How far distant Passions may be from one another, I shall be able to make
appear in these following Rules. I Will prove to you the strong Effects of Love
in some unguarded and ungoverned Hearts; where it rages beyond the Inspirations
of a God all soft and gentle, and reigns more like a Fury from Hell.

I do not pretend here to entertain you with a feigned Story, or any thing
piec'd together with Romantic Accidents; but every Circumstance, to a Tittle,
is Truth. To a great part of the Main, I my self was an Eyewitness; and what I
did not see, I was confirmed of by Actors in the Intrigue, holy Men, of the
Order of St. Francis: But for the sake of some of her Relations, I shall give
my fair Jilt a feigned Name, that of Miranda; but my Hero must retain his own,
it being too illustrious to be concealed.

You are to understand, that in all the Catholic Countries where Holy Orders
are established, there are abundance of differing kinds of Religious, both of
Men and Women: Amongst the Women there are those we call Nuns, that make solemn
Vows of perpetual Chastity: There are others who make but a simple Vow; as, for
five or ten Years, or more or less; and that time expired, they may contract
anew for longer time, or marry, or dispose of themselves as they shall see
good; and these are ordinarily called Gallopping Nuns: Of these there are
several Orders; as, Chanonesses, Begines, Quest's, Swart-Sisters, and
Jesuitesses, with several others I have forgot: Of those of the Begines was our
fair Votress.

These Orders are taken up by the best Persons of the Town, young Maids of
Fortune, who live together, not enclosed, but in Palaces that will hold about
fifteen hundred or two thousand of these Fille-Devotes, where they have a
regulated Government, under a sort of Abbess, or Prioress; or rather, a
Governante. They are obliged to a Method of Devotion, and are under a sort of
Obedience. They wear an Habit much like our Widows of Quality in England, only
without a Bando; and their Veil is of a thicker Crape than what we have here,
through which one cannot see the Face; for when they go abroad, they cover
themselves all over with it, but they put 'em up in the Churches, and lay 'em
by in the Houses. Every one of these have a Confessor, who is to 'em a sort of
Steward: For, you must know, they that go into these places, have the
Management of their own Fortunes, and what their Parents design 'em. Without
the Advice of this Confessor, they act nothing, nor admit of a Lover that he
shall not approve of; at least, this Method ought to be taken, and is by almost
all of 'em; though Miranda thought her Wit above it, as her Spirit was.

But as these Women are, as I said, of the best Quality, and live with the
Reputation of being retired from the World a little more than ordinary, and
because there is a sort of difficulty to approach 'em, they are the People the
most courted, and liable to the greatest Temptations; for as difficult as it
seems to be, they receive Visits from all the Men of the best Quality,
especially Straangers. All the Men of Wit and Conversation meet at the
Apartments of these fair Fille Devotes, where all manner of Gallantries are
performed, while all the Study of these Maids is to accomplish themselves for
these noble Conversations. They receive Presents, Balls, Serinades and Billets:
All the News, Wit, Verses, Songs, Novels, Music, Gaming, and all fine
Diversion, is in their Apartments, they themselves being of the best Quality
and Fortune. So that to manage these Gallantries, there is no sort of Female
Arts they are not practiced in, no Intrigues they are ignorant of, and no
Management of which they are not capable.

Of this happy number was the fair Miranda, whose Parents being dead, and a
vast Estate divided between her self, and a young Sister (who lived with an
unmarry'd old Uncle, whose Estate afterward was all divided between 'em) put
her self into this uninclos'd Religious House; but her Beauty, which had all
the Charms that ever Nature gave, became the Envy of the whole Sisterhood. She
was tall, and admirably shaped; she had a bright Hair, and Hazle-Eyes, all full
of Lovo and Sweetness: No Art could make a Face so fair as hers by Nature,
which every Feature adorned with a Grace that Imagination cannot reach: Every
Look, every Motion charmed, and her black Dress showed the Luster of her Face
and Neck. She had an Air, though gay as so much Youth could inspire, yet so
modest, so nobly reserved, without Formality, or Stiffness, that one who looked
on her would have imagined her Soul the Twin-Angel of her Body; and both
together, made her appear something Divine. To this she had a great deal of
Wit, read much, and retained all that served her purpose. She sung delicately,
and danced well, and played on the Lute to a Miracle. She spoke several
Languages naturally; for being Co-heiress to so great a Fortune, she was bred
with nicest Care, in all the finest manners of Education; and was now arrived
to her Eighteenth Year.

'Twere needless to tell you how great a noise the Fame of this young Beauty,
with so considerable a Fortune, made in the World; I may say, the World, rather
than confine her Fame to the scanty Limits of a Town; it reached to many
others: And there was not a Man of any Quality that came to Antwerp, or passed
through the City, but made it his Business to see the lovely Miranda, who was
universally adored: Her Youth and Beauty, her Shape and Majesty of Mein, and
Air of Greatness, charmed all her Beholders; and thousands of People were dying
by her Eyes, while she was vain enough to glory in her Conquest, and make it
her Business to wound. She loved nothing so much as to behold sighing Slaves at
her Feet, of the greatest Quality; and rreated 'em all with an Affability that
gave 'em Hope. Continual Music as soon as it was dark, and Songs of dying
Lovers, were sung under her Windows; and she might well have made her self a
great Fortune (if she had not been so already) by the rich Presents that were
hourly made her; and every Body daily expected when she would make some one
happy, by suffering her self to be conquered by Love and Honor, by the
Assiduities and Vows of some one of her Adorers: But* Miranda accepted their
Presents, heard their Vows with pleasure, and willingly admitted all their soft
Addresses; but would not yield her Heart, or give away that lovely Person to
the Possession of one, who could please it self with so many. She was naturally
Amorous, but extremely Inconstant: She loved one for his Wit, another for his
Face, a third for his Mein; but above all, she admired Quality: Quality alone
had the power to attack her entirely; yet not to one Man, but that Virtue was
still admired by her in all; where ever she found that, she loved, or at least
acted the Lover with such Art, that (deceiving well) she failed not to complete
her Conquest; and yet she never durst trust her fickle Humor with Marriage:
She knew the strength of her own Heart, and that it could not suffer it self to
be confined to one Man, and wisely avoided those Inquietudes, and that
Uneasiness of Life she was sure to find in that married Life, which would,
against her Nature, oblige her to the Embraces of one, whose Humor was, to
love all the Young, and the Gay. But Love, who had hitherto but played with her
Heart, and given it naught but pleasing, wanton Wounds, such as afforded only
soft Joys, and not Pains, resolved, either out of Revenge to those Numbers she
had abandoned* and who had sighed so long in vain; or to try what power he had
upon so fickle a Heatt, sent an Arrow dipped in the most tormenting Flames that
rage in Hearts most sensible. He struck it home and deep, with all the Malice
of an angry God.

There was a Church belonging to the Cordeliers, whither Miranda often repaired
to her Devotion; and being there one Day, accompanied with a young Sister of
the Order, after the Mass was ended, as it is the Custom, some one of the
Fathers goes about the Church with a Box, for Contribution, or Charity-Money;
it happened that Day, that a young Father, newly initiated, carried the Box
about, which, in his turn, he brought to Miranda. She had no sooner cast her
Eyes on this young Friar, but her Face was over spread with Blushes of
Surprise: She beheld him steadfastly, and saw in his Face all the Charms of
Youth, Wit and Beauty; he wanted no one Grace that could form him for Love, he
appeared all that is adorable to the fair Sex, nor could the misshapen Habit
hide from her the lovely Shape it endeavored to cover, nor those delicate
Hands that approached her too near with the Box. Besides the Beauty of his Face
and Shape, he had an Air altogether great; in spite of his professed Poverty,
it betrayed the Man of Quality; and that Thought weighed greatly with Miranda.
But Love, who did not design she should now feel any sort of those easy Flames
with which she had heretofore burnt, made her soon lay all those Considerations
aside which used to invite her to love, and now loved she knew not why*

She gazed upon him, while he bowed before her, and waited for her Charity,
till she perceived the lovely Friar to blush, and cast his Eyes to the Ground.
This awakened her Shame, and she put her Hand into her Pocket, and was a good
while in searching for her Purse, as if she thought of nothing less, than what
she was about; at last she drew it out, and gave him a Pistole; but that with
so much Deliberation and Leisure, as easily betrayed the Satisfaction she took
in looking on him; while the good Man, having received her Bounty, after a very
low Obeisance, proceeded to the rest; and Miranda casting after him a Look all
languishing, as long as he remained in the Church, departed with a Sigh as soon
as she saw him go out, and returned to her Apartment, without speaking one Word
all the Way to the young Fille Devote who attended her; so absolutely was her
Soul employed with this young holy Man. Cornelia (so was this Maid called who
was with her) perceiving she was so silent, who used to be all Wit and good
Humor, and observing her little Disorder at the Sight of the young Father,
though she was far from imagining it to be Love, took an Occasion, when she was
come home, to speak of him. Madam, said she, did you not observe that fine
young Cordelier, who brought the Box? At a Question that named that Object of
her Thoughts, Miranda blushed; and the finding she did so, re-doubl'd her
Confusion, and she had scarce Courage enough to say, -- Yes, I did observe him:
And then, forcing her self to smile a little, continued; And I wondered to see
so jolly a young Friar of an Order so severe, and mortified. Madam (replied
Cornelia) when you know his Story, you will not wonder. Miranda, who was
impatient to know all that concerned her new Conqueror, obliged her to tell his
Story; and Cornelia obeyed, and proceeded.

The Story of Prince Henrick.
YOU must know, Madam, that this young holy Man is a Prince of Germany, of the
House of -- whose Fate it was, to fall most passionately in Love with a fair
young Lady, who loved him with an Ardour equal to what he vowed her. Sure of
her Heart, and wanting only the Approbation of her Parents, and his own, which
her Quality did not suffer him to despair of, he boasted of his Happiness to a
young Prince, his elder Brother, a Youth amorous and fierce, impatient of Joys,
and sensible of Beauty, taking Fire with all fair Eyes: He was his Father's
Darling, and Delight of his fond Mother; and by an Ascendant over both their
Hearts, ruled their Wills.

This young Prince no sooner saw, but loved the fair Mistress of his Brother,
and with an Authority of a Sovereign, rather than the Advice of a Friend,
warned his Brother Henrick (this now young Friar) to approach no more this
Lady, whom he had seen; and seeing, loved.

In vain the poor surpised Prince pleads his Right of Love, his Exchange of
Vows, and Assurance of an Heart that could never be but for himself. In vain he
urges his Nearness of Blood, his Friendship, his Passion, or his Life, which so
entirely depended on the Possession of the charming Maid. All his Pleading
served but to blow his Brother's Flame; and the more he implores, the more the
other burns; and while Henrick follows him on his Knees, with humble
Submissions, the other flies from him in Rages of transported Love; nor could
his Tears, that pursued his Brother's Steps, move him to Pity: Hotheaded,
vain-conceited of his Beauty, and greater Quality, as elder Brother, he doubts
not his Success, and resolved to sacrifice all to the Violence of his newborn
Passion.

In short, he speaks of his Design to his Mother, who promised him her
Assistance; and accordingly, proposing it first to the Prince, her Husband,
urging the Languishment of her Son, she soon wrought so on him, that a Match
being concluded between the Parents of this young Beauty, and Henrick's
Brother, the Hour was appointed before she knew of the Sacrifice she was to be
made. And while this was in Agitation, Henrick was sent on some great Affairs,
up into Germany, far out of the way; not but his boading Heart, with perpetual
Sighs and Throbs, eternally foretold him his Fate.

All the Letters he writ were intercepted, as well as those she writ to him.
She finds her self every Day perplexed with the Addresses of the Prince she
hated; he was ever sighing at her Feet. In vain were all her Reproaches, and
all her Coldness, he was on the surer side; for what he found Love would not
do, Force of Parents would.

She complains in her Heart on young Henrick, from whom she could never receive
one Letter; and at last, could not forbear bursting into Tears, in spite of
all her Force, and feigned Courage; when on a Day the Prince told her, that
Henrick was withdrawn, to give him time to court her, to whom, he said, He
confessed he had made some Vows, but did repent of 'em, knowing himself too
young to make 'em good: That it was for that Reason he brought him first to see
her; and for that Reason that after that he never saw her more, nor so much as
took leave of her; (when, indeed, his Death lay upon the next Visit, his
Brother having sworn to murder him; and to that End, put a Guard upon him,
till he was sent into Germany.)

All this he uttered with so many passionate Asseverations, Vows and seeming
Pity for her being so inhumanely abandoned, that she almost gave Credit to all
he had said, and had much a-do to keep her self within the Bounds of
Moderation, and silent Grief. Her Heart was breaking, her Eyes languish'd, and
her Cheeks grew pale, and she had like to have fallen dead into the treacherous
Arms of him that had reduced her to this Discovery; but she did what she could
to assume her Courage, and to show as little Resentment as possible for a
Heart, like hers, oppressed with Love, and now abandoned by the dear Subject of
its Joys and Pains.

But, Madam, not to tire you with this Adventure, the Day arrived wherein our
still weeping fair Unfortunate was to be sacrificed to the Capriciousness of
Love; and she was carried to Court by her Parents, without knowing to what End,
where she was almost compelled to marry the Prince.

Henrick, who, all this while, knew no more of his Unhappiness, than what his
Fears suggested, returns, and passes even to the Presence of his Father, before
he knew any thing of his Fortune; where he beheld his Mistress and his Brother,
with his Father, in such a Familiarity, as he no longer doubted his Destiny.
It Is hard to judge whether the Lady or himself was most surpised; she was all
pale and unmovable in her Chair, and Henrick fixed like a Statue; at last
Grief and Rage took place of Amazement, and he could not forbear crying out,
Ah, Traitor! Is it thus you have treated a Friend, and Brother? And you, O
perjured Charmer! Is it thus you have rewarded all my Vows? He could say no
more; but reeling against the Door, had fallen in a Swown upon the Floor, had
not his Page caught him in his Arms, who was entering with him. The good old
Prince, the Father, who knew not what all this meant, was soon informed by the
young, weeping Princess; who, in relating the Story of her Amor with Henrick,
told her Tale in so moving a manner, as brought Tears to the old Man's Eyes,
and Rage to those of her Husband; he immediately grew jealous to the last
Degree: He finds himself in Possession ('it is true) of the Beauty he adored, but
the Beauty adoring another; a Prince, young, and Charming as the Light; soft,
witty, and raging with an equal Passion. He finds this dreaded Rival in the
same House with him, with an Authority equal to his own; and fancies, where two
Hearts are so entirely agreed, and have so good an Understanding, it would not
be impossible to find Opportunities to satisfy and ease that mutual Flame that
burnt so equally in both; he therefore resolved to send him out of the World,
and to establish his own Repose by a Deed, wicked, cruel and unnatural, to have
him assassinated the first Opportunity he could find. This Resolution set him a
little at ease, and he strove to dissemble Kindness to Henrick, with all the
Art he was capable of, suffering him to come often to the Appartment of the
Princess, and to entertain her oftentimes with Discourse, when he was not near
enough to hear what he spoke; but still watching their Eyes, he found those of
Henrick full of Tears, ready to slow, but restrained, looking all dying, and
yet reproaching, while those of the Princess were ever bent to the Earth, and
she, as much as possible, shunning his Conversation. Yet this did not satisfy
the jealous Husband; 'twas not her Complaisance that could appease him, he
found her Heart was panting within whenever Henrick approached her, and every
Visit more and more confirmed his Death.

The Father often found the Disorders of the Sons; the Softness and Address of
the one gave him as much Fear, as the angry Blushings, the fierce Looks, and
broken Replies of the other, whenever he beheld Henrick approach his Wife: So
that the Father fearing some ill Consequence of this, besought Henrick to
withdraw to some other Country, or travel into Italy, he being now of an Age
that required a View of the World. He told his Father, that he would obey his
Commands, though he was certain, that Moment he was to be separated from the
sight of the fair Princess, his Sister, would be the last of his Life; and, in
fine, made so pitiful a Story of his suffering Love, as almost moved the old
Prince to compassionate him so far, as to permit him to stay; but he saw
inevitable Danger in that, and therefore bid him prepare for his Journey.

That which passed between the Father and Henrick being a Secret, none talked
of his departing from Court; so that the Design the Brother had, went on; and
making an Hunting-match one Day, where most young People of Quality were, he
ordered some whom he had hired to follow his Brother, so as if he chanced to go
out of the Way, to dispatch him; and accordingly, Fortune gave 'em an
Opportunity; for he lagg'd behind the Company, and turned aside into a pleasant
Thicket of Hazles; where alighting, he walked on foot in the most pleasant part
of it, sull of Thought how to divide his Soul between Love and Obedience. He
was sensible that he ought not to stay, that he was but an Affliction to the
young Princess, whose Honor could never permit her to ease any part of his
Flame; nor was he so vicious, to entertain a Thought that should stain her
Virtue. He beheld her now as his Brother's Wife, and that secured his Flame
from all loose Desires, if her native Modesty had not been sufficient of it
self to have done it, and that profound Respect he paid her: And he
considered, in obeying his Father, he left her at ease, and his Brother freed
of a thousand Fears; he went to seek a Cure, which if he could not find, at
last he could but die; and so he must, even at her Feet: However, that 'twas
more noble to seek a Remedy for his Disease, than expect a certain Death by
staying. After a thousand Reflections on his hard Fate, and bemoaning himself,
and blaming his cruel Stars, that had doomed him to die so young; after an
infinity of Sighs and Tears, Resolvings and Unresolvings, he on the sudden was
interrupted by the Trampling of some Horses he heard, and their rushing through
the Boughs, and saw four Men make toward him: He had not time to mount, being
walked some Paces from his Horse. One of the Men advanced, and cried, Prince,
you must die. -- I do believe thee (replied Henrick) but not by a Hand so base
as thine: And at the same time, drawing his Sword, run him into the Groin. When
the Fellow found himself so wounded, he wheeled off, and cried, Thou art a
Prophet, and have rewarded my Treachery with Death. The rest came up, and one
shot at the Prince, and shot him into the Shoulder; the other two hastily
laying hold (but too late) on the Hand of the Murderer, cried, Hold, Traitor;
we relent, and he shall not die. He replied, It Is too late, he is shot; and
see, he lies dead: Let us provide for our selves, and tell the Prince, we have
done the Work; for you are as guilty as I am. At that they all fled, and left
the Prince lying under a Tree, weltering in his Blood.

About the Evening, the Forester going his Walks, saw the Horse richly
caparison'd, without a Rider, at the Entrance of the Wood; and going farther,
to see if he could find its Owner, found there the Prince almost dead: He
immediately mounts him on the Horse, and himself behind, bore him up, and
carried him to the Lodge; where he had only one old Man, his Father, well
skilled in Surgery, and a Boy. They put him to Bed, and the old Forester, with
what Art he had, dressed his Wound, and in the Morning sent for an abler
Surgeon, to whom the Prince enjoined Secrecy, because he knew him. The Man was
faithful, and the Prince, in time, was recovered of his Wound; and as soon as
he was well, he came for Flanders, in the Habit of a. Pilgrim, and after some
time, took the Order of St. Francis, none knowing what became of him, till he
was professed; and then he writ his own Story to the Prince his Father, to his
Mistress, and his ungrateful Brother. The young Princess did not long survive
his Loss, she languish'd from the Moment of his Departure; and he had this to
confirm his devout Life, to know she died for him.

My Brother, Madam, was an Officer under the Prince, his Father, and knew his
Story perfectly well; from whose Mouth I had it.

What! (replied Miranda then) is Father Henrick a Man of Quality? Yes, Madam,
(said Cornelia,) and has changed his Name to Francisco. But Miranda, fearing to
betray the Sentiments of her Heart, by asking any more Questions about him,
turned the Discourse; and some Persons of Quality came in to visit her (for her
Apartment was, about Six a-Clock, like the Presence Chamber of a Queen, always
filled with the greatest People.) There meet all the Beaux Espreets, and all
the Beauties. But it was visible Miranda was not so gay as she used to be; but
pensive, and answering Mal a propo, to all that was said to her. She was a
thousand times going to speak, against her Will, something of the charming
Friar, who was never from her Thoughts; and she imagined, if he could inspire
Love in a course, gray, ill-made Habit, a shorn Crown, a Hair-Cord about his
Waste, bare legged, in Sandals instead of Shoes, what must he do, when looking
back on Time, she beholds him in a prospect of Glory, with all that Youth and
Illustrious Beauty set off by the Advantage of Dress and Equipage. She frames
an Idea of him all gay and splendid, and looks on his present Habit as some
Disguise proper for the Stealths of Love; some feigned put-on Shape, with the
more Security to approach a Mistress, and make himself happy; and that, the
Robe laid by, she has the Lover in his proper Beauty, the same he would have
been if any other Habit (though never so rich) were put off: In the Bed, the
silent, gloomy Night, and the soft Embraces of her Arms, he loses all the
Friar, and assumes all the Prince; and that awful Reverence, due alone to his
holy Habit, he exchanges for a thousand Dalliances for which his Youth was
made; for Love, for tender Embraces, and all the Happiness of Life. Some
Moments she fancies him a Lover, and that the fair Object: that takes up all
his Heart has left no room for her there; but that was a Thought that did not
long perplex her, and which, almost as soon as born, she turned to her
Advantage: She beholds him a Lover, and therefore finds he has a Heart sensible
and tender; he had Youth to be fired, as well as to inspire; he was far from
the loved Object, and totally without Hope; and she reasonably considered, that
Flame would of it self soon die, that had only Despair to feed on. She beheld
her own Charms; and Experience, as well as her Glass; told her, they never
failed of Conquest; especially, where they designed it: And she believed
Henrick would be glad, at least, to quench that Flame in himself, by an Amor
with her, which was kindled by the young Princess of -- his Sister.

These, and a thousand other Selfflatteries, all vain and indiscreet, took up
her waking Nights, and now more retired Days; while Love, to make her truly
wretched, suffered her to sooth her self with fond Imaginations; not so much as
permitting her Reason to plead one Moment, to save her from Undoing: She would
not suffer it to tell her, he had taken holy Orders, made sacred and solemn
Vows of everlasting Chastity, that 'twas impossible he could marry her, or lay
before her any Argument that might prevent her Ruin; but Love, mad, malicious
Love was always called to Counsel, and, like easy Monarchs, she had no Ears,
but for Flatterers.

Well then, she is resolved to love, without considering to what End, and what
must be the Consequence of such an Amor. She now missed no Day of being at
that little Church, where she had the Happiness, or rather, the Misfortune (so
Love ordained) to see this Ravisher of her Heart and Soul; and every Day she
took new Fire from his lovely Eyes: Unawares, unknown and unwillingly he gave
her Wounds, and the difficulty of her Cure made her rage the more: She burnt,
she languish'd, and died for the young Innocent, who knew not he was the Author
of so much Mischief.

Now she revolves a thousand Ways in her tortured Mind, to let him know her
Anguish, and at last pitched upon that of writing to him soft Billets, which
she had learnt the Art of doing; or if she had not, she had now Fire enough to
inspire her with all that could charm and move. These she delivered to a young
Wench who waited on her, and whom she had entirely subdued to her Interest, to
give to a certain Lay-Brother of the Order, who was a very simple, harmless
Wretch, and who served in the Kitchen in the nature of a Cook in the Monastery
of Cordeliers: She gave him Gold to secure his Faith and Service; and not
knowing from whence they came (with so good Credentials) he undertook to
deliver the Letters to Father Francisco; which Letters were all afterward, as
you shall hear, produced in open Court. These Letters failed not to come every
Day; and the Sense of the first was, to tell him that a very beautiful young
Lady, of a great Fortune, was in love with him, without naming her; but it came
as from a third Person, to let him know the Secret, that she desired he would
let her know whether she might hope any Return from him; assuring him, he
needed but only see the fair Languisher, to confess himself her Slave.

This Letter, being delivered him, he read by himself, and was surpised to
receive Words of this nature, being so great a Stranger in that place; and
could not imagine, or would not give himself the trouble of guessing who this
should be, because he never designed to make Returns.

The next Day Miranda, finding no Advantage from her Messenger of Love, in the
Evening sends another (impatient of Delay) confessing that she who suffered the
Shame of Writing and Imploring, was the Person her self who adored him. 'Twas
there her raging Love made her say all things that discovered the nature of its
Flame, and propose to slay with him to any part of the World, if he would quit
the Convent; that she had a Fortune considerable enough to make him happy, and
that his Youth and Quality were not given him to so unprofitable an End as to
lose themselves in a Convent, where Poverty and Ease was all their Business. In
fine, she leaves nothing unurg'd that might debauch and invite him; not
forgetting to send him her own Character of Beauty, and left him to judge of
her Wit and Spirit by her Writing, and her Love by the Extremity of Passion she
professed. To all which the lovely Friar made no Return, as believing a gentle
Capitulation or Exhortation to her would but inflame her the more, and give new
Occasions for her continuing to write. All her Reasonings, false and vicious,
he despised, pities the Error of her Love, and was Proof against all she could
plead. Yet notwithstanding his Silence, which left her in doubt, and more
tormented her, she ceased not to pursue him with her Letters, varying her
Style; sometimes all wanton, loose and raving; sometimes feigning a
Virgin-Modesty all over, accusing her self, blaming her Conduct, and sighing
her Destiny, as one compelled to the shameful Discovery by the Austerity of his
Vow and Habit, asking his Pity and Forgiveness; urging him in Charity to use
his fatherly Care to persuade and reason with her wild Desires, and by his
Counsel drive the God from her Heart, whose Tyranny was worse than that of a
Fiend; and he did not know what his pious Advice might do. But still she writes
in vain, in vain she varies her Style, by a Cunning, peculiar to a Maid
possessed with such a sort of Passion.

This cold Neglect was still Oil to the burning Lamp, and she tries yet more
Arts, which, for want of right Thinking, were as fruitless. She has recourse to
Presents; her Letters came loaded with Rings of great price, and Jewels, which
Fops of Quality had given her. Many of this sort he received, before he knew
where to return 'em, or how; and on this Occasion alone he sent her a Letter,
and restored her Trifles, as he called em: But his Habit having not made him
forget his Quality and Education, he writ to her with all the profound Respect
imaginable; believing by her Presents, and the Liberality with which she parted
with 'em, that she was of Quality. But the whole Letter, as he told me
afterward, was to persuade her from the Honor she did him, by loving him;
urging a thousand Reasons, solid and pious, and assuring her, he had wholly
devoted the rest of his Days to Heaven, and had no need of those gay Trifles
she had sent him, which were only fit to adorn Ladies so fair as her self, and
who had business with this glittering World, which he disdained, and had for
ever abandoned. He sent her a thousand Blessings, and told her, she should be
ever in his Prayers, though not in his Heart, as she desired: And abundance of
Goodness more he expressed, and Counsel he gave her, which had the same Effect
with his Silence; it made her Love but the more, and the more impatient she
grew: She now had a new Occasion to write, she now is charmed with his Wit;
this was the new Subject. She rallies his Resolution, and endeavors to re-call
him to the World, by all the Arguments that Humane Invention is capable of.

But when she had above four Months languish'd thus in vain, not missing one
Day, wherein she went not to see him, without discovering her self to him; she
resolved, as her last Effort, to show her Person, and see what that, assisted
by her Tears, and soft Words from her Mouth, could do, to prevail upon him.

It happened to be on the Eve of that Day when she was to receive the
Sacrament, that she, covering her self with her Veil, came to Vespers,
purposing to make choice of the conquering Friar for her Confessor.

She approached him; and as she did so, she trembled with Love: At last she
cried, Father, my Confessor is gone for some time from the Town, and I am
obliged to morrow to receive, and beg you will be pleased to take my Confession.

He could not refuse her; and led her into the Sacriste, where there is a
Confession-Chair, in which he seated himself; and on one side of him she
kneeled down, over against a little Altar, where the Priests Robes lie, on
which was placed some lighted Wax-Candles, that made the little place very
light and splendid, which shone full upon Miranda.

After the little Preparation usual in Confession, she turned up her Veil, and
discovered to his View the most wondrous Object of Beauty he had ever seen,
dressed in all the Glory of a young Bride; her Hair and Stomacher full of
Diamonds, that gave a Luster all dazzling to her brighter Face and Eyes. He was
surpised at her amazing Beauty, and questioned whether he saw a Woman or an
Angel at his Feet. Her Hands, which were elevated, as if in Prayer, seemed to
be formed of polished Alabaster; and he confessed, he had never seen any thing
in Nature so perfect, and so admirable.

He had some pain to compose himself to hear her Confession, and was obliged to
turn away his Eyes, that his Mind might not be perplexed with an Object fo
diverting; when Miranda, opening the finest Mouth in the World, and discovering
new Charms, began her Confession.

Holy Father (said she;) amongst the number of my vile Offenses, that which
afflicts me to the greatest Degree is, that I am in Love: Not (continued she)
that I believe simple, and virtuous Love a Sin, when it is placed on an Object
proper and suitable; but, my dear Father, (said she, and wept,) I love with a
Violence which cannot be contained within the Bounds of Reason, Moderation, or
Virtue. I love a Man whom I cannot possess without a Crime, and a Man who
cannot make me happy without becoming perjured. Is he married? (replied the
Father.) No; (answered Miranda.) Are you so? (contiu'd he.) Neither; (said she.
Is he too near allied to you* (said Francisco:) a Brother, or Relation? Neither
of these, (said she:) He is unenjoy'd unpromis'd; and so am I: Nothing opposes
our Happiness, or makes my Love a Vice, but you: -- It Is you deny me Life: It Is
you that forbids my Flame: It Is you will have me die, and seek my Remedy in my
Grave, when I complain of Tortures, Wounds and Flames. O cruel Charmer, it is
for you I languish; and here, at your Feet, implore that Pity which all my
Addresses have failed of procuring me. --

With that, perceiving he was about to rise from his Seat, she held him by his
Habit, and vowed she would in that posture follow him, wherever he flew from
her. She elevated her Voice so loud, he was afraid she might be heard, and
therefore suffered her to force him into his Chair again; where being seated,
he began, in the most passionate Terms imaginable, to dissuade her; but finding
she but the more persisted in Eagerness of Passion, he used all the tender
Assurance that he could force from himself, that he would have for her all the
Respect, Esteem and Friendship that he was capable of paying; that he had a
real Compassion for her; and at last, she prevailed so far with him by her
Sighs and Tears, as to own he had a Tenderness for her, and that he could not
behold so many Charms, without being sensibly touched by 'em, and finding all
those Effects that a Maid so young and fair causes in the Souls of Men of Youth
and Sense: But that, as he was assured he could never be so happy to marry her,
and as certain he could not grant any thing but honorable Passion, he humbly
besought her not to expect more from him than such; and then began to tell her
how short Life was, and transitory its Joys; how soon she would grow weary of
Vice, and how often change to find real Repose in it, but never arrive to it.
He made an End by new Assurance of his eternal Friendship, but utterly forbad
her to hope.

Behold her now denied, refused and defeated, with all her pleading Youth,
Beauty, Tears and Knees, imploring, as she lay, holding fast his Scapular, and
embracing his Feet. What shall she do? She swells with Pride, Love, Indignation
and Desire; her burning Heart is bursting with Despair, her Eyes grow fierce,
and from Grief, she rises to a Storm; and in her Agony of Passion, which looks
all disdainful, haughty, and full of Rage, she began to revile him, as the
poorest of Animals: Tells him, his Soul was dwindl'd to the Meanness of his
Habit, and his Vows of Poverty were suited to his degenerate Mind. And (said
she) since all my nobler Ways have failed me; and that, for a little
hypocritical Devotion, you resolve to lose the greatest Blessings of Life, and
to sacrifice me to your religious Pride and Vanity, I will either force you to
abandon that dull Dissimulation; or you shall die, to prove your Sanctity real.
Therefore answer me immediately, answer my Flame, my raging Fire, which your
Eyes have kindled; or here, in this very Moment, I will ruin thee; and make no
Scruple of revenging the Pains I suffer, by that which shall take away your
Lise and Honor.

The trembling young Man, who, all this while, with extreme Anguish of Mind,
and Fear of the dire Result, had listened to her Ravings, full of Dread,
demanded what she would have him do. When she replied, -- Do that which thy
Youth and Beauty were ordained to do: -- This place is private, a sacred
Silence reigns here, and no one dares to pry into the Secrets of this holy
place: We are as secure from Fears of Interruption, as in Deserts uninhabited,
or Caves forsaken by wild Beasts. The Tapers too shall veil their Lights, and
only that glimmering Lamp shall be Witness of our dear Stealths of Love. --
Come to my Arms, my trembling, longing Arms; and curse the Folly of thy
Bigottry, that has made thee so long lose a Blessing, for which so many Princes
sigh in vain.

At these Words she rose from his Fcet, and snatching him in her Arms, he could
not defend himself from receiving a thousand Kisses from the lovely Mouth of
the charming Wanton; after which, she ran her self, and in an instant put out
the Candles. But he cried to her, In vain, O too indiscreet fair One; in vain
you put out the Light; for Heaven still has Eyes, and will look down upon my
broken Vows. I own your Power, I own I have all the Sense in the World of your
charming Touches; I am frail Flesh and Blood, but yet -- yet -- yet I can
resist; and I prefer my Vows to all your powerful Temptations. -- I will be
deaf and blind, and guard my Heart with Walls of Ice, and make you know, that
when the Flames of true Devotion are kindled in a Heart, it puts out all other
Fires; which are as ineffectual, as Candles lighted in the Face of the Sun. --
Go, vain Wanton, and repent, and mortify that Blood which has so shamefully
betrayed thee, and which will one Day ruin both thy Soul and Body. --

At these Words Miranda, more enraged, the nearer she imagined her self to
Happiness, made no Reply; but throwing her self, in that instant, into the
Confessing-Chair, and violently pulling the young Friar into her Lap, she
elevated her Voice to such a degree, in crying out, Help, help: A Rape: Help,
help, that she was heard all over the Church, which was full of People at the
Evening's Devotion; who flocked about the Door of the Sacristy, which was shut
with a Spring-lock on the inside, but they durst not open the Door.

It Is easily to be imagined, in what Condition our young Friar was, at this
last devilish Stratagem of his wicked Mistress. He strove to break from those
Arms that held him so fast; and his bustling to get away and hers to retain
him, disordered her Hair and her Habit to such a degree, as gave the more
Credit to her false Accusation.

The Fathers had a Door on the other side, by which they usually entered, to
dress in this little Room; and at the Report that was in an instant made 'em,
they hasted thither, and found Miranda and the good Father very indecently
struggling; which they mis-interpreted, as Miranda desired; whc, all in Tears,
immediately threw her self at the Feet of the Provincial, who was one of those
that entered; and cried, O holy Father, revenge an innocent Maid, undone and
lost to Fame and Honor, by that vile Monster, born of Goats, nursed by Tigers,
and bred up on savage Mountains, where Humanity and Religion are Strangers.
For, O holy Father, could it have entered into the Heart of Man, to have done
so barbarous and horrid a Deed, as to attempt the Virgin-Honour of an unspotted
Maid, and one of my Degree, even in the Moment of my Confession, in that holy
time, when I was prostrate before him and Heaven, confessing those Sins that
pressed my tender Conscience; even then to load my Soul with the blackest of
Infamies, to add to my Number a Weight that must sink me to Hell? Alas, under
the Security of his innocent Looks, his holy Habit, and his awful Function, I
was lead into this Room, to make my Confession; where, he locking the Door, I
had no sooner began, but he gazing on me, took Fire at my fatal Beauty; and
starting up, put out the Candles, and caught me in his Arms; and raising me
from the Pavement, set me in the Confession-Chair; and then -- Oh, spare me the
rest.

With that a Shower of Tears burst from her fair dissembling Eyes, and Sobs so
naturally acted, and so well managed, as left no Doubt upon the good Men, but
all she had spoken was Truth.

-- At first, (proceeded she,) I was unwilling to bring so great a Scandal on
his Order, as to cry out; but struggled as long as I had Breath, pleaded the
heinousness of the Crime; urging my Quality, and the danger of the Attempt. But
he, deaf as the Winds, and ruffling as a Storm, pursued his wild Design with so
much Force and Insolence, as I at last, unable to resist, was wholly
vanquished, robbed of my native Purity: With what Life and Breath I had, I
called for Assistance, both from Men and Heaven; but Oh, alas! your Succors
come too late: -- You find me here a wretched, undone and ravished Maid.
Revenge me, Fathers; revenge me on the perfidious Hypocrite, or else give me a
Death that may secure your Cruelty and Injustice from ever being proclaimed
over the World; or my Tongue will be eternally reproaching you, and cursing the
wicked Author of my Infamy.

She ended as she began, with a thousand Sighs and Tears; and received from the
Provincial all Assurances of Revenge.

The innocent betrayed Victim, all this while she was speaking, heard her with
an Astonishment that may easily be imagined; yet showed no extravagant Signs of
it, as those would do, who feign it to be thought innocent; but being really
so, he bore, with an humble, modest, and blushing Countenance, all her
Accusations: Which silent Shame they mistoook for evident Signs of his Guilt.

When the Provincial demanded, with an unwonted Severity in his Eyes and Voice,
what he could answer for himself; calling him Prophaner of his sacred Vows, and
Infamy to the holy Order; the Injured, but the innocently Accused, only
replied, May Heaven forgive that bad Woman, and bring her to Repentance: For
his part, he was not so much in love with Life, as to use many Arguments to
justify his Innocence; unless it were to free that Order from a Scandal, of
which he had the Honor to be professed: (...) as for himself, Life or Death
were things indifferent to him, who heartily despised the World.

He said no more, and suffered himself to be led before the Magistrate; who
committed him to Prison, upon the Accusation of this implacable Beauty; who,
with so much feigned Sorrow, prosecuted the Matter, even to his Trial and
Condemnation; where he refused to make any great Defense for himself. But being
daily visited by all the Religious, both of his own, and other Orders, they
obliged him (some of 'em knowing the Austerity of his Life, others his Cause of
Griefs that first brought him into Orders, and others pretending a nearer
Knowledge even of his Soul it self) to stand upon his Justification, and
discover what he knew of that wicked Woman; whose Life had not been so
exemplary for Virtue, not to have given the World a thousand Suspicions of her
Lewdness and Prostitution.

The daily Importunities of these Fathers made him produce her Letters: But as
he had all the Gown-Men on his side, she had all the Hatts and Feathers on
hers; all the Men of Quality taking her Part, and all the Churchmen his. They
heard his daily Protestations and Vows, but not a Word of what passed at
Confession was yet discovered: He held that as a Secret sacred on his part; and
what was said in nature of a Confession, was not to be revealed, though his
Life depended on the Discovery. But as to the Letters, they were forced from
him, and exposed; however, Matters were carried with so high a Hand against
him, that they served for no Proof at all of his Innocence, and he was at last
condemned to be burned at the Marketplace.

After his Sentence was passed, the whole Body of Priests made their Addresses
to Marquis. Casteil Roderigo, the then Governor of Flanders, for a Reprieve;
which, after much a-do, was granted him for some Weeks, but with an absolute
Denial of Pardon; so prevailing were the young Cavaliers of his Court, who were
all Adorers of this fair Jilt.

About this time, while the poor, innocent young Henrick was thus languishing
in Prison, in a dark and dismal Dungeon; and Miranda, cured of her Love, was
triumphing in her Revenge, expecting, and daily gaining new Conquests; and who,
by this time, had re-assum'd all her wonted Gaity, there was a great Noise
about the Town, That a Prince of mighty Name, and sam'd for all the
Excellencies of his Sex, was arrived; a Prince young, and gloriously attended,
called Prince Tarquin.

We had often heard of this great Man, and that he was making his Travels in
France and Germany: And we had also heard, that some Years before, he being
about Eighteen Years of Age, in the time when our King Charles of blessed
Memory was* in Bruxels, in the last Year of his Banishment, that all on a
sudden, this young Man rose up upon 'em like the Sun, all glorious and
dazzling, demanding Place of all the Princes in that Court. And when his
Pretense was demanded, he owned himself Prince Tarquin, of the Race of the last
Kings of Rome, made good his Title, and took his Place accordingly. After that,
he traveled for about fix Years up and down the World, and then arrived at
Antwerp, about the time of my being sent thither by His Late Majesty.

Perhaps there could be nothing seen so magnificent as this Prince: He was, as
I said, extremely handsome, from Head to Foot exactly formed, and he wanted
nothing that might adorn that native Beauty to the best Advantage. His Parts
were suitable to the rest: He had an Accomplishment fit for a Prince, an Air
haughty, but a Carriage affable, easy in Conversation, and very Entertaining,
Liberal and Good-natured, Brave and Inoffensive. I have seen him pass the
Streets with twelve Footmen, and four Pages; the Pages all in green Velvet
Coats, laced with Gold, and white Velvet Trunks; the Men in Cloth, richly laced
with Gold; his Coaches, and all other Officers, suitable to a great Man.

He was all the Discourse of the Town; some laughing at his Title, others
reverencing it: Some cried, that he was an Imposture; others, that he had made
his Title as plain, as if Tarquin had reigned but a Year a-go. Some made
Friendships with him, others would have nothing to say to him; but all wondered
where this Revenue was* that supported this Grandeur; and believed, though he
could make his Descent from the Roman Kings very well out, that he could not
lay so good a Claim to the Roman Land. Thus every Body meddled with what they
had nothing to do; and as in other places, thought themselves on the surer
side, if, in these doubtful Cases, they imagined the worst.

But the Men might be of what Opinion they pleased concerning him, the Ladies
were all agreed that he was a Prince, and a young, handsome Prince, and a
Prince not to be resisted: He had all their Wishes, all their Eyes, and all
their Hearts: They now dressed only for him; and what Church he graced, was
sure, that Day, to have the Beauties, and all that thought themselves so.

You may believe, our amorous Miranda was not the last Conquest he made. She no
sooner heard of him, which was as soon as he arrived, but she fell in love with
his very Name. Jesu! -- A young King of Rome! Oh, 'twas so novel, that she
doated on the Title; and had not cared whether the rest had been Man or Monkey
almost: She was resolved to be the Lucretia, that this young Tarquin should
ravish.

To this End, she was no sooner up the next Day, but she sent him a
Billet-Deaux, assuring him how much she admired his Fame; and that being a
Stranger in the Town, she begged the Honor of introducing him to all the
Belle-Conversations, etc. Which he took for the Invitation of some Coquet, who
had Interest in fair Ladies; and civilly returned her an Answer, that he would
wait on her. She had him that Day watched to Church; and impatient to see what
she heard so many People flock to see, she went also to the same Church; those
sanctified Abodes being too often profaned by such Devotee's, whose Business
is to ogle and ensnare.

But what a Noise and Humming was heard all over the Church when Tarquin
entered; his Grace, his Mein, his Fashion, his Beauty, his Dress, and his
Equipage surpised all that were present: And by the good Management and Care
of Miranda, she got to kneel at the Side of the Altar, just over against the
Prince; so that, if he would, he could not avoid looking full upon her. She had
turned up her Veil, and all her Face and Shape appeared such, and so enchanting
as I have described: And her Beauty heightened with Blushes, and her Eyes full
of Spirit and Fire, with Joy to find the young Roman Monarch so charming, she
appeared like something more than mortal, and compelled his Eyes to a six'd
Gazing on her Face: She never glanced that way, but she met 'em; and then would
feign so modest a Shame, and cast her Eyes downward with such inviting Art,
that he was wholly ravished and charmed, and she overjoyed to find he was so.

The Ceremony being ended; he sent a Page to follow that Lady home, himself
pursuing her to the Door of the Church; where he took some Holy Water, and
threw upon her, and made her a profound Reverence. She forced an innocent Look,
and a modest Gratitude in her Face, and bowed, and passed forward, half assured
of her Conquest; leaving him to go home to his Lodging, and impatiently wait
the Return of his Page. And all the Ladies who saw this first Beginning between
the Prince and Miranda, began to curse and envy her Charms, who had deprived
'em of half their Hopes.

After this, I need not tell you, he made Miranda a Visit; and from that Day,
never left her Apartment, but when he went home at Nights, or unless he had
Business; so entirely was he conquered by this fair One. But the Bishop, and
several Men of Quality in Orders, that professed Friendship to him, advised him
from her Company; and spoke several things to him, that might (if Love had not
made him blind) have reclaimed him from the Pursuit of his Ruin. But whatever
they trusted him with, she had the Art to wind her self about his Heart, and
make him unravel all his Secrets; and then knew as well, by feigned Sighs and
Tears, to make him dis-believe all. So that he had no Faith, but for her; and
was wholly enchanted and bewitched by her, at last, in spite of all that would
have opposed it, he married this famous Woman, possessed by so many great Men
and Strangers before, while all the World was pitying his Shame and Misfortunes.

Being married, they took a great House; and as she was indeed a great Fortune,
and now a great Princess, there was nothing wanting that was agreeable to their
Quality; all was splendid and magnificent. But all this would not acquire 'em
the World's Esteem; they had an Abhorrence for her former Life, despised her;
and for his espousing a Woman so infamous, they despised him. So that though
they admired, and gazed upon their Equipage, and glorious Dress, they foresaw
the Ruin that attended it; and paid her Quality very little Respect.

She was no sooner married, but her Uncle died; and dividing his Fortune
between Miranda and her Sister, and leaves the young Heiress, and all her
Fortune, entirely in the Hands of the Princess.

We will call this Sister Alcidiana; she was about Fourteen Years of Age, and
now had chosen her Brother, the Prince, for her Guardian.

If Alcidiana were not altogether so great a Beauty as her Sister, she had
Charms sufficient to procure her a great many Lovers, though her Fortune had
not been so considerable as it was; but with that Addition, you may believe,
she wanted no Courtships from those of the best Quality; though every Body
deplored her being under the Tutorage of a Lady so expert in all the Vices of
her Sex, and so cunning a Manager of Sin, as was the Princess; who, on her
part, faild not, by all the Caresses, and obliging Endearments, to engage the
Mind of this young Maid, and to subdue her wholly to her Government. All her
Senses were eternally regaled with the most bewitching Pleasures they were
capable of: She saw nothing but Glory and Magnificence, heard nothing but
Music of the sweetest Sounds; the richest Persumes employed her Smelling, and
all she eat and touched was delicate and inviting; and being too young to
consider how this State and Grandeur was to be continued, little imagined her
vast Fortune was every Day diminishing, toward its needless Support.

When the Princess went to Church, she had her Gentleman bare before her,
carrying a great Velvet Cushion, with great golden Tassels, for her to kneel
on, and her Train born up a most prodigious length; led by a Gentleman Usher,
bare; followed by innumerable Footmen, Pages and Women. And in this State she
would walk in the Streets, as in those Countries it is the Fashion for the great
Ladies to do, who are well; and in her Train, two or three Coaches, and perhaps
a rich Velvet Chair embroidered, would follow in State.

'Twas thus for some time they lived, and the Princess was daily pressed by
young sighing Lovers, for her Consent so marry Alcidiana; but she had still one
Art or other to put 'em off, and so continually broke all the great Matches
that were proposed to her, notwithstanding their Kindred, and other Friends,
had industriously endeavored to make several great Matches for her; but the
Princess was still positive in her Denial, and one way or other broke all. At
last it happened, there was one proposed yet more advantageous; a young Count,
with whom the young Maid grew passionately in Love, and besought her Sister to
consent that she might have him, and got the Prince to speak in her Behalf; but
he had no sooner heard the secret Reasons Miranda gave him, but (entirely her
Slave) he changed his Mind, and suited it to hers, and she, as before, broke
off that Amor; which so extremely incensed Alcidiana, that she, taking an
Opportunity, got from her Guard, and ran away, putting her self into the Hands
of a wealthy Merchant, her Kins-man, and one who bore the greatest Authority in
the City; him she chooses for her Guardian, resolving to be no longer a Slave to
the Tyranny of her Sister. And so well she ordered Matters, that she writ to
this young Cavalier, her last Lover, and retrieved him; who came back to
Antwerp again, to renew his Courtship.

Both Parties being agreed, it was no hard matter to persuade all but the
Princess: But though she opposed it, it was resolved on, and the Day appointed
for Marriage, and the Portion demanded, demanded only, but never to be paid,
the best part of it being spent. However, she put 'em off from Day to Day, by a
thousand frivolous Delays: And when she saw they would have recourse to Force,
and that all her Magnificence would be at an End, if the Law should prevail
against her; and that, without this Sister's Fortune, she could not long
support her Grandeur, she bethought her self of a Means to make it all her own,
by getting her Sister made away; but she being out of her Tuition, she was not
able to accomplish so great a Deed of Darkness: But since 'twas resolved it
must be done, she revolves on a thousand Stratagems; and at last, pitches upon
an effectual one.

She had a Page, called Van Brune; a Youth of great Address and Wit, and one
she had long managed for her purpose. This Youth was about Seventeen Years of
Age, and extremely beautiful; and in the time when Alcidiana lived with the
Princess, she was a little in love with this handsome Boy; but 'twas checked in
its Infancy, and never grew up to a Flame: Nevertheless, Alcidiana retained
still a sort of Tenderness for him, while he burned in good earnest with Love
for the Princess.

The Princess one Day ordering this Page to wait on her in her Closet, she shut
the Door; and after a thousand Questions of what he would undertake to serve
her, the amorous Boy, finding himself alone, and caressed by the fair Person he
adored, with joyful Blushes, that beautified his Face, told her, There was
nothing upon Earth, he would not do, to obey her least Commands. She grew more
familiar with him, to oblige him; and seeing Love dance in his Eyes, of which
she was so good a Judge, she treated him more like a Lover, than a Servant;
till at last the ravished Youth, wholly transported out of himself, fell at her
Feet, and impatiently implored to receive her Commands quickly, that he might
fly to execute 'em; for he was not able to bear her charming Words, Looks and
Touches, and retain his Duty. At this she smiled, and told him, the Work was of
such a nature, as would mortify all Flames about him; and he would have more
need of Rage, Envy and Malice, than the Aids of a Passion so soft as what she
now found him capable of. He assured her, he would stick at nothing, though
even against his Nature, to recompense for the Boldness he now, through
Indiscretion, had discovered. She smiling, told him, he had committed no Fault;
and that possibly, the Pay he should receive for the Service she required at
his Hands, should be -- what he most wished for in the World. To this he bowed
to the Earth; and kissing her Feet, bad her command. And then she boldly told
him, 'Twas to kill her Sister Alcidiana. The Youth, without so much as
starting, or pawsing upon the Matter, told her, It should be done; and bowing
low, immediately went out of the Closet. She called him back, and would have
given him some Instruction; but he refused it, and said, The Action, and the
Contrivance should be all his own, And offering to go again, she -- again
re-call'd him; putting into his Hand a Purse of a hundred Pistols, which he
took; and with a low Bow, departed.

He no sooner left her Presence, but he goes directly and buys a Dose of
Poison, and went immediately to the House where Alcidiana lived; where,
desiring to be brought to her Presence, he fell a-weeping; and told her, his
Lady had fallen out with him, and dismissed him her Service; and since, from a
Child, he had been brought up in the Family, he humbly besought Alcidiana to
receive him into hers, she being in a few Days to be married. There needed not
much Entreaty to a thing that pleased her so well, and she immediately received
him to Pension. And he waited some Days on her, before he could get an
Opportunity to administer his Devilish Potion: But one Night, when she drunk
Wine with roasted Apples, which was usual with her; instead of Sugar, or with
the Sugar, the baneful Drug was mixed, and she drank it down.

About this time there was a great Talk of this Page's coming from one Sister,
to go to the other. And Prince Tarquin, who was ignorant of the Design, from
the Beginning to the End, hearing some Men of Quality at his Table speaking of
Van Brune's Change of Place (the Princess then keeping her Chamber upon some
trisling Indisposition) he answered, That surely they were mistaken, that he
was not dismissed from the Princess's Service. And calling some of his
Servants, he asked for Van Brune; and whether any thing had happened between
Her Highness and him, that had occasioned his being turned off. They all seemed
ignorant of this Matter; and those who had spoke of it, began to fancy there
was some Juggle in the Case, which Time would bring to Light.

The ensuing Day 'twas all about the Town, that Alcidiana was poisoned; and
though not dead, yet very near it; and that the Doctors said, she had taken
Mercury. So that there was never so formidable a Sight as this fair young
Creature; her Head and Body swollen, her Eyes starting out, her Face black* and
all deformed: So that diligent Search was made, who it should be that did this;
who gave her Drink and Meat. The Cook and Butler were examined, the Footmen
called to an Account; but all concluded, she received nothing, but from the
Hand of her new Page, since he came into her Service. He was examined, and
showed a thousand guilty Looks: And the Apothecary, then attending among the
Doctors, proved he had bought Mercury of him three or four Days before; which
he could not deny; and making Excuses for his buying it, betrayed him the more;
so ill he chanced to dissemble. He was immediately sent to be examined by the
Margrave or Justice, who made his Mittimus, and sent him to Prison.

It Is easy to imagine in what Fears and Confusion the Princess was at this
News: She took her Chamber upon it, more to hide her guilty Face, than for any
Indisposition. And the Doctors applied such Remedies to Alcidiana, such
Antidotes against the Poison, that in a short time she recovered; but lost the
finest Hair in the World, and the Complexion of her Face ever after.

It was not long before the Trials for Criminals came on; and the Day being
arrived, Van Brune was tried the first of all; every Body having already read
his Destiny, according as they wished it; and none would believe, but just
indeed as it was: So that for the Revenge they hoped to see fall upon the
Princess, every one wished he might find no Mercy, that she might share of his
Shame and Misery.

The Sessions House was filled that Day with all the Ladies, and Chief of the
Town, to hear the Result of his Trial; and the sad Youth was brought loaded
with Chains, and pale as Death; where every Circumstance being sufficiently
proved against him, and he making but a weak Defense for himself, he was
convicted, and sent back to Prison, to receive his Sentence of Death on the
Morrow; where he owned all, and who set him on to do it. He owned 'twas not
Reward of Gain he did it for, but Hope he should command at his pleasure, the
Possession of his Mistress, the Princess; who should deny him nothing, after
having entrusted him with so great a Secret; and that besides, she had elevated
him with the Promise of that glorious Reward, and had dazzled his young Heart
with so charming a Prospect, that blind and mad with Joy, he rushed forward, to
gain the desired Prize; and thought on nothing but his coming Happiness: That
he saw too late the Follies of his presumptuous Flame, and cursed the deluding
Flatteries of the fair Hypocrite, who had soothed him to his Undoing: That he
was a miserable Victim to her Wickedness, and hoped he should warn all young
Men, by his Fall, to avoid the Dissimulation of the deceiving Fair: That he
hoped they would have Pity on his Youth, and attribute his Crime to the subtle
Persuasions alone of his Mistress, the Princess: And that since Alcidiana was
not dead, they would grant him Mercy, and permit him to live to repent of his
grievous Crime, in some part of the World, whither they might banish him.

He ended with Tears, that fell in abundance from his Eyes; and immediately the
Princess was apprehended, and brought to Prison, to the same Prison where yet
the poor young Father Francisco was languishing, he having been from Week to
Week reprieved, by the Intercession of the Fathers; and possibly, she there had
time to make some Reflections.

You may imagine Tarquin left no Means unessay'd, to prevent the Imprisonment
of the Princess, and the public Shame and Infamy she was likely to undergo in
this Affair: But the whole City being overjoyed that she should be punished,
as an Author of all this Mischief, were so generally bent against her, both
Priests, Magistrates and People; the whole Force of the Stream running that
way, she found no more Favor than the meanest Criminal. The Prince therefore,
when he saw 'twas impossible to rescue her from the Hands of Justice, suffered
with Grief unspeakable what he could not prevent; and led her himself to the
Prison, followed by all his People, in as much State, as if he had been going
to his Marriage; where, when she came, she was as well attended and served as
before, he never stirring one Moment from her.

The next Day she was tried in open and common Court; where she appeared in
Glory, led by Tarquin, and attended according to her Quality: And she could not
deny all the Page had alleged against her, who was brought thither also in
Chains; and after a great many Circumstances, she was found guilty, and both
received Sentence; the Page to be hanged, till he was dead, on a Gibbet in the
Marketplace; and the Princess to stand under the Gibbet, with a Rope about her
Neck, the other End of which was to be fastened to the Gibbet where the Page
was hanging; and to have an Inscription in large Characters upon her Back and
Breast, of the Cause why: Where she was to stand from Ten in the Morning, to
Twelve.

This Sentence, the People, with one Accord, believed too favorable for so ill
a Woman, whose Crimes deserved Death, equal to that of Van Brune: Nevertheless,
there were some who said, It was infinitely more severe than the Death it self.

The following Friday was the Day of Execution, and one need not tell of the
abundance of People, who were flocked together in the Marketplace: All the
Windows were taken down, and filled with Spectators, and the Tops of Houses;
when, at the Hour appointed, the fatal Beauty appeared. She was dressed in a
black Velvet Gown, with a rich Row of Diamonds all down the forepart of the
Breast, and a great Knot of Diamonds at the Peak behind; and a Petty-coat of
flowered Gold, very rich, and laced; with all things else suitable: A Gentleman
carried her great Velvet Cushion before her, on which her Prayer Book,
embroidered, was laid; her Train was born up by a Page, and the Prince led her,
bare; followed by his Footmen, Pages, and other Officers of his House.

When they arrived to the Place of Execution, the Cushion was laid on the
Ground, upon a Portugal-Matt, spread there for that purpose; and the Princess
stood on the Cushion, with her Prayer Book in her Hand, and a Priest by her
Side; and was accordingly tied up to the Gibbet.

She had not stood there ten Minutes, but she had the Mortification (at least,
one would think it so to her) to see her sad Page Van Brune approach; fair as
an Angel, but languishing and pale. That Sight moved all the Beholders with as
much Pity, as that of the Princess did Disdain and Pleasure.

He was dressed all in Mourning, and very fine Linen; bare-headed, with his own
Hair, the fairest that could be seen, hanging all in Curls on his Back and
Shoulders, very long. He had a Prayer Book of black Velvet in his Hand, and
behaved himself with much Penitence and Devotion.

When he was brought under the Gibbet, he seeing his Mistress in that
Condition, showed an infinite Concern, and his fair Face was covered over with
Blushes; and falling at her Feet, he humbly asked her Pardon for having been
the Occasion of so great an Infamy to her, by a weak Confession, which the
Fears of Youth, and Hopes of Life, had obliged him to make, so greatly to her
Dis-honour; for, indeed, he had wanted that manly Strength, to bear the Efforts
of dying as he ought, in silence, rather than of committing so great a Crime
against his Duty, and Honor it self; and that he could not die in Peace,
unless she would forgive him. The Princess only nodded her Head, and cried, I
do. --

And after having spoken a little to his Father Confessor, who was with him, he
cheerfully mounted the Ladder; and in the sight of the Princess, he was turned
off, while a loud Cry was heard through all the Marketplace, especially from
the fair Sex; he hanging there till the time the Princess was to depart: And
when she was put into a rich embroidered Chair, and carried away; Tarquin going
into his; for he had all that time stood supporting the Princess under the
Gallows, and was very weary, she was sent back, till her Releasment came; which
was that Night, about Seven of the Clock; and then she was conducted to her own
House in great State, with a dozen white Wax-Flambeau's about her Chair.

If the Affairs of Alcidiana and her Friends before were impatient of having
the Portion out of the Hands of these Extravagants, it is not to be imagined,
but they were now much more so; and the next Day they sent an Officer,
according to Law, to demand it; or to summon the Prince to give Reasons, why he
would not. And the Officer received for Answer, That the Money should be called
in, and paid in such a time; setting a certain Time, which I have not been so
curious as to retain, or put in my Journal Observations; but I am sure it was
not long, as may be easily imagined; for they every Moment suspected the Prince
would pack up, and be gone, some time or other on the sudden; and for that
Reason they would not trust him without Bail, or two Officers to remain in his
House, to watch that nothing should be removed or touched. As for Bail, or
Security, he could give none; every one slunk their Heads out of the Collar
when it came to that: So that he was obliged, at his own Expense, to maintain
Officers in his House.

The Princess finding her self reduced to the last Extremity, and that she must
either produce the Value of a hundred thousand Crowns, or see the Prince, her
Husband, lodged for ever in a Prison, and all their Glory vanish; and that it
was impossible to sly, since guarded; she had recourse to an Extremity, worse
than the Affair of Van Brune. And in order to this, she first puts on a World
of Sorrow and Concern, for what she feared might arrive to the Prince: And
indeed, if ever she shed Tears which she did not dissemble, it was upon this
Occasion. But here she almost over-acted: She stirred not from her Bed, and
refused to eat, or sleep, or see the Light; so that the Day being shut out of
her Chamber, she lived by Wax-Lights, and refused all Comfort and Consolation.

The Prince, all raving with Love, tender Compassion and Grief, never stirred
from her Bedside, nor ceased to implore, that she would suffer her self to
live. But she, who was not now so passionately in love with Tarquin, as she was
with the Prince; not so fond of the Man, as his Titles, and of Glory, foresaw
the total Ruin of the last, if not prevented, by avoiding the Payment of this
great Sum; which could no otherwise be, than by the Death of Alcidiana: And
therefore, without ceasing, she wept, and cried out, She could not live, unless
Alcidiana died. This Alcidiana, (continued she,) who has been the Author of my
Shame; who has exposed me under a Gibbet, in the public Marketplace. Oh! -- I
am deaf to all Reason, blind to Natural Affection. I renounce her: I hate her
as my mortal Foe, my Stop to Glory, and the Finisher of my Days, ever half my
Race of Life be run.

Then throwing her false, but snowy, charming Arms about the Neck of her
Heartbreaking Lord, and Lover, who lay sighing and listening by her Side, he
was charmed and bewitched into saying all things that appeased her: And lastly,
told her, Alcidiana should be no longer an Obstacle to her Repose; but that, if
she would look up; and cast her Eyes of Sweetness and Love upon him, as
heretofore; forget her Sorrows, and redeem her lost Health, he would take what
Measures she should propose, to dispatch this fatal Stop to her Happiness out
of the way.

These Words failed not to make her caress him in the most endearing manner
that Love and flattery could invent; and she kissed him to an Oath, a solemn
Oath, to perform what he had promised; and he vowed liberally: And she assumed
in an Instant her good Humor, and suffered a Supper to be prepared, and did
eat; which in many Days before she had not done; so obstinate and powerful was
she in dissembling well.

The next thing to be considered was, which Way this Deed was to be done; for
they doubted not, but when 'twas done, all the World would lay it upon the
Princess, as done by her Command: But she urged, Suspicion was no Proof; and
that they never put to death any one, but when they had great and certain
Evidences, who were the Offenders. She was sure of her own Constancy, that
Racks and Tortures should never get the Secret from her Breast; and if he were
as confident on his part, there was no Danger. Yet this Preparation she made,
toward the laying the Fact on others, that she caused several Letters to be
written from Germany, as from the Relations of Van Brune, who threatened
Alcidiana with Death, for depriving their Kins-man (who was a Gentleman) of his
Life, though he had not taken away hers. And it was the Report of the Town, how
this young Maid was threatened. And indeed, the Death of the Page had so
afflicted a great many, that Alcidiana had procured her self abundance of
Enemies upon that Account, because she might have saved him if she had pleased;
but on the contrary, she was a Spectator, and in full Health and Vigor, at his
Execution: And People were not so much concerned for her at this Report, as
they would have been.

The Prince, who now had, by reasoning the Matter soberly with Miranda, found
it absolutely necessary to dispatch Alcidiana; he resolved himself, and with
his own Hand, to execute it; not daring to trust to any of his most
Favourite-Servants, though he had many who, possibly, would have obeyed him;
for they loved him, as he deserved; and so would all the World, had he not been
so poorly deluded by this fair Enchantress. He therefore, as I said, resolved
to keep this great Secret to himself; and taking a Pistol, charged well with
two Bullets, he watched an Opportunity to shoot her as she should go out, or
into her House or Coach some Evening.

To this End he waited several Nights, near her Lodgings; but still, either she
went not out; or when she returned, she was so guarded with Friends, or her
Lover, and Flambeau's, that he could not aim at her, without endangering the
Life of some other. But one Night, above the rest, upon a Sunday, when he knew
she would be at the Theater; for she never missed that Day, seeing the Play; he
waited at the Corner of the Statt-house, near the Theater, with his Cloak cast
over his Face, and a black Periwigg, all alone, with his Pistol ready cocked;
and remained not very long, but he saw her Kinsman's Coach come along. 'Twas
almost dark; Day was just shutting up her Beauties, and left such a Light to
govern the World, as served only just to distinguish one Object from another,
and a convenient help to Mischief. He saw a-light out of the Coach, only one
young Lady, the Lover, and then the destined Victim; which he (drawing near)
knew rather by her Tongue, than Shape. The Lady ran into the Playhouse, and
left Alcidiana to be conducted by her Lover into it; who led her to the Door,
and went to give some Order to the Coachman; so that the Lover was about
twenty Yards from Alcidiana; when she stood the fairest Mark in the World, on
the Threshold of the Entrance of the Theater; there being many Coaches about
the Door, so that hers could not come so near. Tarquin was resolved not to lose
so fair an Opportunity; and advanced, but went behind the Coaches; and when he
came over against the Door, through a great Booted, Velvet Coach, that stood
between him and her, he shot; and she having her Train of her Gown and
Petty-coat on her Arm, in great quantity, he missed her Body, and shot through
her Clothes, between her Arm, and her Body. She frightened to find something
hit her, and to see the Smoke, and hear the Report of the Pistol; running in,
cried, I am shot: I am dead.

This Noise quickly alarmed her Lover; and all the Coach-men and Footmen
immediately ran, some one Way, and some another. One of 'em seeing a Man haste
away in a Cloak, he being a lusty, bold German, stopped him; and drawing upon
him, bad him stand, and deliver his Pistol, or he would run him through.

Tarquin being surpised at the Boldness of this Fellow to demand his Pistol,
as if he positively knew him to be the Murderer, (for so he thought himself,
since he believed Alcidiana dead,) had so much Presence of Mind, as to
consider, if he suffered himself to be taken, he should poorly die a public
Death; and therefore resolved upon one Mischief more, to secure himself from
the first: And in the Moment that the German bad him deliver his Pistol, he
cried, Though I have no Pistol to deliver, I have a Sword to chastise thy
Insolence. And throwing off his Cloak, and flinging his Pistol from him, he
drew, and wounded and dis-arm'd the Fellow.

This Noise of Swords brought every Body to the place; and immediately the
Bruit ran, The Murderer was taken, the Murderer was taken; though none knew
which was he, nor the Cause of the Quarrel between the two fighting Men, which
none yet knew, for it now was darker than before. But at the Noise of the
Murderer being taken, the Lover of Alcidiana, who by this time found his Lady
unhurt, all but the Trains of her Gown and Petty-coat, came running to the
place, just as Tarquin had dis-arm'd the German, and was ready to have killed
him; when laying hold of his Arm, they arrested the Stroke, and redeemed the
Footman.

They then demanded who this Stranger was, at whose Mercy the Fellow lay; but
the Prince, who now found himself venturing for his last Stake, made no Reply;
but with two Swords in his Hands, went to fight his Way through the Rabble: And
though there were above a hundred Persons, some with Swords, others with long
Whips, (as Coach-men,) so invincible was the Courage of this poor, unfortunate
Gentleman at that time, that all these were not able to sieze him; but he made
his Way through the Ring that encompassed him, and ran away; but was however so
closely pursued, the Company still gathering as they ran, that toiled with
fighting, oppressed with Guilt, and Fear of being taken, he grew fainter and
fainter, and suffered himself, at last, to yield to his Pursuers, who soon
found him to be Prince Tarquin in Disguise: And they carried him directly to
Prison, being Sunday, to wait the coming Day, to go before a Magistrate.

In an Hour's time the whole fatal Adventure was carried all over the City, and
every one knew that Prince Tarquin was the intended Murderer of Alcidiana; and
not one but had a real Sorrow and Compassion for him. They heard how bravely he
had defended himself, how many he had wounded before he could be taken, and
what Numbers he had fought through: And even those that saw his Valor and
Bravery, and who had assisted at his being siez'd, now repented from the Bottom
of their Hearts, their having any hand in the Ruin of so gallant a Man;
especially, since they knew the Lady was not hurt. A thousand Addresses were
made to her, not to prosecute him; but her Lover, a hotheaded Fellow, more
fierce than brave, would by no means be pacified; but vowed to pursue him to
the Scaffold.

The Monday came, and the Prince being examined, confessed the Matter of Fact,
since there was no harm done; believing a generous Confession the best of his
Game; but he was sent back to closer Imprisonment, loaded with Irons, to expect
the next Sessions. All his Houshold-Goods were siez'd, and all they could find,
for the Use of Alcidiana. And the Princess, all in Rage, tearing her Hair, was
carried to the same Prison, to behold the cruel Effects of her Hellish Designs.

One need not tell here how sad and horrid this Meeting appeared between her
Lord and she; let it suffice it was the most melancholy and mortifying Object
that ever Eyes beheld. On Miranda's part, 'twas sometimes all Rage and Fire,
and sometimes all Tears and Groans; but still 'twas sad Love, and mournful
Tenderness on his: Nor could all his Sufferings, and the Prospect of Death it
self, drive from his Soul one Spark of that Fire the obstinate God had fatally
kindled there: And in the midst of all his Sighs, he would re-call himself, and
cry, -- I have Miranda still.

He was eternally visited by his Friends and Acquaintance; and this last Action
of Bravery had got him more, than all his former Conduct had lost. The Fathers
were perpetually with him; and all joined with one common Voice in this, That
he ought to abandon a Woman so wicked as the Princess; and that however Fate
dealt with him, he could not show himself a true Penitent, while he laid the
Author of so much Evil in his Bosom: That Heaven would never bless him, till he
had renounced her: And on such Conditions, he would find those that would
employ their utmost Interest to save his Life; who else would not stir in his
Affair. But he was so deaf to all, that he could not so much as dissemble a
Repentance for having married her.

He lay a long time in Prison, and all that time the poor Father Francisco
remained there also: And the good Fathers, who daily visited these two amorous
Prisoners, the Prince and Princess; and who found, by the Management of
Matters, it would go very hard with Tarquin, entertained 'em often with holy
Matters relating to the Life to come; from which, before his Trial, he gathered
what his Stars had appointed, and that he was destined to die.

This gave an unspeakable Torment to the now-repenting Beauty, who had reduced
him to it; and she began to appear with a more solid Grief. Which being
perceived by the good Fathers, they resolved to attack her on the yielding
Side: and after some Discourse upon the Judgment for Sin, they came to reflect
on the Business of Father Francisco; and told her, she had never thrived since
her Accusing of that Father, and laid it very home to her Conscience; assuring
her, that they would do their utmost in her Service, if she would confess that
secret Sin to all the World; so that she might atone for the Crime, by the
saving that good Man. At first she seemed inclined to yield; but Shame of being
her own Detector in so vile a Matter, re-call'd her Goodness, and she faintly
persisted in it.

At the End of six Months, Prince Tarquin was called to his Trial; where I will
pass over the Circumstances, which are only what is usual in such Criminal
Cases, and tell you, that he, being found guilty of the Intent of killing
Alcidiana, was condemned to lose his Head in the Marketplace, and the Princess
to be banished her Country.

After Sentence pronounced, to the real Grief of all the Spectators, he was
carried back to Prison. And now the Fathers attack her anew: And she whose
Griefs daily increased, with a Languishment that brought her very near her
Grave, at last confessed all her Life, all the Lewdness of her Practices with
several Princes and great Men; besides her Lust^ with People that served her,
and others in mean Capacity: And lastly, the whole Truth of the young Friar;
and how she had drawn the Page, and the Prince, her Husband, to this designed
Murder of her Sister. This she signed with her Hand, in the Presence of the
Prince, her Husband, and several holy Men who were present. Which being
signified to the Magistrates, the Friar was immediately delivered from his
Irons (where he had languish'd more than two whole Years) in great Triumph, and
with much Honor, and lives a most exemplary pious Life, and as he did before;
for he is yet living in Antwerp.

After the Condemnation of these two unfortunate Persons, who begot such
different Sentiments in the Minds of the People, (the Prince, all the
Compassion and Pity imaginable; and the Princess, all the Contempt and
Despite;) they languish'd almost six Months longer in Prison; so great an
Interest there was made, in order to the saving his Life, by all the Men of the
Robe. On the other side, the Princes, and great Men of all Nations, who were at
the Court of Bruxels, who bore a secret Revenge in their Hearts against a Man
who had, as they pretended, set up a false Title, only to take Place of them;
who, indeed, was but a Merchant's Son of Holland, as they said, so incensed
them against him, that they were too hard at Court for the Churchmen. However,
this Dispute gave the Prince his Life some Months longer than was expected;
which gave him also some Hope, that a Reprieve for Ninety Years would have been
granted, as was desired. Nay, Father Francisco so interested himself in this
Concern, that he writ to his Father, and several Princes of Germany, with whom
Marquis Castiel de Roderigo was well acquainted, to intercede with him for the
saving of Tarquin; since 'twas more by his Persuasions, than those of all who
attacked her, that made Miranda, confess the Truth of her Affair with him. But
at the End of six Months, when all Applications were found fruitless and vain,
the Prince received News, that in two Days he was to die, as his Sentence had
been before pronounced; and for which he prepared himself with all Cheerfulness.

On the following Friday, as soon as it was light, all People of any Condition
came to take their Leaves of him; and none departed with dry Eyes, or Hearts
unconcerned to the last Degree: For Tarquin, when he found his Fate inevitable,
bore it with a Fortitude that showed no Signs of Regret; but addressed himself
to all about him with the same cheerful, modest and great Air, he was wont to
do in his most flourishing Fortune. his Vallet was dressing him all the
Morning, so many Interruptions they had by Visiters; and he was all in
Mourning, and so were all his Followers; for even to the last, he kept up his
Grandeur, to the Amazement of all People: And indeed, he was so passionately
beloved by them, that those he had dismissed served him voluntarily, and would
not be persuaded to abandon him while he lived.

The Princess was also dressed in Mourning, and her two Women; and
notwithstanding the unheard of Lewdness and Villainies she had confessed of her
self, the Prince still adored her; for she had still those Charms that made him
first do so: Nor, to his last Moment, could be brought to wish that he had
never seen her. But on the contrary, as a Man yet vainly proud of his Fetters,
he said, All the Satisfaction this short Moment of Life could afford him was,
that he died in endeavoring to serve Miranda, his adorable Princess.

After he had taken leave of all who thought it necessary to leave him to
himself for some time, he retired with his Confessor: where they were about an
Hour in Prayer, all the Ceremonies of Devotions that were fit to be done being
already past. At last the Bell tolled, and he was to take leave of the
Princess, as his last Work of Life, and the most hard he had to accomplish. He
threw himself at her Feet; and gazing on her, as she sat more dead than alive,
overwhelmed with silent Grief, they both remained some Moments speechless; and
then, as if one rising Tide of Tears had supplied both their Eyes, it burst out
in Streams at the same Instant; and when his Sighs gave way, he uttered a
thousand Farewel's, so soft, so passionate and moving, that all who were by
were extremely touched with it, and said, That nothing could be seen more
deplorable and melancholy. A thousand times they bad Farewell, and still some
tender Look or Word would prevent his going: Then embrace, and bid Farewell
again. A thousand times she asked his Pardon for being the Occasion of that
fatal Separation; a thousand times assuring him, she would follow him, for she
could not live without him. And Heaven knows when their soft and sad Caresses
would have ended, had not the Officers assured him, 'twas time to mount the
Scaffold. At which Words the Princess fell fainting in the Arms of her Women,
and they led Tarquin out of the Prison.

When he came to the Marketplace, whither he walked on foot, followed by his
own Domestics, and some bearing a black Velvet Coffin, with Silver Hinges; the
Heads-man before him, with his fatal Scimitre drawn; his Confessor by his Side,
and many Gentlemen and Churchmen, with Father Francisco, attending him; the
People showering Millions of Blessings on him, and beholding with weeping Eyes,
he mounted the Scaffold; which was strow'd with some Saw-dust about the place
where he was to kneel, to receive the Blood: For they be-head People kneeling,
and with the Back-stroke of a Scimitre; and not lying on a Block, and with an
Ax, as we in England. The Scaffold had a low Rail about it, that every Body
might more conveniently see: This was hung with Black; and all that State that
such a Death could have, was here in most decent Order.

He did not say much upon the Scaffold: The Sum of what he said to his Friends
was, to be kind, and take care of the poor Penitent, his Wife: To others,
recommending his honest and generous Servants; whose Fidelity was so well known
and commended, that they were soon promised all Preferment. He was some time in
Prayer, and a very short time speaking to his Confessor; then he turned to the
Headsman, and desired him to do his Office well, and gave him twenty Leave
d'Or's; and undressing himself with the help of his Vallet and Page, he pulled
off his Coat, and had underneath a white Satin Waste-coat: He took off his
Periwigg, and put on a white Satten-cap, with a Holland one, done with Point,
under it, which he pulled a little over his Eyes; then took a cheerful Leave of
all, and kneeled down, and said, When he lifted up his Hands the third time,
the Heads-man should do his Office: Which accordingly was done, and the
Heads-man gave him his last stroke, and the Prince fell on the Scaffold. The
People, with one common Voice, as if it had been but one entire one, prayed for
his Soul; and Murmurs of Sighs were heard from the whole Multitude, who
scrambl'd for some of the bloody Saw-dust, to keep for his Memory.

The Heads-man going to take up the Head, as the manner is, to show to the
People, he found he had not struck it off, and that the Body stirred. With that
he stepped to an Engine which they always carry with 'em, to force those who
may be refractory; thinking, as he said, to have twisted the Head from the
Shoulders, conceiving it to hang but by a small matter of Flesh. Though 'twas
an odd Shift of the Fellow's, yet 'twas done, and the best Shift he could
suddenly propose. The Margrave and another Officer, old Men, were on the
Scaffold, with some of the Prince's Friends and Servants; who seeing the
Heads-man put the Engine about the Neck of the Prince, began to call out, and
the People made a great Noise. The Prince, who found himself yet alive; or
rather, who was past Thinking, but had some Sense of Feeling left, when the
Heads-man took him up, and set his Back against the Rail, and clapped the Engine
about his Neck, got his two Thumbs between the Rope and his Neck, feeling
himself pressed there; and struggling between Life and Death, and bending
himself over the Rail backward, while the Heads-man pulled forward, he threw
himself quite over the Rail by Chance, and not Design, and fell upon the Heads
and Shoulders of the People, who were crying out with amazing Shouts of Joy.
The Heads-man leaped after him, but the Rabble had like to have pulled him to
pieces: All the City was in an Uproar, but none knew what the matter was, but
those who bore the Body of the Prince, whom they found yet living; but how, or
by what strange Miracle preserved, they knew not, nor did examine; but with one
Accord, as if the whole Crowd had been one Body, and had had but one Motion,
they bore the Prince on their Heads, about a hundred Yards from the Scaffold,
where there is a Monastery of Jesuits; and there they secured him. All this was
done; his Beheading, his Falling, and his being secured, almost in a Moments
time; the People rejoicing, as at some extraordinary Victory won. One of the
Officers being, as I said, an old, timorous Man, was so frightened at the
Accident, the Bustle, the Noise, and the Confusion, of which he was wholly
ignorant, that he died with Amazement and Fear; and the other was fain to be
let blood.

The Officers of Justice went to demand the Prisoner, but they demanded in
vain; they had now a Right to protect him, and would do so. All his overjoyed
Friends went to see in what Condition he was, and all of Quality found
Admittance: They saw him in Bed, going to be dressed by the most skilful
Surgeons, who yet could not assure him of Life. They desired no Body should
speak to him, or ask him any Questions. They found that the Heads-man had
struck him too low, and had cut him into the Shoulder Bone. A very great Wound,
you may be sure; for the Sword, in such Executions, carries an extreme Force.
However, so good Care was taken on all sides, and so greatly the Fathers were
concerned for him, that they found an Amendment, and Hopes of a good Effect of
their incomparable Charity and Goodness.

At last, when he was permitted to speak, the first News he asked was after the
Princess. And his Friends were very much afflicted to find, that all his Loss
of Blood had not quenched that Flame, nor let out that which made him still
love that bad Woman. He was solicited daily to think no more of her: And all
her Crimes were laid so open to him, and so shamefully represented; and on the
other side, his Virtues so admired; and which, they said, would have been
eternally celebrated, but for his Folly with this infamous Creature; that at
last, by assuring him of all their Assistance, if he abandoned her; and to
renounce him, and deliver him up, if he did not; they wrought so far upon him,
as to promise, he would suffer her to go alone into Banishment, and would not
follow her, or live with her any more. But, alas! this was but his Gratitude
that compelled this Complaisance, for in his Heart he resolved never to abandon
her; nor was he able to live, and think of doing it: However, his Reason
assured him, he could not do a Deed more justifiable, and one that would
re-gain his Fame sooner.

His Friends asked him some Questions concerning his Escape; and that since he
was not beheaded, but only wounded, why he did not immediately rise up. But he
replied, he was so absolutely pre-possess'd, that at the third Lifting up his
Hands, he should receive the Stroke of Death, that at the same Instant the
Sword touched him, he had no Sense; nay, not even of Pain, so absolutely dead
he was with Imagination; and knew not that he stirred, as the Heads-man found
he did; nor did he remember any thing, from the Lifting up of his Hands, to his
Fall; and then awakened, as out of a Dream; or rather, a Moment's Sleep,
without Dream, he found he lived; and wondered what was arrived to him, or how
he came to live; having not, as yet, any Sense of his Wound, though so terrible
an one.

After this, Aloidiana, who was extremely afflicted for having been the
Prosecutor of this great Man; who, bating his last Design against her, which
she knew was the Instigation of her Sister, had obliged her with all the
Civility imaginable; now sought all Means possible of getting his Pardon, and
that of her Sister; though of a hundred thousand Crowns, which she should have
paid her she could get but ten thousand; which was from the Sale of her rich
Beds, and some other Furniture: So that the young Count, who before should have
married her, now went off for want of Fortune; and a young Merchant (perhaps
the best of the two) was the Man to whom she was destined.

At last, by great Intercession, both their Pardons were obtained; and the
Prince, who would be no more seen in a place that had proved every way so fatal
to him, left Flanders, promising never to live with the fair Hypocrite more;
but ever he departed, he writ her a Letter, wherein he ordered her, in a little
time, to follow him into Holland; and left a Bill of Exchange with one of his
trusty Servants, whom he had left to wait upon her, for Money for her
Accommodations: So that she was now reduced to one Woman, one Page, and this
Gentleman. The Prince, in this time of his Imprisonment, had several Bills of
great Sums from his Father, who was exceeding rich, and this all the Children
he had in the World, and whom he tenderly loved.

As soon as Miranda was come into Holland, she was welcomed with all imaginable
Respect and Endearment by the old Father; who was imposed upon so, as that he
knew not she was the fatal Occasion of all these Disasters to his Son; but
rather looked on her as a Woman who had brought him a hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns, which his Misfortunes had consumed. But, above all, she was
received by Tarquin with a Joy unspeakable; who, after some time, to redeem his
Credit, and gain himself a new Fame, put himself into the French Army, where he
did Wonders; and after three Campaigns, his Father dying, he returned home, and
retired to a Country House; where, with his Princess, he lives as a private
Gentleman, in all the Tranquillity of a Man of a good Fortune. They say Miranda
has been very penitent for her Life past, and gives Heaven the Glory for having
given her these Afflictions, that have reclaimed her, and brought her to as
perfect a State of Happiness as this troublesome World can afford.

Since I began this Relation, I heard that Prince Tarquin died about three
quarters of a Year ago.

FINIS.

