CONSIDERATIONS On a Book, Entitled The THEORY of the EARTH. Published some
Years since by the Learned Dr. BURNET.



Dedit omnibus Deus, pro virili portione Sapientiam, ut and inaudita
investigare possent, and audita perpendere.

Lactan. de Orig. Error. c. 8. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be
sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1693.

Imprimatur,

Edmund Bohun.
December. 1. 1692.
To his Honored Friend, Dr. ROBERT HOOK, Fellow of the Royal Society, etc.
SIR,
WELL knowing that among that Variety of Learning, in which your Genius has
always exercised itself, you have been particularly delighted in considering
this Terrestrial Globe we inhabit; I have been free to inscribe these few
Considerations, thereunto relating, to your Name; being lately written by me on
a Book, entitled, The Theory of the Earth, offered to the Public by a Learned
Person. This Undertaking was very casual to me; for you know, a few years since
I was upon another Design, first recommended to me by your self, which would
have taken up my thoughts for some Years; but I had no sooner printed a draught
of it, when an ill juncture of times happening, it caused me to lay it by. To
such Providencial disappointments all Men must submit, nor has it been any way
uneasy to me to have been baulkt in writing The Natural History of a County,
the Considerations here in hand being as far more Noble than that other, as
they are of a more general Extent; and I would I had been as able to perform
well in them, as I am conscious to my self, how incompetent the narrowness of
my thoughts may be for solving the Great Aenigma of the World, as to the rise,
tendency, and periods of it, Points considered in this Work. Indeed, when first
initiated in Religion, we have a Doctrine delivered us concerning them, which
by faith we receive, and in which (as in duty bound) we acquiesce. And
nevertheless, as we grow in Years, the mind of Man, urged on by strong and
Luxuriant Instincts, falls naturally a considering how far they may be
resolvable by humane Reason. And though, perhaps, how great soever a Man's
Instincts may be, we may not arrive at a full satisfaction in these matters,
but by an Enlightened and Prophetic Spirit, which God vouchsafes not to all
Men; yet, at least, as far as Reason will bear, Men may be aiding to each other
by an Intercommunication of Thoughts, while we stand waiting at the gates of
Truth, till God is pleased to open to us; And, as for what I have offered in
this kind, I freely submit it to your Censure, being,

Sir, Your most obliged and humble Servant, John Beaumont, Jun.

TO THE Learned Dr. BURNET, Author of the Theory of the Earth.
SIR,
YOur Theory of the Earth, tho extant long since, fell not under my perusal
till of later years; when conversing with a Person of eminent Learning, who
gave your Work its due applause, it hast'ned me in the reading of it, which I
had often designed before, tho still diverted by some Concerns I had in hand.
And I must own that the Worthiness of the Matters there treated, and the
Learned handling of them, were not a little charming with me: And nevertheless
(as it commonly falls out with Men in Philosophical Subjects) many Objections
occurred to me as I read it, and some of them seemingly so strong, that they
have hitherto withheld me from yielding assent to your Hypothesis proposed.
Such as they are, I here lay them before, having gathered them together to no
other end, but that either being solved by you, your Hypothesis may stand
confirmed, or if happily, they will not bear a Solution, that Men may be put upon
new thoughts for finding such an Hypothesis, as will stand all Trials, being

Sir, Your very humble Servant, John Beaumont, Jun.

TO THE READER.
THat the Author of the Book, Entitled, The Theory of the Earth, has shown
much Learning, Ingenuity, and the Command of a Style more than common in his
Work, I conceive to be the Sense of most Persons that have perused it. What I
pretend to consider in it, is, whether the Hypothesis he there proposes can
hold good, and am of Opinion there is a failure and inconsistency in it. The
method I use in my Considerations on the said Theory is thus: I proceed
generally upon each Chapter, as the Author has writ them in his English Copy;
first stating the Contents with as much clearness and conciseness as I may, and
then offering what I have to say upon them. I well know, that the late Right
Reverend Father in God, Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, has already published
some Animadversions on this Theory; as likewise some other Persons: But whereas
his Lordship in his Animadversions has pleased, for the most part, to keep
himself to his Province of Divinity, by expounding some Scripture passages
relating to it, I proceed generally in a Philosophical way, arguing from the
nature of the thing; though no Man can treat of these matters, without a
Scripture ground. And since the other Animadverters, beside what they have
urged from the Scriptures, argue generally in a way differing from me, I
thought this small mite of mine, toward the Elucidation of these abstruse
matters, might not be unacceptable among the Learned. And whereas the Author of
the Theory wishes, that whoever shall offer any thing against it, keep himself
to the substance of it; so I have done as to the main: tho since Collateral
matters are for illustrating and strengthening the Hypothesis, or some way
inducing to a reception of it, I have thought it proper for me now and then, as
occasion presented, to take notice of them, at least in a transient way, and to
show their Insufficiency for such ends.

ERRATA.
BEsides literal faults, the Reader is desired to correct the following
mistakes of the Press. Page 11. line 1. blot out, chiefly. Ib. l. 37. and 38.
read, it little concerned, p. 15. l. 23. r. for a Metaphysical, p. 19. l. 7. r.
ad captum, p. 31. l. 2. r. sediment, p. 42. l. 21. After this, make a full
point. p. 49. l. 31. veil, r. vale, p. 71. l. 15. r. harmonical, p. 127. l. 25.
r. Intimate, p. 137. l. 36. r. Religions, p. 142. l. 30. blot out in, p. 174.
l. 14. r. concerning it, p. 184. l. 16. Vtque r. Atque.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now again Published Weekly, by Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall,
the Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade, with prices of Corn,
etc. By John Houghton F. R. S.

At the same place may be had the three former Volumes, and six-penny Sheet of
Acres, Houses, Proportional Tax, etc. of each County in England and Wales, by
the same Author.

CONSIDERATIONS ON The Theory of the Earth. The First BOOK. Concerning the
Deluge and the Dissolution of the Earth.
CHAP. I.
THE Author here gives an account of the whole Work, of the Extent and general
order of it; so that this Chapter being only Introductory, I note only the
following Passage.

Page 3. He says thus: There is no Sect of Philosophers, that I know of, that
ever gave an account of the universal Deluge, or discovered from the
Contemplation of the Earth, that there had been such a thing already in Nature.
It Is true, they often talk of an Alternation, of Deluges and Conflagrations in
this Earth, but they speak of them as things to come; at least they give no
Proof or Argument of any that have already destroyed the World. And beneath. As
to the Conflagration in particular, this has always been reckoned among the
Opinions or Dogmata of the Stoics, That the World was to be destroyed by Fire,
and their Books are full of this Notion: but yet they do not tell us the Causes
of the Conflagration, nor what preparations there are in Nature, or will be,
toward that great Change. And we may generally observe this of the Ancients,
that their Learning or Philosophy consisted more in Conclusions than in
Demonstrations; they had many Truths among them whereof they did not know
themselves the Premises or Proofs; which is an Argument with me, that the
knowledge they had was not a thing of their own Invention, or which they came to
by fair Reasoning and Observation upon Nature, but was delivered to them from
others by Tradition and ancient Fame, sometimes more public, sometimes more
secret: these Conclusions they kept in mind, and Communicated to those of their
School, or Sect, or Posterity, without knowing, for the most part, the just
Grounds and Reasons of them.

On this Passage I have the following Particulars to offer.

1. We have no reason to expect that the Greeks or Latins should have given any
Account of the Deluge in Noah's time, unless we will allow the Deluge of the
Ancient Ogyges (which is said to have lasted nine months) to have been the same
with that of Noah. for they pretend not to have any Records farther than that
Ogyges: wherefore all things among the Greeks, which Antiquity had worn out of
date, were called Ogygia. And if, happily, they had any thing of times before, it
came very obscurely to them, whence they called the Ante-Ogygian Age (...), and
was only what they had by Hearsay of the Egyptians; or other Nations. Those who
have made any mention of the universal Deluge under Noah, are, The Sibyl in
Lactantius, de Ira Dei, c. 23. Xenophon, de Equivocis. Fabius Pictor, de Aureo
Seculo. Cato, de Originibus. Archilochus the Greek, who introduces also the
Testimony of Moses, in his Book, de Temporibus. Josephus in his Jewish
Antiquities, from Mnaseas. Hierom of Egypt, and Berosus the Chaldean. Alexander
Polyhistor, and Abydenus in Cyril's first Book against Julian. Plato in his
Timaeus. Ovid and others of the Poets confound the Deluge of Noah with that of
Deucalion, describing this as general; which, in regard they must have known to
have been particular, I judge the scope of their Discourse chiefly tended to a
moral or divine Institution, In Virg. Eccl. 6.
the historical Narratson in itself being not true. And Servius tells us, that
by a Deluge and Emphytheosis the Ancients understood a Change, and a
Melioration of times, and we know Deluges were still introduced in the Iron
age, after a total corruption of Manners.

2. As to Alterations by Deluges and Conflagrations which the Author intimates
the Ancients to have held only by Tradition, without finding by the Earth that
any such things had been, and without considering any Causes and Preparations
in Nature for them: I find it to be otherwise.

First, I think it plain enough among the ancient Philosophers (tho unobserved
by the Author) that they discovered from the Contemplation of the Earth there
had been already such a thing as a general Deluge, at least successively; so as
the Waters of the Sea had some time or other covered the whole face of the
Earth. Thus Ovid introduces Pythagoras, saying, Vidi ego quod fuerat quondam
solidissima tellus
Esse fretum, vidi factas ex aequore terras.
Et procul a pelago Conchae jacuere marinae,
Et vetus inventa est in montibus Anchora summis:
Quodque fuit campus, vallum decursus aquarum
Fecit: and eluvie mons est deductus in aequor, etc. Me^. l 13.

I Have seen what was most solid Earth before
Become a Sea, the Sea become a Shore;
Far from the Sea Sea-Cocles often lie,
And Anchors old are found on Mountains high:
Land-floods have made a Valley of a Plain,
And brought a Mountain with them to the Main.
And there you may read much more to the same purpose: and all ancient
Histories, as well as modern, tell us of such marine Bodies found on Mountains;
some urging them as Arguments for such Changes: as there are learned Men now
living, who think they can demonstrate from such Bodies, found on Mountains at
all distances from the Sea, that there is no part of the Land now appearing,
but has sometime been covered by the Sea. I could produce much matter on this
Argument, were it not that I am unwilling to anticipate here what I have
thoughts of setting forth in a particular Tract.

Qu. not. l. 3. c. 27. and Seq.
Again, as for Causes of those Changes, we find that Seneca, a Master among the
Stoics, describing an universal Deluge, assigns Causes for them. The sum of
his Reasoning is thus: He examines whether an universal Deluge will be caused
by the overflowing of the Sea, or by continual Rains, or by the eruption of new
Fountains, and concludes it will be by all three joined together, and that
nothing is difficult to Nature when she hastens to her end: In the rise of
things she uses a gentle effort, and carries them on toward their perfection
by unperceivable degrees; but when the time of their Dissolution comes, it is
done all on a sudden; as he exemplifies in Animals: and so he says Cities are
long building, and Woods long growing, but reduced to Ashes in a few hours.
Therefore when that fatal Day shall come, many Causes will act together: There
will be a general Concussion of the Earth, opening new Sources of Waters;
continued and violent Rains, whence, at length, the Snows heaped up on
Mountains for many Ages will be dissolved; whereby the Rivers greatly swelling,
and forced by Tempests, will overflow their Channels, and by their rapid
course, carry all before them, and many times their courses to the Sea being
damned up, they will return back and drown whole Countries: mean while the
immoderate Rains continuing, the Winter Season encroaching on the Summer, and
the Seas being mightily increased by the vast discharges of the overflowing
Rivers, and being infested with violent Tempests, they will find their Channel
too narrow for them, and overflow the Land, forcing the Rivers back, in a
tempestuous manner toward their Sources, and so at length bury the whole Earth
in Waters: unless, happily for a time, some of the Mountains may here and there
stand as scattered Islands, but at last there being a general Effort in the
Waters, as at Spring-Tides, the whole will be overflown.

He farther tells us, that as Fires and Waters bear sway over earthly things,
their rise and ruin being from and by them, it was the Opinion of Berosus,
that Deluges and Conflagrations will happen, through the Courses of the Planets:
and that a Conflagration shall happen when all the Planets, which now keep
different courses, shall meet in Cancer, being so placed, that it shall pass in
a direct line through them all; and that a Deluge shall happen, when the said
Planets shall so meet in Capricorn; the one making the Summer Solstice, and the
other the Winter; Signs of great Power, being the Points for the Changes of the
Year. And Seneca receives these Causes also; one Cause being too little for so
great a Ruin. He adds, whether the World be an Animal, or a Body, Nature
governing it, as Trees and standing Corn: From its beginning there was included
in it, whatsoever it ought to act, and to undergo to its end; as in the Seed is
comprehended the whole state of the future Man; so that the Child, yet unborn,
has the Law of a Beard and gray Hairs, the Lineaments of the whole Body, and of
the succeding Age being there, in little, and concealed. So he says the Origin
of the World contained as well the Sun and Moon, and Courses of the Planets,
and the Rise of Animals, as those things with which earthly things are changed.
In these was an Inundation, which happens by the Law of the World, no otherwise
than Summer and Winter. And he says all things will help Nature for the
performance of her Constitutions; but the Earth it self will afford it the
greatest cause to drown it; which will be resolved into Moisture, and flow by a
continued consumption, the tainted parts, as in Bodies ulcerated, by degrees,
bringing the rest to a general Colliquation.

Here we plainly see what the grounds of the Stoics and others were, for
admitting Deluges and Conflagrations. They having observed, that particular
Bodies on the Earth had a beginning and decay, and were again renewed by their
Seeds, thence by Analogy concluded, that the same Order must pass, as to the
whole World: and again, having considered that Fires and Waters bore the sway
over earthly things, and that the one prevailed in the Summer, the other in the
Winter: they thence imagined, that besides ordinary Summers and Winters,
whereby the ordinary Changes are wrought on the Earth, there would happen some
great periodical Revolutions in the Heavens, causing so great a Predominancy of
Fires and Waters here below, that they would cause general Changes over the
whole face of the Earth at once.

De Elem. Philos.
Bid, speaking of these Changes, says, it was the opinion of all the
Philosophers, that earthly things received their Periods sometimes by a Deluge,
and sometimes by a Conflagration; because the Waters being placed under the
Fountain of Heat, it happens, that the Moisture increases by degrees, and
overpowers the Heat, till being detained by no bounds, it diffuses it self over
the Earth, and drowns it; which Moisture, at length, being dried by the Heat of
the Sun, and Drought of the Earth, the Heat increases in its turn, and
over-powers the Moisture, till being diffused over the Earth, it burns it. He
adds, there are some that say these things happen through the general Elevation
and Depression of the Planets; for if all the Planets are elevated together,
being removed from the Earth more than they ought, they consume less of the
Moisture; whence the Moisture increasing, it diffuses it self over the Earth,
and causes a Deluge. If but one, two, or three of them are elevated, without
the others, the Moisture thereby does not abound; for what increases by their
remoteness, is dried by the nearness of the others: but if all are depressed
together, they burn the Earth, and cause a Conflagration, doing too much by
their nearness, as by their remoteness they did too little.

Many others who write of these Mundane Changes, word themselves much after the
same manner: Whence we find the Ancients did not barely rely on Tradition for
these Changes, but had such grounds as they conceived rational for admitting
them. Now if it shall be said, that the Causes they have assigned, are not
competent for such Changes; possibly it may be, because they sought for Causes
which were not in Nature to be found: For those Ancients, either supposing the
Deluge of the ancient Ogyges, to have been general, or having heard that some
other Deluge had been affirmed so to have been, and finding by marine Bodies
dug in Mountains, that the Waters of the Sea had been there, they attempted to
assign Causes for an universal Change at one effort; whereas those Causes, upon
examination, were found, either to have been assigned gratis, without any solid
ground, or to answer only partial Changes.

Hence Aristotle, and the soundest Reasoners, well seeing the slight
Presumptions on which this Opinion was grounded, derided the Stoics,
Epicureans, and others, who maintained it. For first, Aristotle knew they had
no sound Records for making out that any such Change had happened in Nature:
And, secondly, he having well weighed the Rotation of the Elements, and what
past in particular Bodies, found that what flowed from the later, receded from
them, which must cause a decay; but whatever flowing there were in the
Elements, it still returned into them, so that nothing was lost or decayed, as
to the whole, nor so much to any chief part, as to cause a total Dissolution.
And since no Man, that I know of, has hitherto assigned a Cause able to work a
general Change in the Earth at once, I should be inclined, according to natural
Principles, to follow his Opinion, a general Change being to be ascribed to
Miracle, for ought I know, till some Prophet shall come to help us out.

As for what has been said by the Sibylls and ancient Magi among the Gentiles,
concerning these Changes (I speak not of what has been prophetically delivered
of them in Sacred Writ, which I judge refers to a miraculous hand) we know they
were Persons chiefly concerned in the Politic Government of their times; and
being greatly skilled in Adept Philosophy (as some of our Prophets also
transcendently were) they knew how to adapt the great Phenomenon of the Earth
to the Microcosm, and moral World, and there is a Mystery in what they
intimate, as to these Changes, which I think not fit here to explain; but may
note, that those who are seen in the Promethean Arcanum Astrologicum, and have
heard the seven-Reed Pipe of Pan, know on what grounds the abovementioned
Astrological Causes for Deluges and Conflagrations were originally introduced,
and whither they tend. The ancient Druids of our Nation, who were the most
famous for Adept Philosophy of any Men of these parts of the World (nay, and as
Pliny says, the Persian Magi may seem to have had their rise from them) and who
governed all here; in their Sacrifices, which they thought most acceptable to
their Gods, were wont to make a Wicker Image in the form of a Man of a vast
proportion; whose inward Cavities they filled with live Men, who were commonly
Murderers, Thieves, Robbers, and other Criminals, but for want of these, often
Innocents, and then to set fire to it, and consume them to ashes.

Now, I think Mr. Sammes, in his Britannia, comes short in his guess,
concerning the grounds of this Festival Solemnity: He conceives the Britains
and Gauls, by this solemn Act, in burning these vast Images, with Men in them,
expressed their detestation of the Phoenicians; who, he says, were Men of a
vast stature, and who for a long time had subdued them, and kept them in
Slavery, from which they were now got free. This interpretation, I say, seems
not to me to answer the Grandeur of the Act; it being much more probable, that
by it, they would present a solemn Type of the general Conflagration (it being
a Point of their Doctrine that such a thing was to be) especially, as it
related to Mankind, and the moral World: tho as Boemus tells us, De omn. Gent.
Rit. l. 3. c. 23.
they were wont also to make such great Images of Rowls of Hay, and therein to
enclose Beasts as well as Men, and to set all on fire in like manner: which,
nevertheless, may also refer to Mankind; for that in Man there are certain
Fomites and Affects of Brutes, which, after they have been a long time
habituated in him, Man seems to have passed into their Nature, the Pythagorean
Transmigration, according to the Sense of all the learned Platonicks, except
Plotinus, importing no more: which Transmigration was a Doctrine so anciently
taught by the Druids, that Lipsius says, he knows not whether they learnt it of
Pythagoras, or he of them.

3. Concerning the Learning of the Ancients, whether it were in Conclusions,
and traditional only, as the Author has intimated, or from a contemplation of
Causes, we may consider what Plutarch says in the Case, L. de Defect. Orac.
which is as follows: All Generation proceeding from two Causes, the first and
most ancient Divines and Poets kept themselves, in a manner, wholly to the
first and most excellent Cause; but as for necessary and natural Causes, they
meddle not with them: whereas, on the contrary, the modern Philosophers leaving
that excellent and divine Principle, ascribe all to Bodies and Affects of
Bodies, and I know not what Juttings against each other, Changes and
Temperatures: So that both are in a fault; the latter because they either
ignore, or omit to tell us by whom; the former after what manner, and by what
means each thing is effected. Again, as to the ancient Philosophy, we know,
that not long before the times of Plato and Aristotle, and the other
Philosophers, all the Dogmata of Philosophy were not delivered openly, but
after an obscure and Aenigmatical manner, under certain Veils: which occult way
of Philosophizing, being learnt by the Greeks from the Egyptians, they brought
it into their Country, and continued the same for a time; being unwilling
openly to publish, among the vulgar, that admirable Learning, which being ill
understood by them, might make them fall from Religion and uprightness of Life;
till at length, in succeeding Ages, the whole came to be unravelled, and Men
came to open Reasoning. Hence it may be said, that as our Corpuscularians or
other Philosophers at present, will not own themselves ignorant of the first
Cause, tho they mention him not in explaining natural Effects: So the Ancients
knew well enough particular Causes, it being wholly inconsistent with a
Philosopher to rely barely on Tradition, ancient Fame, or a general Cause, as
may be imagined, tho they thought not fit generally to insist on any but the
first Cause in their Writings, more than what was done in a fabulous and
aenigmatical way, according to the stately Humor of those most ancient times.
A Prophet indeed may say, Lingua mea tanquam calamus scribae; but for a
Philosopher, who pretends to know things, not by divine Instinct, or
traditional Say-so's, but by their adaequate Causes, it is Nonsense so to do.
Men of Sense, as those Ancients must be allowed to have been, have naturally an
enquiring and restless Genius, which will not permit them to sit still, till
they have either found that a Point is inscrutable in its Nature, or have given
themselves some tolerable account from Reason of it. And any Man that considers
how many things in the Books of the Old Testament, or only in the Books of Job
and Moses (the two most ancient authentic Writings, perhaps, of any extant)
are said, according to a deep knowledge in Physiology; and that Moses had his
Learning from the Egyptians, cannot think the Ancients so ignorant in that
kind, as some may otherwise imagine them to have been. Indeed, it does not
appear that the Greeks received that Philosophy which is demonstrated by
Reasons from the Egyptians; what they chiefly received from them being chiefly
what belongs to Ceremonies and the Mathematics, the grand Theorem amongst
them, which they most valued, relating thereunto; and hence when it is treated
of the Mathematics and Mysteries, we find the Chaldean and Egyptian Opinions
quoted; but for Reasoning in Philosophy, they are not mentioned by Aristotle
and Plato: and nevertheless we may conclude, that from what the Egyptians set
forth under Veils in their Aenigmatical way, used chiefly by them for the sake
of their grand Mystery, which never was nor will be made common; the Greeks, by
solving it, composed their Philosophy: the Egyptians not caring that any Man
should be made acquainted in the knowledge of natural Causes, who was not
initiated in the foresaid Mystery, the knowledge of Nature being subservient
thereunto. And tho it does not fully appear by any thing we have remaining,
that the ancient Chaldeans and Egyptians were so well seen in Physical things,
that they well understood what an universal Cause differed from particular
Causes, or what was the Office of that and these; or what might be the sign of
a thing whereof it was not the Cause; yet when we consider the great insight
they had in the Properties of natural things, it may be a rational inducement
for us to believe, that they had likewise well considered the particular Causes
whence they flowed; and if they did not make them public, nor the Properties
themselves; it was only on that ground mentioned by Aristotle to Alexander,
saying, He is a Transgressor of the Divine Law, who discovers the hidden
Secrets of Nature, and the Properties of things: because some Men desire, as
much as in them lies, to overthrow the Divine Law by those Properties that God
has placed in Animals, Plants, and Stones: Whence to keep the Divine Law in its
full vigor, the Ancients made it their business, always to keep the People
minding the prime Cause, and no others, which, indeed, it concerned them to
mind. And it is observed, even to this day, in some Countries, that Youth
piously educated, with a strong Sense and Zeal of Religion; when they come to
pass a Course of Philosophy, and consider second Causes, often remit of that
earnest Devotion which they used before. That Saying of the Lord Bacon, in
reference to this, being true, viz. That a narrow and slight inspection into
Nature, inclines Men of weak Heads to Atheism; tho a more through insight into
the Causes of things, makes them more evidently see the necessary dependence of
things on the great and wise Creator of them.

CHAP. II. and III.
IN the Second Chapter the Author gives a general Account of Noah's Flood:
proposing also an estimate of what quantity of Waters would be necessary for
making it; and endeavors to show, that the common Opinion and Explication of
that Flood is not intelligible. In the Third Chapter he endeavors to answer
any Evasions, and to show that there was no new Creation of Waters at the
Deluge: also, that it was not particular and national, but extended throughout
the whole Earth; and concludes with a short Prelude to the Account and
Explication he intends to give of it.

Now, as the first Chapter was only introductory to the Work, so we find these
two Chapters are only preparatory to his Hypothesis, by setting forth the
Inconsistency of other Opinions concerning the Deluge: and in regard it does
not concern my Undertaking, to consider how validly he has refuted the Opinions
of others, but how firmly he has established his own; I shall pass by these two
Chapters, to proceed to the Theory he proposes; tho I may have occasion now and
then, in what will ensue, to bring some part of their Contents under
consideration.

CHAP. IV. and V.
THE Author coming now to establish his Hypothesis, undertakes to make out two
things; First, how the Earth, from the beginning, rose from a Chaos, and in
what form it continued, till the time of the Deluge; and Secondly, how a
Deluge, at length, happened; his Fourth and Fifth Chapters, which are now to be
considered, are for making out the Composition of his Earth, or how it rose at
first from a Chaos, and what its antediluvian State was: As for the Dissolution
of it, at the time of the Deluge, he treats of that afterward.

In the beginning therefore of his Fourth Chapter, before he lays down his
Theory, he thinks fit, in the first place, to remove an Opinion concerning the
Eternity of the World; which, he says, takes away a Chaos, and any beginning to
the Earth, and consequently the Subject of his Discourse, whereupon he writes
thus. It has been the general Opinion and Consent of the Learned of all
Nations, that the Earth arose from a Chaos. This is attested by History both
sacred and profane; only Aristotle, whom so great a part of the Christian World
have made their Oracle or Idol, both maintained the Eternity of the Earth and
the Eternity of Mankind, that the Earth and the World were from everlasting,
and in that very form they are in now, with Men and Women, and all living
Creatures, Trees and Fruits, Metals and Minerals, and whatsoever is of natural
Production: We say all these things arose, and had their first Existence and
Production not six Thousand Years ago; he says, they have subsisted thus for
ever, through an infinite Series of past Generations, and shall continue as
long without first or last; and if so, there was neither Chaos, nor any other
beginning to the Earth, etc.

Having thus stated this Opinion, he urges first the Scriptures against it, and
then many Arguments from natural Reason, which would be too tedious here to set
down: but however, this point of Beginnings being very nice, and variously
disputed amongst the Ancients, and the foundation on which the Author proposes
to build his Theory, I must say a little of what I have considered on it.

I find then that Aristotle was not the first Introducer of this Opinion of the
worlds Eternity, as the Author intimates him to have been; and that those who
in their Accounts of beginnings describe a Chaos, are not thence forced to deny
the same Eternity. Aristotle is so far from being the first that held this
Opinion, that even his Master Plato, according to the sense of most of his
Expositors, as Crantor, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Jamblicus, Proclus, Macrobius,
Censorinus, that excellent Christian Philosopher Boethius, and many others, who
generally maintained the same, is concluded to have held that the World was
always, and always was from God, and flowed from him; for they say, God always
is, but that the World is always a making and flows; and if it be considered as
to a beginning of time, the World may be said not to have had any birth; but if
as flowing perpetually from God, its continually brought forth. Nor may the
World be said less to depend of God, if it always has depended, and ever shall
depend of him, than if at some instant of time it began to depend, and may
cease from it: as the light would no less draw its Origin from the Sun, and
depend of it, if it had always flowed from it, and should always so do, than if
it began at some instant of time to slow thence.

Those therefore, who maintain this Opinion, will say that God did not at any
time bring forth the matter new, but from Eternity, and that likewise with its
Ornament; although it be conceived without its Ornament before than with it: for
Nature wants its order, which it expects from another; and since each thing is
conceived first according to what it is, than according to what it receives; it
may properly be conceived first without Order, being void of it in itself. So
that when these men talk of a Chaos and Changes it underwent before it came to
be an habitable World, they understand it only as to the natural order of
things, according to our way of conceiving.

Amongst the Schoolmen, the Thomists, who generally take upon them to defend
Aristotle, say, It cannot be convinced by any natural efficacious Reason, that
the World was not made from Eternity, but in time, because the thing not
implying Contradiction, it depended merely on the will of God: and that when
Aristotle said the World was from Eternity, he said it only, as opining,
because nothing certain can be had in this matter, but by the sole light of
Revelation and Faith, Heb. 11.3.
according to what the Apostle says, By faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God. Tho others say, Aristotle affirmed that God, as
being a necessary Agent, made the World from Eternity. Others, that where he
endeavors to prove the Eternity of the World, he keeps himself within the
Principles of the Science he was treating of, viz. Physiology, and thought
himself not there accountable for Metaphysical Birth. However this may be, I
think it manifest that the Opinion was much more Ancient than Aristotle.
Xenophanes, before him asserted the word to be (...). Philolaus likewise, that
famous Pythagorean, whose Books Plato is said to have bought for a great price,
of his Relations, and to have composed his Timaeus out of them, maintained the
same. Ecl. Phys. 7.44.
Slobaeus recording out of him, that this world was from Eternity and will
remain to Eternity. And again, That the world may truly be called, the Eternal
Energy or effect of God, and of successive generation. Epicharmus also, a
Disciple of Pythagoras, held it, and O^ellus Lucanus, according to Philo.
Neither need I to mention any that have maintained it since Aristotle (the
Author being free to own that he has had followers) as Pliny, Dicaearchus,
Simplicius, Averrhoes, Salustius, Apuleius, Taurus, Alcinous, and indeed most
of the Platonicks and Peripateticks after Christianity: I say, I may pass by
these, the Opinion being much more Ancient than any of those Persons I have
named, and indeed so ancient, that its hard to retrieve the Original: De Omn.
Gent. Rit. l. 2. c. 3.
for Boemus tells us, collecting I conceive from Diodorus; It was a constant
Tradition amongst the Chaldean Priests that the World had never any beginning,
nor should ^ever have an end: which Tradition possibly, with other corrupt
Doctrines, might have been derived to them from times before the Deluge. And
how indeed could they hold any other Opinion? when, as Philo tells us, L. de
Migrat. Abrahami.
they held the World itself, or the universal Soul within it to be God, which
they consecrated under the name of Fate and Necessity; persuading themselves
that there was no other Cause of things, but what is seen; and that both goods
and evils were dispensed by the Courses of the Sun, Moon, and Stars;
conformably to which Lucan introduces Cato, saying, Aestque Dei seeds nisi
terra, and pontus, and aer,
Et coelum, and virtus, superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.
What Seat has God, but The Earth, the Air, the Seas,
The Heavens, and Virtue? Seek no Gods but these,
Its Jove whatever you see, move where you please.
So again Psellus, in his Exposition of the Dogmata of the Assyrians and
Chaldeans, says, that both of them held the World Eternal.

I may add that the Ancient Druids held this Opinion of the Worlds Eternity,
their Philosophy being that of Pythagoras and Plato, which is concluded to have
been generally the same (I say not in this particular) with that of Moses; and
Pythagoras himself is said to have held it by Censorinus. Myth. l. 2. c. 2.
Natalis Comes also tells us, that all the ancient Sages were divided into two
Parties, one of them held the World Eternal, the others that it had sometime a
beginning; on the one hand were the most excellent Wits of the most famous Men,
on the other were divine Persons, and Men divinely instructed. And even the
Ancient Cabalists among the Jews, who think themselves the only Persons deep
seen in Scripture-knowledge, and to whom Origin seemed inclined, held an
Eternity of Worlds, tho indeed they supposed renovations of them from Chaos's
at certain Periods; concerning which I shall say more in the next Book.

I have delivered this Account of the Opinions of Men concerning the Worlds
Eternity, not but I wholly acquiesce in the Opinion commonly received among
Christians, of the Worlds late Beginning, but only to give the Point its due
Latitude, which I judged too much limited by the Author of the Theory.

And upon the whole, when we consider what is urged on both sides; as the
Author has brought Arguments of strength, to prove the World's late Beginning;
so I conceive there are as weighty Reasons to be brought on the other part, and
that many will still say with Scaliger, Exerc. ad Card. 61. 6.

L. de mundo.


Sola Religione mihi persuadetur mundum coepisse, and finem Incendio habiturum;
and with Melancthon, Necessaria est diligentia in omnibus doctrinis videre,
quae certo adseverari possint, quae non possint, and de quibus rebus humana
ratio certam and immobilem doctrinam habeat, de quibus vero arcanis, positis
extra conspectum hominum, erudiat nos vox coelestis. Neutrum humana ratio
invenire per sese potest, videlicet, fuisse mundum inde, usque ab Infinita
Eternitate, aut conditum esse recens, ante annos 5507. And beneath. Brevitas
temporum mundi a Mose tradita Physicis ridicula zidetur. Not a Man among the
Gentiles having dreamt of so late a Beginning of the World, as Moses seems to
intimate.

And hence the learned Father Simon judges it probable, Hist. Crit. c. 4.
that the Greek Doctors in the Septuagint Translation, believing that the World
was more ancient than appears from the Hebrew Text, have took the liberty of
etching out the time; especially upon the belief they had, that when the body
of the Canonick Scripture, which we have, was published, the people had only
given them what was thought necessary for them. So those, who will not allow
Plato to have held the World Eternal, must at least grant, he supposed it to
have existed for a vast and unaccountable Succession of Ages. And so we find
what Simplicius replied to Grammaticus, Simpl. in Arist. Phys. l. 8.
who urged against him a first Generation and a Beginning of time according to
Moses, viz. That Moses's Relation was but a fabulous Tradition, wholly drawn
from Egyptian Fables.

Aquinas also seems to me to give an home hint to those who from humane Reason
will pretend to assign a time for the Worlds beginning, P. 1. Art. 2. Q. 46.
saying, Mundum incepisse est credibile, non autem demonstrabile, aut scibile;
and hoc utile est ut consideretur, ne forte aliquis quod fieri est, demonstrare
praesumens, rations non necessarias inducat quae praebeant materiam irridendi
infidelibus, L. de mundo. c. 25.
existimantibus nos propter hujusmodi rations credere quae fidei sunt. So
again, Picolomini. Quoniam principium originis mundi, long abest a nobis; and
ejus creatio superat naturae vires, per cujus opera elevantur Philosophi ad
inventionem causarum, ideo mirum non est, si Philosophi, humana ducti ratione,
facile in hanc sententiam labuntur, quod mundus omni ex part sit aeternus:
revera enim per naturam, nec principio, nec fine valet esse praeditus.

Moreover, as to all those learned amongst the Gentiles, whose Opinions
concerning the Worlds Beginning, the Author applauds before Aristotle's; its
manifest they were more absurd than him in what they held; for generally
grounding themselves on this Principle, Ex nihilo nihil fit, they either
supposed Corpuscles from Eternity, rolling without order in an immense Space;
or that the said Bodies lay lurking in a confused Chaos from Eternity. Now
wherein do these men excel Aristotle? Is it, in that they have made a deformed
World from Eternity, which came in time to be adorned? Is there less absurdity
and repugnancy in an infinite multitude of disorderly motions, than of such as
succeed in order? and in the Eternity of a deformed Body, than of a beautiful?
Certainly it was better Aristotle's way; who not having foreseen any
Impossibility of eternal Motions and Bodies, had rather have the Face of the
World beautiful from Eternity, than at some time to have emerg'd from an
eternal Deformity.

Again, whereas the Author, in his second Book, where he treats of the
Cosmogonia Mosaica, will have it, that the Creation, according to the six days
Works, set forth, Genesis 1. is delivered only (...), ad capum usumque Populi; and
judges that some of the Ancients have delivered the Generation of the World
more Philosophically. I must confess, if any Tergiversation were to be allowed
from the Text of Moses, I should be more inclined to think, that either the
World being eternal, as the fore-mention'd-Philosophers held; or, at least,
that the time of its Rise or Creation, being indefinite, and wholly inscrutable
by Man (as all the Gentiles, who held it not eternal, must have supposed it,
not a Man of them, as far as I know, having assigned or substituted any
determinate time for its beginning), Moses, as a divine Legislator, substituted
a time for its Creation or Rise, and the Modus of it (whereas the Gentiles
substituted only the Modus according to their corrupt Divinity) thereby to
carry on a Doctrine for the Good and Salvation of Man; and that his Chronology,
according to the Lives of the Patriarchs, may possibly be resolvable by
Arithmantical Divinity, according to certain Symbolical Mysteries contained in
Numbers: or I should more readily follow the Opinion of Austin, than any of
those Philosophers; he holding that God created all things in an instant,
without any succession of time; which Opinion might as well have been
considered by the Author, as that of the World's Eternity, this equally taking
away those gradual Changes, which he represents in the Chaos; setting the World
immediately in the State it is. And truly it seems much more rational to me,
that all things were set in their perfect State at first, whether it be taken
as the Text of Moses literally imports, by a properated Maturation; or
instantaneously, after the Opinion of Austin; than to suppose an Earth
gradually qualified (as those Philosophers do) for the Production of Plants,
and Animals, etc. So that their Earth, as it rose from a Chaos, must have been
a long time in a Quagmire condition, and not affording a tolerable Habitation
for an Irish Bog-trotter; till the Sun, I know not after what Revolution of
Ages, had made it tenantable; which appears but a meagre and unsatisfactory
Story, of which I may say more elsewhere. Of Austin's Opinion also were the
most rational amongst the Jewish Doctors, Rabbi Moses Aegyptius, Philo Judaeus,
Abraham Judaeus, and the Schools of Hillel, De Creatione. Probl. 1:
and Schammai, as Manasseh Ben Israel writes. Procopius Gazaeus also, and
Cajetan held the same. I may add, that Hermodorus the Platonic, says that
Linus writ the Generation of the World, the Courses of the Sun and Moon, and
the Generation of Fruits and Animals; and that in the first Verse of his Work,
he affirms all things to have rose together. And so much for this Point, which
some, perhaps, may think more than need to have been.

I shall now proceed to state the Author's Theory, for the Composition of his
Earth, or how it rose from a Chaos; which runs thus:

First, He supposes that all those that allow the Earth an Origin, agree that
it rose from a Chaos (tho I have shown before, that Austin, and those that are
for instantaneous Creation, could not agree to it, farther than to help out our
way of conceiving; because no real successive Changes could then have passed in
the supposed Chaos, in order to the Earth's Formation,) and then he lays down
two Propositions to be made out by him.

The first is, That the Form of the Antediluvian Earth, or of the Earth that
rose from a Chaos, was different from the Form of the present Earth.

The second is, That the Face of the Earth before the Deluge, was smooth,
regular, and uniform, without Mountains, and without a Sea.

He proves his first Proposition; first, because, he says, he has shown in his
Second Chapter, that if the Earth had been always of the present Form, it would
not have been capable of a Deluge.

Secondly, he proves it from a Passage in the second Epistle of S. Peter,
Chapter the Third.

Thirdly, He proves it from Reason, and the Contemplation of the Chaos, from
whence the Earth first arose.

To the first Proof, I answer, that as I have intimated before, it does not
concern me here to show how a Deluge was possible, according to the present
Form of the Earth, which may still rely on Miracle, till more valid, natural
Reasons are assigned for it, than any, perhaps, have hitherto been; and all I
undertake, is, to show that the Deluge could not have happened according to the
Hypothesis laid down by the Author, which I conceive I shall make out in its
due place.

As to his second Proof from S. Peter, first I have intimated in my
Advertisement to the Reader, prefixed to this Book, that a right reverend Divine
has already given some Explanation of the Passages of Scripture, contained in
the Theory; and in this regard I shall not intermeddle with them, farther than
necessity of Argument shall enforce me thereunto. Secondly, as to Scripture
Passages, I have this to offer in general, that since the End of the Scriptures
is of an higher Nature, than to instruct us in natural History, and in Sciences
grounded on second Causes, to which God has left them, as useless to the
Salvation of Men; I think they ought not to be applied but in those holy
things, of Faith, and Morals, for which they were dictated: and possibly it was
on these accounts, that those of the Ancients, who are supposed to have read
the Books of Moses, did not quote them in their Writings. Again, since the
Author is pleased to set by the first Chapter of Genesis, as not
Philosophically written, (tho certainly this, if any part of the Scriptures is
designed for our instruction, as to the original state of the World, and the
beginnings of things) I know not why he should much insist on any part else,
unless it be so self-evident, that it is not liable to various Expositions, as
those Passages he quotes, are by him allowed to be. Neither to me do they seem
cogent; tho I may allow some of them to bear a fair Exposition enough his way,
as others seem more natural in another sense: But this I observe generally of
Quotations; that, farther than they carry a fair stress of Reasoning with them;
what by various Explications, and comparing of Passages, they breed endless
Cavillations, which rather nauseate, than satisfy a judicious Reader. And even
that Passage of S. Peter, so much insisted on by the Author, tho it seems to
intimate to us some other state of the Heavens and Earth before the Flood, than
they have since; we find the thing is not so clearly hinted, that any Man since
could thence divine what that State should have been: and I shall show in the
sequel, by Arguments drawn from the Nature of the thing, that the Attempt the
Author has made for explaining it, has been unsuccessful: and so for his Tehom
Rabba, or the great Abyss of Moses, which he has also much urged; and for any
other Passages he has quoted.

To come to the Author's third Proof, which is from Reason and the
Contemplation of the Chaos, whence the Earth rose: this Proof, in effect, is
not only for making out, that the Earth, as it rose from a Chaos, in its first
state, was of a different Form from the present Earth, according to the Authors
first Proposition; but, withal, is partly for showing that the Face of the
first Earth was smooth, regular, and uniform, without Mountains and a Sea, as
he has set forth in his second Proposition; wherefore the scope of it being
connected with the Motions, Progress, and Separations, which he supposes to
have passed in the Chaos, for forming the first Earth, I shall briefly state
them both together, as he has represented them.

He supposes then the Chaos as a fluid Mass, or a Mass of all sorts of little
Parts or Particles of the Matter of which the World was made, mixed together,
and floating in confusion, one with another: Hence he says, there follows an
impossibility that this Mass should be of such a Form and Figure, as the
Surface of our present Earth is: Or that any Concretion, or consistent State,
which this Mass could flow into immediately, or first settle in, could be of
the said Figure. He proves the first of these Assertions, because a fluid Mass
always casts it self into a smooth and spherical Surface: He proves the second
Assertion; because, when any fluid Body comes to settle in a consistent and
firm State, that Concretion, in its first State of Consistence, must be of the
same Form, that the Surface was when it was liquid; as when Water congeals, the
Surface of the Ice is smooth, and level, as the Water was before: And hence,
when he has considered the broken condition of the present Earth, both as to
its Surface and inward Parts, he concludes, that the Form of it now cannot be
the same, with that it had originally; which must have been smooth, regular,
and uniform, according to his Second Proposition. And to make this clear, he
sets forth the Motions and Progress which he supposes must have passed in the
Chaos, and how it settled it self in the said Form, when it became an habitable
World.

1. First therefore, he presents us with a Scheme, which represents the Chaos,
as is before expressed, viz. as a spherical and fluid Mass, containing the
Particles of all the Matter of which the World is composed, mixed together, and
floating in confusion in it.

2. The first Change which he conceives must happen in this Mass, must be,
that the heaviest and grossest parts would subside toward the middle of it,
and there harden by degrees, and constitute the interior Parts of the Earth;
while the rest of the Mass, swimming above, would be also divided by the same
Principles of Gravity, into two orders of Bodies, the one like Water, the other
volatile like Air; and that the watery part would settle in a Mass together
under the Air, upon the Body of the Earth, composing not only a Water, strictly
so called, but the whole Mass of Liquors, or liquid Bodies, belonging to the
Earth, and these Separations in the Body of the Chaos are represented to us in
a second Scheme.

3. The liquid Mass, he says, incircling the Earth being not the mere Element
of Water, but a Collection of all Liquors belonging to the Earth; some of them
must be fat, oily, and light; others lean and more earthy, like common Water.
Now these two kinds mixed together, and left to themselves, and the general
action of Nature, separate one from another, when they come to settle (which
these must be concluded to have done) the more oily and thin parts of the Mass
getting above the other, and swimming there, as he represents in a third Figure.

4. Next, he considers, that the Masses of the Air and Waters were both, at
first, very muddy and impure, so that they must both have their Sediments; and
there being abundance of little terrestrial Particles in the Air, after the
grossest were sunk down; these lesser also, and lighter remaining, would sink
too, tho more slowly, and in a longer time; so as in their descent, they would
meet with that oily Liquor on the watery Mass, which would entangle and stop
them from passing farther, whence mixing there with the unctious substance,
they composed a certain Slime, or Fat, soft and light Earth, spread on the Face
of the Waters, as he shows in a fourth Figure.

5. He says that when the Air was fully purged of its little earthy Particles;
upon their general descent, they became wholly incorporate with the oily
Liquor, making both one Substance, which was the first Concretion, or firm, and
consistent Substance, which rose upon the Face of the Chaos; and fit to be
made, and really constituted an habitable Earth; which he sets before us in a
fifth Figure, and which I have also subjoined; where A is the first Sediment of
the Chaos; B the Orb of Water, or the Orb of the Abyss; C the Orb which made
the first habitable Earth.



6. Having thus represented the Rise of the Earth from the Chaos, he adds, that
whereas the Ancients generally resemble the Earth to an Egg, he thinks the
Analogy holds as to those inward Envolvings represented in the Figure of the
Earth, and that the outward Figure of the first Earth was likewise oval, it
being a little extended toward the Poles, which he represents to us in a sixth
Figure, and which I also here insert; where, as the two inmost Regions A B
represent the Yolk, and the Membrane that lies next above it; so the exterior
Region of the Earth ( D) is as the Shell of the Egg, and the Abyss C under it,
as the White that lies under the Shell.



This is the Author's Theory of the Earth, in reference to the Composition of
it, as it settled from the Chaos, in its first State; which he says he has all
along set forth according to the Laws of Gravity: And this must now be
considered by me.

First then, If I should allow that the first Earth was formed from a Chaos,
according to those Separations the Author has represented, it would no way
answer his chief End, for which he gave it this Construction, viz. The Capacity
of causing a Deluge, as I shall make appear in my Considerations on the next
Chapter. But tho I might be free to allow it, as for any Deluge to be thence
caused; yet in other respects, I must not do it, because I take upon me to
maintain, that the World, from its first Existence, had Mountains, a Sea, and
the like, as it has now. And both in reference to the Author's Argument from
Reason, viz. That all fluid Bodies, and any first Concretion on them, must keep
to a sperical Figure; whence he concludes, the Earth, on its first Concretion
from the Chaos, to have taken it; and so as to the Separations he supposes to
have passed in the Chaos, I have many things to say.

Not to stand therefore with the Author for allowing a Chaos, and that it was a
fluid Mass, and of a circular Figure (tho I know no reason why a Man should
admit a Postulatum, which if the Authority of Moses may be set by, as the
Author does, I see no ground for, unless it be to serve a turn, for trying
whether a natural Explication may be given of a Deluge, which I judge
miraculous) and to reason with those, who seem to have held gradual successive
Changes to have passed in the Chaos, in order to the forming of the World; The
main Error, as I conceive, on which the Author has grounded his whole Theory
for the Composition of his Earth, as it rose from a Chaos, is, that he has here
considered the Chaos, not as a strongly fermented Mass, which it must
necessarily have been from the infinite variety of seminal Principles of a
contrary Nature therein contained (as all Antiquity has represented it) and
from this fundamental Error has concluded, that in the Separations and
Settlements of the Chaos, all things passed according to the common Laws of
Gravity, observed in the subsiding of unfermented Bodies; no respect being had
to those Effects, which must necessarily have been produced by the said
Ferments. Can any Man cast his Eye on the Contrariety of Natures which appears
betwixt Superiors and Inferiors, and what we find in the Animal, Vegitable, and
Mineral Kingdoms, which every where occur to us, and not presently thence
conclude from the consideration of a Chaos, where all these are supposed to
have been confusedly mixed, that the same Contrariety must have been there, and
that turbulent and violent Commotions were thence raised in it? To go no
further than Ovid, who has represented the Nature of a Chaos, as well as any of
the Ancients: where he speaks of it, he says, -- Congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
-- And mingled there
The jarring Seeds of ill-joyn'd beings were.
And beneath, -- quia corpore in uno
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
-- 'cause in one Mass
The cold things fought with hot, the moist with dry,
The soft with hard, the light with contrary.
Indeed as he affirms, the World to have risen from the Chaos, he immediately
subjoyns, Hane Deus, and melior litem natura diremit.
God and prevailing Good broke off this Strife.


But how far this jarring Discord was taken away, according to what we may
reason from second Causes, and what Effects must have been produced by them
upon the framing of a World, must be considered by us.

It must not then be thought, that when the Chaos came to be separated in order
to the framing of a World, all the homogenious Bodies, or pure Elements, were
ranged by themselves; a pure Element being a pure Chimaera, no such thing in
Nature. Indeed if such a Separation had been made; whereas there was a Mutiny
before in the Chaos, this would have established a Peace, but such a Peace,
that no habitable World, nor any Animal, Vegitable, or Mineral Productions
could then have been. The Elements then, upon the separation of the Chaos, must
have been mixed and blended together, according to such Proportions as to be
able to produce such Effects, as the prime Author designed them for; therefore
when we consider his design was a World should be produced, qualified for the
Production, Support, and Propagation of those varieties of Species we find in
Nature, and withal reflect what the Quantities and Qualities of those Elements
were, and are, which chiefly concern us in this Discourse, viz. The Earth and
Waters, we shall soon find how this habitable Earth and the Sea thence arose.

All the Water which the Author does account for in Nature (as I shall have
occasion to set forth in the sequel) does not amount to enough to make an Orb
of Water, to cover the Earth, as it lies in an even Convexity with the Sea, a
quarter of a Mile deep; and what is this to the vast Body of the other Element
the Earth? Not comparably so much as a Sheet of the thinnest Paper laid on a
Globe of three foot diameter, adds in thickness to that Globe. Indeed,
notwithstanding this disproportion, if the Earth, when it first settled from
the Chaos, had been an homogenious Body, without any Principle of Motion in it,
arising from Ferments, through the Contrariety of Natures therein contained,
the Waters must have covered it, as Moses seems to intimate it did; Genesis 1. but
when those Ferments, quickened by the ordinary concourse of the first Cause (not
to insist here on a miraculous fiat) came to exert their Force, can we think
that less Effects could be wrought, than the production of Mountains, and a Sea
Channel, such inconsiderable Nothings to the Body which produces them? the
greatest Mountains on the Earth being no more in proportion to the Earth, than
the slightest Dust on a Globe of three foot diameter, is in proportion to that
Globe; as the ingenious French Author of a late Book entitled, De L'Origine
des Fountains, has well made appear; where he has likewise shown, that the
little Protuberances on an Orange, which are usually compared to the Mountains
of the Earth, are each of them a thousand times greater in proportion to that
Fruit, than any Mountain on the Earth is in proportion to that Globe. We find
that many very small vegetable Seeds contain a protrusive Principle in them,
able to raise Bodies by degrees, containing many Tuns weight, and can we doubt
but the primigenial Earth, fermented with the Seeds of all things in it, had a
force able to produce the Effects mentioned? And tho the Author seems to smile
at those, who have held that Mountains have been cast up as Mole-hills, or
produced as Wens on the Body of Man; I know not whether it may be so easy to
show a Disparity, and why the one is not as possible, and as probable as the
other; for if the vastness of the Body will afford it, and there be a
proportional mover, neither of which, I think, any Man has reason to question
in the Earth, I know not why the Earth may not be judged better able to produce
the one, than the Mole, or Man's Body the others.

I well know, that all Antiquity (I mean it of those who held the World had a
gradual beginning from a Chaos) abets this Theory, as I have stated it; and the
feigned Story of the Giant Typhoeus (if it contains any natural deduction)
relates here: Typhoeus being that Enormontick Spirit (if I may so call it) or
that protrusive Impetus, still reigning in the Chaos, through Ferments, Winds
and Inflammations, and causing the present Unevenesses in the Earth, and the
retiring of the Waters into a Sea-Channel, till at length all things being set
in their apt State; Jupiter, or a meet temperies of the World, composed these
turbulent Commotions, and put a stop to their exorbitant Efforts. And this
seems to me a more apt Explication of the original Formation of the World, than
that the Author would introduce.

I may farther here note, that tho I think the original Formation of the World
may be accounted for this way; yet I am of opinion there is no Mountain on the
Earth now, that is an original Mountain, or that existed when the World first
rose, and conclude with Aristotle, that the Sea and Land have changed places,
and continue so to do; and I think it not possible for any Man fairly to solve
the Phenomenon of marine Bodies, found in Mountains, by any other Principle;
especially by a Deluge caused as the Author has proposed. But it being not my
business here to set fort a Theory of the Earth, but only to show the
Inconsistency of the Author's Hypothesis, I shall not enlarge at present in
making out these things; but refer them to a particular Tract, I design to
publish with what convenient speed I may; the Demonstrations whereof will refer
to certain Cuts, taken from a Collection of Fossil's, I have by me; where I
hope to satisfy the Author in some tolerable way concerning the Rise of
Mountains, Islands, etc. and to solve all the Objections he has made against
their Rise any other way, but what he has proposed.

CHAP. VI.
WE are now come to the main drift of the Author's Undertaking, viz. How the
Deluge was caused: And in this Chapter he proposes to show, that it happened
upon the Dissolution of the first Earth, and that the Form of the present
Earth, then rose from the Ruins of the first.

First then, he here presents us with a Figure of the Earth all smooth on the
Unequal part (as he conceivs it must necessarily have been as it rose from a
Chaos) the great Abyss supposed to be spread under it. And next he supposes,
that at a time appointed by Providence, this great Abyss was opened; or that
the Frame of the Earth broke, and it fell down into it: And this, he says,
would first cause an universal Deluge, by the great Commotion and Agitation of
the Abyss, on the violent Fall of the Earth into it: Then after the Agitation
of the Abyss was asswag'd, and the Waters, by degrees, were retired into their
Channels, and the dry Land appeared, we should see the true Image of the
present Earth in the Ruins of the first. The Surface of the Globe, he says,
would be thence divided into Sea and Land; the Land would consist of Plains,
Valleys, Mountains, with Caverns containing subterraneous Waters, etc. The Sea
would have Islands in it, and Banks, and shelfy Rocks on its Shore, etc. And
these things, in the following parts of his Work, he examins piecemeal: but
first here he considers the general Deluge, and how aptly this Supposition
represents it.

Supposing therefore it will be easily allowed, that such a Dissolution of the
Earth would make an universal Deluge, he enquires in what order, and from what
Causes the Frame of this exterior Earth was dissolved.

The great Cause he assigns for producing this great Effect, is, the continued
Heat of the Sun, which he supposes in the Antidiluvian World, to have always
moved in the Equinox, there being then no Colds nor Rains, nor Change of
Seasons; so that what by its* parching Heat, sucking out the Moisture of the
Earth, which was the Cement of its Parts; and so drying it immoderately, and
causing it to cleave in sundry places; and what by rarifying the Waters under
the Earth into Vapors, which would thence force a way for their Dilatation and
Eruption, he concludes the Dissolution followed. He exemplifies his Doctrine
first, by an Aeolipile, or an hollow Sphere with water in it; which, if the
mouth of it be stopped, which gives the vent, the water when rarefied by the heat
of the fire, will burst the Vessel with its force. Secondly in an Egg, which
being heated before the fire, the moisture and air within being rarefied, will
burst the shell: and he is the more free to instance this Comparison, because
he says, when the Ancients speak of the Doctrine of the Mundane Egg; they say
that after a certain period of time, it was broken. Thirdly, In Earthquakes,
which generally he says arise from the like Causes, and often end in a like
effect: viz. a partial Deluge, or innundation of the place or Country, where
they happen, which may naturally lead us to conceive that a general one has so
come to pass.

Lastly, He says the main difficulty proposed, was, to find Waters sufficient
to make an universal Deluge, and that after sometime it should so return into
its Channels, that the Earth should become again habitable: for according to
the common Opinion, he says, it was impossible, that such a quantity of waters
should be any where found or be brought upon the Earth; and then if it were
brought, that it should be again removed: whereas this explication performs the
same effect, with a far less quantity of water; which is easy to be found, and
easily removed when the work is done; for he says, when the Earth broke and
fell into the Abyss, a good part of it was covered by the mere depth of it: and
those parts of it that were higher than the Abyss was deep, and consequently
would stand above it in a calm water, were reached and overtopt by the Waves,
during the agitation and violent commotions of the Abyss; and to represent this
commotion to us, he supposes a stone of ten thousand weight, taken up into the
Air a mile or two, and then let fall into the middle of the Ocean; and believes
that the dashing of the water upon that impression, would rise as high as a
Mountain. But if a mighty Rock, or heap of Rocks, a great Island, or a
Continent fall from that height, the dashing must rise even to the highest
Clouds; and he thinks it is not to be wondered that the great tumult of the
waters, and the extremity of the Deluge lasted for some months: because,
besides that the first shock and commotion of the Abyss was extremely violent,
here were ever and anon some secondary ruins, which made new Commotions lasting
the time supposed, till the waters by degrees were retreated; the greatest part
of them constituting our present Ocean, and the rest filling the lower cavities
of the Earth. And from things thus explained, he concludes, that this third and
last Proposition is made out, viz. That the disruption of the Abyss or
Dissolution of the primeval Earth, and its fall into the Abyss, was the cause
of the universal Deluge, and of the destruction of the old World.

I have been the more particular in stating this part of the Theory, because
the main point under debate is here contained; which I must now examine.

The Causes assigned by the Author for such a dissolution of the Earth as is
mentioned, do not seem to me so competent as would be expected for such a Work.
The Sun doubtless, supposing (as the Author does) that in the Antedilunian
World, it always kept in the Aequinox, there being no Rains, Cold, nor changes
of Seasons; would heat, dry and cleave the Earth in some parts, especially in
the Torrid Zone considerably: but withal it must be considered how far the
action of the Sun could penetrate for producing the effect proposed: its known
that if a Wall be heated red hot on one side, it still continues cold on the
other: Its also a known Experiment, that a good Thermometer, placed in a
subterraneous Grotto of an ordinary depth, scarce varies perceivably in the
hottest day of Summer and the coldest day of Winter: how then shall the Sun
penetrate three miles and three quarters deep into the Earth (for so deep the
Author seems to suppose his Orb of Earth to have been, as I shall by and by
show) and heat an Abyss of waters lying under it, so as to rarifie it into
vapors, Qui queat hic subter tam crasso corpore terram
Percoquere, humorem and calido sociare vapori?
Praesertim cum vix possit per septa domorum
Lucret. l. 6.
Insinnare suum radiis ardentibus aestum.
And indeed, Heat being not essentially in the Sun, but an effect of the light
by whose beams its imparted to us; where Light is excluded, Heat also must of
course. The Grotto, where no operation of the Suns Heat is found, has an open
passage into it, for the Suns operation, if it could there exert it; whereas
the Author supposes the Antediluvian Earth to have been one continued substance
without so much as a Cavern in it. Again, we must consider of what nature the
Torrid Zone must have been: and the Author, in his second Book, concludes it a
sandy Desert: if so, Sand is not inclinable to cleave, but soon fills up any
Cleft made in it; as I believe may be observed in all the sandy Deserts now
extant: and if Rocks are supposed under the Sands; certainly horizondal beds of
Rocks, as all must have then have been, are not liable to the Suns penetration,
at least by any perceivable Heat: and indeed let the nature of it be what it
might, it comes much to the same thing, and every Man who has used himself
underground knows how little the Sun has to do with its Heat there. Now tho the
continued Equinox Heat, then supposed, may seem to aggravate the matter, there
must have been, at least, a vicissitude of days and nights, and those still of
equal length, so that the Earth would be always cooled in the night, as well as
heated in the day.

Moreover, tho the Author supposes his Antediluvian Rivers to terminate as they
came to the parts, on each side the Torrid Zone, being partly exhaled by the
Sun, and partly absorpt in the Sands; yet their waters must necessarily have
passed in the Sands under Ground, through the parts of the Torrid Zone, which
would soon fill up any clefts there made by the Sun. I say the Waters must have
passed so, because his Antediluvian Earth must have been porous, to percolate
waters to all parts, otherwise its impossible the Inhabitants in the temperate
Zones should have been supplied with waters to serve their necessary uses, by
Wells; for no Man can indulge Fancy so far as to think the Antediluvian Rivers
could have been so thick, and near enough each other, to afford a convenient
supply for the Inhabitants of all the parts of the habitable Earth. Men think
it now very burthensom to fetch water a mile or two, as in some places they are
forced to do by their Situation remote from Waters, and I hope it will not be
said that the Rivers were then within a mile, or two, or ten, or hundreds
sometimes of each other.

As to the Comparisons brought in by the Author of the Aeolipile, and the Egg,
which are broken, when the moisture within them is rarefied, and turned into
vapors by the heat of the fire. I answer, that when it shall appear to us,
that the Sun could cause an Heat in the waters of the Abyss, proportional to
what the others have when broken, we may consider more of it; mean while, such
an effect is so far from falling within my Conception, that I look upon it in
Nature impossible. And as to the Doctrine of the Ancients concerning the
Mundane Egg's breaking, I shall consider it in the second Book; tho I may so
far take notice of it here, that whereas the Author here intimates as tho the
Ancients by mentioning the Mundane Egg's breaking, referred to a Deluge, its
being caused that way; the contrary is manifest to us; for we know it was a
general Opinion amongst the Ancients, that the World had been renewed by many
Deluges and Conflagrations, whereas if one Deluge had been caused by such a
disruption of the Earth, any second, or third Deluge had been impossible.

But, what is most urged, is, that the generality of Earthquakes arise from
like Causes, and often end in a like effect; viz. a partial Deluge or
Inundation of the Place or Country where they happen. To this I answer, that
tho some Philosophers assign the Causes of Earthquakes after this manner, viz.
That the struggling of Vapors raised and rarified by the Sun, in the Earth,
sometimes cause a Disruption, the Earth thereupon subsiding into Caverns,
whence Waters flow forth, etc. yet it would be hard to expect that Men should
generally so far acquiesce in this Cause, as to allow it a fair ground to build
an Hypothesis of this weighl upon: When as a great, if not the greatest, part
of Philosophers, assign other Causes for Earthquakes, and those, perhaps, more
probable. Some will have Earthquakes to be caused only by certain Conjunctions
of the Planets, some by the Motion of Comets near the Earth, others by
subterraneous Fires or Ferments; which truly produce Heats and Vapors within
the Earth; the Sun having nothing to do in it, more than by a remote and
general Causality; others will have them produced by the Motion of
subterraneous Waters, others again by certain Moulderings or Founderings in
certain Caverns of the Earth, and other Causes are assigned for them.

Lastly, When the Author comes to the main Difficulty, (as he calls it) viz.
The finding of Waters sufficient to make an universal Deluge, which after some
time should so return into its Channels, that the Earth should become again
habitable; both which, he says, are as easily effected, according to his
Explication (set down before by me) as they are impossible any other way: I
confess, I greatly admire at this his Assertion, and the Explanation he gives
for those Effects.

The first thing we should have expected from the Author in reference to this
Point, is, that he should have signified to us, of what Depth he supposes his
Abyss to have been, and what Thickness he allows to his Orb of Earth; for
unless we will reason by rote, it must be upon a due consideration of these
things, that we must conclude of what Effects could follow, upon the supposed
disruption, in reference to a Deluge, and the forming of the present Earth (as
he will have it) thence: and indeed, if any Person proposes a Theory, or an
Hypothesis, and the Propositions he advances to build his Doctrine upon, be not
either self-evident, or demonstrated by him; the first thing he ought to do, is
to lay down his Postulata, that a Man may clearly see how he adjusts his
Reasonings upon them. But to talk of a Body to be drowned, and not to give us
the Dimensions of the Body, and of the Water to effect it, seems to me to have
neither top nor bottom in it; and no more than to say, such a thing must be
done, but God Almighty knows how. We find the Author has been diligent enough,
in showing what Quantities of Waters would be required to make a Deluge, where
he writes against the Opinions of others: and it seems but Justice, that he
should have been as careful in setting down what Quantities would be requisite,
according to his own: He saw there was no proper way to refute their Opinion,
but by a particular Examination of what Quantities of Waters would be requisite
to make a Deluge, according as they fancied it; and then to show, that if such
a Quantity of Waters were once brought on the Earth, it would be impossible for
the Earth to get rid of them again, so as to make an habitable World: And if he
would help us to conceive how a Deluge should happen, and the present
Phoenomena of the Earth be solved consequentially to it, I see not why he
should be backward to assign us some possible Proportions of his Orbs of Earth
and Waters in order to it; unless (which I cannot think) he had rather involve
Men in erroneous Thoughts, by offering only unlimited Generals, and make them
fancy a possibility where there is none.

It Is the business of Philosophy to possess us with clear and explicit Notions
of things; and not to imbroil us in such as are confused and obscure. I may
allow what the Author says in his Answer to Mr. Warren, Cap. 3.
That when the Nature of a thing admits a Latitude, the original Quantity is
left to be determined by the Effects; and the Hypothesis stands good, if
neither any thing antecedent, nor any present Phoenomena can be alleged
against it: But I cannot see that the Nature of this thing admits of a
Latitude, so that the present Phoenomena of the Earth may not be alleged
against it: And I believe, if Carts had supposed a Deluge to have been caused
(as the Author does) on the Disruption of his Earth (whereas he supposes only
the Rise of Mountains, a Sea, and the like by it, the Conceptions of which may
admit of a Latitude in some more tolerable way) but all Men would have justly
expected he should have assigned Proportions to his Orbs; and I am so far from
thinking that any Latitude assignable to Proportions of such Orbs can be here
admitted, that I am of opinion, when any Man shall assign any Proportion
whatsoever to an Abyss Orb for causing a Deluge (as the Author proposes) I
shall always be ready to show him, either his Abyss Orb to be so shallow, that
the Hypothesis cannot swim in it, or so deep, that it must drown in it.

Now tho the Author has not assigned particular Proportions to his Orbs, as it
might have been wished, yet he has offered some Suggestions, by which we may
guess what he would be at concerning them. What therefore I have gathered from
him, in dispersed Notions, in his Work, in reference to those Proportions, is as
follows.

First, He tells us in his first Book, p. 77. and p. 84. and again, p. 127.
That all the Waters, which were contained in the great Abyss, are now
contained in the Sea Channel, and the Caverns of the Earth.

Secondly, In this same Book, p. 10. he computes the Sea to cover half the
Globe of the Earth, and that taking one part of the Sea with another, it makes
a quarter of a Mile depth throughout.

Thirdly, In this same Book, p. 15. he says, that if the Earth should disgorge
all the Waters it has in its Bowels, it would not amount to above half an Ocean.

From these three Assertions we find, that the great Abyss, which he supposes
for causing a Deluge, must have contained only an Orb of Waters, not a quarter
of a Mile depth, as it was couched on the Face of the first ediment of the
Chaos; which is supposed by him to be of a ponderous compact Substance, and not
containing Waters within it. And so much for the Proportion of his Abyss.

As to the Thickness he allows to his Orb of Earth, I gather it from him as
follows.

First, In his Second Book, p. 273. he says, that the whole primaeval Earth, in
which the Seat of Paradise was, was really seated much higher than the present
Earth, and may be reasonably supposed to have been as much elevated as the tops
of our Mountains are now.

Secondly, He has supposed in this First Book, p. 11. that some of the
Mediterranean Mountains, taken with the general Acclivity of the Earth, from
the level of the Sea, make two Miles in height above the said level: or, at
least he does not there except against this Computation, as he has occasion to
mention it (tho for his satisfaction, I shall state also other Proportions to
his Earth beneath, to see what will follow upon it), and I believe all learned
Men will allow this Proportion. To this I must add, that tho he has not named
what depth he allows to the Sea, I must conclude that he allows it two Miles
deep, as learned Men generally judge it to be; where he supposes his Abyss to
end; part of the first Sediment of the Chaos, receiving the Waters of the Sea
upon it. And thus we find from the top of the highest Mountains, to the bottom
of the supposed Abyss, in the deepest parts of the Sea, we have four Miles (as
we may say) in view; or, at least, agreed to by our Author, and all learned
Men, and that whereas he allows near a quarter of a Mile to the depth of his
Abyss (as I have shown before) so his Orb of Earth must have been at least
three Miles and three quarters in thickness.

All these things being thus established, let us now consider how a Deluge
could be hence made, according to the Description of Moses. If I should but
present a Scheme here, according to those Proportions, allowing a quarter of a
Mile to the Abyss Orb, and three Miles and three quarters to the Orb of Earth;
I believe any Man, at first looking on it (as to any Deluge to be thence
caused) must cry out, Impossibility! The Abyss Orb being but the twelfth part
of the other, without counting what must additionally accrue to the Orb of
Earth from its much larger Circumference, as being the upper Orb. The Author
ascribes the cause of the Deluge to the Violence of the Commotion of the
Abyss, upon the fall of the Earth into it; and to represent to us what this
Commotion must be, he supposes a Stone of a vast weight, carried up a Mile or
two in the Air, and let fall; and tells us to what a vast height Waters must
then be conceived to fly. But I cannot allow this Instance to be fairly brought
in: If a Painter be to draw a Ceiling-Piece in a Room of an high roof, we may
allow him to draw the Picture (of a Man there, suppose) much bigger than the
natural, that it might deceive our Eye, to its advantage, when viewing it at
that distance, it takes it in a proportion to the Life. But to suppose a Rock,
an Island, or a Continent (as he says) two Miles high, in the Air, and to
conceive how high Waters would be thrown, upon their fall into the Sea; why
shall this be done, to deceive our Reason? When the Antediluvian Earth is
supposed before, not to have been suspended in the Air, but couched close on
the Face of the Abyss, as is represented by him in his Scheme of the
disruption of the Earth, Fig. I. p. 135. it being quite a different thing for a
Body, couched on the Face of Waters, to subside in them, and for it to fall
into them from an height.

Again, when part of the Orb of Earth subsided into the Abyss, there was no
room for the Waters of the Abyss to diverge; whereas when any Weight is thrown
into a River, or the open Sea, the Waters may fly off every way. And, indeed, I
think it manifest enough, that upon the subsiding of any part, of such an Orb
of Earth, in a manner all the Waters, that could rise thereupon, upon, must
have been contained either in the Chasms, or hollow places of its broken parts;
and that never any could come to make a Deluge on the higher parts of the
Earth. Besides, it is absolutely contrary to Moses's Narration, to make a Deluge
by such flights of Water in the Air; Moses telling us how the Waters rose and
fell gradually, and that they exceeded the highest Mountains fifteen Cubits;
the Author's Explication of it being so forced and unnatural, that, perhaps, in
so plain a Text, it was not fit to be put upon so great a Prophet.

But to put the matter beyond dispute, supposing the Proportions before laid
down, to the Orbs of the Abyss, and the Earth; we find a Mile and three
quarters of the Orb of Earth missing; for if the Sea be allowed but two Miles
in depth, as learned Men generally judge it to be; and that the Abyss there
ends on the first Sediment of the Chaos (as the Author supposes) we have then
in Nature but as much Earth as will make an Orb of two Miles in thickness, as I
shall show beneath: and what then is become of the other Mile and three
quarters Earth?

The next thing we have to consider, is this notwithstanding all the
Suppositions of the Author, before set down; when we come to view the Schemes
he has given in his Book; we find that contrary to his said Suppositions, in
all of them, he has represented his Abysse-Orb, thicker than his Orb of Earth,
so that counting the more large extent of the Orb of Earth, as being the upper
Orb, and the thickness of the Abyss Orb, which lies under it, we may judge them
to be of equal contents in their Dimensions, as you may see in the Scheme
before given you. And I believe, a Reader, who should peruse his Book
cursorily, not finding the Proportions of his two Orbs clearly stated; and
perhaps, not minding the Suppositions, before set down; which the Author was
forct, by the necessity of the Argument; to make on several occasions; when he
came to view this Scheme of his or the others; would have concluded that the
Author really supposed his two Orbs of the Proportions he here represents; as
indeed it is but a blind Put upon our Eye, as well as our Reason, if he did not.

Now, tho I must declare, I cannot comprehend how this can stand with the
Author's Suppositions (as I conceive they are) before set down, I am content to
suppose, as all his Schemes seem to import; that the Orbs of the Earth, and of
the Abyss, were, in their Contents of equal Dimensions; and we shall examine
what thereupon could follow, in order to a Deluge.

I suppose then, that the Antediluvian Earth contained an Orb of two Miles
deep, or as much as would make two Miles deep if it were coucht on the bottom
of the Abyss, as it then was on the surface of it: and that the Orb of the
Abyss, contained two Miles in depth likewise; for I suppose here, with the
Author, as before, that the two Orbs together made four Miles in height.

This being supposed; when the Earth broke, and made a Deluge, I ask what
became of the two Miles Water? The Author tells us that the Sea contains a
quarter of a Mile depth in Water, over half the Globe of the Earth: and says,
that if the Earth should disgorge all the Waters it has besides in its Bowels,
it would not make half an Ocean: and he tells us again and again, that all the
Waters of the Abyss are contained in the Sea, and in the Caverns of the Earth:
What then is become of the other Mile and three quaters Water?

Having thus demonstratively refuted (as I conceive) the Author's whole
Hypothesis, both according to the Proportions he seems to have given to his
Orbs, in his Schemes; or to have otherwise intimated them to have been in his
Work; I shall urge the matter a little farther, and plainly show it impossible,
either for the Author, or any Man else to assign any Proportions whatsoever to
such Orbs; that a Deluge, and the Form of the present Earth should be thence
caused; supposing only (as the Learned generally do) that the Sea is two Miles
deep in its deepest part; where the Author will have his Abyss to end, on the
first Sediment of the Chaos. For then, I say; first, I conceive, Men will
generally agree with what the Author has before laid down, viz. That there is
in Nature but Water enough to make an Orb of a quarter of a Mile depth, on the
first Sediment of the Chaos. And secondly, As to the Proportion, which must be
allowed to the Orb of Earth, it is manifest to us, that since it is two Miles
from the level of the Sea to the deepest part of it, and since it is all Earth,
in all parts of the Globe to that depth, except what the Waters in the Sea, and
in the Caverns of the Earth do amount to; which is but enough to make an Orb
but of a quarter of a Mile depth, round the Earth; a good part of which Orb
will also be countervail'd by that part of the Earth, which is above the level
of the Sea; it must follow, that no Proportion can be assigned to an Orb of
Earth, but about two Miles in depth. Now, we find, according to these
Proportions; which are the only Proportions assignable to the two Orbs; that
the Abysse-Orb is but a ninth part of the other; a Proportion no way answering
such an Effect, as a Deluge, and the forming of the present Earth, which could
not possibly thence ensue.

Thus I have been forced to apply Arguments several ways, and to make a large
Discourse on a Point; which, if the Hypothesis had been clearly stated, I might
have answered in a few Lines. And now I think, no more need be said, the whole
Contents of the Book falling of course; only as the Author has said in some
part of his Work, That he conceives what he has advanced may, at least, serve
to open the Inventions of some other Men; so, possibly, some part of what I
shall deliver in the sequel, may conduce to the same end.

If the Author does suppose, that at the time of the Disruption of his Orb of
Earth, there was an Orb of Air, or Vapors betwixt it, and his Abysse-Orb;
raised there by the constant Action of the Sun on the Abyss in the later Ages
of the Antediluvian World, as in some places of his Works he seems to intimate:
I think he ought to have represented such an Air-Orb, in his Scheme of the
Disruption of his Orb of Earth, p. 135. which he has not done: and therefore my
preceding Arguments have not related to any such Air-orb. But if he pleases to
be plain in the matter, and fairly tells us (if he supposes any such Air-orb)
how thick he supposes it, and what thickness he allows to his other Orbs; I do
here assure him I shall always be ready, either to show him the impossibility
of a Deluge its being caused that way, so that the Earth should be afterward
habitable; or freely to own that he has represented the Possibility of a thing
to me, which upon long thinking hitherto, I cannot conceive so to have been.

CHAP. VII. and VIII.
IN the seventh Chapter the Author endeavors to make out by Argument, and from
History, and particularly by some passages in the Scriptures, that the
Explication he has given of an universal Deluge, is not an Idea only: but an
account of what really came to pass in this Earth, and the true Explication of
Noah's Flood. And in the 8th Chapter, he endeavors particularly to explain
Noah's Flood, in the material parts and circumstances of it, according to his
preceding Theory: and concludes this Chapter with a Discourse, how far the
Deluge may be looked upon as an effect of an ordinary Providence, and how far
of an extraordinary.

I think it plain enough, by what I have set forth in the foregoing Chapter,
that nothing contained in these Chapters, can be of any force; wherefore I
shall pass them by; only taking notice of what the Author says concerning an
Ordinary or Extraordinary Providence in reference to the Deluge; for performing
which, he will not have the Waters to have been created, or otherwise
miraculously brought on the Earth: but allows, as there was an extraordinary
Providence in the Formation, or Composition of the first Earth, so there was
also in the dissolution of it: and thinks it had been impossible for the Ark to
have subsisted on the raging Abyss, for the preservation of Noah and his
Family, without a miraculous hand of Providence to take care of them. And
concludes, that writing a Theory of the Deluge, as he does; he is to exhibit a
series of Causes, whereby it may be made intelligible, or to show the proxim
natural Causes of it.

Now as for any natural Causes to be found for the Deluge, the learned Johannes
Picus, falling foul with Astrologers, says thus:

Astrologers ascribe Noah's Flood, as well as all other Miracles, mentioned in
the Scriptures, to their Constellations; in which thing doubtless they are
madder than those, who deny any such things to have been; because they believe
them, as they are related, and nevertheless effected by natural Causes; when no
greater madness can be imagined, than to think that any thing is done by
Natures power, above Nature it self; this being demonstrably so; because
nothing is more repugnant to Nature, than that it should attempt its own
destruction: wherefore it would never bring that Injury on its self, that it
could not free it self from by its Power. And if it could not be according to
the course of Nature, that the Waters exceeding the Mountains tops fifteen
Cubits, Noah with his Cargo in the Ark should be free from Shipwreck twelve
months; so it was not Natures purpose to drown the whole Earth with an
Inundation of Waters, to the destruction of all living Creatures. He adds also
particularly against Astrologers (who will have the Stars to be Signs, at
least, if not the causes of such effects) as follows. The course of natural
things is so limited by God, according to the Order he has established; and so
disjoined from those things which are preternaturally done, by the divine Power
and Will; that if all these were taken away, there would be nothing wanting nor
nothing abounding in Nature. Wherefore as by the Order established by God,
natural things are signified by natural Signs, and miraculous things by
antecedent Miracles; so Noah, being divinely inspired, and to be preserved by
the divine Power, signified to the World that an universal Deluge was to come
by a Miracle of the divine Justice, and he exemplifies the usual proceedings of
Providence in other instances of the same kind.

And indeed, we have reason to think, that if there had been any natural Causes
for the Deluge, some of the learned Persons then in being, at least upon Noah's
warning, would have perceived some growing dispositions in the Heavens and
Earth toward such an effect, and not have suffered themselves to have been all
surpised when it came, as the Scriptures represent to us they were.

Again, since the ten Plagues of Egypt were miraculous; which were to teach
only one obdurate King that there was a God, who commanded all things:
certainly when that God pleased to execute his vengeance on a World consummate
in sin; he would do it in an extraordinary and supernatural manner; that
Posterity should have no Tergiversation, but be forced to own that Divine
controling Power, being certified of this act, surpassing all natural Causes
whatsoever. And whereas the Author says, that he writing a Theory of the
Deluge, is to show the proxim natural Causes of it: It will be answered, that
when an effect is thus miraculously wrought, by an arbitrary determination of
the most remote Cause, we must not look after proxim Causes in Nature for it;
Effects being only accountable from any second or proxim natural Causes, when
things are left to Gods ordinary Concourse. Not but God often uses second
Causes in working Miracles, but then he raises that natural Power, otherwise
belonging to them to an height far transcending Nature; so that the common Laws
of motion and gravity, by which the Author pretends to establish his
Hypothesis, have no place here.

I may add, that it is the general Opinion of Divines, that nothing of those
things which God has made by himself, and without the concurrence of any other
Cause, will ever have an end, or total dissolution (as the Author intimates
this dissolution of the Earth to be) for want of Principles in them sufficient
for their eternal support; tho God, by his mere will may put an end to them, or
dissolve them as he pleases; and therefore as the Earth and other Elements were
made by God in the Beginning; so according to their natures they will remain
for ever without any destruction or dissolution, as to the whole, tho they may
undergo some partial Changes. And in reference to this, the learned Vallesius,
on that passage of Esdras, Considera ergo and tu, L. 4. c. 5.
quoniam minori statura estis, prae his, qui ante vos, and qui post vos minori
quam vos, quasi jam senescentes creaturae, and fortitudinem juventutis
praetereuntes. Says, but neither is that fourth Book of Esdras received by
Divines, nor could that Opinion ever down with me: for the World has Ages
according to divine Ordinations, and the account of Times which God has with
himself, but not according to Nature; since neither its rise was from Nature,
nor will its destruction so happen. Indeed, it may be that this or that little
part of the Earth, drained by long culture and sowing may decay, but not the
whole Earth; neither does any little part of it ever so decay, as things which
really grow old; so that it can never after resume its strength, and, as it
were, wax young again; but all things pass away and return in a certain Circle,
according to all and each of their parts, according to all, by vicissitudes,
some being decayed, others rendered more fertile; according to each, each of
them being alternately decayed and restored. And indeed, the Learned Dr.
Hakewill, in his Apology, has so well cleared the Point against a general decay
in the World, that I think it past time of Day now to have it brought in
question: so that such a dissolution in the Earth, tending to its general
decay, as the Author intimates, may not be admitted.

I shall conclude this Chapter by observing, that besides the miraculous
Providence, which the Author allows in the saving of the Ark, his Hypothesis
forces him to introduce two or three Miracles more; as I shall show in the
Second Book: Whence we shall find, that what he has endeavored to save in one
great Miracle, he has been forced to make out in little ones.

CHAP. IX.
NOW the Author comes to prove his Theory from the Effects, and present Form of
the Earth; and in this Ninth Chapter, after having observed that the most
considerable and remarkable things, that occur in the Fabric of this present
Earth, are; First, subterraneous Cavities, and subterraneous Waters: Secondly,
the Channel of the great Ocean: Thirdly, Mountains and Rocks. He proceeds to
give an account of these according to his Hypothesis: Beginning with
subterraneous Cavities and Waters: Saying that those Cavities were made, upon
the general Dissolution of the Earth, according as the broken Fragments
variously fell into hollow and broken Postures: and that the subterraneous
Waters are parts of the Abyss, the Pillars and Foundations of the present
Earth standing immerst in it.

Now, I have shown before, that such an Orb of Earth, and Dissolution of it on
the Face of the Abyss, for causing Noah's Deluge (as the Author has supposed)
was impossible, and consequently his Explanation here of subterraneous Cavities
and Waters cannot hold. I might add some things here for showing the necessity
of subterraneous Caverns in the Antediluvian Earth, which the Author denies to
have been: But because in the following Chapters, I shall show the necessity of
a Sea and Mountains, in those times; the Uses of which may be more conspicuous;
I shall pass by the Cavities at present.

CHAP. X.
HEre the Author treats concerning the Sea-Channel, and the Original of it, the
Causes of its irregular Form and unequal Depths: as also of the Original of
Islands, their Situation and Properties.

He exaggerates much in the Description of the Sea-Chanel; where amongst other
things he says thus, p. 128. When I present this great Gulf to my Imagination,
emptied of all its Waters, naked, and gaping at the Sun, stretching its Jaws
from one end of the Earth to another, it appears to me the most ghastly thing
in Nature. And again, p. 131. If we should suppose the Ocean dry, and if we
looked down from the top of some high Cloud, upon the empty Shell; how horridly
and barbarously would it look? And with what Amazement should we see it under
us, like an open Hell, or a wide bottomless Pit: So deep and hollow and vast;
so broken and confused, so every way deformed and monstrous, etc.

To this I must say, as far as I can conceive of the Sea-Channel, if it were
empty, and had a Sword upon it, and Trees, as the Land has; I can fancy no
other Prospect could be there, than what the Earth now affords us: We have
Mountains now that appear as high to us, as perhaps any would, if we then stood
in any part of the Sea-Channel; and so for any other supposed Unevennesses.
Indeed to look upon many places of it naked, without a Sword on them, might not
seem so well; so draw off the Skin from the most beauteous Creature on the
Earth, and see how it will look: as for other Ghastliness, I fancy none; for
when all is said, it is but a Veil spread over half the Earth, allowed to
afford a quarter of a Mile depth to the Sea, taking one place with another
thorowout, and not being above two Miles deep at the deepest part; and what is
this in a Philosophical Consideration, when compared with the vast Body it lies
upon? It Is a place fit to receive such a poor Lake as the Sea, otherwise not
worth naming, being not comparably so much to the Body of the Earth, as the
thickness of a Leaf of the thinnest Paper, drawn from one half part of a Globe
of three feet Diameter, takes from the bulk of that Globe.

Next the Author tells us, there are three things particularly to be considered
concerning the Sea-Channel, viz. Its general Irregularity, the vast Hollowness
of its Cavity, and the Declivity of its sides, which lie shelving, tho with
some Unevenness, from top to bottom. And these he thinks may be aptly explained
according to his Hypothesis, by the fall of the Earth, and are not explainable
any other way; and he gives us two Figures, for representing the Fall of the
Earth to effect these things: The like he says for the Rise of original
Islands; which he counter-distinguishes from such as are factitious; these
being made either by the Aggestion of Sands, or the Sea's leaving the tops of
some shallow places that lie high, or by a Divulsion from some Continent, or a
Protrusion from the bottom of the Sea. And he gives us also one Figure to
represent the Rise of those original Islands, according to his said Hypothesis.

To this I answer, That the Causes he has given for these Phenomenon relating
to the Sea Channel, are well assigned consequentially to his Hypothesis: but,
as I have already shown a failure in his Hypothesis, those causes cannot be
true, neither shall I be more particular on them. But as the Author has
excluded a Sea from his Antediluvian Earth. I shall set down a few Reasons, to
show the necessity of a Sea from the beginning of the World.

First then, we find a necessity of admitting a Sea, from the beginning, for
the support of Sea-Animals and Vegetables; which we cannot judge but to have
been from the beginning: For, supposing that the Authority of Moses, who tells
us of a Sea, and great Whales, etc. from the beginning should be evaded: I
would ask whether all Sea-Animals and Vegetables were created de novo after the
Deluge, or whether they were kept in the Antediluvian Rivers, or in the Abyss?
First to say they were then created de novo, or that their Seeds had been
preserved in the Antediluvian World, till they exerted their Powers at the
Deluge, it would no way be admitted: For this were in effect to exclude, in a
manner, half the Creation, in reference to Plants and Animals from the
Antediluvian Earth; the Sea being the most fertile of all the parts of the
World, the generative Faculty being no where so luxuriant, as there. Secondly,
they could not live in the supposed Antediluvian Rivers, which in all
probability must have been all fresh, and without any Saltness in them, as I
shall show in the next Chapter: And again, when we consider the various
Genius's of Fishes, we find it inconsistent for them to have lived in those
Rivers: For, as Philo says, Lib. de Mundi Opif.
all marine Animals receive not their Being in all places; some love a moorish
and shallow Sea, some Ditches and Ports, neither passing up into the Land, nor
swimming far from the Sea shore; some living in the deep Seas, shun Islands,
Rocks, and Promontories, running out into the Sea; and others are delighted in
calm and quiet Seas, others in tempestuous, so that being exercised with
continual tossings, and striving against the Surges, they become stronger and
fatter, etc. Now how all these Dispositions and a multitude of others could be
answered in the Antediluvian Rivers, or the Abyss, I see not. The like may be
said of all Birds living always on the Sea Coasts, and feeding on Sea Animals;
and the like of Vegetables, which grow no where, but in, or by the Sea.
Thirdly, as to the Abyss, certainly the Birds could not be preserved there; if
it be said that the Fishes or Sea-Plants could, I desire one Instance in
natural History, where any Animal or Vegetable, has been found living twenty
Fathoms deep in the Earth, where there has not been a Communication to the day:
I well know there are some Fishes (I cannot say Vegetables) living in some
subterraneous Rivers and Lakes, which have such a Communication, a I speak of,
but none otherwise.

To conclude, the Author, in his Answer to Mr. Warren, finding himself urged,
Cap. 11.
against the living of Fishes in the Abyss, through its closeness; instances
that a Child can live many Months, shut up in the Mothers Belly, where, he
says, there is Closeness and Darkness in the highest degree; and thinks it
likely that the Fishes were less active and agile in the Abyss than they are
now; and that their Life was more sluggish then, and their Motions more slow,
as being still in the Womb of Nature, that was broke up at the Deluge; and that
they had Air enough for their imperfect way of breathing in that state; and
that possibly they might have some Passages in their Bodies opened, at the
Disruption of the Abyss, when they were born into the free Air, which were not
opened before, etc.

To this I reply, that it is one thing what a Man is forced to say
consequentially to an Hypothesis, which he proposes to introduce; and another,
what Reason dictates to him, upon free Thought: And I believe, if the Author's
Hypothesis would permit him to be open and candid, he must own that such an
Abyss could be no probable, nor possible Habitation for Fishes. As for the
Instance of the Child in the Mothers Belly; where the Author says there is
Closeness and Darkness in the highest degree; we know it to be otherwise; the
Mother being a living and breathing Animal, and having a Body freely
perspirable; the Envelopings also with which the Infant is encompast, being
very thin; nor can the Child subsist if the Mother dies. Now what Analogy with
this has an Orb of dead Earth a Mile or two thick, with which the Abyss is
supposed to be invested, where the Fishes are said to live? Again, how
unnatural is it for the Author to make the Fishes, in the Antediluvian
Paradisiacal times, to be in an embrionate imperfect state; so that the Whale
could not sport himself, by spouting up Waters, nor the Nautili sail before the
Wind, nor any Fishes divert themselves, according to their Genius, and what
they enjoy in this pitiful degenerate World: So that at a time, when all things
on the Earth are supposed to have flourisht in a degree far transcending the
present; the poor Fishes (which least deserved it) lay under a double Curse;
being wholly pent up in a dark Dungeon, impervious to the Light and Air, as
great Blessings, as the World affords; and having no Food, but by preying on
each other; whereas now, besides Vegetables, growing in the Seas, they have
good Supplies by what the Rivers bring them, besides other good Contingencies
from the Shoars. I must confess that I know nothing forct and unnatural in an
Hypothesis, if this be not so.

Next, we must consider the Necessity of a Sea in reference to its Use, as to
the Earth; and to pass by its Use for Navigation, which is generally supposed
not to have been practiced in the Antediluvian times; we find that the Ancients
unanimously placed the Sea all along the torrid Zone; many of them saying that
the Body of the Sun, and other Planets and Stars were refresht and nourisht by
the Moisture thence drawn: But however we may look upon this Opinion, we must
still say with the Poet, Sed rapidus Titan ponto sua lumina pascens. And that
one of the chiefest Actions of the Sun's Rays on this inferior Globe, is, to
raise Waters from the Seas, to be passed thence by the Winds on all the parts
of the Earth, to qualify the Air, for the Promotion, Refreshment, and Support
of Vegetable and Animal Productions: and hence as Plutarch says, Homer, in the
Battle, opposes Neptune to Apollo; and hence Juno is said to have been born and
brought up in the Island Samos, and to have been educated by Oceanus and
Tethys, or by the Oceanine Nymphs; the Air being chiefly fed by the Sea-Waters
rarified. And indeed it seems much more natural to me, that the great Magazine
of waters, for supplying all the parts of the Earth, should, in good measure,
be placed on that part of it, where the strongest Action of the Sun is; than to
make it near the Poles, where its Rays have little or no Effect; or in places
remote from the said part. It Is true, the Author may say, the Waters are
brought round again, from the Poles to the Parts near the torrid Zone, by the
Rivers; and that the Rivers terminating there, these parts were all plashy and
moorish; whence the Sun might as well raise Waters to supply the Earth, as from
the Sea. But still I say it is unnatural not to place Waters where the strongest
Action of the Sun is; and again, I cannot think those other Waters would serve
the turn, they being all fresh, whereby (notwithstanding their flowing) a
general Corruption must have followed in them, as also in regard they were not
refresht by Rains, and frequent, Fountains passing into them, at certain
distances, as now: Neither do I conceive they could have aptly maintained a
Vegetation and Propagation of Species in Plants and Animals. And I make no
doubt, but if the Uses of the Sea were duly inspected and stated, its Waters,
as now qualified with an highly fermented Brackishness, would be found of as
necessary use in carrying on the Economy of the Macrocosm; as the bilous,
pancreatick, splenetick, and other Juyces are for performing the like Office in
the Body of Man; or indeed, as the learned Palaeopolitanus says, to take the
Sea from the Earth, Div. Dial. 2.
were the same as to drein an Animal of his Heart Blood.

To this we may add, that if the concurrent Vote of all the Men of Sense of
Antiquity signifies any thing, they are unanimous in the Assertion of a Sea
from the beginning; so as a Commentator on Aristotle has truly observed, that
all those who have held the World Eternal, held the Sea so too; and all those
that held the World to have had a beginning, held the Sea to have existed
together with it. And we know that Neptune was always held an Antediluvian God;
and so we know the famous Division of the World betwixt the three Brothers:
Jupiter commanding the Air, Neptune the Sea, and Dis or Pluto the inward
Regions of the Earth. And indeed, we find the Ancients so fond of a Sea, that
scarce any of them describe a terrestrial Paradise, but mention the Sea with it.

CHAP. XI.
THIS Chapter treats concerning the Mountains of the Earth, their greatness and
irregular Form; their Situation, Causes and Origin.

First then, the Author here gives us an Eloge on Mountains, expressing himself
thus:

The greatest objects of Nature are, methinks, the most pleasing to behold; and
next to the great Concave of the Heavens, and those boundless Regions where the
Stars inhabit, there is nothing that I look upon with more pleasure than the
wide Sea, and the Mountains of the Earth. There is something august and stately
in the air of these things, that inspires the Mind with great Thoughts and
Passions. We do naturally upon such occasions, think of God and his Greatness,
and whatsoever has but the shadow and appearance of Infinite, as all things
have, that are too big for our Comprehension, they fill and overbear the Mind
with their excess, and cast it into a pleasing kind of stupor and admiration.
But at last he concludes, that these Mountains, so specious as they seem, are
naught but great Ruins; and then expatiates much in setting forth their
Greatness, irregular Form and Situation, and lastly, assigns their Causes and
Origin.

Now, as to the Causes and Origin of Mountains, and the accidents belonging to
them; since I have already shown that the Account which the Author has rendered
of them, upon the breaking of the Earth at the Deluge, is erroneous; I shall
not here say more to them: especially having intimated already in the fifth
Chapter, how I conceive Mountains, a Sea, etc. may be accounted for more
rationally another way; but shall offer some things concerning the necessity,
and use of Mountains from the beginning of the World, as I have already shown
the necessity of a Sea.

When a man considers the fair Encomium the Author has made on Mountains, tho
at last, concluding them to be but a Ruin, and excluding them his Antediluvian
Earth; he would be apt to say, it is pity that Earth supposed far to exceed the
present, should be without such noble Ruins, and even Paradise it self: and
indeed as the Ancients (according to what I have intimated before) scarce ever
described a Paradise without mentioning a Sea, so they seldom did it without
naming Mountains. I know not how all Mankind may stand affected; but I know a
great part will agree with me, that a level Country can never be so pleasant,
as a Country diversified in Site and Ornament, with Mountains, Valleys, Chases,
Plains, Woods, cataractical Falls, and Serpentine Courses of Rivers, with a
Prospect of the Sea, etc. What is a dull Level to this? Where the sight is
terminated at the next Hedge; and if you raise Towers to overlook it, it can
never equal, or come near the Charming variety of the other. Nor does the
Authors Instance, in his Answer to Mr. Warren, c. 7. seem to me to clear the
Point, where he says, we are pleased with the looking upon the Ruins of a Roman
Amphitheater, or a Triumphal Arch, tho time has defaced its beauty. For the
question will still lie, whether a Roman Amphitheater, or Triumphal Arch, in
its Glory, were not more beautiful and pleasing to behold, than the Ruins of
them: and I shall still be of Opinion, that the present Earth, on the accounts
before expressed, has a more delightful and Charming prospect, than its
Antediluvian state, as by the Author represented, could have afforded, but let
us consider the use of Mountains.

We find the Ancients called the Earth (...) our Mother Earth; for as Plato
says, the Earth does not imitate a Woman, but a Woman the Earth: and they
compared the Mountains on the Earth, to the breasts of a Woman: and indeed if
the thing be duly considered, we shall find that the Mountains are no less
ornamental, and of necessary use to the Earth, for affording continual streams
of fresh Waters to suckle all her Productions; than the protuberant Breasts of
a Woman are, both for beautifying her Person, and yielding sweet streams of
Milk for the nourishment of her Children. Hence also they called Nature (...),
multimamma, and adored it by that name, under the figure of an Hermaphrodite;
this Hermaphroditical Figure of Nature was to denote its double Power; because
the Ancients, and among others of them, Orpheus, Trismegistus and Soranus said,
Nature was both male and female, and hence with the Greeks it is said, (...).
And Orpheus styled Nature (...), Deum Naturam; and the ancient Latins used
Naturus as well as Natura, they gave it therefore an Hermaphroditical Figure,
but still with many Breasts, the Types of Mountains.

Secondly, The very learned Joannes Reuchlin tells us, L. 1. de verb. mirif.
that the whole Ornament of Nature, is from the admirable variety of things
found in it. And D. Hakewill tells us, he ever conceived that Variety and
Disparity in that Variety, serving for Ornament, Use and Delight, Apol. l. 5.,
might thereby serve to set forth the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of the
Creator, no less than his greatest and most glorious Works. We shall therefore
consider of what use Mountains are for promoting that Variety: of which we are
sufficiently put in mind by the learned D. Brown, in his judicious Account of
his Travels, p. 89. where he says thus:

Tho Austria be more Northern than Stiria, or Carinthia, the Heats are there
much greater; for there may be as much difference, as to the temperature of
air, and as to heat and cold, in one Mile, as in ten degrees of Latititude; and
he that would cool and refresh himself in the Summer, had better go up to the
top of the next Hill, than remove into a far more Northern Country. And
beneath. In the hot Country of Arabia Travelers complain much of the Cold they
suffer in passing the Hills. The Mountains of Italy and Spain are covered with
Snow and Ice all the Summer, so is Mount Atlas; when in Great Britain there is
no such thing. Hence it is easy to find of what Importance the Elevations of
Mountains are for diversifying Effects on the Earth: for it is manifest that the
Sun, that Father of Generation, joining with the central or seminal Mover in
the Earth; does not only diversifie Effects here, by his gradual Approaches,
according to the Rectitude of his Rays, on either side the Equator: But does
it rather in a greater measure, according to the various Reflections of his
Rays, through the various Sites and Elevations of the Earth; whence the
Atmosphere must be greatly varied in deep Valleys, on the tops of Mountains,
and in their various Acctivities, according as they regard several Faces of the
Heavens, Earth, and Seas. And since in respect of Elevations (as I have quoted
from Dr. Brown) there may be as much difference, as to the Temperature of the
Air, in one Mile of height, as in ten Degrees of Latitude; I wonder the
Antediluvian Earth is supposed without this Advantage: the Beauty of Nature
consisting in diversified Effects, and it being evident, that nothing can
diversifie so much, as such Varieties of Elevations.

Is it that the supposed Richness of the Antediluvian Soil could have supplied
all this? We answer, that such a rich and fertile Soil is no way proper for
many of Nature's Productions, which delight rather in such Soils as are
generally most barren. The learned Poet knew this when he said, Geor. l. 2.
Nec vero terrae serre omnes omnia possunt,
Fluminibus salices, crassisque paludibus alni
Nascuntur, steriles saxosis montibus orni,
Littora myrthetis laetissima, denique apertos
Bacchus amat colles, aquilonem and frigora taxi, etc.
All Soils produce not all things here below,
Willows delight in Rivers, Alders grow
In muddy Marshes, and the Wild Ash stands
On rocky Mountains, Myrtles on the Sands,
Beside the Sea, the Vine loves open Hills,
The Yew, the cold North Wind, and Winter chills.


We know that many Herbs, set in a fat and moist Soil, lose their Nature and
Virtue; because they love Drought. And Hippocrates tells us, that Mountain
Plants are of a more smart and vehement operation than others: And here a
learned Botanist has a large Field to expatiate, in setting forth the variety
of Plants, according to the various Sites and Elevations of the Earth.

The like may be said of Animals; how many Species of them are there, which
seem to be made for Mountains, and Mountains for them? Of which a Man might
say, as Virgil does of his Goats, Pascuntur vero sylvas, and summa Lycaei,
Horrentes rubos, and amantes ardua dumos. Geor. l. 3.



Goats, and such other Animals delighting in such course Food, which unless
eaten by them, would fall to nothing. And as Dr. Hakewill tells us, Apol. l. 5.
It Is observed that the Inhabitants of Mountains, by reason of the Clearness of
the Air, the Dryness of the Soil, and a more temperate Diet thereby occasioned,
are, for the most part, stronger of Limb, healthier of Body, quicker of Sense,
longer of Life, stouter of Courage, and of Wit sharper than the Inhabitants of
the Valley: And Mountains seem appointed by Providence to guard the lower
Countries from the violence of blasting and fierce Winds, to bridle the Fury of
the enraged Sea, to mark out the Bounds and Borders of Nations, to stop the
sudden Invasions of Enemies, and to preserve Hay, Corn, Cattle, Houses, and Men
from the danger of Land Floods, which overflow the Plains by the rising of
Rivers. And hence, Genesis dier. l. 5.
as Alexander ab Alexandro acquaints us, many of the Ancients paid a Veneration
to Mountains, extended on the Seacoast, as to a Deity, the Sea being thereby
kept from overflowing the Land.

Again, the Author having excluded Mountains from his Antediluvian Earth, he
excludes Metals and Minerals of course; for no Mountains, no Mines nor
Minerals: And it will be hard to give an Instance in natural History, of any
Mines in level Countries, unless some Fragments of Metalline Ores are carried
thither by a Torrent from some adjacent Mountain. For Metalline-Ores lie not in
Horizontal Beds, as they are all in level Countries; but in Beds either
standing perpendicular to, or some degree raised above, the Horizon; the
Reasons of which I may set forth in some other Tract. The Author speaking of
these Mineral Productions, in the Sixth Chapter of his Second Book, says thus,

As for subterraneous things, Metals and Minerals, I believe the Antediluvians
had none, and the happier they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor courser Metals; the
Use of these is either imaginary, or in such Works, as by the Constitution of
their World, they had little occasion for: And Minerals are either for
Medicine, which they had no need of farther than Herbs, or for Materials to
certain Arts, which were not then in use, or were supplied by other ways. These
subterraneous things, Metals, and metalick Minerals are factitious, not
original Bodies, coaeval with the Earth, but are made in process of time, after
long Operations and Concoctions by the Action of the Sun within the Bowels of
the Earth. And if the Stamina or Principles of them rose from the lower Regions
that lie under the Abyss, as I am apt to think they do, it does not seem
probable, that they could be drawn through such a Mass of Waters, or that the
Heat of the Sun could on a sudden, penetrate so deep, and be able to loosen,
and raise them into the exterior Earth.

I have intimated before, that the Author, upon his exclusion of Mountains, was
forced to exclude Minerals from his Antediluvian Earth; tho it be with this
hard Circumstance, that there is a plain Text of the Scriptures against him,
Genesis 4. where Tubalcain is said to have wrought in Brass and Iron, long before
the Flood, which seems to me unanswerable. So again, Genesis 2. it is said that the
River Pison encompassed the Land of Havilah, where there was Gold. And if we
give credit to the Book of Henoch, L. 4. de Antiqu. Biblioth.
quoted by Tertullian L. de Idololat. Tubalcain wrought also in the other
Metals, as Gold, Silver, etc. of which afterward Idols were made. Moreover the
Author allowing the Hebrew Chronology, that supposes but 292 Years from the
Flood to Abraham: now as Ralegh says, Lib. 2. cap. 1.. 7.
in Abraham's time Egypt had many magnificent Cities, and so had Palestine,
and all the bordering Countries; yea all that part of the World besides as far
as India; and those not built with Sticks, but with hewn Stones, and defended
with Walls and Rampires; and how all these Cities should be built with hewn
Stones without Iron, is not so easily imaginable: And to say that the Invention
of it was after the Flood, and all these things done with it in so short a
time, will not pass easily with me, whatever it may with others.

And that Gold and Silver were plenty in the time of Abraham, it is evident,
Genesis 13. where Abraham is said to have been very rich in Gold and Silver; and
again, Chapter 20. Abimelech says to Sarah, Behold, I have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver: and Chapter 33. Abraham says to Ephron, I will give thee
money for thy Field: Ephron answers, The field is worth four hundred sheckles
of silver: which when Abraham had heard, he weighed to him the Sum he had
named, in current Money. Again, it is recorded in History, that the first Man
that stamp't Money in Italy, was Janus; whom Berosus will have to be the
Patriarch Noah: which Opinion also the Author abets, both in his Theory, and in
his Answer to Mr. Warren. I could add many other Instances relating hereunto,
but I think these sufficient.

Now, it is true the Author, in his Answer to Mr. Warren, Chap. 10, as to the
Passage of Tubalcain, replies, That he does not believe Iron or Brass to be
once mentioned in all his Theory: Neither do I observe that they are there
particularly named; but, I believe, if any Man please to read that Paragraph of
the Authors, before set down, and duly weighs it, he will soon find (the whole
Context of it considered) what it naturally imports; and that there is a
difference betwixt an Evasion, and a satisfactory Answer. However I think it
reason, that every Man should be allowed to be his own Expositor. And if the
Author does take upon him to maintain, that Brass and Iron were before the
Flood, but no other Metals; I conceive what I have urged for the others
Coexistence with them, carries some weight; and if this will not be allowed: I
would ask what should hinder the Generation of the other Metals, if those were
then generated: For the main Difficulty still returns, No Mountains, no Mines;
and I would gladly see an Instance or two, in natural History (if there are
any) where Metals are generated without Mountains; and have some colorable
Reasons assigned, why, if any of the Metals were generated before the Flood,
others should not; since it is generally observed, that in the same Tracts of
Lands, where one sort of Metal is generated, several others accompany it. The
Author in the later part of the said Paragraph, intimates himself of Cartes's
Opinion, viz. That the Stamina, or Principles of Metals rose from the lower
Regions, that lie under the Abyss; and thinks it probable, that they could not
be drawn through such a Mass of Waters: Now, tho this be a good Argument
against him, Ad hominem, to show that he excludes all Metals before the Flood;
yet I shall not insist upon it; because I could never acquiesce in Cartes's
Hypothesis; and were he still living, I should be free to show him the ground
of my dislike. Carts consequentially to his Hypothesis, supposes Metals to be
altogether generated at the feet of Mountains; whereas, by Experience, we find
them as often, if not oftener, in Plains and Valleys on the tops of Mountains;
and those of a very considerable height, as in the sides and at the feet of
them. But this is no place to refute Cartes's Hypothesis. To conclude, whoever
goes about to exclude Metals from the Antediluvian Earth, I believe that the
Passage of Tubatcain will never admit of a fair Solution; for if any Passages,
in the Scriptures, are so self-evident, that they will not bear various
Interpretations, I look upon that to be one; and it not seeming to contain
Mystery, which may require to be allegorically resolved: And again, as for the
Nature of the thing, I believe no Man will be able thence to draw any Argument
to convince us of their Nonexistence before the Flood: Nor have we reason to
admit of any precarious Hypothesis tending thereunto.

Moreover, when the Author excludes Minerals from his Antediluvian Earth, we
should know how far the Word extends; for among other Minerals, Salt is one;
and indeed the Sea and Mountains being excluded, which are the two Magazines
for Salt, I know not how the World could have been well supplied: It Is true,
Men being generally supposed then to have eaten no Flesh, it would be the less
wanted: But whatever they eat, Salt is still a good Seasoner; besides the Uses
it has in the World for maintaining Vegetation, and other ways, especially in
Marine Plants; which cannot be supported by the ordinary Saltness, drawn from
the Earth.

Whereas the Author says that Metals and Metalick Minerals are factitious, not
original Bodies, coaeval with the Earth, etc. I cannot allow this to be so, at
least as to their Nonexistence before the Flood; for if he supposes those
Rocks, which are found on Mountains, with Metalline Ores betwixt them, to have
been primaeval, and to have fallen at the Deluge, those Ores must have been so
too; for it is evident to him that views Rocks containing Ores betwixt them,
that the Rocks and Ores were formed together, as I may demonstrate in some
other Work. And the Author allows the Rocks in Mountains to have been
Antediluvian, and to have fallen at the Flood; being free to own, that the
great naked Rocks he saw in the Alps, were some of the chief Motives, which
prompted him to this Hypothesis.

CHAP. XII.
IN this Chapter the Author gives a review of what has been already treated; he
sets forth the several Faces and Schemes, under which the Earth would appear to
a Stranger that should view it; first at a distance, and then more closely: he
examines and endeavors to refute all Methods offered by others for the
Explanation of the Earth's Form: and lastly adds a Conjecture concerning the
other Planets, their natural Form and State compared with ours.

There being little new in this Chapter, I have the less to consider in it;
neither will it concern me here to mind whether others have duly explained the
Form of the Earth, or not. I shall therefore only take notice of one Passage
here, because it relates to what I have elsewhere urged, where the Author
argues against some Divines; who say that God Almighty made the Mountains and
Sea-Channel immediately when he made the World; which Point he states as
follows.

Let us consider the Earth in that transient in complete Form, which it had
when the Abyss encompassed the whole Body of it: We both agree that the Earth
was once in this state; and they say it came immediately out of this State into
its present Form; there being made by a supernatural Power, a great Channel or
Ditch in one part of it, which drew off the Waters from the rest, and the Soil
which was squeezed and forced out of this Ditch, made the Mountains: Against
this he urges as follows.

If the Mountains were taken out of the Channel of the Sea, then they are equal
to it, and would fill it up, if they were thrown in again: But these
Proportions, upon examination will not agree: for tho the Mountains of the
Earth are very great, yet they do not equal by much the great Ocean: the Ocean
extends to half the surface of the Earth; and if you suppose the greatest depth
of the Ocean to answer the height of the greatest Mountains, and the middle
depth to the middle sort of Mountains, the Mountains ought to cover all the dry
Land, to make them answer to all the capacity of the Ocean: whereas we supposed
them upon a reasonable Computation, to cover but the tenth part of the dry
Land; and consequently, neither they nor the Sea-channel could have been
produced in this manner, because of their great disproportion to one another:
And the same thing appears if we compare the Mountains with the Abyss, which
covered the Earth before this Channel was made; for this Channel being made
great enough to contain all the Abyss, the Mountains taken out of it, must
also be equal to all the Abyss; but the aggregate of the Mountains will not
answer this by many degrees; for suppose the Abyss was but half as deep as the
Ocean, to make this Calculus Answer, all the dry Land ought to be covered with
Mountains, and with Mountains as high as the Ocean is deep, or doubly high to
the depth of the Abyss, because they are but upon one half of the Globe.

Now, whatever may be said of that Opinion of the Divines; which I do not take
upon me here to maintain: the Reasoning which the Author here urges against
them is no way conclusive, but contrary to his own Assertions and suppositions;
If he will be just to the Divines in allowing the whole Acclivity of the Earth,
with the Mountains to have been then taken out of the Sea Channel, and placed
where they are. For then, I say, he has supposed that the Sea covers half the
Globe of the Earth, and allows it, as I conceive, two Miles deep in the deepest
part (as it is esteemed in the computation of the most Judicious) and that
there is a general declivity from all Shoars to the bottom of the Sea, in all
its parts, tho that declivity be not every where even, but sometimes
interrupted, and the depth of the bottom of it be various. So again, He has
supposed in the second Chapter, that the whole Earth being, as it were a
Mountain above the Sea; there is a general Acclivity in it, from the Seashores
to its Mediterranean Mountains, and that this general Acclivity makes a Mile in
height to the foot of the said Mountains, and that some of those Mountains are
raised a Mile or more from the foot of them to their Summit: which makes an
height proportional to the Deepest parts of the Sea. Hence, I say, according to
the Authors own suppositions; if all the rise of the Earth above the level of
the Sea, taking both the general acclivity of it with the Mountains were pared
off, and turned upside down into the Sea-Channel, they must of necessity fill
it: the highest Mountains answering to the deepest parts of the Sea, and the
general acclivity of the Earth with the other Mountains, to the general
declivity, and other deeper parts of it. Or it may be represented briefly thus:

The Author supposes the Sea to cover half the Globe, and that taking one part
with another of it, it makes a quarter of a Mile depth throughout: Now I
believe the Author and all Men will agree, that if all the Mountains, taken
with the general acclivity of the Earth, were cast into a level, they would
make an Area over the other half part of the Globe, a quarter of a Mile in
height above the level of the Sea; and consequently according to his own
Hypothesis, it must be able to fill the Channel of the Sea, if empty.

For a Conclusion to this Book the Author considers the other Planets, which he
conceives to be of the same Fabric, and to have undergone the like fate and
forms with our Earth. Particularly as to Venus, he says, it is a remarkable
passage that St. Austin has preserved out of Varro, which is as follows:

That about the time of the great Deluge, there was a wonderful alteration or
Catastrophe happened to the Planet Venus, and that she changed her color,
form, figure and magnitude. This the Author says is a great Presumption, that
she suffered her Dissolution about the same time that our Earth did.

Now, First, the Author seems not to have quoted Austin's Passage right, saying
that the Planet Venus changed her color, form, figure and magnitude; De Civ.
Dei. l. 21. c. 8.
Austin's words being, ut mutaret colorem, magnitudinem, figuram and cursum.

Secondly, This Passage, I conceive has been answered aptly enough long since
by Ralegh, L. 1. c. 7. 2.
tho no great Philosopher; where he says, It is not improbable that the Flood
of Ogyges, being so great as Histories have reported it, was accompanied with
much alteration of the Air, sensibly discovered in those parts, and some
unusual face of the Skies. Varro, in his Book de gente Populi Romani (as cited
by St. Austin) reports out of Castor, that so great a Miracle happened in the
Star of Venus, as never was seen before, nor in after times: for the Color,
the Greatness, the Figure, and the Course of it, were changed: This fell out as
Adrastus Cyzicenus, and Dion Neapolites, famous Mathematicians, affirmed, in
the time of Ogyges.

Now, Concerning the Course of that, or any other Planet, I do not remember
that I have any where read of so good Astrologers flourishing among the Greeks,
or elsewhere in those days, as were likely to make any Calculation of the
Revolutions of the Planets so exact, that it should need no Reformation. Of the
Color and Magnitude I see no reason why the difference found in the Star of
Venus, should be held miraculous; considering that lesser Mists and Fogs, than
those which covered Greece with so long darkness, do familiarly present our
Senses with as great alterations in the Sun and Moon. That the Figure should
vary, questionless was very strange; yet I cannot hold it any Prodigy; for it
stands well with good reason, that the side of Venus which the Sun beholds,
being enlightn'd by him, the opposite half should remain shadowed; whereby that
Planet would unto our Eyes, descrying only that part whereon the Light falls,
appear to be horned, as the Moon seems, if distance (as in other things) did
not hinder the apprehension of our Senses.

A worthy Astrologer, now living, who by the help of Perspectives has found in
the Stars many things unknown to the Ancients, affirms so much to have been
discovered in Venus, by his late observations; Whether some watery disposition
of the Air might present as much to them that lived with Ogyges, as Galilaeus
has seen with his Instrument, I cannot tell: sure I am that the discovery of a
Truth formerly unknown, rather convinces men of Ignorance than Nature of
Error. So far Ralegh. Neither shall I add more here concerning the other
Planets, being willing first to see whether we can establish any thing certain
concerning this Planet we inhabit; concerning which we have much more hopes to
arrive at some solid Knowledge, than of Bodies so remote from us; and I little
pleasing my self in opining concerning things undeterminable by Man.

I shall conclude this Book by considering one thing, which the Author greatly
insists on in several parts of it: viz. That the first order of things is
regular and simple; and that the deformity of this present Earth, as it appears
all broken, and its incommodiousness show, that the present state of it was not
original, nor disposed according to the Laws and order of Gravity; and he
intimates, that in the primigenious Mass, the Earth must have held the lower
place, and the other Elements their proper Seats, according to the said Order,
and as he represents in his Hypothesis.

Now, the true Doctrine (as I conceive) of the Site and Figure of the Earth,
and other Elements runs thus. Although the Earth be a terminated Body, and seems
to have a certain Figure; yet the Elements have no proper and natural Figure,
3. De caelo.
as Aristotle has truly said; because if they had a natural Form they would be
corrupted if they lost it. But beside this Reason of Aristotle, there is
another: viz. That to each similar Body any Figure agrees, it having none
proper to it; nor does this hold only in the four Elements, but in all similar
Bodies; and it therefore agrees to the Elements, because they are similar; and
the reason why similar Bodies have no proper Figure, is, because a Figure was
not necessary to them; a Figure being constituted by Nature for actions; as an
Arm has such a Figure, because by the benefit of that Figure the Arm exercises
its actions: and by this Figure the Arm is an Arm, and such a Figure being
lost, it is no longer an Arm: so in artificial things, an Hatchet is therefore
an Hatchet, because it has such a Figure, which being lost, the Hatchet is no
longer an Hatchet, but only Iron and Matter; because the action of the Hatchet
flows from the Figure, which is to cut. A Figure is therefore necessary in
compounded things, but not in similar; because the use of Similars is not any
Operation, but only this, that they be the matter of others. Now tho the
Elements have not a proper Figure, yet of necessity their place must be
circular, and of a spherical Figure, as Aristotle says, by reason of the
extreme evenness of all their parts; so that an Element, being all even, it has
not whereby Angles should be made. And this must be understood of pure
Elements, or such as continue fluid: but our Earth, of which Mountains are
made, is not pure Elementary Earth, or a simple Body, but is a certain Compound
and aggregate of many Bodies: and when a Man considers the infinite variety of
Soils and Fossils, of which it consists, and their differing degrees of
Gravity, he cannot imagine that an even Surface could be thence made, even in
that respect, without considering any protrusive force of an inward Mover. And
whatsoever even rotundity the Earth were to have, according to its natural
Constitution; since it agrees most to the advantage of things, that certain
parts of the Earth should be high raised, others lying lower; it was fit they
should have such a Site, that so through the differing Complexion of diverse
parts of the Earth, the diversities of Minerals, Plants and Animals might
arise. And since things were first instituted by God, not only for having a
Being in themselves, but that they might be the Principles of others, therefore
they were produced in a perfect State, in which they might be the Principles of
others: And therefore, as Philo says, L. de mund. Opif.
the World was created in its Perfection, and not left crude, and all Plants in
their first Rise were laden with their Fruits, otherwise than now; for now all
things are generated in their seasons, and not all together. So Macrobius says,
Saturn. l. 7. c. 16.
If we grant particular things to have had a Beginning, Nature first formed all
Animals perfect, and then gave them a perpetual Law, that they should continue
a sucession by Propagation. And so Plutarch says, Its probable that the first
Generation was entire, and accomplished from the Earth by the virtue and
perfection of the Maker, without having need of those Instruments and Vessels,
which Nature has since invented and made in Females, which bear and engender,
by reason of its impotence and imbecility.

If we consider Animals, in which Nature is much more polite than in forming
this Compost of the Earth; we see how little the common Laws of Gravity and
even'ness in Figure are observed in them. What Mountain seems so enormous in
the body of the Earth, as the Bunch on a Camels back in that Quadrupede, or the
Bill of a Bill bird, in that Bird, or the head of a Rana piscatrioc in that
Fish? If it be said that these are organical Bodies, and that those parts are
formed so for certain uses: I think it as easy to show Analagous uses in the
various Site and parts of the Earth. And so, as to Gravity in Animals, why is
the upper Jaw placed above the lower? Or, why in Man are the Heart, Liver and
Spleen placed above the Pancreas, Reins and Bladder? Is it that they are
lighter? And why is the Soul it self in the Body? The Globe of the Earth
therefore, as well as the particular Bodies in it, have been set in order by an
Understanding Principle, and have every where a rational distribution of parts
for their proper Uses: for otherwise, as Plutarch says, If each thing were left
to itself, all would return into a Chaodical Confusion.

And I think Gassendus, as he reflects on D. Flud, Flud. Philos. Examen.
has aptly enough expressed himself to his Friend Mersennus, in reference to
those, who take upon them to correct the Order observed in Nature, saying; Why,
think you, are there Men that fancy Plants in Mountains, and the Stars in
Heaven might have been set in a far better order than they are, but because
they judge no order apt, but that which the mind of Man so discerns? These are
Men, who, if humane sagacity has excogitated certain artificial Contextures,
which seem pleasing, presently, by a narrowness of mind, strive to transfer
them to the nature of things, and think Natures works must then aptly consist,
when they are according to an Imitation of Art; as tho besides the mind of Man,
there were not another mind, to whom other harmoniacal Laws may be more
pleasing. And beneath he adds, If Hypotheses are proposed as learned
Inventions, which may exercise the Wit of Man by their subtlety, and by a
certain shadowy Analogy to things themselves seem not ungrateful, I freely
allow them as so: but for Men to urge them, as tho the nature of things must
consist as they have fancied, I see no reason we have so to receive them.

CONSIDERATIONS ON The Theory of the Earth. The Second BOOK. Concerning the
Primaeval Earth, and concerning Paradise.
CHAP. I. and II.
THE first Chapter is an Introduction, setting forth the Contents of the second
Book. The general state of the Primaeval Earth, and of Paradise. And its thus:
In the first Book, he says, He showed the Primaeval Earth to have been without
a Sea, Mountains, Rocks, or broken Caves; and that it was one continued and
regular Mass, smooth, simple, and complete, as the first works of Nature use
to be; but here he must show the other Properties of it; how the Heavens were,
how the Elements, what accommodation for humane Life, why more proper to be the
Seat of Paradise than the present Earth.

Concerning Paradise, he notes first two Opinions to be avoided, as two
extremes: One placing Paradise in the Extra-mundane Regions, as in the Air, or
in the Moon; the other confining it to a little spot of ground in Mesopotamia,
or some other Country of Asia, the Earth being now as it was then. For, he
says, It is not any single Region of the Earth, that can be Paradisiacal,
unless all Nature conspire, and a certain order of things proper and peculiar
to that State; so that both must be found out, viz. the peculiar order of
things, and the particular Seat of Paradise.

As to the peculiar Order of things; he says, It Is certain there were some
Qualities and Conditions of Paradise, that were not merely Topical, but common
to all the rest of the Earth at that time; and that the things that have been
taken notice of as extraordinary and peculiar to the first Ages of the World,
and to Paradise; and which neither do, nor can obtain on the present Earth,
were first a perpetual Spring and Equinox. Secondly, The Longaevity of Animals.
Thirdly, Their Production out of the Earth, and the great Fertility of the Soil
in all other things. The Ancients, he says, have taken notice of all these in
the first Ages of the World; or in their golden Age; and what they have
ascribed to to this Age, was more remarkably true of Paradise: tho not so
peculiar to it, but that it did, in a good measure, extend to other parts of
the Earth at that time. And he says, It Is manifest, their Golden Age was
contemporary with our Paradise, they making it to begin immediately after the
Production and Inhabitation of the Earth (which they, as well as Moses, raise
from the Chaos) and to degenerate by degrees till the Deluge. And as the Author
avers the whole Earth to have been in some sense Paradisiacal in the first Ages
of the World, and that there was besides some portion of it that was peculiarly
so, and bore the denomination of Paradise; so the Ancients besides their golden
Age, which was common to all the Earth, noted some parts of it, which did more
particularly answer to Paradise; as the Elysian Fields, Fortunate Islands,
Gardens of Hesperides, Alcinous, etc,

The first Character then of Antiquity, concerning the first and Paradisiacal
state of things, was a perpetual Spring, and constant serenity of the Air: for
this he quotes Virgil, Ovid, and other Poets of the Gentiles, and Christian
Authors for the same: and adds, that Jewish Authors have spoken of Paradise in
the same manner; saying, that the days there were always of the same length
thorowout the whole Year, which made them fancy Paradise to lie under the
Equinoxial.

The second Character was the Longaevity of Men (and he thinks it probable of
all other Animals in proportion) and this he says is well attested, and beyond
all Exception; having the joint Consent of sacred and profane History.

The third Character was the Fertility of the Soil, and the Production of
Animals out of the new made Earth: Hence also he says, all Antiquity speaks of
the Plenty of the golden Age, and of their Paradises, whether Christian or
Heathen; and so of the spontaneous Origin of living Creatures out of the first
Earth.

Now, as to the time of Duration: He says, It is to be noted, that these three
Phoenomena of the first World did not last alike. The Longaevrity of Men and
the Temper of the Heavens lasted to the Deluge: but that Fertility of the Soil,
and the simple and inoffensive way of living failed by degrees from the first
Ages.

In the second Chapter, the Author, upon a more distinct Consideration of the
three Characters before mentioned, represents the great Change (as he supposes)
of the World since the Flood; intimating it as well in the Civil World, as the
natural; and endeavors to show that the Earth, under its present form, could
not be Paradisiacal, nor any part of it.

I thought it necessary to state the Contents of these two Chapters here; that
the Reader might clearly possess himself of the Authors Doctrine introductory
to this Book; tho I shall offer nothing against them at present, but refer what
I have to say thereon to my considerations on the next, and some following
Chapters, where the Contents of these two will come more properly under
Examination.

CHAP. III.
HERE the Author sets forth the Original differences of the first Earth from
the present, or Post-diluvian. He proposes to find the Characters of Paradise,
and the Golden Age in the Primitive Earth, and gives a particular Explication
of each Character.

The Differences of the Primaeval Earth from the Present, He says, were chiefly
three, viz. The Regularity of its Surface, it being smooth and even: the
Situation or Posture of its Body to the Sun, which he affirms to have been
direct, and not as it is at present, inclined, and oblique; and the Figure of
it, which was more apparently and regularly oval than it is now. From these
Differences, he says, flowed a great many more inferior and subordinate, and
which had a considerable influence on the moral World at that time, as well as
the Natural; but he takes upon him to observe only here their more immediate
effects; and that in reference to those three general Characters, or Properties
of the Golden Age, and of Paradise, before expressed.

The most fundamental of the three Differences mentioned, he says, was that of
the Right Situation and Posture of the Earth to the Sun; for from this
immediately followed a perpetual Equinox, all the Earth over, or, if you will,
a perpetual Spring; and that was the great thing that made it Paradisiacal, or
capable of being so: the other two Properties, of Longaevity, and of
spontaneous and vital Fertility, being thence also easily explained.

Now the Right Situation of the first Earth to the Sun, he says, needs no proof
besides its own evidence; it being the immediate result, and common effect of
Gravity or Libration, that a Body freely left to itself in a fluid medium,
should settle in such a posture as best answers to its Gravitation; and this
Earth whereof we speak, being uniform, and every way equally balanced, there
was no reason why it should incline at one end more than at the other toward
the Sun. Wherefore, he says, the Earth at the Deluge was so broken and
disordered, that it lost its equal Poise, and thereupon the Center of its
Gravity changing, one Pole became more inclined toward the Sun, and the other
more removed from it, and so its right and parallel Situation, which it had
before to the Axis of the Ecliptic was changed into an Oblique, in which skue
posture it has stood ever since, and is likely so to do for some Ages. And from
this Change and Obliquity of the Earth's Posture, he intimates the change of
the form of the Year to have happened, it bringing in the inequality of Seasons.

The Right Situation of the first Earth to the Sun being therefore supposed by
the Author, making a perpetual Equinox, or Spring to all the World, answering
to the first and fundamental Character of the Golden Age and Paradise; which
Character, he says, had hitherto been accounted fabulous, as it was given them
by the ancient Gentiles, and Hyperbolical as by the ancient Christians; He comes
to explain the other two Characters, viz. the spontaneous fertility of the
Earth, and its Production of Animals at that time; which he will have to
proceed partly from the Richness of the Primigenial Soil, as he has set it
forth in his first Book, and partly from this constant Spring, and the
benignity of the Heavens; and concludes, that what makes Husbandry and humane
Arts so necessary now for the Fruits and Productions of the Earth, is, partly
the decay of the Soil, but chiefly the diversity of the Seasons, whereby they
perish if care be not taken of them. And for Animals, he supposes their Eggs,
as well as the seeds of Plants (there being a great Analogy between them) to
have been in the first Earth, and made fruitful equally with them, by the
Heavens or Ether, supplying the Influence of the Male, and imbibing
nourishable Juices from the well tempered Earth, for carrying on their growth
to Perfection.

The third Character, viz. Longaevity, he says, sprung from the same root with
the other, because taking a perpetual Equinox and fixing the Heavens, we fix
also the life of Man; the Course of Nature being then more steady and uniform,
whence followed a stability in all things here below. The Change and the
contrariety of Qualities we have now, being the fountain of Corruption,
suffering nothing to be much in quiet, either by Intestine motions and
fermentations excited within, or outward Impressions.

This is the substance of what the Author has delivered in this third Chapter,
against which I shall now proceed in order; considering first the three
Differences he assigns to his Primaeval Earth from the present; and then the
three Characters or Properties he ascribes to it, as rising from them.

The first Difference of the Primaeval Earth from the present, assigned by the
Author, is, The Regularity of its Surface, it being all smooth and even,
without Mountains, a Sea, etc. Now, as for this difference, I have refuted it
in my first Book, there showing his Hypothesis, as to the rise of Mountains, a
Sea, etc. to be erroneous and null; and having proposed a way more probable,
(as I conceive) for their Production from the beginning of the World.

The second difference he has assigned, is, The Situation or Posture of the
Earth's Body to the Sun; which, he affirms to have been direct, and not, as it
is at present, inclined and oblique; and subjoyns the reason which I have
before set down for it, viz. That the first Earth being uniform and every way
equally balanced, there was no reason why it should incline at one end, more
than at the other toward the Sun, till at the Deluge, being broken, it lost its
equal Poise.

To this I answer first, as is intimated just before, I have shown in my first
Book, that the Author has failed in making out by his Hypothesis the
Antediluvian Earth to have been more uniform, or otherwise equally balanced,
than it is now; and consequently his Reason here has no place. I have also
shown in the said Book, that common Gravitation rules not all in the
distribution of the parts of the World (as he supposes it does) but rather,
that there is a rational distribution of them in order to certain Uses: and
when a Man considers the present Posture of the Earth to the Sun, where one
Body so successively enlight'ns the whole, that in an annual Revolution, one
time considered with another, it balances light and darkness in every part of
it; and whereby the Earth in all its parts is rendered as habitable as it may
be, can this be looked upon as a forced, unnatural, Contingent, or
unprovidential Situation of it, as the Author intimates it to be, happening
only upon a Ruin. And if the World in its present Posture carries the face of
Eternity: and there has been no decay in it from the beginning, nor will ever
be, according to the ordinary course of Nature, as I think Dr. Hakewill has
learnedly made out, it looks odd to me that this Posture should be called
Forced and Unnatural; since nothing is more contrary to Reason, than that
Bodies should be held in an Eternal violent State; nothing being more certain
with Philosophers than that nothing violent can be Eternal. And indeed Dr.
Hakewill's Apology of the Power and Providence of God in the Government of the
World, is one continued Argument against the Author's Hypothesis; which had he
perused with attention, I believe it might have caused him to have saved his
pains in composing it.

Again, The Author seems to have greatly failed here, in not considering the
Vastness of the Earth's Globe, and that no conceivable, or possible Change,
happening upon any Dissolution of such a pitiful Epidermical covering of it, as
he intimates his Orb of Earth to have been, could have made it change from a
direct to an oblique or inclined Posture, through a fancied loss of its equal
Poise; and this, whether the frame of the Earth be supposed (as vulgarly) to
consist by an Equilibration of parts to the Center of Gravity; or (according to
the soundest Philosophy) by a Magnetic Vigor strongly binding its parts
together. For suppose his Orb of Earth, a Mile or two thick, C. 6.
as he says it was in his Book of the Conflagration; this can be no more to the
whole Globe of the Earth, than the thickness of a sheet or two of Paper is to a
Globe of three foot Dameter, as I have set forth in my first Book: Now suppose
a Globe of three foot Diameter, suspended as the Earth is by Libration, or
Magnetism; what conceivable alteration, in as much on the surface of it as
comes to about the thickness of a sheet or two of Paper, could cause any Change
in its Libration? Or what alteration in such a proportion of a Magnetic
Terrella three foot Diameter, could make it decline from its wonted Points of
bearing? When the Author pleases to explain these things to me, I may think
more of it; mean while, I must conclude the bare Proproposal of this matter to
be a plain Refutation of his Hypothesis. Nay, Let him suppose his Orb of Earth,
ten Miles thick if he pleases, or more, I desire him to show us some possible
way, how upon its disruption, such a proportion of either Hemisphere should be
brought on the other, as to be able to make it change the Position it had
before. Besides, if any such disruption of an Orb of Earth, as the Author
supposes, caused the Earth to change its Posture; it must have inclined to the
North, and not to the South, as he says it did; because from what appears to us
on the Globe of the Earth, it is manifest that we have much more Earth in the
Northern Hemisphere, than there is in South; and consequently its inclination
must have been this way.

But because the Author lays a great force on this Site of the first Earth to
the Sun, insisting on it, as the most fundamental of the three Differences in
the first Earth from the present, and establishing it as the Ground for making
out the three great Characters, Properties, or Phenomenon of the Golden Age of
the Ancients, and of Paradise; I shall be a little moan full in this Point, and
set down a few Reasons against this Doctrine, leaving it to Philosophical Heads
to consider how far it can bear. Neither has it been unconsider'd by many
learned Men already, what the Consequences must be, if the Sun should
constantly hold this Equinox Root, or the Earth had always a right Posture to
the Sun; which makes me somewhat the more admire how this Doctrine should now
be offered at.

We read of a King of Arragon, who was wont to say, that if he had been with
the Almighty when he made the World: he would have given him Councels, as to
Heats, Colds, and other Particulars, as to the frame of it, that it should have
been in a better state than it now is: and this may pass among the extravagant
Fancies of an inconsiderate Man. But when we come Philosophically to assert a
thing, it would require a more than ordinary Consideration, before we go about
to unhinge a Frame of Providence, as thinking to put it in a better state, than
an Infinite Wisdom has done. And so distinct is the Relation, and so artificial
the Habitude of this inferior Globe to the Superior, and even of one thing in
each unto the other, that the more we consider them, the more we may admire
them, and I think, the more despair of ever contriving them in a better, or
more advantageous Site than they are in. And tho all the advantages of the Suns
present Course, or of the Earths Situation to it, may not be known by Man; yet
I believe whoever shall go about to alter it, let him frame his Hypothesis as
finely as he please, he shall never be able to involve humane Reason so far,
but it may ever be made appear to him from what is known, that he has been
guilty of no less a mistake than that of Phaeton, in not carrying an even hand
as to Heats, Colds, Light and Darkness, etc. and that it cannot consist with
the general benefit of the Earth. And hence Theodoret, in his first Sermon
concerning Providence, sharply taxes those who would be finding fault with the
Seasons: Sed exurget fortasse ingratus quispiam, qui ea quoque quae been and
pulchre facta sunt, simulque sapienter and commode administrantur, reprehendere
vel culpare volens, dicat: Cur sodes istae anni conversiones fiunt? and quaenam
ex hisce anni partium successionibus ad nos utilitas redit? etc. And tho
according to the scantling of our Reason, we might fancy some posture of the
Heavens more commodious to the Earth than the present, yet thence presently to
conclude that such a thing must really have been; we having no solid historical
Ground for it; I cannot see but it renders us liable to that reprehension of
Austin; Tam stulti sunt homines ut apud artificem hominem non audeant
vituperare quae ignorant, sed cum ea viderint credunt esse necessaria, ut
propter usus aliquos instituta; in hoc autem mundo, cujus conditor and
administrator praedicatur Deus, audent multa reprehendere, quorum causas non
vident, and in operibus atque instrumentis omnipotentis artificis volunt se
videri scire quod nesciunt, l. 1. de Genesis contra Manich. c. 16. But to proceed
in Reasoning.

First then, The Author making the Sun in the Antediluvian times to hold
constantly the Equinox Root, or giving the Earth a right Posture to it, burns
the middle Zone, making it wholly uninhabitable, and unpassible (as he owns
himself) so that in the Antediluvian Earth there was no possible Communication,
betwixt the Men, or other Animals inhabiting the two Temperate Zones; which is
followed with these Absurdities (especally with the Author, who seems very
thrifty of Miracles) that, first, when God turned Adam out of Paradise (which
he supposes to have been in the South Temperate Zone, and the Torrid Zone to be
the Flaming Sword) he must have wrought a Miracle to have thence conveyed him
and Eve into this Temperate Zone. Secondly, after Adam had got Children here,
the Author owning the other Temperate Zone to have been inhabited before the
Flood, God must have wrought another Miracle, to have conveyed some of Adam's
Children thither to people it. Thirdly, at the time of the Deluge, he must have
wrought a third Miracle, to have brought of every Species of Animals in the
other Temperate Zone, into this, to have been received into the Ark; unless the
Author will say, that the Earth here produced all the same Species of Animals,
that were in the other Zone; which a Philosopher, considering that diffused
Variety Nature delights in, may be content to smile at, but will never allow;
or unless he can make out some other way the Conservation of those Species
besides the Ark, which will be considered by us in the sequel.

Secondly, By this Doctrine the Author drowns the two Polar Zones, supposing it
to have then rained continually there; and that all the Rivers that supplied
the Earth, thence arose; no Rains falling in the Torrid, or either of the
Temperate Zones. But in reference to the State of the two Polar Zones, L. 6. c.
5.
in case the Sun always kept the Aequinox Root, we must consider what the
Learned Dr. Brown says in his Vulgar Errors, where he has a Digression
concerning the Wisdom of God in the Site and Motion of the Sun: It is as
follows; If the Sun moved in the Equator, unto a parallel Sphere, or to such
as have the Pole for their Zenith, it would have made neither perfect Day, nor
perfect Night: For being in the Equator, it would intersect their Horizon, and
be half above, and half beneath: Or rather, it would have made perpetual Night
to both; for tho in regard of the rational Horizon, which bissects the Globe
into equal parts, the Sun in the Equator would intersect the Horizon, yet in
respect of the sensible Horizon (which is defined by the Eye) the Sun would be
visible unto neither: For if, as ocular Witnesses report, and some also do
write, by reason of the Convexity of the Earth, the Eye of Man, under the
Equator, cannot discover both the Poles, neither would the Eye, under the
Poles, discover the Sun in the Equator. Hence we find, that contrary to what
the Author has urged in his Answer to Mr. Warren, C. 5.
If the Sun moved in the Equator, there would be a total absence, or in a
manner as good, of the Sun in the Polar Parts; whence vehement and continual
Frosts must be there caused, which would render them impossible Sources for his
supposed Rivers.

Thirdly, we may consider whether the Sun, keeping always in the Equator, so
as to make a continual Spring, without a variety of Seasons, would make better,
for the Rise, Support, and Propagation of the Earth's Productions, even in the
Temperate Zones, than by its present Course. L. de Elem. Philos.
Bid, considering it, says, that if the Sun kept it self always at an equal
distance from us in the Equator, this great Evil would thence ensue, that the
Earth would never conceive within, which it does in the Winter, nor would
Fruits, if any then grew, come to a maturity, without which Animals cannot
live. And indeed, how the Sun, always keeping in the Equator, and making still
equal Days and Nights in all parts of the Temperate Zones, should carry on
Vegetation in the remote parts of them, is not to me intelligible: For now,
when the Sun is in the Aequinox, we find its Heats but faint to us, and were it
not that we are helped out, by its approach to us toward the Tropic, and
thereby rendering our Days much longer than the Nights, we have reason to doubt
how our Fruits would be brought to a maturity; much more those who live in the
more northerly parts, where the Vegetation wholly depends, on their continued
Days, in the Summer, with little or no intermission of Night. And hence the
Diversity of Seasons has been always looked upon as necessary, of which Cicero
says, De Rep. l. 4.
In Autumn the Earth is opened to conceive Fruits; in the Winter it is comprest
to digest them; in the Spring it is opened to bring them forth; in the Summer,
being brought to a maturity, they are either mellow'd or dried. In the Summer
the Bodies and Branches of Vegetables are increast; in Winter the Roots are
strengthened, and what is raised in the Summer is consolidated. We see generally
in Plants and Animals how Nature pleases it self in moving by interchangeable
starts, they require a time of rest as well as a time of labor: One while,
upon the Sun's access, they bring forth their Fruits, another while, upon its
retreat they resume their Strengths: Some Fruit Trees, indeed, in some Parts,
bear all the Year, but to conclude thence that all may do so every where, is
more than their Natures will bear; a Vicissitude of Seasons being necessary for
them: which Vicissitude seems to me plainly intimated in the Scriptures to have
been from the beginning: For when at the Cessation of the Deluge God says to
Noah, Genesis 8.22.
That he will no more curse the earth for the sake of man, and that thence
forward all the days of the earth, seed-time and harvest, heat and cold, summer
and winter, day and night shall not cease. This plainly denotes that such
things had past before, which having been interrupted during the Deluge, should
now return in their common course; for otherwise those words Summer and Winter,
Seed time and Harvest, had not been intelligible to Noah, as never having seen
or heard of such Seasons before. And Pererius, on the foresaid Passage, says,
it plainly appears to be fabulous, and full of Vanity and Ignorance, what Ovid
had said, Met. 1. That this Inequality of Seasons was not in the Golden-Age of
Saturn, but that then there was a constant Spring, and that afterward the Age
degenerating, this alternate Succession by Changes was brought on the World.

So again, when it is said, Genesis 1. Let lights be made in the firmament of
heaven, and let them divide day and night, and let them be for signs and
seasons, and days and years: All expound those Seasons for the four Seasons of
the Year. And here I may add, that by this altering the Sun's Course, and
making but one Season, it subverts all ancient Astronomy, which, if any
Learning, is concluded to have been derived to us from times before the Deluge.

And this Argument alone is convincing with me, I cannot say it will with all
Men, that since all agree, Clavem Magiae naturalis esse clavem Astrologicam,
and since the former Science has certainly been conveyed down to us from
Antediluvian Times, the Clavis to it must of course; now that Clavis is known
to be according to the present Disposition of the Heavens to the Earth; whence
I absolutely conclude that the same has ever been. And we know, that among the
Priestly Ornaments of Aaron, which carried the Types of the whole Universe, the
Breast Plate was one of the chief, in which the twelve precious Stones, among
other Significations, typifi'd the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and their being
ranged in four Ternaries, denoted the four Seasons of the Year; which I believe
had never been, unless those Seasons had been according to the most perfect
state of the World. And that the Antediluvian Patriarchs, as well as the
Postdiluvian, were in their respective times, the most absolute Masters of the
foresaid Science, of any Men on the Earth, and that from them, it has been
conveyed down in its Pureness to us, is what I know not how to disbelieve.

Fourthly, The Diversity of Nature's Productions being considered, the
Diversity of Seasons will be found absolutely necessary for them. For tho the
Sun, keeping always in the Equator, there would be a Diversity of Climates,
according to the different Latitudes from it: Yet no Man can think that this
alone would so much diversifie Effects, as withal the Sun's Access and Recess,
according to the Latitude of the Zodiac, in the Ecliptic; the Sun being the
chief universal Cause in Nature's Productions; and tho general Causes do not
specify alone, yet particular, or proxim Causes cannot exert their Power, L.
2. de Genesis and Cor. Text. 56.
without these gradual Approachments and Retirements of the Sun. Aristotle is
plain in this Matter, viz. That the Sun, by its oblique Motion, and not by its
direct, diversifies Effects: Because the Sun being in an unequal distance, its
Motion must be unequal, when the variety of Effects is caused. Or we may say
thus, if the Sun causes things by its Heat and Motion, and gives a differing
Impulse by its Motion, according to the Rectitude of its Rays, it cannot but
diversifie upon such gradual Accesses and Recesses.

To conclude, the four Seasons of the Year seem so natural, as nothing more, if
we consider their Analogy with the four Elements, the four Humors in Man's
Body, the four Quarters of the World, the Ages, the parts of the Days and
Nights, etc. And every Season is tempered or seasoned by another, and all
Fruits receive their Temperament in the Seasons from Heat, Cold, Rain, etc. so
that they are called Seasons from their Seasoning, and have a mutual Connection
and Dependence on each other for the general benefit of the Earth: and as the
Learned Dr. More says, consulting with our own Faculties, Antid. against
Atheism, l. 2. c. 2.
we observe that an orderly Vicissitude of things is most pleasant to us, and
much more gratifies the contemplative Property in Man; so that on all accounts
I must conclude the four Seasons to have been from all Ages. And hence the
Learned Vives says, De Verit. Fid. l. 1. c. 9.
Non semper est idem habitus Coeli and Soli, quum nihil ordinatius cogitari
possit, aut descriptius, mutantur enim rerum perpetuarum and immutabilium
actiones, prout expedit iis ad quae referuntur. And I believe that all Men
considering the State of Nature as it is, will say with Maximus Tyrius, Natura
est perfectissima harmonia.

Now, if the Reasons which I have given against the supposed Site of the Sun,
or Earth to it, before the Flood, have any Weight; as some of them seem to me
to carry a demonstrative Force, in showing the Nullity of the Author's
Hypothesis in this Point; then the three general Characters or Properties,
which he ascribes to the Golden Age and to Paradise, viz. The perpetual Spring,
(against which I have also particularly urged some Reasons) the spontaneous
Fertility of the Earth, and the Longaevity of Animals and Vegetables; all being
chiefly grounded by him on the supposed Site of the Sun, or Earth to it, must
fall of course, unless other Reasons are assigned for them, than this he has
urged.

There still remains the third Difference, which he assigns to the Primaeval
Earth from the present, viz. That the Figure of it was more apparently and
regularly oval, than it is now; which Difference I shall refute in my
Considerations on the Fifth Chapter of this Book, where he treats particularly
of this oval Figure of the Earth.

Now, as to the Longaevity before mentioned, besides what the Author has said
of it in this Chapter, he has added another Chapter particularly concerning it,
the Contents of which I shall first set down, and then offer what I have to say
upon it.

CHAP. IV.
HEre the Author, by way of Digression, treats concerning the natural Causes of
Longaevity: He sets forth that the Machine of an Animal consists of Springs,
and which are the two principal; and endeavors to make out, that the Age of
the Antediluvians is to be computed by Solar, not Lunar Years.

He says therefore that in our Bodies, we may consider three several Qualities
or Dispositions, according to each whereof they suffer Decay. First their
Continuity: Secondly, that Disposition whereby they are capable of receiving
Nourishment, which we call Nutribility: and Thirdly the Tone or tonical
Disposition of the Organs, whereby they perform their several Functions. In all
these respects they would decay in any state of Nature, but far sooner and
faster in the present state, than in the primaeval.

As for their Continuity, he says all consistent Bodies must be less durable
now, than under the first order of the World, because of the unequal and
contrary Motions of the Elements, or of the Air, and Ether that penetrate, and
pervade them. But it is not the gross and visible Continuity of the parts of
our Body that first decays, there are finer Textures that are spoiled
insensibly, and draw on the Decay of the rest, such as are; Secondly that
Disposition and Temper of the Parts, whereby they are fit to receive their full
Nourishment; and especially that Construction, and Texture of the Organs, that
are preparatory to this Nutrition. These being also wrought upon by external
Nature, whose Course, while it was even and steady, and the ambient Air mild
and balmy preserved the Body much longer in a fresh and fit temper to receive
its full Nourishment, and consequently gave longer bounds both to our Growth
and Life.

But the third thing, he says is the most considerable; the Decay of the
organick Parts, and especially of the Organs preparatory to Nutrition.

To explain this Point, he says, that all the Organs of the Body are in the
nature of Springs, and that their Action is tonical, for that no Matter that is
not fluid, has any Motion or Action in it, but in virtue of some Tone: If
Matter be fluid, its Parts are actually in motion, and consequently may impel,
or give Motion to other Bodies: But if it be solid, or consistent, the Parts
are not separated, or separately moved from one another; and therefore cannot
impel, or give Motion to any other, but in virtue of this Tone, they having no
other Motion of themselves.

This being observed, he considers upon which of the Organs of the Body Life
depends more immediately, and the Prolongation of it: He says then, that in the
Body of Man there being several Setts of Parts, the Animal and Genital System
have no Influence upon long Life, being Parts nourished, not nourishing:
Wherefore laying these aside, there remain two Compages more, the Natural and
Vital, which consist of the Heart and Stomach, with their Appendances. These
are the Sources of Life, and all that is necessary to the Constitution of a
living Creature. Wherefore we consider only these first Principles and
Fountains of Life, and the Causes of their natural and necessary Decay.

Now, he says, Whatsoever Weakens the Tone or Spring of these two Organs,
shortens the natural duration of Life; and therefore in the primitive Earth,
the Course of Nature being even, steady, and unchangeable, without different
Seasons, it must have permitted Bodies to have continued longer in their
Strength and Vigor, than they can possibly do, under these Changes of the Air.

For a Conclusion to this Chapter, he argues against those who say, the Age of
the Antediluvian Patriarchs is to be computed by Lunar Years, or Months, and
not by Solar or common Years, and he refutes that Opinion.

Now, it appears from what I have urged against the last Chapter, That the Sun
could not be supposed with any ground, to have still moved in the Aequinox in
the Antediluvian World: So that tho the Reasons the Author here gives for
Longaevity, may be plausible enough, if applied and considered according to the
order of things we now find established in the World, and which we have reason
to conclude, must have been so from the beginning; we must not go about to
alter the Frame of the World to gratify them. Yet since he urges that the
Antediluvian long Life ought to be ascribed to the Aequinox Course of the Sun,
making always one Season; we shall consider, first, whether one even and
continued Season, such as that Course must cause, would make most for the
Prolongation of Life, or such a Change of Seasons as we have now; and Secondly,
what other plausible Reasons may be assigned for the Antediluvian Longaevity,
besides this Course of the Sun, which the Author urges for.

The Learned Weindrichius, in his Problems, treats this for one; Whether it
were not better that Nature had instituted only one Constitution of the Year,
as that of the Spring, or to Change it into four different Seasons, and why
necessarily there have been four. And concludes, it was far better that Nature
has constituted these notable Changes of the Air, than otherwise it would be.
The effect of his Reasoning runs thus: If any Man shall say, that an even
Season, which holds a mean, is more proper for those Bodies which are duly
tempered, as being apt to preserve them in that Temper, which a Change by
exceeding Qualities would be apt to corrupt: we also confess that those Corpora
Quadrata, such as described by Galen, require such a Conservation; but because
it is extremely rare that such completely sound Bodies are to be found, L. 2. de
Sanit-Tuend.
as Galen says; therefore Bodies could not be preserved in that temper, which
they had not. For almost all Bodies exceed in some Quality, which must also
have held in the Antediluvians, tho we may allow them to have been generally of
a sounder Constitution than Bodies are at present) and if at any time there be
a Body of an exact temper, it is so, only for an instant: and therefore since
Bodies could not be conserved by one Season always alike, Nature foresaw, that
if there were one Season, in which Cold and Moisture reigned, as the Winter,
then old People, and all those who were of a cold and moist Temperament would
die, because the Distemper would be more encreast: wherefore it made a notable
Change, in which an exceeding Heat should sway, which Season is called Summer:
during which that notable Moisture remits, and is diminisht, and by this means
such as are moist become Temperate, th'Errour committed in the Winter and
Spring, by reason of their Humidity being thereby corrected. Again, Young
People, and those that have hot and dry Bodies must necessarily die if it were
always Summer, because they would be wholly dried by its Heat; therefore Nature
to prevent this made a Winter, cold and moist, to correct the Error committed
in the Summer. And in fine, since all Bodies have some excess of Quality, there
ought to be different Seasons, that some may live more commodiously in this
Season, others in another. For by this means, all Bodies succeed in Life, and
so the Order of the Universe is conserved.

In 13. Aph. 1.
Weindrichius adds. But what shall we say to the Authority of Hippocrates,
saying, The Changes of Seasons bring forth Diseases. For instance an hot
Season, as the Spring, stirs up store of matter which is gathered together in
Bodies in the Winter, by its cold Constitution, which being stirred and moved
it brings forth Diseases, whence many Diseases in the Spring are engendered. But
Hippocrates says, this is not done through the fault of the Spring it self,
that it generates Diseases; of it self, it being the healthiest part of the
Year; but by reason of a multitude of ill Humors gathered together in the
Winter: whence we see that those who are free from ill Humors, live very
healthy in the Spring. This Season therefore is said to generate Diseases,
because the Humors lurking in the Body before, and which were not moved, are
stirred now, and being thus agitated, stir up Diseases: for Hippocrates says,
they bring forth, because they do not make, but stir up the Humors which
afterward are the Cause of Diseases: nay, the Changes of Seasons are so far
from ingendring Diseases, that they solve them, In 8. Apr. p. 3.
as Galen also says, and this we see very often done: for if a Quartan, rising
in Autumn, be not solved in the Winter, L. de dieb. decret.
it is solved as the Spring comes on, as Galen likewise says, and if it be not
solved in the Spring, it is afterward solved in the approaching Summer.

Wherefore it is better that Nature has distinguished the Year by these four
Changes: because tho perhaps one Individuum might enjoy its Health more in one
Season than in another, because it would more agree with it: yet since Nature
has not made Seasons in respect of this or that Individuum, but of all
together, or of a whole Species and Species's: therefore that the Order of the
Universe might be preserved by a certain heavenly and divine distributive
Justice, whereby it has formed different Bodies as to their Temperatures, it
would also distinguish the Seasons of the Year, and make them different, and
not of one kind, that these should live well in the Summer, those in the
Winter; and that the Diseases engendered in preceding Seasons should be solved
in the following. And we conclude that those Seasons then especially agree with
living Creatures, when they keep in their proper Nature, as the Summer hot, the
Winter cold, etc. So far Weindrichius, concerning this Point.

As for Causes assigned by Authors, or that may be assigned for the
Antediluvian Longaevity, beside that of the Suns still moving in the Equinox,
urged by the Author, I divide them into three kinds: they are either Divine,
Celestial, or Sublunary. By Divine, I mean such as are from a particular
Providence, as Austin, Rabbi, Leui and others say, those Antediluvian Fathers
had long Life granted them by a particular Providence, that the first World, by
a few, might be peopled in a short time, it being not to last long; and that
they might more conveniently learn things by a long experience. So Josephus
tells us, Antiq. Iud. l. 1.
that God gave long Life to those Fathers that they might teach Virtue, and
practice with convenience those things which they had invented in Astronomy and
Geometry: the Demonstrations whereof they had never attained, unless they had
lived at least six hundred years, the great Year being accomplished by that
Revolution.

As for Celestial Causes, the boldest Assertor I find, is Petrus Apponensis,
who says, we must by no means envy those of the first Age for having lived a
longer Series of years than us; the disposition of the Heavens being by Nature
more benign and propitious to them: for then there were two Animal Circles
together cooperating, one in the ninth Sphere, and the other in the eighth,
where the Firmament is; being so disposed that Aries answered diametrically to
Aries, Taurus to Taurus, Gemini to Gemini, etc. They so fortifying the
Celestial Influences, that Herbs, Roots, standing Corn and Fruits grew then
much more wholesome than since, that Society through a long motion being
dissolved; whence the whole Inferior World began to grow diseased and decay.

For Sublunary Causes, first we may allow, as the Author does, that the
Stamina, or Principles of Life of the Antediluvians were much stronger than Men
have at present, by which they had a more vigorous natural Constitution.
Secondly we may allow them to have been better circumstantiated and regulated,
as to the Six Non-Natural things: as first, that their Atmosphere being throwly
impregnated with balsamic Particles, arising from that pure primigenial Soil,
the Celestial Influences had a more kindly Cooperation with them, forming an
Air far transcending ours now in the healthiest part of the Earth, for
prolonging Life; and in this the Author is free to expatiate as he pleases.
Secondly, as to their Diet, it is conceived that the Antediluvian Soil being
excellently tempered, brought forth better and more wholesome Fruits than are
since the Deluge, that it has been tainted with the Saltness of the Sea; and
that the Fountain Waters were also then more wholesome, and that those Fathers
were endued with a greater Knowledge to discern what was good and bad for them,
and observed a greater Temperance than is now used. Thirdly, it is conceived,
that if Man had not so many extrinsical Causes; as Pleasures: domestic and
public Cares, and other Troubles to discompose him, he might live a much
longer Age; in which it is thought the Ancients were not so much concerned,
leading a more sedate and calm Life. And so, as to the other Non-Natural
things, they may be conceived to have governed themselves better in them than
Men do now. And upon the whole it may be said, that tho we may not ascribe the
Antediluvian Longaevity to any one of these sublunary Causes singly, yet taken
altogether, they may be looked upon as competent Causes for it: But to go about
to alter the Sun's Course, or the Earth's Posture to it to make it out, I
believe it is what will never pass among learned Men.

Having assigned such Causes, as, perhaps, by some, may be thought tolerably
plausible for the Antediluvian Longaevity: in the last place I shall give my
opinion of the matter, which is, that I look upon the long Lives of the
Patriarchs to have been from a particular Providence. I cannot say it was for
the reason assigned by Austin, that the first World, by a few, might be peopled
in a short time; for on that account long Life seems as necessary to others, as
to the Patriarchs; besides that, each of the Patriarchs, as far as we find by
Scripture, spent many Years, as Adam above an Hundred, others above an Hundred
and Eighty before they got Children, whereas before that time they might have
got Children enough to have peopled many Countries: tho, as Rabbi Gedalia says,
according to the opinion of many Jewish Doctors, the Patriarchs did not live so
long before they had Children, as the Scripture speaks of, but that it makes
mention of those only from whom they received the Tradition, not taking notice
of many others, whom there was no necessity of meddling withal. But I am of the
opinion of that Adept Philosopher, Lib. de Quint. Essentia Philos. circa finem.
who in his late Answer to the learned Dr. Dickinson, affirms long Life to have
been granted the Patriarchs from a particular Providence, that they might the
better learn and propagate Arts and Sciences, and convey down with more
Certainty the Tradition of the Creation, the Fall of Man, God's Judgment upon
him, and the Hope of his Redemption, etc. and I know not why we should make a
Difficulty of admitting a particular Providence, when such particular Designs
of Providence are to be carried on by it.

I reject therefore Lunar Years with the Author, tho as to the Testimony he
quotes from Josephus, saying, that the Historians of all Nations, both Greeks
and Barbarians, ascribe Longaevity to the first Inhabitants of the Earth; many
of the Authors, whom he names, averring them to have lived a Thousand Years: I
value it not; and much doubt whether the Author himself gives credit to those
Histories: For either they relate to Antediluvian or Postdiluvian Times; if to
the former, I know no color of Reason we have for relying on any thing as
Authentic, delivered by Greeks or Barbarians concerning those times: If to the
latter, I cannot think the Author believes any Man to have lived a Thousand
Years since the Deluge. So we find that Pliny considering what many of the
Greeks and others had writ concerning the length of some Men's Lives, plainly
says, they have writ Fables instead of true Histories, through their Ignorance
of the various acceptance of Years and Ages; an Age signifying with some,
Thirty Years, with others only One Year, and with others an Hundred Years. And
the space of a Year being determined by some, by one Revolution of the Moon, by
others it is made Trimestrial, Hist. Crit. l. 2. c. 4.
and by others to consist of Six Months. And Father Simon tells us, It Is
certain that even the ancient Jews, not finding in their Histories Genealogies
enough to fill up the time, made one single Person to live many Ages, whence
there is nothing more common in their Histories than these long lived Men: so
that we ought not over easily to give belief to Jewish Histories, which make
their Doctors survive, till such a time as they can find another to join him.
Nay, a great many of the Jewish Doctors, who have so great a Veneration for the
Scriptures, are so far from acquiescing in what Josephus urges from the Greek
and Barbarian Tradition, that they have affirmed, Ibid.
as Father Simon tells us, the Patriarchs to have lived no longer than other
Men, and that the Holy Scripture makes only mention of the Head of a Family, to
whom it immediately joins the last of the same Family, without taking notice of
those who have been betwixt both; those Doctors believing that when any Head of
a Family had ordained certain Laws, and Methods of living to the Family, he was
made to live till the last of the Family, who had observed those Laws were
dead; so that he is supposed to have lived all this while in his Family. And I
doubt that all Men who are not content to have recourse to a particular
Providence, for upholding the Ante and Postdiluvian Longaevity, will be forced
to relapse here, for any thing that can be made out from Authentic History or
Reason in the Case: Not but we have several Instances of late date, of Persons,
who have lived two or three Hundred Years and upwards: But this has not been
successively, as in the Patriarchs; and there is odds betwixt three or four
Hundred Years, and near a Thousand. And whereas the Author urges for a general
Longaevity among the Antediluvians, as well as for some time after the Flood,
we do not find it authorized by Scripture. And that it was granted only to the
Patriarchs and some few others by a particular Providence, and this through the
means of a certain Panacaea, well known to the Mystae, I am satisfied,
according to what is written of it, by the forementioned Adept Philosopher: But
leest instead of open reasoning, I seem to obtrude Mystery on the World, which
by some may be interpreted vain Ostentation: I refer the Reader to the Book it
self, where he may read, at least, what is written, and if hapily he does not
fully apprehend what is said, he may believe or reject what he thinks good.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter the Author treats concerning the Waters of the Primitive
Earth: what the state of the Regions of the Air was then, and how all Waters
proceeded from them. How the Rivers arose, what was their Course, and how they
ended: He applies also several places in Sacred Writ to confirm this
Hydrography of the Earth, especially the Origin of the Rainbow.

He says then, that the Air being always calm and equal before the Flood, there
could be no violent Meteors there, nor any that proceeded from extremity of
Cold, as Ice, Snow and Hail; nor Thunder neither: nor could the Winds be either
impetuous or irregular in that smooth Earth, there being one even Season, and
no unequal action of the Sun: But as for watery Meteors, or those that rise
from watery Vapors more immediately, as Dews and Rains; there could not but be
plenty of those in some parts or other of the Earth; the action of the Sun
being strong and constant in raising them, and the Earth being at first moist
and soft; and according as it grew more dry the Rays of the Sun would pierce
more deep into it, and reach at length the Great Abyss, which lay under the
Earth, and was an unexhausted storehouse of new Vapors. He adds, but the same
Heat which extracted these Vapors so copiously would also hinder them from
condensing into Clouds or Rains in the warmer parts of the Earth; and there
being no Mountains at that time, nor contrary Winds, nor any such Causes to
stay them, or compress them, we must consider how they would be disposed off.

To this, he says, as the heat of the Sun was chiefly toward the middle part
of the Earth, so the copious Vapors raised there, being once in the open Air,
their Course would be that way where they found least resistance to their
motion, which would be toward the Poles and the colder Regions of the Earth:
for East and West they would meet with as warm an Air, and Vapors as much
agitated as themselves, which therefore would not yield to their progress that
way. So that the regular and constant Course of the Vapors of the Earth would
be toward the extreme parts of it; which when arrived in those cooler
Climates, would be there condenst into Dews or Rains continually.

This Difficulty, he says, for finding a Source for the Waters in the Primaeval
Earth, was the greatest he met with in the Theory; which being thus cleared, he
finds a second Difficulty, viz. how those Waters should flow upon the even
surface of the Earth, or form themselves into Rivers; there being no descent or
declivity for their Course. And he has no way to explain this, but by giving an
oval Figure to that Earth, in which the Polar Parts, he says, must have been
higher than the Aequinoctial, that is more remote from the Center; by which
means, the Waters that fell about the extreme parts of the Earth would have a
continual descent toward the middle parts of it: and by virtue of this Descent,
would by degrees form Channels, for Rivers to pass in through the temperate
Climates, as far as the Torrid Zone.

And here he meets a third Difficulty, viz. What Issue the Rivers could have,
when they were come thither? To this, says he, when they were come toward
those parts of the Earth, they would be divided into many Branches, or a
multitude of Rivulets: and those would be partly exhaled by the heat of the
Sun, and partly drunk up by the dry sandy Earth. For he concludes, as those
Rivers drew nearer to the Equinoctal parts, they would find a less declivity or
descent of Ground than in the beginning or former part of their Course: for
that in his supposed oval Figure of the Earth, near the middle part of it, the
Semidiameters, he says, are much shorter one than another; and for this reason
the Rivers when they came thither, would begin to flow more slowly, and by that
weakness of their Current suffer themselves easily to be divided and distracted
into several lesser streams and Rivulets; or else having no force to wear a
Channel, would lie shallow on the ground, like a plash of Water.

As for the Polar parts of the Earth, he says, they would make a particular
Scene by themselves: the Sun would be perpetually in their Horizon; which makes
him think the Rains would not fall so much there, as in other parts of the
Frigid Zones, where he makes their chief Seat and Receptacle: whence sometimes
as they flowed, they would swell into Lakes, and toward the end of their
Course, parting into several streams and Branches, they would water those parts
of the Earth like a Garden.

Having examined and determined of the state of the Air and Waters in the
Primitive Earth, he considers some Passages in Holy Writ, which he conceives
represent them of a different Form from the present order of Nature, and
agreeing with what he has set forth. First he tells us, that the Rainbow,
mentioned by Moses to have been set in the Clouds after the Deluge, makes out
that those Heavens were of a different Constitution from ours: Ep. 2. c. 3.
And secondly, that St. Peter says, the Antediluvian Heavens had a different
Constitution from ours, and that they were composed or constituted of Waters,
etc. He urges concerning the Rainbow, that it was set in the Clouds after the
Deluge as a Confirmation of the Promise or Covenant, which God made with Noah,
that he would drown the World no more: that it could not be a Sign of this, or
given as a Pledge or Confirmation of such a Promise, if it were in the Clouds
before, and with no relation to this Promise: He adds much more concerning the
Nature of Signs, given by God, mentioned in the Scriptures, which I think too
tedious and needless here to insert.

Now concerning the first Difficulty, which the Author has endeavored here to
explain, in reference to the Source and Origin of the Antediluvian Waters, I
have this to offer.

He supposes that copious Vapors were continually raised from the Torrid Zone,
and the parts of the Temperate Zones next it, and that they were hindered by the
heat of the Sun from condensing into Clouds or Rains, there being then no
Mountains or other Cause to stay and compress them, till having past through
the Temperate Zones, they came toward the extreme parts of the Earth, or the
Poles, where they were continually condenst into Clouds, Rains, and Dews.

Now this, I conceive, is what no Meteorologist can allow: for first, though I
should grant there were no Mountains before the Deluge (for the existence of
which from the Beginning, I have already argued) at least there must have been
other Causes no less powerful to stop and compress the Vapors then arising,
notwithstanding the Author either has not taken notice of them, or has here
forgot them. Certainly there were Woods before the Flood, and those in a great
plenty, which (to use the common Expression) are known to attract Vapors as
freely as Mountains; and the Author allows the Trees then to have been of an
imcomparably more vast and lofty growth than now; the largest of our Trees
being but shrubs to the Trees then: and would not these attract Vapors in a
plentiful measure, whence Clouds and Rains would be produced to serve all the
parts of the Earth? It Is known that in several parts of the West Indies, wont
to be much infested with Rains and Tempests, after the Woods were there cut
down, those effects ceast. Georg. Agricola tells us of a Valley in a
Mountainous Tract in Germany, In Bermanno.
which in Autumn and Winter was wont to be continually invested with thick
Fogs, hindering the sight of the Sun; but at length, the Woods being there cut
down, and some Adits driven in Mines for the Waters to pass, those Fogs ceast.
I know also some Woods in England standing much on a Level, which always cast
forth a great smoke, and have a Cloud over them against Rain, the Country
people thence taking their Prediction of it; We know that in the Isle of Ferro,
there being not Fountains to supply the Inhabitants with fresh Water, there
grows a Tree, over which a Cloud settles itself every Morning, and resolves
into Water, which streams down from the Branches, and is received in Vessels
underneath for use. And can we think but some of those stately Antediluvian
Trees, in case there had been no Rains, would have performed this good natured
Office to Man? as indeed they had been bound to do it to Beasts: for Men
possibly might have then been supplied with fresh Water in all the parts of the
Earth by the means of Wells, but how should the Beasts be supplied, remote from
Rivers.

These Instances from natural History, I think, are sufficient to show that
Woods, as well as Mountains attract Vapors, and cause Rains, and must have
done it in the Antediluvian Earth.

Secondly, to pass by Mountains and Woods, and to consider the Quality of the
Primaeval Earth, which the Author supposes to have been at first soft and
boggy; can it be imagined that Vapors raised from it in the Torrid Zone, and
in the parts of the Temperate Zones next it, should be conveyed to the Polar
Zones for a Series of Ages, without being condensed into Clouds and Rains by
the way; when at the same time the Days and Nights are supposed to have been
constantly of an equal length; and when the Weakness of the Sun's Action,
arising from the Obliqueness of its Rays in a good part of the intermediate
Distance, is duly considered.

C. de Venris.
Carts, in his Meteors, has well demonstrated, as I conceive, the Courses
observed by the Vapors, raised from the Earth by the Sun's Action, in order to
Clouds and Rains: and he represents it thus. Let the Earth be EB FD, the Poles
OF, where the Earth being not much heated by the Sun, it must be much covered
by Mists and Clouds, and at B, where the Sun sends on it direct and
perpendicular Rays, many Vapors are raised, which being agitated by the Action
of the Light they swiftly get aloft, till they come so far, that being pressed by
their Weight, they readily fly off to the sides, and hold their Course toward
I and M, above the Clouds G and K, rather than ascend farther upwards, and
whereas the Clouds G and K are also heated, and rarified by the Sun, the Vapors
going thence rather go freely to H, and from K to L, than either to E or to F,
because the gross Air which is under Poles, more strongly resists them, than
the Vapors rising from the Earth toward the South, in regard these being
strongly agitated, and ready for Motion every way, easily yield them place.

Now, this plainly shows, that the Vapors raised by the Sun in the torrid and
temperate Zones, could never reach near the Poles, before they were condensed
into Clouds and Rains, even tho the Earth were all smooth, and the Sun always
kept the Aequinox Root, as the Author supposes the state of things then was.

Thirdly, how should Vegetation have been maintained for sixteen Hundred Years,
without Rains to refresh the Plants? It Is true, there are some parts now which
have little Rain, but either they lie near the Seas, where they are plentifully
supplied with Vapors, or have some annual Inundations, as Egypt, etc. which
could not have held in the Antediluvian Earth. Indeed the Earth being supposed
soft at first, it might possibly have supplied Moisture for some Ages; but
after five Hundred or a Thousand Years, what Moisture could that Earth have
afforded? And to talk of the Sun's pumping up Waters from the Abyss, lying two
or three Miles deep in the Earth, to supply Waters for the Rivers to run, when
the other Moisture was spent, it seems to me too inconsistent to deserve naming.

Again, it is known that Rains are no less necessary now and then, for purging
the Air, than a Dose of Physic may be for the Body of Man: And tho it may be
said that the Air then could not have been infested with evil Vapors, as now,
the Quality of that Soil not affording them: Yet, as Purges are sometimes
prescribed, not only to evacuate the Body of evil Humors, but in Cases of mere
Plenitude, when the Humors are not peccant: so the Atmosphere then could not
but be sometimes troubled with an Hazyness and Stagnation, through the great
plenty of Particles raised by the Sun's constant Action: and unless it were now
and then purged by Rains, Winds, and fiery Meteors, which are all denied, it
could not have been duly qualified for the support of Animals and Vegetables:
to which I may add, that were it not for Rains many times, all the Fruits of
Countries would be destroyed by Insects devouring them in their first tender
growth.

Lastly, whereas the Author says, that when the Vapors were arrived in the
frigid Zones, they would continually be there condensed into Clouds, Rains, and
Dews; I reply, if that holds true, which I have suggested from Dr. Brown, that
the Sun keeping in the Equator, it would be always Night or Twilight in a more
considerable part of the frigid Zones, the Sun never rising above the Horizon:
and since the Author supposes those Zones to have been continually invested
with Clouds, which at least, must have caused a Cimmerian Darkness there,
whether we can conceive any thing but continued Frosts and Snows to have been
there, which must have made them incapable of being Sources for those Waters he
has supposed.

As to the second Difficulty the Author meets with here, viz. for making the
Waters flow on the even Surface of the Antediluvian Earth, to explain which he
has supposed that Earth to have been of an oval Figure, in which the Polar
Parts were higher than the Aequinoctial, to afford a Descent to the Waters, to
form Channels to the extreme Parts of the Temperate Zones, next the Torrid;
there are many things here to oppose.

First, the Author's main Reason for the oval Figure of the Earth, seems not to
me to hold good, where he says, L. 2. c. 8.
in his Latin Copy, since the Bulk of Waters in the first Formation of the
Earth, when it was yet an aqueous Globe, was much more agitated under the
Equator, than the Water toward the Poles, where it made less Circles, those
Parts, so greatly agitated, endeavoring to recede from the Center of their
Motion, since they could not wholly spring up and fly away, by reason of the
Air every where pressing on them; nor much flow back, without the Resistance of
the said Air, they could not otherwise disingage themselves, than by flowing
off to the sides, and so making the aqueous Globe somewhat oval. This, I say,
is contrary to Experiment; for the more rapid any Course of Waters is, the more
it draws all neighboring Waters to join with them in their Course, and forces
them not to recede from them into calmer Parts, where the rapidness of their
Course is checked by a slower Motion; and if this should be done to some
distance, can it be imagined but their native Gravity, when raised considerably
above their level, long ere they reached the Polar Parts, would make them fall
back again to the lower Aequinoctial Current: And the native Nitency of the
Waters in both Hemispheres, on each side the Torrid Zone, would much more
strongly repel any Waters there raised above their level, than the Rapidness of
the Aequinoctial Current could force them off.

Again, since the Earth, considered as a Spherical Body, is allowed to be above
7000 Miles Diameter; and since to enlarge a Circle into a moderate oval Figure,
its Area must be made a quarter as big again at least, one way of its Diameter,
as it was before (as Mr. Warren has demonstrated) it follows that the
Antediluvian Earth, C. 5.
at each Pole, must have been near 900 Miles extent in the supposed oval State,
more than if it had been exactly round. And since this Earth enclosed an Orb of
Waters within it; I desire to know how many Miles Depth of the 900 Miles the
Author allows to his Orb of Waters; he must allow it Miles enough to make an
oval Orb, for so his Water was supposed to be, before the Orb of Earth was
formed upon it: and consequentially to what is said, he cannot allow his Orb of
Waters to be less than 450 Miles deep at each Pole, to make any thing of an
oval. Now, to say that any Detrusion of Waters toward the Poles, by the
resistance of of the superambient Air, could form a Mountain of Waters, at each
of the said Poles, about 450 Miles in Height, above their Spherical Convexity,
seems to me a strange and unaccountable Paradox in Hydrography, especially the
Orb under the Abyss being supposed Spherical, as the Author has represented it
in all his Schemes, so that there was nothing to bear on the Detrusion of the
Waters.

It Is true, as the Author says in his Answer to Mr. Warren, we see the Waters
flowing toward and upon the Shoars by the Pressure of the Air under the Moon,
tho it be an Ascent both upon the Land and into the Rivers; but I answer, this
flowing is only to the Height of some few Fathoms, and besides, it is maintained
by a bulk of Waters then swollen in the Sea, near as high, as any protruded on
the Land, and carrying a Pondus able to support them: But what Force shall be
able to support a Body of Waters in a violent State, carried 450 Miles in
height, above their natural tendency, as they all are when past the spherical
Convexity. For the Author owns the Demonstration of Archimedes, concerning the
spherical Figure of Water to be true; and says that a fluid Body, be it Water
or any other Liquor, always casts it self into a smooth and spherical Surface,
and if any parts by chance, or by some agitation become higher than the rest,
they do not continue so long, but glide down every way into the lower places,
till they all come to make a Surface of the same height, and of the same
distance every where from the Center. By what agitation or resistance then of
the superambient Air can Waters be driven on and held together for 450 Miles
ascent in the open Air, so as not to diverge, and fall off by their natural
tendency.

Besides, if according to what I have said before, the Author allows his Abyss
Orb to be 450 Miles deep at the Poles, he must allow it of a depth proportional
to its oval Figure in its other parts, and so for his Orb of Earth, and how
this can stand with the proportion he seems to assign to his Orbs, according to
what I have set forth l. 1. c. 6. and how a Deluge according to these
proportions could be caused, and the Waters go off, so as to make an habitable
World, may require his consideration.

Again, since the Sun, according to the Authors Hypothesis moving always in the
Aequinox, before the Flood, would constantly have held as remote, if not more,
from the supposed rainy Region, than it is now from us in the depth of Winter;
and since we find the Mountains now, which are of any considerable height, even
in the temperate Zones, are so cold that they are generally covered with Snows,
notwithstanding the Sun shines more on them than on the Countries lying beneath
them, and that, even in the Summer, when the Sun is nearest to them, and the
days are much longer than the nights; it follows that the two Polar Mountains,
in all respects, must always have had Colds in the greatest excess, both in
regard of their great distance from the Sun, and of their being Mountains, and
of their having little or no Day; nay if it were constant Day at the Poles
themselves, and there were as much Day as Night in the supposed rainy Regions,
as the Author can pretend to no more there; this could not protect them against
continual Frosts and Snows, as appears by what I have said of the Mountains in
the temperate Zones. I may add that, C. 5.
(as Mr. Warren has observed) several Navigators attempting to find out a
nearer Course to China, have been frozen to death, tho they sailed not so far
North, as the supposed rainy Regions in the oval Earth, and chose the most
seasonable time for their Enterprise, viz. When the Sun was on this side the
Equator, and the days then in those Regions were much longer than the Nights,
if they had any Night at all: Besides what experience all other Sailors have
had, of the great Colds, and continued Frosts and Snows in those Countries,
notwithstanding the Vapors of the Sea, or any nearness of the Sun, and length
of days, which might help to remit them.

Lastly, Whereas the Author conceivs the present Earth to be also of an oval
Figure, we know the general Sense of Men, according to all experience and
observation to be contrary, and that whether the Constitution of the Earth be
considered according to Gravity or Magnetism. Aristotle, who considered it
according to the former, says, L. 2. de coelo. c. ult.
that all the Particles of the Earth have a natural Gravity, which carries them
toward the midst or Center, whence a spherical Figure of it must be caused, as
he explains at large, and concludes that the Figure of the Earth must therefore
be Spherical, or naturally Spherical; and that every thing must be said to be
such as it uses to be, or is by Nature, and not what it may be by force or
preternaturally, and in a violent state. The same may be said of the Earth's
Figure, if it be considered according to Magnetism; the Experiment of the
Terrella, according to the various Inclinations of the Needle to it, showing
the Earth to be Spherical. And whereas the Author says, that Circumnavigation,
the appearing and Occultation of Mountains and Towers to Saylors, as also the
Stars, and the like, prove indeed the Earth not to be plain, but unequal, but
does not plainly prove what that Convexity is, whether Spherical or Oval: In 1
c. sphaerae de Sacro. hosco.
We find that Clavius was of a contrary Opinion, he thinking to have well
proved the Spherical Figure of the Earth, if measured either from East to West,
or from North to South, by showing that if a Man keeping the same Meridian,
passes from North to South, there is that proportion still observed in the
decrease of the elevation of the Pole, which can only agree to a spherical
Figure: and so if any Man travels from East to West, betwixt two Parallels, he
may still observe that to a City fifteen degrees more Easterly than another,
the Sun always rises and sets an hour sooner or later, than to the other; which
anticipation of the rising and setting of the Sun could not keep the said
proportion, unless we give the Earth a spherical Figure.

As to the third Difficulty that the Author finds, and the Explanation he
endeavors to give of it, viz. What Issue the Rivers would have when they were
come to the parts near the Torrid Zone, to which he says, That then they would
be divided into many Branches or a multitude of Rivulets, and those would be
partly exhaled by the heat of the Sun, and partly drank up by the dry sandy
Earth: This seems not to me fairly to account for the Rivers Issue. It Is true,
we have now accounts of some Rivers absorpt in the Sands; but the Waters so
absorpt, or which any where pass into the Earth, have their Issue again at some
other place, either passing into the Sea, or emerging again on the Land: but
what became of those Antediluvian Waters, (which must have been in vast
quantities) absorpt in the Sands? Did the Circumgyration of the Earth carry
them back again, under ground, upon an Ascent, toward the Poles? Or did they
sink into the Abyss? This must have been full before for many Ages, till the
Sun had cloven the Earth, and drawn out great quantities of the Abyss Waters;
and the other way of their Issue seems not to me conceivable. But I shall
insist no farther on this matter.

The Author, in the last place, urges that the Rainbow set in the Clouds after
the Deluge, makes out that the Antediluvian Heavens were of a different
Constitution from ours, the Rainbow having not been seen in the Clouds before.

Now, concerning the Rainbow mentioned Genesis 9. many have said many things, but
the most natural Interpretation of it seems to me to be thus. We find in the
foregoing Chapter when Noah and his Family, by Gods Command were come forth of
the Ark, and that Noah had raised an Altar, and sacrificed to God; God
accepting his Sacrifice, assured him that he would no more destroy every living
Soul as he had done, but that Seed-time and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and
Winter, Night and Day should not cease, or should continue. They having been
interrupted for a years time before. And in the 9th Chapter, after having
blessed Noah, and his Sons, he made a Covenant with them against any future
Deluge, and to comfort them, gave them the Rainbow, as a present sign of the
Air's settling in its wonted way, the Seasons which he had mentioned before to
Noah being to succeed in Course. And the Rainbow thus appearing after the
Deluge, carried somewhat new in it, as the Author says a Sign ought to have
done, because it had not been seen for a year before; and in its nature
appearing after Rains, it betokens fair Weather, as appearing after fair
Weather, it betokens Rains.

Whereas the Author says, he does not look upon the Rainbow as a voluntary
Sign, and by divine Institution, but that it signified naturally and by
Connection with the effect, importing that the state of Nature was changed from
what it was before; and so changed that the Earth was no more in a condition to
perish by Water; This seems to me without any ground. I agree with him so far,
that the Rainbow signified naturally, and by Connection with the effect,
because appearing after Rains, it betokens a remission of the moisture, and
consequently fair Weather; and this with Gods Promise to Noah, and his seeing
the Waters retired from the Earth, I think was sufficient for Noah's
satisfaction, he having had experience that God was Master of his Word before,
when he had revealed to him that he would bring a Deluge on the Earth. But to
say that the appearance of the Rainbow imported the state of Nature to be so
changed, that the Earth was no more in a condition to perish by Water, this
will not be allowed; for if the Deluge was miraculously caused (as I conceive
it to have been) what natural sign could foreshew its coming, or no return of
it? Wherefore in this respect, I look upon it to be only a voluntary Sign and
by divine Institution: And we know some have been so far from thinking the
Rainbow to denote a change of Air toward a Conflagration, that they plainly
say it denotes a Dominion of moisture in the Air, and that on this account it
will not appear forty years before the Conflagration happens. Neither do I
believe that Noah, or perhaps any Man since him, besides the Author, could find
by any natural signality in the Rainbow, that a Deluge should never return.

Indeed (as the Author says) if Noah had never seen a Rainbow before, on its
first appearance, it could not but have made a lively Impression upon him, for
his assurance: for its probable it would have raised a stupor in him, and he
would have looked upon it as a Miracle wrought by God for his satisfaction:
whereas the Rules of Providence are otherwise, God never giving a miraculous
Sign, but of a miraculous Effect, which the preservation of the Earth from a
second Deluge was not to be, but only the Earth left to itself, with those
second Causes that attend it, for its own preservation. And those instances of
Signs which the Author has quoted from the Scriptures are miraculous Signs of
miraculous Effects, and therefore of another nature from this here under
Consideration.

Again, its well known, that many Institutions in the Law of Moses were made
directly in opposition to certain Customs among the Gentiles: Now whereas Iris,
among the Gentiles, was made generally the Messenger of Discord, whence it was
called Iris quasi (...), why may it not be thought, that in opposition to this,
which might have been derived down from the corrupt Antediluvian times, God
would have the Rainbow to be his sign of Love and Concord, it signifying in its
Nature indifferently Rains and fair Weather, as Pliny says.

As to the existence of the Rainbow before the Flood, certainly all the Gentiles
were of that Opinion; Juno must have been an Antediluvian Goddess, who was
never without her Nymph Iris, she being the most diligent Attendant she had,
always standing ready at her Elbow, and more officiously serviceable to her than
the other thirteen Nymphs that belonged to her: among other services, she is
said to have made Juno's Bed, and was represented with Wings, and a Robe of
diverse Colors, half tuckt up, to show her readiness to obey the Commands of
her Mistress on all occasions. The two predominant Colors of her Robes were
blew and red, denoting the two great destructions of the World, the blew that
which happened by the Waters at the Deluge, and the Red the general
Conflagration to succeed by Fire; so that the Rainbow carries a mixed signality.
And indeed the ancient Philosophers might properly enough make her the
Messenger of Discord, she carrying the Types of those two contrary Elements,
Fire and Water; and God might make her his Messenger of Peace, he controuling
and directing all natural Powers, and re-establishing a Concord betwixt those
two contrary Elements, whereof she carries the Types in those Colors she bears.

Hist. Crit. l. 3. c. 14.
I may note in the last place, that Father Simon censures Luther of Ignorance in
the style and symbolical sense of the Scriptures, for saying, that there was no
Rainbow before the Deluge, and that God created it for those very Reasons set
down Genesis 9. But though there may be a known symbolical sense contained under
the Rainbow, which may far more require our attention than the Symbol it self:
yet I shall not here take upon me to determine how far Luther may stand
affected by that Censure.

As for what the Author urges from the Passage of St. Peter, Ep. 2. c. 3.5.
viz. That the Antediluvian Heavens had a different Constitution from ours;
containing only watery Meteors: I do not find he makes out that there were more
of those watery Meteors in the Air then, than there are now, so that a Deluge
should be thence particularly caused; on which account St. Peter intimates that
different Disposition to have been: and when the Author has said all he can of
it, L. 2. c. 5. p. 202.
he plainly concludes in his Latin Copy, That he cannot find, or discover by
Reason, whence that Glut of Waters rose at that time, or wherefore after
fifteen Ages after the World was made, that Immense Glut of Waters, gathered
together in the Air, discharged itself on the Earth, it might have been, he
says, from supernatural Causes. And in his Answer to Mr. Warren, he says, the
Rains that made the Flood, were extraordinary, and out of the Course of Nature.
And what is this in effect, but to own that the Deluge is not explicable by
humane Reason, and that Miracles are to be allowed in it; but they must be the
Authors own way, and not as others have said; which perhaps by many may be
interpreted to carry more of Humor than Reason.

CHAP. VI.
THIS Chapter contains only a review of what the Author has said concerning the
Primitive Earth, with a more full survey of the state of the first World
Natural and Civil, and the Comparison of it with the present World; so that
here is little new: wherefore I shall note only the following Passage, where
the Author says, I cannot easily imagine, that the sandy Deserts of the Earth
were made so at first immediately from the Beginning of the World.

To this we may reply, That if the sense of one Man may be opposed against that
of another, Lucan seems of a contrary Opinion, where he says, Syrtes, vel
primam mundo natura figuram
Quum daret, in medio pelagi terraeque reliquit. Phars. l. 9.

When Nature framed the World, at its first birth,
It left the Quicksands 'twixt the Sea and Earth.


CHAP. VII.
HERE the Author comes to the main Point to be considered in this Book, viz.
the Seat of Paradise; and says, that its Place cannot be determined by the
Theory only, nor from Scripture only; and then gives us the sense of Antiquity
concerning it as to the Jews, the Heathens, and especially the Christian
Fathers, showing, that they generally place it out of this Continent in the
Southern Hemisphere.

He declares that considering the two Hemispheres according to his Theory, he
sees no Natural Reason or occasion to place it in one Hemisphere more than in
the other; and that it must rather have depended on the Will of God, and the
series of Providence that was to follow in this Earth, than on any natural
incapacity in one of those Regions more than in another, for planting in it
that Garden. Neither do the Scriptures determine where the place was. As to
Antiquity, he says, the Jews and Hebrew Doctors place it in neither Hemisphere,
but under the Equinoctial; because they supposed the Days and Nights to have
been always equal in Paradise. Among the ancient Heathens, Poets and
Philosophers, he finds they had several Paradises on the Earth, which they
generally, if not all of them, place without, or beyond this Continent, in the
Ocean, or beyond it, or in another Orb or Hemisphere, as the Gardens of the
Hesperides, the fortunate Islands, the Elysian Fields, Ogygia, Toprabane, as it
is described by Diodorus Siculus, and the like.

As to Christian Antiquity, or the Judgment or Tradition of the Fathers in this
Argument; he tells us, that the Grand Point disputed amongst them was, Whether
Paradise were Corporeal; or Intellectual only, and Allegorical. Then of those
that thought it Corporeal, some placed it high in the Air, some inaccessible by
Deserts and Mountains, and many beyond the Ocean, or in another World, but
named no particular Place, or Country in the known parts of the Earth for the
Seat of it: and upon the whole he brings it to this Conclusion, that tho their
Opinions are differently expressed, they generally concenter in this, that the
Southern Hemisphere, beyond the Aequinoctial, was the Seat of Paradise. And
this Notion of another World or Earth beyond the Torrid Zone, he says, he finds
among Heathen Authors, as well as Christian, and that those who say Paradise
was beyond the Ocean, mean the same, for that they supposed the Ocean to lie
from East to West betwixt the Tropicks: the Sun and Planets being there cooled
and nourisht by its moisture. And having quoted many of the Fathers and others
in reference to the Seat of Paradise in the other Hemisphere, he concludes,
that in this particular he is willing to refer himself wholly to the report and
majority of Votes among the Ancients, whether Christians or others, who seem
generally to incline to the South, or South-east Land.

After so large an Apparatus for making out the Place of Paradise, and a new
World made for it, a Man would have expected that some Circumstances at least,
should have been brought, for pointing it forth, and not barely to sit down, by
saying, I wholly refer my self to the major Vote of Antiquity, especially
having promised us in the first Chapter of this Book a just account of it.
Since then there is nothing brought from Scripture or Reason for proving the
place of Paradise; I shall only consider the Authority of Antiquity for it, as
the Author has done; but withal I must first declare, it is not without a
sacred dread that I commit Pen to Paper on this Subject, well knowing of what
weight it is, and what Dispositions could be required in a Person to treat of
it according to its Dignity: a Man ought to have had a due Institution amongst
the Mystae (by such, I mean those excellent Genii, whose better Stars have so
disposed their Understandings, that they have penetrated the Allegories and
Aenigma's of the ancient Sages; and are able readily to run through the whole
systeme of Nature, every where adapting Superiors to Inferiors according to
those Scales of Numbers which a learned Adeptist has set forth) and to have
used great diligence in Study, undisturbed by worldly Circumstances; both which
I well know to have been wanting in me. A Man ought to be thoroughly seen in the
Analogies betwixt the Intellectual, Celestial, and sublunary Worlds, and of
the Microcosm to them all; for otherwise he shall never be able to discern what
is delivered literally, what figuratively by the Ancients: and for want of
Persons being thus qualified, those infinite Tautological Volumes have been
written by Schoolmen and others, on this and other Parts of the Scriptures. We
know how difficult it is sometimes to discern, even in Heathen Writers, whether
they write literally or figuratively; as in Plato's Timaeus, the Relation of
the War betwixt the Athenians and the Atlantiques, is said by Crantor, Plato's
first Interpreter, to be a plain historical Relation; others say it to be a
mere Allegory; and others again will have it to be a true Historical Narration,
but withal to carry on an Allegory. Certainly the sense of the Scriptures in
many Places, and perhaps in this of Paradise, is more difficult to be
understood than any part of Plato's Works is: and therefore I should rather
have been content to have kept my self within the bounds of natural History, in
all my Considerations on this Theory. But since the occasion offers, that I say
somewhat concerning the Seat of Paradise, I shall lay down what I conceive the
sense of the Ancients to have been in it, humbly standing the Correction of
meet Judges.

First then, (to pass by what the Author allows, viz. that the Jews and Hebrew
Doctors placed Paradise under the Aequinoctial, and not in the Southern
Hemisphere; where he, at last concludes it to have been.) As for the several
Paradises of the Ancient Heathen Poets and Philosophers, which he will have us
particularly observe to have been generally placed by them without, or beyond
this Continent, as pointing at the other Hemisphere, I have this to offer
concerning them: That I truly look upon it as trifling in any Man to think that
any of those Poets or Philosophers judged any place on the Earth really
Paradisiacal; or meant any place so, described by them.

It seems to me plain enough from them that they always meant Paradise
Celestial, or Intellectual, as the Allegorical Fathers did. It Is true, many of
them took some place on the Earth, noted for Salubrity and Pleasantness, for a
ground of their Allegory: it being usual with the ancient Mystae, when they had
any Doctrine figuratively to set forth, to take some historical Ground, whether
Natural or Civil; and those were looked upon the most ingenious, who in the
delivery of such figurative Doctrine could make the historical Truth quadrate
without addition: but when any important Doctrine was to be delivered, where
the historical Truth could not hold, then they either wholly feigned some
historical Narration, by Analogy to which that Truth they designed might be set
forth, or to some true historical Ground they took, they added what Flourishes
they thought fit, for making it serve to carry on their Allegory, as in the
case of Paradise they have proceeded both ways.

To consider particularly the Paradisiacal places they describe, what have the
Fortunate Islands, the Gardens of the Hesperides, Alcinous, etc. (being places
known to us in this Hemisphere, as literally understood) to do with the other
Hemisphere? Some Authors, as Virgil and others, to show themselves openly
Allegorical, placed the Elysian Fields in the subterraneous Regions, where they
thought no Man in his wits would seek for them: and I think it plain enough to
any thing but wilful blindness, that those who placed Paradise beyond the
Ocean, In Phaedone.
in the Air, etc. did it on the same account; as we may judge by the pure
aetherial Earth described by Plato.

The Author intimates more than once, that the Pensile Gardens of Alcinous must
be expounded by the Pensile structure of his Paradisiacal Earth, as it hung
over the Abyss, before the Deluge: whereas it is well known what these Gardens
were: they were that Pensile Vault hanging over our Heads. Alcinous solemn,
lunam, stellasque micantes,
Et coelum aeternum credidit esse Patrem.
where should his Gardens of Pleasure, or his Paradise be, but where his Gods
were, in the Society of whom he drank Nectar and Ambrosia; or, to express it
according to Christian Divinity, in the Love, and Contemplation of whom he was
ravished with Delights? Mythology tells us, that the Gardens of the Hesperides,
said to be seated in the West, were no others; the Golden fruits being those
Golden globous Bodies, with which the Heavens are adorned, and the watchful
Dragon being that Dragon at the North Pole (or the Zodiac Circle, according to
others) said to be always watchful, because it never sets to this part of the
World, which was the only part known to the Ancients. It was said to be seated
in the West, because as the Sun sets in the West the Stars appear, the light of
the Sun hiding them in the daytime. The Gardens of Adonis are the same; Adonis
being the Sun, that glorious Leader of the Celestial Host. And these are the
three Paradisiacal Gardens, which (as Pliny tells us) were most celebrated by
Antiquity; tho even these must refer higher, I mean to the Intellectual and
Archetypal Worlds, till which the Mind of Man can never rest. Those delightful
Gardens of Adonis are said, by some, to have been taken by the Gentiles, from
the Eden of Moses, that word with the Hebrews signifying Pleasures and
Delights, as (...) does with the Greeks, and as the word Pardeis does with the
Chaldeans and Persians, whence the Greeks took the word (...), and the Latins
Paradisus. These are the Gardens where the never-ceasing Nightingale sings. --
-- Vbi suavis cantat Aedon. ( Apollo being famous for his Charms) he foments
his Eggs in his Breast, and solaces the waking labor of the tedious Nights with
the sweetness of his Songs; retiring in the Wintertime from these parts of the
Earth to others then more Pleasant.

Concerning the Elysian Fields, the Author takes an occasion to intimate as tho
they were in the other Continent, as he reflects on those, who he conceives
have misrepresented Paradise, saying, these have corrupted and misrepresented
the notion of our Paradise, just as some modern Poets have the notion of the
Elysian Fields, which Homer and the Ancients placed in the extremity of the
Earth, and these would make a little green Meadow in Campania Foelix to be the
famed Elysium.

Considering Homer and others of the Ancient Gentiles, I see not why they must
be interpreted to have placed those Fields in the other Hemisphere; as for that
Speech of Proteus to Menelaus in Homer, Sed te qua terrae postremus terminus
extat
Elysium in in campum coelestia numina ducunt.
Strabo interprets this of the Fortunate Islands, L. 3.
or the Canaries, famous for a salubrity of the Air, and gentle Zephires
peculiar to that Region lying in the West. Plutarch tells us, that by those
extreme parts of the Earth is meant the Moon; where the shadow of the Earth,
and these sublunary Regions terminate. Macrobius tells us, that according to
Antiquity, those extreme parts of the Earth, where the Elysian Fields are, is
the Sphaera (...), where the purest Minds reside. But to pass by these
Interpretations, it is well known to the Mystae, what Homer would be at by his
extreme parts of the Earth; it implying only a passing from the Flesh into the
Spirit, where the Earth truly ends, and where St. Paul found a real Paradise:
and there is a Torrid Zone to pass e're we come to it, and passable only by
those Qui solis meridiantis fulgidissimum jubar far possunt, it being
hardcoming near those Coestial Fires without being melted by their heat. But I
shall say more beneath concerning what some of the Ancient Gentiles meant by
seeming to place their Paradises in the other Hemisphere.

Virgil, (as I have intimated before) represents the Elysian Fields, Ae. 5. and
6.
as well as the place where the wicked are tormented, in the bowels of the
Earth. And Servius tells that those Fields are at the Center, abounding with
all Delights, and that -- Solemque suum sua sydera norunt. Hither it was the
Sibyl carried Aenaeas, an Enterprise she had not undertaken, but that she knew
him of the Heroes, and some way qualified to attend her in it: for it is an
incredible labor, and indeed in a manner insupportable, to wade through those
subterraneous Regions; nor can the difficulty of it sink into the mind of Man
without trial. The Poet calls it Insanus Labor, and it is so, a divine Fury
attends it; during the transaction the Soul is stimulated, to exert its noblest
Instincts, and the Understanding is consummated, as far as it is capable of so
being. Hence Plato says, In Phoedro.
that humane Wisdom, if compared with that which is had from Oracles, and a
divine Fury, is as nothing: and hence Virgil thought not Aeneas duly qualified
for being founder of the Roman Empire, till with his other Endowments, he had
this divine Institution of the Sibyl. And I make no doubt but there are Sibyls
still in the World, who on certain occasions can and do perform the like pious
Office to Man, though the outward Typical part of Caves and Tripods be left
off; the Caves only denoting a deep mental Recess; the Tripod the three
successions of Time, all known to Apollo.

Virgil, not only in his sixth Aenead, but elsewhere, sufficiently intimates
the dreadful Labor which attends this Transaction, where he disswades
Augustus, though a great Emperor, and a Man of noble Endowments of Mind, from
ever wishing himself a party concerned in it, saying, Quicquid eris (nam te nec
sperent Tartara Regem,
Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira cupido;
Geor. 1.
Quamvis Elysios miretur Graecia campos,
Nec repetita sequi curet Proserpina matrem)
Da facilem cursum --
Whatever you will be (for Hell never hopes you King,
Nor so seek Rule, to wish so direful thing,
Tho Greece admires the Elysian Fields, nor was
Proserpine fond with Ceres thence to pass,)
Vouchsafe the Favor --
And perhaps, it might be in view of this difficulty that Christ said, Regnum
Coelorum vim patitur, and violenti rapiunt illud, Mat. 11. and 12. And again,
That it was as hard for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as for
a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle.

If we consider what the Sibyl required of Aenaeas to perform before he could
accompany her in this great Undertaking, it may not be difficult for us to
conceive what those Regions are into which he passed: the Golden Branch must be
gotten, and carried with him to gain his admittance into them, and a dead Man,
a Friend of his, slain by Triton, a Sea God, whom he had provoked, must be
buried; the Old Man, the Animal Man, must be slain and buried, without which
sacred Necromantick Practice, Christ cannot be formed nor reign within us, nor
can we enter the Kingdom of Bliss. The Poet makes this Man a Trumpeter, the
Animal-man being naught but Clamor and Noise; his Funeral-pile must be made of
that ancient overgrown Forest, that Den of wild Beasts with which the golden
Bow is all invested. Gold, for that its a pure and incorruptible Metal, and the
most ductile and extendible of all Bodies, and in its Color resembles the
glorious Lights of Heaven, it terminating also the desires of Man, was made by
the Ancients the sacred Type of the Deity, or of that divine Nature diffused
through the World; and hence by Divines the whole Intellectual World is called
the Cataena Aurea; and hence also are those famous Stories of the Golden Fleece
at Colchos, and of the Golden Fruits in the Gardens of the Hesperides, and the
Golden Age refers here, and this is that Aurum Ignitum which St. John says,
will make a Man Rich. Now the Sibyl truly tells Aenaeas there is no coming at
this Golden Branch, that divine Spirit, which must be his Passeport to the
Elysian fields, till he has cut down the wild Forest with which it is
surrounded, and made a Funeral-pile of it, to burn the dead Body of his Friend
Misenus, that animal Man: the Forest being naught but that confusion of Vice,
in which humane Life is involved; and till this be cut down and burnt, igne
Sacro, igne Conscientiae, igne Coelesti, absumente sacrificium Domini, quo and
totus mundus uno die periturus est, the Divine Nature cannot be manifested
within us, nor can we enter those pure Aetherial Regions, undisturbed by
corporeal Passions and Affects.

We need not therefore go far to find where that Region lies; all may be
resolved by that Inscription in the Delphick Temple, (...); for though it was
the great wisdom of the Ancients, or rather, of God himself to bring Men round
in Types by a circular fetch of external Nature, they well knew where all must
terminate; I say not in us as Men, but in that God within us, in whom we live,
move, and are, and who sometimes is pleased to manifest himself to Man. And
this I aver, that whatsoever knowledge of God may accrue to Man from a
Contemplation of external Nature, he shall never have that sensible feeling of
him that way, as when being raised in the Spirit, Baptismo flaminis, he comes
to find him within himself. The Poet tells us of two sorts of Persons, both
Diis Geniti, not born of flesh and blood, but of God, who may have a free
Intercourse to those Ethereal Regions; they must be, either Quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, such, as by a Privilege of Nature, or a Genethliacal favor of the
Heavens are gifted for it, that is according to Christian Divinity, such as God
is pleased to save by his particular Grace; as it may be said of St. John, who
in one slumber on the Breast of Christ drew far deeper Mysteries than all the
Schools in the World could teach him; and of St. Paul, who by an overruling
Summons from God was rapt on a sudden to the third Heavens, where a fullness of
Knowledge was communicated to him. Or secondly, Quos ardens evexit ad aethera
virtus, such as having applied the powers of their Soul to the knowledge of
that divine Nature which governs the World, are, at length initiated by a
certain divine Institution, disposing to the supernatural Act, which God has
been pleased to reveal to Man, by which also a Regeneration is truly wrought,
and Paradise is opened to us; though many times the effect of it may prove but
transient, through the instability and frailty of Man's nature, he soon
relapsing into Sin, without a particular Providence to uphold him; as (if I am
not mistaken in Mythology) it is plainly set forth in the expedition for the
Golden Fleece, where, according to some, Medaea in favor of Jason, by her
Enchantments, cast the Dragon which guarded it, into a profound Sleep only; and
did not kill him outright, whilst Jason executed his Enterprise, or she for
him, the Dragon happily afterward awaking again. And Servius well observes, that
Proteus received Divinity only for a time, otherwise he might have known
Aristaeus lying in wait for him. And thus Solomon is known to have received the
Spirit; and as well known it is how notoriously he fell from the Rectitude of
it. Nor was David himself, so great a Prophet as he was, without great Lapses,
the like may be held of Gedeon and others.

This is that Institution, by which, as the Areopagite says, Socrates* being
stirred up, and raised in his Understanding, sang forth divine Mysteries, he
owning himself before ignorant of Celestial and sublunary Things.

I know not how far I may have here incurred the Censure of some Critics, for
having seemed to imitate, as though some Mysteries of Christianity had been
known among the Gentiles: But to pass by the Testimonies of many of the Fathers,
by which the knowledge of Christ is allowed to many of them before his
appearing in the Flesh; we know that Virgil, in what he applies to the Son of
Pollio in his fourth Eclogue, is judged to have prophesied of Christ; and I
know not why it may not be thought with as much reason, that being moved with
the same Spirit in his sixth Aenead, he has prophesied of the Kingdom of Christ
in the Soul of Man. And indeed, I look upon it as a Truth, that to sincere
Souls, living according to the light they had, at all times, and in all
Nations, God has pleased in some extraordinary way to communicate the knowledge
of Christ, and that the Virtue and Efficacy of his Death and Passion, has been
applied to them, tho they knew nothing of the History thereof; And that the
Doctors of the Gentiles have mysteriously delivered many things concerning
Christ, though not with that soundness of Divinity which Christianity teaches.
That true Prophets were not only given by God to his People, but likewise to
the Gentiles to announce the coming of his Son, and teach them many other
things; it appears from the Sibyls, who were given to the Greeks and Romans;
and from Balaam, who was given to the Oriental People.

He that desires to see more concerning what the Ancients thought of a Paradise
being without our Continent, or in another Hemisphere, may read what Bishop
Usher has learnedly set forth concerning it in his Tract of Limbus Patrum,
where in the end he plainly makes out both by sacred and profane Writers, that
though some of the Ancients would personate a Scene of Ades, for the reception
of Souls in the other Hemisphere, beyond the Ocean, (which they supposed then
uninhabited) to gratify vulgar Fancy; yet that the Translation of Souls
thither, in reality signified only their Translation from that which is
visible, to that which is invisible, no Topical Paradise being ever there
dreamt of: and if I should grant that some of the ancient Gentiles fancied the
Elysian Fields, as some pleasant place of Habitation in the other Hemisphere, I
see not how this could relate to Adam's Paradise, the Seat of which was to be
made out by the Author, according to the Opinions of the Ancients: for these
Fields were for the reception of the Soul separate from the Body, and might
answer to the Celestial Paradise, and the state of the Church Triumphant, but
not to any Terrestrial Habitation, and the state of the Church Militant, and I
know nothing but the Golden Age of the Ancients that could answer to Adams
Paradise; concerning which I shall say somewhat beneath: but so much at present
concerning the Paradises of the Gentiles.

Now, in the second place, when a Man considers the Fathers on this Point of
Paradise, he may be apt to say what Cicero said on a greater occasion. De Not.
Deor. l. 1.
Truly so great a Dissension of the most learned Men, in so weighty a matter,
may make even those doubt, who think they have somewhat certain. For some of
the greatest Writers amongst them are so invectively opposite, in their
Assertions concerning Paradise, that Philo and Origin, Pursuers of the
Allegory, and followed by others, censure those as mad Men or Idiots, who go
about to establish a corporeal Paradise; they concluding that the Scriptures,
in what is delivered in them concerning Paradise, so manifestly present us an
occasion to adhere to the Allegory, that we cannot but embrace it: Whereas on
the contrary, Hierom and others censure those as Triflers and Dreamers, who so
addict themselves to the Allegory, that they will not withal allow a plain
Historical Sense in that Narration; they grounding themselves on this, That
unless an Historical Truth be held in those things, which are delivered in the
Scriptures, by way of an Historical Narration, nothing would be certain in them.

Whereas the Author says we may observe, that tho the Fathers Opinions be
differently expressed, they generally concenter in this, that the Southern
Hemisphere was the Seat of Paradise, and that this seems manifestly to be the
Sense of Christian Antiquity and Tradition, so far as there is any thing
definitive, in the Remains we have upon that Subject; I find not that this is
made out by him; for doing which, he distributes the Christian Authors and
Fathers that have delivered their Opinion concerning the Place of Paradise into
three or four Ranks or Orders, and endeavors to show, that tho they expressed
themselves differently, yet duly examined, that all conspire and concur in the
forementioned Conclusion,

In the first place he reckons those who have set Paradise in another World, or
in another Earth, which he concludes must have been beyond the Torrid Zone, in
the other Hemisphere. In this number he places Ephrem Syrus, Moses Barcephas,
Tatianus, and of later date, Jacobus de Valentia. To these he adds, such as
say, that Adam, when he was turned out of Paradise, was brought into our Earth,
or into our Region of the Earth; for this he says, is tantamount with the
former, and this seems to be the sense of S. Hierom, and of Constantine in his
Oration in Eusebius, and is positively asserted by Sulpitius Severus. And
again, those Authors that represent Paradise, as remote from our World, and
inaccessible, as S. Austin, Procopius Gazaeus, Beda, Strabus Fuldensis,
Historia Scholastica; for what is remote from our World, he says is to be
understood to be that Anticthon, or Antihemisphere, which the Ancients opposed
to ours.

I must confess, I have not many of the Authors here quoted by me, my poor
Country Study not affording them: But on a Consideration of what the Author has
quoted from them, and what I find quoted from them by others, we may discern
how far they concur in that Doctrine, which he here ascribes to them: and to
proceed in order as the Author has set them down, I find the Opinion of Ephrem
quoted by Ralegh from Barcephus thus: Ephrem dicit Paradisum ambire terram,
atque ultra oceanum ita positum esse, ut totum terrarum orbem ab omni circumdet
regione, non aliter atque lunae orbis lunam cingit. In Phaedone.
Now he that can make Sense of this may; unless he will expound it according to
Plato's Fable of his Ethereal Earth. The Author, in his Latin Copy, quotes
also this Passage, tho expressed in somewhat different terms, and explains it
thus, That in the Paradisiacal Earth, the Ocean compassed about the Body of the
Earth, and the Paradisiacal Earth compassed about the whole Ocean, as the Orb
of the Moon does the Moon; so that he judges that Form of the Earth to be here
intimated, which he has before given it; where the Abyss compassed about the
Body of the Earth, and the Paradisiacal Earth the Abyss, or the Ocean. Now if
this were so, it is manifest that Ephrem, in that Passage, could not relate to
one Hemisphere more than to the other, which was the only thing the Author had
to make out.

But, to be more plain in this matter, the Book which Barcephas ascribes to
Ephrem (and that falsely, as I conceive) and whence he quotes his Opinion, is
called Parva Genesis, or De Ortu Rerum; the foregoing Passage well suiting with
others, quoted from a Book of that Title, which I guess to be the same; and if
so, I should have the worse Opinion of Barcephas, for quoting so frivolous, and
I think I may say, so impious a Pamphlet. Ralegh derides that Parva Genesis,
for the miserable Stuff, L. 2. c. 26.. 5.
thence often quoted by Cedrenus; and a Man may be as well satisfied of it, by
what we find thence quoted in Glycas, who in the first part of his Annals says,
Cap. de desertore sive Diabolo.
But that little Book, De Ortu Rerum, tells us, that Adam took of the Tree of
Knowledge, and eat, without Circumspection, no way urged thereto by the Words of
Eve, but that he found a certain Disquiet in his Mind from Tiredness and
Hunger. But it is best to bury these things in silence, since they deserve an
eternal silence: And there he cites several other ridiculous Passages from him,
and concludes, that every Man that understands the Scriptures, looks upon them
as so. And again, he quotes this Parva Genesis in the third Part of his Annals,
and rejects it in like manner, saying, that he knows not who was the Author of
it: whereas, when on occasion he quotes Ephrem, he does it with much reverence.
I have given a Character of this Book, because the Author instances it in
several places, lamenting its loss; and seems chiefly to rely on it, in the
Point under debate.

Barcephas indeed, in one Passage which the Author quotes from him, intimates
Paradise to have been in the other Hemisphere: But withal he says, that it was
beyond the Ocean, and intimates it to be still in being, so that unless the
Author will receive these Traditions from him, I know not why he should urge
the other. But I shall say more of Barcephas beneath. As for Tatianus, tho he
distinguishes the Earth of Paradise from ours, saying that to be of a more
excellent make, unless he had been more particular in pointing forth the place
where it lay, I know not why it should be concluded that he thought it in the
other Hemisphere. When Jacobus de Valentia places Paradise in the other
Hemisphere, he says, it is because it lies under more noble Stars than ours: Now
we know this ground to be notoriously false, C. 12.
for that all Astronomers hold the Stars of this Hemisphere more noble than
those in the other: And as Mr. Gregory observes in his learned Notes on some
Scripture Passages, our Hemisphere is the principal, and far more excellent
than the other: we have more Earth, more Men, more Stars, more Day, and which
is more than all this, the North Pole is more magnetical than the South, Rid.
Of Magnetic Bodies and Motions, c. 6.
according to what the learned Ridley says he observed, viz. That the Pole of
the Magnet, which seats it self North, is always the most vigorous and strong
Pole to all intents and purposes. If Hierom opposes Paradise to our Earth, I
know not why it should imply more than some Excellency of that Soil more than
of ours: Neither do the Passages of Sulpitius Severus, or Constantine seem to
me to have any force.

As for Austin, and others that held Paradise remote from our World; we know
their Opinion relates to a supposed high elevated situation of Paradise, and
not to any other Hemisphere. Austin, and Hierom, and the ancient Fathers,
generally holding that there was no other Continent but this we inhabit. And
tho the Author refers the Consideration of this Opinion of the high elevated
situation of Paradise, to another Chapter, I think fit to examine it here.

We find then that several of the Authors beforementioned, as Barcephas,
Strabus Fuldenses, Historia Scholastica, Beda, Austin, besides many others not
named before, as Damascene, Rupertus, Basil, Alchimus Avitus, Tostate, and many
more gave Paradise a very highly elevated situation; some saying it to have
been seated as high as the Sphere of the Moon, or within the Lunar Circle.
Which Opinion seems to me to have been taken from the Theology of the Gentiles,
their Divines, Aen. 5. and 6.
as Servius tells us, placing Elysium about the Lunar Circle. But this Opinion
the Author says, looks very strange and extravagant at first sight, but the
Wonder will cease if we understand this, not of Paradise taken a part from the
rest of the Earth, but of the whole Primaeval Earth, wherein the Seat of
Paradise was: that was really seated much higher than the present Earth, and
may be reasonably supposed to have been as much elevated as the tops of our
Mountains are now: and that Phrase of reaching to the Sphere of the Moon,
signifies no more than these other Expressions, of reaching to Heaven, or
reaching above the Clouds: And he believes the Ancients aimed by this Phrase to
express an Height above the middle Region, or above our Atmosphere, that
Paradise might be serene: And he tells us the Tradition of reaching to the
Lunar Circle is derived by Albertus Magnus as high as from S. Thomas the
Apostle, etc.

I know some reply to this Opinion, that if Paradise had been as high elevated
as those Authors represent it, the Basis or Foundation of it must have taken
up, in a manner, the whole Earth, for it to have afforded an easy and gentle
Ascent to Men, if the State of Innocence had continued: Whence they say, that
when those Fathers said that Paradise reached to the Lunar Circle, or near
Heaven, they said it hyperbolically, to show the Excellency of it by its
hyperbolical Height, or to set forth the continual even Temper of the Air
there, it resembling in this the celestial Bodies, which are without
Contrariety.

But to pass by this Answer, the ground on which these Authors went to give
Paradise this high elevated Situation, which the Author intimates to have been
only for a Sereneness of the Air; I find by a learned School-Divine to have
been threefold: First, for affording a Descent to the four Rivers, which are
said to have issued from Paradise to water the whole Earth: Secondly, for a
serene and wholesome Air, whence they would place it above the Winds and Vapors
of the Earth: Thirdly, that it might be preserved at the time of the Deluge, as
they all supposed it was, being much higher than all the Mountains, said then
to have been overflown. We find therefore on what ground Barcephas gave
Paradise an high elevated Situation, Lib. de Parad. c. 9.
viz. For the Course of the four Rivers, which he plainly signifies thus,
Asserimus eam terrum, in qua est Paradisus, altiorem multo, sublimioremque
existere hac quam nos colimus: Id enim ita se habere indicio sunt quatuor illa
grandia flumina, quae orta in Paradisi terra, per hanc nostram ab illa diversam
feruntur. Ralegh also quotes the following Passage from him to this effect. L.
1. c. 3.. 4.
Deinde hoc quoque responsum volumus, Paradisum multo sublimiore positum esse
Regione, atque haec nostra extet terra, eoque fieri, ut illinc per praecipitium
delabantur fluvii tanto cum impetu, quantum verbis exprimere non possis; eoque
impetu impulsi, pressique, sub oceani vado rapiantur, unde rursus prosiliant,
ebulliantque in hoc a nostro culto orb.

So again, on the other ground, viz. The Preservation of Paradise at the Flood,
it was given an high Situation: L. 5. Adv. Here Is. c. 5.
and as for its Continuance since the Flood, Irenaeus says it was an
Apostolical Tradition, that Henoch and Elias now remain in Paradise, and tells
us he learnt it from Priests, who were Disciples of the Apostles. The same is
taught by Justin Martyr, Athanasius, Austin, Hierom, Aquinas, Theophilus Bishop
of Antioch, Malvenda, and many others. Malvenda says that no Divine till Peter
Lombard, nor none after him till Eugubinus, said that Paradise was not still in
being, or that it perished by the Deluge. Hence we see, if Christian Tradition
shall be stood to, and it be the general Tradition of the Fathers, that
Paradise is still in being, then must the Author's Hypothesis, concerning the
Fall of the Earth at the Flood be void.

Now, whereas the Author says, that the high Situation ascribed to Paradise,
must not be understood of Paradise taken a part from the rest of the Earth, but
of the whole Primaeval Earth wherein the Seat of Paradise was; which may
reasonably be supposed to have been as high elevated as the tops of our
Mountains are now: We find that tho the supposed elevated Situation which the
Author gives to the Primaeval Earth, and the Course he gives to the Sun in the
Antediluvian World, might possibly have afforded a Paradisiacal sereneness of
the Air, as he intimates, yet his frame of the Primaeval Earth, would
manifestly subvert the other two Grounds the Fathers went upon, viz. the Course
of the four Rivers, and the preservation of Paradise at the Deluge; and
consequently he cannot pretend the least color of strength given to his
Hypothesis, as being backed by the Authority of those Fathers and Authors, who
have given Paradise an high Situation.

Next, The Author mentions another set of Authors, that interpret the Flaming
Sword that guarded Paradise, to be the Torrid Zone; whereby he says, they
plainly intimate that Paradise, in their Opinion, lay beyond the Torrid Zone,
or in the Antihemisphere; and for this Opinion he quotes Tertullian, Cyprian,
Austin, Isidore Hispalensis and Aquinas: and in his Latin Copy he much urges
for the Torrid Zone's being signified by the Flaming Sword.

To this I answer, That if any of those Authors supposed Paradise beyond the
Torrid Zone, and not in it (as Tertullian at least held the later) it is
manifest that they never supposed any other Hemisphere inhabitbited there, (tho
possibly they might suppose an Island there) for what then should have hindered
all those Inhabitants from entering into Paradise, they being past the Flaming
Sword. And it seems strange that the Author should urge for the Torrid Zone's
being signified by the Flaming Sword, he having supposed that the other
Hemisphere was inhabited before the Flood; whence consequently all the Men
there must have had free access to Paradise. These are such Inconsistencies
that there is no Man but must see them.

Another form of Expression is instanced by the Author, as used amongst the
Ancients concerning Paradise, viz. That it was beyond the Ocean, this being of
the same Import with the former Head, pointing still at the other Hemisphere.
To which it may be answered as before, that tho they said Paradise was beyond
the Ocean, it is no consequence that they held another Hemisphere inhabited
there; though possibly some may have fansied Paradise an Island there, or in
the Torrid Zone itself.

De bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
As to the Passage of Josephus quoted by the Author concerning the Esseens, a
Sect among the Jews, relating to this Opinion, Josephus explains the meaning of
it well enough, saying thus, The Esseens say, as the Greeks, that the Souls of
good men live beyond the Ocean, in a place of Pleasure, where they are never
molested with Rains, nor Heat, but have always a sweet and pleasant Air coming
out of the Ocean: but the wicked Souls they say go into a place very
Tempestuous, where there is always, as it were, Winter weather, etc. whence it is
plain enough they took their Opinion from the Allegorical Fictions of the
Greeks; some of whom said, that Tartarus was a place under the Poles, by reason
of the sharpness of the Cold, and lasting Darkness.

After all, the Author concludes that what account we have of the Christian
Fathers concerning Paradise, is but a short and broken account; but their
obscure Expressions terminate all in this common Conclusion, That Paradise was
without our Continent, according to the general Opinion and Tradition of
Antiquity.

As to its being a short and broken Account, I think it must be so looked upon
by all Men; and as for their seeming to place it without our Continent, I shall
see forth beneath what seems to me most probable in the Case: but at present
upon the whole foregoing matter, I have only this to offer: Ralegh, as a Civil
Historian with Reason says, L. 1. c. 7.. 10.
That he toyld himself in making out the Seat of the terrestrial Paradise, and
the place where the Ark, rested, because the true understanding of those places
do only and truly teach the Worlds Plantation, and the beginning of Nations
before and after the Flood; and all Story, as well general, as particular
thereby may be the better understood. And though his performance in that kind,
nor no Man's else has been such as to obtain a general Reception; yet since our
Guides in Divine matters, in whose Authority we ought to acquiesce, conclude
that there was a Corporeal Paradise, we must be governed by them in it, and may
well conceive that the Qualities of the Primigenial Soil, Air and Waters far
exceeding ours, there might have been some particular part in it, though not
known, answering to Moses's description. And for what flourishes, the Fathers
or any other Christian or Jewish Authors have added to it; since they have not
particulary made out the place; I think we are free to judge as we please of
them. And as for Heathen Authors both Greeks and Latins, who had their learning
of the Egyptians; they are all known to have derived their learning with the
Egyptians from Moses, and the Postdiluvian Patriarchs before him, though their
streams since have happened to have been miserably corrupted: but in their
Paradises they seem to me still to have kept to the Intellectual, as the
Allegorical Fathers did, their topical Paradises being only feigned. And as to
the passages of the Poets, as that of Virgil concerning the perpetual Spring
ascribed to the Golden Age, and urged by the Author: Non alios prima nascentis
origin mundi
Illuxisse dies, aliumve habuisse tenorem
Crediderim: ver illud erat, ver magnus agebat
Orbis, and hybernis parcebant flatibus Euri, etc.
Servisn tells us that this is said only according to a Poetical freedom, not
that a real Truth could be meant in it. The same must be said of Ovid's Verses
of the Golden Age, urged also by the Author. Ver erat aeternum, placidique
tepentibus annis
Mulcaebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores.
Whosoever takes this as a real Truth, I think with as good reason may take the
following Verses, as so likewise, Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris
ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.
The streams with Milk, the streams with Nectar flow,
And green Oaks drop sweet Honey as we go.
For the one seems as Philosophical to me as the other. And when the Fathers,
to whom we owe a greater Reverence, expatiate themselves, as they often do,
after the like manner, we give them no other Interpretation: for when they go
about to describe a Paradise, which certainly was greatly adorned in itself,
their business is to present us under one view, with all that is most specious
and excellent in Nature: so that they say it had in it whatsoever was best and
most pleasant in every Season of the Year, the sweetness of the Spring, the
plenty of the Summer, the cheerfulness of Autumn, the rest and ease of Winter.
And Fancy is content to indulge all this, as it is set before it, without
reflecting on those Inconsistencies which strict reasoning would soon stumble
at. And all those great Wits, who have writ so floridly of the Golden Age,
could not but know other things, as they considered what according to Natural
and Civil History the World could afford in all Ages from the Beginning. From
the view of which another face of things must be presented, Meth. hist. c. 5.
and we must say with Bodin, Aetas illa quam auream vocant, si ad hanc nostram
conferatur, ferrea videri possit: Praef. in l. de omn. gent. Rit.
And we shall find, as Boemus says, How politely and happily Men live now, and
how rudely and crudely the first Mortals lived from the Creation to the Deluge,
and many Ages after thorowout the Earth. How could Men be conceived to have
lived in those times, but as they have lately been found to do in the
West Indies? vita cruda, seeds incerta, libido promiscua. So Cicero tells us,
Fuit quoddam tempus cum in agris homines passim hostiarun more vagabantur, and
sibi victu ferino vitam propagabant, nec ratione animi quicquam, sed pleraque
viribus corporis administrabant. Nondum divinae Religionis, non humani officii
ratio colebatur, nemo legitimas viderat nuptiaes, non certos quisquam
inspexerat liberos, non jus aequabile quid utilitatis haberet, acceperant.
Ralegh says, the World would be a dull thing without Navigation; and Plutarch
aggravating the matter, says, That Man would be the most vile, most
necessitous, and least regarded Animal in the World without it: and we have no
account of any such thing used in the Antediluvian times, nor in many
succeeding Ages to any purpose, whereas Men have now so cultivated, and
imbellish'd things both by Land and Sea, that the present Earth compared to its
ancient wild, and incult state, must be concluded another thing from what then
it could have been. So Tacitus tells us, that Germany formerly was all Woods
and Moors, barren of Fruit Trees and unimprovable by any Husbandry, that there
were Cattle in it, but Dwarfish; no Gold nor Silver in it, and therefore
despised by all Men; whereas it is now as pleasant a Counrry almost in all
respects as France, Spain, or Italy.

Indeed, in refetence to the Civil or Moral World, it might be said, that by
the Golden Age is meant the Ancient simplicity, which the Poets or others would
represent in our Forefathers, as leading a quiet and calm Life, free from all
Treachery, Voluptuousness, and other burdensome circumstances to humane
Nature; as we find some of the Ancients formerly had so great a hatred and
detestation of Pleasures, Superfluities and Voluptuousness, that in the Temple
of the Town of Thebes, there was a famous square Pillar erected, on which were
engraven Curses and Execrations against King Menis, who was the first that
withdrew the Egyptians from a simple and sober Life without Money and Riches.
But it cannot be thought that ever this Humor was general in the World, though
it might happen sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, Myth. l. 2.
c. 1.
according to the vicissitude of humane Affairs. Or we may say with Natalis
Comes, what is the Golden Age but a common liberty of all Men in a City well
governed by Laws, where wild Beasts live freely with domestic Animals, Dogs
with Hares, Lambs with Wolves, and the like. For in a time of Peace good Men
live safe under the protection of the Laws among Cutthroats and Thieves. Some
by the Golden Age understand the time when Men were governed by the Law of
Nature written in their Hearts, before the written Law was in being. And others
by the four Ages, will have four sorts of Men to be signified. But to pass from
the Moral World to the Natural; though as to the place which God appointed for
Paradise, it must be allowed to have been adorned with all advantages and
delights from the Beginning; yet as to the rest of the Earth, I know not what
warrant we have from the Scriptures or other History. Or what may be suggested
from Reason for any advantageous furniture it had for supplying Men with
Necessaries or Pleasures. Indeed, the Scriptures tell us of the Longaevity of
the Antediluvian Patriarchs, and we have suggested Conjectures already of what
it may be imputed too; but as to the great Fertility ascribed to the
Primigenial Soil, that of necessity must have added to the inconvenience of
Habitation by an overgrowth, without Persons to cultivate it; and it seems
likely to me that Adam, as soon as he was turned out of Paradise, was hardly
put to his shifts: L* an Vsus Carn. sit licit.
Plutarch also sufficiently tells us what Conveniences for the support of
humane Life a recent World could afford; so that a Golden Age in any such
respect, seems to me to have been represented rather for gratifying the Fancy
than the Judgment. And all I can bring it to, is this, that as the Ancients by
the Golden Age, in the moral World would represent an Ideal state of pure
Nature and of Innocence; so by all their Flourishes on the then Course of
external Nature, they would personate an Idaeal state of it correspondent to
the other.

Having thus far shown how little the Author's Hypothesis is backed by the
Sentiments of the Ancients concerning Paradise: I shall now briefly set forth,
what, as far as my Reading has gone, seems to me most probable in this matter.

The Learned Mr. Gregory, on that passage of Zach. C. 6.12. Behold the man
whose name is East; Notes on Scrip. pas. c 18.
whom he makes out to be Christ, lays down this as a Ground, That the special
Presence of God, as he superintends this World, ever was and is in that part of
the Heaven, or Heavens, which answers to the Aequinoctial East of the holy Land.

To make this good, he says, the Ancients always attributed to the Gods the
Eastern parts, as Porphyry says, Proph. l. de Nymph. Antr.
and those parts are called by Varro and Festus, the Seats of the Gods, etc.

He proves it also from Reason, according to Aristotle, Phys. l. 8. Text. 84.
thus, The first Mover, viz. God must of necessity be present either to the
Center or Circumference of his Orb, and since Motions are most rapid in the
nearest distance to the Impression, and since that part of the Sphere is most
rapidly moved, which is most remote from the Poles, therefore the movers Place
is about the middle Line: and this he thinks is the reason why the Aequinoxes
are believed to be of so sacred an Import and signification in Astrology; for
by them (as Ptolomy says) it is judged concerning things Divine, and the Service
belonging to the House of God.

Now the Philosophers meaning is not as if the Mover presented himself alike
unto the whole Circumference, but assisting especially to that part from whence
the motion does begin, viz. the East, whence Averrhoes rightly says, L. 2.
Text. 3.
some Religious worship God that way.

Since therefore the Aequinoctial East passes through the whole Circle, of
necessity it is to be meant of some certain Position, nor is it possible to mean
it but of the horizontal Segment of the then habitable World; the uttermost
bounds whereof from Sun to Sun, they absolutely termed East and West. In the
Philosophers time the Circle of this Horizon past through the Pillars of
Hercules in the West, Calpe and Abyla; and the Altars of Alexander in the East.
And at the Pillars of Hercules the Arabians fixed their Great Meridian. Now,
this Meridian passes through the tenth degree of Longitude from that of
Ptolomy: and the River Hyphasis, on the furthest banks of which Alexanders
Altars were raised, as being the place where his Journeys ended, is placed by
Ptolomy in 131.35. the difference of Longitude is about 120 degrees; the second
part of which is 60. and because the Meridian of Jerusalem is 70 degrees from
that of Ptolomy, that is 60 from the Arabian, the Holy City was, as it was
anciently termed, Vmbilicus Terrae, being precisely placed betwixt the East and
West of the habitable World.

Therefore the Aequinoctial East of Jerusalem, is the Aequinoctial East of the
whole, and answering to the first movers Receipt, which therefore was said to
be in Orient aequinoctiali.

Now, the Notion of Paradise in the Christian acceptance, was that part of the
Heaven where the Throne of God and the Lamb is, it being, as Zoroaster terms
it, in the Chaldean Oracles, the all enlightened recess of Souls. And Irenaeus
says, Adv. haeres. l. 5. c. 5.
as he heard from Disciples of the Apostles, the Receipt of just and perfect
Men is a certain Paradise in the Eastern part of the third Heaven; and many
others of the Fathers agree with him herein. And Pa^. 68.32.33. David says,
according to the Arabic Translation, Sing unto God ye Kingdoms of the Earth, O
sing praises to the Lord, Selah, to him that rides upon the heaven of heavens
in the Eastern part. Genesis 2.8. It Is said, And the Lord planted a Garden
Eastward, or toward the East. In the Apostolical Constitutions it is said, And
turning toward the East let them pray unto God, who sits upon the heaven of
heavens in the Eastern part. L. 2. c. 61.


Mr. Gregory having thus established his Ground, says, that this is the reason
why God planted a Garden in Eden Eastward; and that though some say with
Mercerus, That nothing hinders but we may take it generally that Paradise was
planted in the Eastern part of the World toward the rising Sun, yet Damascen,
and Barcephas say, Barcep. de Parad. l. 31. c. 13.
that at the beginning of March the Sun always rises directly over Paradise;
meaning that the Garden of Eden was planted toward the Aequinoctial East of the
Holy Land; and the meaning of this is that, the Sanctum Sanctorum of this
Mother Church pointed toward that part of Heaven where the Sun rises in the
month Nisan. For the Sanctuary of Paradise was the recess of the Garden, which
was distinguished and made so by the presence of the Tree of Life: Now this
Tree, according as we commonly translate it, was planted in the midst of the
Garden; but in truth it stood in the Eastern part of the place. And that not
only Adam, but the whole World also worshipped toward the East till Abraham's
time, Maimoni in his More, and S. Ephrem, and others in the Arabic Catena
testify.

And it depends from this very same Ground, that the most solemn piece of all
the Jewish Service, I mean that Great atonement, but once a Year to be made,
by the highest and most holy Man, and in the most holy Place, was performed
toward the East, contrary to all other manner of addressments in their
Devotion. For Lev 16.14, 15. It Is commanded, that the high Priest shall do with
the blood of the Goat, as with the blood of the Bullock, and sprinkle it with
his finger upon the Mercy-seat Eastward. Now its known that the sprinkling of
blood, especially this, was the Figure of him who by his own blood entered into
the holy Place, and obtained Eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.12. And hence Isychius
Hierosolom, In Lev. c. 16.
says, this was done to represent the Man, Cui oriens nomen ejus: and there are
many passages in the Scriptures which signify to us, that Christ came down to
us from the East.

And this is one reason why our Savior is said to be the Man whose Name is the
East: in reference to whom the Christians by some have been called Orientales,
and the Blessed Virgin is called Orientalis porta.

The other reason is according to what was intimated before, viz. that from
Adam till Abraham's time the whole World worshipped toward the East. Now this
Original, Principal, and (as it ought to have been everlasting) Ceremony, by an
Error of the Persian and Chaldean worshippers degenerating into an Idolatry of
the Sun; Abraham, (says the Learned Maimoni) by divine Inspiration, appointed
the West to his Hebrews: therefore the Tabernacle and Temple were set toward
that side of Heaven. So that they did, and they did not worshipped toward the
West. It Is true, all the Sacrifices were offered up that way, but all this
while they worshipped no more toward the West than toward the North. They
worship toward the Ark, or toward the place of that, and do so still, and are
so to do, because the Sun of Righteousness was to set upon their Horizon, and
to them the Man whose Name is the East, is not yet brought forth.

It Is known also that Christ's Star appeared in the East, and the Wisemen came
thence, and Christ ascended up into the Eastern part of Heaven, as the Psalmist
says, Qui ascendit super coelum coeli ad Orientem. And S. Jo. Damascen delivers
as from the Apostles that he shall come again in like manner, as he was seen to
go hence, answerable to what he himself said; For as the lightning comes out of
the East, and shines even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of
man be. We worship him therefore toward the East, as expecting him from thence.

Mr. Gregory concludes with an ancient Profession of the Eastern Church, who
say, We pray toward the East, for that our Lord Christ when he ascended into
Heaven, went up that way, and there fits in the Heaven of Heavens above the
East, according to David, Praise the Lord who sits in the Heaven of Heavens in
the East: and in truth, we make no doubt but that our Lord Christ, as
respecting his humane Nature, has his Seat in the Eastern part of the Heaven of
Heavens, and sits with his Face toward this World. To pray therefore, or to
worship toward the East, is to pray and worship toward our Savior.

And that all this is to be meant of the Aequinoctial East; L. 1. c. 13.
it is made out by Moses Barcephas in his Discourse of Paradise: he says there,
that the place toward which they prayed is that over which the Sun rises in the
Month Nisan, which is the Vernal Aequinox.

This is what I have briefly collected from Mr. Gregory, from which I may draw
what follows as a Corollary.

It appears from what is said that the Ancient Jews and Christians placed their
Terrestrial and Celestial Paradises; with reference to the states of the
Churches Militant and Triumphant, the one under the Sun on the Earth, the other
over it, in the third Heavens, as the Sun was placed in the Aequinoctial East
of Jerusalem, and consequently of the whole habitable World; and how possibly
could the ancient Mystae, who took upon them to bring all things to Time and
Place, more aptly personate a particular presence of the divine Logos in Heaven
and Earth than there? Since as he enlightens every Man coming into this World,
so the Sun being in that Aequinoctial East Point, equally diffused its light
over the whole habitable Earth, and hence we direct our divine Worship that
way, and may conclude the Seat of the Terrestrial Paradise there, though
perhaps it was miraculously founded, or at least for many Ages, L. de Aeris and
Epochis.
has not been known to Man. And as the forementioned Mr. Gregory has observed,
according to the sense of the most knowing. The Year of the World began, the
Sun being in that Vernal Aequinox Point, its Revolutions beginning and ending
there, nor can any other good reason be given why the Astronomers should deduce
all their Calculations from the head of Aries.

If the Pains I have bestowed in composing this long Chapter, may help somewhat
to ease the mind of any Man that peruses it concerning the Seat of Paradise, I
shall think it well bestowed: at least, beside my labor for my pains, it seems
to give a little ease to my own.

CHAP. VIII.
HERE the Author sets forth the uses of his Theory, for the illustration of
Antiquity, and endeavors to explain the Ancients Chaos, the Uninhabitableness
of the Torrid Zone, the Changes of the Poles of the World, the Doctrine of the
Mundane Egg, and endeavors to show how America was first Peopled, etc.

First then concerning the Ancients Chaos; he says, they have made a dark,
confused and unintelligible Story of it, telling us of moral Principles in it
instead of Natural; of Strife, Discord and Division on the one hand, and Love
and Friendship on the other: and that after a long Contest, Love got the better
of Discord, and united the disagreeing Principles. Then they make the forming
of the World out of the Chaos a kind of Genealogy or Pedigree; Chaos was the
Common Parent of all, and from Chaos sprung first Night, and Tartarus or
Oceanus; of Night were born Ether and the Earth, the Earth conceived by the
Influences of Ether, and brought forth Man and all Animals.

This, he says, seems a Poetical Fiction rather than Philosophy, yet compared
with his Theory of the Chaos, will appear a pretty regular account, how in the
formation of the World the Chaos divided it self successively into several
Regions rising from one another, as he has set forth in his first Book, how the
Chaos from an uniform Mass wrought in it self successively into several Regions
or Elements. The grossest parts sank to the Center, on this lay the mass of
Waters, and over the Waters, was a dark, impure caliginous Air, which the
Ancients called Night, as they called the mass of Waters Oceanus or Tartarus,
which two terms he finds with them often of the like force. Now this Turbid
air, he says, purifying itself by degrees, as the more subtle parts flew
upwards, and composed the Ether, so the Earthy parts dropped down on the surface
of the Water, and that Mass, on the other hand sending up its lighter and more
oily parts toward its Surface, these two incorporate there, and composed this
habitable Earth, so being the Daughter of Nox and Oceanus, and the Mother of
all other things.

This Doctrine of the Chaos, he says, the Ancients called the Genealogy of the
Gods, and thus from Eris and Eros, Love and Discord, the World arose: for in
the first Commotion of the Chaos, after an intestine struggle of all the parts,
the Elements separated from one another into so many different Bodies or
Masses; and in this state and posture things continued a good while, which the
Ancients after their Poetical or Moral way called the Reign of Eris or
Contention, Hatred, Flight, and Disaffection, till Love and good Nature
conquered, Venus rose out of the Sea, etc.

I shall here adjoyn also what the Author says of the Doctrine of the Mundane
Egg; because it particularly relates to the rising of the World from the Chaos.
He says then, that the Ancients had a Doctrine partly Symbolical concerning the
Mundane Egg; or their comparing the World to an Egg, and especially in
The Original Composition of it. Now he tells us, it is certain that by the World
in that Similitude, they did not mean the great Universe, for that has neither
Figure, nor any determinate form of Composition; and it would be a great vanity
and rashness to compare this to an Egg: but this Comparison is to be understood
of the sublunary World, or of the Earth: and for a general Key to Antiquity
upon this Argument, he lays down this as a Maxim or Canon, that what the
Ancients have said concerning the form and figure of the World, or concerning
the Original of it from a Chaos, or about the Periods or dissolution of it, is
never to be understood of the great Universe, but of our Earth, and of this
sublunary and Terrestrial World. He intimated somewhat to this purpose in his
first Book, saying, that when we speak of a rising World, and the Contemplation
of it, C. 1.
we do not mean this of the Great Universe, for who can describe the Original
of that, but we speak of the sublunary World, this Earth, and its dependancies,
which rose out of a Chaos about 6000 Years ago.

Now, he says, he has shown, that the Figure of the Earth when finished, was
Oval, and the inner form of it was a frame of four Regions encompassing one
another, where that of the Fire lay like the yolk, and a shell of Earth
enclosed them all: and thus the Riddle of the Mundane Egg is Expounded.

I think fit for Clearness-sake, to consider this part of the Chapter, before I
proceed to the rest.

First then, as to Strife, Discord, or Division, on one hand in the Chaos, and
Love and Friendship on the other: it is known on what account these are brought
in: for some of the ancient Philosophers made two eternal and infinite
Principles on this ground; that one natural thing might be derived from many
Causes; and the ancient Philosophers generally affirm the Principles of Nature
to be contrary, and that one thing cannot be contrary to itself. And whereas
the Author calls these Moral Principles, it is known to the Mystae, that there
is a Microcosmical, as well as a Macrocosmical Chaos, and that the Ancients
often, under one Tenor of Discourse, carried on both Moral and Natural
Doctrines, and knew well how to open or unlock the Microcosmical Chaos, and to
form thence a Moral World. The Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets are full of
this Mystery, and a consummation of them was in the Person of our Savior
Christ: the Doctrine also of the Gentiles, both Philosophers and Poets, who were
the ancient Divines, contain the same Mysteries; but their proceedings in
several respects were in a very corrupt way, and are now expelled the World
upon the establishment of a greater Light. Those who are any way initiated in
these Mysteries, know how far they may be free to express themselves in them;
concerning which I have nothing more to offer, than to pray that Love in the
Moral World, as well as in the Natural, may still overpower the other perverse
and refractory Principle, and beseech God, in his mercy to enlighten every Man
in his appointed time.

As to the Chaos out of which the World rose, though the Author thinks he has
given a fair Explanation of it according to the sense of the Ancients, and of
the Changes it underwent, when it formed a World, and all Creatures rose from
it; yet I think I have shown before the inconsistency of this Explanation,
beside what else may be said against it. And admitting th'application, he has
made of his Doctrine, as to what Changes he supposes to have past in the Chaos,
when the World was formed, might quadrate in some tolerable way with what seems
to be delivered by the Ancients concerning it: yet since we are here gotten
into fabulous Philosophy, and since those terms of the Ancients, Night,
Tartarus, Oceamus, Ether, etc. have various significations according as they
are variously expounded by several Authors, all that any Man can urge in the
Case can amount to no more than his Say-so, unless the determinate sense of
those words, as used by the Ancients, were better ascertained to us than
perhaps any Man has yet done: concerning which I should have expected somewhat
in a Book, if extant, which the learned Joan. Picus, in his Oration, and other
parts of his Works, says he had written, Entitled Theologia Poetica, our
Common Mythologists not reaching it; mean while to avoid Cavillations in this
kind, I shall only set down briefly what I conceive to have been the sense of
the Ancients concerning the Chaos, and the Mundane Egg; and let it bear as far
as it may: though withal, to lessen that Reverence which some may have for the
Cosmogonia of the ancient Gentiles, I shall first set down the sense of Eusebius
concerning it; who says, L: de praep. Evang.
That though Plato, out of a seeming compliance with the Laws of his City,
pretends to give credit to the Poetic Theogonia, which is the same with their
Cosmogonia, as a Tradition delivered down from the Sons of the Gods; who must
not be supposed to have been ignorant of their Parents; yet all the while he
does but slily jeer it, plainly intimating the fabulosity thereof, when he
affirms it to have been introduced, not only without necessary Demonstrations,
but also without so much as Probabilities. This being premised, I may set down
what my own thoughts may be concerning it, as follows.

The Ancient Philosophers who made it their business to search into the Reasons
of Humane and Divine things, could not rest in the Examination, and setting
forth of the Causes of particular Effects they found here on the Earth, but
attempted the consideration of the whole World, and how all things issued at
first from their divine or metaphysical Principle. Now the World being anterior
to Mankind, after they had contemplated the proceeding of it from God, when
they came to set it forth, they could not more plausibly do it, than by
similitude, or Analogy to those common Generations we have before us (whence
came the Doctrine of the Mundane Egg) and by the references, which they
conceived were betwixt the operations of the Ideas in the Divine Mind, and
those they observed in the mind of Man. They observed that Nature and Art
proceeded from certain obscure and rough Dilineations to a more exact Form; and
concluding that as Art imitates Nature, so Nature does the Deity from whence it
flowed, they thought that by observing that order which Nature holds, was the
only method to find out the way of the Divine Operation.

But as I have intimated in my Considerations on the first Book, I know not how
far we may look upon any of the most learned amongst the Gentiles to have held
any real successive Changes to have passed in the Chaos, toward the formation
of the World: their design in setting forth a Chaos, and Changes it underwent,
seeming to have been only to help our way of conceiving, by reducing all things
mentally to Number and Order, as issuing at first from one Principle, according
to the Pythagorean Philosophy, deriving all things a monade, or as rising ab
ovo Analogically; which amounts to no more than what Jamblicus says of the
Egyptians, viz. that they made Mud and Water floating (the Chaos being supposed
such) their Hieroglyphick of material and corporeal things. And as Austin says,
when the Ancients talk of a Beginning of the World, intellerunt non esse hoc
temporis sed substitutionis initium. De Civ. Dei, l. 10. c. 31.

Whereas the Author will not allow Moses's Cosmopaeia to be Philosophical; it
not passing from one rank of Beings to another in a Physical Order and
Connection, according to the motions and transformations of the Chaos: Moses
making all things to spring from the allpowerful Word of God one after the
other, in that order which was fittest for furnishing an habitable World
according to a popular Decorum: To this I say, first, that many Men already
pretend to have shown, and among others the Learned Vallesius, L. de sacr.
phil. c. 1.
a due Physical Order and Connection in Moses's Cosmopoeia, and that all things
past in it according to a due priority of Nature: And concerning this
Cosmopoeia, I could wish to have read a Book writ by Don Isaac Abravanel, a
Spanish Jew (mentioned in Father Simon's Catalogue of Jewish Authors, annexed to
his Critical History) entitled Miphaboth Elohim (Works of God) where the said
Rabbin has learnedly treated of the Creation of the World, and withal examined
whence Moses had what is writ in the Book of Genesis. Secondly, That when the
Author shall show us in a more Philosophical way than Moses has done (let him
take it from whom of the Gentiles he pleases) how the World at first proceeded
from God, we may hearken to him: mean while there is this to observe; first,
that the Creation was a Metaphysical act, and the Order of it is
incomprehensible to Man farther than it has pleased God to reveal it to him by
his Prophets. Secondly, That I have already validly refuted (as I conceive)
those separations which the Author has supposed to have past in the Chaos at
the formation of the World. Thirdly, That if the Author, or any Man else shall
attempt to explain what the Ancients have said of a Chaos, and any successive
Changes it underwent, when it formed an habitable World; before they expect us
to acquiesce in their Explanation, or to believe that the Ancients meant more
in what they said in that kind, than to render our thoughts easy, as to an
apprehension of a beginning of things, by their setting it forth by a
similitude to common Generations from Eggs, they ought to bring that ancient
debated Point to a clear determination, viz. whether the Egg or Chick were
first; for those who maintain a Chaos, and real successive Changes to have past
in it, must make out the Egg to have been before the Chick; whereas Plutarch,
Macrobius, and others who have debated the Point, seem more inclined to the
other Opinion, holding all things at first to have been set in their perfect
state, through the perfection of the first Cause. Met. l. 14. c. 6.
Aristotle also tells us, that Pherecydes Syrus, the Magi, and others of the
Sages, affirmed that the first Principle, whence all other things were
generated, was the best; or of an absolute perfect Being: so that in the Scale
of Nature things did not ascend upwards, from the most imperfect to the more
perfect Beings, (as the ancient Poets represent) but on the contrary, descend
downwards from the most perfect to the less perfect, of which Opinion he also
declares himself.

Whereas the Author sets down this as a Maxim that what the Ancients have said
concerning the Original of the World from a Chaos, or about its Periods or
Dissolution, is never to be understood of the great Universe, but of our Earth,
or of this sublunary World; and thinks he can demonstrate that Moses's
Cosmogonia is so to be under stood; I know not whether it may be so easily
done; finding the greatest part of Writers to be of a contrary Opinion. And
those that maintain that Opinion may do well to tell us (if the Heavens were
for I know not what series of Ages before this Earth, and sublunary Region)
what this place was before the time of the Creation, set forth by Moses;
whether it were a Vacuum, or a Spacium imaginarium, for it would seem an odd
Hole left by Providence, after the rest of Beings were completed.

But as what Moses has said of the Creation, by most Christian Writers is
understood of the whole System of Beings, as well celestial as terrestrial, so
we find when the ancient Gentiles speak of the Rise of things from a Chaos, they
mean the same: Hesiod, and Ovid, and others that write of the Chaos, are plain
that the Heavens rose from it as well as the Earth: And we know the Hermetick
Philosophers, who are looked upon by some to be much more ancient than Moses,
but certainly of great Antiquity, tell us of a Cohabitation there was of
Superiors and Inferiors in the Chaos: and that upon the Separation of it, the
Superiors retired to their celestial Abode. Aristophanes also, whom the Author
admires above the rest, plainly says in his Cosmogonia, that the Chaos was
before the Earth, the Air, and the Heavens. Moreover when the Author says the
Theogonia of the Ancients was the same with their Cosmogonia, and their
Cosmogonia the same with their Geogonia, it would be absurd to understand those
Genealogies of the terrestrial Bodies, exclusively to the celestial: For those
Gentiles being infected with Polytheism, and making the chief Parts and Portions
of the World Gods; it is manifest that they did not only make the chief parts of
the Earth so; they being known to have adored the whole Host of Heaven.

So again, as to the Dissolution of the World by Fire, we find the Ancients
generally understood it of the Heavens as well as of the Earth. Hierom, in his
Comment on the 15th. of Isaiah, says, Quae quidem and Philosophorum mundi
opinio est, omnia quae cernimus igni peritura. Seneca, delivering the Opinion
of the Stoics, says, Sydera syderibus incurrent, and omni flagrante materia,
uno igne, quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet, ardebit. Lucan says, Communis mundo
superest rogus, ossibus astra
Misturus --
and he expresses himself to the same purpose elsewhere. Ovid, from the Oracles
of the Sibyls, says, Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
The Sybils Verses are as follows, Tunc ardens fluvius coelo manabit ab alto
Igneus, atque locos consumet funditus omnes,
Terramque, oceanumque ingentem, and caerula ponti,
Stagnaque, tum fluvios, fontes, Ditemque severum,
Caelestemque Polum; caeli quoque lumina in unum
L. 2. Orac.
Fluxa ruent, forma deleta prorsus eorum.
Then from high Heaven vast streams of Fire shall flow,
Those Flames consuming all things here below;
The Earth, the mighty Ocean, the blue Main,
Lakes, Rivers, Fountains, and what Dis does claim,
And Heaven it self, whose Lights shall flow in one,
And Stars shall fall, their Form destroyed and gone.
So again, it is a common Opinion amongst Christian Divines, that the Heavens
will be destroyed by Fire as well as the Earth. L. 4. c. 4.
Dr. Hakewill, in his Apology, says, it seems to him the most likely opinion,
and most agreeable to Scripture and Reason, that the whole World, with all the
parts thereof (only Men, Angels, and Devils, and the third Heavens, the Mansion
House of the Saints and Angels, and the Place and Instruments appointed for the
tormenting of the Damned excepted) shall be totally and finally dissolved and
annihilated; which he proves by many forcible Arguments, refuting the contrary
Opinion, and mentioning many learned Men of his; thinking he has so far evinced
it, that it is not solidly answerable; to whose Book, for brevity sake, I must
remit the Reader. So Salmeron on that passage of S. Peter 2.3. says. Loquitur
ergo hoc in loco de veris coelis, de quibus David dixit: Initio tu Domine
terram fundasti, and Opera manuum tuarum sunt coeli ipsi peribunt; (nimirum per
ignem) ubi ostendit veros coelos, and veram terram vere peritura. And beneath.
Quod autem quidam ex patribus interpretabantur non de supremis and veris
coelis, sed de aereis and aqueis esse intelligendum; ratione ipsius Textus
revincuntur: nam imprimis ostendimus, nunquam coelorum nomine in plurali numero
aereos and elementares coelos accipi; deinde post coelos nominatos subdit
(elementa vero calore solventur; and infra, elementa ignis ardore tabescent:)
quod aerem, and aquam, and sphaeram ignis spectare videtur. Non possunt ergo
per coelos accipi illa tria elementa, cum bis coelos ab elementis contra
distinguat. Again Esaias 34.4. it is said, All the Host of Heaven shall be
dissolved, and the Heavens shall be roul'd together as a scrole; and all their
Host shall fall down, as the Leaf falls from the Vine, and as a falling Fig
from a Fig Tree: Which words S. John Apoc. 6.13. seems to have borrowed from
the Prophet. In Hist. Evangel.
And so I look upon the following Verses of Juvencus to be writ according to a
Prophetic Truth.

Immortale nihil mundi compage tenetur:
Non orbis, non regna hominum, non aurea Roma,
Non mare, non tellus, non ignea sydera Coeli.
Nam statuit Genitor rerum irrevocabile tempus,
Quo cunctum torrens rapiet flamma ultima mundum.
I shall only add, that those, who by their insight in Symbolical Learning,
reach the mystical sense of the Prophets, well know that what is symboliz'd by
the Heavens will pass away in the day of the mystical Conflagration, as well as
what is symboliz'd by the Earth; whence unless the whole shall be symbolically
evacuated, so that the Conflagration shall not concern external nature, I shall
ever believe that the one will be concerned in it, as well as the other: homo
cum dormierit, non resurget, dum non erunt Coeli. And not to rest, in mystery
where I may be plain, the mystical Conflagration is known to be the Baptism by
Fire and the Spirit: (whence, I conceive, some Sects of Christians almost from
the first times of Christianity, as the Jacobites, Aethiopians, Copts, Isini,
etc. instead of baptizing with Water, were wont to have their Children burnt by
their Priests in the Cheeks or Foreheads with an Iron, according to that,
Matthew. 3. He will baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire:) Now, when God is
pleased to send that Baptism, not only Sense, symboliz'd by the Earth, but
Reason also, symboliz'd by the Heavens, passes away and is absorp'd in the
Spirit, and carried above itself; the Spirit being as much exalted above
Reason, as Reason is above Sense; and this is a truth owned by all Divines;
though none, I conceive, can apprehend how the thing is transacted, but those
to whom God has vouchsafed that Baptism, they being brought into that State of
mind, which made S. Paul say, Omnia mihi in Aenigmate facta sunt: Nothing being
able to perceive the ways of the Spirit, but the Spirit; and hence we find
after the Apostles received it, they were censured by the People of being
intoxicated with Wine; their discourse then being besides the common
apprehension of Men; and hence S. Paul also, in the like circumstance, was taxt
by Festus, of being grown mad through too much Learning.

In reference to this assertion of the Author, viz. that the Rise of the World
from a Chaos, and its periods, must be understood only of our sublunary World;
there is one Opinion, which deserves particularly to be noted, viz. that of the
Ancient Cabalists. These Ancient Jewish Rabins, as Eleasar, Moses Aegyptius,
Simon, Ismael, Jodan, Nachinan, and others, with whom Origin seems to agree,
would never yield precedence in depth of Learning to the Philosophers of the
Gentiles: and therefore derided their Opinions, who by Astrology and Philosophy
pretended to know the Methods taken by providence, in the Rise and Periods of
the World; and affirmed themselves the only Men, knowing in the Mysteries of
that Immense Aeternity; as having drawn a consummate knowledge in reference
thereunto, from a Divine Tradition, first communicated to Moses by God himself
in Mount Sinai, God saying, Esdr. 4. c. 14. v. 5. that he had shown him the
secrets and end of times. These Doctors say, that by the benefit of this Cabala
or Tradition, the marrow of the Law of Moses, and the deepest secrets of God
are revealed to them; and that they thence know, that God has created infinite
Worlds in a continued succession, and destroyed and demolished them again, viz.
this sublunary Region, every seven thousand years; and the superior Region
every forty nine thousand years. They add, that in six of the seven thousand
years the Chaos generates and produces all new things, and those being ended,
it gathers all things into itself again, and rests the seventh thousand year,
and in that millenary of rest, it fits and prepares it self for a new
Germination; and so a certain continued succession of Worlds has been hitherto,
and will be for the future; and at length this inferior World being thus
renewed, and as it were reborn seven times, and the course of forty nine
thousand years expired; in the fifty thousandth year the Heavens will also be
dissolved, and all things will return into their ancient Chaos and first
matter; and then God taking all the blessed Minds and Spirits to himself, will
give rest to the bulk of this Universe; and afterward, all things being
renewed by his Immense Wisdom and Power, he will frame a World much more
beautiful and pleasant; and for this reason, no mention is made of the Creation
of Angels in the Scriptures, where the Creation of the World is set forth,
because they remained immortal in the Creation of the precedent Worlds; and
hence Solomon in the Book of Wisdom, supposes a confused matter before the
Creation of this World, and says elsewhere, that there is nothing new under the
Sun. They endeavor to confirm their Opinion from several other Testimonies
taken from the Scriptures, which I shall not stand here to relate.

This Opinion, indeed, if it would bear, might have been a good Salvo for those
Men, who in the Council of Nice objected to Spiridio, and the other Bishops
there, that it seemed very absurd, God in his Infinite Eternity should have
framed this World, so short a time to continue, but about four or five thousand
years ago; they asking what he did before, or what he should do after this
World ceased. But the general stream of Divines is against this Opinion, they
holding that God framed only one World from the beginning. And when all is said
of that Opinion, the Cabalists being a sort of mystical Writers, I look upon
the Scope of what they have said concerning infinite renovations of Worlds, to
be directed in a different way from what the letter seems to import; but in
such cases every Man being apt to please himself best with his own thoughts, I
shall not take upon me here to be their Expositor.

Let us now particularly consider the Doctrine of the Ancients concerning the
Mundane Egg; whence some farther Light may be given to their Doctrine of the
Chaos, and of the Worlds Form or Figure. Now concerning that Doctrine (as I
have intimated before) the Author says it was partly symbolical, they comparing
the World to an Egg, and especially in the original composition of it; and he
adds, it is certain that by the World in that similitude, they did not mean the
great Universe, but the sublunary World only, or the Earth, the Figure of
which, when finished, he has shown to have been Oval; and that the inward form
of it was a frame of four Regions encompassing one another, as in an Egg.

I know not why the Author should be so positive in setting this down as a
general Rule for us to prevent error in reading the Ancients, that what they
have writ about the Form and Figure of the World, as well as of its Origin and
Dissolution, must be understood only of the Earth; when himself tells in his
first Book, c. 5
in the Latin Copy, that some of the Ancients by the Egg represented the World,
others the Earth, and others the Chaos. But he will have those who represented
the World and the Chaos by it, to have talked by rote; or through an ill
understanding, or being biased by their private Opinions to have wrested the
signification of it, from what the wisest among the Ancients thought. This
indeed would be an easy way of refuting the Ancients if it would pass, but
when we particularly consider what they have said in this point, we shall not
find a Man of them that favors the Authors particular Opinion; and in my first
Book, I think, I have shown it a notorious error if they had.

There are three ways then of considering the Doctrine of the Ancients
concerning the Mundane Egg; first, how the Egg is compared, particularly to the
Earth or sublunary Region. Secondly, how to the whole Universe consisting of
the Heavens and the Earth. Thirdly, Problem. l. 2. 84.
how to the Chaos. In reference to the first, Alexander Aphrodiseus says, that
an Egg comprehends all the qualities of the Elements, and plainly shows those
four first Principles of things within itself; the crusty shell resembles the
Earth, it being cold and dry, the White carries the nature of water, being cold
and moist; the Spirit contained in the White is for air, being hot and moist;
and the Yolk represents the Fire, having most of heat, and less of drought, nor
is it without the color of Fire: Briefly he says, that the likeness of the
whole Universe, which we call the World, is shown in an Egg; for it consists of
four Elements, and has a kind of sphaerical Figure, and carries within it a
Principle of Life. Thus we see he makes the sublunary Region an Egg inverted,
resembling the Yolk to the Ether, and the Shell to the Earth, contrary to the
Authors Opinion. Secondly, the Egg is resembled to the whole Universe by Varro,
the most learned among the Romans, as Probus on Virgil's sixth Eclogue
acquaints us saying, that Varro compared the Heavens to the Shell of an Egg,
and the Earth to the Yolk. Achilles Tatius also, quoted by the Author, when he
tells us, that the followers of Orpheus affirm the World to be oval, as an Egg,
he says it of the whole Universe, as Varro does, which no way advantages the
Authors Opinion, applied particularly to the Earth; and the inward envelopings
he supposes it had. c. 15.
Ptolomy also, in his compost, says, that the Elements and all things composed
of them, are enclosed within the first Heaven, or the Heaven of the Moon, as
the Yolk of an Egg is within the White.

But the main Doctrine of the Ancients concerning the Egg (as the Author
himself owns) was by comparing it to the World in its Origin, or as it rose
from a Chaos; they setting forth, that as particular Generations are from Eggs,
Sympas. l. 2. c. 3.
so the whole World rose from it. Thus Plutarch tells us, it was the Opinion of
Orpheus and Pythagoras, that the Egg was the principle and ordinary source of
Generation; and that Orpheus held the Egg not only more ancient than the Hen,
but to have the Seniority of all things in the World. Now though we have no
ground to think that the Ancients were as good Egg Philosophers, as the World
has now, by the help of late Anatomical Researches, assisted by our Optics;
yet Plutarch to exemplify Generations, and the rise of things from Eggs, says
thus. The World containing many differing species of Animals, there is not one
species of them, but passes by the Generation of the Egg; for the Egg produces
volatiles, which are Birds; swimming Creatures, which are Fishes, in an
infinite number; terrestial Animals, as Lizards; Amphibious Animals, which live
both in the Waters, and on the Earth, as Crocodiles; such as have but two feet,
as Poultry; such as have no feet as the Serpent; and those that have many as
Grasshoppers: Whence Plutarch concludes, it is not therefore without great
reason, that the Egg is consecrated to the sacred Ceremonies of Bacchus, as a
representation of the Author of nature, who produces and comprehends in itself
all things. Macrobius also, Saturn. l. 7. c. 16.
who seems in a manner a Transcriber from Plutarch, says, those that are
initiated in the sacred Ceremonies of Liber Pater, pay a veneration to the Egg
in this respect; that from its smooth, even, and almost Spherical Figure, shut
up in every part, and including life within it, it may be called a Type of the
World, and the World by the consent of all Men is the principle of the
Universe; he says further, as the Elements existed at first and then the other
bodies were made of the mixture of them; so the seminal reasons which are in an
Egg, are to be looked upon as certain Elements of the Hen. Thus we find the
great Doctrine of the Mundane Egg referred to the Generation of all things from
the Chaos, concerning which the Doctrine of the Ancients runs thus, as I find it
stated by a certain Author.

They say the Chaos was before all things, and that in a long series of
duration, it settled in itself a Center and a Circumference, gathered together
in the form of a vast Egg; upon the breaking of which, a certain kind of Person
of a double form arose, being both Male and Female, and called Phaneta: out of
this came Heaven and Earth, out of Heaven came six Males, which they call
Titans; Oceanus, Caeus, Crius, Hyperion, Japetus, Cronos or Saturn; from the
Earth six Women; Thya, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Thetis, Hebe; of all these, he
that was first born of Heaven, took the first Daughter of the Earth to Wife;
the second, the second, etc. Saturn therefore took Rhea, etc.

From this Doctrine, we as plainly see how fairly the Analogy holds betwixt the
Generation of the World, upon the disruption of the Chaodical Egg, and the
particular Generations and rise of Animals from their respective specifical
Eggs; as we may see how forced and unnatural it would be to apply this Doctrine
only to the Earth, and its disruption at the deluge; for at the disruption of
the Mundane Egg, upon the appearance of Phaneta, which Orpheus makes the same
with Eros, or Love, the Heavens and Earth, with all their beauteous ornament
arose; as upon the disruption of particular Eggs, the Chick with all that
admirable Mechanism in the structure of its parts, and the advantage of Animal
life comes forth; whereas if this Doctrine shall be applied particularly to the
Antedilunian Earth (as represented by the Author) and it shall be said, that
that Earth after sixteen hundred years Incubation of the Sun, upon its
disruption produced this present World, where is the Analogy with particular
Generations from their respective Eggs? Since upon the disruption of that
Earth, the miserable Chick within (according to the Authors own Hypothesis) was
found no way comparable to the Shell it had before; the Antediluvian Earth far
transcending the present; so that if that Earth must have been an Egg, it was
but an addled one.

The Author therefore has given the Earth an oval Figure, only to serve his
Hypothesis, for the Course of his Rivers (as I have intimated before) and if
the Sectators of Orpheus, or possibly any others of the Ancients gave the Earth
itself an oval Figure; not a Man of them gives the least Intimation of any
inward envelopings it had answering to those in an Egg, as the Author does; who
by over-straining the matter seems to leave a substance by pursuing a Shadow;
thereby wholly perverting the Analogy betwixt the Egg and the World, which
those Ancients endeavored to set forth. And whatever formerly has been
variously said concerning the Figure of the Earth, whether as oval or else, we
know the opinion of its spherical Figure has generally obtained, as looked upon
to be demonstrated. And again, if Eggs are commonly of somewhat an oval form,
there are particular reasons for it, the directer of Natures Mechanism giving
them that Figure, either for the greater ease in Exclusion, according to the
structure of the parts, through which they are then to pass; or for the more
convenient site of the Animal to be formed within; besides that when Eggs are
formed, the fluid matter is not free to run into that Figure it would, to the
film encompassing them being in some part connected to the Ovarium, and they
are also pressed upon by other Eggs; whereas neither of these reasons, nor any
others, I conceive, are to be found in the Earth; and that the Ancients could
not nicely insist upon an Analogy, betwixt the World and an Egg for its oval
Figure, it appears from hence, that Eggs generally are only oblong and not
properly oval, they being much larger at one end than at the other.

The second point considered by the Author in this Chapter, is the
uninhabitableness of the Torrid Zone, concerning which he says thus. But
nothing seems more remarkable than the uninhabitability of the Torrid Zone, if
we consider what a general fame and belief it had among the Ancients; and yet
in the present form of the Earth, we find no such thing, nor any foundation for
it: I cannot believe that this was so universally received upon a slight
presumption, only because it lay under the Course of the Sun, if the Sun had
the same Latitude from the Equator in his Course and Motion that he has now,
etc. he instances several of the Ancient Philosophers, Astronomers, and
Geographers, who held that Zone uninhabitable; and adds, that some of the
Ancient Philosophers whom he also names, held that the Poles of the World did
once change their Situation, and were at first in another posture from what
they are now, till that Inclination happened, etc. and concludes that these
Opinions of the Ancients, must refer to that State of things which he has
represented in his Antediluvian World.

To this I answer, that it seems no wonder it should be the common received
Opinion among the Ancients, that the Torrid Zone was uninhabitable; for
navigation being not come to its perfection, America undiscovered, and no
trading established by Land to those parts of Africa, that lie under the Torrid
Zone, and the great heats found in the neighboring Climates to it, might
naturally induce such a belief in them, so that we may allow it to have past as
a negative Tradition among them, for that no Man had attempted a discovery; but
to conclude that this was a positive Tradition among them, derived from
Antediluvian times, on a supposed differing position, which the Heavens or
Earth then had; it is more than the thing will bear; neither was that Opinion of
the uninhabitableness of the Torrid Zone so general in Ancient times, but some
Patrons of the Earth, merely upon a stress of reasoning, always said nay to it.
De Placit. Phil. l. 3. c. 14.
Thus Plutarch tells us, that Pythagoras (as great a Man as any among the
Greeks, and more ancient than any the Author has named for the contrary
Opinion) held the Torrid Zone habitable, and a temperate Region, as being in
the midst betwixt that of the Summer, and that of the Winter; and certainly
Pythagoras was as likely a Man as any among the Ancients to have known such a
Tradition, and to have faithfully conveyed it to posterity if there had been
any ground for it, himself and Orpheus being judged by many to have been
knowing in the Mosaic Cabala, concerning the true System of the World. Ptolomy
also says, many contend, In Almag. l. 2. c. 6.
that the parts near the Equinoctial are inhabited, as being the most temperate
Region; because the Sun neither stays in the vertical points, but makes swift
recesses according to Latitude from the Equinoctial points; whence the Summer
is rendered temperate; neither in the Solstices is it far from the Vertex,
wherefore the Winters must be very mild. L. de Not. Rerum.
Bid quotes this passage and adds, but what those habitations are, we cannot
say with any likely ground; for Men have not passed thither even to this day;
wherefore what is said of it may be looked upon rather as a conjecture, than a
true History. Tertullian also held the Torrid Zone a temperate Region, and
placed Paradise in it, and so did Nicephoras, according to the Opinion of
Theophilus; the like did Bonaventure and Durandus of later years; and Avicenna
among the Arabians held that Region temperate. Here also it may be noted that
generally those that held the uninhabitableness of the Torrid Zone, held
likewise the two Polar Zones uninhabitable through continual frosts there; so
that the Tradition of the one ought to be held as well as that of the other,
which would destroy the Authors Hypothesis, for the source of his Waters, as I
have intimated before.

As to those Philosophers, mentioned by the Author to have held that the Poles
of the World once changed their Situation, I know no reason we have to follow
them in it, more than a multitude of other erroneous Opinions, which we find
amongst the ancient Philosophers; Ignonorance in Cosmography being an
Epidemical distemper amongst them; De Plut. Phil. l. 2. c. 12.
so that Plutarch tells us Pythagoras was said to be the first who bethought
him of the Obliqueness of the Zodiac, Ib. l. 3. c. 11.
which Invention some ascribe to Oenopides of Chius. The same tells us
Parmenides was the first, who limited the places inhabited on the Earth; to
wit, those that are in the two habitable Zones, to the Tropic Circles. What
wonder then that the Ancients should lie under great mistakes in things
relating to that Knowledge? But the Author urges in his Answer to Mr. Warren,
that Diogenes, Anaxagoras, Empedocles, C. 8.
Leucippus and Democritus say, there was once a Change of the Poles, therefore
it must be looked upon as a Tradition amongst the Ancients, for which they are
good Testimonies: But I would ask the Author whether either of those
Philosophers deliver their Opinion as a Tradition among the Ancients? Plutarch,
whence he quotes their Opinions, entitles his Book The Opinions of the
Philosophers, and delivers this as their particular Opinion, and not as a
Tradition, and assigns the several Reasons they went upon, which are all found
to be erroneous; and to expect that we should receive their Opinion as a
Tradition, and acquiesce in it without any farther Ground, seems to me
altogether as unreasonable as to say, that because Diagoras, Theodorus
Cyreneus, Evemeras, Euripides, mentioned also by Plutarch, and others of the
ancient Philosophers, held there was no Deity, therefore this must be looked
upon as a well-grounded Tradition, and fit for us to receive, that there is no
Deity; This is too hard putting upon our Reason. Well, but the Author grants
their Reasons are false, but says, it would be as injudicious to exclude them
from being Witnesses, or fair Testimonies of such a thing, because they do not
Philosophise well about that Change; as if we should deny that there was such a
War as the Peloponesian War, because the Historian has not assigned the true
Causes and Reasons of it: or to deny that a Comet appeared in such a Year,
because a Person that makes mention of it, has not given a good account of the
generation of it, nor of the Causes of its form and motion. I answer, That I do
not exclude them from being Witnesses merely because of the false Reasons they
give for what they say; but because that they neither own themselves as
Witnesses, neither does it any way appear that what they deliver, is as they
are VVitnesses, but merely from their own fancy; as it may be said of Diagoras
and the rest that held a nonexistence of a Deity. And as to the Instances of
the Peloponesian War and the Comet, there is a vast disparity betwixt these and
the other: for the Peloponesian War and the Comet are notorious Facts conveyed
down to us by every Historian and Astronomer nemine contradicente, as they
received it from time to time from unquestionable Hands. But what are those
five Philosophers to the whole Body of the Philosophers both before and after
them, who mention no such thing. Nor do those five affirm the Change of the
Poles otherwise than their private Opinion; and the Reasons they assign for it
are so frivolous, De sacr. Phil. c. 50.
that Vallesius aptly calls them Ineptiae Infantilis illius Philosophiae, and
shows the erroneous Ground they went upon. But because the Author does not
insist upon the validity of their Reasons, I shall not examine them here, but
refer the Reader to Vallesius.

The Author adds some other Witnesses for this Change of the Posture of the
Earth and Heavens, viz. Plato, the Poets, some Christian Fathers, and Jewish
Doctors, who all justify that in the first Ages there was a constant Spring,
so that the Heavens and Earth must have changed their Posture since. But I
conceive I have sufficiently answered all this in my precedent and and some
other Chapters: and hope the Author will not go about to put upon us
Allegorical Fictions for Historical Truths.

Another thing the Author endeavors to give an account of in this Chapter is,
how America came to be peopled, which he thinks is easily answered according to
his Hypothesis, viz. that the Antediluvian Earth being smooth, Men could freely
pass before the Flood to all parts of this Continent; and if they could not
then pass into the other Hemisphere beyond the Torrid Zone; he says, Providence
seems to have made provision for that, in transplanting Adam into this
Hemisphere, after he had lain the foundation of a World in the other: and
concludes, that God foreseeing how many Continents the Earth would be divided
into after the ceasing of the Flood, made provision to save a remnant in every
Continent, that the Race of Mankind might not be quite extinct in any of them.

As to this Assertion, I shall leave it to the judgment of Divines how far we
must be determined by the Text of Moses as to a destruction of all Mankind,
saving Noah and his Family in the Deluge there described, and shall only offer
what follows from common Reason.

First, It will concern the Author to consider how his Assertion here can
consist with what he has set forth concerning the universality of the Deluge in
the second Chapter of his first Book, where he reasons against those who have
endeavored to represent Noah's Flood, as a partial Deluge, affecting only a
particular Country, and urges thus:

I cannot but look upon the Deluge as a much more considerable thing than these
Authors would represent it, and as a kind of Dissolution of Nature. Moses calls
it a destroying of the Earth as well as of Mankind. And beneath, he says, St.
Peter compares the Conflagration with the Deluge, as two general dissolutions
of Nature: and one may as well say, that the Conflagration shall be only
National, as to say that the Deluge was so. And again, we see that after the
Flood the Blessing for Multiplication, and for replenishing the Earth with
Inhabitants, was as solemnly pronounced by God Almighty, as at the first
Creation of Man, Genesis 9.1. and Genesis 1.28. These Considerations, he says, he
thinks might be sufficient to give us assurance from divine Writ, of the
universality of the Deluge; and yet that Moses affords anonother Argument as
demonstrative as any, when in the History of the Deluge he says, Genesis 7.19. The
Waters exceedingly prevailed upon the Earth, and all the highest Hills that
were under the whole Heavens were covered, all the high Hills that were under
the whole Heavens, then quite round the Earth. And in his Latin Copy, he says,
Moses's History adds particularly, the thing being as it were measured and
accurately examined, that the Waters overflowed the highest Mountains fifteen
Cubits; which Mark, he judges to be added not without Providence, that we might
thence gather, by a Testimony not to be gainsaid, that the Deluge did not keep
itself within the limits of any one Region whatsoever. And much more the Author
urges both in his English and Latin Copies to the same purpose; and how all
this can consist with a preservation of some Remnant of Men in every Continent,
at the time of the Deluge, I must leave it to him to consider.

Secondly, According to the Authors own Hypothesis, when he says, that the
Passages North and South being not free, Men could not go out of one Hemisphere
into the other, but Providence seems to have made a Provision for that, in
transporting Adam into this Hemisphere, after he had lain a foundation for a
World in the other; I hope he does not mean by this, that Adam left any
Children in the other Hemisphere to people it, and be a foundation of a World
there. It being a common Opinion that Adam and Eve were but a few hours in
Paradise before they were expulst, and that expulsion being supposed by the
Author to be into this Hemisphere, there were no People to remain in the other.
Wherefore (as I have intimated before) if the Author's Hypothesis must stand,
C. 3.
it must be with these Absurdities: First, that upon the expulsion of Adam and
Eve out of Paradise, God must have miraculously conveyed them through the
Torrid Zone (which the Author supposes as impassable as a burning Furnace) into
this Hemisphere. Secondly, After Adam had Children God must have wrought
another Miracle, to have conveyed some of them into the other Hemisphere to
People it; and it would have been a Curiosity to know which of Adam's Children
were conveyed thither, Cain we find must have been one, because he is said,
Genesis 4.16. to have dwelt on the East of Eden, which could not be in this
Hemisphere, if Paradise were in the other; and it is much that living so near
Paradise, and being past the flaming Sword he should not get into it, as well
as all descended from him to the Flood, though his Crime could hardly deserve
that Paradisiacal Continent for his Habitation. Thirdly, God must have wrought
a third Miracle to have brought all Animals there of differing Species from
those in this Hemisphere, to the Ark at the time of the Deluge, unless another
Ark were built in the other Hemisphere; Whereas the Author says in his first
Book, C. 6.
that Noah's Ark was the the first Ship, or Vessel of bulk that ever was built
in the World.

And I would ask, whether the Author thinks that a Man may not give a rational
account of the peopling of America, without being clogged with so many
Absurdities; I think it very easy and natural to imagine, supposing the first
Plantation in this Hemisphere, and the World always as it is, how without any
Miracle, some small Vessels with People in them, might have been driven by some
Storm, on the Continent of America from the more Easterly Coasts of the World:
such small Vessels being a thing of common Notion; so that I think we may
reasonably conclude them to have been almost as ancient as Mankind. Moreover,
we know that many Jewish Customs were found among the Americans, on their first
discovery; and Ralegh tells us, that in Mexico, when first discovered, there
were found written Books after the manner of those Hieroglyphics, anciently
used by the Egyptians and Ethiopians: but to require it to be particularly made
out when, and by whom, America received its first Inhabitants, would be an
unreasonable expectation.

CHAP. IX.
HERE the Author endeavors to obviate an Objection against his Theory, viz.
That if there had been such a Primitive Earth as he pretends, the fame of of it
would have sounded throughout all Antiquity; and he sets forth that the most
considerable Records of Learning are lost, whence a confirmation of it might
have been expected.

This Chapter containing little new, I shall have but little to say against it.
The following particulars may be noted.

1. He here confesses, that it has been generally thought or presumed that the
World before the Flood, was of the same Form and Constitution with the present
World. Now this seems to make against him, but he will have this imputed to
the loss of true Records, which is but a gratis Dictum.

2. Speaking of the Jews and Christians, he says, they had Traditions among
them, that there was no Rain from the beginning of the World to the Deluge,
and that there were no Mountains till the Flood, and such like. The Ancient
ordinary Gloss upon Genesis, which some make 800 Years old, mentions both these
Opinions, so does Historia Scholastica, Alcuinus, Rabanus Maurus, Lyranus, and
such Collectors of Antiquity, etc.

To this I answer, That every trifling ungrounded Opinion is not to be looked
upon as a Tradition: neither have we reason to be governed by what those
Authors have said in this Point, unless they had told us from what Authors of
Credit they had it: or had urged it as a constant Tradition to be relied on.
Perhaps they took their Notion from the Author, De mirabilibus Scripturae (by
some supposed to be St. Austin) who says, that possibly the first Age of the
World was without Rains and Storms, and that the Earth was fed with morning and
evening Dews: and let this go as far as it may.

Lastly, the Author says, but to carry this Objection as far as may be, let us
suppose it to be urged still in the last place, that though these Humane
Writings have perished, or are imperfect, yet in the Divine Writings at least,
we might expect that the memory of the old World, and of the Primitive Earth,
should have been preserved.

Now, I confess, I am of this Opinion, notwithstanding any thing may be said by
the Author to the contrary; for tho I agree with Luther in his Chronology, that
the Flood, as commonly understood, was the most horrible of all horrible
things, excepting the Crucifixion of the Son of God, and what may be expected
at the General Conflagration: Considering that not only a World of Relations of
all kinds, and Friends of Noah must have perished; but that even the whole
Church of God, as well as that of Cain and the Serpent, were then utterly
subverted, only eight Souls being saved: Yet with all this, if the Earth upon
the Deluge had been altered from a General Paradisiacal State, to a State so
much inferior to it, as the Author has represented; I cannot believe but Moses,
who made it his business to set forth and exaggerate the Judgments of God on
Sinners, would have plainly recorded this in his Law; for that it would have
been a considerable aggravation to the Judgment, and perhaps more affecting
Posterity than the other part of it had done; and consequently ought to have
been said, and inculcated to them, to deter them from a relapse into sin.

The Author has two Chapters more in this Book, whereof the first treats
concerning the Author of Nature; which, besides, that the Argument in its
nature does not bear opposition, I must own to be well and foundly reasoned;
neither have I any thing to offer against it; and so, as to the last Chapter
which treats concerning natural Providence, I have nothing to say to it, unless
it be to the latter part of it, where he sums up what he has said of the Form
of the Primaeval Earth, the Disruption of it at the Deluge, the Seat of
Paradise, etc. of all which he says he professes his full belief, and against
all which, I have already offered as much as at present I have thought fit.

THE CONCLUSION.
THus I have gathered together a few of those voluminous Objections, which may
be brought against this Theory; and I hope without any breach of Decorum
toward the Learned Author of it, to whom I heartily pay my share of thanks for
the great pains he has taken in composing it; it having given me an occasion to
look into some things of Antiquity with more attention, than perhaps otherwise
I might have used. And indeed, when I first perused it, I could hardly think
that this Theory, how learnedly soever set off by the Author could be his
serious sense, in determining the truth of the points there considered; but I
conceived that by this Work carrying in it so much specious Paradoxical
Novelty, he had a mind only to set Men a thinking on those things, of which,
perhaps, we are all too unmindful. But it would be uncivil now to question the
Authors full Belief of his Theory, since in his Answer to Mr. Warren, he is
pleased to repeat that he professes his full assent to the substance of it, and
looks upon it as being more than a bare Hypothesis, it being a Reality, and
carrying more than a moral Certainty; and consequently it must carry either a
Physical or Metaphysical Certainty. If the former it must be no less certain
than that the Sun will rise every day above our Horizon, if the latter, it
stands the Test of Omnipotence. We find that Carts dared not confide so much
in the Hypothesis he set up for solving the Phenomenon of the Earth; tho, in my
Opinion, it be less liable to Objections than the Authors is; for he concludes
only thus. Nevertheless I would not infer from all these things, L. de Methodo.
that this World was created after the manner that I have represented it; for
it is much more likely that God made it such from the beginning as it was to
continue. But the nature of things may be much more easily apprehended, when
they are looked upon so rising by degrees, than when they are considered only as
completed and perfect. But to proceed, the points which the Author has here
undertaken to determine by his Hypothesis, seem to me of great weight and
difficulty; so that a Man may here aptly say with Maximus Tyrius. Sermon. 34.
It Is a thing of no small labor to arrive at truth and right reasoning; for
the greater vigor of understanding any Man has, the greater Streights he finds
himself reduced to in judging. To bring things to a period, I shall be free to
give my thoughts of these matters, as follows.

I believe then (with reverence be it said to those many Learned Persons who
have attempted it) it was beside the intent of the Prophets that these Magnalia
Dei, the Creation, Deluge and Conflagration, the new Heavens and new Earth,
etc. should ever be brought under a Physiological Consideration; not that I any
way doubt the reality of either; but because I look upon them as works grounded
on an extraordinary Providence, and must own that as often as I have applied my
understanding to the consideration of either, I have always found my self
absorpt in Miracle. To be as plain as I may in this point, I must consider two
sorts of Writers among the Ancients, whether Jews, Gentiles, or Christians;
either they were of the Mystae, being acquainted in Symbolical Learning; or
they were literal Men and mere Physiologers: There is a vast difference in the
procedure of these two sorts of Men in what they Write: and to consider it
first among the Gentiles; I think it too manifest to be brought in dispute, that
many of them were initiated in Prophetic Mysteries (the Spirit of Prophecy
being inter dona gratis data) as among the Greek Poets, Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod,
Theocritus, and others; and so among the Latins, Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, Claudian,
and many more; to these we may add the Sibyls, the Ancient Magi, and the
Druids, who were Pythagoreans, and many of the Platonists. Now the main Scope
of these Men's Writings being a Moral and Divine Institution, and quite
differing from such as write merely as Physiologers; when they came to write of
natural Phenomenon, or to personate external nature, and to set forth civil
facts, (their Writings being generally Symbolical) they mattered not whether
what they set forth did exactly quadrate with truth; but the thing they chiefly
attended to was so to set forth those Phenomenon and civil facts, that they
should carry a fair Analogy with the thing they had a mind to symbolize. And,
as Hierom observes, the Parabolical Style has been much in esteem among the
People of the Levant; and the Learned Father Simon says thus of it: some have
thought that even the Books of Job, Tobit, and Judith were not so much
Histories, as Works composed in this Parabolical Style, being holy Fictions,
which were profitable: This manner of Parabolical Writing he says, is ordinary
enough with the Authors of the New Testament, who give so good circumstances
sometimes to these Parables, that one would be apt to imagine them to be true
Histories, if we were not advertised that they are Parables. This manner of
instructing the People always pleased the Pharisees, and their Talmud, and most
part of their Ancient Books are filled with these sorts of Allegorical
Fictions, which ought not to be explained according to the Letter, as though
they were true Histories. De Sacr. Phil. c. 3.
Vallesius also observes, that in many places of the Scriptures there occur
Moral Fables or Apologues, or Parables, or whatever you please to call them,
which say one thing in the Letter, and allegorically intimate another; and that
there is no useful way of Philosophizing, which has been excogitated by those
who have endeavored to compose manners, but may be found with more exactness
in the Scriptures. Now whether the fact recorded in the Scriptures, be an
History, or a Parable, or an History intermixed with a Parable, it is not for
all that less true or divine, or any way derogating from the Dignity of Sacred
Writ. But there are these great differences betwixt the Scriptures, and the
Writings of the Gentiles (tho both are in good part symbolical, and intending a
Moral and Divine Institution.) First, the Poets among the Gentiles often
injudiciously and impiously ascribe to God things unbecoming him, as Josephus
rightly observes; Antiq. Jud. c. 1.
whereas in the Scriptures, nothing is ascribed to him unbecoming his
Magnificence, but all things are set forth conformably to the universal nature;
from which ground it may be said, that as the Rod of Moses devoured all the
Magicians Rods, so the God of Moses overpowered all the Gods of the Gentiles.
And secondly, that in the Scriptures those great Facts, the Creation, Deluge
and Conflagration, the new Heavens and new Earth, Paradise, the raising of the
Dead, and many other strange things there mentioned, unaccountable from natural
Principles, were and will be Realities beside their being Symbols; whereas,
whatever is set forth by the Gentiles concerning any of those things, or any
other strange Facts, it is merely Symbolical, being excogitated and feigned by
them only to carry on a Divine Law, and to set forth a certain Doctrine
analogically relating to the Spirit. For as among all ancient Nations, as, the
Chaldaeans, Persians, Egyptians, Ethiopians, Indians, Celts, and indeed all
Nations, who were partakers of the Grand Theorem of the Ancients, the same Men
were Priests and Philosophers, and those the only Cultivators and Keepers of
all Sciences, both in reference to natural and sacred knowledge: So their chief
Scope being a Divine Institution, they still so personated the great facts of
external nature, as thereby covertly to carry on the other; and so that the
solemn outward Story served for training on the People, while the inward
Mystery was for the more solid Institution of the Learned. I may give an
Instance of this their proceeding in reference to the Deluge set forth by them.
A Learned Prelate in his Origines Sacrae, l. 3. c. 5.
says, that one reason of the corruption of the ancient Tradition concerning
Noah's Flood, was, that the Gentiles attributed what was done by the great
Ancestors of mankind to some Persons of their own Nations. Thus the Thessalians
make Deucalion to be the Person who escaped the Flood, and from whom the World
was Peopled after it: And whoever compares the Relation of the Flood of
Deucalion in Apollodorus with that in the Scripture, Apollod. Bibl. l. 1. p. 19.
might easily render Apollodorus his Greek in the Language of the Scriptures,
only changing Greece into the whole Earth, Deucalion into Noah, Parnassus into
Ararat, and Jupiter into Jehova. On the same account the Athenians attribute
the Flood to Ogyges, not that the Flood of Ogyges and Deucalion were particular
and distinct Deluges, which many have taken a great deal of needless pains to
place in their several Ages; but as Deucalion was of the eldest memory in
Thessaly, so was Ogyges at Athens; and so the Flood, as being a matter of
remotest antiquity, was on the same account in both places attributed to both
these; because as Mankind was supposed to begin again after the Flood, so they
had among them no memory extant of any elder than these two, from whom on that
account they supposed Mankind derived. And on the same reason it may be
supposed, that the Assyrians attribute the Flood to Xisuthrus, whom they
supposed to be a King of Assyria; Cyril. contr. Julian. l. 1.
but the circumstances of the Story, as delivered by Alexander Polyhistor, and
Abydenus, are such as make it clear to be only a remainder of the Universal
Flood, which hapn'd in the time of Noah. So the Thessalians make Prometheus to
be the Protoplast; the Peloponesians Phoroneus. So far this Learned Prelate
concerning the Corruption of the ancient Tradition by the Gentiles, as they
supposed all that was conveyed by it, to have been acted among themselves;
which he conceives may be imputed partly to their ignorance of the State of
their ancient times, and partly to their pride, lest they should seem to come
behind others in matters of Antiquity.

Now to resolve this matter as far as my reason will bear, all that I can
conceive of it is this. The Ancient Gentiles, as they came acquainted with the
Ancient Tradition of the Jews, derived from Moses and the Patriarchs,
concerning a first Man, from whom all Mankind was descended; and a reparation
of Mankind after a Deluge (tho whether they believed any such things really to
have been, it does not appear to me) and at length coming to be initiated and
well instructed in the Grand Theorem of the Egyptians, (in the deep insight,
and use of which, Moses far transcended the Egyptians themselves) carrying in
it the power of Religion, and a consummation of Wisdom, in order to the
Government and Welfare of Mankind; they thereby knew that certain Symbolical
Mysteries were contained under the foresaid Doctrine; and that it little
imported Man whether any such things really were, but greatly that they should
be personated; and therefore as they had a mind to propagate the same admirable
Learning among themselves, they introduced Protoplasts, Deluges, and
reparations of Mankind in their own Country; and from the same fountain
proceeded the accounts their Poets give of a Chaos, the formation of the World,
the Elysian Fields, etc. and this seems to me the most probable account, how
the Gentiles came to celebrate in their Writings those great Facts, in their
fabulous way. And withal it is to be observed, that some of the Jews and
Christians have wholly allegoriz'd some of those great Facts, as recorded in
Sacred Writ: so we find that Philo, being an Helenist Jew, and conversing with
the Greeks, contrary to the commonly received Opinion among Jews and
Christians, wholly allegoriz'd Paradise, held the Creation instantaneous,
expounded the Deluge in his Allegorical way, etc. and he has had followers both
amongst Christians and Jews. And this we may further note, that though those
great Facts, recorded in the Scriptures (according to the more generally
received Opinion of Divines, to which we ought to submit) are received as
Realities; yet it seems it was not the design of Providence, we should chiefly
attend to those Facts, but rather to the Symbolical Mysteries contained under
them, which far more nearly concern us: Wherefore we find God thought it not
necessary for us that we should precisely know the time of the Worlds
beginning, there being that difference in the Hebrew, Samaritan, and Septuagint
Texts concerning that in the Opinion of Learned Persons, it is impossible to
come to a certainty in the Point; and the certainty of the time of the Deluge
depending on the certainty of the time of the Creation, this being unknown the
other cannot; tho I shall not conceal, that I hear of a Person now living
skilled in the Cabbala Sacra, who says he can plainly demonstrate from the
Hebrew Letters of many words in the Bible, numerically considered, that the
time substituted by Moses for the Creation, is exactly agreeing with the Hebrew
Chronology. So as to the Seat of Paradise, what have all those made of it, who
have been in quest after it, but fallen into a Babel confusion, as having
attempted a thing too great, or rather impossible for them: I conclude
nevertheless, that there was a Terrestrial Paradise, but miraculously founded,
for had the Jews ever known such a place, to be made out by Typography, as they
must have known it, if such a thing had been to be known; I believe the
Tradition of it had been as impossible to be lost, as the Tradition of the
place where Jerusalem is seated. Again, as for the time appointed for the
Conflagration; how many vain attempts have been made by Men for pointing forth
the year in which it shall happen? whereas the time being elapst which they
prefixed for it, it has shown the vanity of their undertaking; and we now hear
of a Foreigner, who has lately prefixed the time for it in the year 1696. and I
doubt not but many Prophets will now start up, upon the expectation of the
determination of this Millenary, who will assign some other shortly ensuing
years for the same period; whereas Father Simon tells us, that the 6000 years,
Hist. C^it. l. 2. c. 4.
which with the Jews in their Talmud contain 2000 years of Inanity, that is to
say before the Law, 2000 years of the Law, and 2000 years from the Messiah, are
only a simple Allegory, which these Doctors have recounted in their Treatises
Sanhedrim and Aveda, and which have no appearance of truth. And again, it is
known that the Greek Church counts already above 7000 years past since the
Creation; and whether they are in the right, of we, or either of us, I believe
all the Chronology extant cannot convincingly determine. It Is enough for us
therefore to believe that a Conflagration will happen; but for us to attempt to
find out the precise time, or any natural Causes for it; I believe the search
transcends the wit of Man, the Effect being besides the ordinary Course of
Providence; as Aquinas has truly said, Illa mundi deflagratio, quae paulo ante
universale Judicium futura est, non ad aliquam naturae vim, sed ad divinam
potentiam referri debet.

Indeed Dr. Alabaster seems of another mind, Tubae pul^. c. 1.
where he says, that the Supputation of the coming of Christ, and the Worlds
passing away, does not exceed the reach and diligent search of our
Understanding, and this for two Reasons; first, because the end prefixed to the
World is a thing which belongs to the knowledge of Nature; for that the
beginnings, middles, and ends, and causes, and the administration of the acts
of created things, have their foundation in Nature itself. And the wise Man
testifies that he knew the beginnings and the ends of times. Secondly, because
whatsoever things are to happen concerning the day of Judgment, are covertly
written in the Scriptures; so that if the Veil of the Letter being removed, we
look thoroughly into the Scriptures, we may thence draw no obscure Testimonies
of the truth.

Now, I look upon Dr. Alabaster, tho he had been a long Student in Mystical
Divinity, to have lain under a mistake in all this reasoning; for first, to say
that the end prefixed to the World, is a thing which belongs to the knowledge of
Nature; and that the beginnings, middles, and ends, and causes, and
administration of acts of created things, have their foundation in Nature
itself; I conclude all this to be false, as I have set forth from Vallesius, in
my Considerations on the first Book of the Theory. c. 7. and 8.
Again, as to the Wise man's testifying, that he knew the beginnings and the
ends of times; and to what he says, that whatsoever things are to happen
concerning the day of Judgment, are covertly written in the Scriptures, so that
if the Veil of the Letter being removed, we look thoroughly into them, we may
thence draw no obscure Testimonies of the truth. I reply to this first, that
the wise Man was inspired; and as to removing the Veil of the Letter, I must
tell him that no Man can do that, till he has seen the rending of the Veil of
the Temple, and has been brought into the Sanctum Sanctorum; and then, at the
coming of the Lord, he may see with S. Peter, in the Spirit, the Heavens pass
away with a noise, 1. Pet. o. 3.10.
and the Elements melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the Works therein
to be burnt up. But what is all this to the search of humane Reason? this is
plain Revelation. And we find after the Dr. had made this specious Offer, for
prefixing a time for the Worlds Period, when he comes to make out any thing
upon it, it all dwindles into a Cabalistical Cant; and I believe whoever shall
attempt the like, or to assign natural Causes for the Conflagration, shall
hardly find a better success in it. Thus we find Lactantius having prefixed a
time for the Worlds Period, which became elapst without effect; R. Azarias the
Jew aptly reflects upon him saying: That God had not made haste to do according
to his say so. Imbre Binah. c. 43. fol. 142. And those that will be meddling in
prefixing a time for the Worlds period, may reflect a little on that saying of
S. Austin. To compute times for knowing when the World will have an end, seems
to me but for us to have a mind to know, what Christ says no Man can know. Ep.
98. It appears, I think from the foregoing discourse, that God never thought it
worth while for us to know the time of the Creation, Deluge, or Conflagration,
or the Seat of Paradise, etc. as not being any way material to our Salvation;
and that it is in vain for us to attempt to make them out from natural causes.
And if we always stick here, perhaps it may be said to us, as the Learned
Boskhierus, Phil. 3. c. 1.
in his Sacred Philipicks, says of the Jews, who were always gaping after their
Terrestrial Paradise. Et quia Judaei terraena semper somniant, cogendi sunt vel
tandem non de terraena sua Hierosolyma semper cogitare, in quam nulla spes
redeundi adfulgeat, sed de coelesti, ad quam utrique invitamur. Arcendi ab
ubere lactisugi illi senes, and ad cibi solidioris usum fame and necessitate
adducendi. A sacred famine pursuing a thoughtful mind, which will never permit
it to be at rest, but still keeps it on the Wing, till it has lighted on some
branch of Peace, and brought it home with it to the Ark; and this must be done
by searching into the sacred Symbolical sense, contained under the foresaid
Mysteries, in which the Mind calmly reposes itself; for otherwise, either with
Ixion, we shall embrace a Cloud instead of a Beauty, by adhering to a false
reason instead of a true one; or be carried down the stream with the Crowd, and
be wholly kept at gaze at the incomprehensible wonder. Thus, methinks,
concerning the passing away of this World, and a new Heavens and new Earth, Men
may rest satisfied with the Sense of Socinus. In Resp. ad def. Fr. Puceii c. 6.
Vita haec animalis ac terrestris in die Judicii cessare debet, and ejus loco
spiritualis and coelestis substitui. Quid ergo vero coelo and vera terra in
illa nobis opus erit? nonne and coelum and terram; ut huic animali ac terrestri
vitae inservirent, Deus creavit? qua cessante propter quam utrumque conditum
fuit, an non and ipsa cessare debent? And beneath. number fortassis aliquo sole
and luna, aliquibusve stellis ad diei and noctis distinctionem, ad tempestatum
vicissitudines, ad annos notandos, propter quae sydera omnia creata fuerunt,
opus erit nobis qui in perpetua luce futuri sumus experturi, qui sempiternam
vitam vivemus? number luce hac creata and ipso sole ac luna ad locum illustrandum
ubi erimus opus erit nobis, qui ipsam increatam lucem perpetuo praesentem
habituri simus; quibusque Deus ipse and claritas ejus, and Dominus Jesus agnus
ille purissimus in aeternum lucebunt, ac vice solis et lunae erunt, Loc. Com.
l. 3. c. 22.
etc. So again Chassonius tells us. Promissionem de coelis novis et terra nova
summam et perfectam Ecclesiae instaurationem in regno Dei patris allegorice,
significare; prout spiritualia et aeterna rebus corporeis et aspectabilibus
saepius in scriptura figurantur, etc. Methinks I find my mind to rest it self
here in a wonderful calm; and I doubt that those who will be searching farther,
will search beyond themselves, and never come at any bottom.

Having so far treated of Symbolical Writers both sacred and profane, and of
the Genius of its Authors; I shall now say a little of literal Writers, and
mere Physiologers. These Men among the Gentiles being unacquainted in the
Learning of the Mystae, and reading in their Writings a beginning of the World,
Deluges, and Conflagrations, a golden Age, etc. majestically set forth by them,
and being swayed by their Authority, who lay too deep for them, (they drawing
all Physics to morals, and personating external nature by analogy to what
passes in the mind of Man, in all its humors, passions, and most pure and clear
instincts) applied themselves closely with all the Industry they had to the
making out of these things from natural causes; and some of them being Men of
great natural parts, have excogitated such plausible grounds in nature for
them, that they have found a reception more or less among Men of their rank;
but of what real validity they are, the long thinking Man, or the Symbolical
Philosopher may determine. Many Men also among the Jews and Christians of the
same rank, have applied themselves to the making out of those things more or
less from causes in nature; tho perhaps the greatest part ascribe them to
Miracle, in which certainly they do well; but on the other hand they do not
withal consider any Symbolical sense couched under these great facts, in which
the great mystery belonging to Mankind lies; and indeed it is hard to be done
without a particular Providence, as Virgil says of getting the Golden Branch.
-- namque ipse volens facilisque sequetur
Si te fata vocant; aliter non viribus illis
Vincere, nec duro poteris convellere ferro. Aen. 6.



To give an instance of the several ways these different sorts of Men take in
considering things, I may here set down the performances of Medaea, according
to the account she gives her self in Ovid. -- Cum volui, ripis mirantibus, amnes
In fontes rediere suos, concussaque sisto,
Stantia concutio cantu sreta, nubila pello
Nubilaque induco, ventos abigoque vocoque:
Vipereas fauces verbis et carmine frango.
Vivaque saxa sua, convulsaque robora terra
Et sylvas moveo, jubeoque tremiscere montes,
Et mugire solum, manesque exire sepulchris,
Te quoque Luna traho -- Met. l. 7.

At list (the banks admiring what is done)
I make the streams back to their sources run,
By Charms I calm and raise tempestuous Seas,
The Winds and Clouds attend to what I please.
By Words and Spells I tear the Vipers Jaws,
The Rocks and Oaks obey those mighty Laws.
I Woods remove, shake Mountains, make the Earth groan,
Call Ghosts from out their Graves, and thee, O Moon!
From Heaven I draw --


What shall we say to the Poets sense in all this; Is there nothing in it? a
Person initiated in Symbolical Learning will tell you, that there is a real
truth contained in it, and that he has seen all these things really transacted,
in that Symbolical Sense the Poet means it; and though this be not literal, yet
there is somewhat very surprising and extraordinary, and beside the common
course of Nature in the Transaction. When a mere Physiologer reads this, being
unacquainted in the other Learning, and finding these things not solvable
according to his Principles, he shall tell you that this is only a fancy of the
Poet, writ to please the Reader, by stirring admiration in him. And again, some
literal Tribunitial Writers will tell you, that an Old Woman having the Devil
at command may do all these fine things as they are literally set down.

Now, there has been always a Contention betwixt these two later Atechnical
Writers, and the others, Inter Mystas et Osores Musarum, as Erasmus calls them;
for these later being incomparably the greater number, and many of them Men of
great parts, and really exceeding many of the mystae in giving accounts of
several Phenomenon of Nature, and in other parts of Learning, think it
derogating from their honor, that any Men should pretend to understand some
mystery in Learning, which they do not, and therefore commonly brand them with
Ostentation, Enthusiasm, or perhaps somewhat worse; not considering that tho
God gives great parts to some Men, yet he commonly limits them to certain
Sciences, and does not extend them to all Knowables; and tho the others, in
their defense sing with the Poet, Invidus annoso qui famam derogat aevo,
Qui vates ad vera vocat --
Yet they commonly Sing to the Deaf.

Some Writers indeed keep a decorum in the matter, as it may be said of Carts;
who, though a Man of unquestionable Parts in an outward demonstrative way, yet
finding himself at a loss in divine Mysteries, says thus: I had a Reverence for
our Divinity, and desired as much as no Man more to be capacitated for Eternal
Happiness; but having certainly informed my self, that the way which leads to
it lies open to the learned no more than to the unlearned; and that the Truths
revealed from God exceed the reach of Man's understanding, I feared I should
incur the Crime of Rashness, if I brought them under the scrutiny of my weak
Reason; and whoever have the hardiness to take knowledge of them and interpret
them, seemed to me to stand in need of a peculiar Grace of God for this
purpose, and ought to be placed in a rank above common Man.

I would not be so understood all this while, as though I pretended my self a
Master in Symbolical Learning; for I think there is but one of a Town and two
of a Tribe that so are; yet I may pretend my self a Scholar in such a Classis
of it, that I see a multitude of Errors introduced into Natural and Civil
History through the ignorance of it. How many Relations, invented as mere
Symbols, have Pliny, Solinus and others (polite Writers indeed, but
unacquainted in mystical Learning) recorded as plain historical Truths? They
being Collectors, and transcribing from the Works of those they did not
understand. And we find that Pliny ridiculed himself, Hist. not. l. 30. c. 3.
by endeavoring to ridicule the Magi for having the Mole in great Veneration,
he little knowing what that subterraneous Animal symboliz'd. To conclude
concerning this mystical Learning of the Ancients, we find that Pliny, Ib. c. 2.
though an opposer of it as vain, and of no effect, found himself obliged to
own that the highest Renown and Glory of Learning from all Antiquity, and in
all continued times was from that Knowledge: and it is certain that those of the
Ancients who were skilled in it, could thereby perform things far transcending
the ability and comprehension of others. They had an Institution amongst them
whereby they could bring the Mind of Man to its (...), and make it exert it
self beyond the Elements of this World; as those who were initiated among the
Jews, and had seen the rending of the Veil, which carried the Types of the four
Elements (as all the Prophets had) saw those Elements pass away, and thereby
became partakers of divine Mysteries. The Ars Amatoria and Obstetricia of
Socrates, (in which it appears that Virgil, Theocritus and others, were
egregiously skilled) contains this Institution; it being for courting and
impregnating the Mind, and at length for helping it to bring forth, (for as to
that illiterate and idle Imputation of their abusive love of Boys, Boys may
talk of it) and as the learned Dr. Henry More has intimated in several parts of
his Works, a certain dispensation of this kind is made use of, now and then,
though sparingly, amongst us, and I doubt not but himself was initiated
thereby. And if I might here use freedom of Speech, I must say, that let a Man's
Parts be never so great otherwise, whoever shall undertake to write of the
Points considered by the Author in his Theory, without being well seen in this
grand Theorem of the Ancients, I must look upon him in a like Circumstance with
a Pilot who should undertake a Voyage round the Globe without his Compass. In
fine, if the learned Author of the Theory, who has occasioned me to write this
Postscript relating to it, as well as my other Considerations on it, proposes
it as merely Symbolical, I think it might aptly enough serve that way, and that
by a full consideration of it, we may be carried round in a fetch upon external
Nature, till a time of Revelation comes, for which we must wait Gods pleasure,
keeping us in the mean time to the Institutions of our spiritual Guides: and
indeed, methinks the very ingenious Emblem which he has prefixed to his Book,
seems to intimate some such meaning in him. He there sets forth seven states of
the World, with the divine (...) or the Messiah, setting one foot on the
Chaodical, the other on the Astral state of it: Now these seven states of the
World aptly symbolize the seven states of man's Life. At first, the mind of Man
is a Chaos, an inform Being, a Tabula Rasa, as is represented by the Chaos in
the first Figure. As he proceeds toward Youth, things go on pretty smoothly
with him, as is Typified by the smooth face of the Earth in the second Figure;
till he comes to the third State, when the Passions growing strong Nature is
overflown with Vice, represented by the Deluge in the third Figure; upon which
the troubles of Life coming on, it causes unevenness in it, and a Sea subject
to Tempests, as Typified in the fourth Figure. At length a Conflagration
happens, a Baptism by Fire and the Spirit, symboliz'd in the fifth Figure;
after which things go on smoothly again for a time, as is denoted by the smooth
face of the Earth in the sixth Figure, and which may aptly make the symbolical
Millennium. Till at last the mind of Man comes to its seventh, Sabbatical,
Astral, and glorious State, as Typified in the seventh Figure, on on which the
divine (...) sets his right Foot, and fixes his Banner of Triumph for Eternity,
having this divine Inscription over his Head, (...) and the intellectual World
of Intelligences on either hand to attend him.

I know not how these Guesses, or what else I have set forth in this Work may
be received. The Author observes in his Preface to the Conflagration that there
are few that apply themselves to a Contemplative Life, and I think there are
fewer by many who succeed in it; as perhaps these undigested thoughts I have
here heapt together may be one Testimony of it, a (...) happily, or other
defects, having incapacitated me for reaching the depths of the things here
treated: but however they are received, Contemplations on God and Nature in
this kind carry in them their own reward, as Cicero has long since set forth,
whose oraculous Expression I shall not go about to alter: Haec tractanti animo,
and noctes and dies cogitanti existit illa a Deo Delphis praecepta cognitio,
Tusc. Quest. l. 5.
ut ipsa se men's vitiis exutam cognoscat, conjunctamque cum mente divina se
sentiat, ex quo insatiabili gaudio compleatur; ipsa enim cogitatio de vi and
natura Deorum studium incendit illius aeternitatis imitandae, neque se in
brevitate vitae collocata putat, cum rerum causas, alias ex aliis aptas and
necessitate nexas videt: quibus ab aeterno tempore fluentibus in aeternum,
ratio tamen, mensque moderatur. Haec ille intuens utque suspiciens, vel potius
omnes parts orasque circumspiciens, quanta rursus animi tranquillitate humana
and citeriora considerat, hinc illa cognitio virtutis existit, efflorescunt
genera, partesque virtutum: invenitur quid sit quod natura spectat extremum in
bonis, quid in malis ultimum, quo referenda sint officia, quae degendae aetatis
ratio deligenda.

Before I make an end, I think it may be proper for me to consider the Motive
which induced the Author to write his Theory, and in his Preface, and second
Chapter of his first Book, he tells us, his intent was to justify the
Doctrines of the Universal Deluge and of Paradise; and to confirm them by a new
Light of Nature and Philosophy, and free them from those misconceptions, or
misrepresentations, which made them sit uneasy on the Spirits even of the best
Men, that took time to think. And he conceives as Men cannot do a greater
injury or injustice to sacred History than to give such Representations of
things there, as to make them unintelligible and incredible; so we cannot
deserve better of Religion and Providence, than by giving such fair accounts of
all things proposed by them, or belonging to them, as may silence the Cavils of
Atheists, satisfy the Inquisitive, and recommend them to the belief, and
acceptance of all Persons.

Now, I confess this to be a good and plausible way of proceeding with what we
find generally recorded in Sacred Writ: but the Question will still lie, how
far we may comply with an Atheist, or any Man else, by endeavoring to make
things, recorded in the Scriptures, easy to their apprehensions; for when we
come to a particular hand of Providence there set forth, whether it be as a
judgment upon, or an act in favor of Mankind (as I take the Deluge to be a
particular Judgment, than which nothing in the Scriptures seems to me to carry
more the face of a Miracle) I am so far from thinking that we ought to
endeavor to smooth things to their Reasons who will not receive the Miracle,
that I look upon it as a breach of Decorum toward our Divine Law to attempt
it. And herein I cannot excuse Josephus; who (as the Learned Mr. Gregory
observes, in his Discourse of the Seventy Interpreters) in compliance with the
Gentiles in that kind, often in his History destroys the Miracle by lessening
it, and makes it cease to be a Wonder, while he strives to make it fit to be
believed, by representing it equal to that which no body doubts of: and I find
many other Writers guilty in the same kind. And we may consider the
unreasonableness of any Man that would expect it from us: for I would ask what
pretended divine Law there is, but has as strange things contained in it as our
Scriptures? Are there not as strange things in the Mohammedan Alcoran, in the
Jewish Talmud, and in the fabulous Divinity of the Gentiles? Or can there be any
divine Law but must set forth God as a most free Agent, no way tied to the
Creatures or second Causes, but may act at Pleasure contrary to their tendency
or Change what he lists in the order of them, as when he is said to have
commanded the Sun to stand still and go back, and to have rendered a
superannuated Woman fruitful. Nay, and the Author owns that those of the
Gentiles, who held Deluges and Conflagrations, were not able to account for them
by any natural Causes, and therefore he looks upon them merely as Traditional
Truths, which they had received from others: why then shall any Man expect it
from us.

Again, The Author by his attempt for making the Deluge conceivable according
to humane Reason, seems to me to have rendered the conception of it more
intricate than, perhaps, it might have been thought by many before: for if he
has validly refuted what others have proposed for that end, as I cannot say but
he has. And if I have refuted what himself has proposed; as (though I lay not
an equal stress on all I have delivered) I truly believe upon the whole I have,
then those who will be leaning on the weak Reed of Reason for solving the
Deluge, are like (for ought I can see) to fall to the ground, for any support
they can thence have in it. And so concerning the place of Paradise, methinks
the Author has left us in as forlorn a Condition as he found us, after all his
Pains. And again, after his great Attempt for solving the Deluge according to
natural Principles; I believe whoever peruses this Book, will find that he has
been forced to introduce the hand of Omnipotence to help him out in it, much
oftener than those, who have plainly said, that the great Glut of Waters for
causing it, was then created by God, and annihilated when the thing was done;
so that we find our selves, at least, as much drowned in Wonder his way, as
those Men owned themselves to be.

To conclude, As for what I have opposed to the Author's Theory, I declare I
did it on no other account, but from my inward Sense, (according to those few
Considerations I have had on Nature) of its being contrary to the Course
Providence has held, and may hold in carrying on the Economy of this World;
and as I freely submit what I have Philosophically asserted to the Judgment of
those who apply their Studies that way; so I hope, if I have any where touched
upon Divine Matters, I have no way interfer'd with what Christian Divinity
maintains.

FINIS.

