A LOVING SALUTATION To all People who have any desires after the Living GOD;
But especially to the Free-Will-ANABAPTISTS.
From one that desires the Eternal good of all Souls.

I. BEEVAN.
FRIENDS,
AS I was meditating on the ways and works of the Lord, I can truly say my
meditation of him was sweet; for now I have found him whom my Soul long
thirsted after in Egypt Land: I say as I was meditating there was brought by
the power of the Lord a perfect remembrance of my sore Travel in that dark Land
of Bondage, now praises, praises to his great Name for ever, who has sent
Redemption to Israel, and set the oppressed free, and broken that heavy yoke,
and laid on his yoke that is easy, and his burden which is light. Now in
bowels of tender love to those that know me by face and name in the outward,
who has been with me in many Trials, and yet are resting there still in that
which will not stand in the day of the Lords power, when no covering will serve
but the Spirit of the Lord; Now if you will but sink down to that which is pure
of God, and see and feel your selves and me also, and let that of God judge of
my Travels in Egypt, and the way from thence, as the Lord God by his mighty
power shall give me to relate.

That the Truth of God may flourish, is the earnest desire of my Soul, and that
he may be exalted above all; Therefore I shall relate a little of the long
suffering of the Lord, and how unwilling he is that sinners should perish, and
also to make known to you that it is the same God I now own that brought me out
of my mothers womb, and gave me life and all things.

Near about the time that I was seven years of age, being bred up by my Parents
very exactly for refraining of gross evils, as Swearing and Cursing and the
like; I can truly say that there was a greater Power restrained me then their
words, and many desires were raised up in me to know that God they talked of so
much, and so often prayed to, and when I often asked where he was, and how he
must be served, they said he was in Heaven above the Skies, but I felt him near
me, reproving me for my playing and wantonness, as Children do practice in that
nature; and many a vow I made not to do so again, but my vows I did not keep
until I came near to fourteen years of age, then was the Lord pleased to show
his power yet more in reproving me for sports and pleasure, to which I hearkened
a little and did refrain it; yet there was something in me lusted to see those
things acted which I could not do my self; then I was judged for that also;
then did I quite separate my self from my Companions which reproach't me, but I
mattered them not, and I went along with a little flock in Leominster, called
Puretans, and many a fast day I kept very exactly, and with the sufferer I took
part; then began my Parents to hate me when I was got above them, and I denied
their formal prayers, and then they grew worse, and many a blow I received upon
that account which I bore patiently, and I can truly say I never repented my
going, nor refrained, until Wars came in England; Then was the Flock of God
scattered abroad as sheep without a Shepherd, and hunted about like a Partridge
on the Mountains, and many were killed with the Sword, and often put to the
flight, which made me and others question whether God had not forsaken his own
People, because he did not deliver them out of their enemies hands; then the
enemies of the Lord did rejoice both within and without, as if all had been
their own, then the Seed of God suffered in Sodom and Egypt, and the two
Witnesses were slain and were made merry over, and then the Seed suffered, and
the seed of the Serpent got on the top, and led me captive at his will; Now
take notice the same Light I now own, not another, did let me see my state that
I was run into darkness and departed from the Lord, and was in the broad way
which leads to destruction; but sometimes did many strong cries run through
me, saying, O that I could but see the day I once saw; yea, when I have been
setting up my self in pride, or otherwise, I have wished, O that I were in such
a condition I was once in, if I had not rags to cover my nakedness; thus I
passed on wild and wanton until the wars were something abated, and Lectors
were set up, and I heard many men, and they held many Opinions, I thought I was
the worst amongst all, for I was ashamed of my present estate, however I left
my Companions, and then I posted up and down after the most eminent men in
those parts, for I soon saw the deceit of the Tithe Priests and denied them
all, yet still I saw in my self I was condemned because I did not walk up to
what I knew, though many branches were broken off, yet the root still remained,
thus was I tossed from Mountain to Hill and hurried here and there, but none
spoke to my present estate until I met with one whose Name was known unto us by
the Name of James Brown, who as I understand died an open enemy to the same
Truth that he once declared, and to the same Light which he once bore
Testimony, though this is a hard saying; but hearken a little and consider you
that were with me at the first in that discory of Water Baptism, and feel what
I say, this man was very low and tender, and had denied himself of all his
honor and profit in the world, insomuch that he came to a low estate, yet I
could not see but that he was contented while he was in that condition, could I
see such an image born up amongst you as was once in him, I should own it as
dear as my life; but feigned humility I deny, mark that, and for his Doctrine,
it was the very same words which the Messengers of the Lord are gone forth
with, and I in my measure do set my seal to, though at the first I did much
oppose him, but my foundation could not stand, though got very high; as
concerning the Light he spoke often of it, that it was the Light and Life of
men, and that it shined in darkness, and that it was the true Light that
lights every one that comes into the World, and that the Word was within the
Mouth and in the Heart, and that Christ was within, and he often pressed it to
me, that if Christ was not within me I was a Reprobate, the which I did believe
it was the truth, and that my greatest enemies were within, I knew it was so;
then the Serpent raged, and then were Wars and rumors of Wars such as never
was before, the Sword of the Lord was drawn to cut down all his enemies, and
the book was opened, and all that ever I had done was laid before me, and my
Good and evil was all judged, I would have ran any way to have hid my self, or
to any one, but I thought none was like me, thus was my condition several weeks
together, I sought death in that day but I could not find it, I would fain have
dyed but death fled from me, when day appeared I was afraid, and also of the
night, many were the temptations to end my life, but there was a secret power
kept me from it, and as I kept low I heard a voice cry, Just and Righteous are
the Judgments of the Lord, and as I kept in, a hope of deliverance was raised
contrary to that Serpents voice, for he said, it would never be otherwise, so
yet I waited till some prophesies arose, that Sorrow should endure for a Night,
but Joy should come in the Morning, and so it was, that as mine Enemies fell,
my Soul rejoiced and my hard Heart was broken, and the Lamb got the Victory,
and a precious condition I did enjoy, and then were the Scriptures precious to
me as I came to witness to them, and Sion was redeemed through judgment as it
is at this day; Now this is to inform your minds that no other Way do I own,
no other Truth, no other Life, no other Rock, no other Refuge, no other hiding
place in time of need then I owned at that day, my Judgment is the same, and
my Guide my Teacher, and my Life is the same now; Why is this wonder both with
Professor and Profane at my great change? It is nothing else but a woman that
has run after many Lovers, returned to her former Husband again: Now praises,
praises to his great Name for ever, who did not shut up his Tender Compassion,
nor Seal me up for the day of Destruction.

Come let us Reason together of former Experiences, though it will not be
mentioned but to your sorrow, and call to mind the Lords Doings; my Soul was
never so poured forth with pity toward you, nor laid so naked and bare before
you, you that were with me in that discovery aforementioned, and many
Revilings, Mocks, Scoffs and Reproaches did we bear together, and esteemed them
as great Riches; And did you not know a day of Suffering within you, and drank
deep of the Cup of the Lords fury and indignation which you called trouble? And
did you not know in some measure the Warfare, and a daily Cross in the
self-denial of your own Words, Ways and Wills, to yea, and nay in your
communication, and to few words, and did you not know a more purer Separation
from the World then in Words, and Houses? Sink down and digg deep in your
earthly hearts and read me there; Did you not feed on daily bread in your
Fathers house, and on the Tree of Life, whose Leaves healed the Nations? And
did you not loose that precious estate by reaching out after the Tree of
Knowledge, and laboring to know more in the Scriptures then your lives could
witness? Both Teachers and others, to that of God do I direct you, who shall
Witness for me in the day of the Lords Power, and he that could speak most and
discourse best was most esteemed, and had forgotten the Ancient Paths, and much
proving our selves to be Saints, when our lives showed before whose Servants we
were, as Saul when the Spirit of the Lord was departed from him, then honor me
before the people, when he had lost the Honor that comes from God, then the
image of the Beast was set up whose head was of gold, and the false prophet,
and he that would not bow unto them, must have no communion with us, and they
got a cover to cover deceit, as Pride they called Decency, Coveteousnesse,
Carfulness and Saving, and Laughter they called rejoicing in the Lord,
Foolish-jesting and lying, and anger and Malice, they called Weakness and
Failings, Jangling about the meanings of Scriptures, they called Contending for
the Faith; But really I could not own these things until I was Married, then
the Branches that were broken off for many years began to sprout again, and
then was I shut out of that Scripture, there be Gods many and Lords many, but
to us there is but one God, I durst not read it, for the witness of God in my
Conscience told me, that I did set up in my heart other things beside the Lord,
as Husband and other Riches which soon did fall, and now I set my Seal to the
Apostles Words, that Covetousness is the Root of all evil, the same Light I
now own did then show me that I was in the Worlds Nature, and did Condemn me
when none else did, for when things prospered I could be merry, but when my
Will was crossed, anger and peevishness grew up; I thought to cover my self,
saying, all others were in that estate, but that Covering was too narrow,
though the Administration of Condemnation is Glorious in its time, yet another
estate must be witnessed before peace be witnessed; When I was by my self sober
I saw my estate, and that there was a great Gulf or a Cloud drawn between the
Lord and I, but all this while who could accuse me without; and often there was
brought to a perfect remembrance my former precious condition, I sat by the
Waters of Babylon when I remembered Sion, then I broke mine heart pouring out my
Soul, saying, Cursed be the day that ever I tasted of that Fruit that was
forbidden, yea I wish that my tongue had cloven to the Roof of my Mouth, rather
then I should have spoke of one Scripture that I could not witness, yea it is
a repentance never to be repented of; in this condemned estate I remained; Then
I questioned my Faith, my hope and my Love, my Repentance, my Meat, Drink and
Aparrel, though it was like to others who were called precious Saints; I knew
not what to do nor which way to take, sometimes I saw the Gate of Mercy opened,
but no way to enter but through Judgment, I was willing to wait therein, but
when I felt it terrible with a mighty cross to the will of the flesh, then I
would mind another thing; I heard a cry run through me, saying, their Servants
you are to whom you obey, whether in obedience to Righteousness or
unrighteousness; I had no rest, at last I replied, Ah Lord, do I not keep all
thy Commandments, he said nay? I said do I not serve thee with Truth of heart?
The answer was, whom do thou serve when thou do evil; a man cannot serve
two Masters, and then my mouth was stopped, then I would shun those thoughts;
then was brought to remembrance how I had read many years before a of man that
when sad thoughts was in his heart, he would get some merry thing to drive them
away, I had no rest, I heard of a people called Quakers, I enquired, as the
manner of professors did, what was their Judgment, let never so much humility
appear, the answer was, that the greatest professors in the Nation, were the
greatest enemies to the Cross of Christ; I do not justify my self, for
condemnation has passed on all my good and evil actions, but I find very few
professors walk so exactly as I did in those days concerning things without,
though all this did not reach so far as the Scribes and Pharisees who were
clean on the out side, I saw it to be so, though we called our selves the
Saints of the Most High, yet I said in my self, if the Saints condition was
thus, it was a miserable estate, I was weary and heavy laden, I went from
meeting to meeting to find out one that was in my condition, all were full, and
smoothed up one another with words and no Reformation; I durst not partake of
their Bread and Wine, for I saw we were ignorant of the Lords Body, I was
brought very low and to a waiting condition, what truth I heard declared I
owned, and the rest I let alone and said little, waiting for the promise of the
Lord to be fulfilled which I read of in the Scriptures, that the Lord would
Teach his People himself; in this estate I remained almost a year, I loved to
be by my self, for then I could pour out my Soul before the Lord, saying, Ah
teach me the way that I should go, and lead me in the Paths of Righteousness;
Oh when shall I see the day of thy appearance in fulfilling thy promise which
thou have made of old? O why are thy Charret Wheels so long a coming; O shall I
never see the day of deliverance? Thus my Soul groaned under a heavy burden
until I met with one of the Lords Messengers, and sore sufferers for the
Testimony of Jesus, whose words struck deep through the Earth, and reached to
the witness of God, insomuch that I durst not speak a word against that thing
that I once enjoyed; I owned his words, and spoke against Professors, Priests
and People, I denied the Worlds words, Ways, Fashions and Customs in a great
measure, I became a reproach, a Proverb and a byword unto the Country round
about, and yet the Life of Truth I knew not, my Lovers and Acquaintance stood
afar off me, my familiar friends were ashamed to own me, Professors they denied
me, as Philip Farmer a Teacher of others did judge me much for denying the
Rule, and stumbling at Strawes, and leaping over Blocks; and he affirmed that
Jesus Christ did bid a woman God speed that was committing Adultery, and that
he did bid a man God speed at Plow, and said, he would prove it by Scripture,
and several lies more; Another Teacher judged me for denying the Ordinance, and
he affirmed, though Bread was Bread at the Bakers, and Wine was Wine at the
Vintners, yet when it came to them it was the Body and Blood of Christ.
Friends, I do not write this out of any evil will that I bear to any man's
person, the Lord is my witness, but that Truth may appear, and that you may
see who denied the Rule them or I, or who denied the coming of God, them or I,
I did then deny the Rule that they walked by, for all such actors are shut out
of the Scriptures, though at that time I knew not the right hand from the left,
though brought through that before mentioned; I would have taken up a rest
there, but the flaming Sword which turned every way cut me down, great were the
sights that I saw with mine Eyes, and that which I heard with mine Ears, one
woe poured out after another, earthquakes in diverse places, this was but the
beginning of sorrows, the great and Red Sea before me, Pharaoh and his Host
behind me, and in that day I knew not God, I durst not name his Name because I
was not departed from iniquity, I knew not what the first principle of Religion
was, I feared least any should ask a reason of my Faith; I cried for the
disquietnesse of my heart, I cursed the day and the hour my Mother brought me
forth, and in that year I did witness Pharaoh plagued with many plagues before
he would let Israel go, I would have done any thing that was pleasing in his
sight, but all was accursed, nothing but Wars and rumors of Wars, many
dispairing thoughts entered into me, I was like one that went from a Lion and a
Bear met him, and leaned upon a wall, and a Serpent bit him, I was pleaded with
by Sword and by Fire, yea the Fire burned all the day till I was almost
consumed, I went about like a Fool or like one destracted, yea if I had been to
write but a Note of an outward thing, I could not compose it no more then a
natural Fool, all my building was decayed, not one stone upon another that was
not thrown down; I went mourning all the day like a woman that mourns for her
only Son, there was no eye pitied me, but then was the time of love, I heard a
voice cry, agree with thy adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with
him, for Judgment am I come into this World, that they which see not might
see, and they which see might be made blind; Now praises, praises to his great
Name for ever, who has made a way in the deep Waters and path in the Sea, for
his own Seed to pass over, and has drowned Pharaoh and his great Host, and
overwhelmed them all, and delivered Israel out of many troubles, and has
turned and overturned till pure peace and joy is witnessed in the Land, and I
witness his words, who said a woman that is in Travel has sorrow because her
hour is come, but as soon as she is delivered of her Child she remembers no
more the anguish for joy; but only for your sakes is the Father pleased to
bring to remembrance, and I dare not be silent but declare what the Lord has
done for my soul, it may be those that are in the Serpents Wisdom will judge
these things to be frothy empty things, but really it is that which you must
all pass through if ever you come to witness a Restoration again, although you
may create to your selves many rests, yet it is that which will not endure the
fire seven times to be tried; My Friends, I know the thing, I call you Friends
out of tender love and pity that I bare to you, though I have not found you
so, yet my love is dear to the Seed of God which is kept under in you. Whether
you will hear or forbear I have cleared my Conscience, for I see Satan's policy,
if he can keep men and women from believing in the Light, then his kingdom
stands sure, for the Light discovers his dark ways and works, and leads the
Creature out of them by degrees to an innocent estate and to a Holy Life.

Therefore retire your minds into that which shows you that you come too short
of what you ought to be; You have been long sweeping without and has not made
it clean, now learn the Parable of the woman, and sweep the house, for verily
there is no other place to find that which you have lost; Dig deep to find that
Pearl of great price, and buy it though it cost you all you have, do not esteem
the Light a low thing, calling it natural; for verily if you will but wait in
it, it will discover spiritual wickedness in high places, and show you the
secret intents of your hearts, this is that light which the Prophet prophesied
of, which should lighten the Gentiles, and old Simeon and Anna rejoiced to see
him that the Prophets prophesied of, this is the True Light which John bare
witness of, and whosoever followed him should not abide in darkness, as he
himself said, this is he which Zacharias prophesied of which should give Light
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, this is that Light
which the Apostle Peter said Shone in a dark place until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in your hearts; Therefore take heed to it, this is he that
searches the heart and tries the Reins, and shows to man what is his
thoughts, Amos 4.13.

Thus have I in love to all your Souls written of the tender dealings of the
Lord to my Soul, as a warning to you that you should no longer resist the
loving kindness of the Lord. THE END.
London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.


