engraving of allegorical representation of William III's victory TRIOMPHE DV
ROY


THE Triumph-Royal: CONTAINING A short Account of the most Remarkable Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and Famous Achievements of the Princes of the
House of NASSAV, etc.

DESCRIBED In the Triumphal Arches, Piramids, Pictures, Inscriptions, and
Devices, Erected at the Hague in Honor of WILLIAM III. King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland.

Curiously Engraven in 62 Figures on Copper Plates, with their Histories; An
Elaborate Piece of Curiosity.

First done in Dutch, then into French, and now into English.

Dedicated to Her Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Rhodes near Bride Lane in Fleetstreet, and John
Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry. 1692.

TO The GREAT and PUISSANT Queen MARIE, By the Grace of God, Queen of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland.
Great and Puissant Queen,
IF in Ancient Times, Hero's were Honored with Public Monuments, when they
had performed any Extraordinary Achievements, to the end the Memory of their
Actions might be preserved to Posterity, and their Offspring the more inflamed
to imitate their Virtues; If the Romans, among other the best regulated
Governments, strove, as they did, to excel all others in celebrating the Renown
of their Kings, their Emperors and famous Captains, by erecting to their Honor
sumptuous Statues, lofty Pyramids, and Magnificent Triumphal Arches, when those
Hero's returned Victorious to Rome; What then can be done too much at this
time, Great and Virtuous QVEEN, to Honor at the Hague the Entrance of WILLIAM
III. Your most Illustrious Husband? He, who by his Glorious Deeds has quite
defaced whatever those Demigods, so much celebrated in History, performed of
most Transcendent. For whatsoever rendered so famous those Prodigies of
Antiquity, they only did in favor of their Country, or rather to get
themselves a Name, but MIGHTY QVEEN, WILLIAM the TRIVMPHANT, had no other aim
in all his Enterprises, but to advance the Glory of the King of Kings: He was
never capable of unjust Ambition, or desire of Rule: Only his Compassion upon
the Miserable, Suffering in a good Cause, and his desire to deliver 'em from
the yoke that Tyranny would have imposed upon their Consciences, were the sole
Motives that rowz'd him up to Action. The many Dangers to which he has already
exposed his Life to defend the Rights of Justice, are too well known to all the
World, for me to enlarge upon 'em. It Is true Great QVEEN, I have here a
spacions Field to fill these Pages with the due Encomiums that belong to our
Matchless Hero, and Your Majesty. For what Great Things might not be said of
Your Wisdom and Prudence, Your Resolution, and the Mildness of Your Government,
when in his Absence You held the Reins of Sovereign Rule. But besides that, I
know You are above the reach of common Praise; I have not Eloquence to acquit
my self, as the Grandeur and the Excellency of the Subject require. Tha^'s a
work for the Bold strokes of the most accomplished Masters of Wit and Learning.
It Is for them to take upon 'em the Care of making known to Posterity the
Eternal Honor, which the Hero of our Age has acquired by the Favorable
Revolution in England. To which they may also add, the happy Change of the
deplorable Face of the Affairs of the United Provinces in the year 1672. There
is no body but knows the Miseries into which they were then plunged, even
within two fingers breadth of utter Ruin, when this Great Prince, being made
Governor-General, made it his chiefest Care to raise their drooping Hopes, and
forced a King no less Potent than Ambitious to restore the Usurpations of his
Unjust War. But MIGHTY QVEEN, What might not also be farther said of You? There
is no body but knows, besides the Grandeur of Your Soul, how deeply sensible
Your Majesty was of the unheard of Cruelties, undergone by the persecuted
Protestants in France, who were driven by the Tempest into these Happy
Provinces; where they not only found an assured Sanctuary under the Protection
of the Sovereigns of the Government, but where they found the frequent and
Extraordinary Marks of your Majesty's, as also of that Generous Prince's
Bounty, wh^m Heaven ordained to be your Husband. You have both Labored so
effectually for the Welfare of the Church, that it is plainly to be seen that
God united your Majesty's together on purpose to be the steady Pillars of it.
Nor is this enough, Great Queen, It behooves me also to add, that the most solid
Part of Europe looks upon You Two, as the Principal Instruments that Heaven has
made choice of to break the Fetters of her Slavery. The Earnestness of so many
Sovereign Princes to be your Allies, is a Sacred Proof of this same Truth. To
which we might also farther add what so many Princes verified, in waiting on
his Majesty upon his first Return from England to the Hague, where they
altogether formed one Court, the most splendid that has been seen for many
Ages. But I wander too far: my aim is Humbly to beg Your Majesty's Protection
of these few Sheets, in hopes of your Gracious acceptance; as being not only a
Collection in part of the great Achievements of the Princes of the House of
Nassau, Your Glorious Ancestors, but of those of his Britannie Majesty, Your
Illustrious Husband, I was willing to believe that by representing to your
Royal View, the Homage that was paid him, and which he had deservedly acquired,
I should in some measure discharge my Duty to your Majesty; and that You would
be so Gracious as to permit me, with a most profound Respect to style my self,

GREAT QUEEN, Your Majesty's Most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Obedient
Servant, J. BEEK.

TO THE READER.
WE Observe in all Histories that whenever any great Personages had Signalized
themselves by any Extraordinary Actions that merited to be preserved in
Remembrance, they erected in their Honors Trophies and Triumphal Arches, not
only to set sorth the Joy of the People, but that they might serve as Eternal
Monuments to perpetuate the Renown of those Great Heroes. All Men know, that
what the King of England did, while he was yet but P. of Orange, in delivering
England and Scotland from the Yoke under which they both groaned, and his
Reducing Ireland after his Advancement to the Crown, and all this in so little
a Time, were Actions altogether Generous and Glorious to the Highest Degree. By
that alone he restored the Rights, Privileges, Liberties and Religion of a
Nation, which a Violent Government was laboring to Annihilate: He
reestablished the Republic of the United Provinces of which he is Governor;
and presently put himself into a Posture to break the Chains which a Prince no
less Ambitious than Covetous, had been a long-time forging to enslave all
Europe. Could they do less in a Country to which this Great Prince has always
been so dear, than erect at his Return those Tryumphant Arches which his
Prowess had deserved? And can I do a greater piece of Service to the Public,
than by giving a Description and Explanation of all the Figures, Paintings and
Devises, which adorned those Sumptuous Triumphant Arches? The Fame of these
Pieces, as being the Workmanship of most Skilful Masters, drew to the Hague
where they were Erected, innumerable Crowds of People, that thronged from all
parts far and near, to be both the Spectators and Admirers of so glorious and
unwonted a Spectacle. And this alone is sufficient to recommend the following
Sheets to the World, and secure the Sale of the Book: If it be favorably
received, as I hope it will be, it will encourage me to continue the marks of
my Zeal for the Public, upon all Occasions of the like Nature.

J. BEEK*

THE Glorious Reception OF William III. King of ENGLAND, At his Entrance into
the Hague, the 5th of February, in the Year 1691.
NEVER was Prince more ardently longed for in a State, as was the King of
England, in the beginning of this Year, expected at the Hague; not only by all
the People of the United Provinces, but also by the greatest part of the
Princes of Europe; where he was stayed for either by the Princes themselves, or
by their Ambassadors, being looked upon by all, as the most solid support of
their Dominions, and the Repairer of all the Losses they had sustained by the
Violences of their Common Enemy.

This Great Monarch, who knows not what it is to be sparing of his own Person,
when all are contending for the Common Cause, made no scruple to expose himself
upon the rude Ocean, in a Season the most incommodious and most dangerous, to
satisfy their Wishes. This was upon the 26th of January in the Year 1691. for
then it was that he departed a second time from London, and arrived upon our
Coasts the 31st of the same Month, in the Afternoon, where he threw himself
into Dangers, perhaps the greatest that ever were hazarded. The Tide was
against him, but the Weather Calm; however accompanied with a thick Fog which
lasted three Days; so that neither the Yachts nor the Men of War that attended
him durst venture near the Shore. Which obliged him, contrary to the Advice of
his Captains, and several other expert Seamen, to hazard himself in a Sloop,
accompanied only by the Earl of Devonshire, Nassau Ouwerkerk, the Earls of
Nottingham and Portland, one Valet de Chamber, and three Lacqueys; in hopes no
doubt that he might get ashore in some Port, or Land at least in some other
Place. But the Sloop finding it self encumbered with the Ice, and having the
Tide contrary, could make no way to any Landing-Place; so that the King was
constrained to lie by, though without shelter from the Weather, for the space
of Two and twenty Hours, environed with Ice, open to imminent Danger, and the
Extremity of a piercing and rigorous Season: Nor did he set foot ashore till
the next day about Noon, at Orange Polder, a little League distant from the
Village of Naetwijck. Upon his going out of the Sloop, he met by good hap with
a Post-Boy's Horse, that was newly come to the place, of which he made use to
get to a Countryman's House, where he warmed himself, together with the Lords
that attended him, till the Coaches that were sent for, arrived, and which he
ordered to drive directly to Honshlaerdijck. He was Complimented by the way by
some of the Deputies of the States: that is to say, by Monsieur d'Opdam, in the
Name of the Chevalry and Nobility of Holland and West-Frise; by Mr. Belarts, in
the name of the City of Dordreck; by Mr. Witsen, in the Name of the City of
Amsterdam, and by Mr. Vryburgh, in the Name of the City of Alcmaer. The same
Ceremonies were also performed by the Imperial and Spanish Ambassadors, the
Counts de Berka and Colonna, and the Governor of Frise, and some other Lords
of greatest Note. At length, he arrived Incognito at the Hague about Six a
Clock in the Evening, extremely discomposed by a Defluxion of Rhume, occasioned
by the vehemence of the cold which he had endured all the while that he lay in
the Sloop.

He was no sooner alighted out of the Coach, but he was Complimented by their
High and Mightinesses, the States of Holland and West-Frise, who at that time
were assembled together: and Mr. Heinsius was the Person who carried the
Message in the Name of the whole Body, to which the King made Answer in few
words, but in most obliging Terms. After which, he sat down to Dinner, and fed
with a good Appetite, notwithstanding the Indisposition of his Catarrh, and
rested very well the following Night.

The certain News of the King's Landing was no sooner arrived at the Hague, but
Orders were given for Three Discharges of the Great Guns, to the number of
Thirty Pieces of Cannon that were planted upon the Vyverbergh, and to Ring all
the Bells; which was done again the same Day, at the very moment of his
Entrance into the Hague. And then it was, that the extraordinary Zeal appeared
of every particular Person to testify their unfeigned Joy; some several times
discharging those lesser Pieces of Artillery which they kept in their Houses;
others not only making Bonfires before their Doors, but Sporting at their
Windows with Variety and Curiosity of Fireworks. But the most part expressed
their Gladness with their Glasses in their Hands, Drinking the King's Health,
and wishing him all manner of Prosperity togegether with Long Life, so that
there were very few that returned home to their own Houses but with light and
cheerful Hearts. Nevertheless, the Streets were so numerously thronged all the
Night long, that you shall seldom see the most enflamed Seditions muster more
People together. The Transports of their Joy might be easily read in their
Countenances; and some there were that could hardly be convinced the King was
arrived, as doubtful whether they deserved of Heaven so great a Happiness.

In the mean time, the Post-Offices both of Amsterdam and other Places, were so
thronged with Letters that Night, while every body was desirous to send the
Pleasing News to his Friends, that it was hardly known that ever so many had
been seen delivered into the Offices at one time.

The Day following, His Majesty was Complimented by all the Ambassadors,
Corporations and Persons of Quality. And then it was, that they found he had so
little Inclination to make his Public Entry into the Hague, that he refused it
altogether. However at length he suffered himself to be overruled by the
earnest Importunities of some of the Bodies of the State, and the Magistracy of
the Hague, who besought him several times, that he would vouchsafe that
Satisfaction to the Public, in regard the Charges were already disburs'd, and
all things in a readiness.

Thereupon, the Monday following, being the Fifth of February, 1691. was fixed
for the Solemnity. And then it was that such a number of People from the Cities
and Provinces adjoining crowded in Throngs to the Hague, that there was hardly
any passing in the broadest Streets of the Town. And the number had been
infinitely greater, had not the incommodious Season of the Winter, and the Ice
locked up the passage of the Boats, and a Dirty Thaw detained some Thousands
within their Houses. For all the Wagons were taken up; nor was the Ice strong
enough to suffer the use of Seats. However the Crowd was so numerous, that the
Magistrates were forced to set open the Church Doors, to give shelter to those
that could meet with no Accommodation in Public Houses.

The Continuance of His Majesty's Entry, in the Manner that it Passed.
The Day appointed for the Ceremony being come, the Burgesses of the Hague had
notice given 'em against Ten of the Clock in the Morning, by the Toll of the
Townhouse Bell, to repair every one to their Posts. Presently they all
appeared under their Banners displayed, and so neat and spruce in their Attire,
with every one a Plume of Feathers in his Hat, that it was a pleasing sight to
behold. A great Number were clad in Buff from Head to Foot; and several Ranks
of Eight a Breast were Apparelled after the same manner, without any
distinction to be perceived either in their Habits or their other Ornaments.
And thus they ranged themselves from the Bridge of Loosduynse to the upper End
of the Hoogstraet. The Baron de Friessum's Regiment of Foot, and Coll.
Ittersum's Regiment of Horse were also drawn up upon the Buytenhof.

About Three a Clock in the Afternoon, the King took Coach upon the Binnen-hof,
the Count of Nassau Overkirke, sitting upon his left Hand, and the Earls of
Monmouth and Scarborough, opposite to him. Two Coaches with Six Horses apiece
preceded the King's, being filled with some Gentlemen of his Train; and on each
side of the King's Coach marched Nine Switzers. After which followed Thirty
other Coaches, the most part Drawn by Six Horses, there being very few that had
less than Four; and among the rest were the Duke of Norfolk's, the Earls of
Devonshire's and Portland's, the Bishop of London's, and several others
belonging to Persons of the highest Quality, every one according to their
Degrees of Precedence. The King being passed the Binnen-hof, continued on along
the Vyverberg, and through the Hangstraet, and thence through the Noordreynde,
and so slowly forward to Scheveling-Bridge, and so keeping on still along the
Noort-Cingel, continued his way till he came to Loosdeynse-Brugg.

There His Majesty was received by the Body of the Magistracy, and Complimented
in few words by their Pensioner. After which, they who were appointed to give
Notice of his Entrance into the Hague, performed that Office by setting fire to
two Rockets, which were presently answered by the Discharge of all the
Artillery upon the Vyverberg, and the Ringing of all the Bells.

Now then to give the Particulars of the Entrance, in the first place Forty
young Gentlemen well Mounted, Magnificently Apparelled and of comely Aspects,
marched at the Head of all the Train. These were followed by two Troops of the
Guards of the Body, that preceded the two Coaches where His Majesty's Gentlemen
rode. After which immediately marched about Twenty Lacqueys, just before His
Majesty's Coach, which was drawn with Six Horses, and attended by Nine Switzers
on each side with their Halberds in their Hands. Behind His Majesty's Coach
rode Eight of the King's Trumpeters continually Sounding, and next to them
Sixteen of the Guards of the Body, two and two, and then the whole Train of
Coaches already mentioned. Thus passing on through the West-Eynde, in the
amidst of the Burghers, Drawn up in Rank and File, they advanced to the Great
Marketplace, to the Triumphal Arch, erected at the Entrance of the Hoogstraet;
through which being passed, they proceeded under the Second to the Third, which
was the most Beautiful and Magnificent of all, erected upon the Buyten-hof,
through which they moved on to the Binnenhof, where ended the Ceremony of
Entrance, in view of such an Infinite number of Spectators, that the like was
never seen at the Hague before.

From Loosduyne-Brugg to the last Triumphal Arch, all the Windows and Balconies
were covered with Tapestry, and crowded for two Stories high, while others
mounted up the Tops of the Houses, and others stood in heaps before their own
Doors, insomuch that several Rooms were Let that Night for several Ducats
apiece. Yet all this while those Crowds were not to be compared to the
Prodigious Multitudes of People that stood gaping in the Streets where they
could best accommodate themselves. Nor must it be forgot, that this August and
Solemn Ceremony was performed with very little Mischief done. True it is that
the inadvertency of a Gunner cost him his Life; for having omitted to cool his
Gun before he charged it again, as he stood before the Mouth of the Piece to
put in the Charge, the Powder took Fire, and carried away one Arm and one Hand,
of which he died in a short time after.

There was but one more Accident that happened of lesser moment as it fell out,
and that was all. For the Lord Ambassador of England's Coach passing by the
Vyverberg, just as the Guns were going off, the Horses being frighted fell a
capring and rearing and went over a single Person, but without doing him any
considerable harm. It Is true, they might have done much more Mischief, but they
were soon stopped in their Fury, and after that went quietly along.

The King with all his Train being thus passed by, the Burghers in their Arms
followed him as far as the Buytenhof, where they drew up and gave him a
Military Salute of three Volleys of shot one after another, and all this while
the Bells rang, and Peals of Cannon proclaimed the Universal Joy. About half an
Hour after Six a Clock in the Evening the Fireworks began, the most Curious
pieces of Skill and Cunning that had been seen; and which were all Played off
from a Theater erected on purpose in the Vivier. And while these Illuminations
filled the Air with a delightful Variety of Artificial Meteors, the Streets
below flamed full of Bonfires as well before every particular Persons Door, as
before the Gates and Windows of all the Foreign Princes and Public Ministers;
not without all the rest of those Concomitants that attend Nocturnal
Exultations,

The Method we shall pursue in the Explanation of all the following Pieces that
served for Ornaments to Complete the Magnificence of this Public Entry, shall
be according to the Order wherein they were erected in the several Places
through which His Majesty was to Pass; beginning at the Bridge of Loosduynse,
and so continuing to the End of the whole Show. We shall also expose to Public
View the several strains of Polite Invention, that were to be seen upon the
Town House, and the Triumphal Arches erected in His Majesty's Passage, to
enliven the Pomp: together with the most memorable Battles, Sieges and Treaties
made by his Ancestors, and some no less famous Achievements of his own, with
all the quaint Devises and ingenious Emblems that embellished the Triumphal
Arches themselves, the Masterpieces both of Art and Learning.

FIGURE I.
The first Triumphant Arch through which the most renowned Monarch made his
Entry, was erected upon the Bridge of Loosduyns, in the Frontispiece of which
was to be seen Scevola, who spared neither his Body nor his Purse for the
Common Cause. Over Him, the King appears standing upright upon his Feet, with a
Battoon of Command in his Hand, and at the upper End of it, his Name, Crowned
with this Inscription, TRIUMPHO. I Triumph.

On each side below, lay two Figures at his Feet, On the one side, representing
Victory, and a great Number of Battles; On the other, several Trophies, with a
Captive laden with Fetters.

Upon each Pillar of the Arch was to be read the following Inscriptions, OB
CIVES SERVATOS and HOSTS FUGATOS For Citizens Preserved, and Enemies put to
Flight.

engraving of triumphal arch Fig 1


On the Backside, LIBERATIS REGNIS Et RESTITUTIS PROVINCIIS. Kingdoms set Free
and Provinces Restored.

Upon the same side were to be seen two Ovals, in one of which was a Laurel,
and underneath VICTORIAE To Victory.

In the other, an Orange, with this single Word CLEMENTIAE To Clemency.

FIGURE II.
The Second Figure gives you a Prospect of the Town House, with Seven
Paintings, all New Inventions, environed with Garlands of Forest-work and
Flowers, which being transparent, and being penetrated by the Nocturnal
Illumination, afforded a most pleasing Variety to the Sight. This Divertisement
was accompanied with a Noise of Trumpets, and several other Instruments of Loud
Music: All which is Represented in the Third and Fourth Figures.

engraving of town house Fig 2


engraving of portraits of William III and Mary II over pictures of a lion and
a unicorn, respectively Fig 3
PLACIDUM VENERANTUR ET HORRENT INFESTUM NIL PASSA VENE^

FIGURE III.
In the Third Figure,

Were the Pictures of the King and Queen in their Royal Robes; and underneath
two Emblems, the one a Lion Passant, with this Motto, PLACITUM VENERANTUR Et
HORRENT INFESTUM. Gentle they Adore him, Dread him Angered.

In the other, a Unicorn Poking a Nest of Serpents with his Horn, with this
Motto, NIL PASSA VENENI. No Venom harms Her.

FIGURE IV.
In this Figure are represented three Emblems: In the Lowermost, an Atlas
bearing the Globe of the World upon his Shoulders, who to ease himself of the
weight of his Burden, rests his Breast against a Hillock with these words, IN
TE DOMUS INCLINATA RECUMBIT. On thee the Falling Fabric leans.

The Second is a Stork upon her Nest, clapping her Wings, and fixing her Eyes
toward the Dawning Day and Rising Sun, with this Motto RECREATUR AB ORTU.
Recherish'd by the Dawning East.

The Third represents another Stork standing upright in her Nest, and clapping
her Wings toward the Sun, with this Imprese VIDIT ET EXULTAVIT. She Beheld and
Rejoiced.

engraving of a stork standing, a stork in a nest, and Atlas holding the globe
Fig 4
VIDIT ET EXULTAVIT RECREATUR AB ORTU IN TE DOMUS INCLINATA RECUMBIT.

engraving of triumphal arch Fig: 5


FIGURE V. The DESCRIPTION of the TRIVMPHAL ARCH ^rected in the Great
Marketplace at the Entrance into the Hoogstraet.
THis was the Highest and most Elevated of all the rest, without any Saliant
Columns, ^e Pillars being only represented in Painting: among which, those that
were above the Gate ^ere of Silk and Diaphanous, to the End the ^vening
Illuminations might strike through ^m; over which appeared a Rainbow Pendent
(...) the Air with three Crowns.

Over the Unequal was placed a Celestial ^^here, upon which stood a flying Fame,
^^lding a volant Pegasus in one hand, and ^^unding a Trumpet which she held in
the ^^her: And on each side of the Sphere a Repre^^ntation of several Trophies.

On the Backside of this Piece were to be ^^en the Imperial Arms of Nassau,
from which ^^e Emperor Adolphus descended, having Eight ^arters on each side.

In the Circuit and several other Parts of ^^e Arch, were represented several
Histories, ^^th their proper Inscriptions. In one place, NOBILIUM PRIMO, DUCUM
MAX^MO, POSTHUMO GULIELMO TERTIO, COELITUS DATO. To the Chiefest of Worthies,
Greatest of Captain^ William the Third, the Posthumous Gift of Heaven.

On the other side, in several Places bo^^ Above and in the Middle of the
Paintings, VICTORIIS, TROPHAEIS, FORTISSIM IMPERATORI, CAUTISSIMO GUBERNATORI,
DESTINATUM. In Honor of the Most undaunted Leader, m^ Prudent Governor, his
Trophies and his Victories

At the Foot of the same Piece this Inscri^tion was to be read, QUATUOR
REGNORUM REGI, FO^DERATI BELGII GUBERNATORI GULIELMO TERTIO VIRTUTE ET
TRIUMPHIS FULGENTI. To the Monarch of Four Kingdoms, Governor of (...) United
Provinces, William the Third, shining with Virtue and Triumphs.

On the other side these words appeared, GRATI ANIMI, ET LAETITIAE PUBLICAE
SIGNUM, HOC EREXIT HAGA COMITIS. This has the Hague Erected, in token of her
Gratitude and Public Joy.

On each side of this Arch were two Wings, that both together formed a kind of
Semicircle: And on each Wing were Seven Pictures representing the Battles and
several Victories of the Princes of Orange, as well by Sea as Land, as may more
at large be seen by that which follows.

FIGURE VI.
The Sixth Figure represents a Naval Engagement, and several Seamen in Shallops
firing each at other, with this Motto underneath, CELSAS SUPERAT VIRTUTE
CARINAS. His Valor vanquishes the Tallest Fleets.

This without Question alludes to some Sea Fights, wherein the Hollanders with
their nimble and light Frigates were Victors over the bulky Buildings of the
Spaniards: And shows, that Victory rather depends upon the Courage of the
Seamen, and Conduct of the Commanders, then the Force of Ill-manag'd unweildy
Fabrics.

engraving of naval battle Fig: 6.


engraving of Siege of Maestricht Fig: 7.


FIGURE VII.
The Seventh Figure sets forth the Siege and Taking of Maestricht by Henry
Prince of Orange, who made himself Master of it by Capitulation, the 12th of
August 1632. in View of the Imperial and another Royal Army, after he had lain
before the Town two Months and four Days.

AQUILAS ET MOENIA CAEPIT. Their Eagles and their Walls he won. To signify
that by his Valor and Conduct, he Reduced several Towns, and Triumphed in many
Battles.

FIGURE VIII.
Is the Portraiture of an Amazon representing Holland, seated upon a Trophy of
Arms: a Helmet covered with a Plume of Feathers on her Head, with this word
underneath, RELIGIO; or Religion. At her Right Hand stands a Statue, under
which was written Politia, or Political Government; and at her Left the
Resemblance of Justice, and by her Head Aerarium, to denote her Treasures. At
her Feet on the Right Side sits a HERCULES, and on the Left PRUDENCE with this
Inscription, TANTAS DEDIT UNIO VIRES. Such Strength and Treasures Union gave us.

engraving of enthroned Amazon Fig: 8.


engraving of Siege of Groll Fig: 9.


FIGURE IX.
The Ninth Figure represents the Siege of Groll, by Prince Henry; which was
Surrendered to him by Capitulation the 20th of August, 1627. with this
Inscription underneath, PER TELA, PER UNDAS. Through Fire and Seas.

FIGURE X.
The Tenth Figure delineates a Castle that was Attacked on every side by
Shallops filled with Soldiers, with these words underneath, AUDENTES DEUS IPSE
JUVAT. The Bold and Daring God himself Assists.

To show that there is nothing too difficult for a Courageous Hero, that
undertakes a Glorious Enterprise, with a firm Assurance of Divine Assistance.

engraving of castle attacked by sea Fig: 10.


engraving of the forming of a confederacy Fig: 11.


FIGURE XI.
The Eleventh Figure represents the Confederacy entered into by several Hero's,
that is to say, Prince William of Nassau, H. L. M. together with his Valiant
Brothers, out of an Unshaken and Magnanimous Resolution to Deliver the Low
Countries from the Tyranny under which they groaned, and which they performed
with an Undaunted Prowess; with this Imprese, RES POSCIT OPEM, ET CONSPIRANT
AMICE. The Exigency calls for speedy Aid, and friendly they Conspire to give it.

FIGURE XII.
In the Twelfth Figure was Pictured a Woman with her Hair about her Ears,
representing Despair; a roaring Lion at her Feet, signifying Holland, and the
Condition to which she was reduced at that time by the Tyranny of Spain,
especially in the Year 1572. when she was almost hopeless of all Human Succor;
and under the Figure this Motto, PATIENTIA LAESA FUROR EST. Patience Injured
turns to Fury.

engraving of a woman beside a broken pillar, soldiers nearby Fig: 12.


engraving of Jupiter threatening people from the sky Fig: 13.


FIGURE XIII.
The Thirteenth Figure represents a Jupiter in the Air sitting upon an Eagle
that seems to fly with a rapid swiftness. At the same time, the whole Sky
appears to be filled with dusky Clouds, darting nothing but Thunder and
Lightning upon the Debaucheries of Babylon. Underneath appears a Woman all
overwhelmed with Sorrow and Sadness, representing the Miserable Condition of
Holland at that time. She is attended with Seven Virgins, that signify the
Seven United Provinces, stretching forth their Hands one to another, and
consulting by what means to alter the sad and lamentable State of their Affairs
into a Posture of Prosperity and Gladness, according to the Common Motto,
CONCORDIA RES PARVAE CRESCUNT. Concord advances Low Beginnings.

FIGURE XIV.
The Fourteenth Figure describes a Person, to whom is Presented a Cap or Bonnet
of Freedom, holding in his Hand the Arms of Holland, which is a Lion. To
signify the Change that happened in the Year 1672. at what time the States of
Holland Presented to William III. now King of England, the Government of the
Provinces, and the Administration of the Military Affairs: and after what
manner he accepted of them, and took his Oath of Fidelity. In the same Figure
is also Presented to him a Sword and a Pair of Scales; to show that Justice
ought to be Administered without Exception of Persons. At the bottom of the
Figure are a great Number of Persons of all Ages ready to assist him with Money
in such a Conjuncture and Time of Need as that was.

And above, is also to be seen the Temple of Justice.

engraving of William III accepting government of Holland Fig: 14.


engraving of birth of William III Fig: 15.


FIGURE XV.
The Fifteenth Figure shadows forth the Birth of William III. wherein is to be
seen a Virgin holding a Shield with a Stork Painted upon it, which represents
the Hague, the Place of the Prince's Nativity. Close by the Laver stands a Lion
steadfastly beholding the Infant. To show that Holland, which is signified by
the Lion, was greatly concerned for the Birth of the Prince. In the middle of
the Plate stand Three Figures, one of which points up to Heaven with one of her
Fingers, having before her a little Box filled with precious Odours, the
Perfumes of which ascend to the Sky, betokening Religion and Divine Worship,
which engage us to render the Homage of our Thanks to God for the Birth of the
Infant, as a most precious Gift bestowed by Heaven upon us.

FIGURE XVI.
The Sixteenth Figure represents the willing Submission of the Kingdom of
England to King William, and his Conquest of Ireland from King James. The
Standard, with a Cuirass and Helmet at the Top of it, denotes King William's
Triumphs in England over his Enemies.

The other Battoon advanced with WILLIAM above Three Crowns, and a Dove at the
upper End, signifies that he had no other Intention in Crossing over into
England and Ireland, than to Protect those that were well Affected, and to
deliver the Protestants of those Kingdoms from the Tyranny under which they
groaned. And the Buckler with the Lion upon it denotes, That Holland had a
great share in the Expedition, notwithstanding the Great Damages she had
sustained but a little before, both by Sea and Land.

engraving representing William III's triumphs in England and Ireland Fig: 16.


engraving representing joy following the truce in 1684 Fig. 17.


FIGURE XVII.
The Seventeenth Figure sets forth the Universal Joy that all Europe received
by the Truce for Twenty Years, in 1684. though it lasted not long. To which
purpose you see Bacchus seated upon a large Tun, to whom others make their
Presents, as desirous to partake in the General Jubilee. Liberty Triumphs, and
Pallas makes one of the Number.

In another part of the Figure, four Warriors seem to join their Bucklers
together in token of Harmonious Unity.

In another part sits Hatred in a furious Posture upon the Ground, and enraged
to see Peace descending upon the Earth, would fain cut the Band of Union with
the Scissors which she holds in her Hand.

FIGURE XVIII.
The Eighteenth Figure shows an Amazon seated upon a Trophy of Arms, with a
Helmet and Plume of Feathers upon her Head, holding in the one Hand a Pike, and
a Helmet in the other. On the one side of her appear several Soldiers armed
Cap-a-Pe; and on the other side two Persons giving to each other their Hands,
with certain Ships appearing over head at a distance; To signify, that after
the Rupture of a Truce or Alliance, it behooves a Nation to betake themselves
again to their Arms without losing time, for fear of exposing themselves by a
pernicious delay to the Surprises of the War; and to put themselves into a
Posture of Action both by Sea and Land, which is the good Counsel hinted in the
following Motto, REPETENDA QUIESCANT,

Lay thoughts of Peace aside,
And Arms and Men provide.


engraving of Amazon seated on trophy of arms Fig: 18.


engraving of the Battle of Flanders Fig: 19.


FIGURE XIX.
This Figure is a Prospect of the Famous Battle fought in Flanders between
Prince Maurice and the Spaniards, under the Leading of Duke Albert; wherein
after a long and obstinate Fight, the Prince became the Victor, and took Eight
hundred Captains, all Gentlemen, Prisoners. This Battle was fought the Second
of July, New Style, the same Month and Day, that about Three hundred and two
Years before, the Emperor Adolphus of Nassau was Defeated by Duke Albert of
Austria. Underneath was written, NON UNO VIRTUS CONTENTA TRIUMPHO. Not
satisfied with single Triumph.

FIGURE XX.
This Figure calls to remembrance one of the most Remarkable Combats that are
to be read of in History: which was called the Battle of Furnhout, wherein
Prince Maurice with only 800 Horse, not only sustained the Charge of Four
Veterane Regiments, Germans, Spaniards, Walloons and Italians, but charged 'em
with that Extraordinary Vigor, that he laid Two thousand Eight hundred dead
upon the Place, took Six hundred Prisoners, and brought away Eight Colors,
which were all Hung up in the Great Hall at the Hague. This was done uyon the
24th of January, in the Year 1667. At the Bottom was this Inscription, FORTIS
PROMISSA JUVENTAE. The Fruits of Daring Youth.

engraving of Battle of Furnhout Fig: 20.


engraving of a battle Fig: 21.


engraving representing Dutch dominion in the Indies Fig: 22.


FIGURE XXII.
The 22d Figure sets before your Eyes two Indians with their Hands manacled
behind their Backs. On the one side stands a Soldier with a Sword in his Hand,
as it were Insulting over the Captive; And on the other side, in the same
Posture, another Soldier with an Ensign displayed, denoting some Important
Conquest. And no question this Figure was set up to show, that the Dutch had
extended their Dominion by the Force of their Arms, even to the remote Regions
of the Indies: which is fairly intimated by this Imprese, ULTRA GARAMANTES Et
INDOS. Beyond the Garamants and Indians.

FIGURE XXIII.
The 23d Figure is the Representation of a Battle fought not far from Bergopsom
between the Spaniards and Prince Maurice's Army, the 4th of September 1643,
wherein the Hollanders won a Considerable Victory* and took above Four hundred
Prisoners from the Enemy; Expressed by the following Imprese, CRESCUNT, NUMERO
CRESCENTE, TROPHAEA. Number of Victories augment the Trophies.

engraving of Battle of Bergopsom Fig: 23.


engraving of Siege of Geertruydenbergh Fig: 24.


FIGURE XXIV.
This Figure Illustrates the Siege and Taking of Geertruydenbergh by Prince
Maurice. This Siege began the 15th of March in the Year 1653. and ended by the
Surrender of the Town upon the 15th of June in the same Year. The Inscription
underneath was this; DEOS IN PRAELIA CONFERT. He joins the Gods his Adjutants
in Battle. To show how much that Renowned Prince always relied upon the
Assistance of Heaven, whose Aid he still most ardently implored, when ever he
undertook any Enterprise of Importance.

FIGURE XXV.
The 25th Figure comprehends a Pyramid erected upon a Pedestal, upon which
there is a Piece of Painting with this Devise, THURE TUO REDOLENT ARAE. Our
Altars with thy Incense smoke.

The Ascent of the Pyramid is embellished with Three several Pictures; of which
the one is an Emblem, the other two certain Trophies, and Queen Mary's Name in
Cipher: and at the Top of the Pyramid the Queen her self is placed, as big as
the Life, with this Inscription below, REPRIMIT ET REFIGIT. She both Represses
and Refixes.

engraving of pyramid Fig: 25.


engraving of pyramid Fig: 26.


FIGURE XXVI.
The 26th Figure discovers another Pedestal containing this Inscription, HANC
ACCIPE, MAGNE, CORONAM.

It is also adorned with three more Pieces of Painting; that is to say, a
Devise, an Altar smoking with Incense, and the King's Name in Cipher: The
upper part of the Pyramid is adorned with Foliage, and Grotesco work, and at
the top of all stands the King as big as the Life; with this Inscription below,
QUIS GRATIOR APPULIT ORIS? More welcome who, to these our Coasts?

FIGURE XXVII.
This Figure shows you a Person with a Glory about his Head, a Bow in his Hand,
and a Youth standing by him with a Quiver full of Arrows under his Arm. At his
Feet sit Three of the Muses, Clio, Urania, and Polyhimne, to show that all the
Designs and Achievements of virtuous Princes aim at Heaven, and consequently
that King William's Enterprises had Crowned him with Immortality. Besides that
Apollo was no less famous for Killing Tyrants with his Bow and Arrows, than for
any of his other Virtues.

engraving of Apollo and muses Fig: 27.


engraving of Hercules fighting a dragon Fig: 28.


FIGURE XXVIII.
The 28th Figure exposes to our View a Hercules Trampling upon a Dragon, with
his Club heaved up to knock that Furious Monster on the Head. To show the
Preparations of the King of England to suppress the Tyranny of the Common
Enemy, that threatens the Destruction of all Europe; and whom the King opposes
not only by his Prudent Conduct, but by Powerful Musters of his Forces.

FIGURE XXIX.
The 29th Figure is the Representation of an Armed Amazon, holding a Gorgon's
Head in her left Hand. To show the Fear and Dread of the Common-Enemy, who now
began to tremble at the formidable Countenance of the Present War, much more
Dreadful and Killing than it was before; as also to signify that the
Confederates were resolved to be no less united than the Gorgons, who had but
one Eye and one Tooth among 'em.

engraving of armed Amazon Fig: 29.


engraving of Neptune and Thetis in shell-chariot Fig: 30.


FIGURE XXX.
In the 40th Figure appears a Neptune Drawn in a fair Scallop-Shell by two
Horses, with the Goddess Thetis sitting by him, and underneath this
Inscription, MEA JURA TUERE. Maintain my Rights.

FIGURE XXXI.
The 31st Figure is the Representation of a Woman overwhelmed with Grief,
stretching forth her Hands in a Posture of Despair, and crying out, ERIPE
RAPTORI MISERAM Rescue a Miserable Creature from the Ravisher.

To signify the Unfortunate Condition of Europe environed on every side by
Thieves and Murderers that Rob her of her Peace and Tranquillity, while she
lies altogether helpless, and can find no way to shelter herself from their
Violences.

engraving of despairing woman Fig: 31.


engraving of Battle of Boyne Fig: 32.


FIGURE XXXII.
This Figure represents the Memorable Battle which King William won over King
James's Army at the Passage of the Boyne in Ireland, where the Rebels were
utterly defeated, losing all their Baggage, and a great Number of Men slain
upon the Place. Never was Battle of Greater Importance, in regard that upon the
Success of that Combat depended the Happiness of Europe. Here we behold the
King according to his usual Custom, appearing at the Head of his Men, never
hesitating to expose his Life to the greatest of Dangers, when he deemed it
necessary for the Welfare of his Subjects and his Allies.

FIGURE XXXIII.
The first Thing that strikes the Sight in this Piece is a Hercules half naked,
bearing his Club upon his Shoulders. He marches along, setting his Feet
strongly to the Ground, and with a daring Courage, toward his Enemy Achelous,
who not finding himself able to Encounter him, took upon himself the shape of a
Bull. The Virgins behind him are making Garlands and Posies of various Flowers
to Crown him at his Return from the Combat, in token of their Joy for the
Victory he had won: others are to be seen Playing in Consort upon several
Musical Instruments, to Celebrate the Triumph of their Victorious Preserver.

To signify that the Prosperous Successes of King William in England, were
such as merited a Triumphal Reception by the People of Holland, at his Return
to the Hague.

engraving of Hercules and virgins Fig: 33.


engraving of Perseus battling for Andromeda Fig: 34.


FIGURE XXXIV.
The Battle represented in this Figure seems to be very Bloody, while all the
Combatants fought hand to hand with Javelins and Bucklers. This was the Battle
which Perseus fought with his Rival that would have forced his Mistress
Andromeda from him, whom he had delivered but a little before from the Whale
that was to have devoured her. See, how he pierces the Sides of his Enemies
with his Lance, and at length enjoys the Possession of his Beloved, by a
Marriage which he had procured at the Price of so many Dangers.

FIGURE XXXV.
The Second large Figure is another Triumphal Arch, a Piece of beautiful
Architecture, supported both before and behind by red Marble Pillars, the rest
of the Structure being of black and white Marble; the Bases and Chapters are
Gilt, and adorned with four Large Pictures, Painted in most Lively Colors; two
on the fore part, and two on the hinder side. Uyon the Top of this Triumphal
Arch upon a fair Pedestal, is to be seen the Statue of the King a Horseback
resembling the color of Brass, as big as the Life; And round the Pedestal
these words, REGI TRIUMPHANTI. To the Triumphant King. Above the King thus
sitting a Horseback, are to be seen two Arches thwarting one another, and over
them, a Crown and two-Scepters laid across.

On each side of this Arch at the top appear two Squares, embellished both
before and behind with Transparent Paintings, which when the Lights began to
blaze, afforded a most Pleasant Sight. On the one side, nothing but Clouds were
to be seen, on the other, engraving of triumphal arch Fig: 30 *
Pillars of Fire. The Corners were also adorned with Grotesco Work; and at the
top of the Border of this Arch, these words were perspicuous, SOLOQUE SALOQUE
By Land and Sea.

And on the other side, IN REPRIMENDA TYRANNIDE ET RESTITUENDA SECULI
FAELICITATE. In Suppressing Tyranny, and Restoring the Felicity of the Age.

On the Right side of the same Border were to be read these words, HEROUM
PRIORI. To the Chief of Hero's.

On the Left side, ANTIQUIS MAJORI, And Greater than his Ancestors.

On the side of the Pedestal where the King Rides, toward the Upper End, are to
be seen two Currasses gilt, and two covered with Silver, together with several
other Arms, in the manner of Trophies. In the Forepart stand the Arms of
England, and upon the Hinder-part the King's Cipher.

On each side of this Arch are Erected two Wings, adorned with Paintings both
before and behind, representing various Stories of Hercules, Perseus, Andromeda
and Phaeton; as shall be afterward more amply described.

At the Bottom of the Arch in the Forepart, these words were displayed by the
Glittering of the Lights, SCEPTRIS EXERCITIBUS, CLASSIBUS, VOTIS.

On the Hinder Part, AUGUSTO, ARMATO, PARATO RECEPTO.

Which was thus to be read, AUGUSTO SCEPTRIS, ARMATO EXERCITIBUS, PARATO
CLASSIBUS, RECEPTO VOTIS. To the August in Empire, environed with Armies,
Potent in Fleets, Received with all Men's Wishes.

And upon the Frontispiece stood this Inscription, HAGA POSUIT COSS. DECRETO.
The Hague Erected this by Order of the Magistrates.

FIGURE XXXVI.
The 36th Figure is the Representation of two Naval Engagements, in both which
there was much Blood spilt, between the Hollanders, and the English and French
then in Confederacy.

engraving of naval battle Fig: 36.


engraving of naval battle in the Downs Fig: 37.


FIGURE XXXVII.
The 37th Figure represents the Famous Sea Fight in the Downs, between the
Spaniards and the famous Dutch Admiral Martin Herperts Tromp in the Year 1639.
wherein the Spaniards lost all their Fleet but Eighteen Ships, to the great
Amazement of all Men at that time.

FIGURE XXXVIII.
This Piece of Painting sets forth what passed at the Nuptials of Perseus and
Andromeda; at what time the Friends of his Rival whom he had Slain, resolving
to revenge his Death, brake into the Festival Room. But their Insolence
remained not long unpunished: For Perseus recovering his Shield, upon which was
Painted Medusa's Head, partly slew, partly changed into Stone all that opposed
him. By this Emblem we are given to understand what befell the King of England,
who thinking to have lived in the Quiet Possession of his Three Kingdoms, yet
met with many secret and open Enemies. But his Generosity, together with his
Extraordinary Prudence will find a way to frustrate all their Wicked and
Malicious Designs.

engraving of Perseus and Andromeda's wedding Fig: 38.


engraving of Phaeton in sun-chariot Fig 39


FIGURE XXXIX.
Here is a Man riding through the Air in a Chariot drawn by four Horses, which
he guides himself. Beneath, appears another Man laid sprawling upon the Earth
by dint of Sword; denoting the Triumph of Phaeton, after he had put to Death
the most Cruel of his Adversaries.

This Emblem also alludes to the Happy Success of the King of England, after he
had once undertaken to subdue the most Formidable of his Enemies.

FIGURE XL.
In the first place, you are to observe in this Figure, a Woman with a Helmet
and Plume of Feathers on her Head, holding a Cap of Maintenance or Bonnet of
Freedom in her Hand. Another Woman takes her by the other Hand, with an
Intention to lead her to the Temple, there to render Thanks to Heaven for the
Peace they have obtained. As she passes along she points down to a Virgin
pensive and full of Sorrow, leaning upon a Shield with a Lion painted upon it,
at whose Feet lie several miserable Creatures, some of which stretch forth
their Hands, as a mark of their being highly affected with the happy occasion
of the other's Joy, which was the general Delivery of Europe from Slavery. At a
distance appear several Armed men surrounding an Altar, where they are giving
Thanks to Heaven so there same Felicity.

engraving of two women, one armed Fig 40


engraving of globe in flames Fig: 41.


FIGURE XLI.
This Figure represents the Globe of the World swarming with Villains and
Murderers, and where Fraud and Breach of Faith are rampant in every corner of
it. In one part it is all enflamed with the Fire of War: and in another part of
the Figure stands a Woman hoodwinkt, with a Sword in her Right Hand, and a Pair
of Scales in the other, representing Justice: on the other side appears another
Woman with a Gorgons Head in her Hand, denoting the Common Cause of the
Confederates, and signifying that Justice and a Good Cause are like Medusa's
Face, subduing and turning into Stones all the vain Opposers of Truth, and the
Regular Order of the World. There are also to be seen a great Number of People
slain, of which some lie dead with their Weapons still in their Hands; denoting
such as have received the Punishment of Justice for the Violence and Wickedness
of their Actions.

FIGURE XLII.
In this Figure you behold a Woman leaning upon a Shield bearing a Lion
Rampant. She sits upon a heap of Arms, among which lies another Lion as it were
Guarding and watching over their Preservation. To signify the Vigilance of
Holland, which has always made it her chiefest care to preserve and secure
whatever was entrusted to her Custody. At the upper part of the same Piece
appear the Portraitures of the King and Queen; and below them a Mars, leading
to the Temple a Lady that carries a Palm Branch in her hand, To signify, that
the Confederates would fain be laying down their Arms, were all their Just
Designs accomplished.

engraving of Mars and women Fig: 42


engraving of two people standing upon a globe Fig: 43.


FIGURE XLIII.
The two Figures placed upon the uppermost part of the Unequal of the
Terrestrial Globe, one of which holds in her Hand an Olive Branch, and the
other a Sword, represent Peace and Justice embracing each other. Beneath the
Sphere of the Earth sits Ceres, the Goddess of Corn, with a Cornucopia in her
Hand; denoting the Freedom of the Countryman to Sow and Reap in time of
Tranquillity. The Peasant resting and sleeping upon her Knee with a Basket of
Fruit in his Lap, alludes to the Plenty and Felicity of Peace; and the Satyrs
Drinking and Sporting about her, signify that we are only to expect from a
Happy Peace, the Enjoyments of Repose and Abundance.

FIGURE XLIV.
Here Perseus mounted in the Air upon a Flying Horse, and armed to Encounter
the Sea Monster, and rescue from his Fury Andromeda, the Daughter of a King, of
whom he was deeply enamored, and whom he sought in Marriage as the Recompense
of his Victory, in case he slew the hideous Monster that was approaching to
devour her, represents the King of England, who inflamed with a desire to
rescue Holland from the Violence of her Enemies, and deliver England from the
Tyranny that threatened her utter Desolation, passed over into that Kingdom to
Expel the Greedy Monster that began to prey upon her Bowels.

engraving of Perseus rescuing Andromeda from the sea monster Fig: 44.


engraving of heroes forming confederacy Fig: 45.


engraving of triumphal arch Fig: 45. *


FIGURE XLV.
In this Assembly of Hero's with Helmets and Plumes of Feathers on their Heads,
and every one a Sword in his Hand, which they hold up, and lay athwart one upon
another, according to the Manner of the Ancients, who were wont to meet in the
Temple of Vulcan, and use this Ceremony over the Altar, when they entered into
any solemn Confederacy for the Defense of their Country; You have a Prospect of
the Confederacy entered into by the Heroic Princes of this Age, and by them
confirmed by all that is most Sacred and Inviolable. The two Virgins kneeling
with their Hands stretched forth to Heaven, denote the Hopes which the Hero's
have of the great Advantages which this confirmed Alliance will produce.

The Monster which you behold at the top of the Figure set upon on every side,
and wounded by several Armed Men, is the Emblem of France. And the most daring
and most forward of those Champions with a Lion upon his Shield, represents
Holland, which is always the foremost and most hardy to attack the common
Enemy. To this Figure belonged two Motto's; of which the first was, UNITI
FORTIUS OBSTANT. United they withstand with greater Force.

The Following words were set over the Figure, POST MAXIMAS RES DOMI FORISQUE
GESTAS, ARCTISSIMO CUM PRINCIPIBUS ICTO FOEDERE, SUORUM VINDEX, DEFENSOR
OPPRESSORUM. After most Renowned Achievements performed at Home and Abroad,
and a strict League confirmed with Princes unjustly wronged, the Avenger of his
own, and Defender of the Oppressed.

engraving of William III on horseback Fig: 46.


FIGURE XLVI.
Presents to our View the King of England a Horseback in his return from
Ireland, after he had subdued that Kingdom to his Obedience, carrying a
Standard in his Hand, as being an Honor which was always allowed by the
Ancients to Triumphant Victors. Two Damsels also meet him and present him with
a Scepter and a Crown, to show, that he was no less beholden for the Possession
of that Kingdom to the Good Will and Affection of his People as to his
Conquering Arms: and under a Cornucopia of Silver, stands this Inscription,
PRAEMIA NON AEQUANT. The Guerdons are not Equal. To signify that he has showed
so much of Generosity, Virtue and Prudence in his Conduct, since his Ascending
the Throne, that his Three Crowns with all their Riches are but a due Reward of
his Merit.

At the Upper End of the Figure hang a Pair of Scales, with a Crown in one
Balance, and a Sword in the other; to signify that he has been constrained to
make use of Force of Arms to gain the Crown which belonged to him. Which is all
Epitomized in the following words written over Head.

MARE TRANSUECTUS LIBERAT BRITANNIAM, ET LATE DOMINANTIBUS ORNATUS SCEPTRIS IN
PATRIAM PUBLICA CUM LAETITIA RECEPTUS EST. Crossing the Sea, He sets Great
Britain Free, and having obtained a spacious Empire, is welcomed to his Native
Country with the Public Joy of the People. engraving of women burning
offerings Fig: 47.


FIGURE XLVII.
In this Figure are to be seen several Virgins going to attend a certain Priest
who has raised an Altar by laying together a Heap of Wood, with an Intention to
offer up Oblations for the renowned House of Orange. The Figures placed about
the Temple, represent the Four last Progenitors of the Reigning Prince. Not far
from whence appears a Phoenix burning in the Flames of her Nest; from the Ashes
of which arises a young Phoenix with this Motto, PRAELUCET POSTHUMA PROLES. The
Posthumous Offspring outshines the Rest.

To show that the Reigning King of England has advanced the Grandeur of his
Family more than all his Ancestors. Intimated in the tacit supply of these
words inscribed upon the Figure, CUM PATRIA LANGUERET PRAE TRISTITIA, CUM TOTA
EUROPA LACHRIMARET, ET ANTIQUISSIMA NASSONIORUM DOMUS, HEROIBUS MAGNISQUE
FOECUNDA PRINCIPIBUS, LUCTUOSIS OBRUERETUR TENEBRIS. When his Native Country
lay overwhelmed with Sorrow, when all Europe languish'd, and the Ancient House
of Nassau fertile in Hero's and great Princes, suffered a Mournful Eclipse.

FIGURE XLVIII.
This Figure represents the Happy and Joyful Birth of this Great Monarch. The
Infant grasps two Serpents, one in one Hand, the other in the the other, which he
kills like a second Hercules. To signify that from his tender Years he gave
assured Marks of that same Inbred Generosity that would enliven him one day to
Triumph over his Enemies.

The Upper Part of this Figure displays a Scepter with Three Crowns, and a Row
of large Pearl environing an open Scallop-shell, with this Inscription, TENUES
ORNANT DIADEMATA CUNAS. The Cradle of his Infancy such DIADEMS Adorn.

To signify that the Malice of his Enemies, nor all their Scorn of his
Princely Youth could hinder his being Crowned Monarch of Three Kingdoms,
notwithstanding all their Opposition to prevent it.

Not far from this, was another Inscription in these words, GULIELMUS
POSTHUMOUS, BRITANNORUM ARAUSIONENSIUMQUE engraving representing birth of
William III Fig: 48.
TERTIUS, PATRIAE SPES, REIPUBLICAE PALLADIUM.

William the Posthumus, Third of that Name, King of England, Prince of Orange,
the Hope of his Country, Palladium of the Commonweal.



To signify that next under God, this Prince is the Only Support upon which
the United Provinces rely.

FIGURE XLIX.
This whole Piece of Workmanship is a perfect Prospect of the Roman Triumphs,
when their Captains and Emperors made their Pompous Entries into Rome, after
they had signalized their Conduct and their Valor by the utter overthrow of
their Enemies. All the Booty, the Captives, the Treasures, the Elephants and
Camels followed the Triumphal Chariot, in the midst of the Loud Acclamations
of the People, who Attended the Victor to the Capitol, there to Pay their Vows
to the Gods for all their Favors. So that the Intention of this Piece of
Painting was to show the General Hopes of Europe in Honor of King WILLIAM, now
ranged in the Number of those Victorious Chieftains, no less amply signified in
the following Devise, ATTINGAT SOLIUM JOVIS. Thus may He reach the Throne of
Jove.

engraving of a Roman triumph Fig. 49.


engraving of William III as a boy

FIGURE L.
The Youth described in this Figure, is the King of England, as yet very Young;
yet such was his Prudence at those Years, that here he comes to ask Counsel.
The Crowns that show themselves at a distance in the Clouds, call to our
Remembrance the Crowns that were seen in the Air at Orange, over the Place
where the States of that Principality were Assembled in the Years 1665. and
1688. Portending Heaven by that same Prodigy foretelling what afterward we saw
fulfilled by his obtaining the Three Crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland.

The Upper Part of this Figure, shows ye a young Eagle flying directly against
the Beams of the Sun, with this Motto, TENER ADVERSIS ENITITUR ALIS. Tho Young,
He strives against the Sun.

This same Eaglet represents the King of England; who, though very Young, with
Forces far inferior, adventured to make Head against the King of France, who
is here signified by the scorching Rays of the Sun; and over this Figure was
this Inscription, PUERUM EXEMPLAR CONSTITUIT. Heaven sent a Youth to be our
Great Exemplar.

engraving of Vulcan and Mars assisting champion Fig: 51.


FIGURE LI.
Here Vulcan throws several pieces of Armor upon the Ground before a young
Champion mounted a Horseback, in order to obey the Commands of Venus. Mars also
gives him a Sword in Testimony of his Favor and Assistance in the Wars which
he is going to undertake. Which was all Embellished with this Inscription, QUI
JUVENTUTE STRENUE TRANSACTA, FUNESTIS JACTATUS BELLIS AC DISSIDIIS, IN TANTO
RERUM DISCRIMINE. The same so strenuous in his Youth, that though turmoyl'd
with Dismal Wars, and Intestine Discords, yet in this dangerous Condition of
Affairs, etc.

Which words contain an Epitome of what befell the Prince in his Youth.

At the Upper End of the Figure is to be seen a Castle seated upon a Mountain,
at the Foot of which a Pike is fixed in the Ground, with several Laurel
Branches shooting from it; Embellished with this Motto, CONTORTA TRIUMPHOS
PORTENDIT. Lanc'd with a Vigorous Arm it Victory Portends.

engraving of hero standing upon a shield Fig: 52.


FIGURE LII.
The 52 Figure represents a Hero holding a Battoon of Command in his Hand, with
a Helmet and Plume upon his Head. He is supported standing upon a Shield by
four other Hero's, every one wearing a Helmet and Plume, and environed with
Armed Soldiers; with this Inscription over head, NUTANTIS BELGII, QUA MARI QUA
TERRA ADMOTUS, IN PRISTINUM DECUS, GUBERNACULI GLORIAM, ARAS ET FOCOS
RESTITUIT. Where ever he moved by Sea or Land, he restored the Glorious
Government, the RELIGION and Liberty of Tottering Belgium to their Pristin
Luster.

This alludes to the Prince of Orange's being restored to the Government in the
Year 1672. according to the Custom of the Ancients, who when they advanced any
Person to Supreme Dignity, used to have him born upon a Shield by Four Hero's,
that he might be conspicuous to the People. Which demonstrates to us, that the
Prince by virtue of his ancient Dignity restored, became the Restorer of the
United Provinces to their Liberty, which was in great Jeopardy in the Year
1672. and that the Battoon of Command belonged as well to him as to his
Ancestors, who had carried it before.

engraving representing William III and Mary II's marriage Fig: 53.


FIGURE LIII.
The Fifty third Figure fancies two Persons standing at the Entrance into a
Temple, and next to them on the one side Justice, on the other Prudence; which
calls to our Remembrance the Marriage of the King and Queen Solemnized at
London in the Year 1678. It farther also denotes, that the Prince was a
Personage who would act with Prudence in all his Undertakings, and that at all
Times and in all Places he would be a Maintainer of Justice.

MERITIS FAMAM EXSUPERANTIBUS TROPHAEIS, PRINCIPI ATAVIS EDITAE REGIBUS,
FELICIBUS JUNCTUS HYMENAEIS. Deserved Trophies, far exeeeding Fames Report, in
happy Wedlock joined him to a lovely Princess, sprung from a long Race of
Kings. FIGURE LIVE.
This Figure represents the Solemnities in use among the Ancients, when they
granted a Triumphal Entry to those that had signalized themselves in any
Sea-Engagement. Among the rest, it was one of their Customs to take off the
Prows from the Ships which they had taken, and after they had hung 'em up in
their Forum, or Hall of Public Judicature, which was therefore called Rostra,
they Erected a Statue in perpetual Honor both of the Victor and the Victory.
Over head was this Inscription.

TRIUMPHET IN UNDIS. May He also Triumph upon the Seas. engraving of Roman
naval triumph Fig: 54.


engraving of enthroned Mary II Fig: 55.


FIGURE LV.
The Portraiture in the Upper Part of this Figure supported by two little
Cupids, of which the one holds a Garland of Flowers in his Hand, is the
Portraiture of the Queen of England. Underneath she is Painted sitting on a
Throne with a Crown upon her Head, surrounded with Armed Soldiers. At her Feet
stand several other People laden with Cornucopia's, and Purses of Money in
their Hands: To signify, That her Subjects accompting themselves Happy under
her Government, are ready to Sacrifice their Lives and Estates in her Defense.

FIGURE LVI.
This Figure that surpised the Eyes of the Beholders, represents a Lady most
charmingly Beautiful, yet holding a Sword in her Hand, with a stern and
menacing Aspect, and surrounded with her Armed Guards; to denote the Noble
Indignation of the Queen, when she understood the Miscarriage of the Fleet, and
the Treachery of those that suffered the Hollanders to bear the Brunt of the
Engagement. At what time one would have thought the Amazonian Age had been
revived, while she took a Resolution to have marched her self at the Head of
her Army against her Enemies, had they attempted any Invasion upon the Coasts.

At the Bottom of the Figure appear several Poor People, to whom others are
distributing Money; to signify Her Majesty's extraordinary Bounty to those
that were Wounded in that Engagement, and to the Widows and Orphans of those
that were Slain.

engraving of Mary II holding sword Fig: 56.


engraving of William crossing the Boyne Fig: 57.


FIGURE LVII.
This Figure delights the Eye with one of the most Daring Actions that ever
History recorded; That is to say, King William's forcing his Passage over the
River Boyn in Ireland, where his Enemies Superior to Him in Number, and
Commanded by King James in Person, lay entrenched upon the Banks of the River
to Oppose Him. But our Courageous Monarch, deeply sensible, that he had then a
Game to Play, upon the good or bad Success of which depended the Ruin or
Prosperity of all Europe, as well as of his own Affairs, marched with an
undaunted Prowess at the Head of his Men, and mauger all the Thunder of the
Enemies both great and small Shot, Foarded the River, forced their
Entrenchments and constrained 'em to a speedy Flight. Which struck such a
Terror into the Hearts of the Vanquished, that the Victory was attended by the
Surrender of the Chief City of the Kingdom, and several other Towns of great
Importance, as also by the Flight of King James himself, who durst not stand a
second Trial, but hastened into France to save one. It Is true, so great a
Courage had like to have cost the Victor his life: for that two Cannon Bullets
very narrowly missed him; one of which came so near him, as to graze upon his
Shoulder, and raze the very Skin it self; and the other carried away a piece of
his Boot: which was the reason that the Report of his Death was spread abroad
in France with that assurance, that for Joy of such welcome News they rose at
Midnight in Paris to make Bonfires; from whence the glad Tidings dispiercing
themselves, put several other Cities of that deluded Kingdom in a blaze. By
which Extravagant Joy for an Imaginary Death we may assuredly conclude the
Dread which all France is in of such a formidable Hero.

engraving of Mary II wearing a crown, holding another Fig: 58.


FIGURE LVIII.
This Figure represents the Queen standing under an Irish Harp, with a Crown
upon her Head, another in her Right hand, and a Bonnet of Freedom in her Left,
which she gives a Damsel kneeling at her Feet. Below, lies a Captive Manacl'd
and Fettered, and another Person Slain outright. On the other hand, she is
presented by two Seamen with Chargers of Fish, supposed to be some Rarities of
the Irish Ocean. To signify, that by the Reduction of Ireland, she is not only
Mistress of that Kingdom, but has regained the wonted Security for her Western
Navigation. To which was added this Inscription, REGNA JOVIS CONJUX. With Equal
Power

The Wife of Jove Commands.



FIGURE LIX.
The 59th Figure represents the Queen of England sitting under an Orange-Tree,
with a Crown upon her Head, and Jupiter's Thunder in her Hand, to whom several
distressed Persons seem to make their hasty Addresses, with Arms stretched
forth for Succor. Below them, stands a Monk grinning and foaming at the Mouth,
and holding a flaming Torch in one hand, with a Vizor in the other. And
lowermost of all, a Sea God, and a Sea Goddess, both in Chains.

This refreshes in our Memory the Cruel Persecution of the Protestants in
France; where the Ecclesiastics out of their embitter'd Rage and Malice,
having thrown away their Vizors, show themselves in their bloody colors. Which
engaged those miserable People to fly for Sanctuary to the Queen of England,
whose Piety and Compassion toward the Afflicted was sufficiently known to all
the World. She therefore takes 'em into her Protection, and Promises to defend
'em from the Cruelty of their Inhuman Persecutors. The Orange-Tree is therefore
aptly planted over her Head, as being the perfect Emblem of the Design, with
this Inscription underneath, TUA VOS REFRIGERET UMBRA. Let thy shade refresh us.

engraving of Mary II holding thunderbolt Fig: 59.
TUA NOS REFRIGERAT UMBRA



engraving of William III returning triumphant Fig: 60.


FIGURE LX.
This Figure represents the King a Horseback attended by his Guards, and by two
Damsels presented with a Crown and Scepter; after which, he rides on through
Multitudes of People welcoming him Home with loud Acclamations, and filling the
Air with shouts of Joy to see him so safely escaped the Dangers he had
undergon. Denoting the Triumphant Return of His Majesty to London, after the
Reduction of Ireland; and how highly he was esteemed and beloved by his
Subjects. The Motto of this Figure was, VENI, VIDI, VICI. I Went, I Saw, and
Overcame.

The Fourth Great Figure
Was a spacious Theater erected in the Vivier before the Court, upon which were
ready prepared a great Number of Artificial Fireworks, which were played off
the same Evening that His Majesty made his Entry. There were also several
Machines of Timber set up and placed in curious Order. Round about the Theater,
several Stakes were fastened to it, shaped in the Form of Darts, of various
Colors, some Orange, some White, others Blew, to the Number of Three hundred
and Fifty, containing Two Pound of Powder each. The Inside of the Theater also
was encompassed with Ten Horn-works, and Five Half-Moons of Timber, and upon
each of these Pieces of Fortifications were placed Eleven Fire Pots, that threw
out a great Number of Artificial Fireworks, most Delightful and Pleasing to
the Beholders. Moreover upon the same Theater they had erected Six High
Pyramids, made of Timber likewise, each of which were embellisht with engraving
of celebration (not folded out) Fig: 61.
Devises; one of which represented a Bird, displaying her Wings, and carrying a
Palm-branch in her Bill, with this Motto, NECESSARIA APPORTAT, ET ABUNDE. She
brings us all things needful and in Abundance.

Upon another appeared two Men that were Hewing down a Tree, with these words,
NUNQUAM FRACTA MALIS. Never broken by Misfortune.

Upon a Third was to be seen a Dove, with a Laurel Branch in her Bill, with
this Device, TANDEM EXPECTATA REDIVIT. Expected long, at length returned.

The Fourth contained a Pillar of Fire, with these words, HINC SPESQUE
SALUSQUE. From Hence our Hope and Safety.

The Fifth was garnished with a Lyoness, having this for her Motto, NESCIA
FAR JUGUM. To Servitude a Stranger.

Upon the Sixth was a Fish flying over the Sea, with this Device, TUMULO
VELOCIOR ALTO. Too swift for my deep Tomb to swallow.

Upon the same Theater were also placed a Lion, a Hercules, and a Sun close one
by another; together with four Chests of 50 Fuzees apiece, representing the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; besides eight more full of
Rockets, some of the same, some a size lesser. In the Middle of the Theater
glittered the two Letters W. R. and above them a Crown. There was also to be
seen a Skipper, who labored his way to the shore among the Ice, with this
short Sentence over his Head, NE METUAS, CAESAREM VEHIS. Fear not, thou
carry'st Caesar.

And Underneath, REGI EX PELAGO PER GLACIEM PER NEBULA REDUCI. To the King now
safe on Shore, through Ice and Foggs.

After a Discharge of 30 Pieces of Cannon that were Planted upon the Walls of
the Vivier, the Cipher and Crown were lighted, and at the same time the Theater
glittered with above 800 Flambeaux; so that the Ciphers and Crown being on
fire, were to be distinctly discerned, which was wonderfully pleasant to the
sight. At the same time several other Motto's and Devises were to be distinctly
read, as they played in the Air upon different little Planks to which the
Rockets were fastened, and among others, these that follow. SEMPER TRIUMPHET
AUGUSTUS. Always may Augustus Triumph. OFFENSUM METUANT HOSTS. When injured
may his Enemies dread Him. CARUM VENERENTUR AMICI. Dear to his Friends may he
by them be Reverenced.

Soon after the Pyramids began to play their Parts. At first nothing was to be
seen but a gloomy Smoke, which was attended with the continued Spurtings of
clear, quick and glittering Fire resembling the Spouts of a Fountain. In the
mean time the Images of Fame that stood near certain Vessels filled with
Incense cast up flaming Balls into the Sky, together with a great Number of
Serpents, which was a Sight most lovely to the Eye. Nor were there any less
than Fifty Boxes filled with these Serpents, and the Pyramids all the while
were seen burning to the very Bottom.

After that the Lion played his part, casting forth fire from his Eyes, and from
his Throat issued a Beam very thick and dusky, about Seven or Eight Foot long;
but the fire that darted from his Eyes, was as quick and clear as Crystal. He
also cast forth a great number of Flaming Balls and Serpents, very pleasing to
the Spectators.

Then the Hercules, that was placed next the Sun that represented France, began
to spout from his Mouth continual Rays of Fire. He also cast forth such a
Number of Serpents and Artificial Fires, that thereby the Sun was quite
consumed. After which, the Fire took hold of his Club, from whence slew several
Balls of Fire into the Sky, as it were to render Thanks to Heaven for the
Victory which he had gained over the Sun.

Afterward, they set fire to all the volant Rockets, of which there was a vast
Number; and at the same time the Mortars that were filled with Artificial
Fireworks to burn in the Water, discharged a very great quantity of flying
Rockets, which, together with the Dolphins that were fired at the same instant,
was a most Charming Spectacle, while at the same time that the flying Rockets
which were every one of 'em filled with several Petards, did their Business in
the Air, the other Artificial Fireworks were no less wanton upon the Water: so
that which way soever you cast your Eye, the Sight was still taken up with some
new object, so that 'twas impossible the Spectators could be weary of gazing.

At length the fire took hold of the pitched Barrels, which at first covered
the Air with a thick smoke, that at last gave way to such an extraordinary
Brightness, that they who were a great way off, might read distinctly the
smallest Character, notwithstanding the fogginess of the Night.

It Is farther to be observed, that all the while the Great Guns played
continually, so that the Bellowing of the Cannon, the Thunder of the Small
shot, both Muskets and Harquebuses, which were the Volleys of the Regiments of
Frissem and Itersum, drawn up in the Vivier, together with the Bounces of the
Petards, and the Shouts and Acclamations of the People were Testimonies so
sufficient of the Public Joy, as afterward in the Relation rung but a harsh
and unpleasant Peal in the Ears of the Common Enemy.

Besides all these, there were several Bonfires and Fireworks before the Houses
of Particular Persons of Quality, and diverse Burghers of the Hague.

In the first place, before the Spanish Ambassador's Palace, there were a great
Number of large Flambaux, and Fireworks with Arms and Devises. As also before
the Palace of the Baron de Suasse in the Great Hoogstraet.

Before the House of Major Duckene in the West End.

Upon the Piazza before Swaen.

Before the House of the Sieur Ravens, Apothecary.

Before the House of the Sieur Van Oyen upon the Kneuterdijck.

Before the House of the Sieur Sulendonck in the Noble Straet.

Monsieur Schuylenbourg Register of the Council was more particularly signal
for several Rarities embellished with Ingenious Motto's and Devises.

Among the rest, there was one in the form of a Lion, with this Sentence.
GENEROSUS ABORTU. Generous from his Birth.

Another represented a winged Pegasus, that by his Strength and Agility mounted
a steep Rock, with this Motto, SUPERAT CAELESTIBUS ALIS. With Wings Celestial
he surmounts.

In a Third, was seen His Majesty holding a Lance, and a Person kneeling before
him, to Congratulate his Return, with these words, REGI GULIELMO REDUCI. To
King William returned.

In a Fourth were to be seen on the one side Armies Marching, and some Battles;
On the other, an Eagle cleaving the Air with her Wings, and holding a Jupiter's
Thunder in her Taloon, with this Sentence, TRANSITQUE FERITQUE. As she makes
way, she strikes.

In a Fifth was to be seen the King and Queen with their Crowns upon their
Heads, and a Train of several Persons Bare attending 'em with this Motto,
IMPERIA AUGUSTO. Empires are only to Augustus due.

Before the House of Advocate Henry Vander Haer, were to be seen the Arms of
England, with this Devise, VIVANT GULIELMUS ET MARIA REGINA. Long live King
William and Queen Mary.

Underneath, appeared in Writing, these words, TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT. At
length the Righteous Cause Triumphs.

On the one side, FORTITUDO.

On the other, VICTORIA.

On the Right side of the said Arms was the Picture of an Orange-Tree bearing
Flowers and Fruit with this Motto, DAT FLORENS FRUCTUS. It Blossoms and bears
Fruit.

On the Left side was another Picture of a Rose-Tree and the Seven United
Provinces, with these words, SUAVIS ODOR REFICIT. The fragrant Smell refreshes.

On the Right side, between the Arms and the Orange-Tree, was a Pallas, with a
Crown Imperial, a Sword in her Hand, and under her Feet an Eagle in Flames,
with a Cornucopia garnished with Arms, Crowns and Scepters, with this Motto,
REGUM DECUS. THE GRACE OF REGAL DIGNITY.

On the Left hand, between the Arms and the Rose-Tree, was the Picture of the
Queen, holding a Mirror in her right Hand, and a Cornucopia in the other,
trampling upon a Serpent; and the Motto for this Devise was, PRUDENTIA AUGUSTA.
Prudence Revear'd.

Underneath the said Arms was an Oval, wherein was Painted Three Lions and an
Imperial Crown, and over the said Lions, this Inscription, LEO BRITANNICUS,
NASSAVIUS, BELGICUS. The British, Nassavian, Belgic Lion.

And under the Three Lions, these words, QUID TANTIS CONJUNCTIS VIRIBUS OBSTET.
What can withstand so great a Force UNITED.

In short, should we go about to Enumerate here, all the Illuminations,
Fireworks, Devises, Sentences, Verses, etc. which were to be seen in the
Principal Streets of the Hague, it would require the Enlargement of a Volume.
However, here is enough to show how highly this Great Monarch is beloved by the
People of these Provinces, and how Superlative their Joy appeared to see him
return Triumphant to his Native Country.

THE END.

