Capt: WILLIAM BEDLOE Discoverer of the Popish Plott


A NARRATIVE AND IMPARTIAL DISCOVERY OF THE Horrid Popish Plot: Carried on for
the Burning and Destroying THE CITIES OF LONDON and WESTMINSTER, With their
SUBURBS, etc.

SETTING FORTH The several CONSULTS, ORDERS and RESOLUTIONS of the JESUITS,
etc. Concerning the same.

AND Diverse DEPOSITIONS and INFORMATIONS, Relating thereunto.

Never before Printed.

By Capt. William Bedloe. Lately Engaged in that Horrid Design, and one of the
Popish Committee for Carrying on such Fires.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulter, John Hancock, Ralph Smith, and Benjamin
Harris, Booksellers in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1679.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE Surviving Citizens OF LONDON RUINED by FIRE
SIRS,
I Know not to whom I could Address these Leaves more properly than to You; who
have been so dismally concerned in the dreadful Effects of the late
Conflagrations: Such deep Sufferers by the Hellish Practices herein more fully
than ever yet discovered.

You have suddenly and unexpectedly seen a glorious City laid waste, Your own
Habitations turned into Rubbish, your Estates destroyed, your dear Incomes of
your many years hard Labor and careful Industry, All in few moments swept away
and consumed by devouring flames, together with some of Your dear Relations and
faithful Servants; whilst Your selves and Families reduced from a plentiful, a
comfortable Trade and Fortune overnight, to the extremest misery next Morning,
without an House to shelter You, Goods to Accommodate You, or settled Course of
Trade to support You? Have been forced (many of You in Old Age) to Begin the
World anew; and remain Exposed to all the Hardships and Inconveniences of want
and poverty?

The Authors and Promoters of All these Your deplorable Calamities have been no
other than those Common Bontefeu's of Christendom, The general Disturbers of
the Peace and Happiness of Europe, and Pests of human Society, I mean those
subtle, active and most cruel Engineers of the Roman Hierarchy, who having long
been Big with the Project of a Fifth-Monarchy, intending to make all the World
slavishly to truckle to their Tripple Crowned Idol at Rome, did merely in order
thereunto contrive Your Destruction: For as they wellknow, England to be the
Bull-work of Liberty, Protestanism, and (indeed I may justly add) Christian
Faith in General, throughout the world: The main Bank, that hinders the Sea of
Rome from overwhelming all Christian Nations with an Universal Inundation of
Tyranny and Superstition: So they are not insensible, what a mighty Influence
LONDON has to obstruct their Designs upon England: In so much, That I have
heard not a few of the Principal of them frequently protest, That until That
City were Ruined or brought low, it was impossible, But All their Attempts on
this Nation must prove Abortive.

How rigorously, how unweariedly have they endeavored this? I shall say
nothing of their Politic By-strooks, Their promoting by Influenced Counsels
Wars at Sea to interrupt Your Commerce, Their Setting up a New Algier (and
perhaps more formidable and mischievous than the Old One) on the other side the
Channel: Their Multiplying Buildings in the Suburbs and Out parts, thereby to
drain away the Trade, and having stock't many of those Colonies with people of
their own Gang, hope to be able in time to out number and overpower You. These
and a thousand other little Strategems for Discouraging, etc. I shall not
insist upon, but only instance, as my present business, Their horrid Design of
Burning and Destroying Treacherously this CITY. This they counted a
Masterpiece of their Cunning, not doubting, when they had laid this Noble City
in Ashes: But that they should soon after have buried Your Religion too in the
same Ruins: But notwithstanding all their facinorous Performances and more
Cursed Attempts God in his Infinite Mercy has Restored the One, and hitherto
preserved the Other: Both as it were by Miracle. Let therefore the Remembrance
of SIXTY SIX be engraven in Indelible Characters on the Hearts of the
Posterity, To make them abhor Popery, and detest such vile Incendiaries: Let it
remain a Monument of Gratitude to God, Caution to England, and shame to Rome,
in after times, when even that stately and durable PILLAR (Erected for that
Purpose) shall by the Revolutions of many Ages be decayed.

Indeed could you be so shamefully Ungrateful as to forget it, These restless
Furies will not suffer You: But still with fresh Alarms and Exploits Awaken
Your Memories. 'Twas a shrewd Item they bestowed on You: But a few Years since,
when Grove and his Irish Ruffians consumed so great a Part of Your
Neighborhood in the Borough of Southwark (not to mention other smaller
Attempts.) But above all, They have given You, and the whole Nation such a
Catholic Memorandum in their detestable Plot, lately discovered just before it
was ripe for Execution, as I trust shall never be forgotten, wherein though All
these three Kingdoms, nay the whole Protestant-Interest throughout the World
was Essentially Concerned, yet none should have drank more deep of that Cup of
Misery, which they had prepared than You the Protestant Inhabitants of This (by
them hated) CITY and Parts adjacent: For as soon as ever the Fatal Blow had
been given against the precious Life of our dear and dread Sovereign, they
would immediately have proceeded to a Second Devastation, first upon the
Dwellings, and next upon the Persons, and then what Horrors and Calamities,
what a Sea of Blood and Chaos of Confusion, You All, long 'ere this should have
been involved in? Whilst these Sons of Cruelty had been Acting over their
Parisian Tragedy and Irish Butcheries amongst You, is no less easy to Imagine,
than lamentable to have seen, and Intolerable to have felt.

I am not ignorant, how strenuously they make it their Business to deny not
only their being any way privy to these Mischiefs of FIREING, but likewise all
other their Traitorous Designs: And I scarce know which is greatest, Their
Impudence in committing horrid Villainies, or in out-facing them, when they are
done. The Desperate Protestations of Innocence, lately made by some of them at
the place of Execution, has (I am informed) mightily unsettled some Peoples
Heads, and a few Formal contrived Speeches have been so prevalent as to make
weak Women, and weaker Men begin to stagger. and ready to imagine they died for
Crimes they might not be guilty of.

But as for my own Part, I bless God, I am thoroughly satisfied in the TRUTH of
every Tittle of the Evidence, I have given against them, and every of them, and
have no checks or guilt on my Conscience on that Account, nor would in the
least be guilty of that bloody Perjury, that might tend to the Taking away any
man's Life wrongfully, for more than all England is worth: But if I have Erred
in any Case, it was on the contrary hand in Speaking the least of Things and
Persons, so for the satisfaction of others, I desire them to consider, besides
the Joint Testimonies of so many Witnesses, speaking to different Times,
Persons, Places and Circumstances, yet all exactly agreeing in the main,
without the least Contradiction of Falsehood, that ever could be found after so
many strict Examinations before Persons of the greatest Judgment and Quality,
and so many cross and insnaring Questions started by the Prisoners, to which
they freely Answered; I say besides all this, and several other Corroborating
Particulars I would have them consider, 1. How Customary it is with this sort
of Men, in all Cases where they are over-taken by Justice; to go out of the
World with solemn Asseverations of their Innocence; there being, I verily
believe scarce a President to be given in our Age, of any Papist that suffered
for any Crime what soever, who confessed the same at his Death, especially if he
received absolution before; For I do averr it to be their Doctrine, that when a
Man has committed any Villainy, and has been thereof absolved by a Priest, if
he be afterward called into Question touching that Fact; he ought not to cast
a Scandal on the Church, whereof he is a Member, by acknowledging himself to
have been guilty; but may lawfully swear and protest in the presence of God,
and the world, that he is as Innocent thereof as the Child unborn, and all this
without any Equivocation, or mental Reservation since it is their Belief, and so
they teach and are taught, that they are then so really, and absolutely
innocent, even as when they came into the World, the crime being wholly taken
off from them by Absolution; much more may they do it in this Case where what
they are charged with viz. a Resolution, to murder a Prince whom they count an
Heretic, and so declared by the Pope, subvert his Government; and introduce
the Roman Religion; as so far from being by them esteemed any Treason or Crime,
that they look upon it to be their Duty and Meretorious.

2. It Is palpable, that all these fine Speeches were studiously prepared by
Confederacy, and Copies industriously spread abroad before they were spoken by
the Prisoners, their Agents and Friends; and they are contrived but just like
so many Scholars Exercises on the Theme, set by their Grand Master, Provincial
Whitebread. Not with the Freedom of Dying Men that spoke the Truth, and
Dictates of their Consciences, but so elabourately flourisht over as might best
work on the Affections of the Ignorant Hearers; and serve the Turn of their
Party, for where there is so much Art, there is always some design. Had not
Hill just such another made Speech in the very same Strain and Method, which he
was to spoke at his Death like a Parrot? Sure, they are very dim-sighted that
cannot see through such Impostures.

3. Do these doubting Gentlemen, really believe there was any Plot at all? Were
Mr. Colemans Letters forged by others, and put by Magick-Art into Six Boxes;
and and yet his Hand so curiously counterfeited, that he himself could not
choose but own it, and his Servants swear it, etc. Either you must believe all
these and many other down right Absurdities, or else confess that by those very
Letters it evidently appears, that there was on foot a damnable horrid Plot to
subvert the Government, and introduce Popery; and can you think Mr. Coleman
alone undertook that Mighty Work? (as himself calls it) Or if he had
Accomplices, who more proper? who more ready than the Traitors that lately
suffered; for when did the Jesuits stand out, when there was any Game to play
for on the Interest of the Pope and Church of Rome? Not to mention, that the
Matter is almost acknowledged in Peter's Letter taken with Harcourt; wherein a
Consult is appointed the 14th. of April 1678 and mention made of great Caution
to be used by the Fathers in coming to it, lest the Design there to be
transacted and managed should be discovered which in its own Nature required
secresy: By this Letter (not found till the other day the Witnesses evidence,
first given so long since, that there was such a Consult, and at that time, is
undeniably confirmed; and that there was some great Design to be consulted of
there that required much Caution and Secresy, is likewise confessed; how
reasonable than is it to believe the Witnesses in this Case; thot then and
there, the Death of the King was consulted of, and resolved upon: That being a
Design that indeed required in its own horrid Nature such Caution, and Secresy,
and the Conspirators being not able to assign any other Design, they had there
of such a Nature; nor could they give any sensible Intrepretation of those
Patents sent to Whitebread mentioned in another Letter, taken with Harcoat, by
which was meant the Commisions for Forces to carry on this Hellish Rebellion.

4. What think you, was there ever such a Man as Sr. Edmundbury Godfry^, was he
not murdered? and who can fall within the Suspicion of any probable
Imagination to have done it, but the Papists that is these Traitors and their
Instruments? which now is more plain upon them than before; for if they had not
been the Procurers of it, how was it possible, that the same Night that worthy
Gentleman was Murthererd? Harcoat should write word thereof into
Staffordshire; whereas his Death was not known in London by any, but those
concerned in it, till Five Days after.

But why should I trouble my self, to demonstrate that it is Light at Noonday,
because Bats and Moles are and and will be Blind? His Most Gracious Majesty, is
satisfied, as appears by several of his Royal Proclamations; Both Houses of
Parliament is fully satisfied, as is evident from their Votes expressly made on
that occasion; The Right Reverend Fathers in God, my Lords The Bishops, in
particular no doubt are satisfied, as is plain by the Form of Prayers
prescribed to be used on the last Fast. All the learned Judges of the Land
generally present at the Late Trials; the Judicious Gentlemen of the several
Jurys, (both upon their Oaths, as well as the Evidence) and all intelligent
Auditors (except Papists) are entirely satisfied and if there be yet any others
that are not; I do not doubt, but in due time (for as there yet are diverse
things behind the Curtain) there will be such open plain Sunbeam discoveries
made, as shall certainly convince them, unless like Papists, they shall at once
refuse to believe, either their Reason or their Senses.

As to the Discourse, which I here present you with; The First part is an
Account of what I know, and was actually employed in by the Benedictines and
Jesuits for contriving, promoting and carrying on of Fires in and about this
City; the rest consists of Affidavits Informations, etc. of others touching
matters of the same nature, of which some it is true, have been formerly
published, but many of them imperfectly, others now almost out of Print, or not
common to be had; and all before scatteringly set forth in several Books; These
I thought fit to insert together here for the fuller satisfaction of the
present Age, and Posterity; to which is added some Account of Latter Fires, and
several Observables that occurred relating thereunto not before made public;
All which I conceive may be both welcome and useful in this Juncture:

TWO Things I would particularly Advertise You to Take Notice of.

The FIRST is the several ways, whereby these Mischievous People begin and
promote Fires, which indeed are so various, that it is difficult to Enumerate
them all: But we know they have practiced these that follow, viz.

1. By Fireballs put in with Poles or otherwise through Holes, or open places
into Houses; as at Mr. Farriners House which began the Great Fire. 2. By hard
Fireballs thrown through Glass-windows, as at the Smiths in Black-Friars. 3.
By flinging the said Balls, or other Combustible Matter fired into Cellars
through the Bars, or Grates, where they are left without Shutters, as at the
Oyl-Mans in Southwork. 4. By firing their own Lodgings, as the Frenchman did
in Shoe-Lane, in the time of the Great Fire; and likewise, the two Peter's near
Safron-Hill. 5. By hiring Cellars in dangerous places, filling them with
Combustibles, and then firing them, which was a Course they much advised me to.
6. By Firing Haylofts, as in Smithfield. 7. By Strangers faining Errands, as in
the Temple. 8. By untiling Houses, Breaking Windows, etc. and there putting in
their Combustibles. 9. By getting into Empty Houses and Setting them on Fire,
as in Budge-Row. 1670. 10. By Creeping into back-yards and firing stacks of
Bavins, Reed, etc. as at Lime-House. 11. By going into Victualling-Houses, and
leaving behind them Trains for Firing, as at the Cooks in Fetter-Lane and in
Southwark. 12. By Consederate Servants, as lately at the Attorneys in the same
Lane.
And That such FIRES may be the more Destructive, when begun, their
Instructions are,

1. To do it in select Places amongst Old Buildings, and where Engines cannot
play. 2. To FIRE the Water-Houses, and get the New River-Water stopped, if they
can, for that time near that Place. 3. To have Some of their Chief Friends
thereabouts, that may misadvise Great Persons, That they may blow up Houses,
where it is not necessary, or where rather it will do harm by Opening a Passage
for the FIRE. 4. To have some of their Active Instruments, who under pretense
of helping may scatter FIRE BALLS in contiguous Houses, and break down the
Windows, Roof, etc. to let in the FIRE more easily. 5. To have others
attending, that shall cry out against French and Papists; and mightily pity
the People, thereby getting to be trusted with Removing of Goods, and so to
plunder and steal; or if they find an opportunity to fire HOUSES at a Distance.
6. Curiously to observe WIND and TIDE in all Attempts, as likewise Frosts, and
very dry Times, and choose Sundays for doing the business, because then there is
the least Water.
The other Thing I would advise You of, is not to Conceit, because the PLOT is
discovered in some measure, and some few of Them brought to Justice, That
therefore now You are secure, and that They will desist from such Attempts: For
I know their Nature and Principles so well, That I dare assure You on the
contrary, They will be more Active and Virulent now than ever: And for some
proof of this be pleased to consider, How many FIRES have either actually
hapn'd, or been designed, or begun, though by Providence, prevented, since the
Discovery of the PLOT.

As,

At Limehouse, September. 18. At the Temple. At St. Paul's Churchyard.
Fetter-Lane, Apr. 10. Near New-Inn. Ship-yard. Southampton Buildings.
Gray-Hound-Tavern in the Strand under a Chair. Golden-Lane. Vinegar-yard.
Crown-Court at the lower End of Chancery Lane. At the Water-house. In the
Minories. At New-Prison.
All these and probably many others, that I never heard of, have been since the
beginning of September last; so that you see, they are still going on with the
Trade of Twexbury-Mustard-Balls, when ever they have an opportunity; it will
therefore concern all Protestants, to be careful and cautious to prevent such
mischeifs from these wicked Incendiaries, who still swarm about this Town,
thinking themselves more safe here, than in the Country, and better able to
hold correspondence, etc.

I know well, with what Envy and Malice they behold the City; and that they
will leave no Villainy unatempted, to lay it once more Level with the Ground,
unless possibly seeing it so gloriously Rebuilt, and upon consideration of late
Circumstances, they should think it now better Hubandry to preserve it for
their own use, as Harcoat the Tower, than to destroy it, and so invert the
other of their Design, and strive first to Depopulate and Massacre its
troublesome Inhabitants; that so themselves and their French Friends may take
Possession of these Noble Structures; and quietly enjoy the Accommodation of the
Heretics Pains and Charge, as the Jews those of the Cananites: this I am
certain of, thas you are continually to expect from them the worst, that a most
improved Subtilty joined with the most Implacable Malice, Both egged on with
vast Bats of Profit and Power, and sharpened with the Fury of blind Zeal and
Thirst of Revenge, can either contrive or execute.

To prevent which nothing can be more effectual than Union, and a good
understanding amongst all Protestants, though of different Persuasions.

To obviate the ill Art of this common Enemy, whose Instruments by a Thousand
Devices daily seek to exasperate you one against another: you must study to
cement, as much as they to divide; But above all, let no Jesuitical Impressions
howsoever maskt; be able in the least to Impair the Loyalty to the King, or
wheedle you into any tumultuous disturbances; you can no way gratify, or serve
their Interest, more than by such a wicked Folly; this is the Point they would
gain upon you; (and which they have pusht on so unhappily elsewhere) and then
infallibly you shall bear the whole Odium of their Hellish-Plot.

May the God of Heaven ever preserve His Majesty from the open violences, and
secret Assassinations of these Bloody-minded Men, as likewise from their subtle
Insinuations; may the same Omnipotent Power Bless and Protect these Nations in
general, and the City of London in particular, that his Majesty may have a long
and Prosperous Reign; the Protestant Religion flowrish, and the Designs of Rome
be blasted, discovered and confounded; Is, and shall ever be the Hearty Prayers
and Endeavors of him,

Who is, A most hearty VVell-wisher to the Prosperity of that CITY, and of the
True PROTESTANT INTEREST William Bedloe.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Popes late Fireworks IN ENGLAND.
AS there is not a more malicious sort of Vermin in the World than the Jesuits
and other Factors for Rome (for let me tell you the Benedictines and rest of
the Orders; nay, the dullest Mass-jobbing Seculars, are not at all behind hand
with the former, in will to commit Roguery, whatever they are in parts and
sufficiencies to conduct and manage it) so there can be none more cursedly
ingenious in inventing and promoting the most exquisite, various, and to us
still new methods of doing mischief. Treason and Rebellion, private Murders,
and public Massacres, poisoned Daggers, and consecrated Knives: All these
have long since been their daily past-time, the old Instruments of their worse
than Pagan Cruelties: But of late years they have thereto added and set on foot
in these parts another medium of destruction, to ruin Protestants in a more
oblique and clandestine way; since they had not (as is hoped they never shall
have) power to re-kindle the Marian Bonfires, and consume their Bodies: they
resolved, and make it their business treacherously to Fire their Houses, to
destroy their Goods and Estates, till they might be strong enough to venture on
their Persons. This Hell-hatcht Design was hugged by these holy Fathers as a
most Ghostly Expedient for their purpose, for hereby they could undo Hundreds,
sometimes Thousands of Families in a few hours space; and the poor Souls scarce
ever imagine who hurts them. Hereby they could lay waste our Metropolis, and
designed the same against other Goodly Cities, Corporations, and Chief Places
of Trade (against which they have a particular Spleen) and then to ascribe the
disaster to Providence, as a Judgment for their Heresy, or at least to make
the Ignorant believe it was only the pure Effect of Chance, or Default of a
drowsy Negligence; whilst in the mean time they with Triumph warm their own
Fingers at the Flames: and not only weaken and impoverish Protestants, but in
those Distractions necessarily attending such Calamities, make great Advantages
to themselves, by Filtching, Stealing, Plundering, etc. Besides the
opportunities they ever hoped then to gain, of putting in execution their long
designed General Massacre.

I speak not this by Guess or Hearsay, but out of certain Knowledge: And
therefore as I have endeavored to discharge my Duty to my Prince and Country,
in discovering other Intrigues and Machinations of this Cursed Popish Plot, so
I think my self obliged to set forth some Transactions that I have been privy
unto, particularly concerning this matter: And therefore omitting several
Consults which have been held, and did all more or less relate to the grand
Design, viz. The Destruction of His Majesty (whom God preserve) His Religion
and Government, I shall at present only undertake to give an Account of what I
know has been Ordered in these Consults (and in pursuance thereof prosecuted
and attempted) tending to the Firing of London, Westminster, etc.

In the month of June 1676. it was my Fortune to be at Paris, at the English
Covent of Benedictine Monks, with whom (by several means and on diverse
accounts, too tedious and not at all material here to be related) I had much
ingratiated my self; so that at that time they reposed an Entire Confidence in
me as a fit Instrument for their Purposes. Amongst other Discourses that
happened there about the great Business, which they and others were then most
vigoriously carrying on; viz. To subvert the Protestant Religion and introduce
Popery into England: They fell to debate the several wars and means preparatory
thereunto, and what might be the best Expedients to facilitate and accomplish
the same: And as they did nothing without correspondence and communication of
counsels from their Fellow-conspirators in England, so some or one of them
produced several betters from London, wherein were diverse particulars relating
to the Firing of the City and Suburbs of London, and other Cities and eminent
Towns in England, which was then and at all times concluded and agreed unto by
them, to be the chief way and almost only means in their power, whereby to
plain the way for their Design: For they were unanimously of Opinion, That it
was absolutely necessary to weaken and ruin the said City of London, ere they
could bring any of their other contrivances to perfection. In this Debate some
of them thanked God (such was their impious piety) that their attempts upon
London in that kind had hitherto succeeded very well; and though the Houses
beyond all expectation were rebuilt to a greater degree of Strength and
Ornament than ever, yet many Thousands of her Inhabitants still labored under
the Effects, and languisht with Incurable Consumptions, occasioned by the late
Burning Fevers they had cast her into: Adding, that they would never leave that
City, till they had pulled down her Pride by Fire and Piracy.

After this Discourse and much more to the like purpose, which was very freely
and earnestly managed, I being all the while present, they at last proceeded to
ask me, Whether I would be assistant to them in carrying on that Business, as I
had been in the other great Concern; This being one of the best Expedients to
ripen and push on That? To which I readily seemed to assent; assuring them that
I could and would do more therein than any other could: magnifying what
intimate knowledge I had of all parts of London and some other great Trading
Cities, which did capacitate me to effect such a Business more certainly and
securely than another. In fine, they were extremely satisfied, and told me,
That when I came to England, I should be joined as an Assistant to Father
Gifford for prosecuting the said Affair. This Gifford was a Jesuit, and (as
the said Letters did specify) the Person that had managed the great
Conflagration in 1666, and as they said, was concerned in the Fire at Southwark
(which had happened not above a month before this Discourse) and had attempted
the like at many other times and places where he had missed of performance.
This likewise is the same Gifford mentioned in the Depositions of Mr. Stubbs
and Mary Oxley, herein after set forth; whereby the later was brought to set
Fire to her Masters House in Fetter-lane in April last.

At this Consult of the Benedictines there were several Letters produced as
aforesaid, all relating to the Firing of London and its Suburbs, and other
Towns in England; and very urgent they were with me to be sure at my return to
be very diligent and expeditious in dispatching the same: and that I should
receive necessary Orders, Encouragement, and Supplies to enable me thereunto.
But I being then upon a Journey into Spain, heard no more of that Business till
the year 1678; and then I was in a Consult with the said Gifford and several
others, Priests and Jesuits (who met in such Consults every Week, in order to
carry on the Business of Firing) At this our Meeting it was concluded to fire
Lime-house and Wapping first, and then and by that means to burn all or the
most of the Ships and Vessels in the River: For which purpose several of the
said Consultors and their Assistants, were to be ready on the Water, as men to
help, but indeed to fire the outwardest Ships, and cut theirs, or other Ships
Cables (as should be most convenient) to make them fall foul on each other, and
burn together. In pursuance of this Resolution, a real Effect thereof was the
Fire at Lime-house, that shortly after followed; though not doing that great
Execution that they expected, by reason of the absence of some of the persons
that were to have managed the same.

After, which Fire I was with Gifford and others several Nights on the Thames
about London Bridge, and there did make strict Observations of the Houses on
either side; making choice of the widest and the lowest Windows in their Vaults
and Cellars, or Lower Rooms; and taking notice what Houses had the most, and
the most dangerous Combustible Materials in them, and where they might best and
most effectually put in their surest Fireballs and Instruments in the Night
under the Houses, to burn down the Bridge; which they concluded to do at
High Water, when their Boats might be brought almost equal to such Windows: We
considered likewise of means how to fire the Tower of London: But Father
Harcourt (now lately executed for Treason) then told us, They had made sure of
that place within; and therefore ordered us not to concern our selves with
that: For it would be more for our advantage, to preserve it for our Business,
than to destroy it.

In short, for near a Twelvemonth before I came in to make a Discovery, I had
been employed to use all Arts and Endeavors to carry on this Design of Firing
the City of London and other places about it; and the Order and Conduct of it,
how and where to set my Fires, was left chiefly to my management; but with this
limitation, that the Jesuits, who were the Master-Incendiaries, and my
Imployers, were to see and inspect, how far and how sure I had laid my
Combustibles and Fuel; which accordingly they did.

In August last I did endeavor to rent several old Cellars, wherein to stow
Wood, Coal, and other Preparations, of which I was ordered to buy several
Parcels; which accordingly I bought; as likewise several Barrels of Gunpowder
and I did place them in many parts of the City and Suburbs, in order to this
Damnable Design: And that the Reader may not think this a naked Affirmation,
but that the truth and certainty of what I here aver, may the better appear, I
will here set down particularly some of the places that I so took, to hold this
Wood and Coal, and where I did House many Chaldrons of Coals and Hundreds of
Faggots, etc. to this purpose: viz.

Some Hundreds of Faggots and Provision of Coal, etc. for this very use, I laid
in at my Lodging in Essex Garden, at the Backdoor of the Palsgraves-Head
Tavern, near the Temple; which was to burn the Temple, with the Records and
Writings there.

Another parcel was in Brewers-yard in the Strand, at a Cellar and some old
Buildings there; which Cellar does belong to Mr. Morgan at the Red Bible in
Bedford-street.

Another parcel at Mr. Browns in White Friars.

Some I was to send into an Old Cellar at Mr. Withers's at the Plough in
Seething Lane: More into Red and White-Cross-street, Bishops gave-street, Queen
H^ve, and several other Places in and about the City. All which I am ready to
make truly to appear, when and how, I shall by Authority be required.

Several other Designs have been laid, in order to this Work, to set diverse
places on fire; and not a few Persons employed, but none of them knowing each
other; some of which have taken effect in part, some have not: But without
speedy prevention and great care, they will always (as unwearied in villainy)
attempt, and too often (as we have just cause to fear) perform what they have
laid and contrived by so many and different ways and means; all still held in
read ness, and attending only the dismal Blow directed against our Sovereigns
Life; which God defend. Amen.

The last Consult I had with them about the Affair of Firing, was in August
1678. when I laid in my stores for the Work; others were then consulting and
advising how to put the King out of the way (for by that phrase they generally
express Murder) and such of the Magistrates as did most oppose them: And that
being done, my Firing of London was to follow; and upon that Conflagration, as
a general Signal, we were openly to appear in Arms and declare for the Pope.

Now for a more full satisfaction to all the World, and the further
Confirmation and Justification of what I have said, and to demonstrate that the
great Fire in 66. and diverse others since, were begun and carried on by the
Contrivance and Industry of the Papists, especially Jesuits and Priests, and
their Instruments; I shall to this Testimony of mine own add the true Copies of
diverse Plain and Authentic Affidavits, Depositions, Examinations, and
Informations of many others, given in unto Committees of Parliament, and taken
before Justices of the Peace, or other sufficient Authority, relating to the
same Matter: And likewise annex an Account of the several notable Fires since
66. to this time, with some Observations on the Circumstances thereof, and
remarkable Passages therein: All which sufficiently corroborate and make it
evident, to whose Designs and Management it is, that England ows most of the
late Dismal Calamities by Fire, which have been so much more frequent and
destructive of late years (notwithstanding the great Improvements of Care and
Art to prevent and quench them) than ever heretofore.

And first of all I shall recite those Testimonies relating to the Dreadful
Fire in 66. the vast damage whereof may be conceived to be inestimable, by this
brief state of the Extent of the Ground laid desolate, and the number of Houses
then consumed, extracted from the Certificates of the Surveyors soon after
appointed to survey the Ruins: whereby it appears,

THat the Fire that began in London upon the Second of September 1666. at one
Mr. Farryners House a Baker in Pudding-Lane, between the hours of One and Two
in the Morning, and continued Burning until the Sixth of that Month, did
overrun the space of Three hundred seventy three Acres within the Walls of the
City of London, and Sixty three Acres three Roods without the VValls. There
remained Seventy five Acres three Roods standing within the VValls unburnt.
Eighty nine Parish Churches, besides Chapels burnt. Eleven Parishes within the
VValls standing. Houses burnt, Thirteen thousand two hundred.

Surveyors.
Jonas Moore, Ralph Gatrix,




Upon the Eighteenth of the same September the Parliament came together, and
upon the 25th. of the same month the House of Commons appointed a Committee to
inquire into the Causes of the late Fire, before whom the following
Informations were given in, and proved before the Committee; as by their Report
will more clearly appear, bearing date the Two and twentieth of January 66. But
upon the Eighth of February following, the Parliament was Prorogued, before
they came to give their Judgment thereupon.

The Order of the House for the Committee, Die Martis 25 Septembris 1666. 18
Car. 2.
Resolved, etc.

THat a Committee be appointed to inquire into the Causes of the late Fire, and
that it be referred to

Sir Charles Harbord Mr. Seymour. Sir Rowland Beckley Col. Strangways Sir John
Charlton Mr. Sandys Mr. Finch Sir Tho. Allen Sir Edward Massey Lord Ancram Col.
Birch Lord Herbert Mr. Whorwood Sir Edm. Walpool Mr. Pepis Sir Robert Brook Sir
John Heath Mr. Coventry Sir Robert Atkins Sir Richard Everard Sir Tho.
Littleton. Mr. Millward Serj. Maynard. Sir Thomas Gower Mr. Crouch Mr. Prin Sir
Richard Ford Sir Jo. Talbot Mr. Trevor Mr. Merrel Mr. Jones Mr. Rob. Milward
Mr. Morley Sir Thomas Clifford Sir Will. Hickman Sir Solom. Swale Sir Will.
Lowther Mr. Garraway Sir Hen. Caesar Sir Richard Brown Sir Tho. Tomlins Sir
Rich. Vatley Sir Fran. Goodrick Sir John Monson Mr. Maynard.
And they are to meet to morrow at two of the Clock in the afternoon, in the
Speakers Chamber; and to send for Persons, Papers and Records.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cer. Dom. Com.

October 9. 1666.

Ordered, That these Members following be added to the Committee appointed to
enquire into the Causes of the late Fire, Viz Sir John Pelham, Mr. Hugh
Buscowen, Mr. Giles Hungerford, Sir William Lewis, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir
John Brampstone, Mr. Milward, Mr. Buscowen; and all the Members that serve for
the City of London.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

October 16. 1666.

Ordered. That Mr. Davies, Sir Thomas Higgons, Mr. St. John, Sir Richard
Franklin, Sir Thomas Tomkins, Mr. Devereux, Mr. Millard, Mr. Lewis, Mr.
Dowdswell, Sir James Thyn, Sir Edm. Pierse, Mr. Coleman, Sir Tho. Allen, Mr.
Giles Hungerford, Mr. Churchill, be added to the Committee appointed to enquire
into the Causes of the late Fire.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

THe Honorable Committee, according to the forementioned Orders of the House,
did meet in the Speakers Chamber, and having chosen Sir Robert Brook for their
Chairman, proceeded to receive many considerable Informations from diverse
credible Persons, about the matter wherewith they were entrusted; and thereupon
did at last agree that Sir Robert Brook should make the ensuing Report to the
Honorable House of Commons.

The Report of Sir Robert Brook, Chairman to the Committee that was appointed
by the House of Commons to enquire into the Firing of the City of London; made
the Two and twentieth of January, 1666.
THat in a Letter from Alanson of the 23d of August 1666, New Style, written
from one Dural to a Gentleman lodging in the House of one of the Ministers of
the French Church in London, called Monsieur Herault, there were these
Expressions:

Pray acquaint me with the truth of certain News which is common in this
Country, That a Fire from Heaven is fallen upon a City called Belke, situated
on the side of the River of Thames, where a world of People have been killed
and burnt, and Houses also consumed: Which seems a word of Cabal, cast out by
some that were knowing, and taken up by others that might be ignorant of the
signification of it.

Mrs Elizabeth Styles informs, That in April last, in an eager discourse she
had with a French man Servant of Sir Vere Fan, he hastily replied, You English
Maids will like the Frenchmen better, when there is not a House left between
Temple Bar and London Bridge. To which she answered, I hope your eyes will
never see that. He replied, This will come to pass between June and October.

William Tisdale informs, That he being about the beginning of July at the
Greyhound in St. Martins, with one Fitz-Harris an Irish Papist, heard him say,
There would be a sad Desolation in September, in November a worse, in December
all would be united into one. Whereupon he asked him, Where this Desolation
would be? He answered, In London.

Mr. Light of Ratcliff, having some discourse with Mr. Langhorn of the
Middle Temple, Barrister Since condemned for High Treason.
(reputed a zealous Papist) about February 65 last, after some discourse in
disputation about Religion, he took him by the hand, and said to him, You
expect great things in Sixty Six, and think that Rome will be destroyed, but
what if it be London?

Mr. Kitley of Barkin in Essex, informs, That one Mrs. Yazly, a Papist, of
Ilford in the said County, came unto his House, August the 13th, and being in
discourse with his Mother, said, They say the next Thursday will be the bottest
day that ever was in England. She replied, I hope the hottest season of the
year is now past. To which she answered, I know not whether it be the hottest
for Weather or for Action, This Mrs. Yazly coming to the same House the Week
after the Fire, Mr. Kitley said to her with some trouble, I have often thought
of your Hot Thursday: To which she replied, It was not indeed upon the
Thursday, but it happened upon the Sunday was sennight after. Mrs Yazly hearing
this Evidence produced against her, endeavored to avoid the words, saying,
That upon the 13th of August she did tell Mrs. Kitley, That they say the next
Thursday will be the darkest Thursday that ever was in England, but not
otherwise; which she affirms to have received from one Finchman, an old Woman
of Ilford; who being examined by a Justice of Peace to discover the truth
thereof, denied that ever she said any such words to Mrs Yazly, or that she had
discoursed with her about any such matter. And as to the subsequent words, she
says Mrs Yazly denies ever to have spoken them: But Mr. Kitley offered in her
presence (if it should be demanded) to bring his Mother and Wife to testify
the same.

William Ducket Esquire a Member of the House, informs, That one Henry Baker of
Chippenham in the County of Wilts, coming from Market with one John Woodman of
Kelloway in the same County, the Thursday before the Fire began in London, they
had some discourse about the buying of a yoke of fat Bullocks, wherein they
differed; because Woodman, who was to sell them, was desired to keep them a
while in his hands: But the said Woodman denied so to do, for that as he
alleged, he could not stay in the Country till that time which Baker would
have them delivered to him in; and being asked whither he was going, he refused
to tell: Asking what had he to do to make that question; But riding a little
further, the said Woodman expressed these words, You are brave Blades at
Chippenham, you made Bonfires lately for beating the Dutch; But since you
delight in Bonfires, you shall have your Bellies full of them ere it be long:
Adding, that if he lived one week longer, he should see London as sad a London
as ever it was since the World began. And in some short time after, he should
see as bloody a time as ever was, since England was England. This discourse was
not much taken notice of at that time it was spoken. But when the City of
London was Burnt, the said Henry Baker gave this Information to the said Mr.
Ducket, and thereupon he issued out his Warrant to apprehend Woodman, but he
was gone out of the Country, and cannot be heard of since.

Robert Hubert of Roan in Normandy, who acknowledged that he was one of those
that Fired the House of Mr. Farryner a Baker in Pudding-Lane, from whence the
Fire had its beginning, confessed, that he came out of France with one Stephen
Piedelou, Piedlou in French, signifies wolves-foot, in English, a Right name
for a Popish Incendiary.
about four months before the Fire, and went into Sweden with him, where he
also staid with him as his Companion four months, and then they came together
into England in a Swedish Ship called the Skipper, where he staid on board with
the said Piedelou till that Saturday night, in which the Fire brake out. When
Piedelou taking him out of the Ship, carried him into Pudding-Lane, and he
being earnest to know whither he would carry him? he would not satisfy him
till he had brought him to the place, and then he told him, that he had brought
three Balls, and gave him one of them to throw into the house. And he would
have been further satisfied in the design, as he said, before he would execute
it: But Piedelou was so impatient that he would not hear him, and then he did
the Fact, which was, That he put a Fire-Ball at the end of a long Pole, and
lighting it with a piece of March, he put it in at a Window The Alehouse in
Buttolphs Lane joining to Mr. Farrine^s House, was the place to which Piedelou
brought Hubert, and he put in the Fire ball through an Hole broken in the Wall,
which he mistaking for a Window, made the Relation to be suspected.
and staid till he saw the House in a flame. He confessed that there were Three
and twenty Accomplices, whereof Piedelou was the Chief.

Mr. Graves a French Merchant living in St. Mary Axe, Informed this Committee,
that he had known Hubert ever since he was four years old, and has ever
observed him to be a person of a mischievous inclination, and therefore fit for
any villainous enterprise; And because of his knowledge he had of him, he went
to visit him in Poison, where when he saw him, he could not but commisorate the
condition whereinto he had brought himself. And for his better discovery of the
Fact, he told him the said Hubert, that he did not believe he had done that of
which he confessed himself guilty. To which Hubert replied, Yes Sir, I am
guilty of it, and have been brought to it by the instigation of Monsieur
Piedelou; but not out of any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of
Reward which he promised me upon my Return into France.

It is observable, that this miserable creature who confessed himself to the
Committee to be a Protestant, was a Papist, and died so. And as for the
aforesaid Piedelou, the said Mr. Graves informed, that he had a full knowledge
of him, and knew him to be a very Deboist Person, and apt to any Wicked Design.
Moreover, for a clear conviction of the Guilt of the aforesaid Hubert, Mr.
Lowman, the Keeper of the White-Lion Prison, was appointed to set him upon a
horse, and to go with him, and see if he could find out the place where he
threw the Fire-Ball. And what followed thereupon, appears by:

Mr. Lowmans Certificate concerning the Behavior of the said Robert Hubert, at
the place where the Fire began, when carried thither.

IN obedience to an Order directed to me, from the Honorable Committee of the
House of Commons, then sitting in the Speakers Chamber of the second of
October, 1666. I did carry Robert Hubert to St. Katherines-Tower by Water, to
let me know the place where the Swedish Ship lay, that brought him and other
Frenchmen from Stockholm, and he brought me to the Dock over against Mr.
Corsellis, his Brew House, and did then verify to me, and Mr. Corsellis, That
the Ship lay there, until such time as he with Mr. Piedelou and others did go
and set fire to a House. And this Hubert did then further say, That Mr.
Piedelou did fix two Fireballs to a long Pole, and put them into a Window; and
that he the said Robert Hubert did fire one in the same manner, and put it in
at the same VVindow. But with all the inquiry and diligence that I could use, I
could neither find nor hear of any such Vessel. And from thence I carried the
said Robert Hubert to Tower Hill, and did then desire him to show me the House
that they did fire, and he said, That it was near the Bridge. So we went along
Thames Street toward the Bridge; but before we came to the Bridge, the said
Robert Hubert said, That the House was up there (pointing with his hand up
Pudding-lane;) So I bid him go to the place, and he went along the Bricks and
Rubbish, and made a stand. Then did I ask one Robert Penny, a VVine-Porter,
which was the Bakers House? and he told me, That was the House where the
aforesaid Robert Hubert stood. So I went to Robert Hubert and stood by him, and
turned my back toward the Bakers House, and demanded of him, which House it
was that he fired, (directing to other Houses contrary to that House:) But he
turning himself about, said, This was the House (pointing to the Bakers House)
that was first fired. Then by reason of his lameness I set him on a Horse, and
carried him to several other places, but no other place would he acknowledge;
but rode back again to the Bakers House, and said again, That that was the
House (pointing at the Bakers House) And this I do humbly certify to this
Honorable Committee.

Be me John Lowman, Keeper of his Majesty's County-Goal for Surry. IT being
intimated to the Committee, That notwithstanding the Confession of the said
Hubert, it was confidently reported the Fire in the forementioned Farryners
house began by accident: The Committee therefore sent for him the said Farryner
before them, who being examined, said, That it was impossible any Fire should
happen in his House by accident; for he had after Twelve of the Clock that
night gone through every Room thereof, and found no Fire, but in one Chimney,
where the Room was paved with Bricks, which Fire he diligently raked up in
Embers. He was then asked, whether no Window or Door might let in wind to
disturb those Coals? He affirmed there was no possibility for any wind to
disturb them: and that it was absolutely set on fire of purpose.

Note, That this Hubert was some time after Tried, Condemned and Executed for
this Fact, and at his Death did acknowledge and own the doing thereof, and that
he was instigated thereunto by Monsieur Piedelou as aforesaid.

Dawes Weymensel Esquire one of his Majesty* Justices of the Peace, informed, That
he saw a man apprehended in the time of the Fire, near the Temple, with his
Pockets stuffed with combustible matter, made of Flax, Tow, and suchlike
materials.

Doctor John Packer informs, that he saw a Person in the time of the Fire,
throw some combustible matter into a Shop in the Old Bailey, which he thinks was
the Shop of an Apothecary; and that immediately thereupon he saw a great smoke,
and smelt a smell of Brimstone. The Person that did this immediately ran away;
but upon the outcry of the People he was taken by the Guards.

Mr. Randal, Mr. Haslem, and Mr. Humphrey Bowyer, do all agree, That they saw a
person flinging something into a House near St. Antholines Church; and that
thereupon the House was on fire, and the smoke thereof infested the adjacent
Houses. And when this was done, there was No fire near the place.

Mr. Michael March, an Officer in the Trained Bands in a Company of Sir Richard
Browns, apprehended a Walloon in the time of the Fire, at the Nags-head in
Leaden-hall-Street, with an Instrument like a dark Lanthorn, made (as is
conceived) to lay a Train of Powder, and it was tilled with Gunpowder. There
were two more of the same Nation in his company. They being asked to what use
they employed the same Instrument, would give no Account thereof.

Newton Killingworth Esquire informed, That he apprehended a person during the Fire
about whom he found much combustible matter, and certain black things of a long
figure, which he could not endure to hold in his hands, by reason of their
extreme heat. This Person was so surprised at first, that he would not answer
to any question; But being on his way to White Hall, he acted the part of a
Madman, and so continued while he was with him.

Sir John Maynard, a Member of this House, affirms, That he had some of that
combustible matter in his hands; and though it were in its natural substance,
and unfired, yet the heat of it was scarcely to be endured by the touch.

Mr. Freeman of Southwark Brewer (whose House was lately fired) informs, That
on the day his House was fired (about a quarter of an hour before that
happened) a Paper with a Ball of Wildfire, containing near a pound weight
wrapped in it, was found in the Nave of a Wheel, in a Wheelers-yard, where lay
a great quantity of Timber. How his House was fired, he knows not; but this
he affirmed to the Committee, That it could not be by accident, because there
had not been any Candle or Fire in the Housewhere the Hay lay, that whole day;
and that the Hay being laid in very dry, and before Midsummer, could not
possibly be set on fire within it self. Moreover he said. That the Hay-loft was
on fire on the top of the House, and that the Fire spread from the one end of
the Roof to another in an instant.

Mr. Richard Harwood informs, That being near the Feathers Tavern by St. Paul's,
upon the fourth of September, he saw something through a grate in a Cellar,
like Wildfire, by the sparkling and spitting of it, he could judge it to be no
other: Whereupon he gave notice of it to some Soldiers that were near the
place, who caused it to be quenched.

I had Order from the Committee to acquaint you, That we traced several Persons
apprehended upon strong Suspicion (during the Fire) to the Guards, but could
not make further discovery of them.

Thus far was the Report: What follows was given in to the Committee, but not
by them Reported to the House at that time.

A Letter from a Person of Credit to the Chairman of the said Committee.
SIR,
HEaring that you are Chairman to the Committee for examining the Firing of
London, I thought good to acquaint you with this Information that I have
received.

William Champneys a Hatband-maker, now living upon Horslydown, was upon
Tuesday-morning, September the fourth 1666, in Shoe-lane, and there met with a
Constable who had apprehended a Frenchman, whom he took firing a House there
with Fireballs, and charged the said Champneys to assist him; who carried the
said Frenchman to Salisbury Court, hoping there to have found a Justice; but
finding that Place burning down, returned into Fleet Street, who was presently
called upon by the Commander of the Lifeguard, to know what the matter was.
The Constable told him, He had apprehended a Frenchman firing a House in
Shoe-lane; he examined the Person and committed him to the Guard, and told the
Constable he would secure him; and carried him along with him. The Constable
asked him whether he should go along with him to give in his Evidence? He
replied, That he had done enough, and might go home. But what became of the
Frenchman he knows not.

Your humble Servant, S. G.


In a Letter from Ipswich, directed, For the Honorable Sir Robert Brook, it is
intimated, That about the 30th of August 1666, one of the Constables of Cotton
in Harismer Hundred, being about the survey of that Town about Hearth money,
was told by one Mr. Will am Thompson, a Roman Catholic in that Town, That
though time, were like to besad, yet if he found any cause to change his
Religion, he would see he should not want: And further said to him, What will
you say, if you hear that London is Burnt?

The Affdavits touching a Frenchman that said, There were Three hundred of them
engaged in Firing the City.

The Informations of Richard ^ou^d of St. Giles in the Fields, Ironmonget;
William Cotes, Samuel Page, Francis Cogny, Edmond Dakins, and Richard Pardoe,
taken the 8th day of September. 1666, by Sir Justlnian Lewen Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Country of Middlesex, upon Oath, as
follows:

RIchard Bound says, That upon Tuesday night last about twelve or one of the
clock, there was a Frenchman brought by the Watch to this Informants Fathers
house, being at the sign of the White-Hart in King Street, taken as a
suspicious person: The said person being questioned by them, Whether he was not
one of those that Fired the City, or had a hand therein, or any privity or
knowledge of any that had designed the same? or words to that effect: The said
person answered a great while in a perverse manner, quite different from the
question. But being further pressed to tell the truth, and being told, that if
be were guilty, it would be the only way to save his life: He did at first
obstinately deny, that he knew any thing of any Plot. Whereupon a young man
took the Prisoner aside to the end of the Room, and after some private
discourse between them, they both returned to this Informant and the rest of
the Company, and the said young man spoke openly to us, in the hearing of the
Prisoner, That the said Frenchman and Prisoner had confessed, There were Three
hundred Frenchmen that were in a Plot or Conspiracy to fire the City. Upon
which this Informant and others spoke to the said Frenchman in these words or
to the same effect: Well Monsieur, you have done very well to confess what you
have done, and no doubt but you may have your Pardon, if you will confess all
you know of this Plot: And thereupon further asked him, Are there no more than
Three hundred persons in the said Plot? He answered, There are no more than
Three hundred persons. Then we inquired who they were, and how he came to know
they were Three hundred? To which he would give no direct Answer, but put it
off with other extravagant discourse. And being asked, why he came to St. Giles
Parish (where he was apprehended?) He told a Story, that he came from
Islington-Fields, where his Masters Goods were: But the Goods were now removed,
but he could not tell whither; and that his Master bid him go up and down the
Fields, but would not declare upon what occasion, or for what end he was so to
do: And being asked whether there were Three hundred persons engaged in this
Design or Plot? He replied, That there were Three hundred engaged in it.

The several Informations of William Cotes of Cow-lane of London Painter, of
Samuel Page of St. Giles in the Fields Weaver, of Edmund Dakins of St. Giles
aforesaid, Bookseller; of Francis Cockney of St. Andrews Holbourn; of Richard
Pardoe Victualler, taken upon Oath, etc. tend to the Confirmation of the
foregoing Relation.

An Extract of a Letter from Heydleburgh, in the Palatinate, September the 29th
1666.
SIR,
YOurs of the Sixth current came on Wednesday to me, and brought me the ill
tidings of the Burning of London, constantly expected and discoursed of amongst
the Jesuits to my knowledge for these Fifteen years last past, as to Happen
this Year. In which they do also promise to themselves and others, The
Introduction of the Public Exercise of the Catholic Religion.


This Letter was sent to Mr. Alton, who lives in New-Gravel-lane in Shadwell,
who negotiates the business of the Palatinate, and will produce the Original,
if there be occasion.

The Information of John Chishul Schoolmaster in Enfield.

Upon Friday, Aug. 31. Mrs. St. George and her eldest Daughter Susanna S.
George, both Popish Recusants, came to visit Mrs. Rebecca Eves Widow, at her
house in Enfield; where speaking concerning the Session of Parliament drawing
nigh, Mrs. St. George told her, That some would hereafter be called to an
account for a plot. Being asked for what? She told her in her ear, For Burning
the City. Mrs Eves afterward hearing of the firing of London (and going to a
place where she might behold it) met with Mrs. Susanna St. George, and (amongst
other discourse) told her how much her Mothers Words, which she spoke the
Friday before, did run in her thoughts; which she repeated to her Daughter: who
made this Reply, That her Mother was very apt to talk, and that sae bid been
fain to keep her Mother within doors during the Fire, fearing lest she should
talk.

After this (during the Fire) Mrs Eves mer with Mrs. Cook, another Popish
Recusant, and of the same Family, to whom she also related Mrs. St. George her
words; who made this return, That she was a worthy woman to keep Counsel.

Also the Lady St. George at Enfield in the Lord of Lincoln's House, declared
to Mrs. Rebecca Eves of the said Town, That within a few days the City of
London would be laid in Ashes. This was spoken about two days before the Fire
happened.

Mrs. Eves of Enfield her Examination before Mr. Jolliff and Mr. Marvel,

December. 20. 1666. concerning Mrs. St. George.

MRs. Rebecca Eves of Enfield; three or four days, or within a week before the
Fire, receiving a Visit in her own House from Mrs. St. George (amongst other
Discourses) Mrs. St. George akt her what News she heard? and, if she knew when
the Parliament sat? Mrs. Eves replied she thought shortly. The other asked, If
she heard of any that were to be called in question before the Parliament? Mrs.
Eves said, About what? Mrs. St. George said, About a I lot. Mrs. Eves asked,
What Plot? Mrs. St. George answered. About Firing the City Mrs. Eves said, I
hope God will preservs the City, but people use not to be questioned before the
fact be committed. So the Discourse was waved for that time.

At the time of the Fine, Mrs. Eves went out to look toward the Fire, and
mentioning Mrs. St. George, one in the Company replied behind her (but she
cannot certainly fix the person) A prime Woman, to keep counsel! After the
Fire, Mrs. St. George her Daughter came to Mrs Eves, who asked her if she
remembered what her Mother had said? She said, My Mother is such a Woman, she
will speak what she thinks. Afterward she said, That she had much ado to keep
her Mother in at the time of the Fire, lest she should speak some things she
should be questioned for.

At the first Discourse, Mrs. Eves, her Daughter, and others of her Family were
present. Mr. St. George, his Wife and Family, have since left Enfield. They are
all great Papists, and there are many more in the Neighborhood.

A Letter directed and sent by the Post to Mr. Samuel Thurlton in
Leicestershire, from My Friend, (...) a person unknown, as follows; Dated
October 16. 1666.

YOur presence is now more necessary at London, than where you are, that you
may determine how to dispose of your Estate in Southwark: For it is determined
by Humane Counsel (if not frustrated by Divine Power) that the Suburbs will
shortly be destroyed. Your capacity is large enough to understand. Proceed as
your Genius shall instruct you.

Cave, Cave, Fuge. Vale.

A True Relation from Essex.

SAturday the first of September 1666, the day before the Fire in London, came
one Urmstraw from Ireland, with a Letter from thence to one Esquire Holcroft at
East-Ham in Essex (being related to that Family by Marriage) where he supped.
After which he asked the Esquire, If he had heard any thing of the Firing of
London? who answered, No. But Urmstraw said, He would shortly, For it was or
would be so that Night. The Esquire answered, If it were, he hoped it might be
quenched again, as it had been no any a time. But Urmstraw answered, No, it
would not be quenched: For it should be said of it, as of Troy, repeating a
Latin Verse, Nunc Seges est ubi ^roja suit, That Now Corn grows where Troy
stood This Discourse was managed pleasantly by him, after which they went to
their Beds. And in the morning this Urmseram inquires carnestly, Whether they
had heard of the Firing of London that Night? They answered, Not But he prayed
them to send one of the Family out so inquire, and doubtless they would hear of
it: Upon which a Messenger was sent, who brought in Word from a man that
traveled upon the Road, That it was on Fire indeed. After Dinner this Urmstraw
desires his Horse to be saddled, that he might be gone. The Esquire entreats
him to stay till next morning: But he answered, If I should stay, I should
sleep no more this night than I did the last: Therefore I would go see London
before its quite burned: For I shall never see it more.

Sunday morning the Fine being begun in London? a person coming from Deptford,
when he came to Barnaby-street-end in Southwark, hears a Woman cry but against
a Frenchman for throwing Fire balls, he runs after him, and lays hold of him:
He asked him what Commission he had for so doing? He answered, That
his-Commission was in his Chest. The People coming in, they searched him, and
found Fireballs in his Pockets. He was delivered to the Guard in Southwark,
but heard of no more.

A Citizen being burnt out of his House, had hired a Lodging in Queens-street
in Covent Garden; and going up Holborn (there being a Crowd of people) steps in
amongst them, and hears a Woman say, that she had a hand in Firing the City.
The People asked her, whether she were an Anabaptist? She said No: Are you an
Independent? She said No: Are you a Presbyterian? She said No: Are you a Roman
Catholic? to which she would give no answer. The Citizen asked her, but
Mistress had you a hand in Burning the City? She answered, what would you have
me say? I have confessed it already, and do deserve to Dye for it: this she
said with great trembling, and seemed to be much troubled. The Citizen enquired
for a Constable, the People replied there was one gone for, But a Gallant
comes, and takes her by the Arm, and leads her away, saying he would have her
examined, and forth with another Gallant closes with him, and they both
carried her to the Griffin Tavern in Holborn. The Citizen follows them, to see
the result of the business. But, they, with the Master of the House, shut out
the Company (all but the Citizen, supposing him to be one of their own
Companions) but asking one the other concerning him, and finding him not of
them, put him out again. Whereupon he goes to the next Company of Soldiers,
and inquires for their Captain, who replied, he was not there, but told him,
Yonder is my Lord Craven, unto whom the Citizen repaired, and acquainted his
Lordship, That there was a Woman apprehended (and rescued by a couple of
Gallants) that had Confessed she had a hand in Burning the City, and was at
such a Tavern. Whereupon the Lord Craven calls to a Captain in the street, and
ordered him to go with that Man and apprehend the Woman that he should direct
him to; Whereupon he goes with the Citizen, and takes her with the first
Gallant, who stood up highly in her defense, and carries them both to an
Alehouse on the other side of the way. The Citizen perceiving that nothing
would be done with her, leaves his name with the Captain, and where he might be
found, but was never called for to justify the words spoken by her.

A Woman standing in White-Chappel with a Company about her, was asked what the
matter was? She said, that she met two young men in that place, and asked them
how it was with the Fire: They answered, Its now almost out, if it can be kept
so, but the Rogues renew it with their Fireballs. Ay says another Woman, Young
men, if you have a heart to it, you may be hired to throw Fireballs too; For I
know where twenty were hired yesterday to throw them. It was asked her, what was
become of the Woman that spoke thus? She answered, That she had apprehended her
and delivered her to the under Beadle of White-Chappel-Parish. The Woman
falling under the accusation (not being able to deny it) there being many
Witnesses at that time that heard it: She was delivered to Sir John Robinson,
but heard of no more.

One from France writes to his Correspondent in London, to know the truth of
what was muttered in Paris, Whether London were laid in Ashes or no. The Letter
being dated a week before the Fire began.

From Surry in or near Darkin, a Person in ordinary habit (who was yet observed
to take place of all the Nobility and Gentry among the Papists) seeing the
People of Darkin mourn for the Burning of the City, he spoke slightingly of it,
telling them, They should have something else to trouble themselves for, and
that shortly Darkin should laid be as low as London. Whereupon the People made
at him, and one Mr. Howard a great Papist rescues him, and sends him away in
his Coach to London. This was deposed before Sir Adam Brown, a Justice of Peace
and a Member of Parliament.

These following Relations (for substance) were delivered to Sir Robert Brooks,
Chairman of the Committee, a little before the Prorogation of the Parliament,
and others are ready to be justified.
A true Relation made by one of the Grand Jury, at Hicks Hall, at a general
Quarter Sessions, presently after the Fire in London.

THat near West-Smithfield in Cheek Lane, there was a man taken in the very Act
of firing a House, by the Inhabitants and Neighbors; and carrying him away
through Smithfield, to have him before a Justice for the fact committed, The
Kings Life Guard perceiving it, made up unto them, and demanded their Prisoner
from them; but they refused to let him go. The Lifeguard men told them, That
he was one of the Kings Servants, and said, We will have him; and thereupon
they drew out their Swords and Pistols, and rescued him out of the peoples
hands by force of Arms.

A Bill of Indictment was brought against him, and two or three Witnesses did
swear unto it, and the Bill was found by the Grand Jury, who did carry it to
the Old Bailey, and presented to the Lord Chief Justice; but it came to no
further Trial, nor was ever seen after at the Old Baily, so far as this person
upon his best enquiry could ever hear or learn.

Concerning a Housekeeper at So-ho, who fired his own Dwelling House.

FIrst he secured all his Goods in his Garden, and then went in and fired his
House; which when he had done, he endeavored to get away out at his Fore Door.
A Neighbor demanded of him who had fired his House? He answered, The Devil.
Upon that, his Neighbor bid him stand, or he would run his Halbert into his
guts. His answer was, If you do, there are enough left behind me to do the
work. Whereupon he was secured, and a Bill of Indictment brought against him,
and about three Witnesses did swear to it, and his Son came in a Witness
against him, who was demanded by the Foreman, What he could say as to the
firing of his Fathers House? He said, that his Father did fire it with a
Fire-ball. It was demanded of him, whether he did fire it above stairs, or
below? He answered, Above-stairs. The Bill was likewise found; but the
Petty-Jury being too much influenced and overawed by the L. C. J. K. did not
find him guilty.

Humphrey Ayrs of White-Lion-Court in Barbican Porter is ready to depose upon
Oath, That on the third of September 1666, being the Monday, at which time the
Fire was as far off as Walbrook, he coming to Budge-Row, and no Fire near
that he could perceive, on a sudden he saw two houses about the middle of
Budge-Row, betwixt St. Antholines Church and Walbrook break out in a light fire
in their middle stories, before ever the tops of the said Houses caught or were
touched with fire, so that they burnt downwards till the Roof fell into the Fire.

The like is attested by Mr. Morton a Goldsmiths near the end of Foster-Lane,
who averrs, that the people that dwelt in Aldersgate, having removed their
Goods and abandoned the same, he on a sudden saw a fire in one of the Rooms,
which must needs be set on fire as well because there was no other fire near
thereabouts at that time, nor for many hours after, as also for that it began
not on the top but inwardly, and so flamed forth through the very stones; But
by his calling out for help it was for that time Quenched, though afterward
fired again; It being so convenient for their purpose, who designed to have
carried on the flames further up Aldersgate Street, though in that respect God
prevented them.

In the same manner A Person of eminent Quality, and another very worthy
Gentleman both then of the Temple, have attested, that in that fire in 1666,
they saw the fire break out at the Temple when no fire was near, nor could they
possibly make any reasonable apprehension how from the common Conflagration any
fire should reach thither, or catch at the place where they observed it to
break out.

A Maid was taken in the Street with two Fireballs in her lap; Some did demand
of (...) where she had them? She said, One of the Kings Lifeguard threw them
into her Lap: She was asked (...) had not caused him to be apprehended? She
said, that she knew not what they were. She was indicted for this, and the Bill
found against her, and turned over to the Old Bailey, but no prosecution upon it.

In the time of the Fire a Constable took a Frenchman firing a House, seized on
him, and going to a Magistrate with him, met with His Royal Highness the Duke
of York, who asked the reason of the tumuit: One told him that a Frenchman was
taken firing a House; his Highness called for the man, who spoke to him in
French. The Duke asked, Who would attest it? The Constable said, I took him in
the Act, and I will attest it. The Duke took him into his custody, and said, I
will secure him. But he was heard of no more.

On Monday the third of September, there was a Frenchman taken firing a House;
and upon searching of him, Fireballs were found about him. At which time four
of the Lifeguard rescued the Frenchman, and took him away from the People,
after their usual manner in the whole time of the Fire.

One Mr. Belland a Frenchman, living at Maribone, who bought great store of
Pastboard for a considerable time before the fire in the City of London, to the
quantity of twenty gross in one Shop, and much more elsewhere, was asked by a
Citizen, What he did with all that Pastboard? He answered that he made
Fireworks for the Kings pleasure. The Citizen asked him, What does the King
give you? He replied, Nothing, only I have Respects at Court: The Citizen
said, Take heed, Mr. Belland, you do not expend your estate, and then lose your
Respects at Court, for you are at a great charge. Belland answered, Sir, do you
think this a great matter? I use all this my self; But if you did see all the
great quantities I have made elsewhere, in three several places, three, four,
and five miles off, you would say something. Another time, the Stationer with
whom he dealt for Pastboard, being at his House in Maribone, and wondering at
the many thousands of Fire Works that lay piled up of several sorts, he said,
Sir, do you wonder at this? if you should see the quantity that I have made
elsewhere by other men, you would WONDER INDEED.

The Sunday before the Fire began, this Belland came to the Shop where he was
wont to buy his Pastboard, but the Stationer being not there, he desired a
Citizen (the Stationers Neighbor) to speak to him, and to let him know that he
had much wronged him in disappointing him of the four gross of Pastboard which
he should have had of him and said that he should not do his work by the time
and that if he had it not by Tuesday night, it would come too late, he should
have no occasion for it after that (which was the Tuesday night before the the
Fire) Mr. Belland (said the Citizen) what is the reason of your have? Have you
any Show suddenly before the King? At which he blushed, and would give no
answer. Says the Citizen, What kind of Fireworks do you make, only such as
will crack and run? Belland answered, I make of all sorts; some that will burn
and make no crack at all, but will fly up in in a pure body of flame, higher
then the top of Paul's, and waver in the Air. Says the Citizen, Mr. Belland,
when you make your Show, shall I see it? Yes, said Belland, I promise you, and
gave him his hand upon it. Which Citizen in the time of the Fire, being upon
the Thames in a Boat, saw, to his great amazement, sundry bodies of fire,
burning above the Fire of the Houses as high again as Paul's wavering in the
Air, directly according to Bellands description.

And after the Burning of the City, the Stationer and the other Citizen agreed
to go to Maribone, to speak with this Belland; and by the way met with his two
Maids and his Boy: And having some knowledge of them, asked for young Mr.
Belland, who told them he was not at home, neither knew they where he was. But
the Citizens observing that they carried with them Rabbets and Capons ready
dressed, concluded, they were going to him, and told them so. Whereat, they were
surly and bad them go look him, for they would not tell them where he was. Upon
that, the Citizens resolved to follow them, and did, till they came to
Whitehall. The Servants went up stairs and down stairs, on purpose to have lost
them, but could not, for they kept close to them. And at last, one of the Maids
went to a door and knocked, Crying out, They were dogged by two men, that they
could not be rid of; With that young Mr. Belland opened the door saying to one
of the Citizens, Sir your Servant, how do you do? One of them answered* Both I
and many Thousand Families more are the worse for you; for you under pretense
of making Fireworks for the King, have Destroyed a Famous City, and Ruined a
Noble People. To which Belland replies. I make nothing but Innocent Things,
that will do no harm; for which I have a Pattent from the King. But the Citizen
answered, If the King gave you a Pattent, it was but for your self: Who
answered, No. Then said the Citizen, What made you then to employ so many men,
in so many places? No, said Belland, I set no man to work, neither know I any
Man that makes of them, but my self; though he had often before said otherwise.
While they were thus discoursing, Old Belland looks from under the Hanging,
Sir, said he, I hear you charge my Son with Suspicion of Burning the City, I
pray you speak lower (casting his Eyes about, fearing the Ladies passing by
might hear) and said, My Son does nothing but what he has a Pattent from the
King for, and shall have an Order to S^e any man, that shall accuse him. And he
said, My Son is no Prisoner, but Lodged here to prevent him from the Rage of
the Common People. Well said the Citizens, You must give an Account for what
you have done. And so they shut the Door upon them.

A House in Shooe-lane fired by a Frenchman taken in the Act, yet discharged.

ON Tuesday the 4th. of September 1666. A Frenchman was taken for Firing the
Turn-broach of the Temples house, in Robin-hood-court in Shooe-lane where he
lodged. This Court was full of pitiful rotten houses, and he did the fact early
in the morning before ever any fire was come over Fleet bridge or cross the
Ditch; but the woman being up and perceiving it just as he was going forth,
cried out to one Mr. Nicasius a neighbor who was then in that Court, saying,
This Rogue has fired my house, and withal came running out of the house into
the Court after him, thereupon Mr. Nicasius seized the Fellow, talked French to
him, searched his pockets and found a writing purporting to be Indentures of
Covenant for him and another to serve one Glowde Lantee of the Parish of St.
Leonard Shoreditch French-fring-maker for 10 l. per Annum wages, dated 10th. of
Jan. 1665. Attested by John Underwood public Notary and Joshuah Thirk^ll his
servant. It Is uncertain whether his name was Martin de Humet, or Andrew
Summers, because they were both parties to the same Indented Articles, but it is
more probable it was de Humet because the same is a French, whereas Summers is
an English name. This person being so taken in the Fact, was asked if he were a
Frenchman which he acknowledged, the people would presently have used violence
to him, but Mr. Nicasius with much ado persuaded them to the contrary* and got
their leave to be patient that he might carry him before the Duke of York whom
he found with his Guard about Salisbury Court, to him he presented the French
man, and related the Fact with its apparent circumstances in English* on which
the Duke called one of the Horse Guard, and delivered him unto him, who rode
away with him triumphantly toward Westminster. The Mounsieurs about the Duke
making a great noise at his delivery, but the next morning Mr. Nicasius
enquired what became of the Frenchman, and the people told him he was let go,
nor has he since been heard of by Mr. Nicasius though he has used means to
inquire and find him out. The Turn-broaches house consisted only of two Rooms,
the uppermost of which was the Chamber in which this Frenchman lay, and which
he had fired, and carried away the key with him, but the people perceiving it
so soon, broke open the Chamber, and had happily quenched the same before Mr.
Nicasius came back from carrying him before the Duke of York.

The same Mr. Nicasius had a fair brick house wherein he dwelt, being the
furthest house on the right hand in Plow yard in Fetter-lane adjoining to
Thavies-Inn Garden, this house on the wednesday was by ill Council ordered to
be blown up, and Powder brought to that purpose, which if it had been done, the
fire had undoubtedly proceeded much further: But upon his representing the
unreasonableness thereof to the King, and that if by playing with the engine on
an house hard by that was on fire, they could so damp the flames that they
might not seize his house, then the same being brick would screen and preserve
other paper Buildings behind it, his Majesty was pleased to order that course
should be taken, and thereby that house and diverse others were saved, Though in
Mr. Nicasius occasional absence for a very short time people got into his house
with strange pickaxes, and battle-axes, etc. Wherewith they broke open his
doors, and (besides what they robbed him of,) brake down all his windows, and
threw a press Cupboard, Pictures and other combustibles into the fire to
increase it, and endeavored to break down the Turret on the top of the house
and did actually break some part of it, which could not be but on purpose to
let in the fire and that it might the sooner take hold on such his house, which
if it had done it is most probable all Holborn had been destroyed.

The Information of Thomas Middleton Chyrurgeon, of St. Brides, London.

I The said Thomas Middleton do hereby certify, that upon the Sunday in the
afternoon (the day wherein the dreadful fire brake out in Pudding lane which
consumed the City) hearing the general outcry, that the City was fired by
Papists and French, I repaired to the top of a Church steeple near the Three
Cranes in the Vintrey, where my self and several others observed the motion of
the Fire for two or three hours together, and we all took notice, that the Fire
did break forth out of several houses, when the houses which were then burning
were at a good distance from them every way, and more particularly, I saw the
fire break out from the inside of Lawrence-Pountney Steeple, when there was no
fire near it. These and such like Observations begat in me a Persuasion, that
the Fire was maintained by design. Upon Monday I repaired again into the City,
and found as the day before, that the Fire did break forth in fresh houses at a
great distance one from another. And as I was returning home, passing through
Wailing-street by a Tobacco Merchants house, I saw the Master of the house come
down stairs, driving a young fellow before him, saying to him, You Rogue, do
you come to Rob me? what did you do in my Garret? or words to that purpose, and
pushed him out of doors: All which I observed, and he seemed to be a Frenchman:
He was a short black fellow of about 22 years of Age: and as soon as he was out
of the house, he having a loose coat on, in a way of Privacy, Shuffles
something under his Coat, whereupon I laid hold of him, and said, Sirrah, what
have you there? the fellow replied, What is that to you, the Master of the
House knows me? Upon that I asked the Mr. of the House whether he knew the
fellow, he answered, he knew him not. Whereupon I searched the fellow, and
found a horn of powder about him, and as soon as the powder was discovered, he
sell a rubbing his hands, they being all black with powder: He had also about
him a book entitled, The Jewish Government. I charged him that he was a
Frenchman, because he spoke broken English; but he denied it, and did much
Vaunt himself. There coming a Constable by with his staff, I Required him to
carry him to Prison, and I would assist him; So we conveyed him to Old
Bridewel, and by the way, the People were ready to kill him, calling him
French-Raskal. I prayed them to forbear, for Justice would give him his Reward.
I told the fellow he would be hanged: he made slight of it, saying, If I die my
Soul stall be Saved, but yours shall be Damned. And when he was put into
Bridewel, I desired that he might be secured and none suffered to speak with
him, till he were Examined before a Magistrate, because the Tobacco-Merchants
House was presently Burned upon it. But so it happned, on the next day that the
fire came on and consumed my House and Goods, so that I was forced with my
Family to fly into the Country, and what became of the Fellow I know not, Old
Bridewel being burnt also. And understanding that the Parliament has appointed
a Committee to enquire after the Actors in, and Fomenters of that Terrible
Fire, I thought good to inform the Honorable Committee thereof, that they may
send for the Keeper of the said Bridewel, to know what became of the Fellow,
that he might receive Justice according to his demerit. Thus much I thought my
self obliged to do, as in duty bound to God and my Country. All which I am
ready to affirm upon Oath, when I shall be thereunto called.

A further True Relation made by the said Thomas Middleton, concerning some
occurrences in the great Fire of London.
THat upon Monday the 3d. of Sept. 1666, being next day after that dreadful
fire began, the Duke of York being at Fleet-bridge in the afternoon, and the
fire not being then come to Ludgate, did declare that those Houses adjoining
upon the bridge should be pulled down the next morning, amongst which was the
said Tho. Middletons, who thereupon endeavored that night to get Carts to
carry away his Goods, and had got a Country Cart and loaded it with Goods, but
by that time the same was done, there was a strong Guard set a Cross the
street, from Shoe-Lane to Salisbury-Court, which the said T. M. perceiving
caused the Cart to be driven up to Shoe-lane, and then he with other
Neighbors, (one of which was Mr. William Wheatly a Common Council-man)
repaired to the Captain of the Guard of Horse under the aforesaid Duke being
then in Salisbury-Court, whose name was Peter's, whom the said T. M. acquainted,
That dwelling on Fleet-bridge, and there being order given by the Duke that his
House amongst others should be pulled down next morning, He therefore prayed
that the man which had his load of goods in his cart in order to remove them,
might have liberty to pass and repass through the Guard to fetch the remaining
part of his goods, he having a large house and many loads in it, But the said
Captain peremptorily denied such his request, declaring that no cart should
pass, except there were an order showed from the Duke, whereas it was then
about 12 a Clock in the night, and the Duke at Whitehall, or some where else,
not easily to be met with, so that it was in possible to procure such an Order
so suddenly; whereupon the said T. M. earnestly desired that the cart might be
admitted to pass, and offered money for the same, and said that for as much as
the Capt. and his soldiers could not save his house, he hoped that they would
not be instrumental for the destroying of his goods, Adding that he thought he
might have some kindness showed him in such a difficult hour, for as much as
not long before he had voluntarily lent his Majesty Money. The man that owed
the Cart standing by all the while, when at last he saw it would not be
granted, said it was a very hard thing that when a man cannot save his House,
he should be hindered from saving his Goods. To which Captain Peter's answered,
why your Cart has carried one Load, which the man acknowledging, the Captain
replied, Then you have done enough, your spokes may be knocked out and your Cart
burnt: So with these unnatural and unchristian Replies Thomas Middleton returns
to his house where he was not long before some of those destroyers were got on
the top of it, throwing the Tiles and bricks down the stairs, so that the said
T. M. and his Family were forced to leave his house and most of his Goods to be
consumed.

He likewise further says, That within a little time after the flames were
over, he the said T. M. with his Son going near the ground where his house had
lately stood, saw a Man that bad took up a Musket that lay in the Ruins not
burnt, and as the said T. M. was coming toward him, he saw him take the
Musket, and break it, whereupon the said T. M. asked him wherefore he did so,
and the fellow replied, and said it was no matter if Thousands of them were
destroyed, or words to that purpose, upon which the said T. M. asked him what
he was that would destroy the Arms of the King? supposing they were some of the
Soldiers Arms, to which he replied that he did belong to a Major or Coll.
whose name the said T. M does not now remember, but T. M. did tell the said
Fellow that he was a Papist, which proved true, for the said T. M. and others
searching his pockets, found therein a Mass Book Printed in Latin, with a
particular Prayer for the Queen of Spain, etc. In the interim comes a Captain,
to whom the said T. M. made this Relation and delivered the man into his
Custody, who said he would carry him before the Committee that sat in the
Temple to examine such matters, but of the man or matter, the said T. M. never
heard more, save only about a year afterward the said T. M 's. Son (who was at
the taking of him as aforesaid) walking in the Strand at noon day the said
Fellow met him and without any provocation struck him withal his force upon the
head with a great stick or club, and then supposing he had knocked him down, ran
into Sommerset House and there sheltred himself.

Mr. Stewarts Information.
IN the time of the Fire, near Bridewell, there was a man sadly bemoaning the
great Loss he was like to sustain (the Fire being within five or six houses of
him) who did beseech the people for Gods sake, they having no Goods of their
own in danger, to help him throw out Trunks, Chests, Beds, etc. out at a
window, having procured two Carts or Wagons to carry them away. Whereupon I
ran into his House with several others, broke down his Windows, threw out his
Goods, and loaded the Carts; and there being some interval of time before the
return of the Carts, and seeing a Room wherein were many Books and loose Papers
(which seemed to be a Library) I went in and took down a Book, which proved to
be Ovid Metamorphosis, and while I was looking upon it, there came into the
same Room an Old Man of Low Stature, with a white Frock, who looked also on the
Book as it was in my hand; I took him in my mind to be some Groom come out of a
Stable, and thought him to be presumptuously foolish, supposing such a mean
like Old Man ignorant of that Language in which the book was written, it being
in Latin, but I spoke not to him: In the mean time, there brake sorth a Fire
amongst the Papers which were behind us, there being none in the Room but he
and I. Whereupon the rest of the people coming in, cried out, we had set the
Room on fire, and rushing in upon us, put out the fire with their Feet:
whereupon I took hold of the Old Man by the Buttons under the throat, and said,
How now Father, it must either be you or I must fire these Papers. There was a
small thing of a black matter, which looked like a piece of a Link burning,
which questionless set fire on the Papers, but it was immediately trod our. A
multitude of people thronged in; and when I said, How now my Father, and took
hold of him, he said, Parce mihi Domine: The people which did not understand
it, cried out, He is a Frenchman, kill him, and with pulling of him, his
Perriwig fell off; then appeared a Bald Skull, and under his Frock he had Black
Clothes, I think of Bishops Satin, whereupon he seemed to be a grave
Ecclesiastic Person. I had much a do to save him from the People, but at last
brought him before the Duke of York: we found in his Pocket a bundle of Papers
closed up with Wax like a Packet, which was delivered to the Duke of York. I
know not what was written in them, neither do I know what Countryman he was;
but methoughts he looked something Jesuit-like. This I am certain of, that when
I went into the Room there was no fire in it, and it was fired when there was
none but he and I in it, yet I cannot say I saw him do it, though I cannot but
suspect he did it, and the rather, because there were several houses untouched
betwixt this house, and where the fire was coming on, when the Papers in the
Library where thus on fire as I have related. What became of this fellow after
we had delivered him to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, I have not heard.

John Stewart.

NOt long after the Burning of London, Mr. Brook Bridges, a young Gentleman of
the Temple, as he was going to attend Divine Service in the Temple-Church, in a
Pew there found this following Paper, which immediately, either by himself or a
Relation of his, was delivered to Sir William Morris, one of his Majesty's
principal Secretaries of State; the Contents of the Paper are as follows:

A Warning to Protestants.
I Who have been a Papist from my Infancy, till of late; and in Zeal for their
horrid Principles, had too great a share in the Fireing of the City; And did
intend to do further mischief to the Protestants (of which I am now, and ever
shall be a Member) do upon abhorency of that Villainy, and Religion that has
moved me to it, declare to all Protestants the Approach of their sudden Ruin,
that it may be prevented, if it be not too late.

When I, together with other Papists, both French, Irish and English, fired the
City; others were employed to massacre the Protestants, we thinking thereby to
destroy the Heads of your Religion; but the Massacre was disappointed by the
Fear of him who was the chief Agent in this Villainy. And the Fire not having
done all its Work, they have often endeavored to fire the remaining part. They
intend likewise to land the French upon you: To whose Assistance they all
intend to come, and for that purpose are stored with Arms: And have so far
deceived the King, that they have the Command of most part of the Army and the
Seaports. The French intend to Land at Dover, that Garrison being most Papists,
And the Papists in England have express Command from Rome, to hasten their
business before the next Parliament, and to dispatch. Therefore as you love
your Lives and Fortunes, prevent vour Ruin, by removing all the Papists in
England, especially Colonel Leg from the Tower, and the Lord Douglass, and all
his Adherents and Soldiers from Dover, and by disarming all Papists. I have
such an abhorrancy, that I would willingly undergo any Punishment for it, and
declare my self openly, were I not assured that I could do you more good in
concealing my Name for the present. Delay not from following these Directions
as you love your Lives; And be not deceived by any Pretenses whatsoever.



Thus we see, that then, even presently after that dreadful Calamity, there
wanted not various proofs of its being contrived and carried on by Popish
Treachery: By what means these Informations were smothered, it is not my
business now to inquire; it is certain, had they been sufficiently taken notice
of, and encouraged, and due prosecution made thereupon, it might have prevented
many mischiefs which since happened: But we have now a more full discovery of
that villainous Intrigue from their own Mouths; for as I my self have more than
once heard them own and boast of the Exploit, so nothing can be more plain than
what Dr. Oaets has made out in his Depositions Sworn before that worthy and
since Marty'd Gentleman, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, on the 6th of September last,
Paragraph 34, To this effect:

That in July 1678, Richard Strange, the then last Provincial of the Jesuits,
did tell him, That their Society of Jesuits did get 14 thousand pounds in that
Fire in 66, and that he the said Strange, with three other Jesuits and a
Dominican Friar, all there named; designed, and were chief Instruments in
effcting the same; That they intended to have Burnt it sooner, viz. in Feb.
1664, but had not then got persons and things ready for Execution: That they
commonly met at the Green-Dragon at Puddle-Dock, and pretending themselves
Fifth-Monarchy-men, first drew in one Green a poor man, by furnishing him with
30l. to join in the Plot of Firing the City, and killing the King, who soon
after brought in 8 more of the same Gang; but at last some notice was taken of
their Design, and away the Jesuits are gone, leaving the poor silly seduced new
Brethren of the Fifth-Monarchy to suffer for their Roguery, and accordingly 8
of them were Executed in May 66, but never spoke a word of the said Fathers,
nor indeed could they, for they knew not their true Names, nor ever suspected
them to be Jesuits or Papists, whereupon the said Strange further said, That he
himself and the others returned again in June following, and fell again to
prosecute their Design, which had been carried on in the mean time by others of
their Society. In short, he said they got 50 or 60 Irish, and diverse French,
who were very faithful to ply the work, and got one Everard, who was chief
Keeper of their Fireworks, a place in the Kings Service, relating to the
public Ammunition, the better to color it; That himself by the Name of
Walker, and the said Fryaer, took a Lodging in Aug. 66. in Fanchurch-street,
that they might be at hand, it having before been resolved where they should
begin; That all things being thus prepared, one Neal of VVhite-Chappel, whose
charge it was to see the Fire carried on through Thames Street to the Tower,
called him up about 12 a Clock, and before he could make him ready, the Fire
was begun; That there was Fourscore or upwards employed therein as Servants by
the Society, and that they spent 700 Fireballs, and had others, both Men and
Women, attending to Plunder what they could, having a Warehouse in
VVild-street, and another at Somerset House, to receive what they so got, which
amounted to the value of 14000 pounds, as aforesaid, etc.

As for the Fifth-Monarchy-men that were Executed, mentioned by the said Strange
to Mr. Oats in this Discourse, It Is very observable what Account the Gazett
gave of their Trial.

It Is in the Gazett published on Monday April the 30th 1666. The words are
these.

At the Sessions in the Old Bailey, John Rathbone, an old Army-Colonel, William
Saunders, Henry Tucker, Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Miles, William Wescot,
and John Cole, (formerly Officers or Soldiers in the late Rebellion, were
Indicted for Conspiring the Death of his Majesty, and the overthrow of the
Government, having laid their Plot and Contrivance for the Surprizal of the
Tower, The Killing his Grace the Lord General, Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of
his Majesty's Tower of London, and Sir Richard Brown, and then to have declared
for an equal division of Lands, etc. The better to effect this Hellish design,
THE CITY WAS TO HAVE BEEN FIRED, and the Portcullices to have (...) let down to
keep out all assistance, The Horse-Guard to have been surprised in the Inns
where they were quartered, several Ostlers having been gained for that purpose,
the Tower was accordingly viewed, and its surprise ordered by Boats over the
Moat, and from thence to scale the Wall; one Alexander who in not yet taken,
had likewise distributed sums of Money to these Conspirators, and for the
carrying on the Design more effectually, they were told of a great Council of
the GREAT ONES that sat frequently in London, from whom issued all Orders,
which Council received their Directions from another in Holland, which sat
with the States, and that the Third of SEPTEMBER was pitched on for the attempt,
as being found by Lillies Almanac, and a Scheme erected for that purpose, to
be a Lucky day, a Planet then ruling which Prognosticated the downfall of
Monarchy. The evidence against these Persons was very full and clear, and they
accordingly found Guilty of High Treason.

Thus that Gazett verbatim. From whence we may observe,

1. How exactly the Account given by Father Strange to Mr. Oats agrees herewith,
as to the Number of Persons, Time, Design, etc.

2. How industrious these Popish Conspiraters are, and how dexterous in turning
themselves into all shapes, and complying with all humors to carry on their
designs, as here pretending to embrace and promote Fifth-Monarchy-Principles,
Levelling, etc. which should methinks caution all Protestant Dissenters from
the Established Church Government, yet to abhor all Conspiracies, and never to
be drawn into any Plot or Seditious Pranks on any pretensions whatsoever, lest
whilst by indirect means they fondly hope to advance some little Notions and
Whimsies of their own, they shall but do the Jesuits Drudgery, and really be
found diligent Instruments to advance that Scarlet Whore whom they so loudly
declaim against and abominate.

3. The Jesuits herein Acted with that Devilish Policy, which is so much the
Study of their Society; for having such an horrid Plot, on Foot, they thought
fit to find out some other Party, upon whom they might lay the Scandal of it,
but it seems could meet with none so ready to be Bubbled as the
Fifth-Monarchy-men; For, said the subtle Fathers, if we can persuade them to
the Business, viz. Fireing the City, and Killing the King, Then not only our
work will be done to out hands, but we shall have an excellent occasion to fall
not only on these people, but whoever else we shall please to call Fanatics,
as their Accomplices; and all the World shall acknowledge, that we do but
Justice in cutting them off, when they shall be made guilty of such Treason and
Villainy. On the other side, if they attempt and fail in it, Let the Rogues
Hang, we and our Church are free, both from the Danger and the Odium of it; Nay
more, we shall gain this advantage, That when we shall do it in earnest, 'twill
certainly be laid at their Doors, because of their former Attempt, and to load
them the heavier, they had set down the Names of all the most eminent
Dissenters, and such as had served under the Parliament, as concerned in this
Plot, and left it with these people, That as a List of the Conspirators, it
might be taken with them, and consequently all those persons secured in Custody
at a time when they designed the French, with whom we were then at War, should
invade the Kingdom; and I am credibly informed, they had all been taken, had
not his Grace, the late Duke of Albemarle Interposed.

4. As they had to do with ignorant Enthusiastical people, so they managed them
accordingly; Telling them a Story of an Equal Division of Lands, a Council of
Great Ones that must be nameless, and another yet greater that sat with the
States; But especially they forgot not to name the Third of September to them,
being the day or next save one, themselves had so long pitched upon for the
Burning of London; and for this purpose, the Oracle, Lillies Almanac, must be
consulted, but indeed, it was the Astrology of St. Omars that resolved the
Question; for they did this merely, that if they should be discovered, that
circumstance should likewise be divulged as part of this, Fifth-Monarchy-Plot,
and consequently being remembered by people when they should see the City on
Fire, They might thence take occasion to fall upon the Fanatics as the
Incendiaries; and it is more than probable, that not finding these Half-witted
Fellows very fit to serve their Purposes actively, They resolved to make them
do it passively, and might themselves cause them to be betrayed, it being
nothing infrequent with the Jesuits to imitate their Father the Devil, in
tempting people first to Villainy, and then to be the first that shall accuse
them.

An Account of some other Fires since that Grand Conflagration in 66.
NExt after destroying the City of London, the Popish Design has all along
been to Ruin and lay wast its Suburbs; This several of the Fathers, as Gifford,
and others, have declared to me, and the same is evident by matter of Fact; For
knowing the Borough of Southwark to be a place of eminent Trade, and generally
a sober industrious people, how often have they made Attempts thereon, till at
last they laid the best part thereof in Ashes. As first,

At the George-Inn the 25 of July, about 8 a Clock in the Morning.

Concerning the manner of this, John Whitler Head-Ostler at the said Inn, did
attest, That the same morning he was removing some Baggs of Hopps which lay in
a shed near to a Flax-shop, in which was some Tow and other Combustibles
ordinarily used to stuff Chairs with, and then he did not perceive or smell any
Smoke or Fire, nor had any Candle or Fire been in the said Flax-Shop for many
Months before, to his or any of the Families knowledge; but as he was removing
the said Packs, there came in 4 persons like Gentlemen, to take Coach for
Dover, or that way, which Coach was standing by the said Shed, and they by it
drinking, immediately after which, the said Ostler was called into the Street,
and left all in safety, but in short time returning, met the said Coach driving
our with all speed, and found the said Flax Shop on Fire.

Anthony Blake the Head-Tapster attesteth that he waited on those Gentlemen,
filling them drink, and being sent for 6 Canns, at his return the Coach was
driving away, and the Tow in the place aforesaid all on a Flame; Mr. Weyland
the Master of the House, and his whole Family solemnly attesting, they know not
how it came to kindle there, but verily believe it must come through some
Treachery.

This is the more probable, because one Harrison, some small time before, had
told Mr. Atkins at the Grey-hound-Inn in Holbourn, that there would within
three weeks or a Month, be great and dreadful Fires about London and Southwark,
and particularly mentioned the Talbot and George-Inns, and advised him to put
off his House and Goods, which Harrison in the time of this Fire was seen
suspitiously lurking about the Talbot-Inn, (which suffered much by this Fire)
and being known by the said Mrs. Atkins, Daughter of the Gentlewoman that kept
the Talbot, and coming thither to help them, he was seized, and carried to a
Foot-Company that stood in Arms near the said Inn, and a Charge given them by
my Lord Craven and Sir John Smith, then one of the Sheriffs of London, to keep
him safe; after the Fire was put out, enquiry being made for him, the Captain
told them he was discharged by the Lord Craven. However, on the 27 of July,
being informed he taught School in Thredneedle-street, he was retaken, and
examined before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, where the following
Articles were proved against him upon Oath.

1. THat he had had frequent Correspondency with Jesuits and Papists. 2. That
he had spoken to several of his Acquaintance to go with him to Popish Meetings,
declaring that he knew of many. 3. That he had been persuaded to turn Mendicant
Friar, and has been offered a stipend to turn to the Romish Religion. 4. That
he knew there would be diverse great and dreadful Fires in and about London
within a month. 5. That he advised Friends to rid their hands of all their
Concerns in and about London, for there would be a great consumption of houses
there. 6. That when he was in Custody of the Foot Company aforesaid, Mr. Atkins
aforesaid offering to swear the former Article; he threatened him if he did, it
should Cost him the best house he had. 7. That he said there were forty
Thousand French Papists lately come over, to his knowledge, besides many that
were amongst us already. 8. The Lord Mayor asking him, Who persuaded him to
turn Catholic? He answered, The King's Under-Barber, Phillips.
After which he told the Court, That when he was first apprehended for these
things, my Lord Craven discharged him, and took him with him in his Barge to
Whitehall. He further told the Court, that he was sometime an Assistant to Mr.
Lovejoy Schoolmaster at Canterbury, and that he had Letters Testimonial of his
goood behavior from the Dean of Canterbury: Upon which my Lord Mayor remembered
that he had seen him with Mr. Lovejoy, and said, that Mr. Lovejoy told him,
That he was an Idle Rogue. And so he was committed to Newgate.

On Saturday the 30th of July, it was further desposed upon Oath by Thomas Roe,
before Sir John Fredrick, as follows.

The Information of Thomas Roe of Bernards Inn Gent. taken the 30th of July
1690 by Sir John Fredrick, Alderman, one of His Majesty's Justices of Peace in
the City of London, upon Oath, as follows.
THomas Roe says, that he has for at least twelve or thirteen years last past
been acquainted with one Joseph Harrison, who was examined lately at the
Guild Hall London, before the Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
upon suspicion of his being a Conspirator in the Fireing the City and Suburbs
in several parts thereof.

Thomas Roe, and Joseph Harrison, having been School-fellows at Eaton College,
and being thereby acquainted; Joseph Harrison has several times lately been
with him, and advised him to withdraw his Concerns, and remove above twenty
miles out of the City; for that the City, and twenty miles round. would be
suddenly destroyed and laid waste (or to that purpose:) Whereupon Thomas Roe
asked him, whether he were privy to any such conspiracy, or concerned in its
Agitation? pressing him with diverse Arguments to discover what he was
acquainted with of that kind. Harrison replied, That he had no personal and
positive knowledge thereof. Thomas Roe demanded upon what ground then he did
thus advise him? Ios. Harrison replied, That he was sometimes conversant among
some Papists, and perceived a Plot or Design was carrying on by them against
the City of London and the Protestant Religion; which Plot or design (said he)
the Papists call, The Game of Trap, or, do you understand Trap ad Crucem? which
is the watchword amongst them. Further, Ios. Harrison said, That he was
informed of those things by some German Protestants, and that he had offers of
fifty pounds per annum, made him by some Jesuits and Papists, to turn to their
Religion; but he had refused it, and would not embrace the Romish Religion.

Thomas Roe further says, That about five weeks since, he walked through
New-Cheapside; and from thence into Mark-lane, with Joseph Harrison, in company
with Mr. Moseley (a Gentleman belonging to Bernards Inn likewise) and one of
his acquaintance, together with another man, a stranger to Thomas Roe. Upon
their first associating, Harrison said unto him, That he would not discover
himself to be an Englishman, but pretended himself to be a German or Italian,
(whether of the two he does not well remember) and that he might not detect
himself, spoke in the company, as occasion offered, in Latin. But leaving the
place where they tarried in Mark-lane, going toward Bishopsgatestreet, Mr.
Harrison told Mr. Roe secretly, That he believed that Mr. Mosely understood the
Game of Trapp by some signs he had observed from him, and that he would try
him. Then going altogether into a house, about the end of Thredneedle-street,
Mr. Harrison (having by this time discovered himself to be an Englishman) said
Trapp, and made a Cross over his face with his finger; directing himself to Mr.
Moseley; whereupon Mr. Moseley did also say Trapp, crossing his forehead or
race two or three times, and with a quick motion drew his finger over his own
Throat. Upon which, Mr. Roe asked Mr. Moseley what was the meaning of Trapp?
but he refused to tell, Mr. Roe urging him again, He replied, He would not,
saying, You are not of my Religion. Then Mr. Moseley asked Mr. Harrison what
his Name was? (for he knew him not by Name) He answered, Harrison. Mr. Moseley
replied, I never saw your Name. Mr. Harrison made answer, Is it Don Olanso del
Harrisonto; if so, says Mr. Moseley, I have seen your Name.

After this, Mr. Moseley and the other stranger being parted, and Mr. Roe and
Mr. Harrison being alone, said Harrison, I told you Mr. Moseley did understand
Trapp; you may see there is a List of the Trapp-Gamesters. Now, whether Mr.
Moseley's imitation of Mr. Harrison was feigned or real, Mr. Roe could not
distinguish; but as they two were passing through Cheapside homewards, Mr.
Harrison looking upon the New-Buildings, said, To what purpose do they Build
this poor City? it will again be destroyed; at the same time he pointed at two
several persons, saying, That is a Trapp-Gamester, and there goes another
Trapp-Gamester.

Mr. Roe further informs, That since the last Term, Mr. Harrison told him, he
would write all the Rogueries of the Trapp-Game and Gamesters in a Play; and
that he would undertake to show him Twenty six Papists Meetings in and about
the City and Suburbs of London; but (said he) some of them are very private,
and if you be discovered not to be a Papist, you will (peradventure) be
poisoned or stabbed.

Mr. Roe does further say, That when the said Harrison advised him to Remove
with all his Concerns above Twenty Miles from London, the said Roe asked him if
Windsor were not far enough, it being both their Native place, and about that
distance? The said Harrison answered, Not; reflecting upon the Castle. And
further, Harrison told Mr. Roe, That the Jesuits by a Composition of
Ingredients, make such a Matter, the Fume of which would corrupt any man's
Intellects; and that he the said Harrison could do it.

This Harrison (who it is probable was some Priest, or at least Proselyte) as
you have heard, was committed to Newgate, but we cannot learn there was any
legal Prosecution against him.

The damage of this Fire at the George-Inne was considerable, for it Burnt
three parts of the said. Inn and 140 Loads of Hay; and at the White-Hart there
was Burnt and blown up one Stable, one dwelling house, and 4 or 5 Lodging
Chambers. At the Three-Cranes near adjoining to the said George-Inn on the
North-side, three dwelling houses and a Still-house; and at the Talbot three
dwelling houses, a Wash-house, and (which is most lamentable) two persons
killed outright, and six or seven wounded.

A Brief Account of a Fire Providentially prevented in Goat-Yard near St.
Margarets-Hill in Southwark.
ANother attempt was on Thursday Aug. 11. 1670. about 10 of the Clock at Night,
a Woman siting at her door in Goat-yard aforesaid, heard a great Hissing noise,
and turning to see what might be the cause thereof, she saw a light upon a Shed
or Hovel in a Wheel-wrights yard, bounding upon the said Goat-yard, on which
Shed or Hovel were old Wheels, and such combustible stuff, whereupon she cried
out Fire; which caused several Neighbors to come forth, who with speedy
application of Water, quenched the said Fire; which done, they diligently
searched the place, where amongst the old Wheels, they found a Canvas Bagg, in
which was some Sulphurous matter, compounded with other Ingredients, and about
half a Yard of Match tied to it, one end of which said Match had been fired,
and on strict observation, several Spoaks had the marks of Fire, and scent of
Gunpowder and Sulphur remaining upon them. This villainous Design was
mischievously placed for the accomplishing of some great Desolation; for, near
adjoining to the said Shed was a Loft full of Hay, the Boards of it old and
dry, and behind the said Shed was also a great quantity of Billets, and
adjoining to that Hay-loft was a Timber-yard, wherein was about an hundred Load
of Boards and Timber. A Justice of Peace inhabiting near the said place, had
the Match and combustible Matter aforesaid delivered to him, and there are
sufficient witnesses yet living, of the whole matter, as herein is related.

Several other Attempts were made on Southwark, but without any considerable
Effect, until the 26th of May, 1676. and then they fatally accomplished their
Design, setting Fire to the house of one Mr. Welsh an Oyl-man, situate near
St. Margarets-Hill, between the George and Talbot-Inns, (it seems that was the
place ordered by the Superiors) which broke out about four of the Clock in the
Morning, and was carried on with that Art and Violence, that it consumed 500
dwelling houses or upwards, many stately Inns, the Meal-market, the Prison of
the Compter, etc. The whole Loss, as to what was actually destroyed, was
modestly computed to be between Eighty and one hundred thousand pounds, besides
damage to the Inhabitants by loss and interruption of their Trade: St. Thomas's
Hospital was happily preserved, chiefly by means of a new invented Engine for
conveying of water, but he that made it, has since beeen threatened to have his
house Burnt for his pains, which has likewise been attempted, as herein after
is related: The manner of contriving this Fire has been confessed by John
Groves (lately Executed) who was chiefly concerned therein, and did on the 10th
of August 1676, in Wild-house Garden declare, That having prepared their
Fireworks, he, with three Irishmen, procured by Doctor Fogarthy, to be his
Assistants, went over and did the business; the said Groves bragged that he
himself did set fire to the said Shop; and by the manner of the thing, 'twas
plain, That it must be done by Treachery; For most of the Family being out of
Town, there had been no Fire in the House for 3 or 4 days before; nor did the
Watch that stood hard by all Night, perceive any danger, but the first that
perceived it were some Letter-Carriers, who, going early to the Post Office, as
they passed by, saw a great Light at the Cellar Window which opened to the
Street, and thereupon looking down, they saw a Fire in the Cellar, but not so
great, but if they could presently have got in, they doubted not but three or
four pail-fulls of water might have quenched it; but whilst they stood calling
to wake the people who were fast asleep, and endeavored in vain to open the
street door; The fire got through the Shop-Floor, where meeting with great
store of Oil, it instantly set the Shop and Stairs on a Flame, and the people
had much ado to get out at a Window into the Talbot Inn to save their Lives.
The said Grove further declared, that for this Service, the Society (Richard
Strange then Provincial) gave them a Thousand pounds, viz. Four Hundred pounds
to him the said Groves, and Two Hundred pounds apiece to the three Irishmen;
and yet (besides carrying on their Design of weakening and impoverishing
Protestants) got considerably by the Bargain; for Groves affirmed they got at
least Two Thousand pounds by that Fire, for whilst the Fire raged, they had
their Instruments to Plunder houses, and Steal what goods they could, and
convey them to their Warehouses at VVild-street and Sommersethouse. And
touching this their gaining Two Thousand Pounds by Southwark-Fire, the said
Richard Strange the Provincial, has likewise acknowledged it to be true; yet
it should seem they were not content with all this Desolation, but endeavored
still to carry it on further; for after the Fire was believed to be stopped and
Mastered, about 10 a Clock at Night, on a sudden, a House appeared on Fire near
St. Mary Overies Church, but on the other side thereof furthest from the
General-Fire, so that it must needs be wilfully set on Fire, but by blowing up
of one house in time, and good Help, it was prevented from spreading further.

Of the Fires at Wapping, Lime-house, and Shadwell.
THese were Places that the Conspirators have diverse Years resolved should be
Destroyed by Fire, and in pursuance thereof, not a few Attempts have been made
to that purpose. As,

First, on the 29th of June 1673, there was a Fire promoted over against
VVapping-Dock in a Bakers-house amongst his Bavins: Now that this was wilfully
and with Design set on Fire, besides what I and others know of such their
Resolutions to destroy that place, the circumstances attending it, may easily
convince a considerate Impartial man; for about a Month before, there was found
in the said heap of Bavins a new Cordevant Glove full of Gunpowder and other
ingredients, by a Boy that happened to be at Play there, and that very Night it
began; there were seen several Gentlemen with Swords by their sides, that had
that day been drinking at the Fortune Tavern near the place, with some of the
Bakers Family, and were seen, in the Evening the Fire happened, to walk round a
place called the New Market, which was on the Backside of the Bakers House, and
to go in and out toward the Bakers said House backwards, about an hour or two
before it happened, which began on Saturday. Night between the hours of Eleven
and Twelve, and continued most fiercely Burning till 8 or 9 in the Morning,
which made a great Devastation, being no doubt carried on and endeavored to be
Augmented by the Assistance of those wicked Instruments who first occasioned it.

The great Fire at St. Katherines was designed for the Burning of the Ships in
the River, though in that respect, by the special Providence of God, and timely
Help, there was no mighty mischief done, but on Shore a great number of houses
were destroyed.

Shadwell Fire began at Shadwell-Dock in a Brew House, in which there had not
been any Fire for a considerable time, nor can account be given how it should
happen by accident, and there-we may probably Assign it to the same mischievous
hands.

But all these mischiefs did not satisfy the Romish undertakers, but they
resolved on a more general Devastation; For no longer ago than the 30th of
August last, the before named Blundel at ^enwicks Chamber, produced a Scheme or
Mapp, describing the manner of Firing wholly both VVapping, Westminster,
Toolies-street, Barnaby-Street, etc. For Westminster, the Jesuits and their
Agents were to begin at the next door to the Palsgraves-head Tavern without
Temple-Barr (being my appointed Post as aforesaid) and carry on the Fire to the
Savoy, and then the Benedictines to manage it on both sides the way to
Charing Cross, and so to White Hall: This was attested on Oath before Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey in September last, wherein it is observable, though then, and
for long after, he was not at all acquainted with me, yet he mentions the very
house where I was lodged, and had prepared materials as aforesaid, to be the
place for the Commencement of the Fire; so that it is plain it was not the
design of any particular men, but a thing generally known amongst them, and to
be Prosecuted not only by the Jesuits, but Benedictines, and others had an
hand in it: He there likewise sets forth how this should have been done in the
time of the great Frost 1676, but put off, because they were not then assured
of the French Kings Aid, which now they have obtained [By the Negotiations of
Coleman and others.] How VVapping and the Ships were to be Burnt by a Fire to
be begun near Limehouse, and how himself was ordered to ply at the Hermitage,
with seven more as his Assistants, to help carry it on; for which service he
was to have a great Reward, and besides a Priest was every day to come and say
Mass in his Chamber for the good success of the design, [so much a work of
Religion do they think it to be, and that Heaven would Interest it self to
promote their Hellish Villainies.] Furthermore, that but a very few days before
his open Discovery, when they began to grow jealous of him, and thereupon had
resolved to send him beyond the Seas, Blundel was ordered to supply his place
in mannaging the said Fire at VVapping.

And though the Plot were in the mean time partly discovered, yet such was
their confidence, that they endeavored nevertheless to go on with this Design;
For on Wednesday the 18th of Sept. 1678, a Fire was promoted near Lime-house,
in pursuance of such their former Order and Resolution, which began there about
five of the Clock in the Morning in a Boat-Builders-yard in a parcel of Reeds,
which afterward being increased by certain dried and seasoned Timber caught
hold of a Sea-Captains house with that violence, that the lower part thereof
was possessed by the dreadful Flames before any of the Family perceived it, or at
least could get out; at last Ladders were brought, and two or three of the
Servants made shift to get out at the uppermost Windows, but just as they came
to save the Mistress of the House and a Servant-Maid which attended her in her
Room, the floor of the Chamber in which they were sunk down, and so they both,
without any possibility of help, perished. As also an adventurous Seaman, who
presuming too far to save some Goods afterward in another house, was
interrupted in his return by one of the Rafters, which falling on his Head,
knocked out his Brains. This Fire was carried on very vigorously, insomuch that
in three or four hours time, it burnt down and wholly destroyed between 40 and
50 Houses, and had undoubtedly done much more mischief, had not the
indefatigable pains and hazards of a great number of Seamen, or rather, the
accidental Absence of some of those Agents ordered to promote it as aforesaid,
prevented its further Progress.

But often before this, there were several other Fires, or at least Attempts of
that kind, for destroying the Suburbs, as appears by the following Depositions,
which deserve our Notice.

The substance of the Examination of Robert Redway Victualler, at the Red-Lyon
in Fetter-Lane, taken the 6th of August, 1670, by Sir Thomas Bludworth Knight,
as follows:
THe Examinate says, That on Wednesday the third of August 1670, about Ten of
the Clock at Night, his House was fired up three Stories high, by a person or
persons (as he verily believes) who were strangers, and near about the same
time in his said House; but not presently mistrusted by him, he keeping a
Victualling-house (where it is not usual to take such special cognizance of
Guests.) The fire was discovered by one of his Maidservants, who had occasion
to carry a Child to Bed, which Bed she found on Fire, and the Chamber so full
of smoke, as put her into a sudden fright; but it being but newly kindled,
through the industry of the Family, with the assistance of Neighbors, it was
soon extinguished; But this Examinate was so Alarmed by the unexpected
suddenness hereof, and the many fearful occurrences of this kind of late, that
he could take no rest in his house, till he had caused narrow search and
inspection to be made in every Corner thereof; cleansing it from all such
matter as might easily be fired, locking or bolting the doors of every Room
where any Bed was, or that was not common for entertainment.

Yet notwithstanding all this care and vigilance was used, he says, that the
very next day, viz. Thursday the fourth of August 1670, his house was again
fired two Stories high, about twelve of the Clock at Noon, which was discovered
by one of his Menservants, who, as he was going up one pair of Stairs to
attend some Guests, heard a very great noise, cracking and bouncing like
Squibs, but much louder, which caused him to run down stairs, crying out,
Master, Master, the house is on Fire, whereupon search was made, and the fire
found out two pair of Stairs in an enclosed Bed, (commonly called a Press-Bed)
which was broke out into a perfect Flame, the Rails thereof, with the
Deal-boards that enclosed it all round, being on fire, and almost consumed,
together with the Bed-cloaths, all save the upper Rugg. This Bed this Examinate
says, must of necessity be set on fire by some Fire-ball, or such like stuff,
conveyed into the Bed, (or cast on some combustible matter about it) at a hole
about an Inch and half wide, which was made in a Deal-board, instead of a
Staple to receive the shutter or bolt of the Lock.

Had not the fire been seasonably discovered, it would have consumed the whole
house, and probably many more. But by such timely detection thereof, it was
suppressed without doing any further Hurt, unless to the Goods in the Room
adjoining, and what else was near it.

As to the Persons that are violently presumed to be the Authors hereof, this
Examinate says, That on the said Thursday at Noon, two Persons came to his
house and Dined above stairs, and by their long continuance there, gave some
suspicion; but nothing appearing till they were gone, caused less notice; yet
in less than a quarter of an hour after broke forth the Fire, as aforesaid,
just upon the discovery of the breaking forth of which, these two men, one in
Black clothes, the other in Gray, well apparelled, having his Hair of a bright
brown color, with a Shash tied about him, were seen as they went, to make a
stop near by the Examinates House, smiling one upon the other, and pointing at
the Fire, which was observed by a near Neighbor, who was condoling the
Disaster, and making some compassionate reflections on the Neighborhood, who
were like to share in the same affliction; at which these two men deridingly
said, It was either a Casualty, or set on Fire by the Fanatics, and so
departed.

Now, that these two persons or one of them, were the immediate Instruments of
this Villainy, is more than probable by diverse circumstances, as well as in the
opinion of this Examinate and his Neighbors, who took some small observation
of them the latter time; For when they departed, they made no stay to change
their Money (as is usual) but had Money ready for what they had to pay.

And the description of the habit, stature, and complexion, etc. which the
Neighbors gave of these persons, does exactly agree with the Characters that
this Examinate and his Servants describe them by.

But that they were not apprehended or pursued at that Instant, must be
attributed to the deep surprise the people of the House and Neighborhood were
in, every one striving to make provision to secure his own Concern, and partly
perhaps to the small Encouragement and little notice then taken by some in
Office of such services; it being less dangerous, as things were sometimes
managed, to be a Traitor and a Villain, than to detect or discover one.

The substance of the Examination of Joseph Speed, servant to Abraham Ever
Upholster in the Minories, taken upon oath before the Right Worshipful Sir Tho.
Bludworth, July the 31th. 1670.
THat he the said Joseph Speed being sent on the Saturday before about eight of
the clock at night, by his Master to carry some goods into Wapping, in his
return homewards in new Gravel Lane was overtaken by two proper men in Gentile
Habit, the one of them in a Light colored periwigg and a stuff suit, black and
gray mixed, as near as could be gliessed, by the help of a Link that a person
passed by withal, it being then grown late in the Evening, and a Rapier by his
side; The other in a Cloth coat, his own hair and a stick in his hand; Who
began to discourse with the Deponent, and after diverse discourses of the
deadness of Trade and difficulty of getting money, when they were come into an
obscure lonesome place, being a field commonly known by the name of King David's
Fort, he in the Wigg began to declare himself more fully, telling the Deponent
that there was a way of late come up of geting of money with a great deal of
ease. He having some suspicious of them, by their frequent swearing, to found
the depth of their intentions, seemed very inquisitive to know what way that
was, and how glad and ready he would be to embrace it: whereupon at last the
said person in the Wig told him it was to be done by making of fireballs and
firing them; At which the Deponent, though much surprised, yet concealed his
resentments, and pretended to comply with them, discoursing after such a manner
as might give them reason to suppose him fit for their pupose. After several
words passed, he in the Wig tells him he shall be employed. Then the Deponent
desired to know when and how. Whereupon the same person took two fireballs (as
he called them) out of his pocket, shows them to him, and tells him he should
have Twenty shillings to take those Balls, and Fire them in such places as they
should direct; the which he expressed as follows, viz. In the great ship that
was building in such a yard, being wholly or near finished, and newly Tarr'd on
the outside: (which Ship was afterward understood to be Captain Tailors,
though the owner was not mentioned by them; and whose Bolt-spit lay cross the
street, at Wapping) But if it might not conveniently be done there, then to do
it at the house adjoining to the Yard: or if too severe a guard were kept
thereabouts then at a Tarr-shop, near the Armitage Bridge, or else at the
Talbot Inn in Southwarks, where he said, the Deponent might come easily to the
house, the back way, and no body observe him. But he principally urged the
firing of the said Ship; and as for the time he bid him observe the Tide, and
be sure to do it within an hour of low water. He also gave him directions
touching the manner of firing the said Balls, viz. That if he could by any
means privately get into the said ship, or any of the said houses, then to wrap
one of the Balls in half a pound of pitch, with some quantity of Tow, and set
fire to it. But if that might not be done with safety and secresy, then to
observe a hole or narrow passage which was in the middle or Center of the Ball,
into which he should put some dust of gunpowder, and setting fire to it, throw
it into the place intended. After these directions the same fellow gave the
Deponent one of the said Balls into his hand, who then was urgent for his
money, but is denied till the Ship or one of the houses should be on fire, They
telling him that they would be thereabouts, and when they had observed his work
to be done, would go to the Bull-head Tavern in Grace Church Street, where they
would meet with him and give him his reward. In this discourse about the money
the Deponent told them that Twenty shillings was too small a matter, and they
might well give him four or five pounds, because he ventured his life, being
sure to be hanged if discovered: to which was returned by them, that they would
certainly procure him a pardon, if it should happen so, but of that there was
no danger. After all this talk the Deponent willing to apprehend them, tells
them he was very dry, and desires that they would give him some drink: to which
they would by no means assent: But he was so importunate with them as begot a
suspicion in them of his design upon them, whereupon he with the Stick said,
Hang him Dog, or Hang him Rogue, he will not do the business, or words to that
effect; and after some other words, endeavored to seize the Deponent, one of
them drawing his Sword, but he got away, and they did not pursue him, but run
away themselves cross the fields as fast as possibly they could, as he turning
back at some distance observed. They being thus fled the Deponent at once
apprehending the hazard of Concealment, and the danger those places might be in
that they directed him to fire, did immediately repair to Captain Tailors
house, as also to the Tarr-shop by the Armitage Bridge, acquainting them with
this affair, as also several people in Wapping as he went along, particularly
two Constables and their Watch; thence he went home to his Master, and
presently informed him of it, who repaired to the next Constable, they to the
Common Council-man of their Liberty, and then all together to the watch-house
at Aldgate, where part of the Fire-ball was tried for an experiment, which
burned to their general wonder and amazement.

The same Night was he to appear before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor at
his house, but his Lordship being in Bed, he was put off till next morning, and
then by reason of his Lordships indisposition, carried before the worshipful
Sir Thomas Bludworth, before whom he deposed the premises, and further declared
on his oath, that the beforementioned persons told him, when the Fire came to
the midst of the Ball, it would flame two yards or two yards and an half high.

An Account of the apprehending of a Scotchman, about the same time, at the
Cross-keys in Fleet Street, about Firing.
A Scotch-man pretending great respect he had for William Colborn (then)
keeping the Cross-keys, a Victualling-house in Fleet Street, near Chancery Lane
end, came to him, and advised him, that by all means he should remove his goods
out of London, and dispose of his house. Colborn asked for what reason, the
Scotch-man replied, Because that he with many others, were employed to set the
remainder of London on fire, and that they would set it on fire at several
places at one and the same time, and Chancery lane end (which is near the said
Colborns house, as aforesaid,) they intended should be one of the first set on
fire. With several other discourses very soberly, and after a friendly manner
expressed. Whereupon Colborn (according to his duty) apprehended him, and being
brought to his Trial he was sentenced to stand in the Pillory, and did
accordingly stand three times, once at Chancery lane end, and twice elsewhere
in the City.

A Relation of a Fire that happened in Budge-row, in July, 1670.
ON the eighth of July about midnight, in a new house, not glazed, in
Budge-row, a Fire began; the Shop-windows and doors were all made and close
shut and fastened when the Brick-layers went away, which was between six and
seven of the Clock in the evening before; (the Carpenters not having been at
work that afternoon) and the Bricklayers at that time having nothing to do
above stairs, but only to build up a wall in the yard. When the fire was first
discovered, it appeared in a Room over the front of the Shop, right against the
Chimney, where stood several Deal-boards and Laths reared against the wall,
being prepared in order to floor part of the said house, then unfinished; some
of the next neighbors who heard the first alarm of the Fire, do affirm, That
if they could presently have got to it, they might easily have quenched it,
'twas so small to appearance, or that they could, in case they had wanted
water, have thrown it out at the Window. But before they could get the doors
open, it was grown so outrageous, that there was no venturing up stairs to
suppress it, and in short time it so far prevailed, as very considerably to
prejudice four Houses: That this came by Treachery there is good reason to
believe; as well because there had been no fire, nay not so much as any person
all the day before in the said Chamber where it began, as also for that near
Islington, on the evening before, some persons that were going thitherwards,
met two men and one woman, who very earnestly inquired, If there were not a
Fire in London near Cheap Side.

The Information of one William Trigg, taken before Sir William Turner, Knight;
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of London, the 13th of
August, 1670. as follows.
THis Informant says, That he lives in Angel-alley in Aldersgate Street, and
has no Family but himself, and two young men and a maid at home at this time
(his wife being at or near Hampstead with his said young Child) and that his
young men lie at his Shop at a distance from his house; that the next night
save one before the fire happened, she called him out of his Bed, saying,
either the house was on fire, or there were thieves in it, neither of which
being found true, caused him to have some Jealousies she intended some
mischief, and therefore last night after she was gone to Bed, sent for her
Candle down, and caused search to be made over and under all the Beds to see
all safe from Fire; that this morning between six and seven of the Clock when
he went forth to his Shop, he did not perceive or smell any fire, and left no
body in the house but his said servant maid, and that about eight or nine of
the Clock his neighbors came to call him, saying, his house was on fire, so he
went home, and up stairs, and found it all on fire, two Beds, Curtains and
Vallins, and some of the Chamber floor under the Bed burnt.

Joseph Ashby says, That he living over against the said Mr. Trigg, perceived
much smoke to come out of his house this morning, and then saw the said maid go
up stairs and down again, through the window; but never heard her cry fire till
Mr. Shirley went up to her room where the said fire was, and that he saw the
Window Curtains of that room close shut, and that about six of the Clock the
same were open.

William Sherley, and Matthew Crockford in effect depose the same.

Nor could Mary Torberfeild the maidservant herself on her Examination allege
any thing material, but only denied that she either went up stairs after the
rose in the morning, or that she did open the Window-Curtains, both which were
positively proved to the contrary as aforesaid, so that there was a most
violent presumption that she set it on Fire, and accordingly she was committed
to Newgate, but for want of positive Witnesses that saw her do it, discharged
and Bailed out by some of her Confederates as it is credibly related.

It is observable that this Fire was most mischievously designed, as being in a
place where no Engine could come, the passages through the Entries are so
narrow, and that within five or six yards where it began, there lay two or
three thousand Bavins belonging to a Baker: but the providence of God timely
prevented, otherwise it had doubtless seized both the Alleys, and then quickly
would have reached Juin-street: But being thus discovered before it had got
head, it was suppressed, doing no further damage than to that room where it
began.

The Fire in the Savoy, 1670.
ABout the latter end of June, in the Savoy, near One a Clock in the morning, a
Fire happened in a back room that had been a Strong-Water-shop, where it was
first discovered, which immediately went on from house to house, Eastward and
Westward, till there were Burnt and Blown up fourteen Dwelling-Houses in four
or five hours time. There is Treachery believed to have been in the bottom, as
occasioning this damage: For it is credibly reported, That Sr. Jeremy Whithcot
upon his examining the premises had two Watermen brought before him, who did
affirm, that they carried two persons appearing as Gentlemen, overnight, to
Westminster, who were speaking of the heat of the Evening, and one replied to
the other, in the said Water-mans hearing, That it would be an hotter morning
at the Savoy. Timely care with the help of Engines and blowing up of houses
Eastwards; was a prevention of its going further into the Strand and toward
Worcester house. Westwards there was a great Brick Wall, which gave such a
Check to it, that by Gods good providence, and the industry of those that came
in to help, it was stopped, but two persons were killed outright and six or seven
hurt.

An Impartial account of the Fire happening near the Royal Exchange, on the 23
of July 1670. at the house of Mr. Francis Nowers, Herauld-painter.
THE Watch belonging to that Ward, gave in upon Oath before the Coroner and his
Inquest, that the said Mr. Nowers was in his own Balcony at Twelve a clock that
night, and that he talked to them in as sober and composed a frame as ever they
saw him in their lives, and about one of the clock it appears his house was on
Fire; being first discovered by some passengers going that way, who gave notice
to the Neighborhood. There were in this house, the Master and his Brother, a
Nurse and two young Children, a maidservant, and an Apprentice: At the time
when this fire began the Maid was in the Kitchen under ground, all the rest of
the Family being in bed; but the said maid understood nothing of it till it was
noised in the street; upon which she ran up stairs to her Masters room, which
she found all on a light Fire. By this time her Masters Brother (who lay a
story higher) hearing a sudden shriek, awaked, and in his shirt ran down to his
Brothers Chamber, but found the door on fire, and with the strength of the
smoke was forced back again having much ado to save himself; yet remembering the
Apprentice that lodged on the same story, forthwith awaked him, and they ran
together out at the Gutter-window and so broke their way into the Dolphin
Tavern near adjoining.

How this Fire happened is very uncertain; though it is suggested that it might
come by a careless Nurse that lay on the same floor with the Masters Chamber
and used to have a Candle burning all Night, having in her charge a child of
about Thirteen weeks old: But whether it happened so or not, the fatal
Consequence was very sad, for it did destroy the Master of the house and a
child in Bed with him; and the said Nurse and child with her; yet through the
timely help of Neighbors it did not much further harm than destroying the said
house, with the upper parts of two houses adjoining.

Nor were great and unusual Fires less frequent in these times in the Country;
of which I shall mention only two amongst many.

The first at Northampton, where on Monday the Twentieth of September, 1675. a
dreadful Fire began in the afternoon, and in few hours space burnt down most
part of the High street, the Market place (which was a very goodly one) the
Stately Church of St. Allhallows and two other parish Churches, and above three
parts in four of the whole Town. Which being known to be a Corporation of great
Trade and generally sharp enemies to Popery, it may probably be supposed there
might be something of design in it, but I shall not urge that, because it is the
general opinion it came by accident.

Another great Loss by Fire was at Cottenham near Cambridge happening on
Saturday the Twenty ninth of April, 1676. about ten of the clock in the
forenoon, when a great part of the inhabitants, especially the men, were gone
to Cambridge Market, or otherwise employed abroad: It began in an house almost
at the Entrance of the Town, at a place called Green-End, and the next house to
it remaining untoucht, the people were in hopes it would have ended there, but
on a sudden, another house being the third from it, was on fire, and from
thence (the second still remaining without harm) the Flames were dispersed
almost all over the Town, furiously raging on both sides of the street, and
burnt down the whole Street as far as the Church before three of the clock in
the afternoon. Which is in distance of ground near three Quarters of a Mile,
there being about one hundred dwelling houses, besides Barns, outhouses, Corn,
Hay, etc. consumed in that short time.

I the rather mention these fires in the Country, though generally they pass
unregarded as common accidents; because as I well know the design of the
Jesuits etc. was, that their Instruments should do all the mischief in this
kind, wherever they came, either in City or Country, so it is well known that
about this very time, I mean in 1675. or 76. there were two idle extravagant
persons formerly about St. Martins Le grand, one named Robert Norris, the
other, Finch, whose ill course of life to the great trouble of their friends
had reduced them to a condition fit to become the Agents of any villainy. These
two came on foot into an Inn at Hodgsdon in Hartfordshire, and having lodged a
while there, took an opportunity and with a light burning Firebrand, purposely
carried out of the house through the yard down into the Stables, set a parcel
of straw on Fire; but being observed by a young Maid who acquainted the Master
of the house therewith, he that did it was taken in the very act; the straw
flaming and the Firebrand lying in it; but being seen so soon was quickly
extinguished without much hurt done. One of these Companions hereupon run away
and made his escape, the other being apprehended confessed he put the Firebrand
there on purpose to burn down the Inn and Town if he could do it, and that they
came down for that very end, being hired to burn that and some other places,
and were to have such a sum (5. l. as I remember) for each Town they could
Fire; Hereupon he was committed to Hartford Gaol. But in his Trial I know not
how things were so ordered that though the fire was actually begun in the Straw
as aforesaid, yet it was looked upon only as an Intention, and consequently not
a Felony, but only a misdemeanour, for which he was ordered to stand in the
Pillory, etc.

In Town still their work went forward with all the insolence imaginable; for
about the year, 1676. one Mr. Keeling a Smith, a very ingenious workman in
Black friars, having made an Engine most effectual for quenching of Fires,
being so contrived that it might be carried into any room, and the pipes of it
and consequently the water conveyed by Ladders or up Stairs into any place
where Fire may be, The excellency and great use of which Engine was notably
Experimented at the Fire in Southwark, the Hospital there being chiefly by
means thereof preserved; For which he was shortly after upbraided and affronted
by a certain person, said to be a Frenchman; telling him plainly that he
deserved to have his house burnt for making such an Engine; and several other
threatening words: nor did they fail to attempt it: For within few days after
such Menaces, there was one evening a hard ball thrown out of the street
through a Glass window breaking a pane as it passed into a Chamber of his said
house one pair of stairs high, which as providence would have it, fell into the
middle of the room where there was nothing near apt to take Fire, but only the
boards; into which it burnt a round hole of considerable depth, but did no
further harm, whether by reason the matter of the Fire-b. was not rightly
prepared, or what other accident not known. The whole Room was filled with
smoke and stench of burning when the people came into it, which much affrighted
them, especially when they found this Ball which was then almost cold, and saw
how it had burnt the boards, and which way it came in, expecting no other but
that their house was resolved upon to be burnt.

In the Winter 1677. at the sign of the Shipin Shadwell, the house of one
Pierce a Victuallerthere, there was a Fire-ball placed ready to be fired under
a shed, found and discovered accidentally fore the intended mischief was
performed, by some of the Watch, it was of the bigness of a large Orange, very
black in color, and smelt strong of Brimstone, they that found it brought it
to Shadwell Watch, and divided it to several parts, some to Wapping, and
White-Chapel, some to Rosemary-lane Watch, to try Experiments for all their
satisfaction. From whence Mr. Samuel Maurice had a small part no bigger than a
Cherry-stone, and fired it at the house of Thomas Horn the Beadle in
Rosemary-lane, where that little quantity flamed up at least three foot high,
and then the flame suddenly ceasing, the Coal left burnt down into an hard
Walnut-tree-plank a quarter of an inch deep; This was done in the presence of
Samuel Maurice, Thomas Horn, and many others in the said Horns house, where the
hole is yet to be seen.

The Temple (as we told you before) was a place these Incendiaries had
particularly in their Eye, whether it were to revenge themselves in some
measure on the Lawyers, many worthy Members of that Honorable profession
having from time to time, in our Parliaments, been the most active Patriots to
preserve the Protestant Religion, and prevent the fly invasions of Popery, Law
being the best humane out-guard to Religion; or whether (as I rather judge
because they have told me so) that they thereby aimed to destroy what Writings
and Records they could, some of which relating to their Conviction of Recusancy
have (as I have heard some boast,) been prevailed with for valuable
considerations to have been kept there, and never returned to the proper
Offices, whence effectual prosecution and levies might have been made on Popish
Estates. But for whatsoever particular intent, or perhaps only for the general
design of doing mischief; or whether they were (as some would have them
thought) unconcerned therein, this is too certain, there have happened two
grievous and lamentable Fires in the Temple of late.

The first on the 28th. of September, 1677. at the Kings Bench Office, which
thereby was burnt down with diverse good Chambers and about a dozen
dwelling-houses in White-Fryars; the beginning of this was generally charged on
one Mr. Carpentar, who was reported to have gone to Bed in drink, but possibly
it might be by some other means: However this is certain, if he were the
unhappy occasion, he suffered severely for it, being burnt there, and seven or
eight persons killed by the fall of a Wall.

The next was yet more great and calamitous, beginning at one Mr. Thornberies
Chamber (a Gentleman known to be a very sober worthy person) on Sunday the
26th. of January, 1679. about eleven of the Clock in the Night, the vast
desolation hereby caused is yet sadly visible by te hruines, and by the
circumstances it is most apparent that the same was Fired by design.

After this an Attempt was made on an Inn in Smithfield, where a Frenchman
came in the evening, set fire to the stables and ran away, but going into
Thamestreet was apprehended, and for the present committed, but afterward for
want of a through prosecution got away.

On the ninth of April one Elizabeth Oxley having dwelt about six weeks as a
servant-maid with one Mr. Bird an eminent Attorney in Fetter-lane, took the
opportunity when all the Family was in bed, to Fire a large Press in his
Closet, in which were kept papers and writings, and when she thought fit,
acquainted her Master that the house was on fire; and running down let in the
Watch: but it being observed that she had packt up her clothes, and several
other suspicious circumstances, she was charged with setting the same on fire,
and at last confessed the same, declaring on her examination, that she was
employed to do it by one Mr. Stubbs, who promised her five pound to do it.
Hereupon Mr. Stubbs was seized, and acknowledged that he had persuaded her
thereunto, and was to give her five Guinneys, besides a Crown in hand. And
further said, That one Father Gifford (the same man that I my self was to be an
Assistant to for such wicked purposes as aforesaid) his Confessor had put him
on this business, and told him it was no sin to Fire all the houses of
Heretics, and that the said Gifford had promised him one hundred pounds for
the same, and told him he was to have the money from the Church. And further
declared that he used to meet the said Gifford, and other two persons, in St.
James's fields, in the dark of the evening to consult these matters.

They likewise declared several other things concerning an Insurrection at home
by Papists, and an Invasion speedily to be made by the French, etc. upon which
ingenuous Confessions, the House of Commons became suitors to his Majesty to
grant them both his gracious Pardon, which was granted, and lately allowed in
Court.

The last Intrigue of this kind I shall mention is that of Daniel Clark, an
Apprentice to a Gentlewoman that kept a Flax-shop in the Minories, who on the
fifteenth of May last set fire to his Mistresses house by putting a Candle to a
bundle of Flax, but being seen to do it, the same was seasonably extinguished
without much damage, and he committed to Newgate, declaring on his examination,
that he was hired to do it by an eminent Papist; on the fifth of June he was
Indicted at the Old Baily and thereunto pleaded Guilty: And though it appeared
he had been much tampered with, yet at last the indefatigable pains of the
Court got the whole Truth (as I am credibly informed) out of him, and in pity
to his youth reprieved him.

After these numerous Instances I think no ingenuous, impartial man can
question that this cursed design of treacherous Burning has long time been, and
to this day is vigorously carried on by the Jesuits and other Papists and
their Instruments. Also that no wise man or good subject will be wanting in
caution to prevent the future designs of these Incendiaries, or in contributing
all he can to bring any of them that shall be discovered and apprehended to
condign and exemplary punishment. Which God grant, and ever preserve his
Majesty, the Protestant Religion, and this Honorable City.

FINIS.

