PROPOSALS HUMBLY OFFERED to the Honorable House of Commons, First, For a WAY,
or METHOD, to procure Bullion. Secondly, That His Majesty, and Subject, will be
Gainers thereby. Thirdly, That it will highly tend to the Good of Trade, and
Commerce in general, during the time the MONEYS shall be Re-Coining.

Which are as follow, (viz)

IT is Humbly PROPOSED, that, toward regulating, and making a New COIN, Silver
be reduced, and brought to Five Shillings per Ounce: And by way of
encouragement to the Subject, for bringing in their Plate to be Coined; which I
Humbly Conceive the only way to procure a speedy Supply of Bullion at this
Necessitous Juncture.

THE Government, by way of Encouragement, allowing Ten Pounds Interest, for
Eighteen Months, for One Hundred Pounds value of Plate, to be brought in to be
Coined; and so in proportion for a greater, or lesser Sum; and His Majesty to
have the use of the Money, as the same shall be Coined; which may (in a great
measure) be completed in Six Months, and will bring a speedy Supply, by making
daily Payments, so soon as the said Money shall be Coined; which Money will
Circulate amongst the Subject, and, at the same time, answer His Majesty's
present Occasions.

AND by way of further Encouragement to those, who shall bring in their Plate,
at the time of weighing, and delivering the same, in order to be Coined, there
may be Bills, or Notes, advanced by the Government; with the aforesaid Interest
allowed into the same: And the Bills, or Notes, (so advanced, being Stamp't or
Marked, to prevent Frauds, or Counterfiting the same) be made, to pass from Man
to Man, in any Payment whatsoever, which said Notes, or Bills, will supply the
use of Money, by settling a Fund for that purpose, as a Security for the same;
and support, and carry on Trade, until such time as the said Eighteen Months
shall be Expired, by which time, there may be Coin sufficient to discharge the
said Bills, or Notes, otherwise, they may be continued for a longer time, as to
Your Great Wisdoms shall seem Meet.

AND the better to enable His Majesty to pay the aforesaid Interest, with
Submission to this Honorable House, (I humbly conceive) there may be Two
Shillings per Pound discounted out of the value of Coin, by lessening it Six
Pence in every Five Shillings; which Amounts to Ten Pounds per Cent, and will
answer the Interest of the Ten Pounds per Cent allowed to those Persons, who
shall bring in their Plate so to be Coined; and not only discharge the
aforesaid Interest so allowed, but (as I humbly presume) will be a great, and
the only means to keep our Money at Home: Which, should Coin be made of the
full value with Bullion, in case of a Rise of Bullion, it will be in Danger of
being melted, or carried abroad to supply a dearer Market: And, upon the
aforesaid considerations, it is to be hoped, all people will readily bring in
their Plate; which did not Cost them above Five Shillings per Ounce, besides
the making, they having the present Advantage of using their Moneys, and
receiving such Large Interest for the same; which would otherwise remain in
their hands as a Dead Stock and Charge.

IT is supposed, by most People, that the value of Plate, in this Kingdom,
exceeds that of our Coin; and considering the great Numbers of Silver Tankards,
and other Plate, in all Taverns, Victualling-Houses, and Public Houses of all
sorts, there may be a sufficient Supply from thence (without having regard to
greater Quantities in Private Houses) to Coin several Millions, when so brought
in; besides what will be brought in by private Houses, under the Encouragements
for that purpose. And Public Houses are very sensible their Plate is of great
Disadvantage to them, in many kinds, being glad to embrace such an Opportunity
as this may be, [if approved on by this Honorable House] to dispose of the
same under such Advantages, and for the preventing such Mischiefs as they have
often met with.

BUT should an Unwillingness appear in some Persons, after all the
Encouragements before premised, to bring in their Plate, (I humbly conceive) a
Duty, or Tax, may be laid upon all persons, as to this Honorable House shall
seem convenient, thereby to Obliege them to the same; Goldsmiths and Traders
excepted, for the supply of their Shops and Trades: And the said Goldsmiths and
Traders to be limited from Buying, or Melting down any Old Plate, for the space
of Eighteen Months; which will invite all other persons to bring in their
Plate, to be Coined for the Use of the Government. And the Duty, or Tax, so
laid upon those who shall not bring in their Plate, 'twill be a help to Repair
the Loss, sustained by Clipped and Adulterated Money.

R. B.


