A POSTSCRIPT TO A BOOK Published the Last Year, ENTITLED CONSIDERATIONS ON
Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
MANY Persons, since the publishing my Considerations on Dr. Burnet's Theory of
the Earth, having used Cavillations against some parts of them, viz. where I
seem to leave some things in Mystery, which they will needs have to proceed
from Enthusiasm: Some having done this in my Presence, and Others where I have
not been present, as I have been Informed by many Friends: I have thought fit,
by printing this Paper, to bring the Matter above Board, and to see what may be
said in the Case; and try whether we cannot sound the Depths of these Men's
Thoughts as they take upon them to judge others.

To dissuade a Man from leaving any thing he writes, or discourses on, in
Mystery, I remembered to have read an Ingenious Writer of Politic Essays, who
says, That a man renders himself as liable to Censure, by offering to maintain
a Mysterious Truth, as an open Falsehood; and therefore he disswades Men, by
all means, from meddling in Mysteries. I remembered also that Ecclesiastical
Maxim of Melancthon; Solent homines aut odisse aut superle contemnere quae non
intelligunt. I called to mind the old Tricks, both of Aesop's Fox, which cried
out, that the Grapes were sour, which were out of his Reach; and of his ill
natured Curr in the Manger, which would not permit the Horse to ear Oats, when
he cared not to eat them himself. I remembered likewise those wretches mentioned
in the Scriptures, who damm'd up Isaac's Wells, and would not permit him to
draw Waters for his Use, though themselves made no use of them. Moses does not
say, if the Paschal Lamb cannot be eaten by your self, it must presently be
burnt; but first call in your Neighbor, and if he cannot eat it, then let it
be committed to the Fire. And as for some things which may seem obscurely
intimated in my Work, I well know there are many Men in the World who will
fully apprehend what they import; but if all do not, I cannot help it. Are
there not Tacenda on many Accounts, in the common Practice of Life? And why may
there not be in some parts of Learning? It Is known that the greatest Writers
among Mankind have left a great Part of what they have writ, wrapped up in
Enigma's; or however they have otherwise expressed themselves, it is intelligible
only to a few. Are Roger Bacon, Picus Mirandula, Joannes Trithemius, Cornelius
Agrippa, Joannes Reuchlin, our Dr. Dee, any of the whole Tribe of Hermetick
Philosophers, or any Masters of a Contemplative Life among the Jews, Gentiles,
or Christians, I say, are any of these open in all things they write, so that
every Man acquainted in Common School Learning, or any Man, acquainted in no
more, understands them? Or have the Writers of the Scriptures, or Christ
himself thought fit, still to be open to every Man's Capacity? Because in the
first Chapter of my Considerations, I mention a Promethean Arcanum
Astrologicum, and a Seven Reed Pipe of Pan. without a farther Explanation, some
will needs have This to be Enthusiasm: Now as for the Promethean Arcanum
Astrologicum, Prometheus is known to have been Famous for some notable Skill he
had in Astrology, as a Schoolboy may read in any Mythologist: And the
Assyrians are known to have been the most Famous of any Men in the World, for
Astrology, and their most Ancient Astronomical Observations, which Sciences
they are said to have first learnt of Prometheus. And there are many Men living
in the World, who know themselves to have been touched by the Rod of
Prometheus, or of some Priest of Apollo touch before at the Chariot of the Sun;
whereby They are become animated with a lively and penetrating Aetherial
Spirit; whereas before they were as Lumps of Clay, conversant only with the
outside Barks of things: And in Reference to this, Men may remember the Epitaph
of the Ancient Poet Colophonius Phoenix on Ninus, where reflecting on him for
his giving himself wholly over to the Vanities and Pleasures of this Life;
among other things he says thus of him; Astra nunquam vidit, nec forsitan id
optavit
Ignem apud Magos sacrum non excitavit;
Deum nec virgis attigit, etc.


It Is of this Fire of the Magi that Zoroaster speaks in the Oracles. Quando
videris Ignem Sacrum, forma sine Collucentem, totius per profundum Mundi, Audi
Ignis Vocem. And I know Men in our Nation, who have seen this Fire, and
hearkened with Dread to the Voice of it.

And even in the Temple of Jerusalem, as in the Holy Place, on the North side
stood, on a Table, the Twelve Loaves of Shewbread, denoting, as Josephus tells
us, the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and having a Crown of Gold about them,
said by the Jews, to denote the Crown of the Kingdom. So on the South side of
it, there stood the Candlestick with Seven Lamps, denoting the Seven Planets,
six of which were turned bending toward the Lamp in the middle, and that
toward the Sanctum Sanctorum, where the Mystery lay. And how far this may
relate to some Astrological Arcanum, I shall leave it to Men acquainted in an
apt dispensation of Types, and to those Masters of a contemplative Life, who
have passed Proficients in the most sublime Science of Mystical Divinity.

As to the Seven Reed Pipe of Pan, a Man that knows any thing of Hieroglyphical
Philosophy, knows that Pan is always drawn with a Pipe of Seven Reeds, and that
those Seven Reeds denote the Seven Planets. And certainly Virgil had heard this
Pipe, and could play upon it himself; when, in the Person of Corydon, he said
to Alexis, Est mihi disparibus septem compacta Cicutis
Fistula, --
Having said before to him,
Mecum una in Sylvis imitabere Pana canendo.


And why must it be expected that I should be more explanatory concerning this
Pipe than Virgil?

Indeed, I make no doubt, but there have been, and are still many Men in the
World, who through an affected Sublimity in Writing, or a Vanity of seeming
Knowing in what others are not, have often been sinking themselves in Mystery,
where, in truth, there is no Bottom. And again, on the other hand, I am as well
satisfied, that there have been, and are still many Men in the World, who being
deeply sick of a Philautian Arrogance, to keep up their Repute for Learning
among the Vulgar, have gone about to persuade them, that there is nothing
valuable in Learning, forsooth, but what is known to their Learned Selves,
though, in truth, there are Parts of Learning of far greater Excellency than
any they ever came acquainted withal. If a mere Grammarian, having his Boys
about him, should hear one Logician say to another, that a Syllogism contains a
majus extremum, a minus extremum, and a medium; to make himself seem somebody
among his Boys, he may say, that this is but Cant, Ostentation, and Enthusiasm.
For there are Men, who knowing nothing of some Sciences, and thinking it Shame
to confess their Ignorance of any thing, or seeking a Subterfuge, or solacing
themselves in their Want of knowledge, make their Boast, that those things they
know not, are but Trifles, of little or no Use. But, as Terence says, It Is no
wonder if a Whore acts impudently. And are there not many Realities in Nature,
which cannot be brought under every Man's Apprehension? A Man may talk long
enough to a Person, born blind, of Light, Colors, and a Sun; but he shall
never make him frame a Conception of them. You will say, we are not Blind, we
have more Learning than your self, and therefore you must not obtrude this on
us. Be it so, you are more learned many Ways; yet if a Child tells a blind Man
that there is a Sun, Light, and Colors, and the blind Man will not believe
him, the Child cannot but smile at him for it, though the blind Man may have a
sound Sense otherways, and the Child is but a Child. And I say, there are many
Truths in Nature, which cannot be known but by Experience (as all Masters of a
Contemplative Life testify) and that the greatest Man of Parts in the World
cannot apprehend them, without having had a peculiar and practical Initiation
for taking Knowledge of them; according to what Zoroaster says in the Oracles,
Est quoddam intelligibile, quod oportet te intelligere mentis flore, (by an
esflorescent Excess of Mind.) The Lord Bacon tells us, that the Magia Naturalis
is a Setting of Forms a Work. Now I would fain have any Man, who has not seen
an Operation in that kind, to tell me (if he can) the Meaning of That; but I
know it impossible.

We read of Socrates, that having perused the Works of Heraclitus, he said,
what he understood of them was Excellent, and therefore he believed that what
he did not understand of them was so too. And though I pretend not to any
Excellency of Writing, I hope, what I have openly offered in my Considerations,
may be thought tolerably Plausible by indifferent Judges; and if I leave a few
Things Veiled, I think there may be no great Reason for Censure. Some may
object that if we give Way to Obscure Writing, all Enthusiasm breaks in upon
us, and we know not how to distinguish betwixt the one and the other. To this I
can only say, that if, when a Man reasons Openly, he reasons Soundly, and
Writes in a Free and Unaffected Manner, I think it may be a rational Inducement
for us to believe, that though sometimes, for Reasons known to himself, he
leaves some few Things in Mystery, there may be some worthy Learning contained
under them, which he conceives not fit to be Openly explained. So let any Man
of Judgment read the Tract of Joannes Reuchlin, De Verbo mirifico, or his other
Works; and though in many Places he finds him involved in Mystery, that he is
not understood by him; yet I believe, by what he has Writ openly, and his Way
of Delivery, the Reader will be convinced, that he is no Muddy-brain'd
Enthusiast, using an affected Obscurity, to beget Admiration in his Readers,
for his Seeming deep Reach into Mysteries to others unknown. And so I may say
of a multitude of others, of the like kind; Men whom a great Insight in the low
Circumstances of human Life, had made truly humble, so that they could be no
ways guilty of so poor a Vanity.

Having been thus far Explanatory in this Matter, I shall little value any
Man's Censure in such Cases: Nay, I shall be so far from dealing precariously
with him for his favorable Opinion, that I shall freely come wi^h him to this
Unexceptionable Accommodation, viz. That we laugh at each other by Consent, and
let him pass for the Idiot, who laughs without Just Cause. And I shall conclude
with Bid, who was Clamoured, and supercili^usly De Elem. Philos. 1. 2. in
proaem.
Censured by some Men of his Time, for his searching into and writing on some
Parts of Learning vulgarly not understood. Nihil de Multitudine, sed de
Paucorum prolitate gloriantes, Soli Veritati insudamus.

JOHN BEAUMONT Jun.

I recommend the following Particulars to be inserted in their proper places,
in my Considerations on the Theory of the Earth.

BOOK 1. Chap. 1. Page 10. Lin. 20. after times read, And hence, as the
preceding Age was called (...), obscure, so this Age was called (...),
fabulous. Ib. p. 11. in the last Line, after Mind read, And from hence sprung
their Multiplicity of Gods, according to the diversified Powers of Nature. At
the end of the said Chapter add the following Paragraph.

I shall conclude this Point concerning the Learning of the Ancients, with the
Testimony of Averrhoes; who (as the Learned Fabricius tells ^s in h^s
Zoroaster) says in some part of his Works, That Philosophy was in as great
Perfection among the Ancient Chaldeans, as it was in the times of Aristotle.
Now the Testinony of this Man is the more to be valued, because he was
indisputably the soundest Reasoner, and the most Learned among all the
Arabians, and a great Favourer as well as Follower of Aristotle, he having writ
Commentaries on his Works; so that had he not been thoroughly convinced of the
height of Philosophy among the Ancient Chaldeans, he would not have brought it
in Competition with that in the Times of Aristotle. So again the Learned
Pierius, concerning the Learning of the Ancient Egyptians; Constantissima fama
celebratum In Ep. Comment, hierog. praemissa.
est, Sacerdotes Aegyptios omnem Naturae obscuritatem adeo manifest sibi
cognitam professos, ut (...) traditam disciplinam haereditariam possiderent.

Chap. 4. p. 15. l. 7. after conceiving, add. And as for any other meaning in
it, they would say with Trismegistus, in his Minerva Mundi; Minime posteris
credenda Fabula putetur esse Chaos.

I have thought on many other Additions and Amendments, but I want Room to
insert them here.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall. 1694


