THE DOCTRINE OF A General Resurrection: WHEREIN The Identity of the Rising
Body is asserted, against the Socinians and Scepticks. IN A SERMON PREACHED
Before the UNIVERSITY, at St. Mary's in OXFORD, on Easter-Monday, Apr. 5.

BY THO. BECONSALL, A. M. and Fellow of Brasenose College.

OXFORD: Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for GEORGE WEST, Bookseller, An. Dom. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
THE Biass of Humane Nature toward those things we in any Sense call our Own,
is so notorious and remarkable, that it often influences our Judgments in the
Affairs of States and Kingdoms, no less than Families and private Persons. But
certainly there is a Parental kind of Affection exercised toward the Offspring
of our own Minds, as well as that of our Bodies, that often transports us into
overweening Fondnesses, and unaccountable Partialities. Hence writing of
Books, or publishing of Thoughts from the Closet, or Pulpit, is by the rest of
the World generally pronounced a piece of Affectation and Vanity, founded in an
Opinion of some extraordinary intrinsic Worth or Merit. Men are not content to
conceive and bring forth in a private Apartment, and view and admire their own
Productions; but height of Admiration sends 'em forth into the open World, to
exercise the same Faculties in others, no doubt with an Intention, that the
Praises of all should be returned back on the Original. I must confess this is
a Censure, which may sometimes carry a great deal of Truth in it, though at last
it seems to be a very uncharitable Truth; unless every short-sighted Mortal can
pretend to be a Searcher of the Heart and Reins, or unless no Attempts of this
kind could be acted by any other Motive, that is truly Just and Honorable. But
however this Doctrine may prevail in common Cases, certainly the special
Obligations I Am unfortunately under, in doing Justice to my self and others,
will at this time free me from the Imputation of it. It has been more than once
represented, how much I lie under the Displeasure, not to say the Reproaches of
some Men, for shamefully Mis-representing the Author of the Essay concerning
Humane Understanding, for branding his Notions of Identity, with little less
than the Imputation of Heresy, whilst at last I was forced to have recourse to
'em, to establish my own Hypothesis: This is a Charge formed on a transient
Delivery of a Sermon, and for the Truth of the greatest part of it, I submit it
to every Ingenuous Reader, upon a View on both sides.

But certainly it seems to reflect as much Positiveness and Presumption on its
Authors, as it industriously fixes Folly and Disgrace on me. It might have been
considered who presides in the University-Church, to censure all such notorious
Miscarriages, and consequently they might at least have expected a Reprimand
from Authority, before such a severe Sentence had passed upon me. This would
have given them, not only an Opportunity to express their Resentments or
Indignation, but added weight and force to 'em. As the Case stands, I Am not now
to be a Judge; I can only declare, I Am as yet so unhappy to be wholly
unsensible of any Misrepresentations, and consequently of any Injustice
committed against Mr. Lock. And therefore being so highly charged, I thought
the best Expedient to set both sides to Rights, to put the one into a Condition
of Vindicating himself, and the other of being Informed of an Error, was to
publish the whole Discourse, which (as far as concerns Mr. Lock) I Have done
without the least Alterations. Having said thus much, give me leave to offer
something by way of Pre-caution. I can safely declare, I am acted by no
Personal Prejudices, no more than Unchristian Designs, for this Author is as
absolute a Stranger to me, as I am to him. The Subject I was engaged on,
directed me to the Controversy, and the Duty I owe to what appears to me to be
Truth, and especially a Fundamental Christian Truth, obliged me to enter the
List with those that have advanced Positions, that apparently shake or
over-turn it; and perhaps the Duty and Obligations are justly heightened in an
Age, when the Assailment of the most important Articles of Faith is become so
exquisitely Fashionable. But now, if in the Defense of Truth, it at last
appears, that I have done this Author the least Injustice, either in
mis-representing, or mis-applying his Sense or Notions, I shall heartily and
freely make him Satisfaction, and that too as public, as he or his Friends
shall think fit to make my Mistakes.

A Sermon, etc.
JOH. Chap. V. ver. 28, 29. The hour is coming, in the which All that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: They that have done
good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.


THE present Solemnity has engaged me on a Subject, which as it is the support
and glory of the Just and Faithful, so it has always been the contempt and
laughter of the Impious and Unbelieving. Its true, the Learned have often
attempted to trace the Footsteps of a general Resurrection, from certain
Resemblances in the Book of Nature, or from certain Doctrines advanced (I know
not how) in the Schools of Philosophers. Thus the Earth has been represented
as a kind of Grave or Sepulcher to the Vegetable World, where the vital Powers
are sealed up, and stifled all the Winter, and yet at Spring are actuated,
expand, and send forth a lively Verdure: Thus every Grain of Corn, that
ministers Life and Sustenance to our own Species, must suffer Death, in order
to receive a new vital Principle. Thus the Doctrine of Transmigration, in the
Schools of Plato and Pythagoras, has been sought to, to speak out that of the
Resurrection: And the Doctrine of a general Conflagration among the Stoics,
must usher in the Restitution of all things. These are Arguments, by no means
the Product of any Modern Wits; but of the earliest Apologists and Advocates
for the Faith. As if the Doctrine of the Resurrection had been legible, in the
very Frame and Constitution of Nature; and to deny it in the Old Schools of
Philosophy, were to renounce their own avowed Principles. But yet for all this
its well known, the most powerful Assailants of the Christian Faith, made their
greatest Efforts against this Christian Bulwark. It did not become the subject
of Drollery and Ridicule to the Stoics at Athens alone, but it engaged the Wit
and Malice too, of Lucian and Celsus, of Julian and Caecilius. In a word, when
it came to the Test, neither the most improved Doctrine of Transmigration, nor
of the Soul's Immortality, nor of a future State, was sufficient to introduce
the Belief of it: For the whole Tribe of Gentile Philosophers, though otherwise
sufficiently distinguished in their Notions and Principles, do here unanimously
conspire to pronounce it Absurd and Impossible, and its Professors, for this
very reason, Vile and Despicable. In a word, Though the Doctrine of a
Resurrection, particularly that of the Just, had obtained in the Jewish
Schools, except those of the Sadducees, yet the Notion of it was vastly
different from that Glorious Resurrection, which the Christian Institutions
ratify and establish, for none of 'em could ever arrive to a strict numerical
Resurrection; and therefore its in this sense One of those Doctrines, which
stands to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. But
notwithstanding these extravagant Insults, its to those that believe, The power
of God, and the wisdom of God. Its a Doctrine as powerful in the Evidence of
it, as it has been mighty in its Successes; and though we cannot assert it from
the established Course of Nature, nor desire to rake it up out of the Rubbish
of Heathen, or Jewish Traditions, yet it rests upon an unshaken Foundation,
even a sure word of Prophecy, unto which we shall do well to take heed; for we
have before us the words of Him, that is become The Lord of Life and Glory, and
has the Keys of Hell and Death: He it is that assures us, The hour is coming,
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth: They that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

This famous Passage is almost universally allowed to be a Description of a
general Resurrection. Indeed the Learned Bishop Pearson observes, that it
strikes so closely at the Socinian Notion of a Resurrection, that some of 'em
are forced to apply it to a Spiritual Resurrection, and pronounce the Grave to
be the Regions of Heathen Ignorance and Impiety, and the Reception of the
Gospel, to be the Resurrection from 'em. But we must do Socinus, and the most
considerable of his Followers, Crellius and Schlictingius, a piece of Justice
here; for though they will not allow the words to prove the Identity of our
Rising Bodies, yet they reject the conceit of a spiritual Resurrection, and
assign the same Arguments against it, that are advanced by this Eminent
Prelate. Since then we are thus far agreed, that the thing pointed at is a
General Resurrection, we may venture to affirm, that they instruct us in two
important Circumstances of it; first, the Extent, and secondly, the Manner of
it.

Here Is a distinction of Allotments, Life and Damnation, and they are founded
in distinct Works and Actions, good and evil, and both imply distinct Classes
of Persons, the Righteous and the Wicked, and consequently a Resurrection of
both: The Wicked must certainly bear a part in the Resurrection, for every Soul
that sins, and every Body that dies, and is committed to the Dust, must
rise again: Yes, as surely as he dies and enjoys a Sepulcher, he must be
forced from his Lodgment, and rise again; for neither the Grave, nor Rocks, nor
Mountains shall cover, much less secure him, since all that are in the Graves
must come forth: Thus we have the Extent of the Resurrection.

Again, If we demand with what Bodies shall we come? Why certainly since our
Resurrection is to be made from the Grave, and since our Bodies, even Flesh and
Blood were committed to the Grave, the very same Bodies will rise again; the
Substance will not be changed, though the Quality's altered: And thus we have the
Manner of the Resurrection, for All that are in the Graves shall come forth. I
shall endeavor to assert both these important Truths, and that in Opposition
to the Adversaries of 'em.

I begin with the First, I mean the Extent of the Resurrection. As for the
Extent of it, the Socinian Doctors are not yet agreed, though the most Judicious
declare for a general Resurrection. Its observable Smalcius, the Author of the
Racovian Catechism, only describes the Resurrection of the Just, without taking
the least notice of that of the Wicked; whilst others allow the former, but
expressly deny the latter. But an impartial Reader, one would think, could not
have wished for a clearer Decision of this matter, than our Savior's words
afford us, when we are told, That all that are in the Graves shall come forth,
part to the Resurrection of Life, and part to the Resurrection of Damnation. So
that he that disputes the Truth of a general Resurrection, must allow no
distinction between the Righteous and the Wicked, no more than their future
Allotments; or he must deny the Wicked the most common Office of Humanity, that
of Burial, or excuse it, by asserting an immediate Annihilation: For if the
Wicked at the point of Death, do not immediately vanish into soft Air, or if
Mankind do not usually judge beforehand, and thereupon deny 'em the Office of
Burial, or if the Allotments of Life and Damnation are not indiscriminately
ascertained (to affirm any of which would be a gross and palpable Absurdity)
then the Wicked must come forth of their Graves, and make their Resurrection,
though a most Fatal one, even the Resurrection of Damnation. We may add to this
leading Authority another of St. Paul's, and its the more considerable, since
this great Apostle industriously pursues our Savior's Methods in Representing
it, and that too with respect to the Universality, Design and Manner of it: For
we must all appear (no doubt from our Graves) before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body (no doubt in
that very Body they were committed) according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. But to conclude this Argument from express
Authorities of Scripture; the Divine Author of the Book of Revelations has so
accurately described a general Resurrection, that he seems to have
industriously Ransackt all the Corners of the World, in order to advance a
Challenge, to produce one single Mortal, that has not his Summons to it. And I
saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God (no doubt with that very
Part about 'em, for which they were once esteemed Dead-men) and the Sea gave up
the dead which were in it, and Death and Hell gave up the dead which were in
them, Chap. 20. ver. 12, 13. Here we see the Prince and Peasant, the Infant and
Man of Years, must obey the Summons of a general Resurrection; and all the
Repositories of Art and Nature, are forced to surrender up their Dead, or
disgorge the Mortal part of 'em: And will any Socinian pretend to contrive a
shelter for the Wicked? I Am afraid he will leave himself, as well as them,
miserably exposed, especially when the Text assures us, That the very Heavens
shall flee away, and there shall be no place found for them, ver. 11.

But farther, not to rest any longer in Generals, I shall endeavor to prove it
from the Nature of the Thing, and that too in its particular Instances. And
First, As for the Resurrection of the Just, its on all hands agreed, that they
are virtually raised in Christ, for since the Head is risen, and as such
styled, The firstborn from the Dead, the Members that are united to him, by a
spiritual, vital Principle, his holy Spirit, shall certainly be raised, for He
that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal Bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in us, Romans 8.11. Again, Christ is expressly styled, The
first fruits of our Resurrection. And as the First Fruits offered to God,
consecrated, or blessed the whole Lump, so this First-fruit having purchased to
himself a vital Principle, by fulfilling the Divine Compact, it will be
conveyed to all those that have an interest in him; so that the Resurrection of
the Just, or Faithful, is in a spiritual Sense, or the way of Grace, derived
from that of our Savior, as absolutely as Light or Warmth from the Sun, in the
way of Nature. But then here is the Foundation of the Miscarriages of our
Adversaries, the Rock which they carelessly split upon: For since they are not
able to discern any such Connection, between the Resurrection of our Savior,
and that of the Wicked, they are apt to imagine, he can have no just Right or
Title to it, and consequently there is no real Foundation for it. But the
Mistake is extremely obvious: For as our blessed Savior became a Mediator
between God and Man, and this Mediation, in the original Design of it, extends
to all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, he challenges an unquestionable Right of
Dominion over the whole Species, upon the Performance or Execution of it; For
to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both
of the dead and living, Romans 14.9. This is so clear, that it extends even to
Heathens and Unbelievers, for by virtue of it he becomes their proper Judge,
and as he is their Judge, he can rightfully summon 'em from their very Graves,
in their proper Bodies or Persons. And therefore he has an uncontrollable
Authority to rouse even once the most potent Sinner, and oblige him to account
for his Actions, with those Eyes, and Hands, and Heart, that so grossly
dishonored him. And since in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments, he
has signified a special regard to the Body, as well as Soul, we might without
St. Paul's express Declaration conclude, That there shall be a Resurrection,
both of the just and unjust, Act. 24.15. It is true, they move upon a different
Foundation; the first is an Act of infinite Grace and Mercy, an Act that
carries the most joyful Invitations in it, for its the glorious Consummation of
Christ's Espousals with his Church; but the second, an Act of sovereign Power
and Justice, and implies a kind of forcible Entry on the Tombs of the Wicked,
who shall be haled forth, to receive the Sentence of Disobedience in a personal
and bodily Appearance. And thus much for the Extent of the Resurrection.

I proceed to examine the Second General, which respects the Manner of it; and
it is, That we shall all be raised in our own proper Bodies: And for the
clearing of this Argument, I shall first evince it from the Nature of the Thing
from Scripture, and Antiquity. And for as much as the Resurrection of our own
proper Bodies will appear from these Authorities, I shall in the Second Place,
endeavor to state the Nature of Humane Identity, and consequently the Identity
of our rising Bodies; and from both these conclude what is proper to be
Believed, and make some returns to the Possibility of such a Resurrection.

And First, That we shall All be raised in our own proper Bodies: This is a
Position which the Socinians unanimously reject; Its true, Schlictingius places
humane Identity purely in the Identity of a Rational Spiritual Soul; and though
he does not expressly deny the Resurrection of the Body, yet he makes the
Identity of the Body no way material in the Resurrection. See Comment on Romans
8. v. 11. As for the Nature of humane Identity, I shall speak to it in its
proper place; and therefore I shall prosecute my present Design, and prove,
that the Christian Faith is, We shall be raised every one in his own proper
Body.

And first this is indisputably evident from the very Notion of a Resurrection,
and the received use of the Word. Now certainly a Resurrection is the restoring
a dead Creature to its former State of Life, by a Reunion of its first
Principles. The constituent Principles of a Man are a Soul, and a Body, and
Death primarily consists in the Separation of 'em; or rather, as Death is the
Forerunner of Corruption, in the Dissolution of one, or both of 'em: If
therefore Lazarus, or any other Person is to be raised again, those Two
numerical Principles of which he was originally compounded, must be united; and
then, and not till then, is Lazarus raised from the Dead. The Notion
sufficiently discovers it self in the Case of Lazarus, and our Blessed Savior;
where the Body was not dissolved, and the same is absolutely required, where
the corruptible Principle is actually dissolved. Man is certainly compounded of
a corruptible, and incorruptible Principle, the incorruptible Principle cannot
suffer Death, or Dissolution, and therefore Men are chiefly said to be Dead, in
respect of their corruptible Principle, that usually suffers Corruption;
certainly then if any particular Person is to be raised from the Dead, that
Principle which properly dies, and is corrupted, is to be restored to its
former State, and united to the incorruptible Principle, without which there
can be no Resurrection. For if the corruptible Principle, which properly dies,
and is dissolved, is not restored, but a new one formed, or created in the room
of it, and united to the incorruptible Principle, it may be properly esteemed a
new Production, but by no means, a proper Resurrection; and to assert the
contrary, is to confound received Terms, as well as Notions. In a word, when a
new Body is formed out of the common Mass of Matter, and united to the Soul of
any particular Person, its in reality no more but the Pythagorean
Transmigration, which though performed after a new manner, yet by no greater a
share of Divine influence, than that which gives a plastic Power, to form a
Body in the Womb, and unites a particular Soul to it. Shall the Socinians then,
those pretending Masters of Reason, call this a Resurrection? This is to
obtrude a Notion contrary to the sense of Mankind, when the great Argument for
rejecting the true Resurrection, is because they cannot reconcile it to their
scanty Measures of Reason. But that, what has been hitherto asserted, was the
true Notion of a Resurrection, not only the Testimony of Scripture, and
Christian Antiquity, but the joint Suffrage of the Learned Heathens abundantly
assures us: For it was on this account the Doctrine of the Resurrection was
loaded with so much Contempt and Scorn; when they considered so many various
Transmigrations of Matter, they esteemed it impossible for Omnipotence it self,
to range every Particle into its own peculiar Place and Order, so as to restore
and make up every individual Body. Hence it was they triumphed in their
Barbarities exercised upon some of the Martyrs of Christ, since they designedly
committed 'em to the Jaws of wild Beasts, to defeat (as they thought)
Omnipotence, and infinite Truth at the same time, in disabling him from
performing what he had solemnly promised. Indeed had the Resurrection, in the
most strict and proper Sense of it, implied a Restitution of the same
individual Body, it could not have extorted such severe Censures from most of
the Learned Heathens; for since they allowed the Immortality of the Soul, and a
natural Tendency to assume a new Vehicle, they might easily allow that
Omnipotence could without any difficulty prepare a new Body, if that had been
sufficient, (as the Socinian would have it) to give it the Denomination of a
Resurrection. For in a word, This would have passed off as a specious kind of
Transmigration, and consequently a Doctrine that would have met with a very
easy Reception in most of the Greek Schools. But to proceed:

Let us in the next place examine what Scripture says to this Matter, whereby
we shall prove our main Design, as well as confirm this very Notion. And first
from the Passages already cited on another Argument, where the Resurrection is
said to be made from the Grave, from the Sea, and Hell, and Death; where the
Dead are said to stand before God, and Death and Hell are said to give up their
dead. See Rev. 20: 12, 13. Joh. 5.28. I think its indisputably evident, the
Holy Spirit directs us to the corruptible Principle, the Body, which alone
suffers Death, and is committed to the Grave, and consequently the Resurrection
must imply a Restitution of this very Principle, in Conjunction with the
incorruptible Principle, the Soul. Indeed it seems absurd, to send us to all
the Repositories of the Dead, to establish the Belief of a Resurrection, if a
new Corporeal Part is to be framed, or rather if the Mortal Part, that was laid
in the Prison of the Grave, is not to be given up again, and actually restored.
The Argument is so obvious and convincing, that neither Socinus nor Crellius,
upon these Passages of Scripture, are able to make any other Reply, but Non
sequitur, or it does not appear, that the rising Body is the same numerical
Body with that which fell. Its true, Socinus appeals to a Passage of St. Paul,
which proves nothing (as will appear by and by) but what we freely grant, that
our corruptible Bodies* cannot inherit Incorruption. See Comment o^ Joh. 5.28.
And therefore it concludes nothing against the present Argument.

But the Identity of our rising Bodies is evinced from yet more express
Authorities of Scripture; in one place we are assurred, that the holy Spirit
shall quicken our mortal bodies, Romans 8.11. In another, that our Savior shall
change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
Phil. 3.21. In a third, that This corruptible shall put on incorruption, 1 Cor.
15.53. Here we have the Notion of a Resurrection asserted in express Terms, as
well as the Identity of the rising Body. For is it not that mortal corruptible
Principle, or that Body which suffered Corruption in the Grave, that is said to
be quickened, or restored to Life? Crellius I know has the Face to affirm, that
they are not our mortal Bodies, that are quickened, but new ones assigned us. [
See Comment on the Place.] But can a new Body, substituted in the room of my
mortal Body, without Solecism and Nonsense, be called my mortal Body, or this
New Body quickened, the quickening of my mortal Body? But to proceed, the
remaining Passages carry the Absurdity higher: Can a new Body, as to Matter or
Substance, placed in the room of my corruptible Body, be fairly reconciled with
this Corruptible? Or can my corruptible Principle, or dead Body, though never to
be restored, be said to put on Incorruption, only because my Soul is after a
certain Period united to a new incorruptible Body, diametrically distinct from
my corruptible Body? My Soul, in such a case, puts on Incorruption, but by no
means my corruptible Body, that still rots and moulders in the Dust. Again, our
vile Bodies may be fashioned, or changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious
body, by reducing 'em from a natural, to a spiritual, and from a corruptible,
to an incorruptible Frame; but if perfect new Bodies are to be fashioned and
substituted, then our vile bodies are not the things fashioned or changed into
the likeness of glorious bodies, but exchanged for 'em. We therefore freely
grant, that the Substance is transformed by a Change of Qualities, from natural
to spiritual, and from corruptible to incorruptible Bodies: And this is all the
Apostle intends, when he tells us, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of Heaven. A great Truth no doubt, as it is encompassed with humane
Infirmities, and corruptible Qualities; for the Close of the Verse gives us the
sense of the whole, nor corruption inherit incorruption. [1 Cor. 15.35. the
place cited by Socinus.] But now we have gone thus far, it would be highly
absurd to affirm, that a vile corruptible Body puts on Incorruption, or is
fashioned or changed into a glorious Body, when it remains in an eternal State
of Corruption. Therefore, the Resurrection, which changes a vile and
corruptible Body into a glorious and incorruptible one, must imply a
Restitution of the corruptible Principle, and consequently the same numerical
Body is the undoubted Subject of the Resurrection.

But farther, that I may not dwell too long on this General, I shall only have
recourse to Scripture for one Argument more; its The Resurrection of our
Savior's Body: Now its well known, the History of all the Evangelists, the
Print of the Nails in his Hands and Feet, and of the Spear in his Side,
demonstrate, That our blessed Savior rose in that very Body which was
Crucified, Dead and Buried; but now its on all hands agreed, that our Savior
was a Type and Pattern of our Resurrection; yes, he is more to the Righteous,
for its Christ's the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming. The Apostle all along carries the Analogy between him and us, and
therefore As Christ rose in his own proper mortal Body, so we shall all rise in
ours. The Socinians are pressed here, and therefore endeavor to evade the
force of it, by pretending, That though our Savior rose in his Crucified Body,
yet upon his Ascension he received a glorious and spiritualized Body. But this
Evasion proves nothing, unless it appear from Scripture, that Christ deposited
his Crucified Body, and assumed a new Body in the room of it. But this is a
Conceit that is destitute of all Foundation from Scripture, and indeed so much,
that I do not find any Socinian that peremptorily asserts it. Therefore this
Glorified Body can be nothing but the Crucified Body, refined, adorned and
beautified, and its no more but what we allow in the Resurrection of our vile
mortal Bodies, for they shall be fashioned like unto his glorious Body:
Therefore as Christ the First Fruits is risen in his own proper Body, so shall
every one of us be raised in our own proper Bodies at his coming. Thus far it
appears, that the current of Scripture, as well as the nature of the Thing,
declares for the Identity of the Rising Body.

But that we may confirm the one, and not be mistaken in the Sense of the
other, give me leave to reflect a little the Sentiments of the Primitive
Church. And because it would be impertinent in this place, to produce
particular Passages of Authors, I shall only endeavor to represent this
Argument in a few Observations. And first its evident, the Suffrage of the
Primitive Church determined for the Resurrection of the same Body; since the
Belief of this very Article was the great Prop to the Constancy and
Perseverance of Martyrs and Confessors. Their very Persecutors observed it in
'em, and they resolutely attested the Power and Efficacy of it at the place of
Martyrdom. They were persuaded, that the very Hairs of their Head were all
Numbered, and should one Day be restored to 'em; and therefore they powerfully
bore up under the Cruelties of their Executioners, though torn piecemeal by
Racks and Saws, or devoured by wild Beasts. Again, its well known, the grand
Objection from the various Transmigrations of Matter, was in Being in the first
Ages of the Church, and taken notice of on both sides; and the Heathen
Persecutors (as was observed before) took care to improve it, by exposing the
Faithful to the Ravage of wild Beasts. Its well known, the Fathers fix the
Resurrection of the Body on the Justice of God, in the distribution of Rewards
and Punishments. Its well known, they contended for the Resurrection of the
Flesh, and expound most of the forecited Passages of Scripture, of that very
Body and Flesh, that was committed to the Grave; nay, which is more than all
this, the Style of most of the ancient Creeds was, I believe the Resurrection
of the Flesh. And therefore since these are unquestionable Truths, we must
conclude, that the Doctrine of a numerical Resurrection constantly prevailed in
the Primitive Church.

Give me leave to add but one word more. The Judgment of the Primitive Church,
for a numerical Resurrection, is indisputably evident from the Censures that
passed upon Origin; since we find him more than once condemned as Heretical,
(sometimes by Councils) for asserting, that we shall, make our Resurrection in
an Ethereal Body, or rather that our rising Body is only formed from a seminal
Principle of the corruptible Body. Upon the whole then it appears, that the
Voice of Reason, Scripture and Antiquity, jointly declare for the Resurrection
of the same Body, and therefore we have all the Authorities which a Matter of
this Nature is capable of, that we are not mistaken in our Notions of it:
Therefore we must not only believe, that we shall all be raised in our own
Bodies, but Earnestly contend for this Faith, as originally delivered to the
Saints.

And now since it is concluded, the Resurrection we are to make will be a
Resurrection of the same Body, it remains that we Enquire into the Nature of
its Identity, or wherein this Sameness consists. And that we take just Measures
of the Identity of the rising Body, I think it will be necessary to offer
something concerning the Nature of Humane Identity, or which is all one, the
Identity of a humane Person, because the Identity of the rising Man will
certainly be formed upon the same Rules and Principles with that of the living
Man. And first, since Man, or which is the same thing, a humane Person, is
certainly a Being compounded of Two distinct Principles, an animal, and a
spiritual Principle, a Soul, and a Body; I cannot comply with a late Reformer
of Humane Understandings, See Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Vderstanding,
Book 2. Chap. 27. Sect. 15.20.26.
that places Personal Identity purely in Consciousness, or a Faculty of
Reflecting on our own Thoughts and Actions, and ascribing 'em to our selves as
such. I shall take liberty to consider it, because this Author speaks of it
only as applied to a humane Person, and expressly applies it to the Resurrection
(no doubt) as an Expedient to solve the difficulties of it.

Its true, for as much as Consciousness is an incommunicable Property of every
intelligent Being, it will easily be granted, that there cannot be personal
Identity without Consciousness; but we can by no means allow, that
Consciousness is the sole Principle, or Foundation of personal Identity, as
this Author plainly asserts. Indeed he gives it such an absolute Sovereignty in
this Affair, and discovers such an overweening Fondness for the Notion, That
the little Finger cut off from the Body, if Conscious, must be the same Person,
Sect. 17. That Consciousness inhabiting successively several Bodies, must be
all One and the same humane Person: That Two distinct Consciousnesses acting in
the same Body, one by Night and the other by Day, must make a Night-man and a
Day-man, and Two distinct Persons, Sect. 22. In a word, he fairly suggests,
That Transmigration is a Doctrine no way absurd, but very probable, and a good
piece of Christian Platonism. And in plain terms, That Socrates after this Life
can no way be the same Man, but by Consciousness, Sect. 20. Now certainly, as
for the Doctrine of Transmigration, it will be readily allowed to be a good
Piece of Platonism, but he that owns himself an Advocate for it, renders his
Christianity justly suspected. For whosoever admits the Resurrection of the
same Body, must pronounce Transmigration extravagantly absurd; for certainly,
if Socrates's Soul has successively informed, presided, and acted in several
Bodies, there will be as great a Contest at the Resurrection, which Body shall
be Married to Socrates's Soul, as the Sadduce foolishly supposed, when he
demanded Whose Wife shall she be of the Seven? As for the Identity of
Socrates's Resurrection, I hope to make it appear, that it does not consist in
Consciousness. But to return, Personal Identity can never consist in
Consciousness, though we take Person for an Intelligent Being, without any regard
to any particular Substance wherein it exists; since it is only a reflex Act,
or Faculty of an Intelligent Being, and supposes several Faculties antecedent
to it, whereas the Identity of any Being must arise from the first Principles
of its Existence. But now its evident, Person implies an Intelligent Being,
with regard to the particular Substance, and the Parts and Principles of it,
whereby it exists; for otherwise I would fain know, how its possible to
distinguish a Humane, an Angelick, and a Divine Person. Mr. Lock will reply,
That they are only to be distinguished by distinct Principles of Consciousness;
but thus far every particular Humane Person is distinguished; and consequently
there must be something else than Consciousness, to distinguish the several
species of Persons. I am sure an Angelick, and Humane Person must be
distinguished by diversity of substance, as well as Consciousness, in as much as
the one is a pure Spirit, the other a Substance compounded of Spirit and
Matter, or an animal and spiritual Part. These are Positions that answer to the
most uncontroverted Idea's or Notions of a humane Person. But now if a humane
Person, in the true Notion of it, implies an Existence of the animal, as well
as the immaterial or spiritual Part, the Identity of a humane Person, or which
is the same thing, Personal Identity, as applied to a particular Man, must
consist in the Identity of the animal, as well as immaterial Part,
whereinsoever that happens to consist; and consequently Consciousness, which is
only a Property of an immaterial Soul, and in the Judgment of Mr. Lock, may be
Communicated to any new Body, or animal Part, cannot reach the Identity of a
humane Person. In one word, I dare appeal to all the world, Whether Mr. Lock,
throughout his whole Chapter of Identity, does not speak of personal Identity,
as applied to a humane Person; and certainly Consciousness, which may exist
with the Soul in a state of Separation, can never be the adequate Principle of
personal Identity, unless we can imagine, that the Body contributes nothing to
the making up of a humane Person; or indeed, that it is not an essential
Principle as well as the Soul. I am sure such Notions, such Assertions as
these, would have done signal service to the Sect called (...), that resolved
our Savior's humane Nature into mere Phantasm; for if Consciousness is alone
sufficient to constitute the Identity of a humane Person, or if the animal Part
of a humane Person is not an Essential, as well as the Soul, it was
unpardonable Injustice in the Primitive Church, to pronounce this Set of Men
Heretics. I remember Mr. Lock very learnedly assures us, that Person is a
forensick Term, applied to a Being capable of judicial Punishment, as well as
Rewards: But certainly such a Person, in the Judgment of the Bench, contains an
animal Part in the Idea of it, as well as Consciousness; else the Person may be
conscious of a Thousand Crimes, and stand Convicted too, and yet defy the
Judicial Power in inflicting personal Punishments. But to conclude this
Argument in a few words, if Consciousness is the sole Principle of personal
Identity, suppose we should find it, at the general Resurrection, United to a
little Finger, to an Indian Tortoise, or a Body made up of the Remains of
Heliogabalus's Hogs, (Instances of his own culling) it may be the very
ingenious Author of the Essay concerning Humane Understanding Risen from the
Dead, or the very same numerical Person he was in the Land of the Living. I am
sure all this literally agrees with his own Language, when he tells us, Sect.
26. in the Name of an Apostle, That at the great Day every One will be the same
by Consciousness, in whatever Bodies they shall appear, or Consciousness
adheres to. If therefore he will be content to make his Resurrection on these
Terms, I leave him to enjoy his beloved Notion, so that he will allow others to
expect a Resurrection according to the Catholic Faith. And now I am ready to
accuse my self, for dwelling so long upon a single Notion: But yet I think it
was absolutely necessary to my present Undertaking, which is to state the
Nature of humane Identity, or which is the same thing, personal Identity, as
applied to a humane Person, to assert the Catholic Doctrine of the same Rising
Body; and in a word, to rescue it from downright Socinianism in a new Dress.

For what is all this but to act the Socinian in Masquerade, or under the
Disguise of new Names, rather than Notions; for if Consciousness alone
constitutes the Identity of the rising Person, what does it differ from the
Socinian Notion, that places the Identity of a humane Person in the same
Individual Spirit, and allows the rising Body to be formed of common Matter. I
shall not peremptorily affirm, that this is a Notion which deserves the Name of
Heresy; but certainly, if Origen's Notion of an Ethereal Body, or a Seminal
Principle, was justly condemned as Heretical, I am sure it must be a signal
Favor to exempt Consciousness thus applied, from as severe a Censure. Thus we
see the wonderful Product of free Thinking, when it acts without the least
regard to the Canon of Scripture.

But to return to the Decision of the Nature of Humane Identity: As for the
spiritual Principle, the Soul, though it does by no means consist in
Consciousness, yet its abundantly concluded, it consists in the same individual
intelligent Spirit. The remaining Difficulty then is to fix the Identity of the
Animal Part, the Body; and certainly the Identity of the animal Part must in
one word consist In a sit Construction and Organization of certain Particles of
Matter, whereby one common Principle of Life is begun, continued, and the
Integral Parts of the Man are perfected and maintained. If it be demanded,
Which are the Integral Parts of a Man, certainly they are either to be measured
by this common Principle of Life, as they are more or less serviceable to the
Maintenance of it, or at least from the received Idea of the animal Part.
Under the first Head are to be reduced the Vessels and Instruments of
Concoction, and the Elaboratories of the Blood and Spirits, or Vehicles of
Life, such are Nerves, Veins and Arteries. Under the second are the Skin,
Flesh, Bones, and their Appendages, and even Shape and Proportion; for though as
to Bones and Flesh, there may be no express Standard, with respect to Weight,
Dimension, or Number, no more than in Nerves or Arteries, yet its impossible to
make up the Idea of the animal Part of a Man, without something of each of
these; for we can no more conceive a humane Body, without Flesh and Bones, than
without Life: Feel, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have,
and the same is to be said of Figure and Proportion, since it would be absurd
to pronounce a Tortoise, or a little Finger, the animal Part of a Man, or
humane Person. This is a Truth so indisputable, that were the Body of the
Author of the Essay of Humane Understanding, transformed into a Tortoise, or
little Finger, and Consciousness joined to it, I Am persuaded he would scarce
think himself the same humane Person, unless it was done when his Brain was
exceedingly warmed with this uncouth Notion. Again, as to those fleeting
Particles, whether vital Spirits, or other more subtle Parts, that are carried
off by more nice and delicate sorts of Evacuation, though we cannot esteem 'em
integral, constituent Parts of a Man, because humane Identity is not destroyed
by the loss of 'em, yet they are justly to be esteemed proper Appendages of
every particular Man; inasmuch as during their abode in the Body, they were
instrumental to the carrying on of Life and Action, and often ministered to a
Man's Vices, as well as Virtues.

And now having fixed the Identity of the Animal Part, in this Life, together
with its Integral Parts and Appendages, it will be easy to determine wherein
the Identity of the rising Body, and consequently of the whole Man consists,
and how it may be preserved.

And, first, I think we are not obliged to proceed upon the Aristotelian
Principles of Generation and Corruption, which pronounce every little
Transmutation of Matter, a total Destruction of the Individual, and though the
same Particles are re-collected and formed into a Being of the same Model, yet
make it to be a new Individual. With submission then, the most direct Method to
assert the Identity of the rising Body, is to resolve it into its first
Principles, Dust, for dust we are, and unto dust must we return; and certainly
Dust must be the Materials of the rising Body. If therefore there are
sufficient Materials of this kind left in the Chambers of Nature for each
respective Body, its the special Business of Omnipotence to form 'em into the
integral Parts of a humane Body, and in this Sense, Give to every seed its own
body. But as for the Original of this Stock of Matter, I do not think it
necessary, that Socrates's rising Body should be wholly compounded (as some
would have it) of those Particles which are the remains of Socrates's dead
Body, for its certainly sufficient, if to these a supply be called in from any
evaporated Particles, that were once real Appendages of Socrates's living Body.

Secondly, It cannot be sufficient to establish the Identity of Socrates's
rising Body, if it only enjoys so many Particles of his animal, or dying Body,
as serve to make up the Bones and principal Vessels, and the rest (as others
contend) by a plastic Power, or seminal Principle, made up from foreign
adventitious Matter. In a word then, I think its absolutely necessary, that all
the necessary integral Parts of Socrates's rising Body, even Flesh and Blood,
should be made up of the Particles of Socrates's dying Body, or at least of
those evaporated ones of his living Body; and and when Substance, Life,
Lineaments, and the Proportion of a humane Body are formed out of the aforesaid
Mass of Matter, God may add what Embelishments he pleases from the stock of
common Matter, and yet Socrates's Body is undoubtedly raised, and when the
individual Soul or Spirit of Socrates is united to this rising Body, Socrates
is certainly raised the same Man, and the same Person he was in the Land of the
Living. And thus much for the Nature of humane Identity, as well in the
Resurrection, as before it.

From hence we may, in a few words, discover what is fit to be believed
concerning the Resurrection of the Body, and remove the Sceptick's mighty
Objection advanced against it.

And as to the first, I think we may leave the Schoolmen sweating in the midst
of Objections and Answers, about Hairs and Nails, the State of Infants, and
Adam's Rib too, for I do not think it Matter of Faith to determine, whether
Children shall rise grown Men, or whether we are to enjoy the same Number of
Ribs, Nails, or Hair, or whether they shall be compounded of foreign Matter,
or no. We may in general conclude, that it seems most agreeable to the infinite
Wisdom of God, to restore at least the Elect, or Blessed, in the utmost
Perfections of humane Nature.

But Secondly, From the Premises it may justly be presumed pursuant to the
ancient Faith, that we are to believe the Resurrection of the Flesh; for though
no certain quantity or proportion can be prescribed, yet Man was originally
Created in Flesh and Blood, and its to be esteemed as much an integral Part, as
Nerves and Arteries, and consequently an Identity is to be observed in this, as
well as in other Cases. I know there are Two Passages in St. Paul's famous
Discourse on the Resurrection, which seem to interfere with it; where we are
told, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and the Body is
said to be sown a natural body, but raised a spiritual body. The first of these
has been in some measure replied to, and the second is certainly to be
expounded the same way; Its sown a natural body, (...), or an animal body, or a
Body that is to be supported by Food, Sleep and Warmth, and carries the Seeds
of Corruption in it; but its raised a spiritual body, refined, or freed from
its corruptible Qualities, or from that continued Flux of Parts, whence the
Imperfections and Infirmities of an animal Body are derived; or again, its not
a Body of that gross Allay, which our animal Bodies were Created in, since its
Parts will be wonderfully attenuated, refined and spiritualized, and in a word,
fashioned after the manner of a glorified Body. So that here seems to be no
Foundation to reject the Resurrection of the Flesh; I Am sure it cannot be that
of Corruption, for that Almighty Arm, that raises the Body out of the Dust, can
by the same Act, render Flesh and Blood incorruptible, as well as the most
refined Particles of Matter. And thus much for what is proper to be believed.

In the last place we come to make a return to the Sceptick. Does he with
Triumph, and a scoffing Infidelity demand, How can these things be, after such
repeated Transmigrations of Matter? The Reply is easy, when we have demanded
what he can by no means reject: And First, Will he allow that the evaporated
Particles of the living Body, as well as those of the dying Body, may be fit
Materials for the rising Body? Will he allow the received Doctrine of
Nutrition, that scarce the Fiftieth Part of what is eaten, turns to real
Nourishment, or is assimilated and consubstantiated with the several parts of
the feeding Body, so that the rest is cast forth into the Draught, or common
stock of Matter? Will he allow, that the principal parts of those Bodies that
are exposed to the Mouths of wild Beasts, such as Bones, Ligatures, Cartilages,
and almost the whole Genus of Vessels, are very unfit Materials for Food; will
he allow, that the devouring Animal may live so long, as to disgorge most of
his Prey, I say, to disgorge by insensible Evacuations most of those Particles
that turned to real Nourishment? Will he allow, that the Parts of the glorified
Body may be attenuated to that degree, that half the Matter which made up the
Animal Body, may serve to give it all the Features, Lineaments and Proportions
of a humane Body? Lastly, When Infidelity industriously exposes the Bodies of
his Saints to Ravage or Spoil, to defeat the Engagements of the Almighty, will
he allow that this All-wise All-powerful Being may for that time invert the
Course of Nature, and send forth the greatest part of that Matter, which would
otherwise have turned to Nourishment? These are all Concessions, which the
original Notices of a God, and the common Principles of Philosophy, will
warrant and confirm. But now since all these must be allowed, though the most
avowed Sceptick, or Infidel turn Tyrant and Devil too, and exert his utmost Wit
and Malice, in defeating the Designs of the Almighty; in a word, though he outdo
the most improved Cruelties of former Persecutors, and tear Infants from the
Womb, to sacrifice to Wolves and Tigers; yet after Wit and Malice, and Cruelty
have spent themselves, there will still be Materials enough for Omnipotence to
perfect his own Designs, in a glorious and triumphant Resurrection.

And thus I have in some measure performed what I at first engaged in. But
certainly this is a very vile way of Practicing upon our Faith; Suppose we were
not able to form any manner of an Hypothesis, to represent the Possibility of a
General Resurrection, must the clearest Revelations be rejected, and the Fact
pronounced impossible, because we are not able to form a Modus, to demonstrate
the Possibility of it. Certainly this is to measure Omnipotence, by the shallow
Projections of a finite Understanding. But before any Man pretends to fix
Impossibilities upon revealed Matters of Fact, he must be able to give an exact
Account of the various Modes, by which its impossible for on All-wise and an
All-powerful God, to execute and perform 'em. Till this is done, to pronounce
any thing of this Nature impossible, is the height of Impudence, Folly and
Presumption; And shall any Man pretend to trace the different Workings of
Omnipotence, when he is baffled in every little Phenomenon in natural Causes; a
finite Understanding is not able to comprehend the one, and nothing less than
Knowledge, as extensive as infinite Power, is able to fathom or unravel the
other. Let no Man then be Bubled out of his Faith, by such extravagant
Pretenses: But let him consider, that God who comprehends the dust of the Earth
in a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance, can not only Marshal together, all the dispersed Particles of each
respective Body, but reserve such a Stock of each in the Chambers of Nature, as
will enable him to answer, and make good his Promises. And since he has plainly
assured us, that we shall All rise in our Bodies, let not any seeming
Difficulties shake our Faith, but rather let his infinite Power and Wisdom
answer and remove them; for we may be sure of this, that his infinite Power and
Wisdom will conspire to assert his Veracity. In a word, It ought to be
considered, that the sacred Canon expressly place's the Article of a general
Resurrection upon the Infinite Power of God; and therefore though the Doctrine of
future Rewards and Punishments, may not discover the necessity of the same
rising Body, yet in as much as it resolves it self into the Infinite Power of
God, it ought to be looked upon as a special Attestation of the Divine
Authority of the Gospel Institution: And consequently we may conclude, that God
will find out Methods to accomplish his own Designs, so that neither the Power
of Hell, Death, nor the Grave shall be able to baffle and defeat 'em. And then
we need not fear, but God will give to every Seed his own Body, and in the same
act, change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious
Body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things
to himself.

A Postscript.
SInce the Composure of this Discourse, there is an Attempt made to over-turn
the Numerical Identity of the Rising Body: [ See Latitudinarius Orthodoxus, de
Mysterio Resurrectionis, Cap. 7. Sect. 3.] And though a great deal is offered --
-- -- from the Justice and Wisdom of God, yet I think there is nothing
considerable, besides the Argument drawn from the Instance of Seed or Grain,
given by St. Paul upon the Subject; and because it seems to clash with the
Hypothesis I have advanced, I think my self obliged to make some Return to it.
The words are these: But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and
with what Body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die? And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: But God
gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body, 1 Cor.
15. ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. Upon the words we may very justly premise, that the
Apostle argues by way of Allusion and Example, and therefore the Parallel is to
be carried no farther than the Design and Scope of the Apostle's Argument; for
when Instances come up to the main Design of an Argument, though in other Cases
there is an apparent Disparity, they have served the Intention of 'em, and to
extend 'em farther is Illogical and Unjust. Again, there can be no force in
Alluding Instances, when applied beyond their primitive Design, if the
Application is inconsistent with other express Positions of Scripture. This is
a Limitation so just and reasonable, that where any Doctrine is express and
clear, its to be a Rule or Interpretation to any Allusion that seems to
interfere with it; especially as long as the Interpretation concludes any
things, and is not forced and unnatural. This I offer, because I hope I have
produced express Authorities of Scripture, which prove the numerical Identity
of the Rising Body, beyond all dispute or control: But now for the Apostle's
design, I think its only to represent the Nature of that Change, which is to be
made on our mortal Bodies at the Resurrection: How are the Dead, or how is the
Mortal Part of 'em Raised up? With what Bodies do they come? How shall these
mortal Bodies be changed, altered, or modeled? The Instances represent a a
Change, but its only in Qualities and Perfections, not in Matter or Substance;
this is apparent from the whole Catalogue of Instances, which ought to be
uniform and consistent.

As one sort of Flesh differs from another sort of Flesh in Frame and
Contexture, and consequently in Qualities and Dispositions; so does the rising
Body differ from the mortal Body, as the Glory of the Sun, Moon and Stars is
vastly different, so is the Glory and Perfections of the rising Body from those
of the mortal Body; and the leading Instance is apparently subject to the same
Application. The Seed sown, viz. of Wheat, or some other Grain, is sensibly
different from the Product of it: The first is but bare Grain, the second Grain
with Root, Blade and Ear to it; and no doubt the difference between the Rising
and Mortal Body is as visible, as to its Frame and Qualities, for its God that
models our mortal Bodies, or gives them Bodies as it has pleased him. And its
plain, the Parallel is designed thus far, and no farther, for thus it is
expressly applied: So also is the Resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body. Here Is indeed a very considerable Change,
but its a change of the same Body, and consequently a change of Contexture,
Quality, or Disposition, not a change of Matter and Substance; and therefore
its absurd to carry the Parallel any farther: For though the Production of Corn
supposes only a seminal Principle in the Seed, whilst the greatest share of
Matter is adventitious, and only prepared by proper Vessels; yet it can be no
Argument that our rising Bodies are to be made up of adventitious Matter,
unless it were expressly applied thus far: Besides, this Instance of Seed can be
carried no farther, than those of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the different
kinds of Flesh; and as these cannot, without Absurdity and Nonsense, be
applied to represent any thing, but the different Qualities and Perfections of
the rising Body; so that of Seed cannot, by the Rules of Logic, or right
Reason, extend any farther.

Upon the whole then, the Identity of the Rising Body is established on the
clearest Authorities of Scripture, and there is nothing in the Argument before
us, that can be thought to invalidate, or weaken the force of 'em: The refore
what is before asserted, concerning the Identity of the Rising Body, is still
in force, and may be esteemed consosonant to the Canon of Scripture, and the
Catholic Faith.

FINIS.

