THE HISTORY OF THE NUN: OR, THE Fair Vow-Breaker. Written by Mrs. A. BEHN.

LICENSED, October. 2^. 1688. Ric. Pocock. LONDON: Printed for A. Baskervile, at
the Bible the Corner of Essex-Street, against St. Clement's Church, 1689.

To the Most Illustrious Princess, The Duchess of MAZARINE.
Madam,
THere are none of an Illustrious Quality, who have not been made, by some Poet
or other, the Patronesses of his Distressed Hero, or Unfortunate Damsel; and
such Addresses are Tributes, due only to the most Elevated, where they have
always been very well received, since they are the greatest Testimonies. we can
give, of our Esteem and Veneration.

Madam, when I surveyed the whole Toor of Ladies at Court, which was Adorned by
you, who appeared there with a Grace and Majesty, pecutiar to Your Great Self
only, mixed with an irrefistible Air of Sweetness, Generosity, and Wit, I was
impatient for an Opportunity, to tell Your Grace, how infinitely one of Your
own Sex adored You, and that, among all the numerous Conquest, Your Grace has
made over the Hearts of Men, Your Grace had not subdued a more entire Slave; I
assure you, Madam, there is neither Compliment, nor Poetry, in this humble
Declaration, but a Truth, which has cost me a great deal of Inquietude, for
that Fortune has not set me in such a Station, as might justify my Pretense to
the honor and satisfaction of being ever near Your Grace, to view eternally
that lovely Person, and here that surprising Wit; what can be more grateful to
a Heart, than so great, and so agreeable, an Entertainment? And how few Objects
are there, that can render it so entire a Pleasure, as at once to hear you
speak, and to look upon your Beauty? A Beauty that is heightened, if possible,
with an air of Negligence, in Dress, wholly Charming, as if your Beauty
disdained those little Arts of your Sex, which Nicety alone is their greatest
Charm, while yours, Madam, even without the Assistance of your exalted Birth,
begets an Awe and Reverence in all that do approach you, and every one is
proud, and pleased, in paying you Homage their several ways, according to their
Capacities and Talents; mine, Madam, can only be expressed by my Pen, which would
be infinitely honored, in being permitted to celebrate your great Name for
ever, and perpetually to serve, where it has so great an inclination.

In the me an time, Ma'dam, I presume to lay this little Trifle at your Feet;
the Story is true, as it is on the Records of the Town, where it was
transacted; and if my fair unfortunate Vow-Breaker do not deserve the honor of
your Graces Protection, at least, she will be found worthy of your Pity; which
will be a sufficient Glory, both for her, and,

MADAM, Your Graces most buinble, and most obedient Servant, A. Behn.

THE HISTORY OF THE NUN: OR, THE Fair Vow-Breaker.
OF all the Sins, incident to Human Nature, there is none, of which Heaven has
took so particular, visible, and frequent Notice, and Revenge, as on that of
Violated Voms, which never go unpunished; and the Cupids may boast what they
will, for the encouragement of their Trade of Love, that Heaven never takes
cognizance of Lovers broken Vows and Oaths, and that it is the only Perjury that
escapes the Anger of the Gods: But I verily believe, if it were searched into,
we should find these frequent Perjuries, that pass in the World for so many
Gallantties only, to be the occasion of so many unhappy Marriages, and the
cause of all those Misfortunes, which are so frequent to the Nuptiall'd Pair.
For not one of a Thousand, but, either on his side, or on hers, has been
perjured, and broke Vows made to some fond believing Wretch, whom they have
abandoned and undone. What Man that does not boast of the Numbers he has thus
ruined, and, who does not glory in the shameful Triumph? Nay, what Woman,
almost, has not a pleasure in Deceiving, taught, perhaps, at first, by some
dear false one, who had fatally instructed her Youth in an Art she ever after
practiced, in Revenge on all those she could be too hard for, and conquer at
their own Weapons? For, without all dispute, Women are by Nature more Constant
and Just, than Men, and did not their first Lovers teach them the trick of
Change, they would be Doves, that would never quit their Mate, and, like Indian
Wives, would leap alive into the Graves of their deceased Lovers, and be buried
quick with 'em. But Customs of Countries change even Nature her self, and long
Habit takes her place: The Women are taught, by the Lives of the Men, to live
up to all their Vices, and are become almost as inconstant; and ^^ is but
Modesty that makes the difference, and, hardly, inclination; so depraved the
nicest Appetites grow in time, by bad Examples.

But, as there are degrees of Vows, so there are degrees of Punishments for
Vows, there are solemn Matrimonial Vows, such as contract and are the most
effectual Marriage, and have the most reason to be so; there are a thousand
Vows and Friendships, that pass between Man and Man, on a thousand Occasions;
but there is another Vow, called a Sacred Vow, made to God only; and, by which,
we oblige our selves eternally to serve him with all Chastity and Devotion:
This Vow is only taken, and made, by those that enter into Holy Orders, and, of
all broken Vows, these are those, that receive the most severe and notorious
Revenges of God; and I am almost certain, there is not one Example to be
produced in the World, where Perjuries of this nature have past unpunished,
nay, that have not been peisu'd with the greatest and most rigorous of
Punishments. I could my self, of my own knowledge, give an hundred Examples of
the fatal Consequences of the Violation of Sacred Vows; and who ever make it
their business, and are curious in the search of such Misfortunes, shall find,
as I say, that they never go unregarded.

The young Beauty therefore, who dedicates her self to Heaven, and weds her
self for ever to the service of God, ought, first, very well to consider the
Self-denial she is going to put upon her Youth, her fickle faithless deceiving
Youth, of one Opinion to day, and of another to morrow; like Flowers, which
never remain in one state or fashion, but bud to day, and blow by insensible
degrees, and decay as imperceptibly. The Resolution, we promise, and believe we
shall maintain, is not in our power, and nothing is so deceitful as human
Hearts.

I once was designed an humble Votary in the House of Devotion, but fancying my
self not endu'd with an obstinacy of Mind, great enough to secure me from the
Efforts and Vanities of the World, I rather chose to deny my self that Content
I could not certainly promise my self, than to languish (as I have seen some
do) in a certain Affliction; though possibly, since, I have sufficiently bewailed
that mistaken and inconsiderate Approbation and Preference of the false
ungrateful World, (full of nothing but Nonsense, Noise, false Notions, and
Contradiction) before the Innocence and Quiet of a Cloister; nevertheless, I
could wish, for the prevention of abundance of Mischiefs and Miseries, that
Nunneries and Marriages were not to be entered into, 'till the Maid, so
destined, were of a mature Age to make her own Choice; and that Parents would
not make use of their justly assumed Authority to compel their Children,
neither to the one or the other; but since I cannot alter Custom, nor shall
ever be allowed to make new Laws, or rectify the old ones, I must leave the
Young Nuns enclosed to their best Endeavors, of making a Virtue of Necessity;
and the young Wives, to make the best of a bad Market.

In Iper, a Town, not long since, in the Dominions of the King of Spain, and
now in possession of the King of France, there lived a Man of Quality, of a
considerable Fortune, called, Count Henrick de Valtary, who had a very
beautiful Lady, by whom, he had one Daughter, called Isabella, whose Mother
dying, when she was about two years old, to the unspeakable Grief of the Count,
her Husband, he resolved never to partake of any Pleasure more, that this
transitory World could court him with, but determined, with himself, to
dedicate his Youth, and future Days, to Heaven, and to take upon him Holy
Orders; and, without considering, that, possibly, the young Isabella, when she
grew to Woman, might have Sentiments contrary to those that now possessed him, he
designed she should also become a Nun: However, he was not so positive in that
Resolution, as to put the matter wholly out of her Choice, but divided his
Estate; one half he carried with him to the Monastery of Fesuits, of which
number, he became one; and the other half, he gave with Isabella, to the
Monastery, of which, his only Sister was Lady Abbess, of the Order of St.
Augustine; but so he ordered the matter, that if, at the Age of Thirteen,
Isabella had not a mind to take Orders, or that the Lady Abbess found her
Inclination averse to a Monastic Life, she should have such a proportion of
the Revenue, as should be fit to marry her to a Noble Man, and left it to the
discretion of the Lady Abbess, who was a Lady of known Piety, and admirable
strictness of Life, and sonearly related to Isabella, that there was no doubt
made of her Integrity and Justice.

The little Isabella was carried immediately (in her Mourning for her dead
Mother) into the Nunnery, and was received as a very diverting Gompanion by all
the young Ladies, and, above all, by her Reverend Aunt, for she was come just
to the Age of delighting her Parents; she was the prettiest forward Pratler in
the World, and had a thousand little Charms to please, besides the young
Beauties that were just budding in her little Angel Face: So that she soon
became the dear loved Favorite of the whole House; and as she was an
Entertainment to them all, so they made it their study to find all the
Diversions they could for the pretty Isabella; and as she grew in Wit and
Beauty every day, so they failed not to cultivate her Mind, and delicate
Apprehension, in all that was advantageous to her Sex, and whatever Excellency
any one abounded in, she was sure to communicate it to the young Isabella, if
one could Dance, another Sing, another play on this Instrument, and another on
that; if this spoke one Language, and that another, if she had Wit, and she
Discretion, and a third, the finest Fashion and Manners; all joined to complete
the Mind and Body of this beautiful young Girl: Who, being undiverted with the
less noble, and less solid, Vanitles of the World, took to thief Virtues, and
excelled in all; and her Youth and Wit being apt for all Impressions, she soon
became a greater Mistress of their Arts, than those who taught her; so that at
the Age of eight or nine Years, she was thought fit to receive and entertain
all the great Men and Ladies, and the Strangers of any Nation, at the Grate;
and that with so admirable a Grace, so quick and piercing a Wit, and so
delightful and sweet a Conversation, that she became the whole Discourse of the
Town, and Strangers spread her Fame, as prodigious, throughout the Christian
World; for Strangers came daily to hear her talk, and fing, and play, and to
admire her Beauty; and Ladies brought their Children, to shame 'em into good
Fashion and Manners, with looking on the lovely young Isabella.

The Lady Abbess, her Aunt you may believe, was not a little proud of the
Excellencies and Virtues of her fair Nieee, and omitted nothing that might
adorn her Mind; because, not only of the vastness of her Parts and Fame, and
the Credit she would do her House, by residing there for ever; but also, being
very loath to part with her considerable Fortune, which she must resign, if she
returned into the World, she used all her Arts and Stratagems to make her
become a Nun, to which all the fair Sisterhood contributed their Cunning, but
it was altogether needless; her Inclination, the strictness of her Devotion,
her early Prayers, and those continual, and innate Stedfastness, and Calm, she
was Mistress of; her Ignorance of the World's Vanities, and those that
uninclos'd young Ladies count Pleasures and Diversions being all unknown to
her, she thought there was no Joy out of a Nun^nery, and no Satisfactions on
the other side of a Grate.

The Lady Abbess, seeing, that of her self she yielded faster than she could
expect; to discharge her Conscience to her Brother, who came frequently to
visit his Darling Isabella, would very often discourse to her of the Pleasures
of the World, telling her, how much happier she would think her self, to be the
Wife of some gallant young Cavalier, and to have Coaches and Equipage; to see
the World, to behold a thousand Rarities she had never seen to live in
Splendour, to eat high, and wear magnificent, Clothes, to be bowed to as she
passed, and have a thousand Adorers, to see in time a pretty Offspring, the
products of Love, that should talk, and look, and delight, as she did, the
Heart of their Parents; but to all, her Father and the Lady Abbess could say of
the World, and its Pleasures, Fsabella brought a thousand Reasons and
Arguments, so Pious, so Devout, that the Abbess was very well pleased, to find
her (purposely weak) Propositions so well overthrown; and gives an account of
her daily Discourses to her Brother, which were no less pleasing to him; and
though Isabella went already dressed as richly as her Quality deserved, yet her
Father, to try the utmost that the World's Vanity could do, upon her young
Heart, orders the most Glorious Clothes should be bought her, and that the Lady
Abbess should suffer her to go abroad with those Ladies of Quality, that were
her Relations, and her Mother's Acquaintance; that she should visit and go on
the Toore, (that is, the Hide Park there) that she should see all that was
diverting, to try, whether it were not for want of Temptation to Vanity, that
made her leave the World, and love an enclosed Life.

As the Count had commanded, all things were performed; and Isabella arriving
at her Thirteenth Year of Age, and being pretty tall of Stature, with the
finest Shape that Fancy can create, with all the Adornment of a perfect
brown-hair'd Beauty, Eyes black and lovely, Complexion fair; to a Miracle, all
her Features of the rarest proportion, the Mouth red, the Teeth white, and a
thousand Graces in her Mien and Air; she came no sooner abroad, but she had a
thousand Persons sighing for love of her; the Reputation her Wit had acquired,
got her Adorers without seeing her; but when they saw her, they found
themselves conquered and undone; all were glad she was come into the World, of
whom they had heard so much, and all the Youth of the Town dressed only for
Isabella de Valerie, she rose like a new Star that Eclipsed all the rest, and
which set the World a gazing. Some hoped, and some despaired, but all loved,
while Isabella regarded not their Eyes, their distant darling Looks of Love,
and their signs of Adoration; she was civil and affable to all, but so
reserved, that none durst tell her his Passion, or name that strange and
abhorred thing, Love, to her; the Relations, with whom she went abroad every
day, were feign to force her out, and when she went, 'twas the motive of
Civility, and not Satisfaction, that made her go; whatever she saw, she beheld
with no admiration, and nothing created wonder in her, tho'never so strange and
Novel. She surveyed all things with an indifference, that tho'it was not
sullen, was far from Transport, so that her evenness of Mind was infinitely
admired and praised. And now it was, that, young as she was, her Conduct and
Discretion appeared equal to her Wit and Beauty, and she increased daily in
Reputation, insomuch, that the Parents of abundance of young Noble Men, made it
their business to endeavor to marry their Sons to so admirable and noble a
Maid, and one, whose Virtues were the Discourse of all the World; the Father,
the Lady Abbess, and those who had her abroad, were solicited to make an
Alliance; for the Father, he would give no answer, but left it to the
discretion of Isabella, who could not be persuaded to hear any thing of that
nature; so that for a long time she refused her company to all those, who
proposed any thing of Marriage to her; she said, she had seen nothing in the
World that was worth her Care, or the venturing the losing of Heaven for, and
therefore was resolved to dedicare her self to that; that the more she saw of
the World, the worse she liked it, and pitied the Wretches that were condemned
to it; that ssie had considered it, and found no one Inclination that forbad
her immediate Entrance into a Religious Life; to which, her Father, after using
all the Arguments he could, to make her take good heed of what she went about,
to consider it well; and had urged all the Inconveniences of Severe Life,
Watchings, Midnight Risings in all Weathers and Seasons to Prayers, hard
Lodging, course Diet, and homely Habit, with a thousand other things of Labor
and Work used among the Nuns; and finding her still resolved and inflexible to
all contrary persuasions, he consented, kissed her, and told her, She had
argued according to the wish of his Soul, and that be never believed himself
truly happy, till this moment that he was assured, she would become a Religious.

This News, to the Heartbreaking of a thousand Lovers, was spread all over the
Town, and there was nothing but Songs of Complaint, and of her retiring, after
she had shown her self to the World, and vanquished so many Hearts; all Wits
were at work on this Cruel Subject, and one begat another, as is usual in such
Affairs. Amongst the number of these Lovers, there was a young Gentleman, Nobly
born, his Name was Villenoys, who was admirably made; and very handsome, had
traveled and accomptish'd himself, as much as was possible for one so young to
do; he was about Eighteen, and was going to the Siege of Candia, in a very good
Equipage, but, overtaken by his Fate, surprised in his way to Glory, he stopped
at Ipers, so sell most passionately in love with this Maid of Immortal Fame;
but being defeated in his hopes by this News, was the Man that made the softest
Complaints to this fair Beauty, and whose violence of Passion oppressed him to
that degree, that he was the only Lover, who durst himself tell her, he was in
love with her; he writ Billets so soft and tender, that she had, of all her
Lovers, most compassion for Villenoys and dain'd several times, in pity of him,
to send him answers to his Letters, but they were such, as absolutely forbad
him to love her; such as incited him to follow Glory, the Mistress that could
noblest reward him; and that, for her part, her Prayers should always be, that
he might be victorious, and the Darling of that Fortune he was going to court;
and that she, for her part, had fixed her Mind on Heaven, and no Earthly
Thought should bring it down; but she should ever retain for him all Sisterly
Respect, and begged, in her Solitudes, to hear, whether her Prayers had proved
effectual or not, and if Fortune were so kind to him, as she should perpetually
wish.

When Villenoys found she was resolved, he designed to pursue his Journey, but
could not leave the Town, till he had seen the fatal Ceremony of Isabella's
being made a Nun, which was every day expected; and while he stayed, he could
not forbear writing daily to her, but received no more Answers from her, she
already accusing her self of having done too much, for a Maid in her
Circumstances; but she consess'd, of all she had seen, she liked Villenoys the
best; and if she ever could have loved, she believed it would have been
Villenoys, for he had all the good Qualities, and grace, that could render him
agreeable to the Fair; besides, that he was only Son to a very rich and noble
Parent, and one that might very well presume to lay claim to a Maid of
Isabella's Beauty and Fortune.

As the time approached, when he must eternally lose all hope, by Isabella's
taking Orders, he found himself less able to bear the Efforts of that Despair
it possessed him with, he languish'd with the thought, so that it was visible
to all his Friends, the decays it wrought on his Beauty and Gaity: So that he
fell at last into a Fever; and 'twas the whole Discourse of the Town, That
Villenoys was dying for the Fair Isabella; his Relations, being all of Quality,
were extremely afflicted at his Misfortune, and joined their Interests yet to
dissuade this fair young Victoress from an act so cruel, as to enclose her self
in a Nunnery, while the finest of all the Youths of Quality was dying for her,
and asked her, If it would not be more acceptable to Heaven to save a Life, and
perhaps a Soul, than to go and expose her own to a thousand Tortures? They
assured her, Villenoys was dying, and dying Adoring her; that nothing could
save his Life, but her kind Eyes turned upon the fainting Lover; a Lover, that
could breath nothing, but her Name in Sighs ^ and find satisfaction in nothing,
but weeping, and crying out, I dye for Isabella! This. Discourse fetched
abundance of Tears from the fair Eyes of this tender Maid; but, at the same
time, she besought them to believe, these Tears ought not to give them hope,
she should ever yield to save his Life, by quitting her Resolution, of becoming
a Nun; but, on the contrary, they were Tears, that only bewailed her own
Misfortune, in having been the occasion of the death of any Man; especially, a
Man, who had so many Excellencies, as might have rendered him entirely Happy
and Glorious for a long race of Years, had it not been his ill fortune to have
seen her unlucky Face. She believed, it was for her Sins of Curiosity, and
going beyond the Walls of the Monastery, to wander after the Vanities of the
foolish World, that had occasioned this Misfortune to the young Count of
Villenoys, and she would put a severe Penance on her Body, for the Mischiefs
her Eyes had done him; she fears she might, by something in her looks, have
enticed his Heart, for she owned she saw him, with wonder at his Beauty, and
much more she admired him, when she found the Beauries of his Mind; she
confefs'd, she had given him hope, by answering his Letters; and that when she
found her Heart grow a little more than usually tender, when she thought on
him, she believed it a Crime, that ought to be checked by a Virtue, such as she
pretended to profess, and hoped she should ever carry to her Grave; and she
desired his Ressations to implore him, in her Name, to rest contented, in
knowing he was the first, and should be the last, that should ever make an
Impression on her Heart; that what she had conceived there, for him, should
remain with her to her dying day, and that she besought him to live, that she
might see, he both deserved this Esteem she had for him, and to repay it her,
otherwise he would dye in her debt, and make her Life ever after reposeless.

This being all they could get from her, they returned with Looks that told
their Message; however, they rendered those soft things Isabella had said, in
so moving a manner, as failed not to please, and while he remained in this
condition, the Ceremonies were completed, of making Isabella a Nun; which was
a Secret to none but Villenoys, and from him it was carefully concealed, so
that in a little time he recovered his lost health, at least, so well, as to
support the fatal News, and upon the first hearing it, he made ready his
Equipage, and departed immediately for Candia; where he behaved himself very
gallantly, under the Command of the Duke De Beanfort, and, with him, returned
to France, after the loss of that noble City to the Turks.

In all the time of his absence, that he might the sooner establish his Repose,
he forbore sending to the fair Cruel Nun, and she heard no more of Villenoys in
above two years; so that giving her self wholly up to Devotion, there was never
seen any one, who led so Austere and Pious a Life, as this young Votress; she
was a Saint in the Chapel, and an Angel at the Grate: She there laid by all her
severe Looks, and mortified Discourse, and being at perfect peace and
tranquillity within, she was outwardly all gay, sprightly, and entertaining,
being satisfied, no Sights, no Freedoms, could give any temptations to worldly
desires; she gave a loose to all that was modest, and that Virtue and Honor
would permit, and was the most charming Conversation that ever was admired; and
the whole World that passed through Iper; of Strangers, came directed and
recommended to the lovely Isabella; I mean, those of Quality: But however
Diverting, she was at the Grate, she was most exemplary Devour in the Cloister,
doing more Penance, and imposing a more rigid Sevarits and Task on her self,
than was required, giving such rare Examples to all the Nuns that were less
Devout, that her Life was a Proverb, and a President, and when they would
express a very Holy Woman indeed, they would say, She was a very ISABELLA.

There was in this Nunnery, a young Nun, catt'dl, Softer Katteriens, Daughter
to the Grave Vanhenault, that is to say, an (...), who lived about fix Miles
from the Town, in a noble Villa; this Sister Katteriena was not only a very
beautiful Maid, but very witty, and had all the good qualities to make her be
beloved, and had most wonderfully gained upon the Heart of the fair Isabella,
she was her Chamber-Fellow and Companion in all her Devotions and Diversions,
so that where one was, there was the other, and they never went but together to
the Gr^te; to the Garden, or to any place, whither their Affairs called either.
This young Katteriena had a Brother, who loved her entirely, and came every day
to see her, ^e was about twenty Years of Age, rather ^all than middle Statur'd,
his Hair and Eyes brown, but his Face exceeding beautiful, adorned with a
thousand Graces, and the most nobly and exactly made, that 'twas possible for
Nature to form; to the Fineness and Charms of his Person, he had an Air in his
Mien and Dressing, so very agreeable, besides rich, that't was impossible to
look on him, without wishing him happy, because he did so absolutely merit
being so. His Wit and his Manner was so perfectly Obliging, a Goodness and
Generosity so Sincere and Gallant, that it would even have atoned for ^gliness.
As he was eldest Son to so great a Father, he was kept at home, while the rest
of his Brothers were employed in Wars abroad; this made him of a melancholy
Temper, and fit for soft Impressions; he was very Bookish, and had the best
Tutors that could be got, for Learning and Languages, and all that could
complete a Man; but was unused to Action, and of a temper Lazy, and given to
Repose, so that his Father could hardly ever get him to use any Exercise, or so
much as ride abroad, which he would call, Losing Time from his Studies: He
cared not for the Conversation of Men, because he loved not Debauch, as they
usually did; so that for Exercise, more than any Design, he came on Horseback
every day to Iper to the Monastery, and would sit at the Grate, entertaining
his Sister the most part of the Afternoon, and, in the Evening, retire; he had
often seen and conversed with the lovely Isabella, and found, from the first
sight of her, he had more Esteem for her, than any other of her Sex: But as
Love very rarely takes Birth without Hope; so he never believed that the
Pleasure he took in beholding her, and in discoursing with her, was love,
because he regarded her, as a Thing consecrate to Heaven, and never so much as
thought to wish, she were a Mortal fit for his Addresses; yet he found himself
more and more filled with Reflections on her which was not usual with him; he
found she grew upon his Memory, and oftener came there, than he used to do, that
he loved his Studies less, and going to Iper more; and, that every time he
went, he found a new Joy at his Heart that pleased him; he found, he could not
get himself from the Grate, without Pain^ nor part from the sight of that
all-charming Object, without Sighs; and if, while he was there, any persons
came to visit her, whose Quality: she could not refuse the honor of her sight
to, he would blush, and burn, and pant with uneasiness, especially, if they
were handsome, and fit to make Impressions: And he would check this Uneasiness
in himself and ask his Heart, what it meant, by rising and beating in those
Moments, and strive to assume an Indifferency in vain, and depart dissatisfied,
and out of humor.

On the other side, Isabella was not so Gay as she used to be, but, on the
sudden, retired her self more from the Grate than she used to do, refused to
receive Visits every day, and her Complexion grew a little pale and languid;
she was observed not to sleep, or eat, as she used to do, nor exercise in those
little Plays they made, and diverted themselves with, now and then; she was
heard to sigh often, and it became the Discourse of the whole House, that she
was much altered: The Lady Abbess, who loved her with a most tender Passion,
was infinitely concerned at this Change, and endeavored to find out the Cause,
and 'twas generally believed, she was too Devout, for now she redoubied her
Austerity; and in cold Winter Nights, of Frost and Snow, would be up at all
Hours, and lying upon the cold Stones, before the Altar, prostrate at Prayers:
So that she received Orders from the Lady Abbess, not to harass her self so
very much, but to have a care of her Health, as well as her Soul; but she
regarded not these Admonitions, though even persuaded daily by her Katteriena,
whom she loved every day more and more.

But, one Night, when they were retired to their Chamber, amongst a thousand
things that they spoke of, to pass away a tedious Evening, they talked of
Pictures and Likenesses, and Katteriena told Isabella, that before she was a
Nun, in her more happy days, she was so like her Brother Bernardo Henault, (who
was the same that visited them every day) that she would, in Men's Clothes,
undertake, she should not have known one from the other, and fetching out his
Picture, she had in a Dressing-Box, she showed it to Isabella, who at the first
sight of it, turns as paleas Ashes, and, being ready to swound, she bid her
take it away, and could not, for her Soul, hide the sudden surprise the Picture
brought: Katteriena had too much Wit, not to make a just Interpretation of this
Change, and (as a Woman) was naturally curious to pry farther, though Discretion
should have made her been silent, for Talking, in such cases, does but make the
Wound rage the more; Why, my dear Sister, (said Katteriena) is the likeness of
my Brother so offensive to you? Isabella found by this, she had discovered too
much, and that Thought put her by all power of excusing it; she was confounded
with Shame, and the more she strove to hide it, the more it disordered her; so
that she (blushing extremely) hung down her Head, sighed, and confessed all by
her Looks. At last, after a considering Pause, she cried, My dearest Sister, I
do confess, I was surpised at the sight of Monsieur Henault, and much more
than ever you have observed me to be at the sight of his Person, because there
is scarce a day wherein I do not see that, and know beforehand I shall sie him;
I am prepared for the Encounter, and have lessened my Concern, or rather
Confusion, by that time I come to the Grate, so much Mistress I am of my
Passions, when they give me warning of their approach, and sure I can withstand
the greatest assaults of Fate, if I can but foresee it; but if it surprise me,
I find I am as feeble a Woman, as the most unresolved; you did not tell me, you
bad this Picture, nor say, you would shem me such a Picture; but when I least
expect to see that Face, you show it me, even in my Chamber.

Ah, my dear Sister! ( replied Katteriena) I believe, that Palenesi, and those
Blushes, proceed from some other cunse, than the Nicety of seeing the Picture
of a Man in your Chamber: You have too much Hit, ( replied Isabella) to be
imposed on by such an Excuse, if I were so silly to make it; but oh! my dear
Sister! it was in my Thoughts to deceive you; could I have concealed my Pain
and Sufferings, you should never have known them; but since I find it
impossible, and that I am too sincere to make use of Fraud in any thing, it is
fit I tell you, from what cause my change of Color proceeds, and to own to
you, I fear, it is Love, if ever therefore, oh gentle pitying Maid! thou were a
Lover? If ever thy tender Heart were touched with that Passion? Inform me, oh!
inform me, of the nature of that cruel Disease, and how shon found'st a Cure?
While she was speaking these words, she threw her Arms about the Neck of the
fair Katteriena, and bathed her Bosom (where she hid her Face) with a shower of
Tears: Katteriena, embracing her with all the fondness of a dear Lover, told
her, with a Sigh, that she could deny her nothing, and therefore confessed to
her, she had been a Lover, and that was the occasion of her being made a Nun,
her Father finding out the Intrigue, which fatally happened to be with his own
Page, a Youth of extraordinary Beauty. I was but Young, (said she) about
Thirteen, and knew not what to call the new-known Pleasure that I felt; when
e're I looked upon the young Arnaldo, my Heart would heave, when e're he came
in view, and my disordered Breath came doubly from my Bosom; a Shivering seized
me, and my Face grew man; my Thought was at a stand, and Sense it self, for
that short moment, lost its Faculties: But when he touched me, oh! no hunted
Deer, tired with his flight, and just secured in Shades, pants with a ninebler
motion than my Heart; at first, I thought the Youth had bad some Magic Art, to
make one faint and tremble at his touches; but he himself, when I accused his
Cruelty, told me, he had no Art, but amful Passion, and vowed, that when I
touched him, he was so; so trembling, so surpised, so charmed, so pleased.
When he was present, nothing could displease me, but when he parted from me;
then 'twas rather a soft silent Grief, that eased it self by sighing, and by
hoping, that some kind moment would restore my Joy. When he was absent, nothing
could divert me, however I strove, however I toiled for Mirth; no Smile, no
Joy, dwelt in my Heart or Eyes; I could not feign, so very well I loved,
impatient in his absence, I would count the tedious parting Hours, and pass
them off like useless Visitants, whom we wish were gone; these are the Hours,
where Life no business has, at least, a Lover's Life. But, oh! what Minutes
seemed the happy Hours, when on his Eyes I gazed, and he on mine, and half our
Conversation lost in Sighs, Sighs, the soft moving Language of a Lover!

No more, no more, ( replied Isabella, throwing her Arms again about the Neck
of the transported Katteriena) thou blow'st my Flame by thy soft Words, and
make me know my Weakness, and my Shame: I love! I love! and feel those
differing Passions! -- Then pausing a moment, she proceeded, Yet so did thou,
but have surmounted it. Now thou have found the Nature of my Pain, oh! tell me
thy saving Remedy? Alas! ( replied Katteriena) though there is but one Disease,
there is many Remedies: They say, Possession's one, but that to me seems a
Riddle; Absence, they say, another, and that was mine; for Arnaldo having by
chance lost one of my ^illets, discovered the Amor, and was sent to travel,
and my self forced into this Monastery, where at last, Time convinced me, I had
loved below my Quality, and that shamed me into Holy Orders. And is it a
Disease, ( replied Isabella) that People often recover? Most frequently, ( said
Katteriena) and yet some dye of the Disease, but very rarely. Nay then, ( said
Isabella) I fear, you will find me one of these Martyrs; for I have already
opposed it with the most severe Devotion in the World: But all my Prayers are
v^in, your lovely Broth^r persues me into the greatest Solitude; he meets me at
my very Midnight Devotions, and interrupts my Prayers; he gives me a thousand
Tho^ghts, that ought not to enter into a Soul dedicated to Heaven; he ruins all
the Glory I have a'chiev'd, even above my Sex, for Piety of Life, and the
Observation of all Virtues. Oh Katteriena! he has a Power in his Eyes, that
transcends all the World besides: And, to shem the weakness of Human Nature,
and how vain all our Boastings are, he has done that in one fatal Hour, that
the persuasions of all my Relations and Friends, Glory, Honor, Pleasure, and
all that can tempt, could not perform in Years; I resisted all but Henault's
Eyes, and they were Ordained to make me truly wretch d: But yet with thy
Assistance, and a Resolution to see him no more, and my perpetual Trust in
Heaven, I may, perhaps, overcome this Tyrant of my Soul, who, I thought, had
never entered into holy Houses, or mixed his Devotions and Worship with the
true Religion; but, oh! no Cells, no Cloisters, no Hermitages, are secured from
his Efforts.

This Discourse she ended with abundance of Tears, and it was resolved, since
she was devoted for ever to a Holy Life, That it was best for her to make it as
easy to her as was possible; in order to it, and the banishing this fond and
useless Passion from her Heart, it was very necessary, she should see Henault
no more: At first, Isabella was afraid, that, in refusing to see him, he might
mistrust her Passion; but Katteriena, who was both Pious and Discreet, and
endeavored truly to cure her of so violent a Disease, which must, she knew,
either end in her death or destruction, told her, She would take care of that
matter, that it should not blemish her Honor; and so leaving her a while,
after they had resolved on this, she left her in a thousand Confusions, she was
now another Woman than what she had hitherto been; she was quite altered in
every Sentiment, Thought, and Notion; she now repented, she had promised not to
see Henaulr; she trembled, and even fainted, for forifear she should see him no
more; she was not able to bear that thought, it made her rage within, like one
possessed, and all her Virtue could not calm her; yet frnce her word was past,
and, as she was, she could not, without great Scandal, break it in that point,
she resolved to dye a thousand Deaths, rather than not perform her Promise made
to Katteriena; but 'its not to be expressed what she endured; what Fits Pains,
and Convulsions, she sustained; and how much ado she had to dissemble to Dame
Katteriena, who soon returned to the asslicted Maid; the next day, about the
time that Henault was to come, as he nsuidly did, about two or three a Clock
after Noon, it is impossible to express the unenfiness of Isabella; she asked, a
thousand times, What, is not your Brother come? When Dame Katteriena would
reply, Why do you ask? She would say, Because I would be sane not to see him:
You need not fear, Madam, (replied Katteriena) for you shall keep your Chamber.
She need not have urged that, for Isabella was very ill without knowing it, and
in a Fever.

At last, one of the Nans came up, and told Dame Katteriena, that her Brother
was at the Grate, and she desired, he should be bid come about to the Private
Grate above stairs, which he did, and she went to him, leaving Isabella cotn
dead on the Bed, at the very frame of Henault: But the more she concealed her
Flame, the more violently it raged, which she strove in vain by Prayers, and
those Recourses of Solitude to lessen; all this did but augment the Pain, and
was Oil to the Fire, so that she now could hope, that nothing but. Death would
put an end to her Griefs, and her Infamy. She was eternally thinking on him,
how handsome his Face, how delicate every Feature, how charming his Air, how
graceful his Mien, how soft and good his Disposition, and how witty and
entertaining his Conversation. She now fancied, she was at the Grate, talking
to him as she used to be, and blessed those happy Hours she past then, and
bewailed her Misfortune, that she is no more destined to be so Happy, then
gives a loose to Grief; Griefs, at which, no Mortals, but Despairing Lovers,
can guess, or how tormenting they are; where the most easy Moments are, those,
wherein one resolves to kill ones self, and the happiest Thought is Damnation;
but from these Imaginations, she endeavors to fly, all frighted with horror;
but, alas! whither would she fly, but to a Life more full of horror? She
considers well, she cannot bear Despairing Love, and finds it impossible to
cure her Despair; she cannot fly from the Thoughts of the Charming Henault, and
it is impossible to quit 'em; and, at this rate, she found, Life could not long
support it self, but would either reduce her to Madness, and so render her an
hated Object of Scorn to the Censuring World, or force her Hand to commit a
Murder upon her self. This she had found, this she had well considered, nor
could her servent and continual Prayers, her nightly Watchings, her
Mortifications on the cold Marble in long Winter Season, and all her Acts of
Devotion abate one spark of this shameful Fever of Love, that was destroying
her within.

When she had raged and struggled with this unruly Passion, 'till she was quite
tired and breathless, finding all her forcein vain, she filled her fancy with a
thousand charming Idea's of the lovely Henanlt, and, in that soft fit, had a
mind to satisfy her panting Heart, and give it one Joy more, by beholding the
Lord of its Desires, and the Author of its Pains: Pleased, yet trembling, at
this resolve, she rose from the Bed where she was laid, and softly advanced to
the Staircase, from whence there opened that Room where, Dame Katteriena was,
and where there was a private Grate, at which, she was entertaining her
Brother; they were earnest in Discourse, and so loud, that Isabella could
easrly hear all they said, and the first words were from Katteriena, who, in a
sort of Anger, cried, Urge me no more? My Virtue is too nite, to become an
Advocate for a Passion, that can tend to nothing but your Ruin, for, suppose I
should tell the fair Ifabella, you dye for her, what can it wait you? What hope
can any Man heue, to move the Heart of a Virgin, so averse to Love? A Virgin,
whose Modesty, and Virtue is so very curious, it would fly the very word, Love,
as some monstrous Witchcraft, or the foolest of Sins, who would loath me for
bringing so lewd a Message, and banish for her Sight, as the Object of her Hose
and Scorn; is it unknown to ^ou, how many of the noblest Youths of Flanders
have addressed themselves to her in vain, when yet she was in the World? Have
you been ignorant, how the young Count De Villenoys languish'd, in vain, almost
to Death for her? And, that no Persuasions, no Attractions in him, no worldly
Advantages, or all his Pleadings, who had a Wit and Spirit capable of
prevailing on any Heart, less severe and barsh, than hers? Do you not know,
that all was lost on this insensible fair one, even when she was a proper
Object for the Adoration of the Young and Amorous? And can you hope, now she
has so (...) wedded her future days to Devotion, and given all to Heaven; nay,
lives a Life here more like a Saint, than a Woman; rather an Angel, than a
mortal Creature? Do you imagine, with any Rhetoric you can deliver, now to turn
the Heart, and whole Nature, of this Divine Maid, to consider your Earthly
Passion? No, 'its fondness, and an injury to her Virtue, to harbor such a
Thought; quit it, quit it, my dear Brother! before it ruin your Repose. Ah,
Sister! ( replied the dejected Henault) your Counsel comes too late, and your
Reasons are of too feeble force, to rebate those Arrows, the Charming
Isabella's Eyes have fixed in my Heart and Soul, and I am undone, unless she
know my Pain, which I shall dye, before I shall ever dare mention to her; but
you, young Maids, have a thousand Familiarities together, can jest, and play,
and say a thousand things between Railery and Earnest, that may first hint what
you would deliver, and insinuate into each others Hearts a kind of Curiosity to
know more; for naturally, (my dear Sister) Maids, are curious and vain; and
however Divine the Mind of the fair Isabella may be, it bears the Tincture
still of Mortal Woman.

Suppose this true, how could this Mortal part about her Advantage you, ( said
Katteriena) all that you can expect from this Disoovery, (if she should be
content to hear it, and to return you pity) would be, to make her mratched,
like your self? What farther can you hope? Oh! talk not ( replied Henault) of
so much Happiness! I do not expect to be so blessed, that she should pity me, or
love to a degree of Inquietude; it is sufficient, for the ease of my Heart, that
she know its Pains, and what if suffers for her; that she would give my Eyes
leave to gaze upon her, and my Heart to vent a Sigh now and then; and, when I
dare, to give me leave to speak, and tell her of my Passion. This, this, is
all, my Sister. And, at that word, the Tears glided down his Cheeks, and he
declined his Eyes, and set a Look so charming, and so sad, that Isabella, whose
Eyes were fixed upon him, was a thousand times ready to throw her self into the
Room, and to have made a Confession, how sensible she was of all she had heard
and seen: But, with much ado, she contained and satisfied her self, with
knowing, that she was adored by him whom she adored, and, with a Prudence that
is natural to her, she withdrew, and waited with patience the event of their
Discourse. She impatiently longed to know, how Katteriena would manage this
Secret her Brother had given her, and was pleased, that the Friendship and
Prudence of that Maid had concealed her Passion from her Brother; and now
contented and joyful beyond imagination, to find her self beloved, she knew she
could dissemble her own Passion and make him the first Aggressor; the first
that loved, or, at least, that should seem to do so. This Thought restores her
so great a part of her Peace of Mind, that she resolved to see him, and to
dissemble with Katteriena so far, as to make her believe, she had subdued that
Passion, she was really ashamed to own; she now, with her Woman's Skill, begins
to practice an Art she never before understood, and has recourse to Cunning,
and resolves to seem to reassume her former Repose: But hearing Katteriena
approach, she laid her self again on her Bed, where she had left her, but
composed her Face to more cheerfulness, and put on a Resolution that indeed
deceived the Sister, who was extremely pleased, she said; to see her look so
well: When Isabella replied, Yes, I am another Woman now; I hope Heaven has
heard, and granted, my long and humble Supplications, and driven from my Heart
this tormenting God, that has so long disturbed my purer Thoughts. And are you
sure, (said Dame Katteriena) that this wanton Deity is repelled by the noble
force of your Resolution? Is he never to return? No, (replied Isabella) never
to my Heart. Yes, (said Katteriena) if you should see the lovely Murderer of
your Repose, your Wound would bleed a new. At this, Isabella smiling with a
little Disdain, replied, Because you once to love, and Henault 's Charms
defenseless found me, ah! do you think, I have no Fortitude? But so in Fondness
lost, remiss in Virtue, that when I have resolved, (and see it necessary for my
after-Quiet) to want the power of keeping that Resolution? No, fiorn me, and
despise me then, as lost to all the Glories of my Sex, and all that Nicety I Have
hitherto preserved. There needed no more from a Maid of Isabella's Integrity
and Reputation, to convince any one of the Sincerity of what she said, since,
in the whole course of her Life, she never could be charged with an Untruth, or
an Equivocation; and Katteriena assured her, she believed her, and was
infinitely glad she had vanquished a Passion, that would have proved
destructive to her Repose: Isabella replied, She had not altogether vanquished
her Passion, she did not boast of so absolute a power over her soft Nature, but
had resolved things great, and Time would work the Cure; that she hoped,
Katteriena would make such Excuses to her Brother, for her not appearing at the
Grate so gay and entertaining as she used, and, by a little absence, she should
retrieve the Liberty she had lost: Put she desired, such Excuses might be made
for her, that young Henault might not perceive the Reason. At the naming him,
she had much ado not to show some Concern extraordinary, and Katteriena assured
her, She had now a very good Excuse to keep from the Grate, when he was at it;
For (said she) now you have resolved, I may tell you, he is dying for you,
raving in Love, and has this day made me promise to him, to give you some
account of his Passion, and to make you sensible of his Languishment: I had not
told you this, (replied Katteriena) but that I believe you fortified with brave
Resolution and Virtue, and that this knowledge will rather put you more upon
your Guard, than you were before. While she spoke, she fixed her Eyes on
Isabella, to see what alteration it would make in her Heart and Looks; but the
Masterpiece of this young Maid's Art was shown in this minute, for she
commanded her self so well, that her very Looks dissembled, and showed no
concern at a Relation, that made her Soul dance with Joy; but it was, what she
was prepared for, or else I question her Fortitude. But, with a Calmness, which
absolutely subdued Katteriena, she replied, I am almost glad he has confessed a
Passion for me, and you shall confess to him, you told me of it, and that I
absent my self from the Grate, on purpose to avoid the fight of a Man, who
durst love me, and confess it; and I assure you, my dear Sister! (continued
she, dissembling) You could not have advanced my Cure by a more effectual way,
than telling me of his Presumption. At that word, Katteriena joyfully related
to her all that had passed between young Henault and her self, and how he
implored her Aid in this Amor; at the end of which Relation, Isabella smiled,
and carelessly replied, I pity him: And so going to their Devotion, they had no
more Discourse of the Lover.

In the mean time, young Henault was a little satisfied, to know, his Sister
would discover his Passion to the lovely Isabella; and though he dreaded the
return, he was pleased that she should know, she had a Lover that adored her,
though even without hope; for though the thought of possessing Isabella, was
the most ravishing that could be; yet he had a dread upon him, when he thought
of it, for he could not hope to accomplish that, without Sacrilege; and he was
a young Man, very Devout, and even bigoted in Religion; and would often
question and debate within himself, that, if it were possible, he should come
to be beloved by this Fair Creature, and that it were possible for her, to
grant all that Youth in Love could require, whether he should receive the
Blessing offered? And though he adored the Maid, whether he should not abhor
the Nun in his Embraces? 'Twas an undetermined Thought, that chilled his Fire
as often as it approached; but he had too many that rekindled it again with the
greater Flame and Ardor.

His impatience to know, what Success Katteriena had, with the Relation she was
to make to Isabella in his behalf, brought him early to Iper the next day. He
came again to the private Grate, where his Sister receiving him, and finding
him, with a sad and dejected Look, expect what she had to say; she told him,
That Look well became the News she had for him, it being such, as ought to make
him, both Grieved, and Penitent; for, to obey him, she had so absolutely
displeased Isabella, that she was resolved never to believe her her Friend
more, Or, to sie you, (said she) therefore, as you have made me commit a Crime
against my Conscience, against my Order, against my Friendship, and against my
Honor, you ought to do some brave thing; take some noble Resolution, worthy of
your Courage, to redeem all; for your Repose, I promised, I would let Isabella
know you loved, and, for the mitigation of my Crime, you ought to let me tell
her, you have surmounted your Passion, as the last Remedy of Life and Fame.

At these her last words, the Tears gushed from his Eyes, and he was able only,
a good while, to sigh; at last, cried, What! see her no more! see the Charming
Isabella no more! And then vented the Grief of his Soul in so passionate a
manner, as his Sister had all the Compassion imaginable for him, but thought it
great Sin and Indiscretion to cherish his Flame: So that, after a while, having
heard her Counsel, he replied, And is this all, my Sister, you will do to save
a Brother? All! (replied she) I would not be the occasion of making a Nun
violate her Vow, to save a Brother's Life, no, nor my own; assure your self of
this, and take it as my last Resolution: Therefore, if you will be content with
the Friendship of this young Lady, and so behave your self, that we may find no
longer the Lover in the Friend, we shall reassume our former Conversation, and
live with you, as we ought; otherwise, your Presence will continually banish
her from the Grate, and, in time, make both her you love, and your self, a
Town-Discourse.

Much more to this purpose she said, to dissuade him, and bid him retire, and
keep himself from thence, till he could resolve to visit them without a Crime;
and she protested, if he did not do this, and master his foolish Passion, she
would let her Father understand his Conduct, who was a Man of a temper so very
precise, that should he believe, his Son should have a thought of Love to a
Virgin vowed to Heaven, he would abandon him to Shame, and eternal Poverty, by
disinheriting him of all he could: Therefore, she said, he ought to lay all
this to his Heart, and weight it with his unheedy Passion. While the Sister
talked thus wisely, Henault was not without his Thoughts, but considered as she
spoke, but did not consider in the right place; he was not considering, how to
please a Father, and save an Estate, but how to manage the matter so, to
establish himself, as he was before with Isabella; for he imagined, since
already she knew his Passion, and that if after that she would be prevailed
with to see him, he might, some lucky Minute or other, have the pleasure of
speaking for himself, at least, he should again see and talk to her, which was
a joyful Thought in the midst of so many dreadful ones: And, as if he had known
what passed in Isabella's Heart, he, by a strange sympathy, took the same
measures to deceive Katteriena, a well-meaning young Lady, and easily imposed
on from her own Innocence, he resolved to dissemble Patience, since he must
have that Virtue, and owned, his Sister's Reasons were just, and ought to be
persu'd; that she had argued him into half his Peace, and that he would
endeavor to recover the rest; that Youth ought to be pardoned a thousand
Failings, and Years would reduce him to a condition of laughing at his Follies
of Youth, but that grave Direction was not yet arrived: And so desiring, she
would pray for his Conversion, and that she would recommend him to the
Devotions of the Fair Isabella, he took his leave, and came no more to the
Nunnery in ten Days; in all which time, none but Impatient Lovers can guess,
what Pain and Languishments Isabella suffered, not knowing the Cause of his
Absence, nor daring to enquire; but she bore it out so admirably, that Dame
Katteriena never so much as suspected, she had any Thoughts of that nature that
perplexed her, and now believed indeed, she had conquered all her Uneasiness:
And, one day, when Isabella and she were alone together, she asked that fair
Dissembler, if she did not admire at the Conduct and Resolution of her Brother?
Why! (replied Isabella unconcernedly, while her Heart was fainting within, for
fear of ill News:) With that, Katteriena told her the last Discourse she had
with her Brother, and how at last she had persuaded him (for her sake) to quit
his Passion; and that he had promised, he would endeavor to surmount it; and
that, that was the reason he was absent now, and they were to see him no more,
till he had made a Conquest over himself. You may assure your self, this News
was not so welcome to Isabella, as Katteriena imagined; yet still she
dissembled, with a force, beyond what the most cunning Practitioner could have
shown, and carried her self before People, as if no Pressures had lain upon her
Heart; but when alone retired, in order to her Devotion, she would vent her
Griefs in the most deplorable manner, that a distressed distracted Maid could
do, and which, in spite of all her severe Penances, she found no abatement of.

At last, Henault came again to the Monastery, and, with a Look as gay as he
could possibly assume, he saw his Sister, and told her, He had gained an
absolute Victory over his Heart; and desired, he might see Isabella, only to
convince, both her, and Katteriena, that he was no longer a Lover of that fair
Creature, that had so lately charmed him; that he had set Five thousand Pounds
a Year, against a fruitless Passion, and found the solid Gold much the heavier
in the Scale: And he smiled, and talked the whole Day of indifferent things,
with his Sister, and asked no more for Isabella; nor did Isabella look, or ask,
after him, but in her Heart. Two Months passed in this Indifference, till it
was taken notice of, that Sister Isabella came not to the Grate, when Henault
was there, as she used to do; this being spoken to Dame Katteriena, she told it
to Isabella, and said, The Nuns would believe, there was some Cause for her
Absence, if she did not appear again: That if she could trust her Heart, she
was sure she could trust her Brother, for he thought no more of her, she was
confident; this, in lieu of pleasing, was a Dagger to the Heart of Isabella,
who thought it time to retrieve the flying Lover, and therefore told
Katteriena, She would the next Day entertain at the Low Grate, as she was wont
to do, and accordingly, as soon as any People of Quality came, she appeared
there, where she had not been two Minutes, but she saw the lovely Henault, and
it was well for both, that People were in the Room, they had else both
sufficiently discovered their Inclinations, or rather their not to be concealed
Passions; after the General Conversation was over, by the going away of the
Gentlemen that were at the Grate, Katteriena being employed else, Isabella was
at last left alone with Henault; but who can guess the Confusion of these two
Lovers, who wished, yet feared, to know each others Thoughts? She trembling
with a dismal Apprehension, that he loved no more; and he almost dying with
fear, she should Reproach or Upbraid him with his Presumption; so that both
being possessed with equal Sentiments of Love, Fear, and Shame, they both stood
fixed with dejected Looks and Hearts, that heaved with stifled Sighs. At last,
Isabella, the softer and tenderhearted of the two, though not the most a Lover
perhaps, not being able to contain her Love any longer withing the bounds of
Dissimulation or Discretion, being by Nature mnocent, burst out into Tears, and
all fainting with pressing Thoughts within, she fell languishly into a Chair
that stood there, while the distracted Henault, who could not come to her
Assistance, and finding Marks of Love, rather than Anger or Disdain, in that
Confusion of Isabella's, throwing himself on his Knees at the Grate, implored
her to behold him, to hear him, and to pardon him, who died every moment for
her, and who adored her with a violent Ardor; but yet, with such an one, as
should (though he perished with it be conformable to her Commands and as he
spoke, the Tears streamed down his dying Eyes, that beheld her with all the
tender Regard that ever Lover was capable of; she recovered a little, and
turned her too beautiful Face to him, and pierced him with a Look, that darted
a thousand Joys and Flames into his Heart, with Eyes, that told him, her Heart
was burning and dying for him; for which Assurances, he made Ten thousand
Asseverations of his never-dying Passion, and expressing as many Raptures and
Excesses of Joy, to find her Eyes and Looks confess, he was not odious to her,
and that the knowledge he was her Lover, did not make her hate him: In fine, he
spoke so many things all soft and moving, and so well convinced her of his
Passion, that she at last was compelled by a mighty force, absolutely
irresistible, to speak.

Sir, (said she) perhaps you will wonder, where I, a Maid, brought up in the
simplicity of Virtue, should learn the Confidence, not only to hear of Love
from you, but to confess I am sensible of the most violent of its Pain my self;
and I wonder, and am amazed at my own Daring, that I should have the Courage,
rather to speak, than dye, and bury it in silence; but such is my Fate. Hurried
by an unknown Force, which I have endeavored always, in vain, to resist, I am
compelled to tell you, I love you, and have done so from the first moment I saw
you; and you are the only Man barn to give me Life or Death, to make me Happy
or Blessed; perhaps, had I not been confined, and, as it were, utterly forbid by
my Vow, as well as my Modesty, to tell you this, I should not have been so
miserable to have fullen thus low, as to have confessed my Shame; but our
opportunities of Speaking are so few, and Letters so impossible to be sent
without discovery, that perhaps this is the only time I shall ever have to
speak with you alone. And, at that word, the Tears flowed abundantly from her
Eyes, and gave Henault leave to speak. Ah Madam! (said he) do not, as soon as
you have raised me to the greatest Happiness in the World, throw me with one
word beneath your Scorn, much easier it is to dye, and know I am tov'd, than
never, never, hope to hear that blessed sound again from that beautiful Mouth:
Ah, Madam! rather let me make use of this one opportunity our happy Luck has
given us, and contrive how we may for ever see, and speak, to each other; let
us assure one another, there are a thousand ways to escape a place so rigid, as
denies us that Happiness; and denies the fairest Maid in the World, the
privilege of her Creation, and the end to which she was formed so Angelical.
And seeing Isabella was going to speak, lest she should say something, that
might dissuade from an Attempt so dangerous and wicked, he persu'd to tell her,
it might be indeed the last moment Heaven would give 'em, and besought her to
answer him what he implored, whether she would fly with him from the Monastery?
At this Word, she grew pale, and started, as at some dreadful Sound, and cried,
Hah! what is it you say? Is it possible, you should propose a thing so wicked?
And can it enter into your Imagination, because I have so far forgot my Virtue,
and my Vow, to becomes a Lover, I should therefore fall to so wretched a degree
of Infamy and Reprobation? No, name it to me no more, if you would see me; and
if it be as you say, a Pleasure to be beloved by me; for I will sooner dye,
than yield to what -- Alas! I but too well approve! These last: words, she
spoke with a fainting Tone, and the Tears fell anew from her fair soft Eyes. If
it be so, said he, (with a Voice so languishing, it could scarce be heard) If
it be so, and that you are resolved to try, if my Love be eternal without Hope,
without expectation of any other Joy, than seeing and adoring you through the
Grate; Fam, and must; and will be contented, and you shall fee, I can prefer
the Sighing to these cold Irons, that separate us, before all the possessins of
the rest of the World; that I choose rather to lead my Life here, at this cruel
Distance from you, for ever, than before the Embrace of all the Fair; and you
shall see, how pleased I will be, to languish here; but as you see me decay,
(for surely so I shall) do not triumph over my languid Looks, and laugh at my
Pale and meager Face; but, Pitying, fay, How easily I might have preserved that
Face, those Eyes, and all that Youth and Vigor, now no more, from this total
Ruin I now behold it in, and love your Slave that dies, and will be daily and
visibly dying, as long as my Eyes can gaze on that fair Object, and my Soul be
fed and kept alive with her Charming Wit and Conversation; if Love can live on
such Airy Food, (though rich in it self, yet unfit, alone, to sustain Life) it
shall be for ever dedicated to the lovely Isabella: But, oh! that time cannot
be long; Fate will not lend her Slave many days, who loves too violently, to be
satisfied to enjoy the fair Object of his Desires, no otherwise than at a Grate.

He ceased speaking, for Sighs and Tears stopped his Voice, and he begged the
liberty to sit down; and his Looks being quite altered, Isabella found her self
touched to the very Soul, with a concern the most tender, that ever yielding
Maid was oppressed with: She had no power to suffer him to Languish, while she
by one soft word could restore him, and being about to say a thousand things
that would have been agreeable to him, she saw her self approached by some of
the Nuns, and only had time to say, If you Love me, live and hope. The rest of
the Nuns began to ask Henault of News, for he always brought them all that was
Novel in the Town, and they were glad still of his Visits, above all other, for
they heard, how all Amors and Intrigues passed in the World, by this young
Cavalier. These last words of Isabella's were a Cordial to his Soul, and he,
from that, and to conceal the present Affair, endeavored to assume all the
Gaity he could, and told 'em all he could either remember, or invent, to please
'em, tho'he wished them a great way off at that time.

Thus they passd the day, till it was a decent hour for him to quit the Grate,
and for them to draw the Curtain; all that Night did Isabella dedicate to Love,
she went to Bed, with a Resolution, to think over all she had to do, and to
consider, how she should manage this great Affair of her Life: I have already
said, she had tried all that was possible in Human Strength to perform, in the
design of quitting a Passion so injurious to her Honor and Virtue, and found
no means possible to accomplish it: She had tried Fasting long, Praying
ferventlv, rigid Penances and Pains severe Disciplines, all the Mortification,
almost to the destruction of Life it self, to conquer the unruly Flame; but
still it burnt and raged but the more; so, at last, she was forced to permit
that to eonquer her, she could not conquer, and submitted to her Fate, as a
thing destined her by Heaven it self; and, after all this opposition, she
fancied it was resisting even Divine Providence, to struggle any longer with
her Heart; and this being her real Belief, she the more patiently gave way to
all the Thoughts that pleased her.

As soon as she was laid, without discoursing (as she used to do) to
Kalteriena, after they were in Bed, she pretended to be sleepy, and turning
from her, settled her self to profound Thinking, and was resolved to conclude
the Matter, between her Heart, and her Vow of Devotion, that Night, that she,
having no more to determine, might end the Affair accordingly, the first
opportunity she should have to speak to Henault, which was, to fly, and marry
him; or, to remain for ever fixed to her Vow of Chastity. This was the Debate;
she brings Reason on both sides: Against the first, she sets the Shame of a
Violated Vow, and considers, where she shall show her Face after such an
Action; to the Vow, she argues, that she was born in Sin, and could not live
without it; that she was Human, and no Angel, and that, possibly, that Sin
might be as soon forgiven, as another; that since all her Devout Endeavors
could not defend her from the Cause, Heaven ought to excuse the Effect; that as
to showing her Face, so she saw that of Henault always turned (Charming as it
was) toward her with love; what had she to do with the World, or cared to
behold any other?

Some times, she thought, it would be more Brave and Pious to dye, than to
break her Vow; but she soon answered that, as false Arguing, for Self-Murder
was the worst of Sins, and in the Deadly Number. She could, after such an
Action, live to repent, and, of two Evils, she ought to choose the least; she
dreads to think, since she had so great a Reputation for Virtue and Piety, both
in the Monastery, and in the World, what they both would say, when she should
commit an Action so contrary to both these, she professed; but, after a whole
Night's Debate, Love was strongest, and gained the Victory. She never went
about to think, how she should escape, because she knew it would be easy, the
keeping of the Key of the Monastery, often entrusted in her keeping, and was,
by turns, in the hands of many more, whose Virtue and Discretion was
Infallible, and out of Doubt; besides, her Aunt being the Lady Abbess, she had
greater Privilege than the rest; so that she had no more to do, she thought,
than to acquaint Henault with her Design, as soon as she should get an
opportunity. Which was not quickly; but, in the mean time, Isabela's Father
died, which put some little stop to our Lover's Happiness, and gave her a short
time of Grief; but Love, who, while he is new and young, can do us Miracles,
soon wiped her Eyes, and chased away all Sorrow from her Heart, and grew every
day more and more impatient, to put her new Design in Execution, being every
day more resolved. Her Father's Death had removed one Obstacle, and secured her
from his Reproaches; and now she only wants Opportunity, first, to acquaint
Henault, and then to fly.

She waited not long, all things concurring to her desire; for Katteriena
falling sick, she had the good luck, as she called it then, to entertain
Henault at the Grate oftentimes alone; the first moment she did so, she
entertained him with the good News, and told him, She had at last vanquished
her Heart in favor of him, and loving him above all things Honor, her Vow or
Reputation, had resolved to abandon her self wholly to him, to give her self up
to love and serve him, and that she had no other Consideration in the World;
but Henault, instead of returning her an Answer, all Joy and Satisfaction, held
down his Eyes, and Sighing, with a dejected Look, he cried, Ah, Madam! Pity a
Man so wretched and undone, as not to be sensible of this Blesseng as I ought
She grew pale at this Reply, and trembling expected he would proceed: It Is not
(continued he) that I want Love, tendenest passron, and all the desire Youth
and Love can inspire: But; Oh, Madam! when I consider, (forraving mad in Love
as I am for your sake, I do consider) that if I should take you from this
Repose, Nobly Born and Educated, as you are; and, for that Act, should find a
rigid Father deprive me of all that ought support support you, and afford your
Birth, Beauty, and Merits, their due, what would you say? How would you
Reproach we? He fighing, expected her Answer, when Blushes overspreading her
Face, she replied, in a Tone all haughty and angry, Ah, He nault! Am I then
refused after having abandoned all things for you? Is it this you reward my
Sacrificed Honor, Vows, and Virtue? Cannot you ^^^^rd the loss of Fortune to
possess Isabella, who loses all for you! Then bursting into Tears, at her
misfortune of Loving, she suffered him to say, Oh, Charming fair one! how
industrious i^ your Cruelty, to find out new Torments for an Heart, already
pressed down with the severities of Love? Is it possible, you can make so
unhappy a Construction of the tenderest part of my Passion? And can you imagine
it want of Love in me, to consider, how I shall preserve and merit the vast
Blessing Heaven has given me? Is my Care a Crime? And, would not the most
deserving Beauty of the World hate me, if I should, to preserve my Life, and
satisfy the Passion of my fond Heart, reduce her to the Extremities of Want and
Misery? And is there any thing, in what I have said, but what you ought to take
for the greatest Respect and tenderness! Alas! ( replied Isabella sighing)
young as I am, all unskilful in Love I find, but what ^^ el, that Diser^tion is
no part of it; and Consideration, inconsistent with the Nobler Passion, who
will subsist of own Nature, and l^ve unmixed with any other Sentiment? And'tis
not pure, if it be otherwise: I know, had I mixed Discretion with mine, my Love
must have been ^^ss, I never thought of living, but by Love; and, if I
considered at all, it was, that Grandeur and Magnificence were useless Trifles
to Lovers, wholly needless and troublesome, I thought of living in some loanly
Cottage, far from the noise of crowded busy Cities, to walk with thee in
Groves, and silent Shades, where I might hear no Voice but thin^; and when we
had been tired, to sit us down by some cool murmuring Rivulet, and be to each a
World, my Monarch thou, and I thy sovereign Queen, while Wreaths of Flowers
shall crown our happy Heads, some fragrant Bank our Throne, and Heaven our
Canop): Thus we might laugh at Fortune, and the Proud, despise the duller
World, who place their Joys in mighty Shem and Equipage. Alas! my Nature could
not beur it, I am unused to Worldly Vanities, and would boast of nothing, but
my Henault; no Riches, but his Love; no Grandeur, but his Presence. She ended
speaking, with Tears, and he replied, Now, now, I find, my Isabella loves
indeed, when she is content to abandon the. World for my sake; Oh! thou have
named the only happy Life that suits my quiet Nature, to be retired, has always
been my Joy! But to be so with thee! Oh! thou bast charmed me with a Thought so
dear, as has for ever banished all my Care, but how to receive thy Goodness!
I Will think no more what my angry Parent may do, when he shall h^ar, how I have
disposed of my self against his Will and Pleasure, but trust to Love and
Providence; no more! be gone all Thoughts, but those of Isabella! As soon as he
had made an end of expressing his Joy, he fell to consulting how, and when, she
should escape; and since it was uncertain, when she should be offered the Key,
for she would not ask for it, she resolved give him notice, either by word of
Mouth, or a bit of Paper she would write in, and give him through the Grate the
first opportunitys and, parting for that time, they both resolved to get up
what was possible for their Support, till Time shauld reconcile Affairs and
Friends, and to wait the happy hour.

Isabella's dead Mother had left jewels, of the value of 2000 l. to her
Daughter, at her Decease, which Jewels were in the possession, now, of the
Lady, Abbess, and were upon Sale, to be added to the Revenue of the Monasstery
and as Isabella was the most Prudent of her Sex., at least, had bitherto been
so esteemed, she was entrusted with all that was in possession of the Lady
A'bess, and 'twas not difficult to make her self Mistress of all her own
Jewels; as also, some 3 or 400 l. in Gold, that was hoarded up in her
Ladiship's Cabinet, against any Accidents that might arrive to the Monastery;
these Isabella also made her own, and put up with the Jewels; and having
acquainted Henauls, with the Day and Hour of her Escape, he got together what
he could, and waiting for her, with his Coach, one Night, when no body was
awake but her self, when rising softly, as she used to do, in the Night, to her
Devotion, she stole so dexterously out of the Monastery, as no body knew any
thing of it; she carryld away the Keys with her, after having locked all the
Doors, for she was introsted often with all. She found Henault waiting in his
Coach, and trused none but an honest Coachman that loved him; he received her
with all the Transports of a truly ravished Lover, and she was infinitely
charmed with the new Pleasure of his Embraces and Kisses.

They drove out of Town immediately, and because she durst not be seen in that
Habit, (for it had been immediate Death for both) they drove into a Thicket
some three Miles from the Town, where Henault having brought her some of his
younger Sister's Clothes, he made her put off her Habit, and put on those; and,
rending the other, they hid them in a Sand-pit, covered over with Broom, and
went that Night forty Miles from lper, to a little Town upon the River Rbine,
where, changing their Names, they were forth with married, and took a House in
a Country Village, a farm, where they resolved to live retired, by the Name of
Beroone, and drove a Farming Trade; however, not forgetting to set Friends and
Engines at work, to get their Pardon, as Criminals, first, that had
transgressed the Law; and, next, as disobedient Persons, who had done contrary
to the Will and Desire of their Parents: Isabella writ to her Aunt the most
moving Letters in the World, so did Henault to his Father; but she was a long
time, before she could gain so much as an answer from her Aunt, and Henault was
so unhappy, as never to gain one from his Father; who no sooner heard the News
that was spread over all the Town and Country, that young Henault was fled with
the so famed Isabella, a Nun, and singular for Devotion and Piety of Life, but
he immediately settled his Estate on his younger Son, cutting Henault off all
his Birthright, which was 50-0 l. a Year. This News, you may believe, was not
very pleasing to the young Man, who though in possession of the loveliest Virgin,
and now Wife, that ever Man was blessed with; yet when he reflected, he should
have Children by her, and these and she should come to want, (he having been
magnificently Educated, and impatient of scanty Fortune) he laid it to Heart,
and it gave him a thousand Uneasinesses in the midst of unspeakable Joys; and
the more he strove to hide his Sentiments from Isabella, the more tormenting it
was within; he durst not name it to her, so insuperable a Grief it would cause
in her, to hear him complain; and though she could live hardly, as being bred to
a devout and severe Life, he could not, but must let the Man of Quality show it
self, even in the disguise of an humbler Farmer: Besides all this, he found
nothing of his Industry thrive, his Cattle still died in the midst of those
that were in full Vigor and Health of other Peoples; his Crops of Wheat and
Barley, and other Grain, though managed by able and knowing Husbandmen, were all,
either Mildew'd, or Blasted, or some Misfortune still arrived to him; his
Coach-Horses would fight and kill one another, his Barns sometimes be fired; so
that it became a Proverb all over the Country, if any ill Luck had arrived to
any body, they would say, They had Monsieur Beroone 's Luck. All these
Reflections did but add to his Me^^ncholy, and he grew at last to be in some
want, insomuch, that Isabella, who had by her frequent Letters, and submissive
Supplications, to her Aunt, (who loved her tenderly) obtained her Pardon, and
her Blessing; she now prefs'd her for some Money, and besought her to consider,
how great a Fortune she had brought to the Monastery, and implored, she would
allow her some Sallary out of it, for she had been married two Years, and most
of what she had was exhausted. The Aunt, who found, that what was done, could
not be undone, did, from time to time, supply her so, as one might have lived
very decently on that very Revenue; but that would not satisfy the great Heart
of Henault. He was now about three and twenty Years old, and Isabella about
eighteen, too young, and too lovely a Pair, to begin their Misfortunes so soon;
they were both the most Just and Pious in the World; they were Examples of
Goodness, and Eminent for Holy Living, and for perfect Loving, and yet nothing
thrived they undertook; they had no Children, and all their Joy was in each
other; at last, one good Fortune arrived to them, by the Solicitations of the
Lady Abbess, and the Bishop, who was her near Kinsman, they got a Pardon for
Isabella's quitting the Monastery, and marrying, so that she might now return
to her own Country again. Henault having also his Pardon, they immediately quit
the place, where they had remained for two Years, and came again into Flanders,
hoping, the change of place might afford 'em better Luck.

Henault then began again to solicit his Cruel Father, but nothing would do, he
refused to see him, or to, receive any Letters from him; but, at last, he
prevailed so far with ^im, as that he sent a Kinsman to him, to assure him, if
he would leave his Wife, and go into the French Campagn, he would Equip him as
well as his Quality required, and that, according as he behaved himself, he
should gain his Favor; but if he lived Idly at home, giving up his Youth and
Glory to lazy Love, he would have no more to say to him, but race him out of
his Heart, and out of his Memory.

He had se^led himself in a very pretty Houle, furnished with what was fitting
for the Reception of any Body of Quality that would live a private Life, and
they found all the Respect that their Merits deserved from all the World, every
body entirely loving and endeavoring to serve them; and Isabella so perfectly
had the Ascendent over her Aunt's Heart, that she procured from her all that
she could desire, and much more than she could expect. She was perpetually
progging and saving all that she could, to enrich and advance her, and, at
last, pardoning and forgiving Henault, loved him as her own Child; so that all
things looked with a better Face than before, and never was so dear and fond a
Couple seen, as Henault and Isabella; but, at last, she proved with Child, and
the Aunt, who might reasonably believe, so young a Couple would have a great
many Children, and fonefeeing there was no Provision likely to be made them,
unless he pleased his Father, for if the Aunt should chance to dye, all their
Hope was gone; she therefore daily solicited him to obey his Father, and go to
the Camp; and that having achieved Fame and Renown, he would return a
Favorite to his Father, and Comfort to his Wife: After she had solicited in
vain, for he was not able to endure the thought of leaving Isabella, melancholy
as he was with his ill Fortune; the Bishop, kinsman to Isabella, took him to
task, and urged his Youth and Birth, and that he ought not to wast both without
Action, when all the World was employed; and, that since his Father had so
great a desire he should go into a Campagn, either to serve the Venetian
against the Turks, or into the French Service, which he liked best; he besought
him to think of it; and since he had satisfied his Love, he should and ought to
satisfy his Duty, it being absolutely necessary for the wiping off the Stain of
his Sacrilege, and to gain him the favor of Heaven, which, he found, had
hitherto been averse to all he had undertaken: In fine, all his Friends, and
all who loved him, joined in this Design, and all thought it convenient, not
was he insensible of the Advantage it might bring him; but Love, which every
day grew fonder and fonder in his Heart, opposed all their Reasonings, though he
saw all the Brave Youth of the Age preparing to go, either to one Army, or the
other.

At last, he lets Isabella know, what Propositions he had made him, both by his
Father, and his Relations; at the very first Motion, she almost fainted in his
Arms, while he was speaking, and it possessed her with so entire a Grief, that
she miscarried, to the insupportable Torment of her tender Husband and Lover,
so that, to re-establish her Repose, he was forced to promise not to go;
however, she considered all their Circumstances, and weighed the Advantages
that might redound both to: his Honor and Fortune, by it; and, in a matter of
a Month's time, with the Persuasions and Reasons of her Friends, she suffered
him to resolve upon going, her self determining to retire to the Monastery,
till the time of his Return; but when she named the Monastery, he grew pale and
disordered, and obliged her to promise him, not to enter into it any more, for
fear they should never suffer her to come forth again; so that he resolved not
to depart, till she had made a Vow to him, never to go again within the Walls
of a Religious House, which had already been so fatal to them. She promised,
and he believed.

Henault, at last, overcame his Heart, which pleaded so for his Stay, and sent
his Father word, he was ready to obey him, and to carry the first Efforts of
his Arms against the common Foes of Christendom, the Turks; his Father was very
well pleased at this, and sent him Two thousand Crowns, his Horses and
Furniture suitable to his Quality, and a Man to wait on him; so that it was not
long e're he got himself in order to be gone, after a dismal parting.

He made what have he could to the French Army, then under the Command of the
Monsignior, the Duke of Beaufort, then at Candia, and put himself a Voluntier
under his Conduct; in which Station was Villenoys, who, you have already heard,
was so passionate a Lover of Isabella, who no sooner heard of Henault's being
arrived, and that he was Husband to Isabella, but he was impatient to learn, by
what strange Adventure he came to gain her, even from her Vowed Retreat, when
he, with all his Courtship, could not be so happy, tho'she was then free in the
World, and Unvow'd to Heaven.

As soon as he sent his Name to Henault, he was sent for up, for Henault had
heard of Villenoys, and that he had been a Lover of Isabella; they received one
another with all the endearing Civility imaginable for the aforesaid Reason,
and for that he was his Countryman, though unknown to him, Villenoys being gone
to the Army, just as Henault came from the Jesuits College. A great deal of
Endearment passed between them, and they became, from that moment, like two
sworn Brothers, and he received the whole Relation from Henault, of his Amor.

It was not long before the Siege began anew, for he arrived at the beginning
of the Spring, and, as soon as he came, almost, they fell to Action; and it
happened upon a day, that a Party of some Four hundred Men resolved to sally
out upon the Enemy, as, when ever they could, they did; but as it is not my
business to relate the History of the War, being wholly unacquainted with the
Terms of Battles, I shall only say, That these Men were led by Villenoys, and
that Henault would accompany him in this Sally, and that, they acted very
Noble, and great Things, worthy of a Memory in the History of that Siege; but
this day, particularly, they had an occasion to show their Valor, which they
did very much to their Glory; but, venturing too far, they were ambush'd, in
the persuit of the Party of the Enemies, and being surrounded, Villenoys had
the unhappiness to see his gallant Friend fall, fighting and dealing of Wounds
around him, even as he descended to the Earth, for he fell from his Horse at
the same moment that he killed a Turk; and Villenoys could neither assist him,
nor had the satisfaction to be able to rescue his dead Body from under the
Horses, but, with much ado, escaping with his own Life, got away, inspite of
all that followed him, and recovered the Town, before they could overtake him:
He passionately bewailed the Loss of this brave young Man, and offered any
Recompense to those, that would have ventured to have searched for his dead
Body among the Slain; but it was not fit to hazard the Living, for unnecessary
Services to the Dead; and though he had a great mind to have Interred him, he
rested content with what he wished to pay his Friends Memory, though he could
not: So that all the Service now he could do him, was, to write to Isabella, to
whom he had not writ, though commanded by her so to do, in three Years before,
which was never since she took Orders. He gave her an Account of the Death of
her Husband, and how Gloriously he fell fighting for the Holy Cross; and how
much Honor he had won, if it had been his Fate to have outlived that great,
but unfortunate, Day, where, with 400 Men, they had killed 1500 of the Enemy.
The General Beaufort himself had so great a Respect and Esteem for this young
Man, and knowing him to be of Quality, that he did him the honor to bemoan
him, and to send a Condoling Letter to Isabella, how much worth her Esteem he
died, and that he had Eternized his Memory with the last Gasp of his Life.

When this News arrived, it may be easily imagined, what Impressions, or rather
Ruins, it made in the Heart of this fair Mourner; the Letters came by his Man,
who saw him fall in Battle, and came off with those few that escaped with
Villenoys; he brought back what Money he had, a few Jewels, with Isabella's
Picture that he carried with him and had left in his Chamber in the Fort at
Candia, for fear of breaking it in Action. And now Isabella's Sorrow grew to
the Extremity, she thought, she could not suffer more than she did by his
Absence, but she now found a Grief more killing; she hung her Chamber with
Black, and lived without the Light of Day: Only Wax Lights, that let her behold
the Picture of this Charming Man, before which she daily sacrificed Floods of
Tears. He had now been absent about ten Months, and she had learnt just to live
without him, but Hope preferv'd her then; but now she had nothing, for which to
wish to live. She, for about two Months after the News arrived, lived without
seeing any Creature but a young Maid, that was her Woman; but extreme
Importunity obliged her to give way to the Visits of her Friends, who
endeavored to restore her Melancholy Soul to its wonted Easiness; for however
it was oppressed within, by Henault's Absence, she bore it off with a modest
Cheerfulness; but now she found, that Fortitude and Virtue failed her, when she
was assured, he was no more: She continued thus Mourning, and thus enclosed,
the space of a whole Year, never suffering the Visit of any Man, but of a near
Relation; so that she acquired a Reputation, such as never any young Beauty
had, for she was now but Nineteen, and her Face and Shape more excellent than
ever; she daily increased in Beauty, which, joined to her Exemplary Piety,
Charity, and all other excellent Qualities, gained her a wondrous Fame, and
begat an Awe and Reverence in all that heard of her, and there was no Man of
any Quality, that did not Adore her. After her Year was up, she went to the
Churches, but would never be seen any where else abroad, but that was enough to
procure her a thousand Lovers; and some, who had the boldness to send her
Letters, which, if she received, she gave no Answer to, and many she sent back
unread and unsealed: So that she would encourage none, though their Quality was
far beyond what she could hope; but she was resolved to marry no more, however
her Fortune might require it.

It happened, that, about this time, Candia being unfortunately taken by the
Turks, all the brave Men that escaped the Sword, returned, among them,
Villenoys, who no sooner arrived, but he sent to let Isabella know of it, and
to beg the Honor of waiting on her; desirous to learn what Fate befell her dear
Lord, she suffered him to visit her, where he found her, in her Mourning, a
thousand times more Fair, (at least, he fancied so) than ever she appeared to
be; so that if he loved her before, he now adored her; if he burnt then, he
rages now; but the awful Sadness, and soft Languishment of her Eyes, hindered
him from the presumption of speaking of his Passion to her, tho it, would have
been no new thing; and his first Visit was spent in the Relation of every.
Circumstance of Henault's Death; and, at his going away, he begged leave to
visit her sometimes, and she gave him permission: He lost no time, but made use
of the Liberty she had given him; and when his Sister, who was a great
Companion of Isabella's, went to see her, he would still wait on her; so that,
either with his own Visits, and ahose of his Sister's, he saw Isabella
everyday, and had the good luck to see, he diverted her, by giving her
Relations of Transactions of the Siege, and the Customs and Manners of the
Turks: All he said, was with so good a Grace, that he rendered every thing
agreeable; he was, besides, very Beautiful, well made, of Quality and Fortune,
and fit to inspire Love.

He made his Visits so often, and so long, that, at last, he took the Courage
to speak of his Passion, which, at first, Isabella would by no means hear of,
but, by degrees, she yielded more and more to listen to his tender Discourse;
and he lived thus with her two Years, before he could gain any more upon her
Heart, than to suffer him to speak of Love to her; but that, which subdued her
quite was, That her Aunt, the Lady Abbess, died, and, with her, all the Hopes
and Fortune of Isabella, so that she was left with only a Charming Face and
Mien, a Virtue, and a Discretion above her Sex, to make her Fortune within the
World; into a Religious House she was resolved not to go, because her Heart
deceived her once, and she durst not trust it again, whatever it promised.

The death of this Lady made her look more favorably on Villenoys; but yet,
she was resolved to try his Love to the ulmost, and keep him off, as long as
'twas possible she could subsist, and 'twas for Interest she married again,
though she liked the Petson very well; and since she was forced to submit her
self to be a second time a Wife, she thought, she could live better with
Villenoys, than any other, since for him she ever had a great Esteems and
fancied, the Hand of Heaven had pointed out her Destiny, which she could not
avoid, without a Crime.

So that when she was a gain importuned by her impatient Lover, she told him,
She had made a Vow to remain three Years, at least, before she would marry
again, after the Death of the best of Men and Husbands, and him who had the
Fruits of her early Heart; and, notwithstanding all the Solicitations of
Villenoys, she would not consent to marry him, till her Vow of Widow hood was
expired.

He took her promise, which he urged her to give him, and to show the height of
his Passion in his obedience; he condescends to stay her appointed time, tho'he
saw her every day, and all his Friends and Relations made her Visits upon this
new account, and there was nothing talked on, but this designed Wedding, which,
when the time was expired, was performed accordingly with great Pomp and
Magnificence, for Villenoys had no Parents to hinder his Design; or if he had,
the Reputation and Virtue of this Lady would have subdued them.

The Marriage was celebrated in this House, where she lived ever since her
Return from Germany, from the time she got her Pardon; and when Villenoys was
preparing all things in a more magnificent Order at his Villa, some ten Miles
from the City, she was very melancholy, and would often say, She had been used
to such profound Retreat, and to live without the fatigue of Noise and
Equipage, that, she feared, she should never endure that Grandeur, which was
proper for his Quality; and though the House, in the Country, was the most
beautifully Situated in all Flanders, she was afraid of a numerous Train, and
kept him, for the most part, in this pretty City Mansion, which he Adorned and
Enlarged, as much as she would give him leave; so that there wanted nothing, to
make this House fit to receive the People of the greatest Quality, little as it
was: But all the Servants and Footmen, all but one Valet, and the Maid, were
lodged abroad, for Isabella, not much used to the fight of Men about her,
suffered them as seldom as possible, to come in her Presence, so that she lived
more like a Nun still, than a Lady of the World; and very rarely any Maids came
about her, but Maria, who had always permission to come, when ever she pleased,
unless forbidden.

As Villenoys had the most tender and violent Passion for his Wife, in the
World, he suffered her to be pleased at any rate, and to live in what Method
she best liked, and was infinitely satisfied with the Austerity and manner of
her Conduct, since in his Arms, and alone, with him, she wanted nothing that
could Charm; so that she was esteemed, the fairest and best of Wives, and he
the most happy of all Mankind. When she would go abroad, she had her Coaches
Rich and Gay, and her Livery ready to attend her in all the Splendor
imaginable; and he was always buying one rich Jewel, or Necklace, or some great
Rarity or other, that might please her; so that there was nothing her Soul
could desire, which it had not, except the Assurance of Eternal Happiness,
which she labored incessantly to gain. She had no Discontent, but because she
was not blessed with a Child; but she submits to the pleasure of Heaven, and
endeavored, by her good Works, and her Charity, to make the Poor her Children,
and was ever doing Acts of Virtue, to make the Proverb good, That more are the
Children of the Barren, than the Fruitful Woman. She lived in this
Tranquillity, beloved by all, for the space of five Years, and Time (and
perpetual Obligations from Villenoys, who was the most indulgent and indearing
Man in the World) had almost worn out of her Heart the Thoughts of Henault, or
if she remembered him, it was in her Prayers, or sometimes with a short Sigh,
and no more, though it was a great while, before she could subdue her Heart to
that Calmness; but she was prudent, and wisely bent all her Endeavors to
please, oblige, and caress, the deserving Living, and to strive all she could,
to forget the unhappy Dead, since it could not but redound to the disturbance
of her Repose, to think of him; so that she had now transferred all that
Tenderness she had for him, to Villenoys.

Villenoys, of all Diversions, loved Hunting, and kept, at his Country House, a
very famous Pack of Dogs, which he used to lend, sometimes, to a young Lord,
who was his dear Friend, and his Neighbor in the Country, who would often take
them, and be out two or three days together, where he heard of Game, and
oftentimes Villenoys and he would be a whole Week at a time exercising in this
Sport, for there was no Game near at hand. This young Lord had sent him a
Letter, to invite him fifteen Miles farther than his own Villa, to hunt, and
appointed to meet him at his Country House, in order to go in search of this
promised Game: So that Villenoys got about a Week's Provision, of what
Necessaries he thought he should want in that time; and taking only his Valet,
who loved the Sport, he left Isabella for a Week to her Devotion, and her other
innocent Diversions of fine Work, at which she was Excellent, and left the Town
to go meet this young Challenger.

When Villenoys was at any time out, it was the custom of Isabella to retire to
her Chamber, and to receive no Visits, not even the Ladies, so absolutely she
devoted her self to her Husband: All the first day she passed over in this
manner, and, Evening being come, she ordered her Supper to be brought to her
Chamber, and, because it was Washing-day the next day, she ordered all her
Maids to go very early to Bed, that they might be up betimes, and to leave only
Maria to attend her; which was accordingly done. This Maria was a young Maid,
that was very discreet, and, of all things in the World, loved her Lady, whom
she had lived with, ever since she came from the Monastery.

When all were in Bed, and the little light Supper just carried up to the Lady,
and only, as I said, Maria attending, some body knocked at the Gate, it being
about Nine of the Clock at Night; so Maria snatching up a Candle, went to the
Gate to see who it might be; when she opened the Door, she found a Man in a
very odd Habit, and a worse Countenance, and asking, Who he would speak with?
He told her, Her Lady: My Lady (replied Maria) does not use to receive Visits
at this hour; Pray, what is your Business? He replied, That which I will
deliver only to your Lady, and that she may give me Admittance, pray, deliver
her this Ring: And pulling off a small Ring, with Isabella's Name and Hair in
it, he gave it Maria, who, shutting the Gate upon him, went in with the Ring;
as soon as Isabella saw it, she was ready to swound on the Chair where she
sat, and cried, Where had you this? Maria replied, An old rusty Fellow at the
Gate gave it me, and desired, it might be his Pasport to you; I asked his Name,
but he said, You knew him not, but he had great News to tell you. Isabella
replied, (almost swounding again) Oh, Maria! I am ruined. The Maid, all this
while, knew not what she meant, nor, that that was a Ring given to Henault by
her Mistress; but endeavoring to recover her, only asked her, What she should
say to the old Messenger? Isabella bid her bring him up to her, (she had scarce
Life to utter these last words) and before she was well recovered, Maria
entered with the Man; and Isabella making a Sign to her, to depart the Room,
she was left alone with him.

Henault (for it was he) stood trembling and speechless before her, giving her
leisure to take a strict Survey of him; at first, finding no Feature nor Part
of Henault about him, her Fears began to lessen, and she hoped, it was not he,
as her first Apprehensions had suggested; when he (with the Tears of Joy
standing in his Eyes, and not daring suddenly to approach her, for fear of
increasing that Disorder he saw in her pale Face) began to speak to her, and
cried, Fair Creature! is there no Remains of your Henauit left in this Face of
mine, all o'regrown with Hair? Nothing in these Eyes, sunk with eight Years
Absence from you, and Sorrows? Nothing in this Shape, bowed with Labor and
Griefs, that can inform you? I was once that happy Man you loved! At these
words, Tears stopped his Speech, and Isabella's kept them Company, for yet she
wanted Words. Shame and Confusion filled her Soul, and she was not able to lift
her Eyes up, to consider the Face of him, whose Voice she knew so perfectly
well. In one momen:, she run over a thousand Thoughts. She finds, by his
Return, she is not only exposed to all the Shame imaginable; to all the
Upbraiding, on his part, when he shall know she is married to another; but all
the Fury and Rage of Villenoys, and the Scorn of the Town, who will look on her
as an Adulteress: She sees Henault poor, and knew, she must fall from all the
Glory and Tranquillity she had for five happy Years triumphed in; in which
time, she had known no Sorrow, or Care, though she had endured a thousand with
Henault. She dies, to think, however, that he should know, she had been so
lightly in Love with him, to marry again; and she dies, to think, that
Villenoys must see her again in the Arms of Henault; besides, she could not
recall her Love, for Love, like Reputation, once fled, never returns more.
'Tisimpossible to love, and cease to love, (and love another) and yet return
again to the first Passion, though the Person have all the Charms, or a thousand
times more than it had, when it first conquered. This Mystery in Love, it may
be, is not generally known, but nothing is more certain. One may a while suffer
the Flame to languish, but there may be a reviving Spark in the Ashes, raked
up, that may burn anew; but when it is quite extinguished, it never returns or
rekindles.

'Twas so with the Heart of Isabella; had she believed, Henault had been
living, she had loved to the last moment of their Lives; but, alas! the Dead
are soon forgotten, and she now loved only Villenoys.

After they had both thus silently wept, with very diff^rent Sentiments, she
thought, 'twas time to speak; and dissembling as well as she could, she
caressed him in her Arms, and told him, She could not express her Surprise and
Joy for his Arrival. If she did not Embrace him heartily, or speak so
Passionately as she used to do, he fancied it her Confusion, and his being in a
condition not so fit to receive Embraces from her; and evaded them as much as
'twas possible for him to do, in respect to her, till he had dressed his Face,
and put himself in order; but the Supper being just brought up, when he
knocked, she ordered him to sit down and Eat, and he desired her, not to let
Maria know who he was, to see how long it would be, before she knew him or
would call him to mind. But Isabella commanded Maria, to make up a Bed in such
a Chamber, without disturbing her Fellows, and dismissed her from waiting at
Table. The Maid admired, what strange, good, and joyful News, this Man had
brought her Mistress, that he was so Treated, and alone with her, which never
any Man had yet been; but she never imagined the Truth, and knew her Lady's
Prudence too well, to question her Conduct. While they were at Supper, Isabella
obliged him to tell her, How he came to be reported Dead; of which, she
received Letters, both from Monsieur Villenoys, and the Duke of Beaufort, and
by his Man the News, who saw him Dead? He told her, That, after the Fight, of
which, first, he gave her an account, he being left among the Dead, when the
Enemy came to Plunder and strip'em, they found, he had Life in him, and
appearing as an Eminent Person, they thought it better Booty to save me,
(continued he) and get my Ransom, than to strip me, and bury me among the Dead;
so they bore me off to a Tent, and recovered me to Life; and, after that, I was
recovered of my Wounds, and sold, by the Soldier that had taken me, to a
Spahee, who kept me a Slave, setting a great Ransom on me, such as I was not
able to pay. I writ several times, to give you, and my Father, an account of my
Misery, but received no Answer, and endured seven Years of dreadful Slavery:
When I found, at last, an opportunity to make my Escape, and from that time,
resolved, never to cut the Hair of this Beard, till I should either see my
dearest Isabella again, or hear some News of her. All that I feared, was, That
she was Dead; and, at that word, he fetched a deep Sigh; and viewing all things
so infinitely more Magnificent than he had left 'em, or, believed, she could
afford; and, that she was far more Beautiful in Person, and Rich in Dress, than
when he left her: He had a thousand Torments of Jealousy that seized him, of
which, he durst not make any mention, but rather chose to wait a little, and
see, whether she had lost her Virtue: He desired, he might send for a Barber,
to put his Face in some handsomer Order, and more fit for the Happiness 'twas
that Night to receive; but she told him, No Diess, no Disguise, could render
him more Dear and Acceptable to her, and that to morrow was time enough, and
that his Travels had rendered him more fit for Repose, than Dressing. So that
after a little while, they had talked over all they had a mind to say, all that
was very indearing on his side, and as much Concern as she could force, on
hers; she conducted him to his Chamber, which was very rich, and which gave him
a very great addition of Jealousy: However, he suffered her to help him to
Bed, which she seemed to do, with all the tenderness in the World; and when she
had seen him laid, she said, She would go to her Prayers, and come to him as
soon as she had done, which being before her usual Custom, it was not a wonder
to him she stayed long, and he, being extremely tired with his Journey, fell
asleep. It Is true, Isahella essayed to Pray, but, alas! it was in vain, she was
distracted with a thousand Thoughts what to do, which the more she thought, the
more it distracted her; she was a thousand times about to end her Life, and, at
one stroke, rid her self of the Infamy, that, she saw, must inevitably fall
upon her; but Nature was frail, and the Tempter strong: And after a thousand
Convulsions, even worse than Death it self, she resolved upon the Murder of
Henault, as the only means of removing all Obstacles to her future Happiness;
she resolved on this, but after she had done so, she was seized with so great
Horror, that she imagined, if she performed it, she sho sid run Mad; and yet,
if she did not, she should be also Frantic, with the Shames and Miseries that
would befall her; and believing the Murder the least Evil, since she could never
live with him, she fixed her Heart on that; and causing her self to be put
immediately to Bed, in her own Bed, she made Maria go to hers, and when all was
still, she softly rose, and taking a Candle with her, only in her Nightgown
and Slippers, she goes to the Bed of the Unfortunate Henault, with a Penknife
in her hand; but considering, she knew not how to conceal the Blood, should she
cut his Throat, she resolves to Strangle him, or Smother him with a Pillow;
that last Thought was no sooner borne, but put in Execution; and, as he soundly
slept, she smothered him without any Noise, or so much as his Struggling: But
when she had done this dreadful Deed, and saw the dead Corpse of her once-lov'd
Lord, lie Smiling (as it were) upon her, she fell into a Swound with the Horror
of the Deed, and it had been well for her she had there died; but she revived
again, and, awakened to more and new Horrors, she flies all frighted from the
Chamber, and fancies, the Phantom of her dead Lord persues her; she runs from
Room to Room, and starts and stares, as if she saw him continually before her.
Now all that was ever Soft and Dear to her, with him, comes into her Heart,
and, she finds, he conquers anew, being Dead, who could not gain her Pity,
while Living.

While she was thus flying from her Guilt, in vain, she hears one knock with
Authority at the Door: She is now more affrighted, if possible, and knows not
whither to fly for Refuge; she fancies, they are already the Officers of
Justice, and that Ten thousand Tortures and Wrecks are fastening on her, to
make her confess the horrid Murder; the knocking increases, and so loud, that
the Laundry Maids believing it to be the Woman that used to call them up, and
help them to Wash, rose, and, opening the Door, let in Villenoys; who having
been at his Country Villa, and finding there a Footman, instead of his Friend,
who waited to tell him, His Master was fallen sick of the Small Pox, and could
not wait on him, he took Horse, and came back to his lovely Isabella; but
running up, as he used to do, to her Chamber, he found her not, and seeing a
Light in another Room, he went in, but found Isabella flying from him, out at
another Door, with all the speed she could, he admires at this Action, and the
more, because his Maid told him. Her Lady had been a Bed a good while; he grows
a little Jealous, and persues her, but still she flies; at last, he caught her
in his Arms, where she fell into a swound, but quickly recovering, he set her
down in a Chair, and, kneeling before her, implored to know what she ayl'd, and
why she fled from him, who adored her? She only fixed a ghastly Look upon him,
and said, She was not well: Oh! (said he) put not me off with such poor
Excises, Isabella never fled from me, when Ill, but came to my Arms and to my
Bosom, to find a Cure; therefore, tell me, what is the matter? At that, she fell
a weeping in a most violent manner, and cried, She was for ever undone: He,
being moved with Love and Compassion, conjured her to tell what she ayl'd; Ah!
(said she) thou and I, and all of us, are undone! At this, he lost all
Patience, and raved, and cried, Tell me, and tell me immediately, what is the
matter? When she saw his Face pale, and his Eyes fierce, she fell on her knees,
and cried, Oh! you can never Pardon me, if I should tell you, and yet, alas! I
am innocent of Ill, by all that is good, I am. But her Conscience accusing her
at that word, she was silent. If thou art Innocent, said Villenoys, taking her
up in his Arms, and kissing her wet Face, By all that is Good, I Pardon thee,
what ever thou have done. Alas! (said she) Oh! but I dare not name it, 'till
you swear. By all that is Sacred, (replied he) and by whatever Oath you can
oblige me to; by my inviolable Love to thee and by thy own dear Self, I swear,
whatever it be, I do forgive thee; I know, thou art too good to commit a Sin I
may not, with Honor, pardon.

With this, and hearten'd by his Caresses, she told him, That Henault was
returned; and repeating to him his Escape, she said, She had put him his Bed,
and when he expected her to come, she fell on her Knees at the Bed - side, and
confessed, She was married to Villenoys; at that word, (said she) he fetched a
deep Sigh or two, and presently after, with a very little struggling, died;
and, yonder, he lies still in the Bed. After this, she wept so abundantly, that
all Villenoys could do, could hardly calm her Spirits; but after, consulting
what they should do in this Affair, Villenoys asked her, Who of the House saw
him? She said, Only Maria, who knew not who he was; so that, resolving to save
Isabella's Honor, which was the only Misfortune to come, Villenoys himself
proposed the carrying him out to the Bridge, and throwing him into the River,
where the Stream would carry him down to the Sea, and lose him; or, if he were
found, none could know him. So Villenoys took a Candle, and went and looked on
him, and found him altogether changed, that no Body would know who he was; he
therefore put on his Clothes, which was not hard for him to do, for he was
foarce yet cold, and comforting again Isabella, as well as he could, he went
himself into the Stable, and fetched a Sack, such as they used for Oats, a new
Sack, whereon stuck a great Needle, with a Packthread in it; this Sack he
brings into the House, and shows to Isabella, telling her, He would put the
Body in there, for the better convenience of carrying it on his Back. Isabella
all this while said but little, but, filled with Thoughts all Black and
Hellish, she pondered within, while the Fond and Passionate Villenoys was
endeavoring to hide her Shame, and to make this an absolute Secret: She
imagined, that could she live after a Deed so black, Villenoys would be eternal
reproaching her, if not with his Tongue, at least with his Heart, and
emboldened by one Wickedness, she was the readier for another, and another of
such a Nature, as has, in my Opinion, far less Excuse, than the first; but when
Fate begins to afflict, she goes through-stitch with her Black Work.

When Villenoys, who would, for the Safety of Isabella's Honor, be the sole
Actor in the disposing of this Body; and since he was Young, Vigorous, and
Strong, and able to bear it, would trust no one with the Secret, he having put
up the Body, and tied it fast, set it on a Chair, turning his Back toward it,
with the more convenience to take it upon his Back, bidding Isabella give him
the two Corners of the Sack in his Hands; telling her, They must do this last
Office for the Dead, more, in order to the securing their Honor and
Tranquillity hereafter, than for any other Reason, and bid her be of good
Courage, till he came back, for it was not far to the Bridge, and it being the
dead of the Night, he should pass well enough. When he had the Sack on his
Back, and ready to go with it, she cried, Stay, my Dear, some of his Clothes
hang out, which I will put in; and, with that, taking the Pack-needle with the
Thread, sewed the Sack, with several strong Stitches, to the Collar of
Villenoys's Coat, without his perceiving it, and bid him go now; and when you
come to the Bridge, (said she) and that you are throwing him over the Rail,
(which is not above Breast high) be sure you give him a good swing, lest the
Sack should hang on any thing at the side of the Bridge, and not fall into the
Stream: He warrant you, (said Villenoys) I know how to secure his falling. And
going his way with it, Love lent him Strength, and he soon arrived at the
Bridge; where, turning his Back to the Rail, and heaving the Body over, he
threw himself with all his force backward, the better to swing the Body into
the River, whose weight (it being made fast to his Collar) pulled Villenoys
after it, and both the live and the dead Man falling into the River, which,
being rapid at the Bridge, soon drowned him, especially when so great a weight
hung to his Neck; so that he died, without considering what was the occasion of
his Fate.

Isabella remained the most part of the Night sitting in her Chamber, without
going to Bed, to see what would become of her Damnable Design; but when it was
toward Morning, and she heard no News, she put her self into Bed, but not to
find Repose or Rest there, for that she thought impossible, after so great a
Barbarity as she had committed: No, (said she) it is but just, I should for
ever wake, who have, in one fatal Night, destroyed two such Innocents. Oh! what
Fate, what Destiny, is mine? Under what cursed Planet was I born, that Heaven
it self could not divert my Ruin? It was not many Hours since. I thought my
self the most happy and blessed of Women, and now am fallen to the Misery of one
of the worst Fiends of Hell.

Such were her Thoughts, and such her Cries, till the Light brought on new
Matter for Grief; for, about Ten of the Clock, News was brought, that two Men
were found dead in the River, and that they were carried to the Town Hall, to
lie there, till they were owned: Within an hour after, News was brought in,
that one of these Unhappy Men was Villenoys; his Valet, who, all this while,
imagined him in Bed with his Lady, ran to the Hall, to undeceive the People,
for he knew, if his Lord were gone out, he should have been called to Dress
him; but finding it, as 'twas reported, he fell a weeping, and wringing his
Hands, in a most miserable manner, he ran home with the News; where, knocking
at his Lady's Chamber Door, and finding it fast locked, he almost hoped again,
he was deceived; but Isabella rising, and opening the Door, Maria first entered
weeping, with the News, and then brought the Valet, to testify the fatal Truth
of it. Isabella, though it were nothing but what she expected to hear, almost
swounded in her Chair; nor did she feign it, but felt really all the Pangs of
Killing Grief; and was so altered with her Night's Watching and Grieving, that
this new Sorrow looked very Natural in her. When she was recovered, she asked a
thousand Questions about him, and questioned the Possibility of it; for (said
she) he went out this Morning early from me, and had no signs, in his Face, of
any Grief, or Discontent. Alas! (said the Valet) Madam, he is not his own
Murderer, some one has done it in Revenge; and then told her, how he was found
fastened to a Sack, with a dead strange Man tied up within it; and every body
concludes, that they were both first murdered, and then drawn to the River, and
thrown both in. At the Relation of this Strange Man, she seemed more amazed
than before, and commanding the Valet to go to the Hall, and to take Order
about the Coroner's sitting on the Body of Villenoys, and then to have it
brought home: She called Maria to her, and, after bidding her shut the Door,
she cried, Ah, Maria! I will tell thee what my Heart imagins; but first, (said
she) run to the Chamber of the Stranger, and see, if he be still in Bed, which
I fear he is not; she did so, and brought word, he was gone; then (said she) my
Forebodings are true. When I was in Bed last Night, with Villenoys, (and at
that word, she sighed as if her Heart Strings had broken) I told him, I had
lodged a Stranger in my House, who was by, when my first Lord and Husband fell
in Battle; and that, after the Fight, finding him yet alive, he spoke to him,
and gave him that Ring you brought me last Night; and conjured him, if ever his
Fortune should bring him to Flanders, to see me, and give me that Ring, and
tell me -- (with that, she wept, and could scarce speak) a thousand tender and
endearing things, and then died in his Arms. For my dear Henault's sake, (said
she) I used him nobly, and dismissed you that Night, because I was ashamed to
have any Witness of the Griefs I paid his Memory: All this I told to Villanoys,
whom I found disordered; and, after a sleepless Night, I fancy he got up, and
took this poor Man, and has occasioned his Death: At that, she wept anew, and
Maria, to whom, all that her Mistress said, was Gospel, verily believed it so,
without examining Reason; and Isabella conjuring her, since none of the House
knew of the old Man's being there, (for Old he appeared to be) that she would
let it for ever be a Secret, and, to this, she bound her by an Oath; so that
none knowing Henault, although his Body was exposed there for three Days to
Public View: When the Coroner had Set on the Bodies, he found, they had been
first Murdered some way or other, and then afterward tacked together, and
thrown into the River, they brought the Body of Villenoys home to his House,
where, it being laid on a Table, all the House infinitely bewailed it; and
Isabella did nothing but swound away, almost as fast as she recovered Life;
however, she would, to complete her Misery, be led to see this dreadful Victim
of her Cruelty, and, coming near the Table, the Body, whose Eyes were before
close shut, now opened themselves wide, and fixed them on Isabella, who, giving
a great Schreek, fell down in a swound, and the Eyes closed again; they had
much ado to bring her to Life, but, at last, they did so, and led her back to
her Bed, where she remained a good while. Different Opinions and Discourses
were made, concerning the opening of the Eyes of the Dead Man, and viewing
Isabella; but she was a Woman of so admirable a Life and Conversation, of so
undoubted a Piety and Sanctity of Living, that not the least Conjecture could
be made, of her having a hand in it, besides the improbability of it; yet the
whole thing was a Mystery, which, they thought, they ought to look into: But a
few Days after, the Body of Villenoys being interred in a most magnificent
manner, and, by Will, all he had, was long since settled on Isabella, the World,
instead of Suspecting her, Adored her the more, and every Body of Quality was
already hoping to be next, tho'the fair Mourner still kept her Bed, and
Languish'd daily.

It happened, not long after this, there came to the Town a French Gentleman,
who was taken at the Siege of Candia, and was Fellow-Slave with Henault, for
seven Years, in Turkey, and who had escaped with Henault, and came as far as
Liege with him, where, having some Business and Acquaintance with a Merchant,
he stayed some time; but when he parted with Henault, he asked him, Where he
should find him in Flanders? Henault gave him a Note, with his Name, and Place
of Abode, if his Wife were alive; if not, to enquire at his Sister's, or his
Father's. This French Man came, at last, to the very House of Isabella,
enquiring for this Man, and received a strange Answer, and was laughed at: He
found, that was the House, and that the Lady; and enquiring about the Town, and
speaking of Henault's Return, describing the Man, it was quickly discovered, to
be the same that was in the Sack: He had his Friend taken up, (for he was
buried) and found him the same, and, causing a Barber to Trim him, when his
bushy Beard was off, a great many People remembered him; and the French Man
affirming, he went to his own Home, all Isabella's Family, and her self, were
cited before the Magistrate of Justice, where, as soon as she was accused, she
confessed the whole Matter of Fact, and, without any Disorder, delivered her
self in the Hands of Justice, as the Murderess of two Husbands (both beloved)
in one Night: The whole World stood amazed at this, who knew her Life a Holy
and Charitable Life, and how dearly and well she had lived with her Husbands,
and every one bewailed her Misfortune, and she alone was the only Person, that
was not afflicted for her self; she was Tried, and Condemned to lose her Head;
which Sentence, she joyfully received, and said, Heaven, and her Judges, were
too Merciful to her, and that her Sins had deserved much more.

While she was in Prison she was always at Prayers, and very Cheerful and
Easy, distributing all she had amongst, and for the Use of, the Poor of the
Town, especially to the Poor Widows; exhorting daily, the Young, and the Fair,
that came perpetually to visit her, never to break a Vow, for that was first
the Ruin of her, and she never since prosper'd, do whatever other good Deeds
she could. When the Day of Execution came, she appeared on the Scaffold all in
Mourning, but with a Mien so very Majestic and Charming, and a Face so
surprising Fair, where no Languishment or Fear appeared, but all Cheerful as a
Bride, that she set all Hearts a flaming, even in that mortisying Minute of
Preparation for Death: She made a Speech of half an Hour long, so Eloquent, so
admirable a Warning to the Vow-Breakers, that it was as amazing to hear her, as
it was to behold her.

After she had done with the help of Maria, she put off her Mourning Vail, and,
without any thing over her Face, she kneeled down, and the Executioner, at one
Blow, severed her Beautiful Head from her Delicate Body, being then in her
Seven and Twentieth Year. She was generally Lamented, and Honorably Buried.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SAducismus Triumpbatus; or, Full and Plain Evidence concerning Witches, and
Apparitions; in two Parts: The first, Treating of their Possibility; the
second, Of their Real Existence: By Joseph Glanvil, late Chaplain in Ordinary
to His Majesty, and Fellow of the Royal Society The Third Edition. Sold by
Anthon, Baskervil^^, at the Bible, the Corner (...) Street, without Temple Bar.


