THE Behavior, Confession, and Execution OF The several Prisoners that
suffered at TYBURN On Friday the ninth of May, 1679. VIZ. George Rawlins, For
Robbery on the Highway. Thomas Benfield, For Burglary. Sarah Dent, For Murder.


Together with THO. PICKERING, Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered for High Treason.

GIVING A true Account of their Deportment after Condemnation, penitent
Expressions, and last Words.

Published for a Warning to others.

Having perused this Narrative, and conceiving the same may be very full to
Admonish other Ill Livers, I do Attest that the matters therein contained are
truly Related.

Sam. Smith Ordinary.



LICENSED, 1679,

LONDON: Printed in the year 1679.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners at Tyburn, etc.
AT the Session holden for London and Middlesex, ending May the 2d 1679. there
were in all Fitfeen that received Sentence of Death. An Account of their
respective Trials has already been divulged, to which we refer the Reader: Our
Work at present being to acquaint you with their deportment after Condemnation,
as far as is remarkable, or may serve to caution others to avoid the evil
Courses that brought them to this untimely Destruction; which is the main End
for which this Paper is Published.

Several of the beforementioned unhappy and Condemned Persons obtained his
Majesty's gracious Reprieve; which as it was mercifully extended, that by
Reformation they may avoid destruction; so it is hoped that in Gratitude it will
work in them such a real and deep sense of their former ill-spent Lives, and
horrid Crimes, as by the Operation of Divine Grace on their Consciences, it may
serve to reclaim them from those pernicious extravagant courses, and put them
on the study of redeeming their time by Repentance and good Actions for the
future: For he or she whom neither the terrors of Death, nor indulgence of
Pardon can Reclaim, deserves (if afterward they offend) neither Mercy nor Pity.

However, since that gracious favor (no less to be expected than immerited)
was kept strictly private from their notice, it will not be unfit to give some
Account in general of their Behavior under those fatal Circumstances.

But first we must take notice of Thomas Pickering, who being above a quarter
of a year ago found guilty of High Treason, and Condemned with Father Ireland
and Grove, formerly Executed, for designing and endeavoring to Murder his
Sacred Majesty, was this day drawn on a Sledge (but not till about an hour
after the rest) and with a numerous Guard conveyed to Tyburn, and there Hanged
and Quartered. He was bred up a Tailor, sometimes pretended to be a Merchant,
but in truth fell in with the Jesuits, and was admitted a Lay-brother amongst
them. The horrid Crime he was executed for was, That he designed to Kill the
King, and was to have Thirty thousand Masses said for his Soul, if he happened
to be cut off in, or Condemned for the same. He did once attempt to shoot his
Majesty, but Heaven (the best Lifeguard of Kings) ordered his flint to fall
out just in that moment, and yet his Popish Superiors were so impudent, as to
make him do penance, and whipped him severely for his negligence, and loosing
opportunity.

Mr. Ordinary on the Evening before his Execution, told him, he was come to
offer his Service to fit him for his approaching Death; that it was now no time
to deal slightly with him, but that he would beg great Repentance of God for
his abominable Crimes. The particular Arguments he used, are too tedious here
to be related; the Prisoner thankt him for his good Council, but would not
permit him to pray with him, but desired him to pray at home for him. At place
of Execution, according to the usual manner of those Men, he would not
acknowledge any thing of his Crimes, but repeated the Lords Prayer and Apostles
Creed, and so in an obstinate manner Persisted, till Executed according to
Sentence.

One of them (though not pleased to own the particular Fact) was yet observed
to be very penitent, acknowledging, that for his disobedience to the pious
Admonitions of his Parents, and extravagant life, especially for these two
years last past, viz. in Swearing, Drunkenness, and keeping Debaucht Company,
God had most justly brought him to this terrible Sentence of Death, for a Crime
of Burglary, which he was involved in (as he affirmed) by the Extravagancies
and Incitements of others; and therefore declared it as a necessary caution to
all young Men, to take especial Care whom they make their Consorts, or contract
a familiarity with. Noscitur ex socio, qui non cognoscitur ex se.

He was observed, during his Imprisonment, constantly to attend the Public
Worship of God in the Chapel, and gave himself very much to the reading of
Books of Devotion; in which Practice there is good ground to judge him very
sincere, for that the Ordinary coming many times near his Chamber Door, unknown
to him, has heard him pray very servently, that God would fit him for his
Trial, and sanctify his Distresses unto him.

Another did acknowledge he had been brought up with a Religious Education, but
being obstinate and undutiful to his Parents, which he now much lamented, as a
Provocation given to God to desert him to Highway-Robbery; which he confessed he
had practiced for some years, yet affirmed he never used violence to any
persons life: and affirmed, that once having robbed a person of 20 s. coming to
Market, whom he had reason to believe to be a poor man, he was so smitten in
Conscience, that he could not rest till he had inquired him out, and for
restitution sent him 40 s. And being demanded why he returned 40 s. for 20 s.
taken away, he said, He did it out of Confideration, for that he supposed the
poor man by his robbing him, might loose 20 s. which he might otherwise have
gained by his Market. Which shows that generally, even in the most profligate
persons, God leaves his witness in their Consciences to check them for ill
deeds, and that there is a certain innate Principle of Virtue, and Ray of good
Nature, which the most Debaucht cannot, without extreme difficulty, totally
extinguish.

But as to the Persons that now suffered, the first we shall mention is George
Rawlins, for a Robbery on the Highway near Kensington. He had been bred a
Soldier both here and beyond the Seas, and appeared as a person stout and
bold. Mr. Ordinary, to bring him to Contrition and Repentance, thought fit, in
respect of his Profession, to use this Argument: That David, though a mighty
man of War, yet humbled himself and wept for sin, counting it no dishonorable
imputation of Effeminacy. To which he excellently replied, and above what could
be exprected from his Education, That Soldiers indeed ought to be men of
Courage; but, alas, said he, there is no Valor against God: for to him we must
all bow in an humble Confession: And therefore he was not at all ashamed to
weep for sin, for he felt the Anguish of it, but hoped that his Repentance was
Heart-deep, as well as his Eyes moistened with Tears; counting that no
Faint-heartedness at the approach of Death; but rather desired to show himself
a man in Christ, than one that, pretending to imitate a Roman Courage, outfaces
Death with a stupid ignorance of a future Judgment.

Another stood Condemned for a Burglary, and stealing 415 l. He confessed that
he served five years an Apprentiship to a Poulterer; but being corrected for
Miscarriages, deserted his Master, and afterward addicted himself to bad
Company: amongst whom he learnt to profane the Sabbath, Drink to excess,
Swear, etc. So that he soon became a grand Proficient in wickedness. He
expressed good degrees of Remorse for all his sins, and particularly for his
unjust folly in leaving his Master and lawful Employment: Upon which he was
enticed, for a small Reward, to assist the principal Burglarian (who is fled
from Justice) in carrying part of the Money as far as Deal; where being
dismissed, on his return to Town he was apprehended, and now Convicted but
obtained a Reprieve.

Thomas Benfield Suffered for a Burglary, which he ingeniously Confessed, and
much lamented; as also those leading sins, Sabbath-Profanation, Swearing,
Debaucht Company, etc. all which he expressed himself heartily sorry for.

Sarah Dent was Executed for Murdering of her Bastard-Child, which she
acknowledged; and that the person that begot it was her Fellow Servants; who
being since dead, she partly out of Distrust of Providence, as not knowing how
to maintain it, and partly to cover her Shame, added Murder to Uncleanness,
and made away with it. She much bewailed that in her youth she had neglected to
learn to read; whereby from God's Word she might have received Instruction, and
now under this Calamity Directions and Comfort, having been lamentably ignorant
of God and her Duty, till now awakened with the Sentence of Death; Yet
professed a deep sense of her bloody, unnatural Crime. And Mr. Ordinary
desiring her that she would let him hear what she prayed to God for, since some
Convictions were wrought in her; she did pray in his hearing (apart from the
rest) very well, and fervently, in expressions suitable to her Crime and
Condition, with much Self-abhorrency and brokenness of heart, to the best of
his apprehension.

At the place of Execution they freely declared their Crimes, begged Pardon of
God, and desired all that were present, or of their Acquaintance, or that
should hear of their shameful End, thereby to take warning to avoid the like
Crimes, and amend their Lives.

FINIS.

