THE PRINCIPLES OF THE QUAKERS Further shown to be Blasphemous and Seditious.

In a REPLY to GEO. WHITEHEAD'S Answer to the Brief Discovery, Styled, Truth
and Innocence Vindicated.

BY EDWARD BECKHAM, D. D. Rector of Gayton-Thorpe; HENRY MERITON, M. A. Rector
of Oxborough; LANCASTER TOPCLIFFE, LL. B. sometimes Senior Fellow of Gonvil and
Caius College in Cambridg, now Rector of Hockwold;
Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1700.

To the Honble Sir JACOB ASTLEY Knight and Baronet, and Sir WILLIAM COOK
Baronet, Members of this present Parliament for the County of Norfolk.
GENTLEMEN,
YOUR known Love to our Church, and Loyalty to your Prince, render you
deservedly esteemed by all that have a value for each, and was our
encouragement to shelter the following Papers under your Names. We are forced
in a Christian Country ( Quis temper at a lachrymis?) to contest for
Christianity, and appear Advocates for our Ancient and English Government,
against a sort of Men who are risen against the Lord The Apostles preached
Christ that was crucified within, and not another -- for the other is the
Antichrist -- Now I say, if there be any other Christ but he that was crucified
within, he is the false Christ, Geo. Fox' s Great Mist. p. 205. Do you read
that there were any Kings since the days of the Apostles, but among the
Apostate Christians? -- We know that these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians
got up since the days of the Apostles. Geo. Fox in his several Papers given
forth, etc. See Brief Discovery, p. 16.


The Priests of the World are Conjurers, Thieves and Robbers, Antichrists,
Witches, Devils, Scarlet-colored Beasts; really they are Bloodhounds, says
Geo. Fox. See Pennyman' s Quakers Contradictions, p. 3. Sect. 7. And Richard
Crane styles them, Antichrists, Deceivers, Sorcerers, ravening Wolves, and
Babylons Merchants. See Will. Mather's Appendix to his Answer to the Switch, p.
10, 11.
and his Anointed, reproaching them both as Antichristian. As for the Ministers
of Christ, they, upon all Occasions, have been sufficiently reviled by them;
and we doubt not but 'twas spoken by way of Contempt, when George Whitehead at
every turn calls us Priests, and in his Title Page styles us the Three Norfolk
Priests, he very well knowing that the common People have an ill apprehension
of the Word, tho very honorable and worthy in it self, and of great esteem in
the first and Primitive days: For who can deny ( says a most Learned Mr. Jos.
Mede, l. 1. Disc. 5. p. 27.
Man of our own) that the word Priest is corrupted of Presbyter? our Ancestors
the Saxons first using Preoster, whence by a farther contraction came Priest
and Priest; the High and Low Dutch have Priester; the French, Prestre; the
Italian, Prete; but the Spaniard only speaks full, Presbytero. A Name which
those two great Apostles of our Lord, St. Pet. 5. 1. 2 d and 3 d Epist. of St.
John v. 1.
Peter, and St. John, were pleased to call themselves by; and (...) signifies
both in our. Holy Books, and amongst the Greek Cor. 5. 20. Ephesians. 6. 20. See
Scapula and Steph. These.
Writers, to perform the Office of an Ambassador; and sure, both the Name and
the Persons were in great esteem with the Christians of the best and earliest
Times, Epist. ad Smyrn. p. 6, 9. ad Ephesians. p. 19. ad Magnes. p. 31, 33. ad
Phil. p. 43. ad Trall. p. 48, 50, 53. Edit. Voss.
whenas Ignatius scarce wrote an Epistle wherein he gave not some Marks of
Honor to them, stiling them the Council of God, charging the People to
reverence and obey them as the Apostles, and in holy things to do nothing
without theirs and their Bishops Advice. But had the Word been a style of
Reproach, we should have worn it as our Crown, since it was for vindicating the
great Truths of the Gospel, and discovering the Blasphemies of those who would
introduce another: for when our Savior was so coarsly used, yea, blasphemed by
a new Race of Scribes and Pharisees, should his Disciples, as St. Peter, stand
a far off, whilst they buffet and spit upon him, that were in construction to
deny him, or at least to say, we know not the Man; how could we but (with the
Lydian Prince, who, tho dumb before, broke silence when he saw his Father ready
to be assassinated) cry out, ' it is our Savior, and our holy Books, the
Scriptures, Oh! do not vilify and blaspheme them. God knows we would not
imitate St. Peter's rashness (no more than his cowardice) draw a sword to cut
off an Ear, no not so much as an Hair of their Heads; our hearts desire is with
holy Paul, that they may be saved, that they may own their Blasphemies, and
repent of them (if it be posiible for Infallibility, or Perfection, to
acknowledge Sin or Error) and that they would take the Advice of a great tho
Heathen Woman, Mat. 27. 19. to meddle no more so wickedly and blasphemously
with the Holy Jesus.

We know it has been the usage of many to turn their Dedications into
Panegyricks on their Patrons, and sometimes deservedly too, great Merits
calling for just Acknowledgments as a due return, and to encourage others to
become imitators of them: but tho your Worth would afford us a large Field to
expatiate in, your Modesty forbids our very entrance upon it, since to do you
justice Ignat. Epist. ad Trall. p. 49. Edit. Voss.
herein, would, we are sure, render you very uneasy; like the holy Martyr who
underwent a Penance when he heard himself commended.

Gentlemen! You had our Votes, and you shall not want our Prayers, That God
would by his Grace establish you in all Goodness, and continue you, whilst in
this Station, the true Representatives of the best and worthiest part of your
Country, in a just Zeal for the Established Religion, and a ready support of
the Ancient Government of our Church and State, which is the only way wherein
we can manifest our selves

May 10. 1700. Your most affectionate, most humble, and devoted Servants,
EDWARD BECKHAM. HENRY MERITON. LANCASTER TOPCLIFFE.


A PREFACE To the Judicious and Impartial Reader.
THE Piece lately put forth by George Whitehead, called, Truth and Innocence
Vindicated, might more properly have been styled, Blasphemy and Sedition
palliated. We acknowledge the Charge, which the Brief Discovery gave, was high
and home, and could not but affect them deeply; and therefore some Paint and
artificial Colors must be procured to render their Doctrines at least
tolerable in the Eyes of the World; which how far they have done, the Reader
will easily discern by the following Reply. 'Twas hoped, after we had given so
many clear Instances out of their approved Authors, of several blasphemous and
seditious Principles maintained by them, that either the Citations would have
been evidenced to be false and forged, or the Authors disowned, as to these
Particulars at least, and so the Doctrines being pernicious disclaimed by them,
which had been the only fair way of vindicating Truth and themselves: But no
such matter, our Adversary denis not but they are quoted truly, but only says
they are perverted and mistaken, or else maimed and imperfect (which is the
usual Artifice of this sort of People) as if we did not understand the sense of
common English words, and know not what is meant by equal, or infinite; by a
part, or the whole. Sure we are, that passage of a plain-dealing Quaker had
been a more proper answer, who says, They are no Blasphemers, because it is
impossible Shewen' s Treatise of Thoughts, p. 14.
they should be so; they have not erred, because it is impossible they should,
being infallible. But it is pleasant to hear them cry out, we put a wrong sense
upon their words, whilst we have not offered to give any sense of them at all,
but barely recited them as we find them in their own Books: And had we quoted
every word he charges us to have designedly concealed, we should still have
been deafned with their clamours of disingenuity and unfairness of Citations;
there might always have been a pretense of something left out, unless we had
transcribed whole Leaves; which would have been infinitely tedious to any, but
especially to so august an Assembly as the Brief Discovery was tendered to. But
for all our Charge of their being guilty of blasphemous and seditious Words,
they mean as honestly as you can desire; but we pretend not to know the meaning
of their Authors, but of their Words. We had always thought Words had been the
best Interpreters of our meaning, and that these ought to be taken according to
the common and customary usage of them in our Nation; and if so, we are sure
they import Blasphemy and Sedition: 'twas not our work to inquire into the
meaning of the Men, but of the words. Here thou have showed ( says Geo. Fox to
his Adversary) that the Quakers have a Spirit given to them beyond all the
Forefathers (which we do witness) since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostasy; and they can discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are
Apostates, without speaking ever a word, they that be in the Power and the Life
of Truth. Great Mystery, p. 89.
We have heard indeed that the Quakers have such a Spirit of discerning, as can
tell us Men's thoughts and meanings without their speaking a word; but we
pretend to no such unerring Key, but judging by their words, we must declare
them monstrously blasphemous and seditious. Again, we are told there are other
words in the Authors we have cited, which were able to have sweetened the
Expressions we blamed, into Truth and Orthodoxy: But why may not those
seemingly Orthodox Expressions be as well interpreted by these we have quoted,
as these be expounded by them, especially since one who was lately of their own
Communion, and so best knows their meaning, has averred, that notwithstanding
all their palliations and seeming agreeableness, they do not truly and rightly
believe one Article of the Creed according to the Scriptures, and the true
universal sense of sound Christians in all Ages? (see G. Keith's Postscript to
the Serious Dialogue between a Churchman and a Quaker) Thus like the Heretics
of old, tho they used the same words with the Orthodox in the Articles of their
Belief, yet they meant differently, yea sometimes quite contrary to them, as
Ireneus complains, l. 3. c. 19. ult. Similia loquentes fidelibus, non solum
dissimilia sapiunt, sed and contraria. But supposing this were so, will
Orthodoxy in one place be an excuse for Heterodoxy in another? It Is not their
having spoken like Loyal Subjects yesterday, will clear them if they speak
Treason to day. It must be acknowledged that G. Whitehead of late has attained
a notable skill in the Art of Chemistry; if you send him not only both the
Foxes, Buroughs, Howgil, and the rest, but even Julian, Porphiry, and Celsus,
the keenest and most venomous Revilers of Christianity, by the same methods he
has here used to clear those, he may correct the poison of their Writings, and
extract wholesome Doctrines from the most pestilent Expressions; for let him
take but the liberty, as he has done here, of three things, and what should
hinder it? 1. To blot out part of a Sentence, as in p. 10. where Fox says, He
that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal with God. Now,
says Whitehead, He that has, should be left out; and then indeed the Sentence
is very Orthodox, viz. The same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal
with God. 2. To say they are confusedly misplaced, as p. 6. or the words Brief
Discov. page 5.
are to be transposed, as p. 19. Sol. Eccles tells us, It was said of Christ,
That he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not: So it may be said of this true Prophet ( Geo. Fox) whom John said he was
not, etc. These words, says Whitehead [whom John said he was not] we disown in
that place, they are confusedly misplaced: to be sure he was in great confusion
how to bring him off from being guilty of Blasphemy, for saying, Fox was he
whom John the Baptist said he was not, i. e. the Christ. And p. 19. Geo. Fox
had said to the Priest, Thou can not know Scripture, but by the same degree
of the Spirit the Prophets and Apostles had. No, says Geo. Whitehead, it must
be by a degree of the same Spirit, the words before cited should, as I suppose,
be so transposed. Who sees not a vast difference between saying, We must have
the same degree of the Spirit the Prophets and Apostles had to know Scripture,
and a degree of the same Spirit? Or, 3. that such a part of the Sentence is to
be put into a Parenthesis, and so left out if we think fit, as p. 25. when Fox
had been charged (by the Brief Discovery p. 12.) for saying, The Apostles
preached Christ that was crucified within, and not another -- for the other is
the Antichrist -- And he that has not this Christ that was risen and crucified
within, is a Reprobate: Geo. Whitehead, to vindicate him, says, that these
Expressions wanted their due Points, and so puts the words, that was crucified,
in a Parenthesis, thus, The Apostles preached Christ (that was crucified)
within -- and he that has not this Christ (that was risen and crucified)
within, is a Reprobate: Thus altering the great intendment of Fox, which was to
set their whole value upon Christ's being crucified and risen within us, as is
evident by many other Passages in their Writings; and believing sure that no
Person would ever look this Passage in Fox's Great Mystery, where 'twas
objected against the Quakers, as their deluding poor Souls, to hold forth a
crucified Christ within, risen within, ascended within, which indeed he answers
in the next words orthodoxly enough, tho nothing to the purpose of the
Objection (no body denying that if Christ that is crucified be not within us, we
are Reprobates) but within six lines after he has these Passages the Brief
Discovery charges, The Apostles preached Christ that was crucified within, etc.
Now, allowing this Sophistry, we defy any Turk, Jew, or Atheist, nay even the
Devil himself, to utter so vile a Blasphemy but that it may be made as Orthodox
as the Creed. But let wise Men judge whether this ought to be allowed any Writer
who undertakes to vindicate another, when by his confession, if the words be
read as they are, and have been printed for many and many years, the Author
must be guilty of Blasphemy. Great endeavors has he used in many places to
vindicate himself and others from Blasphemy (as where he says, That which is
spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the
Scriptures, and greater) but the best way he ever took was, when charged with
that most blasphemous passage against the Trinity, in a Book put out by him and
three other Quakers, called, Ishmael and his Mother cast out; where they
bespeak their Adversary thus: The three Persons thou dreamest of, which thou
would divide out of one like a Conjurer, are all denied, and thou shut up
with them in perpetual darkness for the Lake and the Pit. Geo. Whitehead does
now expressly disown the words (tho they were justly chargeable upon him as well
as the others, being Partner with them in the whole, and setting his Name,
without any distinction, to the entire Book) affirming, that they are none of
his, and that he wrote not that part of the Answer; and that he shall neither
stand by, nor own these words, etc. This we are sure is the best way he could
take to vindicate himself, tho thereby he has left his three Brethren under
this black mark of being Blasphemers; for to say only, The words appear too
rash and irreverent, is handling the Ulcer too gently, which ought to be cut
out to the very Coar. But if we may believe a great and good Man, Geo.
Whitehead could not always thus excuse himself in this particular, for the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Falkner (in his Treatise of Reproaching and Censure,
Part 2. cap. 3. sect. 1. number. 5, 6. p. 265, 266.) tells us, That when he
disputed with Geo. Fox and Geo. Whitehead at Lynn Regis in the County of
Norfolk, Anno 1659, they sent him nine Questions, or Positions rather; the
first of which was against the three Persons of the Deity: And in the first day
they plainly declared themselves against the three Persons of the Trinity, and
then (says Dr. Falkner) I charged G. Whitehead, in the presence of Geo. Fox,
and a great number of other Witnesses, with those horrid and blasphemous words
against the Trinity aforementioned; which, says the Doctor, he neither did nor
could deny but this wicked Assertion was written and published by him and his
Companions (it seems he made no such excuse for himself then, or declared that
he would not stand by or own them, as he now does, for what Reason let the
World judge Nay in his dispute with Mr. Suith of Christ's College in Cambridge,
he owned the Book: for says Mr. Smith to him, tell me plainly whether you will
own it or not; if you will not at all, then tell me what you will own, and what
not -- if you will not own it, speak -- To which George Whitehead answers,
Well, I will own it, prove what you can. Smith's Quaker disarmed, printed 1659.
: Tho the licentiousness of those times permitted Men to belch forth any Poison
their corrupt minds had conceived against the Trinity, which they durst not now
do) but to show, says that Reverend Person, their particular zeal to oppose the
Holy Trinity, I received a Paper of four Queries (directed to them that affirm
that there are three distinct Persons in the Godhead, and that the Father is
the first, and the Word the second, and the Spirit the third; and that the
second was begotten as to his Godhead) wholly levelled against the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and subscribed by G. Whitehead, and G. Fox. After I had returned
an Answer to these, I received another large Paper, containing a long Harangue
against the Holy Trinity, with Geo. Whitehead's Name alone subscribed: In this
Paper (which, says the Doctor, I have by me) it is declared, That to call three
distinct Persons in the Trinity, are Popish Terms, and Names the Papists do
call the Godhead by, etc. As if none but Papists did so, or 'twas never done
till the days of Popery; thus laboring to render the Doctrine odious, by
representing it as Popish. However (whether it be owing to the change of his
Mind, or for fear of the Scourge that was over him, viz. that Passage in the
Act for Toleration, which secures a Reverence to this Doctrine of the Trinity;
Provided that neither this Act, nor any Clause, Article, or Thing herein
contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend to give any Ease, Benefit,
or Advantage -- to any Person that shall deny in his Preaching or Writing, the
Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, as it is declared in the aforesaid Articles of
Religion) we are glad to find him at length returning to a more fober mind, and
wish he would have corrected, if not his Sentiment, yet his Style in many other
Particulars, as plainly blasphemous as this taken notice of in the Brief
Discovery; but merely to seek out and study Evasions, does but multiply words,
and argues a mind very mean and insincere, studious only of preserving a Name,
and upholding a Party.

We have endeavored a just and honest Reply, laboring to set things in a
right Light, and thereby evidencing the Truth of what we had charged them with.
We speak as to wise Men, and let them judge between us, for we can do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth. And as to the Persons of these Men, we
have no particular quarrel with them; neither have we, to our knowledge, any
Family of their Persuasion in all our Parishes (which is a happiness that many
of our neighbor Ministers cannot boast of) and had they not grown to such an
insolence, as even to dare all our Robe with a particular Challenge, as not
only we, but our Superiors, apprehended, we should never (for ought we know) in
any public way have entered the Lists with them; but being duly and regularly
called forth (as we made appear in our first piece, styled, The Quakers
Challenge) we hold it both just and dutiful to our Religion, Superiors, and our
selves, to endeavor maintaining the Orthodox Faith of that Church we profess
our selves Members and Ministers of: And whereas many (the Laodiceans of this
Age) have blamed us for contesting with so foolish a People (as the Quakers
generally are) telling us, That we might have found a better employment than to
be busied with such Impertinents as these, planting a Battery against Aspin
Leaves, that ruffle indeed and make a noise for the present, but would e're
long wither and fall of themselves; We could wish the Issue might make good
their Presage: But tho many of them are absurd and unreasonable Men, (...),
that have no Topic to build a rational Discourse on, but are given rather to
railing and raving (the Logic of Bedlam) yet are there some among them that
pretend to Art, and do express much cunning in their evasive and elusive ways
of Discourse, whereby they are apt to deceive the simple and wellmeaning; and
it is for the sake of these weak Ones ( Children, as the Apostle calls them) who
are too easily spirited away with good words and fair pretenses, that we have
undertaken this: but we hope there will be no occasion for us any more to
appear upon the Stage in vindication of these great Truths of our Religion, but
that the more worthy Sons of our Mother (whose Learning and Authority may
conciliate a greater reverence to their Writings) will espouse so excellent a
Cause, and by their clear and close Discourses stop the mouths of these proud
Boasters, who truly know nothing, but dote about Questions and strife of Words,
from whence come po^^erse Disputings of Men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of
the Truth.

Being in the following Pages to discourse of Blasphemy, we think it necessary
first to settle the Notion thereof.
BLASPHEMY is originally a Greek Term, which signifies, at large, to hurt and
injure ones Fame with evil words, (...), famam laedere calumniando vel
maledicendo; and thus it is often used by our Holy Writers. Tit. 3. 2. (...), to
speak evil of no man. Ephesians. 4. 13. Let all evil speaking [(...)] be put away. 1
Cor. 4. 13. Being defamed, (...), we entreat, we return Prayers for their
Reproaches, and speaking evil of us. Romans 3. 8. As we be slanderous^^ reported
[(...).]

But Blasphemy, strictly taken, denotes, 1. A speaking evil or reproachfully of
God. 2. A vilifying or speaking contemptuously of those things which have a
peculiar relation to God. 3. An attributing to others, or an assuming to our
selves, that which is proper to God alone.

1. A speaking evil or reproachfully of God. That this (and the next particular
also) is Blasphemy, that place, Rev. 13. 6. does evince. The Beast is said to
open his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. And Naboth was charged to blaspheme
God (1 Kings 21. 13.) to speak evil or reproachfully of him. It Is true this,
like other Crimes, admits of Aggravation and degrees of Guilt: for there is a
Blasphemy of impious outrage and downright defiance against God, such as was
that of Rabshakeh, openly denying the Power of the God of Israel, as sufficient
to rescue out of his Master's hand: Such that of Mezentius in the Poet; Dextra
mihi Deus, and telum quod missile libro. And this sort of Blasphemy in an
Israelite, was that which, as we conceive, was punished with Death, Levit. 24.
11, 15, 16.

Again: Blasphemy against God may be charged upon Men, when from their avowed
Professions, Principles, or Practices, it follows, by clear Evidence, and
uncontestable Reasoning, that the peerless Majesty, Holiness, Immutability,
Truth, Unity, or other Perfections of God, are rivaled, vilify'd, injured or
depraved; because there is none Holy as the Lord, and because in him is Light,
and no Darkness at all. Thus, to ascribe to God a sinful Impulse, or a lying
Divination; to detract and derogate from his adorable Perfections, can never be
excused from a deep Tincture of this dangerous Crime.

2. A vilifying or speaking contemptibly of those things which have a peculiar
relation to God; as in the forementioned place, Rev. 13. 6. the Beast is said
to blaspheme his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. The mocking and
abusing our Savior, who, as the Messiah, had a peculiar relation to God, sent
by him as his Servant for a particular Office and Employ, is called Blasphemy.
Luke 22. 63, 64, 65.
Thus also the denying him to be the Christ of God, being attended with
speaking vilely and contemptibly of him, is, upon this account, reckoned Acts
18. 5, 6.
Blasphemy: and was the Blasphemy St Paul was guilty of before his Conversion,
Jam. 2. 7.
and which he compelled others to. Depraving the Doctrine of the Gospel, 1 Timothy
1. 13.
and thereby renouncing of it, is reckoned Blasphemy, as we find in Hymeneus:
Acts 26. 11.
1 Timothy 1. 20.
for it gives occasion to speak evil of the Doctrine and Ordinances of
Christianity; upon which account the vilifying and depraving, the speaking evil
and contemptibly of Baptism by Water, and the Supper of the Lord by Bread and
Wine, which not only were but are yet the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ
(as we hope is made evident in the following Discourse) is no less Jude v. 8.
than Blasphemy, they having so near and peculiar a relation to God and Christ.
2 Pet. 2. 10.
Hence reviling Magistrates is in several places styled Blasphemy, (...), 1
Kings 21. 13.
they speak evil of Dignities: 'Twas laid to Naboth's charge that he blasphemed
the King. Speaking evil of the King is blasphemy, because of the peculiar and
special relation he bare to God, being his Viceroy and Representative.

Thus reproachful words against the Temple and the Law, they bearing a special
Acts 6. 13.
relation to God, were accounted Blasphemy. This man ceas^th not to speak
blasphemous words against this Holy Place, and the Law. Yea, speaking
contemptuously, and by way of derision against the Mountains (the Land) of
Israel, is for the same reason reckoned Blasphemy, as we read, Ezekiel. 35. 12. I
have heard all thy Blasphemies, which thou have spoken against the Mountains of
Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume. Much like
that of Tully's Quam chara Diis immortalibus esset, quod eam victa, quod
elccata, etc.
deriding Jerusalem for accounting it self the peculiar Care and Darling of
Heaven, whenas it was stormed and taken by Pompey. And if reproaching and
reviling Things and Persons that have a near and special relation to God and
Christ, be Blasphemy, then those, we fear, are guilty thereof, who affix to the
Ministers of the Gospel such vile Names, as Conjurers, Thieves, Witches,
Devils, Orat. 24. pro L. Flacco.
Bloodhounds, and the like. We hope we shall not bring a railing Accusation
against them, only say, as Michael the Archangel did to him that inspires this
Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish Temper into the Minds of Men, The Lord rebuke
thee.

3. An attributing to others, or an assuming to our selves, that which is
proper to God alone. Upon this account Idolatry is so often in Scripture said
to be Blasphemy, because men attribute to the Idol that which is peculiar to
God, as Omnipotence, Omniscience, and the like: Ezekiel. 20. 27. In this your
Fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a Trespass against me:
and that Trespass was Idolatry, as v. 28. When I had brought them into the
Land, they saw every high Hill, and all the thick Trees, and there they offered
their Sacrifices, and presented the provocation of their Offering; there also
they made their sweet Savor, Mr. Mede, Comment. Apocal. Par. 2. in (...), l.
3. p. 503.
and poured out their Drink Offerings. So Isa. 65. 7. Your Fathers have burnt
Incense upon the Mountains, and blasphemed me upon the Hills. And that
Blasphemy the Beast is said to be guilty of, is conceived by Learned Men to be
Idolatry, viz. the giving his incommunicable Name and Attributes to Idols or
Images. Dr. He^. More in loc.


And as an attributing to others, so an assuming to our selves that which is
Luke 5. 21.
proper to God alone, is Blasphemy, as the places cited in the Margin show.
Mar. 2. 7.
When our Savior said to the Paralytick, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, presently
Mar. 9. ^.
the Scribes and Pha^isee^ cried oat, This man blasphemeth, who can forgive
Sins but God alone? Remission of Sins was God's Prerogative, as they well knew;
and had not Christ been God as w^^^ as Man, to have assumed this Authority as
originally and of right belonging to him, would have been Blasphemy: as also
the assuming to himself the honor of being the Son of God, of sitting at his
Right hand, and being the Great Judge of the World, would have made him guilty
of Blasphemy, had he not been the Son of the most High, and also sanctified and
set apart for the judging the World, by a Commission from his Father; as
appears by these Scriptures, Joh. 10. 33, 36. Mat. 26. 64, 65. Mark 14. 62, 64.

Let the Followers of Geo. Fox (who called himself the Judge of the World)
consider this; and such vile Wretches as Audland and Coal, who in their
Letters See the Letters in the Snake in the Grass, 8. p. 115. 3 d Edit.
attributed to him that which is peculiar to our Blessed Savior, viz. That his
Habitation was in the Power of the Highest, in which be ruled and governed in
Righteousness; and that his Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end. (All which William Pen labors to justify in his Judas
and the Jews, p. 24.) Dear and precious one (says Audland in his Letter to Geo.
Fox) in whom my Life is bound up, and my Strength in thee stands; by thy
Breathings I am nourished, by thee is my Strength renewed -- Life and Strength
comes from thee, Holy One -- Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for
evermore -- I am thine, begotten and nourished by thee, and in thy Power am I
preserved: Glory unto thee, Holy One, for ever. And let those that Hosanna'd
James Naylor into Bristol, as our Lord was into Jerusalem, reflect seriously
upon their Blasphemy therein. If we may not be allowed to say these men
blasphemed, we are utterly to seek touching the true notion of Blasphemy, and
will take it for a favor to be, by some worthy Pen, directed more rightly to
conceive of it.

WHEREAS George Whitehead declares our Designs were to incense the Government
against them, and deprive them of their Christian Liberty, it is evident we
meddled not with their Persons, but Doctrines, and desired not an Abridgment of
any Liberty the Government thinks fit to allow them; but we would be loath
Blasphemy and Sedition should be embraced as part of the Christian Faith, or
that Men who profess them be reckoned as true Members of the Prot^st^^nt
Church: all that we could hope for was, that a Mark might by Public Authority
be set upon such Principles, and thereby Persons checked who endeavored to
propagate them among the People; and whether any in Authority will think fit to
do so, we know not. But we judge it agreeable to our Office and Ministry to
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and to endeavor
the stopping their Mouths that speak perverse things, as the brief Discovery
shows Buroughs, both the Foxes, Howgil, and others have done; and especially
in these following particulars.

CHAP. I.
Of the Light Within.
Dr. Cudworth's true Notion of the Lord's Supper.
IT IS the Observation of a learned Man, That there is always some truth which
gives being to every Error, pure Falsehood not being able to subsist of it self,
and therefore twines about some Truth for its Support and Succor: and it being
a great Truth that Christ is the true Light which John 1. 9.
lights every Man that comes into the World, i. e. by the Light of Reason,
human Understanding, and natural Conscience; and all People perceiving they
have a Light within that discerns some things to be good, and moves them
thereunto, and also checks for many things that are evil, and dissuades them
from them; our Adversaries conclude that this Light is Christ himself, the true
Light: whereas it is but a Ray from that Sun, an Illumination from the Father of
Lights, and not the true Eternal God and Christ, as is their current and most
fundamental Doctrine; for thus viz. Richard Ashby, Thomas Bonnet, John Hubbard,
John Fiddeman, Daniel Philips, Tho. Buckingham.
six of them together in the Defense of the People called Quakers, p. 14. tell
us, The Light within is Christ, and Christ is the Word that was in the
beginning with God, and was God. And the viz. Rich. Ashby, John Fiddeman, and
John Cade.
Authors of the true Light owned and vindicated, p. 10. argue thus: If the
Light which shines in the Heart of Man, be God and Christ, as we believe and
teach, then it is impossible the Light within so taught by us, should expose us
to Blasphemy against God, Christ, or the Holy Scriptures: But the Light which
shines in the Heart of Man, is God and Christ. And this the brief Discovery
charged them with, quoting Fox's Great Mystery, saying, The Light which every
one that comes into the World is enlightened with (and Fox jun. saying, The
Light in you) is not Conscience, for the Light was before any thing was made,
or Conscience named. George Whitehead in his Vindication hereof makes a hideous
Out^ry, Where Is the blasphemous Principle? why truly in these words: The Light
that is in us (as Fox jun. explains it, and as Rich. Ashby, and the rest above
assert) is not made, and so by Consequence must be God.

When they speak of the Inbeing of this Divine Light in Believers, we hope they
mean something peculiar to them, and not common to Beasts, which is nothing but
the Presence of his Essence, and that is every where. We say then that Light
which is in us peculiarly, and enlightens us, is but a Ray and Beam of that
Eternal Light (as William Penn owns in many places) subjected in our minds; and
to say that Light was not made is the Blasphemy, that Light being manifestly
distinct from the Enlightner himself, as the Light in a Room is distinct from
the body of the Sun. To say that Light which is in the Room subjected in the
Air there, is the Sun in the Firmament, is egregious Folly; and to say those
beams of Light that are shed abroad in Men's Hearts and subjected there, are the
very Eternal Sun of Righteousness it self, is Blasphemy, seeing they are but an
effect of it. Truth is, the Essence of God enlightens nothing as barely present
with it; if it did, then every thing would be enlightened where it is (for a
Quatenus ad omne valet Consequentia) which is evidently false, but only where
it actually effects and sheds its Light; and where that is subjected (sure they
will not say that the Essential Light of God is subjected in our Minds, and so
reduce him to an Accident) it is not possible for any Creature to understand or
know any thing the more for God's being only present with it essentially, for
then a Tree or a Brute would be as knowing and understanding as Men are, but by
something God effects in the Understanding, and is subjected there, which must
be made; and it is Blasphemy to say the contrary.

William Penn in his Reply to an answer made to his Key, has an Exception P.
52.
to this Instance, saying, God does not enlighten Trees and Beasts by his
Presence with them, because Trees and Beasts are not in Man's Nature, nor in
any capacity for such enlightening. Which is manifestly false: for every thing,
tho not in a natural aptitude and fitness, is in a Capacity in relation to the
Almighty and powerful Presence of God, that implies not a Contradiction. How
rationally is Balaam's Ass Number. 22. 28.
taught to discourse with and reprove his Master? God could, if he pleased,
make Birds of the Air discover the closest Treason, and the Beam out of the
Eccl. 10. 20.
Timber cry out against the Oppressor; and turn a Stone into a Loaf of Bread:
Hab. 2. 11.
but then all these mighty things could not have been done by God's Essential
Presence (for then every Ass would speak and discourse, and even that Ass would
have done it before; every Bird would tell News; every Beam would cry murder,
and every heap of Stones would be a Batch of Bread, God being always present
with every one of them) but by exerting some powerful Operations upon these
Subjects; nay he did not create the World by being barely present with the
Chaos or Inane, for then the World would have been from Eternity, but by his
voluntary powerful Fiat which effected that change. In like manner the
Illumination of Believers is not from any such Essential Presence with us, but
by that same powerful Operation of God upon the Souls of dead Sinners, whereby
he raised up Jesus from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 20. If God illuminated us qua
essentially present, he must illuminate necessarily, not ad placitum, and he
should always illuminate where present, not where he pleases. Let the Reader
observe that Geo. Whitehead in his Vindication of George Fox here, flies from
the Quakers Principle of the Light within being Christ, to the Light without
them; no Body ever denied those Passages he cites out of St. John, to represent
Christ: but then it is a personal Christ without them, and that Light no doubt
was before any thing was made, or Conscience named. But what was this to the
purpose? Does Christ say, John 8. 12. I the Light within Joh. 1. 3.
you am the Light of the World, or all things were made by me the Light within
you? So that in pitying our Ignorance he betrays his own.

Fox jun. is cited by the Brief Discovery, p. 3. I the Light will fall upon you
and grind you to Powder, who will not own me the Light in you: I Will make you
know that I am the true Eternal God which created all things, and that by me
the Light all things are upheld; and that there is not another besides me can
save. He says the Light in us does, and we say the Light in us does not these
wonders, being but a Beam of that Light which effects them; and to say it does
is the Blasphemy. Again, for so poor a Wretch to personate the Great and Mighty
God, without Commission from him, and say I Will do this and this, as Whitehead
pretends he does, is Blasphemy. Whitehead P. 4. l. 3.
pretends that the true Light gave him these Words to declare to the
Inhabitants of the Earth; but have we not reason to fear he belies the Eternal
Living God, in pretending his Commission (to declare such hard things against
the Inhabitants of the Earth) which he cannot produce? To counterfeit the
King's Broad Seal is no less than Treason; and for such a little Worm to be so
impudent as to pretend he has God's Seal to his counterfeit Commission, What is
this but Blasphemy? For such a bold Fellow as Fox (as if he had been really
commissied God's Attourny and Representative) to come strutting forth, I, I, I,
at every word in God's Name; I Will fall upon you and grind you to Powder; I Will
make you know I am the Eternal God, etc. and this without any Commission from
him: What softer Name can you find for this than Blasphemy? Had he been, Cited
Brief Disc. p. 5. l. 31.
as Brother Fox affirms, one Soul with God, and part of God equal with God, not
distinct from God; none would have envied him such a style of Majesty; the
being so was Commission enough. If the Prophets or Apostles delivered their
Messages in any such Style, they gave, we are sure, better proof of their
Authority than this Impostor. But how if after all, this Light of the Quakers
be not any Beam of the true Light, but a spark from the Devil's Forge (and our
Savior tells us of a Light within that is Darkness) then 'twill be plain it is
none but Fox himself, or the Devil that is in him, that thus cur^ets and
vaunts, telling the World what mighty things he will do: they cannot make it
appear it is Christ in them, while we can make it evident it cannot be so, as by
other Arguments, so by the Doctrines it inspires them with, of which hereafter.

Brief Disc. p. 3. quotes Fox's Pearl, and why may not a Pearl come out of a
Fox's Head? we have heard of one taken out of the Head of a Creature, every
whit as full of Poison if possible: But what says this precious Pearl? there
you find the Fox ranting and swaggering in the same Majestic Style as before,
I, k, I, his Quaker-Light flashes there very terribly, like Lightning it burns
where ever it falls; read it over if you durst, and if thou came but believe
it, 'twill surely make thee to quake and tremble, you will have such a
thunderclap from Jupiter Fox, as would make even Caligula to run under his Bed
again to hide himself from it. -- I Will break in pieces; I Will make Nations like
dirt, I Will tread them into mire; I Will make Religions, Professons and Teachings,
Gatherings of Heaps, Gatherings of Multitudes, Gatherings which they call
Churches, I Will make mire of them -- The Wrath of the Lamb is risen, the Scepter
is gone out, the Throne is set, ye shall be shaken, ye D^^mers, ye Dreamers, ye
Notion^^^, I Will whirl you under Hailstones, Vials, Plagues, Thunders, Woes,
Judgments are come amongst you, upon your Heads all Nations; the Rod is over
you which must rule all Nations, Trumpets founding and sounded; the Just will
rule, (and you ken well enough we trow, who those just ones are) the Lamb will
have the Victory. Can this be the voice of the Spirit of the meek and peaceable
Jesus, the bleating of the Lamb that is risen as he tells us, or rather the
roaring of a Lion that wants his Prey? You may easily know what Spirit it is by
its vomiting up such Flakes of Fire and Brimstone: For such a Wretch to pretend
(as he does in the close of the Paragraph) that this rumbling Message he had
seen and heard from the beginning, and was the Word of Life, when it was but a
Flash of his own Wildfire and hair-brained Imagination; what is this but
Blasphemy?

Again, Brief Disc. p. 4. cites George Fox's Book, styled the Teachers of the
World unveiled; but George Whitchead grievously complains that we have left out
somewhat which might have done him mighty service had it been called in: Well,
he shall have fair play, let him take in what he pleases, the whole Book if he
thinks fit, it will yet appear blasphemous enough: Hark how the Varlet struts;
I am the Light of the World, by whom the World was made; a Blasphemy as appears
by the former Paragraph, personating so boldly the Lord of Glory without his
Commission: but the Caput Mortuum is in these Words, There is your Condemnation
from him who of the Lord was moved this to write: He writes not this sure too
in the Person of Christ, he tells you plainly it is from him who of the Lord was
moved this to write; the Lord sure was never moved of the Lord: but he puts all
out of doubt when he adds, Whose Name of the World is called GEORGE FOX. Here
the Varlet sits as Judge of the World; and See Snake in the Grass, p. 20.
truly (as in the Quakers Challenge, p. 6.) a very unmerciful Judge, if he be
like his Brother Eccles, who hangs all that fall not down and worship his
imaginary Christ the Light within, tho they worship a Christ without them never
so devoutly and sincerely. Come Protestants, Presbyterians, Independants, and
Baptists, the Quakers deny you all, the Quakers are in the Truth and none but
they. Good my Lord Mercy for this once, for some Primitive Christians and
Martyrs of the Church; let not all these good Men, because they did not yea it
and nay it as the Quakers, be sentenced to be hanged up in Chains of darkness,
because they cannot how down and worship the golden Image you have set up, an
imaginary Christ within, tho the true Christ, God and Man without them, they
always loved and adored.

In the same Book and Page of the Quakers Challenge, Eccles amongst his Brief
Disc. p. 4, 5.
Panegyricks of George Fox, has these words; It was said of Christ that he was
in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not: so it
may be said of this true Prophet whom John said he was not. Here Is no complaint
now made that we have left out somewhat, but rather that we have quoted too
much; these words it seems, whom John said he was not, ought to be omitted, tho
written from the Spirit of the Lord as well as Fox's Mystery, and proved to be
so by the same Arguments that his was, his inward sense and feeling, he was
sure of it; and now to disown these words, printed so long since, and the Error
never discovered, nay so ost examined by the Court of Inquisition, the second
Day's Meeting, and never put into the Index Expurgatorius -- But, why, George,
should such an Expression as this be disowned? a poor, harmless, innocent
Expression as he deems it; for George cannot see a jot of Blasphemy in it, tho
he says that George Fox was he that John said he was not, i. e. Christ himself.
Alas, 'twas only a little want of skill in Language! for he, Good Man! was not
skilful in Expression, but meant well, whatsoever he said. Sure, George, thou
have a notable Horoscope, to see into the Hearts of Men, let their words be
what they will: but thou know we charge not their Meanings, but their Words
with Blasphemy; and his Intention ought not to be considered, as thou say it
should, if contrary to the plain import of his words.

Thou tellest us he was none of the most eminent or approved Quakers: Come,
George, never be ashamed of Prophet Eccles, who was as zealous and self-denying
a Disciple of Christ within George Fox, as ever St. Matthew was of Christ
without him: for he forsook all, every Fiddle he had, and (which was more than
that holy Publican did by his all) burnt them all to a Gittern or a
Juice-tromp. But, says Whitehead, he could not intend the World was made by
George Fox; no 'twas impossible, being secured from such a Blasphemy by the
Amulet of Infallibility. But we wonder why it might not as well have secured
him from blasphemous Words, as Meanings: But how comes it to pass that a Quaker
cannot intend Blasphemy, tho he speaks never so much; tho he says he was the
Christ, the Person that John said he was not? Come, George, never stand
mumbling of Thistles any longer, and chewing blasphemous Words so gingerly,
sometimes this way, sometimes that; but spit them out of thy Mouth, as putid
and stinking Blasphemy. But alas! what shall we do with our poor Infallibility
in the mean time? Why even leave her to shift for her self, as poor people turn
their Children out of doors a begging, when they cannot maintain them any
longer.

George Whitehead here plainly disowns Eccles's Infallibility; and why may not
we disown Fox's and Burroughs's, yea, and his Worship's too. God Almighty grant
that they may all at last see what extravagancies they have been fooled into by
a bold pretense to it, and in time flee out of that House, whose chief Pillar
begins to crack.

Edward Buroughs (as the Brief Disc. p. 5.) returns an answer to this Question
propounded to him by the Priest: Is that very Man, with that very Body within
you, yea, or nay? To which he answers, The very Christ of God is within us, we
dare not deny him. Whitehead says, To instance this as a proof of 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Blasphemy, is to charge the Apostle with Blasphemy, who says, Christ is in
you. But does that, or any other Scripture say, the very Man Christ, with that
very Body, is in us? Either Burroughs*s Answer is direct and honest, or it is
not: If it be direct, he must say, that very Man Christ, and that very Body of
Christ is within us; but that is such an evident Falsehood, that it is beyond
the power of any man alive to defend it, even of Whitehead himself, whose
chiefest Faculty lies that way, to streighten the most crooked Doctrines, and
set them right, and to shape the most ugly deformed Blasphemies, so that they
shall appear most Divine Truths. How many Manhoods would there be, if the Man
Christ were in every Quaker? As many as ever Transubstantiation made. We
heartily own his appearance in the Flesh and in the Spirit, his personal
appearance in the fullness of time, and his spiritual appearance in every true
Believer; but this is not the Man Christ and his Body being in them, which the
Question was of. If the Answer of Buroughs be indirect, and nothing to the
purpose, the Question being of that very Man and his very Body; if his Answer,
we say, was not direct, but shifting and shuffling to another point, as
Whitehead intimates, when he says, p. 7. he means he is only spiritually in
Believers; tho we agree the Truth, we cannot allow the Honesty of such an
answer; nor can George Whitehead justify this dodging in him, it rendering him
more like a Jugler than a Disputant. When you ask for your Money again out of
the Juglers Hand, be opens it, and shows you nothing but a Counter: The
Question was asked, Is that very Man, with that very Body, within you? His
Answer is (as Whitehead tells us) he is in us spiritually, which no body
questioned, viz. by his Graces and Influences. We may see how loath Whitehead is
that Buroughs should be counted a Blasphemer. Well! for once we are content he
should pass for a Jugler.

CHAP. II.
Of the SOUL.
THE Brief Discovery has four Quotations out of Fox to prove his Blasphemy
touching this. P. 5, 6. he says, The Soul is brought up into Great Mys^ery, p.
91.
God, whereby they come to be one Soul: He tells us farther, It Is of God's
Being, and that it is not Blasphemy to say the Soul is a part of ibid. p. 100.
God: He also says, The Soul is without beginning, and Infinite in it self:
and in Readiness Errand, Fox says, He that has the same Spirit that raised up P.
8.
Jesus Christ, is equal with God. One would think these are Blasphemies plain
enough, and too hard for an Apology, unless by one that can make a Panegyric
upon Vice, and could represent Whoredom and Drunkenness so as to appear the
greatest Instances of Chastity and Temperance. Why here is the Man! George
Whitehead can do the feat: All these horrid Blasphemies, with a little hocus
pocus of his Sophistry, are changed into true Quaker Orthodoxy. Cressey 15
Revel. of Divine Love, c. 49. 112.


He begins with the first Citation, where Fox says, the Soul is one Soul with
God. Here Fox has but lickt up the Froth from the mouth of Mother Juliana in
one of her Enthusiastic raving Fits: She tells us, We are substantially united
unto God, our Soul is oned to God; between God and the Soul there Chapter 5. 12.
46. 105.
is right ought; God is its Maker, to whom it is oned. But Whitehead cries out
amain, Where Is the Blasphemy in this? He cunningly repeats a part of the Chapter
56. p. 144.
Instance, which was an aggregate one, consisting of many parts; and then crows
and triumphs, Where, where is it? Like him that hides the Body out of sight,
and shows only a Finger or a Thumb, and then cries out, Where is the Man? Tho
we believe this single Allegation out of Fox, if it were alone, would appear
blasphemous enough. We have carefully read the Scriptures, to the number of ten
brought as Witnesses, who yet say not the least that the Soul is one Soul with
God; only 1 Cor. 6. 17. says, The man that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.
Now what an inference is this! because a man, who is a Body of Flesh and Blood,
is one Spirit with God, which is not possibly to be understood but he is one
with him spiritually, therefore the Soul must be one Soul with God. We are one
with God morally by Faith and Love, and other Graces of the Spirit; or
federally one by Compact and Covenant, as the Wife and Husband: but one Soul
speaks a substantial Union with God. God and the Soul may be one (as explained
before) nay in the same manner one Spirit, because God is a Spirit; but God and
the Soul cannot any ways be one Soul, because God is not a Soul at all. Every
good Man is one with God, but not one Man; and every good Soul is one with God,
but not one Soul, because God is neither a Man, nor a Soul.

Thus we have considered this place by it self, and discovered its Blasphemy;
let us now consider it with the rest of its Company, and you may see he means
not a moral, but a substantial Union: He says the Soul is a part of God. (Then
a part of God might sin, and repent, and be pardoned, or if not, be damned
besides.) A part of God, we think, was never heard of, but in Fox's Philosophy:
He would have done well to have taught it to the Scholars of Cambridg See a
Trumpet founded by D^n. Leeds, p. 17. Numb. 26. where the same is asserted by
Geo. Fox, in his Epistle to Geo. W^. Divin. of Christ.
and Oxford in his Learned Battledoor, among other his profound Aphorisms. He
says again, it is without beginning, it is Infinite in it self, and nothing that
is so but is the same with God. But George has something to say for him. Fox
says, the Soul is a part of God: Whitehead says (a part of God) appears to be
by some Adversaries obtruded upon them; it is not Fox's Assertion, he only
questions them in their own improper Terms; p. 8. For shame blush, if thou
can, and own the Blasphemy: Read the words over again, and thou will find
there is not so much as a semblance of truth in such an answer. The Priest
says, it is horrid Blasphemy to, say the Soul is a part of God: Fox positively
denies (not questions) it is not horrid Blasphemy to say the Soul is a part of
God.

P. 8. l. 7.
Whitehead vindicates Fox, where he says, the Soul is of God's Being: Of God's
Being, says he, relates to the Breath of God, that came out from God, and not
to the Soul; no, no, it is only the Breath of God, that came out of God, that is
of God's Being. Read but impartially the Citation, p. 273. Gr. Mist. It Is not
horrid Blasphemy to say the Soul is a part of God; for it, i. e. the Soul, came
out of him (not the Breath of Life) and is of him. And again, p. 100. God has
all Souls in his hands; and is not this which comes out from God, which is in
God's Hand, part of God? He had said immediately before, our Souls are in God's
hand, not God's Breath; and now, what was in his Hands must be a part of God.
He complains of our disingenuity for leaving out what might have cleared the
point; whenas we aver nothing is left out of that Sentence which could serve
his turn. He says plainly, p. 100. "that which came out from God, which God
has in his Hand, that Christ is Bishop of, is not this of God's Being? Now we
read that Christ is the Bishop of Souls, never the Bishop of God's Breath.
After all, let George Whitehead tell us what is meant by the Breath of God:
Does he think that God really breaths, or has Lungs to breath with? or is it
only a Metaphorical Expression? Is it an* more when it is said, God breathed
into Man the Breath of Life, than he spoke the word, and it was made? (as
Whitehead owns, p. 9. l. 25.) Speech being caused by the Breath, and that is no
more than a will to create: And it would have been the same, if he had said, he
breathed a Being into the Sun or Moon, they being both created by his powerful
Word or Breath, as well as the Soul. Now this Will or Word of God we doubt not
but is God's Being, for it is himself; but this Will of God, can it be ever
said, it came out from God, or was in the hand of God, or that Christ was the
Bishop of it? Can any thing that is God, as the Will, the Word, or the Breath
of God is, come out of God? as if any thing of God could be divided or
separated from God. And tho a Creature may be said to come from God, as an
effect of his Wisdom and Power, which yet is an impropriety of Speech, tho
tolerable enough; yet to say that which comes out from God, is a part of God,
of God's Being, as Fox does, is rank putid Blasphemy.

Whitehead says, p. 9. l. 19. his Friend speaks plainly in another place; and
what is that to the Blasphemy he has spoken in this? Would you have a man
blaspheme in every Line he writes? that were to outdo the great Blasphemer
himself, who sometimes drops a Truth, tho it ill becomes the Father of Lies. We
know no Amulet or Charm, no, not his pretended Infallibility he so much boasts
of, could secure that Prophet from speaking Inconsistencies or Contradictions
sometimes; neither can plain Blasphemy in one place, be excused by plain
Orthodoxy in another. Is it such a matter for Quakers to be inconsistent, as
their Tutor was? to say sometimes, thou art the Son of the Living God, and
sometimes, if thou be the Son of God. There is a spiritual Lunacy that
possesses Quakers, so that they speak Orthodoxly by fits; they are not always
in the raving mood of Blasphemy, tho the mad fit was upon Penn and Whitehead
(in the sandy Foundation, and in Light of Life) against the Trinity and the
outward Blood; when their Moon, their Light within them, was at the Full: that
Light waining now apace, they begin to speak soberly of both. To say then he
could not speak Blasphemy in one place, because he is Orthodox in another, is
idle and inconsequent.

Brief Discovery, p. 6. charges Fox for saying, p. 91. Gr. Mist. that the Soul
is without beginning or ending, and is infinite in self. What says Whitehead to
this? Truly not one word, but cunningly glides by to another point, which
brings to mind a piece of Poetry:

When Broth's too hot for greedy Hounds, how they Quarles.

Will lick their scalded Lips, and sneak away.
Ah George! Thou saw it well enough, and that it was too evident a Blasphemy
to be excused; but Friends must not fall out, and call one another Blasphemers,
tho they be so. But give us leave to stop thee in thy have; and when thou have
read it once more, tell us upon the new Quaker Oath, As God is thy Witness,
whether thou think such words as these to be blasphemous, viz. that the Soul
is without beginning and infinite in it self, and by consequence God. Why then
do thou not yield up thy Friend and Apostle to be bored through the Tongue
for a Blasphemer? Two things we may take liberty to conclude from thy silence:
1 st. That George Fox for once has been convicted of Blasphemy; and therefore
we may call him a Blasphemer upon a nihil dicit. And 2 ly, That when he said
the Soul was one Soul with God, he must mean substantially one, because he
makes it without beginning, and infinite in it self, that is, the same with God.

William Pen, in his Invalidity of Faldo's Vindication, lays it upon Fox's
great P. 353.
Ignorance, saying, he observed no nicety of Expression. Truly it is evident he
was ignorant enough; and tho we thought him always acted by a kind of Religious
Madness, yet we never believed that too much Learning made him so. The words
abovesaid are nevertheless Blasphemy in themselves, tho it may be more
excusable in him who speaks them ignorantly, than in another who does it
knowingly. It Is Blasphemy to say there is no God, tho spoken by a Fool; and ^
Tim. 1. 13.
St. Paul blasphemed, tho he did it ignorantly. Again, we grant his Expressions
were very vulgar, far from having any nicety in them, and therefore think
'twould have better become him to have kept to his Trade of mending of Shoes,
than set up for a mender of Religion before he could speak sense; and tho his
Ignorance might excuse Fox from so great a Guilt, yet we can never excuse his
Impudence in laying all this Blasphemy at God's Door, by telling the World they
were all from the mouth of the Lord. From mentioning his ignorance we cannot
forbear a short comparison of Brother Fox the Father of the Foxonians, to
Brother Francis the Father of the Franciscans. Bonavent tells us St. De Vita
Franc. c. 1. Sect. 2.
Francis was a simple illiterate Man, his Conversion was owing to Dreams and
Visions, as Father Fox's upon a Northern Mountain; he had no Teacher, but he
learnt all by Inspiration, and the People flockt about him like a Madman, and
gave him, the common Civility of such People to mad Folk, Dirt and Vita Igna.
l. 1. c. 1. l. 1. n. 44. e. 16.
Stones. Maffeius tells us that Loyola had hardly ever learnt his Letters, yet
never without Visions and Revelations. Orlandinus tells you he never gave any
Titles of respect; and Maffeius says, when he was brought before the Spanish
Commander, he would not so much as pull off his Hat to him; that he ran up and
down praying in the Streets: so that Quakery we now see is a little older than
we thought, and derives its pedigree some 100 of years from ancient and
honorable Families, two great Saints of the Church of Rome, St. Francis, and
St. Ignatius, tho rather from the latter. A Man would be apt to believe that
these Authors wrote the Life of George Fox by Prophecy; truth is, you may take
it to be the life of Loyola or Fox, which you please: but to return.

P. 6.
Brief Discovery charges Fox for saying in* Readiness Errand, p. 8. He that has
the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal with God: To which
Whitehead P. 9. ult.
answers, We deny the Words as there printed to be according to Fox' s sense,
P. 10. init.
or ours; and he tells us the words ( he that has) should be left out: It must
be so, or I cannot for my heart tell how to defend our dear Friend George Fox
from the Imputation of Blasphemy, and then Panduntur Portae, we break down our
Walls and strongest Bulwarks, and let in the deceitful Greeks upon us, and so
our Troy is lost. No, those words ( he that has) must be left out. And had the
Fool left out the little Monosyllable, no, when he said in his Heart there was
no God, he had been as Orthodox as Brother Fox. But for once, George, deal a
little sincerely with us, and tell us whether as the Words lie in the Citation,
P. 5. col. 2.
they are Blasphemy or no. In thy Charitable Essay thou tellest us it was only
an accidental Mistake; an Excuse thou have cut out for Fox, which may serve for
every Blasphemy Quakers or any other can be charged with, slips of the Pen,
accidental Oversights, innocent Mistakes, and it is a good Horse never stumbles;
tho we are told yours never does, being infallible in all his paces. But
George, do words slip accidentally from the mouth of the Lord, as those were
said to have been spoken? does the Spirit of the Lord write blindfold, and at
adventure? Had his Brother Fox been alive, he would not have been ashamed to
father the Brat, being so like him in all its Features; neither would he have
taken it kindly for thee to deny him such a friendly Office; and had thou not
thought it a Monster, thou would not have refused (as much asthou hate
Godfathers) to have answered for it, notwithstanding a Mole, or a little
blemish upon its Face, a small Mistake: But now these words ( he that has)
must be discarded and cashiered. But, George, to be sure those words are found
printed there, and have been so this 40 years, and not only in Fox's life time,
but viewed and reviewed by the second day's Meetings, and never yet amended or
corrected, tho now when a more diligent search is made into your Principles,
these words are disowned and rejected; as stolen goods are thrown away by the
cunning Thief, when the hue and cry is close at his Heels. We are glad however
so hardy a Forehead as Whitehead's is, can blush at the Blasphemy of these
words.

They are not Fox's, says Whitehead; but Francis Howgill very ingenuously P.
232.
owns that they are Fox's, and is ready to fall fowl upon Whitehead as well as
his other Opponents (calling them even Beetles and Owls) for stumbling at such
a Straw: The first thing thy dark mind stumbles at, says Howgill, is, that some
have said (it seems Fox had Company with him) He that has the Spirit of God is
equal with God; and he labors to confirm it by adding, he that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit, there is Unity, and the Unity stands in equality it
self: Silly Creatures, and blind Buzzards, says he, to be offended at so
light, so trivial a Blasphemy. We expected Whitehead would have given Howgill a
sharp rebuke for so bold a Reflection; no, he passes it over without any
notice, for Friends must not fall out for a hard word or two; but when he
labors to clear Howgill, whom we cited as justifying George Fox herein, he
with great sincerity leaves out the first part of the Quotation, viz. The first
thing thy dark Mind stumbles at is, that some have said, that they that have
the Spirit of God are equal with God; and begins, He that is joined to the Lord
is one Spirit; there is Unity, and the Unity stands in Equality it self --
there is Equality in Nature, tho not in Stature. Here, says Whitehead, the
Equality is placed between the Father and the Son, as the Union is between him
and them: A most evident Falsehood! such an one as if he has not Aes triplex
circa pectus, his Conscience must feel Remorses for. Do but read the Words, He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: Is not the Unity here between the
Lord and him that is joined to him? Is not here the Unity? and is it not this
very Unity that is the Unity between God and Believers, which stands in
Equality it self? Or else how would he have vindicated Fox's words, which he
undertook to do, and by consequence calls George Whitehead as good as Fool for
stumbling at them? It would not answer the Design of Howgill, which was to
prove a good Man was equal with God, only to prove God the Father and God the
Son are equal. Where Howgil says there is equality in Nature, tho not in
Stature, hear what Whitehead says to this, The Equality in Nature relates to
the Divine Nature, which the Child of God partakes of in measure. Did ever any
one hear before now of an Equality to the Divine Nature in measure, i. e. a
short, defective, unequal Equality? Equal in Nature to God in measure, See
Wyeth's Switch, p. 20.
may pass for another Blasphemy (or at least Nonsense) without measure.

Whitehead, p. 11. appeals to his Reader, whether he has not more right to put
a sense upon his Friends words than we; so then, tho Fox's words were
Blasphemy, yet we may be assured (for Whitehead says it) his sense and meaning
was not so, it seems he wrote one thing and meant another, which William Penn
in his Rebuke, p. 8. says, is to be no better than one of the worst of Knaves:
when he said Equal, he meant not Equal; when he said Infinite, he meant not
Infinite; when he said a part of God, he did not mean a part of God: so that we
must read him as we do Hebrew, backwards This is a common muse Whitehead has
made for the Fox to creep out of here, and in many other places, he meant thus
and thus: but let this serve for a general Answer; We charge not their Meanings
but their Words with Blasphemy; nor has G. Whitehead, nor any Man else, a power
to put what sense they will upon words, but they must be conceived to signify
what in the common usage and custom of the Country they import, that being Vis
and Norma loquendi, the Force and Rule of speaking.

CHAP. III.
Of INFALLIBILITT.
AND now for Infallibility, the grand Sinew of Quakery and Popery too; and if
we can but shake this Pillar, we certainly pull down the House upon the Heads
of these Philistines: we say then, this is an Attribute incompatible with a
Creature, even Angels in Heaven; for some of them have fallen, and that all do
not so, is not to be imputed to the Perfection of their created Beings, but to
the Will and Counsel of God establishing and upholding them; and it is Blasphemy
for any Creature to assume this unto it self; and that it is such an
incommunicable Attribute, is thus proved. If Infallibility be the highest
Perfection of the Understanding, to which nothing imaginable can be added, then
it must be an incommunicable Attribute of God* but it is such a Perfection, for
it implys an impossibility of erring, therefore it must be an incommunicable
Attribute of God: for he that has such a Perfection, has an infinite One; for
nothing that is finite, but may have something added to it in point of
Perfection; for God never acted yet ad ultimum virium, neither has he made any
thing so perfect in any kind, as he could: this were to say that Infinite Power
could be exhausted, which were a contradiction, for then 'twould not be
Infinite. Truth is, God gives no more Infallibility to the Christian, than the
Sun does to the Traveller, who notwithstanding its clearest Light may err and
wander if he will. That they attribute Infallibility to themselves, appears by
what Fox says in his great Mystery (as the brief P. 107.
Discovery charges him) when the Priest said, The holiest Man that is, is not
P. 6.
able to give an infallible Character of another Man, Fox answers, Have thou
not in this discovered thy self to be no Minister of Christ, or of the Spirit,
who cannot give an infallible Character of another Man? How can thou P. 33.
minister to his Condition? And he says, Are they Ministers of Christ, that
are fallible? This, hardy George ventures to vindicate; and first he complains
P. 11.
we leave out material Questions; let us hear what they are, He that is not
infallible in his Counsel, Judgment and Advice, is not he in Error? which
amounts to this Proposition, Every One that is not infallible, is in Error: and
if this were true, we own there must be an Infallibility amongst good Men, or
there would be none such; this only wants a little truth in the Consequence,
that if not infallible, then in Error; either we must be Scepticks, or Gods;
knowing nothing certainly, for all things infallibly. The following questions
cited by him are of the same import, and confirm what the Brief Discovery
charges upon G. Fox.

Now let us hear how Whitehead vindicates him, and evidences our great Darkness*
which he charges us with herein; he makes it a wonderful Error in us, and a
Consequent of our Principle to maintain these four contrary Propositions.

First, That the Holiest Man is not able to give an infallible Character of
another Man: G. Fox's Assertion was, that every Minister of Christ is able to
give an infallible Character of another Man; which tho we deny, yet it is not
consequent we must hold that none does (even the holiest of them) because we
deny every Man is wise and virtuous, therefore we must hold there is none so.
But to let go the Consequence for once, because we will have no more wrangling
than needs must, we will come to the Proposition, and say as the Priest did to
G. Fox, That the holiest Man that is, is not able to give an infallible
Character of another Man; and for this Reason, Because the holiest Man alive is
but a Man, and cannot be vested with the incommunicable Attribute of the Deity,
which is to be (...), there being no certain, much less infallible Character to
be given of a Man, but from the Lineaments of his Heart. We deny not but God
may reveal to Persons the Hearts of others, and they may declare it to the
World, as St. Peter did concerning Ananias; but he gave Acts 5. 3, 4.
sufficient evidence, that God had revealed it to him by the miraculous death
of Ananias, and upon that account his Declaration ought to be believed. But
must we therefore credit every Gipsy or Fortuneteller, who pretends to give
Characters as well as any? Nay further, when God revealed to Balaam such
glorious things which he declared, was he ever the more infallible for
publishing an infallible Declaration?

The second Proposition he charges us with as a Consequence of the former
Principle, is, That tho a Minister of Christ cannot give an infallible
Character of another Man, yet he may minister to his condition; which is
certainly true; and he may safely do it to all. For the clearing of which, let
us distinguish upon the states of Men.

First, There is the general State of all Men, which is to be by Nature
Children of Wrath, of Disobedience, Enemies in their Minds to God; this we
certainly know, because it is revealed to us by the Scriptures, tho we do not
understand the particular state of that Man whether he be still in that state
of Enmity: and it will be granted sure, we may minister to his Condition, by
acquainting him with the methods of Reconciliation from Scripture, and with all
manner of Arguments thence to his hopes and fears, to persuade him to embrace
the Terms of it.

Secondly, As for the States of Men in particular, and that in reference either
to Doctrinals or Practicals, we may minister to them in either.

First, As to Doctrinals, whether they be false Teachers or true, it is evident
we may certainly know, or else why are we commanded to try the Spirits? which
shows, they may be discerned of what sort they are, tho Satan does never so
much transform himself into an Angel of Light: and that some have not the
Spirit of God, whatsoever they boldly pretend, we are assured in that the
Scripture has revealed it to us; they separate themselves, having not the
Spirit, Verse. 19.
says St. Jude. So that we may distingush betwixt a Man of God and a dreamer of
Dreams, between a Theopneust and a Demoniack, a real possessor of Divine
Revelation, and a fantastic pretender to it. And if God should give him such
immediate Revelation as he did to the Apostles, with an intent to oblige others
to believe it, God will attest it by such miraculous Operations as the Apostles
were enabled to perform, which are sure Evidences of a Divie Commission, that
they do not run before they are sent; and like the foolish Ezekiel. 13.
Prophets in Ezekiel, follow their own Spirit, and prophesy out of their own
hearts, saying, The Lord says, and the Lord has not sent them. And sure we
may minister unto these, as we do now to Quakers, convincing them of their
Errors, and reprehending of their Blasphemies.

Secondly, As to Practicals, we, alas, too certainly know of many that are in a
very evil state, being common Liars, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Blasphemers, etc.
because the Scripture reveals it to us, that such shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: and sure we may minister to such Men, by using the same
Arguments to their hopes and fears as before. But there are a sort of People
who pretend to be Children of Light, Sons of God, that are yet Bastards, and
not Sons; many a Wolf that lurks under a Sheep-skin: so that the appearance can
give us no certain Rule to judge by, and we can look no further, nor can we
certainly know whether he be a Sheep or a Wolf, Devil or Saint, without a
Revelation: the Apostles themselves could not discern a Judas, tho our Savior
could; nor the Quakers a wanton Atkinson, till a great Belly revealed it to
them. Yet we can minister to their Cases too, we can press upon them a sincere
and universal Holiness, we can show them the danger of Hypocrisy. Thus we can
minister unto all, tho we know not certainly, much less infallibly, every Man's
Case, till it be revealed to us. We desire to know of G. Whitehead, if a Person
should come to him with a troubled mind, how he could discern, by the help of
his Infallibility, where it pained or pinched him, unless he opened his
Condition, and told him the cause of his Grief; and yet if he were sullen, and
would not, he might minister Advice and Counsel to him. In none of these Cases,
can we reach further than a certainty, far from a Quaker Infallibility; and in
every Case, where we have not so much as a certainty, still we may and ought to
minister.

The Third Proposition. We own, That a Minister that is fallible, is in the
Spirit a Minister of Christ, tho he cannot discern another Man's State and
Condition, so as to give an infallible Character of him. The Apostles were
Ministers of Christ, and yet could give no such infallible judgment of the
state of one amongst themselves, and therefore cry, Master, Is it I? and
entreat their Master, who alone could do it, to discover the Traitor. Neither
can the most infallible Quaker of them all, infallibly tell whether G.
Whitehead himself he a right-bred Eagle Quaker, tho now listed into the number
of their Apostles. One would imagine by his late coined Creeds, he were about
to Keithize and warp from his ancient Testimony, which God Almighty grant, and
is the worst harm we wish him; neither would it be any dishonor to him to
become an Holy Apostate, which the Apostle exhorts every Christian to be,
(...), let him depart from iniquity.

The fourth is ushered in with a consequently; and therefore now, if ever, we
shall have a Consequence, yea verily such an one which as naturally flows from
our Principles, as the Tyber from the Thames; it is this, Because the holiest
Man alive does not infallibly know a Man's spiritual State, he must not only be
fallible but uncertain in his Ministry. If we be fallible, we must be
uncertain, a Consequence evidently false and foolish; for a Man may be certain
by his sense and knowledge, not from the Infallibility of the Faculties, but
from a rational Evidence that in the present Case he is not deceived. Whitehead
in this agrees with his Brother Penn, who in his Answer to Faldo, says, He
that does not infallibly Page 36.
know, knows nothing certainly. They would fain make Certainty and
Infallibility the same thing, which are vastly different: Certainty is an
Affection that belongs properly to an Act of the Understanding, Infallibility
to the Power and Faculty it self; and there is still such an Imperfection in
the Power and Faculty of our Understanding, that it might possibly have been
deceived, even in those things wherein we are certain it has not actually been
deceived; and our Certainty that we are not deceived, does not arise from the
Infallibility of the Power or Faculty, but from hence, that we have all the
Reason in the World to believe, that in the present Case our Faculties have not
deceived us. G. Whitehead at the Close of this Principle, makes it consequent,
that we are not only rendered hereby fallible and uncertain, but blind and
ignorant of the state and condition of others: How far ignorant of Men's States,
we have shown before, but by his leave not quite blind.

He says he ascribes this Infallibility originally and principally to the
Spirit P. 12. l. 18.
of Truth ( one would have thought it might have been wholly) which as it is it
self infallible, so is the teaching of it, says he. Yes verily, the Spirit's
teaching is very infallible; but is he sure that every Man alive, ^ay that any
Man alive does infallibly follow the Spirit's Teachings? is it impossible it
should be otherwise? It must be therefore a wonderful Opening in G. Whitehead
to tell us, That so far as we are led by the Spirit, we are assured by it, and
led into sound Judgment, Certainty, and full Assurance, etc. Whenas the
difficulty lies here, to prove that fallible Creatures do at any time
infallibly follow the Spirit's Instructions: neither can we take it for Gospel
what Prophet Parnel says, That whoever P. 23. l. 12.
are guided by the true Light, cannot walk contrary to it; no more than he that
is guided by the Light of the Sun cannot stumble nor stagger tho he shuts his
Eyes, or be drunk: unless he means they that follow the guidance of the true
Light cannot but follow it, while they follow it; an Identical Proposition,
which Fools assert, and no wise Man can deny.

Again, he adds, If there be no discerning of Spirits, no infallible Character
P. 12. ult.
to be given of Men, then Christ's Sheep may follow Strangers, Dogs, Wolves.
Alas, poor Sheep, that cannot discern the Shepherd from his Dog. If they will
consider, the Sheep may know a Shepherd, if he be rightly called, and minister
to the Sheep according to the Instructions of the chief Shepherd of the Sheep:
They may be true Shepherds in relation to their Flocks, tho in relation to God
they may be Wolves, and so reckoned at the last Day; but the Sheep sure may
hear such a ones Voice, and follow such a Conduct, tho the men be wicked and
ungodly, whilst their Doctrine is true. 'Twas our Savior's direction to the
Multitude, and to his Disciples also, concerning the Scribes and Pharisees (who
were the wickedest of men) Whatsoever they bid you observe, Mat. 23. 3.
that observe and do; but do not ye after their Works. There was once a Wolf in
Sheeps clothing (as they will acknowledge) amongst themselves, whom they thought
to be very instrumental in bringing many out of our Darkness into their Light,
while he taught men to follow the Light as the only Rule, and stoutly declaimed
against an imaginary God, and a carnal Christ beyond the Stars. Oh how they
flock unto him by shoals! Poor Lambs! how they suck at the Breasts of this
Wolf, as at their own natural Dam. For all their inward sense and instinct,
they run bleating after him for spiritual Food and Refreshment, being deceived
by the Sheepskin Covering that he wore: His Wenching and Fornicating, which
were the Wolf in him, were not discovered till some time after. Leeds, in his
Trumpet sounded, p. 64. tells us of a counterfeit Quaker, who, tho a silly
Woman, could put a cheat upon their pretended Spirit of discerning how she
traveled from Meeting to Meeting through several Countries, and held forth most
powerfully, and was entertained by Friends as a (...), to their great
refreshment and admiration, and never discerned to be no Quaker, till
discovered by others: So that now they admit none to travel upon Truth's
account without Certificates. Whitehead, in his Quaker plainness, tells us they
have a record in peoples Consciences; but now they must have a record in their
Pockets too, or their Friends will not receive them upon a Conscience-Record.
Who doubts but Judas was wicked enough? yet the people might hear him and
follow him, whilst in his Doctrine he followed the Instructions of his Master:
Nay, there is no doubt he might convert some by his Ministry, and they receive
Nourishment from this Wolf (as Romulus and Renues from another) seeing the
efficacy of the Ministry depends not so much on the worth of the Minister, as
upon God's Grace. Far be it from us to plead for the profane and scandalous; we
could heartily wish there were no more of such Wolves in the Church than there
are of the other sort in the Kingdom, because (tho God may cooperate with the
Ministry of such, if their Doctrine be according to Truth and Godliness) yet he
does not so usually do it, unless their Preaching be accompanied and enforced
with the visible Doctrine of a holy Life. Remember Judas was one of the Twelve
sent out by Christ to gather a Church; and it were an impeachment of the Divine
Wisdom to say he made choice of an 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Instrument which was no ways fit for the work. As for the two Scriptures 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
which he produces, when he tells us what he brought them for, whether to prove
Infallibility or Transubstantiation, we will return an answer.

P. 7.
But there is another Quotation out of G. Fox, given him by the Brief Discovery,
which George Whitehead is pleased to take no notice of; and it is P. 96.
this. He says to the Priest, Thou not being infallible, thou art not in the
Gr. My^^.
Spirit, and ^o art not a Minister of Christ, and art not able to judge of
Powers that is not infallible, nor Magistrates, nor Kingdoms, nor Churches. So
then it seems Powers, Magistrates, Kingdoms and Churches, are to be judged at
this infallible Bar. It Is to be feared 'twas this Judgment of such a Light
within, that c^ndemned and cut off the Head of one great Magistrate in our own
Country; for nothing can stand before its High Court of Justice, all Power P.
13.
in Heaven and Earth (as W. Smith in his Primer says) being given to it. Let
the Magistrates look to this; perhaps ere long they may find it as necessary
for their preservation to cause People to renounce the Authority of a Pope
within, as of a Pope without. Whereas Edward Buroughs was charged in the Brief
Discovery, as saying Heretics are infallibly known and discerned by the P. 7.
Spirit of God in the true Church of Christ, and by every Member of the same;
George Whitehead endeavors to justify him, by desiring the contrary may be P.
13.
inverted upon us; and then, says he, it must be thus: That Heretics are not
infallibl, known and discerned by the Spirit of God in the true Church of
Christ, nor by the Members thereof. But, George, will thou never play fair with
us, always dropping the Card out of thy hand, that may spoil thy Game? Should
not thou have said by every Member thereof? No, that were too invidious; and it
would have been hard to have brought off Brother Buroughs handsomely, for
making too large a stretch, if he had said, every Member; therefore he
cunningly shuffles in an Indefinite for an Universal, The Members of the
Church, which cannot imply every individual Member, as Buroughs said, but may
mean some few of them, as the Church-Representative in their yearly Juncto. But
does not Buroughs expressly say, Heretics are known infallibly by the true
Church of Christ, and every Member thereof? And is this a fair Conversion of
such a Proposition, to say, The Members thereof? Whitehead has some
Scriptures, which he hopes may help him at a dead lift, to prove this
Infallibility of discerning amongst the Quakers: but 'twill easily appear they
have not the least disposition to testify to this Infallibility; nay, that it is
impossible to wring such a senseless Blasphemy from them: for can any imagine
the Scriptures of God should go about to set up another God, which they would
do, should they assert another infallible? Yet give us leave, out of pure Love
to them, to rescue them from such barbarous violence, that they may only give
their voluntary and unconstrained Testimony in this matter. We will begin with
the last, being a reserve he places the greatest Confidence in. Enoch
prophesied of this: Behold the Lord comes, (...), he Jude v. 14. 15.
would have it rendered, in ten thousands of his Saints, and denote only
Christ's coming in the Spirit into his Saints; and then it must be only a
Christ in them must execute Judgment upon the Ungodly, and convince them, etc.
and so Christ will have as many Courts of Judicatory as there are Saints, in
which he shall judge and condemn Sinners. But all this while, tho Christ in
executing Judgment be every where infallible in judging or discerning, how
proves this the Saint is so, in whom he is? But perhaps he means, every Saint
must be infallible in his Judgment, having such an infallible Director and
Mover within him: But the Lameness of this consequence is shown before; it will
be still with us as with our Watches, tho the Spring be never so strong and
good, yet by reason of some Cracks and Bruises it got by the fall, there may be
some Errors and Stops in the motion even of this Masterpiece of the Creation,
which was at first so fearfully and wonderfully made by God. But after all,
it is plain the word ((...)) must be rendered, as in our Translation, with; and
it was never otherwise interpreted by any Christian Writer than of the coming
of Christ to Judgment with his Saints, to this day, till it fell into Quaker
hands. We have a parallel Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
place; He came with thousands of his Saints. So, The Lord my God shall Zach.
14. 5.
come, and all the Saints with thee. At the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ
with 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.
all his Saints: Which he explains, by being caught up together in the Clouds
to Chap. 4. 17.
meet the Lord in the Air. Mind but the Context, and it will necessarily ^^ad
to this Interpretation. St. Jude tells us of a sort of Libertines risen up
amongst v. 4.
them, whom he would not have to Batter themselves that they should escape the
just severity of a righteous God, if they continued such: therefore he minds
them, that tho God most wonderfully saved the Children of Israel, his peculiar
People, from their Egyptian Bondage, yet he destroyed them for their
Infidelity, and also tells them how severely he dealt with the mutinous Angels,
that he v. 6.
clapped them up in everlasting Chains of Darkness, to be reserved to the
Judgmeet of the last day. From them he descends to Sodom and Gomorrha, whose
Wickedness provoked God to involve them in a dreadful Ruin; and yet the outward
Fire, which burnt down their Cities, was but an Emblem of those eternal Flames
which were to be endured by them afterward. Having thus described the Fate of
these great Sinners, he presently inveighs against their Filthiness and
Impurities, telling them, that to such is reserved the blackness of Darkness
for ever; and that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, foretold the Judgment which
should befall such men, in these words: Behold the Lord comes to execute
Judgment, even this Judgment, which St. Jude had spoken of before; Chains of
Darkness; the vengeance of eternal Fire, and Blackness of Darkness for ever: He
comes with ten thousands of his Saints. Sure not Christ in his Saints; for
Christ even then was come in many of his Saints, and that Vengeance was not
executed upon those Sinners, and as yet they felt not the least scorching of
those Flames: But Christ shall come with them to execute this Judgment at the
last Day.

Eccl. 8. 5.
The second Scripture is Eccles. 5. 8. it should be Eccl. 8. 5. A wise man's
Heart discerns both Time and Judgment. What a Text is this to prove the
Infallibility Char. Essay, p. 6.
of discerning who are Saints and who are Devils: He might even as well have
proved from hence every wise man to be a judicial Astrologer, able to give
certain Judgment of Times and Seasons, Rain or Wind, Famine or Pestilence. 1
Cor. 2. 15.
Next, 1 Cor. 2. 15. is called in as a witness, which says thus: He that is
spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of none. Here again
wants the word infallibly; neither does the Apostle say, the spiritual man
judges all Men, but Things. We cannot but allow the spiritual man judges all
things by the assistance of the Spirit; but then this ( all) must be restrained
to what went before, all things that are revealed to him in the Gospel: All
things there revealed, that are necessary to Salvation, the spiritual man, the
Spirit assisting him, may certainly discern by the Gospel of Christ (which is
the Christian's Rule) good or evil, true or false, which can never be done by
the Rule or Standard of Fleshly Wisdom. Further, the Text says, he cannot be
judged by any, viz. fleshly-minded men: Being taught by the Spirit of God, he
is not to stand before the Tribunal of carnal Reason, neither is he to stand or
fall by such a Sentence; as 1 Cor. 4. 3. ' It Is a small thing for me to be
judged by you, or 1 Cor. 4. 3.
of Man's Judgment: And indeed what need he regard what such men talk of him
and his Religion, no more than he should heed what the blind man's judgment is
about Colors or Beauty. All this while where is the Infallibility of every
Member of the Church in discerning who are Saints and who are Devils? But above
all, his Ignorance, or much worse, is to be wondered at, to think he 1 Cor. 6.
1-6.
could suborn 1 Cor. 6. 1, etc. as a witness to such an Infallibility of
discerning, when the Text speaks plainly of civil Disserences between
Believers: and is it not the Apostle's main design to take them off from
seeking redress of wrongs at the Heathen Tribunals, where the application would
be scandalous, and the Judgment partial, but rather to refer the matter to some
Christian Friends? If there be a wise man to be found amongst you, let him
judge; but must every Umpire or Arbitrator needs be infallible in their
Judgments? Does this suppose that the Christians of those days could penetrate
into the very Hearts and secretest Actions of the Litigants, and upon the first
sight of them could discover who it was that did the wrong, and who that
suffered it, without any further search into the business, by examining
Evidences, only by the immediate Revelation of the Spirit of God? If Quakers
could do this, we would readily subscribe to that Doom which Fox pronounces
against all Rulers, Judges, Justices, Lawyers, etc. and give our consent for
the cutting down such a fruitless News out of the North, p. 20.
Tree, and set up Quakers in the room of them, who can discern which are the
Just and Righteous, which the wrong Doers and the wrong Sufferers, without the
tedious and expensive trouble of sending for Witnesses from York to
Westminster, without such dilatory Forms of Allegata and Probata, or feeing the
Lawyers with Guineas to plead our Cause: if they do but look them in the Face,
they can tell you from the Spirit of the Lord, who it was that stole the Horse,
or robbed the Glover's Till, etc.

Next poor Job must be wronged by him, even as much as by his censorious
Friends: He is a Witness (as George Whitehead says) to this Blasphemy; but let
us not take his word, since we find he has abused as great Saints as him. What
then says holy Job? Cannot my tast^ discern perverse things? And we dare Job 6.
30.
refer it to any that has any taste at all, whether he can discern
Infallibility here. God has given us sensible Faculties, to enable us to
discern sweet and bitter, hurtful or healthful things to these Bodies of ours;
as also rational Faculties to discern what is good or evil, true or false, for
the welfare of our Souls: therefore he has given us Infallibility of discerning
who are Saints, who are Devils. Truly, Reader, both you and we had need of
Patience (as the Apostle speaks) to be continually vexed with such
Impertinencies as these. Just thus deals he 1 Cor. 14. 29.
with St. Paul: Let the Prophets speak, and let others judge. It Is well our
Bibles have escaped the Censure of the second days meeting; we should have had
Infallibility trump'd upon us in every one of these Texts, as from the mouth of
the Lord, by those bold Inquisitors, who sit every week to correct and amend
every Message from the Lord, before it is licensed to go forth into the World.
We doubt not but this dead and killing Letter, this Serpents Meat (the
Scriptures) must have undergone the same sat e're now, but only, thanks be to
God, it was printed long before Quakery was born. Heb. 5. 14. is another Heb.
5. 14.
of their convincing Proofs: Those that are strong have their Senses exercised
to discern both Good and Evil. It Is a wonder he missed that Text, which seems
fuliest of all to his purpose: For God does know, that in the day you do eat
Genesis 3. 5.
thereof, your Eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods knowing both Good
and Evil; viz. you shall infallibly know them as God does. It would have been
very pertinent, only for one thing, that such an Infallibility was the Doctrine
of the Devil* Well, Mal. 3. 18. must do the business or nothing: Then shall ye
return Mal. 3. 18.
and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not. Here is not a word of Infallibility neither;
and if this place be further examined, it will speak as little to the purpose
as any of the rest: You may see how they murmur at God's Severity toward his
own People; ' It Is a vain thing to serve God, and a man gets nothing thereby: If
we v. 14.
were never so wicked, proud, and Tempters of God, we should fare as well as we
do; they that swear, for ought we see come off as well as they that pray. Well,
says God, stay but till the Resurrection: Non est judicandum de operibus Dei
ante quintum Actum, there is a time coming when you shall see a difference, a
time when I make up my Jewels, a time of the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God; then shall ve return, Convertimini, come to a better sense of
things, ^ou shall see a difference, how much it avails to be religious, when I
shall separate the Sheep from the Goats, and send one to Heaven, and the other
to Hell. Does this infer we can infallibly discern in this World, who are
Saints and who are Devils? And yet George Whitehead gives Truth defending, etc.
p. 24.
this Testimony of himself, I witness this truth fulfilled in me; then shall ve
discern between the Righteous and the Wicked. Rainaldus in his Ecclesiastical
Anno 1380.
Annals (as Dr. Stillingfleet in his Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome cites
Number. 25.
him) tells us that Philip Nereus had a faculty given him to smell Souls, and
would often desire Persons to empty the Jakes of their Souls; perhaps with
other Legacies he left to his Faternity, he may have bequeathed his Nose to the
Quakers, by which they are enabled to discern Souls: for such another Testimony
Fox is said to have given, when he pretended, he could see into the Heart of
Mr. Nichols of Carlisle, declaring him to be a Hypocrite, but could not tell
his Name, See Christ. no E^thus. p. 73.
when he was asked. But Revelations are as common with these Men, as Reason
with others, whenever they have a mind to defame or bespatter any. A great many
more instances of their pretending to Infallibility might be added to P. 47.
these. George Whitehead in his Voice of Wisdom, tells Danson, he was not
worthy to be a Minister, who pretends to no Infallibility in the Ministry. Thus
P. 22.
Fran. Howgill asserts, That which is not infallible is carnal, and all who are
guided by the Spirit of Christ are infallible. As to any thing he has said
more upon this head, we may venture to leave it to thy Judgment, Good Reader,
whilst we pass to another point.

CHAP. IV.
Of PERFECTION.
IT IS the usual Sophistry of this People to cover their Errors under some
equivocal Expression or other. They have a high value for the Blood of Christ,
but they mean the inward Blood, as Sol. Eccles told Porter. Paptism and the
Lords Supper, O what an esteem have they for them! But they do not mean what
you and we and all the World besides understand by them; but a spiritual
Baptism, and a feasting with Christ in the upper Room of the Heart. They own
the Saints Union with Christ: but then it is not a moral or federal Union, but a
substantial one. Every Christian owns Perfection in a right sense, as far as is
consistent with our present state: the Quakers own the word as well as we, but
then it is in a sense incompatible with our human frailty; a sinless one, free
from the least failing and infirmity. As Buroughs says, God does not accept
any, where there is any failing; a Condition unattainable in this Life. Where a
word is equivocal or ambiguous, and has two Senses, as Perfection has in the
Scripture, we would sain know why it should not be understood in that sense
which agrees with universal Experience, rather than in that which contradicts
it. Let us ask the boldest Quaker of them all, dare he come strutting forth
with the bragging Pharisee, God I thank thee I am not as others are, the Men of
this World; I am as pure, as spotless as the holy Angels themselves; when I
have searched every corner of my heart, I cannot find the least Sin to be
lamented; the whole Day, Month, or Year past, not a word amiss, or a thought
out of order; I find no need of Repentance, or God's pardoning Mercy, or of
Christ's outward Blood to purify me, who am so perfectly clean? Solomon gives
the same Challenge, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
Sins? his meaning Prove. 20. 9.
is, Who dares say it, or can say it justly? for he tells you there are those
that say it, yea a whole Generation who were pure in their own eyes, yet not
washed Prove. 30. 12.
from their Filthiness. It Is a wonder the Quakers have not pleaded this Text
for the Antiquity of their Religion, it being, you see, as old as Solomon. But
it is strange any Christian, that has heard never so little of the Bible, of the
Lives of the Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, should talk so proudly of
Perfection and a sinless State, which this People of all men have the least
reason to challenge. But were it so with us, Job's expostulation would have
been but reasonable, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me? and every (...)
Job 10. 2.
he had suffered from God might have been esteemed as an unjust and cruel
Execution of an innocent Person. If this were true, Repentance and Faith in the
Blood of Christ ought to be discharged the service. How come we to be commanded
to put on the whole Armor of God, if it be the Doctrine of Devils, as Ephesians. 6.
11.
G. Fox affrms, to preach that Men shall have Sin, and be in a warfare so long
Gr. Mist. p. 101.
as they be on Earth? But to take the Quotations as they lie: Whereas Mr.
Cawdrey said, surely they cannot be perfect here or hereafter in Equality, but
only in Quality; Fox answers, Christ makes no distinction in his words, but Br.
Disc. p. 7.
says, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect; and as he is, so^^re
we; and that which is perfect as he is perfect, is in equality with the same
thing which is of God and from God. Now where is the Blasphemy I pray, cries
Whitehead? It Is strange he should ask, when Fox asserts good men to be perfect
as God; and that as he is, so are they in Equality with him: had he said, as G.
Whitehead does here, It Is not for any Man or Men to be perfect God; but perfect
men, true Men, as their heavenly Father is true God (tho these Expressions are
far from being distinct and clear as we wish them, and as their following words
are) Men after God's own Heart in sincerity and truth; none of us would have
quarrelled him for it. But to oppose Men when they say, That the Saints are
partly sinful and falling in their best works, as Fox did Mr. Cawdry P. 281.
there, and Phil. Langford for fa^^ing St. Paul was not freed from the Act P.
279.
of Sin, whilst in this Life; and that tho Faith turns us from Sin, yet we are
subject to Sin, the Act of Sin, whilst in this mortal Body: to oppose Men, we
say, for speaking thus, and tell them they are ignorant of Christ, and this is
not sound Doctrine; speaks him a Pleader for absolute Perfection, and a
sinle^s, state in this Life, which we had Reason to censure as blasphemous.
When some Libertines broacht the same Doctrine, and patroniz^d it by the same
Text, Be ye perfect, etc. they were as severely brand^d by a learned Man, who
told Mat. 5. 48.
them, it was most impudently wrested to establish their most flagrant
Wickedness Ad stabiliendam suam falsissimam impietatem impudentissime
detorquetur.
herein. And as to absolute Perfection which Fox assert in this and the
following Quotations (tho Whitehead would avoid the Odium of it) we aver it not
attainable by any mere Man in this state; the Scriptures teaching us, that in
many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. that there is not a Man that sins not,
1 King. 8. 46. and there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does good, and
sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth Bez. in Mat. 6. 10.
is not in us, 1 John 1. 8. which made David cry out, Enter not into Judgment
with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.
2. and hereupon our Savior teaches us, not more humbly than truly (whatsoever
either Pelagians or Quakers think of it) to pray daily, Forgive us our
trespasses. But they have thrown this Prayer out of their Houses and
Meeting-places as Apocryphal, as an old Almanac out of date in this their new
year of Revelation. And we shall add another Proof from thy self, George, which
will convince thee sure, that there are failings amongst the best in this Life,
even amongst the Quakers themselves. In thy Epistle to Friends, 1689, thou
make a lamentable P. 7.
complaint of Quakers Failings, that few of them had their minds exercised P.
10.
in Prayer and Meditation; that too many had their Hearts taken up with these
fading Objects; that they were degenerated into Pride, Height of Spirit and
Apparel, contrary to Gravity, Modesty, Sobriety, Plainness, Simplicity,
Innocence and Humility. We should con thee thanks, George, for this plain and
honest Testimony, but only we are afraid it dropped from thy Pen unawares; thou
did not consider sure: What, a Quaker and confess Failings in Friends? Can
Infallibility ever trip or stumble? Thou did not perhaps consider how thou
have here exposed the Friends to the Pit and the Lake, for Brother Buroughs
has told thee, that God will accept none of them who have any Failings: or
perhaps thou may think, because Fox says that Perfection is given to every
Quaker in particular, that all these Imperfections don't hinder the Perfection
of a Quaker; or that in them they are no Faults or Failings: and so tho thy
Testimony be very true, we have no reason to thank thee for it, yet we should
be very glad to hear that when thou prayest among thy Friends, thou shall make
as frank and open confession of Friends Sins and Failings to God, that you may
obtain Forgiveness, as you have done to men.

Now if after all this, the Scripture in several places style some Men perfect,
and exhort all thereunto, it ought to be understood so, as neither to
contradict plain Experience, nor other Testimonies thereof, which assert no Man
to be without Genesis 17. 1.
Sin, whilst he is in this state; and therefore Divines well say, that our Job.
1. 8.
Perfection in this Life either refers to Sincerity and Uprightness, or to our
Endeavors Psalm. 37. 37.
and Strivings after it, which cannot be an absolute Perfection, since
Additions Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.
may be made thereunto, and yet such are there styled perfect; or to a ripe
well confirmed and settled Habit of true Holiness, when the Soul is established
in 1 Pet. 5. 10.
Faith, Love and Hope; The God of all Grace make you perfect, establish,
strengthen, settle you. Or else it is a Perfection of Parts, not of Degrees;
with reference to which a Child is as perfect as a Man, and Christians in this
Life have the Seeds of all Graces planted in them by the Holy Ghost, tho they
are not grown up to the highest degrees. Or else they are styled perfect
comparatively, 1 Cor. 2. 6.
with respect to those that are less so. Or lastly, our Holiness is the same
Mat. 5. 48.
for Kind and Quality with that of God's and Christ's (and therefore said to 1 John 3. 3.
be perfect) tho not for Equality. These and the like Distinctions give us a
true Notion of our Perfection in this State, which is far different from that
we 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
shall attain unto in the Life to come, where the Spirits of just Men are said
to 2 Pet. 1. 4.
be made perfect; and when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away. And whereas G. Whitehead asks, Was not Perfection of
Holiness, Righteousness, and Purity, the Apostles Doctrine, Intent and End of
their Ministry? No doubt, so far, as that they pressed upon Christians a
striving after the highest measures attainable in this Life: because when they
had done their uttermost, there was yet a plus ultra, a higher measure that
might be attained to. And a learned Man shows that when St. Paul exhorted the
Hebrews to go on to Perfection, he means nothing else by it but the state of
Chap. 6.
Manhood, which consists in a well-settled Habit of Wisdom and Goodness. This
is plain; first, from ver. 11, 12. where he more fully explains his meaning; We
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance
v. 11, 12.
of Hope unto the end: That ye be not s^othful, but followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Secondly, from the latter end of the
fifth Chapter, where we discern what gave occasion to this Exhortation; he Heb.
5.
there distinguishing Christians into two Classes, Babes and strong Men, i. e.
perfect and imperfect, both of which he describes at large. And from thence v.
12, 13, 14.
this learned Person asserts, That the utmost height to which the Scripture
exhorts Dr. Lucas Rel. Per. 2d. edit. 3. pt. of Enq. p. 5, 6.
us, is nothing more than a steady habit of Holiness. That place of St. John,
purifyeth himself even as he is pure, speaks not their attaining to Perfection
equal with Christ's, but their taking him for their Pattern daily to regulate
themselves by; and the Term even as signifies an Analogy, i. e. a Proportion, 1
Jo. 3. 3.
Sutableness, and Agreeableness, not an Equality. Another place he cites to
prove this Perfection of Purity; but that speaks of the whole Church, Ephesians. 4.
12, 13.
which the Apostles and other Ministers were constituted to render exact and
orderly fitted in every part, in which there should be no Chasm, no Luxation,
but every thing duly placed with great Coherence and Agreement; and this Church
he compares to a Body, and Christ to the Soul that animates it: and as the
Soul, when the Organs of the Body are by degrees strengthened, puts forth its
Powers, till the Body comes to an Age of Consistency; so is the Church actuated
by the Spirit of Christ, till it comes to a consistent State, and at last the
Holy Jesus presents it to his Father without spot or wrinkle; but it is not so
whilst in this Life. And after all this, Is it not Blasphemy to say, That it is
the Doctrine of Devils to preach that men shall have Si^, and be in a Warfare
as long as they be on Earth? since they are not absolutely perfect, and
therefore win have Sin inherent in them at their best state, and adhering to
their best Works. See this Doctrine of Perfection discoursed of by Dr. Lucas in
his Religious Perfection, or the third part of the Enquiry after Happiness,
with reference to the Chap. 2.
Quakers. Tho that good Man is so candid that he will hardly believe the
Quakers P. 22, 23, etc. 2 d Ed.
designed any thing more by their asserting Perfection in this Life, than the
arriving to a steady well-settled habit of Wisdom and Goodness, which he may be
convinced of by what we have already quoted, and a^o^, peru^ing See also Geo.
Keith' s 4 th Narrative, P. 10. to 22. concerning their sinless Perfection.
Geo. Fox's Great Mist. in the several pages here referred unto, page 4. line
19. p. 7. ult. 12. med. 24. l. 15. 27. l. 11. p. 30. med. usque ad fin. p. 37,
38, 39, 40, 41. ult. p. 51. med. p. 124. ult. 125. per ^ot. 133. ult. p. 137.
med. 156. ult. 157. init. 159. ult. 160. init. p. 231, 232, 243, 251, 252, 253.
ult. p. 257, 258, 277, 279, 280, 282, 286, 288, 293, 307. ult. 318. ult. 320.
med. And also by consulting a Piece, called, Ishmael and his Mother caff^ out,
p. 3. in Quarto, where George Whitehead's, and three other Quakers Answer to
their Adversary was in these words, But thou and thy Generation hates this, and
says, that there is no Perfection to be attained here: O thou blind Guide! did
Christ ever command any thing that might not be accomplished? or did he speak
of being perfect not till after death? here thou do deny the very End for
which Christ came, who came to take away Sin, and in him is no Sin, Mat. 1. 21.
1 John 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 John 5. 18, etc.

So also page 12. Thou sayen (say these four Quakers to their Adversary the
Priest) the most eminent Believer sins in many things. O thou Blasphemer and
Slanderer of the Just (reply then) when will thou cease from thy Lies and
Blasphemy? where do, or can thou prove such a Scripture as the most eminent
Believer sins in any things, when the Scripture says, He that believes is
born of God, and he that is born of God sins not; for whosoever sins,
has not seen him, neither known him; and he that commieteth Sin is of the
Devil? and there is thy condition, and he is thy Father who is the Father of all
Liers as thou art, 1 John 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

But more plainly and directly from that Account Will. Baldwinson gives in a
Letter of his dated Jan. 14. 1653. and attested by three others, where he
declares, that before a company where James Naylor and Richard Farnsworth were
setting out this Doctrine of Prefection, he demanded of them in these words;
Friends! do you hold that a Man may attain to that height of Perfection in this
Life, to be as perfect, as pure, as holy, and as just as God himself? And he
asserts that they jointly replied, Yea, and they were so. For which look The
Defense of the Snake in the Grass, Part the First, page 88.

But that the best of Men were liable to commit Sin, the Man after God's own
Psalm. 91.
Heart, David, found it so, and confessed it; and the Church of God complained
that their Righteousness was as filthy Rags; not that their Righteousness was
Sin, but that Sin cleaved to, and blemished their best Performances: as clean
Water running through a Channel not perfectly clean, contracts some Soil.
Neither do we say that this Pollution makes the Work cease to be good, or puts
the doer into a state of Damnation, because God for Christ's sake forgives the
Imperfection, and reputeth the Duty good for the sake of that part which his
own Spirit wrought.

And are we not in a state of Warfare whilst on Earth? when the Apostle says,
Gal. 5. 17.
That the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other, (and therefore there will be a War
betwixt Romans 7. 20, 21.
them) so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. And I delight in the Law
of God after the Inward Man. But I see another Law in my Members warring
against the Law of my Mind. And-to what end did holy Paul so nicely describe
the whole Armature of a Christian, if it were to hang up for a show only, as
rusty pieces are wont to do in a time of Peace. No, he directs to put them on,
telling us our Warfare is not so much with evil Men, as with evil Spirits. We
wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual
Wickedness in high Places: Ephesians. 6. 12, 13.
Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, etc. God himself published
this War first in Paradise, declaring that our Lives should be a continual
Warfare Genesis 3. 15.
with the Devil. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy
Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall Ecce Jehovam
secialem! ecce positam inimicitiam in cajus Exorcitio sundarur hoc quicquid est
Militiae! ecce primaevam belli istius denuntiationem, quod ab Incunabulis mundi
gestum est, etiamnum geritur, and geretur ad sinem seculi inter Christum cum
suis ex una part, and Diabolum ex altera cum suis Asseclis. Arrowsm. l. 1. c.
1. Sect. 5. Tact. sacr.
bruise his Heel. See here God himself denouncing the War that Enmity put,
which is the ground of our Warfare, which began near the beginning of the World
it self, and has been ever since carried on, and will be so between Christ and
his Servants on one side, and the Devil and his Angels on the other, to the end
of all things below. And therefore we think it ill became W. Pen, to deride
Holy Men (who carry on their Warfare by humble Confession and earnest Prayer,
which brings them Aid from Heaven (...) saying, Alas poor Souls! are you not at
Have Mercy upon us Miserable Sinners, there is no Health in us from seven to
seventy? And was not this the Cry of penitent David, and the humble Publican;
and shall these devout Supplicants be mocked by such a Wretch as Will. ^en? But
says G. Whitehead, Alas! is not sign of Laughter at them, but of Lamentation
and Pity over their miserable State? Is then their State so miserable above all
others, when they open their Case to a Physician that can and will assuredly
help them upon their earnest Application to him? Thus God directs his People to
take to them words, and say, Take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously;
which Hof. 14. 2, 4.
is in effect to say, Have Mercy upon us miserable Sinners: and when done
penitently and sincerely, he has promised to show Favor thereupon; I will heal
their Backslidings, and love them freely. So that (...) this Case they were no
Objects of his Pity; and alas, there is no sign of it, as it comes from W. Pen,
who reckons such a Practice greatly Erroneous and grossly Ridiculous: and let us
ask W. Pen and G. Whitehead, whether they would not take it as a bitter
Sarcasin, should we say, Alas, poor sinless Cater, to fall a Whoring and
Wenching after sixty years of Age, it would be thought sure a jea^ at their
pretended Perfection; so that Alas may sometimes be spoken by way of Contempt
as well as of Pity. What he adds, that W. Pen pitied them, because they were
always confessing but never forsaking, is an unworthy Reflection and base
Falsehood; when it is evident, those who are oftnest in these Devotions make the
greatest Progress in subduing and mortifying their Sins, tho none of them can
obtain so perfect a Victory, as not to be troubled with the remains of Sin any
more; nor are we herein Sin's Advocates (as we are falsely charged) we are far
from pleading its Cause, but mournfully complain of it as our Burden, and long
for that time in which we shall be free, not from its Power, but from its
Presence: How joyfully could some of us sing our Nunc Dimittas, and welcome a
Winding Sheet, which can only wipe us perfectly clean.

To that of Edward Buroughs, George Whitehead answers, His meaning is, that P.
1^.
is his common Refuge, a Refuge that lies out of our Reach; he meant well, tho
his words be never so blasphemous. Well, let us hear if his meaning be any
thing better. God does not accept Men in their failings in Duty; but by his
leave, tho God does not accept Men for their failings, yet he graciously
accepts them through Christ, whilst they are under them; and to say he does not,
is not only to mean, but to say the very same thing with Buroughs, That God
does not accept any where there is any failing. And to show thou fully agreest
with Brother Buroughs in this, thou have commended one of absolute Perfection
to us for our Imitation, who boasted, when a dying, to his Friends about his
Bed, that he was not conscious of any Action that he had done, that he should
be afraid of appearing before Almighty God: it was Tudor Brain, a Lad of about
seventeen years old; this was even the last Breath he drew, and was it not
sweet and edifying? can you imagine how greedily Friends sucked it in as a
sweet smelling Savor; how their Souls were refreshed and nourished by it, as a
most heavenly Expiration? (Poor Child! that had only learnt to parrot so
presumptuously, as he had been taught a little before by his Parents; neither
at Age, God knows, See Whitehead' s Account of this Touth's Death, p. 2.
nor at years of Discretion: yet this poor Boy is set forth by Whitehead as a
Pattern for us to imitate). A Doctrine that utterly cancels the Gospel Covenant
and its gracious Terms, laying a Millstone upon our Shoulders that the strongest
Sampson is not able to bear. Whitehead tells us, there are some that complain
their best Duties are sinful; but upon the strictest search, he will hardly
find any among us, who hold Duty to be a Sin, i. e. that Duty is no Duty. What
we hold herein is, That every Duty we perform to God is good, because it is a
Duty; but for the manner of its performance, it is not so well, but it might be
better; some chilness of Zeal, distraction of Thoughts, make a great Abatement,
but yet we are accepted therein, through the Grace of the Gospel. The old Covenant
Terms were strict and rigorous; but it is the merciful Condescension of the
Gospel, since we are not sufficient to pay the whole Debt (and if our Almighty
Creditor should exact it, we must all to Prison) to compound with us and accept
of what we can, and forgive us if we pay what we are able.

Whitehead says, Our Acceptance is in Christ, which is very true, but
inconsistent with their Doctrine of Perfection; for what need they a Savior's
Mediation, who are not chargeable with any failing, who fulfill the Law and
answer every demand of Justice, as Buroughs says, or God will not accept
them? their own Perfection shall speak for them. St. Paul says, Who shall
condemn? it is Christ that justifies. But if Buroughs say true, and they can
answer every Demand of Justice, they may say it is I that will justify my self;
my own Actions shall speak for me; surely nothing can condemn, if the Justice
of God cannot. In citing this Passage of Buroughs, Whitehead complains we have
dropped somewhat which might have done him a kindness, viz. these words, But
those that love God, keep his Commandments, and they are not grievous. All
which we own, but that his Commandments are not grievous, and his Burden is
light, is owing not to our natural Strength and Ability, but to the gracious
Terms of the Gospel Covenant, which imparts a larger measure of the Spirit to
enable the Christian, and also accepts Sincerity instead of Perfection, which
is directly contrary to what Buroughs asserts here, viz. That God does not
accept any, where there is any failing, who does not fulfill the Law and answer
every demand of Justice, which Experience, as well as God's Word, assure us
none is able to do: so little do these foregoing words contribute toward the
rendering those Orthodox, which the Brief Discovery charges upon him; and if
these People in particular should pretend above other Men to be without
failings, 'twould but make them the more ridiculous, which in this matter they
are already even to Contempt.

He says we oppose the Urim and Thummim, Light and Perfection; but do we oppose
the Urim and Thummim, whilst we assert it to be only in the Breastplate of our
great High Priest, but not upon the Breast of every, or any Saint on Earth?

CHAP. V.
Of Immediate REVELATION.
THE Brief Discovery charges Whitehead and Fox jun. with saying, That P. 8.
which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as
the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater. This undervaluing the Scriptures,
with respect to their own Writings, is not a careless stumble of their Pen, but
deliberate and designed; for wherever they treat of Scripture, it is in the same
Strain, not varying from the Analogy of this Faith: If ever you will own the
Prophets, Apostles, or Christ himself, you will own our Writings given forth by
the same Spirit.

You may as well condemn the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries; and in
this Answ. to the Westmorel. Petit. p. 30.
place Whitehead gives the pre-eminence to their Writings, says, They are of as
great Authority, and greater. Here he complains again of Injustice, because we
left out some explanatory words, as he calls them in the same period; the words
are these ( which rather darken than enlighten the matter) as Christ's words
were of greater Authority when he spoke, than the Pharisees reading the Letter:
never sure was there so cross, so perverse an Answer; was the comparison made
between the Pharisees reading the Letter, and the Quakers Speakings, or between
the Scriptures and their Speakings? The Question asked was, Whether they
esteemed their Speakings of as great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? And
the Answer was direct enough, They are as great, and greater too. But when they
prefer their Writings to the Scriptures, he does not, as he tells us, mean the
Scriptures, but the Pharisees reading them. If the Pharisees were such A B
C-Darians, that they knew not how to read a Chapter in the Bible as it ought to
be; yet the Bible is of the same Authority still, read by a Pharisee, or an
Apostle, tho perhaps not of the same Efficacy: and the Scriptures, whenever
spoken, or by whomsoever, tho they have not the Spirit who speak them, yet
(whatever Whitehead says in the close of that Paragraph) the Scriptures, by
whomsoever spoken, we must obey, and not, as he says, deny.

In the next Paragraph he bids us note, That the Comparison is placed upon the
Spirit of Truth speaking in Man in the first place, and through and by the
Ministers thereof in the next place. A wonderful opening, and amounts to thus
much; The Comparison is placed upon the Spirit of Truth speaking in Man in the
first place, and in and through Man in the second place: He concludes (we
suppose) from hence, as he should have said, the Spirit speaking in and through
them, as in and through the Apostles, has not lost its Authority and Power
since it gave forth the Scriptures, therefore their Writings must be of the
same Authority with the Scriptures. This were true, if the Spirit spoke in us
or them as through a Trunk (as the Devil did through the Images when he uttered
his Oracles) but he speaks in us or them, whilst he assists us in our Speakings
and Writings; so that it is not the Spirit, but we that speak and write by the
assistance of Christ's Spirit; which assistance is given us according to what
degree our Lord pleases (as Whitehead acknowledges) to us, in P. 17. P^r. 2.
such a degree as overcomes not the Infirmities of our Nature so, as that we
should not be liable to some Mistakes; but to the Apostles in such a degree as
left them liable to none in their speaking, or delivering the Scriptures to the
World; and the Miracles that they wrought were an abundant Evidence to all Men
thereof.

And to show that which he says in the next, viz. That the Spirit of Truth
immediately ministering in Man, is of greater Authority or Power than the
Chapters are without the Spirit, is very vain or worse: for which are those
Chapters in our Bible, that are without the Spirit or its Authority, since
every Chapter, sure they will acknowledge, is as much the Dictates of the Spirit
as their Teachings are? And it must be an Atheistical Consideration of the
Scriptures, to look upon them, as Whitehead does here, without the Spirit.

P. 17. l. 3, 4, 5.
As for his Profession, that they acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament to be of Divine Authority, and prefer them above all other
Writings, etc. it is Protestatio contra factum; he only professing he does not
do a thing, even whilst he is doing of it. Whereas he says, the Spirit of God
speaking in the Soul, is of greater Efficacy, Power and Authority than the
Scripture without, it is a captious Assertion; for Efficacy, Power and
Authority, are not the same thing, and therefore as joined together, we can
neither affirm nor deny: for of greater Efficacy and Power it may be, but not
of greater Authority, unless they will say the Spirit is of greater Authority
than the Spirit, it being the same Spirit (we are sure) that wrote the
Scriptures, which they pretend speaks in them. All this while he has not
offered to prove their Speakings to be of greater Authority than the
Scriptures, tho he said it very absurdly and blasphemously: For can there be
any Authority greater than that which is Divine? and this Divine Authority
Whitehead here says, they (the Quakers) sincerely acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to have. We think now 'twould be but
just to forbear charging the Priests with ignorance, as he frequently does,
since it is a spice of that which makes his Discoverer so confused here.

Letter of the 3 d day, 3 d month, 98. See Keith's 3 d N^^. p. 66.
Such Expressions as those above, thou thoughtest fit to excuse to G. Keith in a
Letter to him; for there thou confessedst, thou have been too short and dubious
in some Words or Exprestions, as not fully explained in thy former Writings,
which may easily be helped by some ingenuous or charitable Explication or
Emendation.

First, by the way, Here is thy Infallibility left to its shifts, tho Thomas
Danson and his Brethren were once no Ministers of Christ for disclaiming of it;
and F^x tells us, Whoever speaks a word, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, is
a Witch and Conjurer. I hope, these short and dubious words, that need the help
of some ingen^ous and charitable Person to explain and amend them, were not
from the Mouth of the Lord; yet they were from the Mouth of G. Whitehead to be
sure: and if thy Prophet calls thee Witch and Conjurer for them, tho^ must even
take it patiently from one that spoke every word from the Mouth of the Lord,
unless thou would have him rather recorded for the Conjurer than thy self.

(...).
But, secondly, They are short, it seems; what thou say in thy Nature of
Christianity, I am afraid was a little too long, viz. We have no Scripture
Proof that Co^^st exists outwardly at God's right hand; which would have been
as good Doctrine as you could have wished, if the Reader would be (...)
charitable and ingenuous as to throw out ( No). And here where thou say, That
which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as
the Scriptures, and greater, seems to be too short: Let but the ingenuous
Reader be so kind as to put in that word ( not) and it is admirable orthodox;
and he is very uncharitable, that will not help a poor Man out of the Briars
when a word will do it.

Thirdly, Thou say, Ingenuity and Charity might explain them and amend them
for thee; methinks, this were work might very well become thy self. And this is
all at present we have to desire of thee, that thou would correct and amend
those blasphemous words, we and others have charged thee with, i. e. renounce
them, and give us other words more plain and orthodox in the room of them.
Brief Discovery, and Fr. Bugg have taken some Pains to show thee a few of them;
and we should be glad to see thee mending and correcting them: and when thou
have mended thy own, when thy hand is in, thou would do well to be so
charitable to thy Brethren, to amend few words of theirs: and if thou do but
once set up the mending Trade, we promise we will find thee mending work enough
out of your own Authors for thy self and a Journy-man too.

G. Fox tells us the Priests say, The Apostles were Eyewitnesses, and
understood Mist. p. 24.
by Immediate Revelation from God, inspired with the Gift of the Spirit, more
than any Man could hope for since: And says, they do not pretend to any such
Gift, nor depend upon any such immediate, miraculous Revelation from Heaven. To
which G. Fox answers, Then all may see now in this, what you received, that
has been from Man, which is not from Heaven immediate, nor the Gifts of the
Spirit, nor received the Gospel by the same means the Apostles did, who were
not the Eyewitnesses as the Apostles were, neither have ye attained to the
same Knowledge and Understanding as the Apostles did, nor received it from
Heaven, etc.

But we deny this silly consequence, That because what we receive is not by
immediate Revelation, therefore it must be from Man (tho Man may be a means by
which it is received) and that it is not from Heaven, nor the Gift of the
Spirit, nor the Gospel neither, because not received by the same means the
Apostles received it (to let go the nonsense that the Apostles received the
Gospel by means, and yet immediately, viz. without means) for the Gospel is the
same, whether received by the Ministry of Men, or without it: for whatever
those Holy Men of God, the Prophets and Apostles, have through the Assistance
of the Spirit written and sent down to us, we consonantly thereunto preach unto
our People; and therefore may truly say, As they delivered, so we preach, and
so ye believed. But alas, it seems it cannot be the Gospel we received, because
we are not Eyewitnesses, as the Apostles were; we cannot say with St. John,
That which was from the beginning, which we have seen with 1 John 1. ^.
our Eyes, and our Hands have handled of the word of Life: Because we had the
fortune to be born sixteen hundred years after the Gospel was preached and
confirmed, and so wanted the Happiness of a personal Converse with our Savior,
and had not the honor to feast with him in Cana, to be with him in the Mount,
in Galilee, in Samaria, to see the Draught of Fishes, the Multiplication of
Loaves, and all his other Miracles; because we did not see him in the Garden,
upon the Cross, after his Resurrection, or when he actually ascended into
Heaven; or at least were not wrapped up into the third Heaven with St. Paul, and
had not the abundance of Revelations that he had, therefore we know nothing of
the Gospel, tho we have as rational an evidence as the nature of the thing will
bear (...) that which all wise men were satisfied with, who never expected to
(...) ^to the same capacity, or to be in the same circumstances with the (...)
Di^ciples of our Lord as to this matter. But we fear it is another Gospel they
pretend to than ours, their Gospel being only a manifestation of a Christ
within, his inward Life, Death, Blood, Resurrection and Ascension, which they
pretend to feel, taste, and see within them every day.

In the close of this Citation, George Fox would have all People judge, and so
would we too, whether it may not be the same Gospel preached now by the
Ministry of Men, and from Heaven too, that was received by the Apostles
immediately from God; since we give sufficient evidence, that it is the same we
preach, which we received from them, tho we do not teach immediately from Romans 1.
God, or by Revelation. The Gospel, he says, is the Power of God, and
therefore immediate. It Is true, the Gospel is styled both the Power and Wisdom
of God; and they are immediately in God, for they are God. But then, that the
Gospel (which had a beginning) is so called, is not properly, but figuratively,
as the Cause may be predicated of the Instrument; for the Gospel is an
Instrument of God's Power and Wisdom for the Salvation of Believers. It may
innocently enough be said, Preaching the Word of God by a lawful Minister is
the Power of God, because the Power of God makes use of this means for the
conversion of Thousands; but then it is meant secondarily or subordinately, not
originally and supremely.

There is a heavy complaint made for our omitting (after these words, They are
in the same Power, Understanding, Knowledge and immediate Revelation from
Heaven, that the Apostles were in) those in the close of the Sentence, That
understand the Gospel; as also those, And they that be in another cannot
understand it. Which amounts to thus much: Every one that understands the
Gospel, is in the same Power, Understanding, Knowledge, and immediate Revelation
from Heaven, that the Apostles were in; and they that are not can never
understand the Gospel; when it is evident a man may understand the meaning of
the Gospel by the help of common Illumination without any special enlightening,
much more without immediate Revelation from Heaven. But this is their general
Sentiment and Opinion: Geo. Fox says the same with Whitehead, not only here,
but in his Journal, p. 22. and Pen in his Answer to Faldo, p. 58, 64. Now for
the honor of the Scriptures, that they may not ly under the Popish Imputation
of so great obscurity, we shall prove that they who are not in the same Power,
Understanding, Knowledge, and immediate Revelation from Heaven that the Apostles
were in, may yet understand the sense of the Scriptures in things necessary to
Salvation.

The Scriptures are plain in themselves; a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto
our Paths, Psalm. 119. 105. and their Words manifest their Sense to us, as other
Writings do, if we have but the use of rational Faculties, and the common
Illumination of the Spirit of God. And it were contrary to the Goodness and
Justice of God to enact Laws, and make our Obedience to them necessary to
Salvation; and yet propound them so darkly and obscurely, that none should be
able to understand them, unless they enjoyed the same Power, Understanding,
Knowledge, and immediate Revelation from Heaven with the Apostles, which to be
sure the greatest part of those they wrote unto, viz. the Romans, Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, and others, never did. Besides, the Scripture obliges all
to whom they are delivered to believe and obey, and therefore to understand
both the Promises and Precepts thereof, tho they have not attained to the same
Understanding, Knowledge, and immediate Revelation from Heaven which the
Apostles had; nay, wicked men, who are far from any such Knowledge and
Revelation, etc. are yet bound, if they have the Scriptures, to understand
them, since they sin if they do not; Mat. 22. 19. Ye do err not knowing the
Scriptures, says Christ to the Sadduces; and the consequence is evident,
because God never obliges to an Impossibility.

Besides, they will not sure deny, but we may understand the Scriptures of St.
Whitehead, St. Pen, St. Fox, and St. Buroughs, without the same degree of the
Spirit the Apostles were acted by; and why not of St. Peter and St. Paul, who
sure were able to speak as clearly and intelligibly as the former? We
understand well enough what the Friends mean, when they say, Infant Sprinkling
is from the Devil, and the Pope; when they say, the Priests are Devils, Dogs,
Beasts, Hirelings; and many more such Characters drawn to the life by those
Artists in Railing. See Fox, Hubberthorne, Truth's Defense, and many more. And
if we cannot understand your Scriptures, why are we invited to read them, who
are carnal, destitute of the Spirit, of the Spirit we hope they were wrote by?

Again; Did not Julian, Celsus, and Lucian understand the sense and meaning of
the Scriptures, and many Articles of our Faith contained therein? Did they not
scoff and jeer at them? not sure at Ink and Paper, dead Letters, but the sense
they imported? They knew the meaning of those words well enough, A Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a Son, and laughed at them as an impossible Fiction: They
well understood the sense of that Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. (even
better than William Pen, who has allegorized away the literal meaning to a
spiritual Resurrection) and therefore scoffed at it as a Romantic Dream. And
Celsus (who, as Origin tells us, boasted that he knew all the Christian
Doctrines) derided both the Holy Virgin (asking if God were in love with her
Beauty) and the descent of the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove, the Voice
from Heaven, the coming of the Wise men, etc. as may be seen, l. 1. p. 30, 31.
Orig. contr. Cells. These sure were not in the same Power, Understanding,
Knowledge, and immediate Revelation from Heaven, that the Apostles were in; and
yet by a very common Illumination could discern the sense and meaning of many
Scriptures, But we may instance in one more, and he a great Quaker too, that
certainly was not in such Power and Understanding, etc. the Apostes were in,
and yet understands the Scriptures well enough to his cost: the Devi^ we mean;
for he believes them, and trembles.

The Scriptures he brings, p. 18. parag. 5. prove nothing but what we have
owned before: Mat. 11. 27. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him; and has not the Son revealed him to every one of
us by the Scriptures? To the same purpose is that place, 1 Cor. 2. 9. And the
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: By the common Illumination
of the Spirit he is enabled to understand the sense of that Revelation, and by
a more special one to understand it savingly, i. e. to believe and obey it; and
all this without the same Power, Knowledge, Understanding, and immediate
Revelation from Heaven that the Apostles were in. And we are taught of God, and
by the Spirit ( John 6. 45. Isa. 54. 13. Jer. 31. 33.) when we are taugh by the
Scriptures, they being the means used for our instruction; which is all that is
observed in the Margin of the old Bible (in Q. Elizabeth's days) by hearing of
his Word, and inward moving of his Spirit, the Spirit cooperating with those
means. And the following Note upon Jer. 31. 33. has only reference to that more
plentiful effusion of the Spirit in the days of the Gospel than was afforded
under the legal Ministration; which tho no body ever denied, or yet by granting
shall need to render less useful and necessary the preaching of God's
Ministers, or the reading of the Scriptures.

The Priest had said, Thou do not speak in that degree of the Holy Ghost as
the Prophets and Apostles did, that spoke forth Scriptures. To which George Fox
answers, p. 213. Gr. Mystery, Thou can not know Scriptures, but by the same
degree of the Spirit the Prophets and Apostles had. But p. 19. l. 14. Whitehead
seems to boggle at this expression, saying, Now the Scripture ( i. e. the whole
Scripture) cannot be truly known ('it is like he means all the dark Visions,
Mysteries, and Revelations, which no private Christian is concerned to
understand) but by a high degree of the Spirit, if not the same; but presently
comes to confession that the true knowledge of the Scripture must be obtained by
a degree of the same Spirit. Instead of the same degree of the Spirit, it is
now a degree only of the same Spirit, which all know to be vastly different;
and yet thus the words should have bin wrote at first, for they were so
intended, says this excellent Vindicator, had not Fox's Infallibility nodded
whilst he was writing, and so mistakingly wrote the same degree of the Spirit,
for a degree of the same Spirit.

And now for a close of this Head, it is a thing much to be lamented, and ought
by all sober Christians to be seriously laid to heart, that such persons as
both the Foxes, Parnello, Eccles, and a great many more of the Gang, who can
scarce speak or write good sense, should dare to challenge Inspiration, and
immediate Revelation from Heaven equal with the Apostles themselves, a thing
not to be claimed without the greatest certainty in our selves, and the highest
evidence given to Mankind; since the Glory of God, the Authority of the
Scriptures, the State and Welfare of human Societies, as well as the Interest
of the Christian Religion, and the Souls of so many thousands (easily entangled
by such pretenses) are deeply concerned therein. May we not Sleidan' s Comment,
5th and 10th Books. Ross' s Appendix to his View of all Religions. Casaubon of
Enthusiasm. Spencer' s Vulgar Prophecies. Rutherford' s Surve of the Spiritual
Antichrist. Short History of the Anabaptists in Germany.
be convinced from the accounts given us by many learned and impartial Writers
(mentioned in the Margin) that evil Designs, inward Heats, melancholy Fancies,
Satan's Suggestions, nay, the want of good Arguments, have frequently taken
sanctuary under this sacred Cover? It were easy to make good this by Instances,
some from Heretics in the primitive times, others from the Enthusiasts amongst
the Romanists, and very many from the Sectaries of late days both at home and
abroad; as the persons cited, and others have largely done. The Anabaptists
flew high with this Claim, and it was Rutherford, p. 6, 7, 8.
their Blind to carry on every design: Their Founder Nich. Storke boasted of
Dreams and Visions, rejecting the Scripture, as being a carnal and literal
Rule, saying, God spoke to him by an Angel, and revealed to him his Will in
Dreams, promising him the place of the Angel Gabriel, and the Empire of the
World. See the Short History of the Anabaptists of High and Low Germany, chap.
2. p. 6. His Follower Tho. Munster pretended the like Communications from God,
and would fain have gained Luther to his side; but he wrote to the Senate of
Mulhaysen (a famous Town in Thuringia) to beware of that Wolf. John Becold, a
Tailor, afterward called John of Leyden, carried on all his Designs by a
pretense of immediate Revelation from Heaven; and the great Mischiefs caused
thereby are abundantly known, above a hundred thousand being killed by occasion
of these bloody Inspirations. John Matthiz, or Matthias, the Baker of Harlem,
had Secrets revealed to him, which God had not revealed to others, he being
Enoch the second High Priest of God, and was in effect perpetual Dictator at
Munster. Yea, Herman the Cobbler professed himself a true Prophet, Hist. of the
Anabapt. chap. 3. p. 21.
and the true Messiah. These, with Knipperdolling, Tuscocurer the Goldsmith,
and many more of that Sect, pretended Inspirations from Heaven for all they did
and said, and at all turns made known their Revelations to the People, which
betraved them to Ruin and Destruction, which made Melancthon severely censure
them, saying, These Fanatical Dotages are accursed: And we (in opposition to
such who assert new Revelations are to be expected from Melanct. de numero
sacrament.
God) do declare, that God out of his infinite Goodness having revealed his
Will to us in the Gospel, other Revelations are not to be expected. And it is
evident, Revelation has been pretended for very ill purposes among the Quakers
themselves; one of them replying to his Creditor, It Is revealed to See
Christianity no Enthusiasm, page 125, 126.
me that I owe thee nothing. Thus Mary Gadbury pretended a Revelation to get
some Cloth from Mrs. Woodward: And there were two Quakers near Stukely in
Yorkshire, whose Consciences bidding them destroy Original Sin, they
apprehending their Mother was the Fountain thereof, went and murdered her.
Agreeable to the Practices of some of the Anabaptists beyond Sea, who being
drunk with Enthusiasm (the spiritual Lunacy of this Schismatical Age, as a Dr.
Hicks. Short History of the Anabaptists, p. 51.
Learned Man calls it) committed many such wild Freaks: One of their Sect being
in his prophetical mood, called his Father, Mother, Brother and Sisters to him,
and commanding his Brother to kneel down, cut off his Head with one Blow,
crying out, The Will of God is done. Thus John of Leyden, led by his
prophetical Spirit, wrote several Conclusions, which he commanded the Preachers
to teach the People; the sum of which was, That men are not tied P. 24.
to one Wife, but may have as many as they please (and he had fifteen for his
share) which when they refused, he declared, the Doctrine was revealed to him
from Heaven, and commanded the first Opposer thereof to be beheaded, which was
done presently.

These, and the like Extravagancies made a Learned Man declare, That Dr. Hicks'
s Spirit of Enthusiasm exorcis'd, p. 37, 38.
it was a dangerous Principle to assert, That immediate Revelation, or
Inspiration, is not ceased, but is a standing and perpetual Gift in the Church
of Christ; and that this Spirit is not like the Spirit in the Primitive times,
to be tried by the Scriptures and Reason, but both of them are to be tried by
it, as Barclay in his Theses asserts. And he very well observes further, That
amongst all the miraculous Gifts taken notice of in the New Testament, there is
no mention made of Heroical Impulse, by which men were sometimes irresistably
moved from the Spirit under the Jewish Economy to execute Judgment P. 39.
in an extraordinary manner upon the Enemies of God: for God being the
Political King and Legislator of the Jews* did, as other absolute Monarchs do,
in some special Exigencies send men with extraordinary supralegal Commissions,
to do present execution upon great and dangerous Offenders, without staying for
the ordinary process by Law; but our Savior (one end of whose coming was to
put an end to the Jewish Economy, and who came not to destroy men's Lives, but
to save them) gave no such Gifts unto Men: There is to be no Fire from Heaven,
nor no Phineas's under the Christian Dispensation; accordingly, the first
Apostolical Ages of Wonder were utterly ignorant of killing Impulse and Zeal.
-- And let us, says he, P. 40.
a little more particularly reflect upon that blasphemous Doctrine of the
Quakers concerning a spiritual Ministry and spiritual Worship, whereby they
pretend that the Holy Ghost now comes down upon their Assemblies, as it did in
the Apostles time, and moves them to preach and pray by inspiration, without
any regard to Condition or Sex.

Hence when they meet together, they sit hanging their heads in a silent dumb
manner, till the Spirit, as they pretend, shall move some body, it is
indifferent be it Man or Woman, to preach or pray: Accordingly they call their
Preaching, Prophesying, and precariously say, that they have the Spirit of
Adoption by which they call God Father; and that the Spirit in the inspired
Minister makes intercession for them with unutterable Groans: that they groan
sufficiently we grant, for sometimes in their Meetings they do nothing else;
but if their groaning or vocal Devotions be from the Spirit, how comes it to
pass that the Spirit never moves them, as it did in the Apostles days, to pray
and prophesy in unknown Tongues? When we shall see in their Assemblys, as the
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles did in the Primitive Christians Meetings, that
they have the Gift of Tongues, and the gift of interpreting thereof; when
together with the Gift of Tongues, we shall see that they have, as the
Christians had, all the other miraculous Gifts; when we shall see that they
show themselves to be Prophets, and spiritual in receiving what this Apostle
has written (in particular, that a Woman should not speak in the Church) as
the Commandments of God: And lastly, when with all this they shall preach no
other Doctrine than what the Apostle has preached, and the Catholic Church
received, then we will believe, if they be lawfully baptized, that it is the
Spirit which is speaking in them, and that God is in them and among them of a
truth; but till then we must believe them all to be Impostors, or Enthusiasts,
or Blasphemers of the Holy Ghost. Thus he, enough to silence all their
pretenses to immediate Inspiration, Calv. adv. Libertines, c. 2.
which has been the common Stal^ of each fanatical Party to influence the
People by; so the Libertines would boast of their Intimacy with God, and all
See Rutherford's S^^vey of the Spiritual Antichrist, cap. 9. p. 55, 56, 57, etc.
their talk was de Spiritu, of what Communications they had from the Spirit (as
Calvin notes.) Henry Nicholas, the first nominated Elder of the Family of Love,
pretended to Visions and Revelations, and Conferences with Angels, and said, He
was raised by the highest God, ^anointed with the Holy Ghost, godded with God
in the Spirit of his Love. Casp^r Swenkefield pretended to the Spirit, and
Enthusiastical Dreams, called for spiritualness, and the Spirit, and the
Rutherf. cap. ^. p. 15, 16, etc. Id. Part 2. p. 211.
internal Word, revealed his fancys to Luther, who sharply rebuked him, but to
no purpose, Pertinacy cleaving to the Plague of Heresy, says our Author: his
Errors are there recited, they were condemned by a Synod at Norimburg, Anno
1554, and by the Confession of the Divines of Mansfield 1555. who tell us, he
had vexed the Church thirty years. That American Jezabel (as she is called)
Mrs. Hutchison, deceived and drew away many, boldly asserting, that her
peculiar Revelations about Events to fall out were as infallible as any parts
of Scripture, and that she was as much bound to believe them as the Scripture,
for the same Holy Ghost was the Author of both. It were endless to recite what
is said of this sort of People, who all deluded the World with the Pretense to
Visions, Revelation, and immediate Teachings from the Spirit, which was the
shield they labored to secure themselves by when assaulted by the Ministers of
the Gospel; and therefore we have great reason to caution our People against
itching Ears, and the being fond of new things, but more especially to avoid
those who pretend to new ^ights and Revelations, as being but Wolves in sheeps
clothing, remembering that it is recorded, to the great praise of the Bereans,
that upon St. Paul's preaching they searched the Scriptures daily whether those
things were so. To the Law, and to the Testimony; If they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them: which shows that this
ought to be their rule to try all Doctrines by.

CHAP. VI.
Of the SCRIPTURES.
G EO. FOX in his Piece, styled, News coming out of the North, written See
Brief Discov. p. 9.
from the Mouth of the Lord, etc. says, Your Original is Carnal Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin -- A learned Man reading this, wondered, and well he might, how Latin
came to be an Original; and we cannot guess, unless it be to make a court to
the Church of Rome, which has decreed the vulgar Latin to be as infallible and
authentic as the Greek and Hebrew; and had he brought in the Latin Service, as
well as the Latin Bible, we had been Al-a-Mode Roman. Who knows, tho not he,
yet his infallible Successors may one day make that authentic too? Oh this
Infallibility can do strange feats when it pleases. But he goes on, Your Word
is carnal, the Letter and the Light is carnal, the Letter -- their Original is
but dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death: and their Gospel is but
Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which is the Letter.

To this Geo. Whitehead answers here, That the Letter it self is not made up of
spiritual Matter, or of lasting materials, but of such as will decay and turn
to dust. A wonderful discovery, That your Gospel Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
are not printed with never-failing Ink, and upon immortal Paper! he tlls us, in
Innocence Triumphant, p. 17. they mean no more than the Writings, abstractly
considered as in Paper and Ink, and false Ministers, dead preaching and
commenting on them. Well, George, if thou had but as much honesty as wit, tho
in that there is but bare measure, thou would not abuse us with such a
trifling Answer; Was ever any thing properly called Carnal, that was not
capable of being made spiritual, Carnality being only the want of Spirituality
in a Subject capable?

And it is as improper to say, Ink and Paper are carnal, as a Stone is blind;
would it not be a wise business for one to discourse of a carnal Dog, a carnal
Horse, a carnal Tree, or a carnal Block, as if there were those that could be
spiritual? But further, who ever thought the innocent Letters of the Alphabet,
and the Scrivener's Bottel, should be accused as carnal, or Hebrew and Greek
should have the fortune to be censured as carnal Languages, and not French,
Spanish, or Italian, unless it was because Hebrew and Greek were the first
Languages whereby the Doctrine of Salvation was conveyed to the World, without
the least mention of Light within, unless with a note of infamy ( if the Light
in thee be darkness) O! it is this carnal Hebrew and Greek which has done us all
the mischief, that has chok'd us with this Serpents meat. But Fox tells us, We
Dogs, Serpents, Swine, feed upon the Letter, which is Death; tho we think 'twas
never heard that ever any fed upon the Letters of the Alphabet, and a Bottle of
Ink, and took them for his dinner; or how Pen, Ink, and Paper should kill any,
unless he were such a Fool as to choke himself by swallowing his Bible. No, no,
Quakers are not so silly, tho wicked enough, to think so* there is no question
but it is somewhat conveyed to us by their Letters and Languages they have their
spite at, as appears further by what he says here, Your Word is Carnal, and
your Light is Carnal, your Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which
is the Letter. Sure our Word, our Light, our Gospel, our Matthew, Mark, etc.
are somewhat else besides Ink and Paper; and if not Pen, Ink, and Paper, they
must be somewhat conveyed to our knowledge by them. But he tells us, they mean
only our dead preaching and commenting on it: so then, God be thanked, the
Letter is alive again, and it is only our preaching and commenting on it is
dead; tho Fox in direct opposition to him, says, it is the Letter is dead. But
let us a little expostulate with the two Georges herein: Why are they not as
bold and plain with their own Writings, as they are with the Scriptures? are
they not Pen, Ink and Paper as well as these? or are the Ink and Paper of Fox,
and Burroughs's writing made of more lasting materials than our Bible? How
comes it to pass then that they are not Dust, and Death, and Serpents Meat, as
well as the Scriptures? No, they are all messengers from Heaven, given from the
Mouth of the Lord, sealed with the Eternal Spirit: What care is there to guard
the honor of their own Writings (see Snake in the Grass, p. 102.) To you this
is the Word of the Lord, says Fox, every where of his Scribbles. No, no, yours
are not dead, and killing, Serpents Food; they are all Manna, Quail, Honey and
the Honeycomb, our Souls Nourishment, as Coal said of Fox's Book; a good
stomach surely he had which could feed so savourly (as some Africans are said
to do) upon Guts and Garbage, nay on Snakes and Serpents: In the mean time St.
Paul's Scriptures are but Dust, Husks, Rottenness, scarce Dogsmeat. It Is true,
of late they give the Scriptures better names, but it is their cunning Artifice
very highly to complement and caress this Favorite of the People, especially
when they have some Act of Parliament to procure which may tend to their
advantage; and when their turn is served, perhaps you may hear of them under
their old Character, and they may be as much Serpents Meat as ever. That place,
2 Cor. 3. 6. which they often quote to depreciate the Letter of Scripture by,
is understood of the Legal ceremonial Dispensation, which the Apostles were not
made Ministers of; and in that place the Law is the Letter that kills, and
the Gospel the Spirit which gives Life, as will appear plainly to them who
attentively read the following Verses to the end of the Chapter.

Lawson's Brief Discovery, p. 9. says, The Ministers are Babylon's Merchants,
selling beastly Ware for a large price, the Letter, which is Dust and Death. A
very high complement to the Ministers, as if they were no better than a company
of Pedlars that cheat the Country, selling the excrements of Beasts cunningly
dressed up, for choice Perfumes: but our comfort is, we fare as well as the Holy
Scriptures, for they are the beastly Ware we sell, as follows; the Letter,
which is Dust and Death. Here George begins to open against the injustice and
falsehood of this Quotation, saying, the Quotation runs thus, selling beastly
Ware for a large Price, all the week time heaping up a rabble of Notions into
the Brain: And there he stops, as Balaam's Ass could be got no further for the
Sword; truth is, had he gone any further, he would have felt the point of it,
which was in these words, the Letter which is Dust and Death; so that beastly
Ware relates not only to the rabble of Notions in our Brains, but to the Letter
also.

George says again, This was never spoken of the Ministers without exception,
P. 20. l. 19.
but of the false Ministers. Geo. we thank thee for nothing, we know who they
are very well that are the false Ministers in your account, even my Lord of
Canterbury, and all the Bishops and Priests of the Nation, that take Tithes, as
Rob. Barclay; that Antichristian apostatized Generation, the National Ministry:
His Anarchy, p. 41.
And as Smith says, They are the false Ministers which preach Christ without:
Primmer, p. 8.
so that all the Christian Ministry in the World are here ranked as well as
ours, amongst a company of cheating Pedlars; And when he says, He excepts the
Ministers that are not the false ones, he excepts none but themselves.

Br. Discov. p. 9. quotes Readiness Errand; All that study to draw a living thing
P. 7.
out of a dead, the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers: neither is Fox
alone, His brief Discovery of the threesold state, p. 7, 8, 9, 10.
for Lawson says the same, The Priests of the World are Conjurers, raising dead
doctrines out of the Letter, dead reasons, dead uses, dead motives.

We have proved before it is not the Scripture as it is barely Ink and Paper,
but as containing a System of Doctrines necessary to be believed and practiced
for our Salvation, which they profanely call a dead Letter, which is yet that
very salutary Letter the Spirit himself has written to his Church: Besides,
how can we, or the Devil himself, draw any Doctrines Reasons or Uses at all,
from Paper and Ink abstractly considered, as G. says, but from some doctrinal
Propositions contained under those Letters; and so there will be no such need
to conjure to raise a living thing out of a living, viz. the Word of Life, or a
spiritual Doctrine from the Spirit's Letter: yet thus all the Ministers of the
Gospel, from Christ's time to this day, are villainously traduced by the yea
and nay Men, as a company of Magicians and Sorcerers that work by the Black
Art, that preach out of the Scriptures as out of a conjuring Book; and no doubt
those Wretches would not be much concerned to see them burnt with the rest of
those Acts 19. 19.
Books of Sorcery, thereby to spoil the Priests trade of conjuring by them.

Here again G. upbraids us of partiality, for leaving out some passages of Fox,
P. 20. l. 29.
wherein he distinguishes between the Letter and the Light, the Letter and the
Spirit; while, by his good leave, the Letter containing such Doctrines as
abovesaid, is the Light as David says, the Spirit's Epistle to us, containing
lively Directions in our way to Heaven, the lively Oracles of God, which are
quick and powerful, and therefore there needs no conjuring to raise Spiritual
matter out of them.

As for what he adds, ibid. Mic. 3. 11. that the Prophet prophesys against such
Priests that preach for hire, we cannot imagine how it comes to be fetched in
here, unless it be a device to start another Subject before us about Tithes, on
purpose to divert us and draw us off from the pursuit of their Blasphemy: only,
by the way, we say our Tithes are no Hire; neither did we ever hear that it was
accounted Wages what was paid to a Man out of his own, of that which was due
Debt before.

P. 9. l. 31.
Brief Discovery quotes Truth's P. 101.
defense, saying, It Is dangerous to read the Scriptures, which the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles spoke forth freely. G. Whitehead clamours hideously,
the Qotation is abused; for he says the P. 21. l. 6.
words are these: It Is dangerous to read, and to make a trade of that which the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles spoke forth freely, and to give meanings to
it contrary than it is. We have not now the Book by us, and therefore are
forced to yield him his Quotation; neither do we see any great hurt it will do
us as he has stated it; for he makes three different Sentences of it, joined
together by two Conjunction Copulatives, it is dangerous to read them, and to
make a trade of them, and to give contrary meanings to them: so that with him
every one of these is dangerous, both to read them, to make a trade of them,
and to pervert the sense of them, which is Blasphemy. Nay further, we say it is
a profane Slander upon the Scriptures, to affirm that they are dangerous to be
read by any, tho they wickedly make a trade of them, or pervert their Meaning;
it is only that wicked Merchandise and Perversion that is so dangerous: nay, to
say it is dangerous for Men to read the Scriptures, that read them with a design
to pervert and scoff at them; such a design is dangerous, but not their
reading, the reading the Scriptures being a good means to bring them into
better Temper and Sobriety. 'Twas happy for St. Austin that he heard that
Sermon of St. Ambrose, tho it is said he went with a purpose to flout and jeer
at him: and the Officers had no reason to repent them John 7. 45, 46.
of their coming to Christ, though they came with a purpose to take him
Prisoner, who were so happily taken by him; they could not, for never man spoke
like him. So then this must still go for a Blasphemy against the Scriptures,
that Ibid. l. 16.
it is dangerous to read them, as it is to make a trade of them and pervert them:
As for what he says, It Is dangerous for any to read them for an unlawful end,
we say it is not the reading them is dangerous, but the propounding an unlawful
end is dangerous; such a man that has such ends, may safely read them, though
he may not safely read them with such ends. Come, come, G. never stand mincing
of this gob, 'twill go down well enough with other Friends. Isaac Pennington
very ingenuously tells us, That Knowledge gained by the Letter of the Scripture
makes a Man wise and able in his Head to oppose Truth, and brings him into a
state of Condemnation, Wrath, and Misery beyond the Heathen, and makes him
harder to be wrought upon by the Light than the very Invalid. of Faldo's
Vindie. p. 124.
Heathen. This Citation of Faldo, Will Penn quotes and owns. Well said Isaac,
thou say the Knowledge gained by the Letter makes us worse than Heathens, and
it must be very dangerous sure to read such a Letter that will make us all turn
Heathens or worse; perhaps to Will. Penn this seems to be no fault to His
Address to Protestants, p. 118, 119.
make us Heathens, since with him to be an Heathen and a Christian is (...)
one: He says every meek and patient Man is a Christian; he argues largely for
Heathens to be Christians.

Thomas Elwood justifys this, That moral Heathens are very good Christians, See
his Answ. to Keith' s Narrat. p. 75.
and pleads for his Master Penn at large: so that a Man may learn the
Principles of Christianity out of a Seneca, or a Socrates, as well as out of a
Bible. Well, whatever Whitehead may think, if Isaac says true, that the reading
the Scriptures will bring us into an Estate of Wrath worse than Heathens, we
cannot but think it sadly dangerous to meddle with them; and if Will. Penn be to
be believed, the Scriptures are at leastwise needless, and it is but a wise
caution to cast them quite out of their Meetings.

P. ^. l. 2^.
Brief Discovery quotes Fox and Hubberthorn Truths Defense, p. 2. and (...) 4.
again, saying, You might as well condemn the Scriptures to the Fire as some of
our Queries; and also giving this Reason, Because our giving forth Papers and
printed Books, is from that same immediate Eternal Spirit of God. G. says it is
a great Evil to condemn the Scriptures to the Fire, or any of their Books given
forth by the Eternal Spirit of God; as without question all those are that are
authorized by their second Day's Meeting, nay, all that they have spoken or
printed, or else they must be Conjurers that have so spoken and printed, if not
from the mouth of the Lord: you may be sure Fox's Great Mist. and Burrows's
Works were so, for they stoutly witness it in the beginning of them. May the
Bible as well be burnt as these? Most impudent Blasphemy! To compare such
Writings full of Ignorance, Blasphemy, Barbarisms, Nonsense, Contradictions,
pouring out such Filth and Nastiness upon God's Ministers, not to be read but
when a Man stands in need of a dose of Physic to make him vomit! Must such
Stuff come in competition with that holy and heavenly System of our Religion
the Scriptures, that are able to make a Man wise unto Salvation? Ah G. may we
as well spare all the Bibles the World as such Writings? This thou cunningly
insinuatest while thou only say, It Is dangerous to burn them both; but
rebukest not in the least that blasphemous comparison, That 'twas as well to
burn the Scriptures as their Writings; but speak as if it were equally
wicked to burn either, which Fox and Hubberthorn have spoke out plainly: yet
sometimes the Bible is the best Book in the World, though now it be no better
than a nonsensical Battledoor, and may as well be burnt. We have known the time
when such a comparison as that would have made their Tongues have hist with an
hot Iron; though we are accounted Persecutors, we rather desire their Tongues
should confess the Blasphemy than so hiss for it.

'Twere an easy matter for us to pretend to immediate Revelations and
Inspirations, such as the Apostles had, as well as they, and we could cry as
loud as they, This is from the Mouth of Lord, a Message from the Great God, and
could prove it too by the same Argument that they prove theirs by; we are sure
of it, and we could cluck and call Shoals of Followers after us among the
credulous Multitude, as well as they: but we dare not be so bold with God, as
to set his Hand and Seal to every Fancy and Dream of our own, and call it
divine Revelation; nor dare we be so treacherous to the Souls of Men, as to
loobel them into a snare by false Lights, or to hold up an Ignis fatuus before
them, which God knows some are apt enough to follow, thereby to lead them into
Pits and Precipices: could they prove their Revelations as convincingly as
Christ and his Apostles did theirs, we should not envy them the comparison.
What multitudes of Miracles were wrought by them before multitudes of
inquisitive and prying Enemies, confessed by the most malicious of you; such as
outdid all the pretended and apelike imitations of the Devil's Instruments.
Moses's Acts 13. 11.
Serpent swallowed up all the Serpents of the Egyptian Sorcerers, and St. Paul
could strike Elimas the Sorcerer himself with Blindness for all the power of
his magical Enchantments.

Good Sir, immediate Revelation, such as Christ's and his Apostles were, is of
greater consequence than to be taken upon trust; do you think we will be put
off with such Miracles, as Fox's Journal boasts of, for the proof of it, such
as were done no body knows where, nor when, having no witnesses to them;
published 20 or 30 years after they were said to be done, or with such Tricks
as Simon Magus is said to have done in his own name, which made some say he was
the power of God, or such as were done by the Jewish Exorcists, In Acts 19. 13.
the name of Christ we adjure thee by Jesus whom Paul worshippeth: Because they
saw St. Paul do so many Miracles by Faith in the name of Christ, they thought
they might do the same by using it as a Spell or Charm.

Fox indeed thought it would add some Authority to his Delusions if he could
commend them to the World with such a Divine Attestation, and therefore
wickedly pretends to it; his Battledoor is filled with all the learned
Languages which he tells you were as nothing, but as Dust to him; and G.
underwrites his name to several Pages, to beget an opinion, that he could speak
with Tongues: some Quakers have told us, they thought verily he had attained to
it; several have traveled to convert the Turk and Pope, presuming upon the
Gift of Tongues, as the Apostles had; and when they came before them could
speak nothing but MotherEnglish, which gave them occasion to admire nothing so
much as their Impudence and Madness: and it was evident at last G. Fox for his
Polyglot Battledoor was more beholding to his Gifts of Gold, than his Gift of
Tongues.

One of them gets an heap of Wood, and lays it in order, and expects Fire from
Heaven, as the Prophet Elijah had obtained at his request; but the poor Man
went away troubled, and almost angry with God Almighty that he would not come
at his call.

Eccles offered to fast a vye with any of us for 7 days and 7 nights: And a
Serious Search p. 58.
Jury found that Parnel had starved himself by attempting to imitate our
Savior's Abstinence: Well, but tho these Miracles had the Misfortune to
miscarry, if they will be thankful, we will help them to two that were Miracles
indeed; one was wrought by G. Fox in his Professors Catechism, And is not (he
P. 13.
says) the Pope the Mother of all your observing days, etc. Here Is a Man
converted Quakers Quib.
into a Woman, and that a Pope too; perhaps you may think this was Pope Joan
that was the Mother of this observing days, etc. no, we can assure you, to
maintain the credit of the Miracle, which the envy of some would overthrow, it
was a Man, and the Name Pope Father signifies as much, else it should have
been, Is not the Popess the Mother of, etc. If this will not pass for a
Miracle, nothing will; you shall have another if you please, reported by Will.
Smith: Those things, says he, calied Baptism, and Bread and Wine, arose from
the Pope's Invention: Here we have a Man inventing and devising before he was
born: for neither Pope nor Popery appeared in the World till 600 years after
the practice of them. We must needs own these to be Miracles, and to carry a
sufficient Evidence and Demonstration with them, but it is of their Ignorance
and Folly.

Indeed Will. Catton in his moderate Inquiry abandons all Pretenses to them,
and Whitehead does the same; says he, They would have a Sign, that Quakers
Plainness, p. 34.
they might believe, but none must be given them but that of Jonah; for they
are an adulterous Generation, that seeks one, saying, show us a Sign, or work
us a Miracle, that we may believe: Profanely abusing that instance of our
Savior, who had wrought Signs and Miracles sufficient for their conviction,
but not to gratify their Curiosity. Our Savior was pleased to work a great
many among the unbelieving Jews, but not a Sign can we get from these new
Revelation men, tho we beg never so hard for it: Methinks they might give an
adulterous Generation one for pity sake, and we will ask no more.

Quakerism a new Nickname, p. 15.
Pen tells us, There is no need of Miracles, because they pretend not to a new
Ministration. But, by his leave, he does to new Revelations. Truth is, they now
begin to be ashamed of their pretenses to them, and to lessen their Authority
as much as may be; to disparage the Grapes, as the Fox in the Fable, because
out of their reach.

P. 153.
Shown speaks as if they had done no good for the conviction of the World; a
gross Untruth, tho it signifies little, if there had not been many convinced by
them, if they have been an apt and a rational way of conviction, as they must
certainly be, when God shall exercise his Almighty Power in working them for
our conviction: Therefore to reject the Gospel after such means of Conviction,
is the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that cannot be forgiven, as appears Mat. 12.
because hereby we reject the best evidence that God Almighty could lay before
us for our conviction.

Shown (ibid.) tells us that Conversion and Regeneration are greater Miracles
than those outward ones wrought by Christ or his Apostles. If this were
granted, yet they are not so proper to convince, because not visible: they can
be no evidence to an Unbeliever, because not seen by him. We are sure the other
Miracles were the Evidence Christ and his Apostles appeal to every where;
neither would the Almighty Power of God have been so often engaged to work so
many Miracles to satisfy the curiosity of Spectators, as Juglers show their
Tricks, but to convince people of the Divine Testimony of those that wrought
them.

Emericus direct. inquisition. p. 2. quest. 15. error 35.
Fox says, they are in the same Power, Understanding and Knowledge the Apostles
were in, and immediate Revelation from Heaven that they were in. There was one
Petrus Johannes, a Franciscan ^riar, got many Followers after him, called
spiritual men, Fratricelli: They all agreed their Doctrine was from God by
immediate Revelation, and that all the Writings of that Petrus were revealed to
him. Their Doctrines are there reduced to these 4 Heads:

1. Evangelical Poverty. They were not to pamper with delicate Diet, or spruce
up themselves in gay fantastic Habits, no Lace, nor Points, nor Ribbons; they
were to be all leathern men.

2. The Doctrine of Perfection. They had no failings neither.

3. The unlawfulness of Swearing. It seems nothing but yea and nay would down
with them.

4. Opposition to the carnal Church. Would not any one believe a Metempsuchosis
here, and that the Soul of Petrus Johannes was entered into Fox, and we were
Quakers now after the Order of St. Francis? But come let us ask these
Revelation-men a Question: Can they show me any reason why we should believe
them so extraordinarily inspired as Christ and his Apostles, any more than
Munster, John of Leyden, or Muggleton? Either I must believe every one that
pretends to it, or I must have some reason why I should believe one rather than
another. We would fain know what other rational proof they can bring of a
Divine Revelation, than Miracles? Can we imagine that a Wise and Righteous God
should call immediately, and send persons into the World, for nothing but to be
laughed at, giving them no Gifts nor Signs, whereby they may be distinguished
from other folk, and certainly known to be so called and commissioned, that men
might obey them? We would fain know what other Signs Maimon. de fundam. legis,
c. 7.. 11.
are there that may convince a rational person, but Miracles? It was a Maxim
amongst the Rabbis, that whenever God sent a Prophet to a People, he gave him
a Sign or a Wonder, that the People might know God had truly sent him; and
therefore the Jews would not be satisfied without a Sign from Acts 2. 22.
Christ: And St. Peter calls to the men of Israel, Hear these words, says he; I
preach no other Jesus to you, than him that is approved of God by Miracles, and
Wonders, and Signs done in the midst of you, as your selves know. And our Lord
himself is pleased to make his appeal to them, John 10. 25. The Works that ^do
in my Father's name bear witness of me. V. 37, 38. If I do not the Works of my
Father, believe me not; but if I do, tho you believe not me, believe my Works.
And John 15. 24. If I had not done the Works that no man did, they had not had
Sin: And if it had not been a Sin not to have believed the Son of God himself
without a Miracle, sure it would not be a very great one, if we should reject
the testimony of Cobbler Fox without one.

Brief Discovery, p. 10. quotes Buroughs, p. 47. saying, That Is no command
from God to me, what he commands to another; neither did any of the Saints
which we read of in Scripture, act by a Command which was to another, not
having a Command to themselves. Smith speaks plainly, (...) p. (...)
The Scriptures have no authority of themselves to oblige us. No, Will? We hope
George Fox's Commands have authority of themselves to oblige, especially those
weighty Commands about slit Peaks, short black Aprons, Vizard-masks,
^^immindish Hats, to thee and thou Men and Women, tho St. Paul's have none. How
useless does that render the Scriptures to us! for if we have a Command in our
selves from the same Spirit that gave them forth, that inward Command will be
sufficient to oblige us, if there were no other in the Scripture; so that that
were altogether ne^dless. But that is not all; for Buroughs P. 105.
tells us, They that take up a Command from the Scriptures, are in the
Witchcraft. Good Mr. Buroughs! would thou take such an answer from any of
thy Servants, that God it seems must be forced to take from you, should you
command them to do a lawful thing? No, Sir, we thank you; till we have a
Command in our selves, thy Command is of no authority to oblige us at all. But
thou would take it much worse sure, if they should say, thou were a Wizard,
or in the Witchcraft, if they should obey thee. Or would Quakers take such an
answer from their People, when they have been speaking to them from the mouth
of the Lord? And yet that lewd Wretch is so bold and impudent, as to tell us,
that when God Almighty commands his Servants, they are no less than Witches and
Devils, and have familiar conversation with that Fiend, that take up a Command
from his Scriptures.

P* 5.
Fox jun. says, You took it from the Letter, and never received a Command from
God for it: As if the Command he received from the Letter had not been from
God. A Command it seems it was, but not from God. We wonder then from whom it
was; it was not sure from the Devil, as Buroughs intimated just now, when he
said, He that takes up a command from the Spirit, is in the Witchcraft.

Whitehead speaks of Pen to the same purpose, saving, No command in P. 22. l.
21.
Scripture is any further obliging to any man, than he finds a Conviction upon
his Conscience, otherwise men should be engaged without or against Conviction.
And again be says against Faldo, The reason of our obeying the Scripture P. ^.
is Conviction, Manifestation, and drawing of the Light. So that of themselves
they have no more authority than an AEsop's Fables* all the authority they have
is from those Convictions and Drawings of the Light within: and no man sins in
not obeying Scripture Commands, till he is convinced he is bound to obey them; so
that their Power to oblige us does not arise from the Authority of God that
gave them forth, but from our Convictions, that is, they have none till we
think they have. Sure Mr. Pen forgot himself; for elsewhere he tells us, It Is a
dangerous Principle, and pernicious to true Religion; nay, Brief Exam. P. 3.
printed 1681. see Brief Discovery, P. 14.
that it was the root of Ranterism, to assert nothing was a Duty, but what we
were persuaded was our Duty. We see great Wits have but bad Memories. We shall
next prove that the Scriptures have authority over us, without such a Command,
Conviction, Manifestation within us. Thus,

If there be a sort of men that have sinned grievously in not having obeyed the
Precepts of the Gospel, which never had these new Revelations, Manifestations
or Convictions, then those Revelations, Manifestations, and Convictions, are
not the reasons of Obedience; but there have been, and yet are, many such:
Ergo. The Minor thus:

St. Paul before Conversion, the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, sinned
gri^vously in not obeying the Precepts of the Gospel, tho they had no such
Revelations, Manifestations, and Convictions: Ergo.

1. The Scribes and Pharisees sinned, it is evident; how many Woes are denounced
against them for their Unbelief? And that St. Paul sinned, it is as evident: how
many bloody Crimes is he charged with? He breathed out Threatenings Acts 9. 1, 4.
and Slaughter against the Church; and says Christ, Saul, said, why persecutest
thou me? See how he charges himself; I was a Blasphemer, Persec^^^, 1 Timothy 1.
13, 14.
injurious.

2. That they had no such Revelations, Manifestations, or Convictions, is as
evident That the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees knew not it was their Duty to
embrace that new Discipline, our Savior says, That they did it ignorantly:
nay, they had, Luke 23. 34.
as they thought, Manifestations, etc. to the contrary; for in all their
oppositions to Christ and his Gospel. they thought they did God service. The
same may be said of St. Paul, he knew nothing of the Power of the Lord Christ,
till he was informed by a Vision: Says Paul, Who art thou, Lord? and he
answered, Acts 9. ^.
I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. He also pleads for himself; Because I did 1 Timothy 1. 1^.
it ignorantly.

As for the two nameless Scriptures G. W. mentions; which he says we had left
out, the first is an exhortation not to do those things whereof they were
ashamed: The Scripture he means, we suppose, is Romans 6. 21. What fruit had you
of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? This is brought to prove, no
Command in Scripture is obligatory any further than I have a conviction, etc.
'Twas fit we should tell the Reader this, or else he could never have thought
so. G. we cannot but wonder what fruit thou hopest to gather from this
Scripture, but Shame, who would fain prove such a Doctrine from it, which is
every whit as apt to prove the contrary: and yet thou art not at all ashamed of
such an abuse of those holy Writings. The second nameless Scripture, we suppose
is Romans 1. 19. which speaks nothing at all to the case of Conviction, but seems
rather to countenance the sufficiency of the Light within without the
Scripture, which some of thy Brethren have brought it for. The words are, That
which may be known of God, is manifested within. But what, is there nothing
needful to be known of Jesus Christ without? what he has done and suffered,
and taught us for our Salvation? No, Truth defending Quakers, p. 65.
George, when Wad^ says our Savior instructs to abide in such a Faith, which
confideth in himself without us, thou tellest him plainly, That was false
Doctrine, that is, thou meanest, since we have a Christ within.

Whitehead, p. 22. l. 4. complains of our Partiality: He tells us, It Is evident
that E. Buroughs means special Commands, as to baptize, preach, and Reason
against Railing, p. 102.
pray. The same W. Pen says. But, G. Edward Burroughs's Proposition was
universal, no Commands, etc. But the Quaker Commentary is quite spoiled, if you
will not allow them a liberty to interpret Universals by Particulars, Negatives
by Affirmatives; by no Commands he must mean some.

P. 22. l. 15.
He tells us again, There are universal moral Commands and Prohibitions, which
are universally binding to Mankind, but chiefly from inward Light and
Conviction. Which is very false: Had Man stood in Innocence, his own Reason
unobscured (which is Light) might have been sufficient to have instructed him
in the practice of Justice and Honesty, etc. but alas, now there is a Thief in
our Candle, a thick Mist about our Understanding, that clouds it so, as that we
are ready without other helps, to take the most brutish Immoralities to be
laudable Virtues, as in those unscriptural Countries of Africa and America.
Therefore Almighty God in his Love to Mankind, the first Edition of his Laws
being so blotted and effaced, is pleased to set forth a new one more correct in
the Holy Scriptures, wherein we read them in a clearer and fairer character
than in that old blur'd and blotted Book of Nature: and therefore the
Scriptures being a clearer discovery of the Mind of God, may oblige us sure as
well as that inward Light, that is so dark and dim, and somewhat more; and yet
tho now our inward Light be so weak and glimmering, we have Light enough left
us to discover, that this Scripture Revelation is from God, and to enable us to
understand the sense of it in things that are necessary; and if we have not
that special Revelation, whereby we are enabled to believe and love the
Doctrine of it, and conform to it, yet we are bound to believe, etc. because
it is our fault if we have not that special Light: for God will never be wanting
with his special Grace to those that use that common Light as well as they are
able; and if men do what they can do by their common Light, God will certainly
help them with his special Grace to do what they cannot do without it.

P. 22. l. 6.
Whitehead says again, They that go to prayer or preaching in their own wills
and time, or perform any other Acts of Worship or Devotion toward God, without
the moving of the Spirit of God, it is Will Worship, and not accepted. But,
George, we had thought a Christian could never have gone to Prayer, etc. but he
must be moved by the Spirit, it being the Spirit's Command to pray always; or
if thou meanest some inward Motion, we have met with none that went to Prayer,
that did not find some inward motion and disposition to it: If thou meanest yet
a more special Impulse of the Spirit, and that (the Spirit being a Wind that
blows when and where it lists) we are not to adventure rashly upon that
Duty before we feel those powerful Gales upon the Soul, which we must wait for
as the Seaman for his Wind; why may not a man pray that he may have such
assistances?

But, George, how often do you preach and pray too in your own will and time,
not at all waiting for the spiritual Blasts? you seem to have a power to
command that Wind to be at your beck and lure, and can appoint time and place
for it. Good people are told they shall have a precious Exhortation, and a
devout Prayer at -- Life and Spirit at such a time and place. One thing we
wonder at, that you can never make this Wind blow into your Houses, where you
have not a Prayer for a month or a year together: As Dan. Leeds informs us (who
was a Quaker twenty years) in his Preface to the Trumpet sounded out of the
Wilderness of America, p. 2. That he remembers well his Mother being a
religious Woman, used often to take him aside to pray with her upon his knees;
but as soon as she turned Quaker, he heard no more of that kind of exercise.
And your great Prophet Sol. Eccles, says in his Music Lecture, p. 25. Where
they are ( viz. the Professors) I was in Performances, in Family Duties, in
Hearing, in Reading, in Fasting; but when I came to bend my mind to that of God
in me, then I began to be a Fool, insomuch as I durst not give thanks for the
Victuals that was set before me. What thou say concerning Sacrifices and
Oblations, we say that neither Prayer now is, P. 22. l. 10.
nor offering Sacrifices of old was Will Worship; and God did not blame that
People because they performed those Services, but because they relied upon and
trusted to them as the only Duty required of them for Salvation.

To these Quotations give us leave to add another, which is worth them all for
Spondani Annals. A. D. 1204. n. 17.
its Antiquity; it is of one Almericus, Student at Paris, as great an Enthusiast
as themselves: He cries out, Now was the time of the Holy Ghost, in which the
use of Sacraments was to cease, and all external Administrations; and every one
was to be saved by the Inspiration and inward Grace of the Holy Ghost.

The Mendicant Friars defended this Doctrine, and Pope Alexander the 4 th Mat.
Paris Hist. 909.
was their Protector: So that you see these Doctrines of Quakers are but the
Sink and Drainings of Popery. We care not if we add another out of the
Spiritual Exercise of the Jesuits: It Is the great perfection of a Christian P.
31, 32. printed, 74.
to keep himself indifferent to do what God shall reveal to him, and not to
determine himself to do what he has already revealed and tanght in the Gospel.
No, Fox, thou art not the Father of the Quakers, as some have Stillingfleet' s
Fanaticism, etc. p. 341.
thought; but Almericus, and the Jesuits, and Papists, have only put out that
Brat to thee to nurse it for them, and we own it has battled prodigiously at
thy Breasts, and grown to be a very formidable Monster.

CHAP. VII.
Of the RVLE of FAITH.
BRief Discovery quotes Parnel, p. 16. line 33. Shield of Truth, p. 11. saying,
He that says the Letter is the Rule and Guide of the People of God, is
without, feeding upon the Husks, and is ignorant of the true P. 515.
Light. Buroughs is also quoted, saying, The Scriptures are not the Rule and
Guide of Faith and Life, but the Spirit of God: This is the current Doctrine of
the Quakers, you may see it in Parnel's P. 71.
Collect. Smith's Primmer. P. 10. Light and Life, 17.
Fisher speaks plain English, and tells us, Scripture is not the Voice of God;
tho the very Dribbles of a Quaker are from the Mouth of the Lord. The same says
Howgil. 68, 7^, 251.
Pen, Reason against Railing, p. 32. yea all of them, Not the Scriptures, but
the Light within is our Rule of Faith and Life.

Fisher' s Messages of the Lord, p. 19, 21.
By the way observe how this symphonizes with your Testimony before the House
of Commons; the form of your Confession there was this, I believe with my
Heart, and confess with my Mouth, that the Scriptures are a divine and History
of Quakerisin, p. 53.
exact Rule of Faith and Life; yet you must know the Quakers are always the
same, and sweetly agree with one another, as their Brethren the Papists do, tho
they have never so many Opinions, and differ as much from one another as Lines
in the Circumference, yet you must believe they are all one for all that,
because they meet in the same Center of Unity the Pope. So the Quakers, let
them differ never so much, yet in spite of Sense and Reason, there is nothing
but Harmony and Unity amongst them, because they all follow the same unerring
Light, tho it lead them into never so many contradictions.

We would fain know whether their Light within be their Rule, when they call us
Sorcerers, Devils, Gimcracks, Wheelbarrows, Tatterdemallions. Whitehead says,
The Scripture allows these Names, p. 68. l. 26. Thus far then sure you will
allow the Scripture to be a practical Rule to guide and countenance you in the
Work of railing and reviling, for the great Honor and Respect you give them,
you keep them to do your dirtiest Drudgery, to authorize you in your
Billinsgate Rhetoric. But because this Principle is so generally held by
Quakers, that the Light within is the Rule, and not the Scriptures, and of so
vast an Importance, we shall enlarge a little the more upon it: but first we
shall lay down some preliminary Propositions.

1. We do not say the Scriptures are a Rule to us as written, tho they are so
when they are written.

2. We do not suppose that the Revelation of the Mind of God in Scripture is a
general Rule to Chr^stians, Jews, and all our Forefathers from Adam, before the
Mind of God was committed to writing.

3. We positively assert, that neither God, nor Christ, but the Mind of God
revealed to Mankind, either written or unwritten, is a general Rule. The
unwritten Revelations, before the Scriptures were put into writing, and the
written ever since: And further we say, That revelation of the Mind of God,
conveyed to us by writing in all things necessary to Salvation, is the only
complete and general Rule to us to whom it is so conveyed, for our Faith and
Practice, and not God, nor Christ, essentially or substantially considered, nor
any immediate Revelation; not that we deny all immediate Revelation in these
last days, but we say God does not ordinarily bestow it, and that because he
has taken care in his Providence, that in this last Age there shall be no need
of it, having provided the Scriptures as a Supplement of that want; neither if
there should be such immediate Revelations to a Person now as formerly to the
Apos^les, yet carrying not the same Evidence to us, to oblige us in our Faith
and Practice, as the Apostles Revelations did, they can be no Rule to us; they
that have them, and have good assurance they have so on God's Name, let them
believe and obey them if they please.

1 st. We prove the Light within can be no Rule to us:

1. Because it teaches not all things necessary to our Salvation: the Light
within could never have instructed us about the Fall of Man, or our recovery by
Jesus Christ; how then could it have been the Rule of our Faith as to these
Particulars? Sure you dare not deny but these are necessary to be believed. We
had had a deep silence of this thing to this day, had we not had tidings of
them in our Scriptures, or some other Revelations of them; we could never have
known there had been a Spirit of Christ, or a Scripture, as they call it, for
they dare not call it Trinity, as if there were some Magic in that Latin word,
but from the Scriptures: And if the Light within be the same with Christ, and
the Spirit of Christ, as Quakers say, I must believe first that there is such a
Light, such a Christ, and such a Spirit of Christ (which I cannot do but by the
Scriptures) before I can believe any thing upon their Authority, unless I must
believe a Doctrine upon the Authority of a Rule, of whose Being and Existence I
have no Evidence sufficient to induce me to believe it; so that the Scriptures
only can be the Rule of such a Faith. The Truth is, the Light within is not the
Rule, but the rational Sight, or Eye rather whereby we discern our Rule, advise
and consult with it: How ridiculous would it be to say, Christ, or the Spirit
of Christ, is our Rule (who is our Rule) tho his Laws are so? he is our Judge,
and Guide, rather than our Rule, and he judges and guides us by the Rule and
Laws of the Holy Scriptures.

2. Because we are yet at uncertainties where to find that Rule, that we may be
guided by it; if the Light within be a guide to us, we would be glad to know
whose Light it is that has the honor, whether that Light in Whitehead, or
Pen, or Buroughs, or Hubberthorn, for without our Compass how can we steer a
right Course? and therefore we entreat you to tell us, whether we are to go to
London, York, Bristol, or Rome, for our Christians Rule.

If they say the Spirit it self is our Rule, it is no more than to say, the
Light within us, or the Light the Spirit of God ^heds into our Hearts, is so;
for the Spirit, substantially considered, is no Rule to any; for so it guides
and teaches none, but as it effects and sheds abroad a Light into our minds to
guide and direct us by (as is proved before) which Light being different in
every one of us, for, as they phrase it, it is in every one of us according to
our different incasures; so that we cannot have one and the same Rule of
Christianity common to all, but as many Rules as there have been or will be Men
in the World to the World's end; which was an inconvenience God Almighty
thought fit to obviate in the beginning by sending our first Forefathers a
Revelation concerning the Seed of the Woman, the Sabbath, Sacrifices, and other
Doctrines of Faith and Means of Worship, a settled standing Rule they were to
walk by; he did not leave every own to his own Light to hammer out and invent a
Rule for himself: and now in these last Ages God has given by a particular
Revelation of his Mind, tho conveyed to us in ten thousand Bibles: any one that
pleases may know where to find our Rule, it is in our Bibles; and if we had a
mind to it, we could tell where to search for the Popish Rule, in the Tomes of
their Councils; but we think it not worth our pains: but where to find the
Quakers Rule, we should be beholding to him that will inform us.

Again, how shall I know which are those Dictates of the Spirit of God, that I
may not be deceived in the choice of my Rule, seeing I have no Rule to judgthem
by. Will not every Fancy, and strong Inclination of Man, vicious or virtuous,
be ready to put in a Plea, for that honor to be accounted his Rule? One Man
has an unsatiable thirst after the glittering Glorys and Honors of this
World, why may he not pretend to that Spirit of God that moves him to climb
that Precipice? Another has a brutal lustful Inclination, why may be not
pretend he has a vehement impulse of the Spirit upon him to commit Fornication
and Adultery, as a Speaker in Maryland, Tho. Thurston, pretended P. 138.
to a Woman when her Husband was absent in England? See Bugg's Pilgrim. Mather'
s Answer to the Switch, p. 4. G. Fox' s Great Mist ^. 77. ult.
Another that has a violent inclination to Sodomy, as Mather relates of Clark
a Quaker Speaker; why may he not pretend 'twas a motion of the Spirit of God
lead him to it for love of the Creature? Another, whose fingers itched to be
robbing a Till, or a Church, why might he not pretend, as one did, he was moved
to it by God*s Spirit, having no Rule to judge by but the Spirit in every Man?
and you may be sure that no Man's Spirit will bring in its Verdict against it
selt.

If they say the several individual Lights in the several members of their
yearly meetings (that make up our great Luminary collectively) is their Rule,
what must poor Quakers do all the interval of this meeting, being all that
while without a Rule, without Light (for it seems the Light in particular
Defense of the Snake. Collect. p. 15. Numb. the first.
Quakers is too weak and glimmering) sufficient to guide them in their course?
which was the reason, when some hard Questions were propounded to the
Pensylvani in Quakers the other day, their Light being so dim that they could
not answer them by it, they were sam to send to London for more Light to
resolve them by.

We hope they will not say it is their inward Light in specie, as abstracted
from the several individual Quaker Lights, is to be our Rule to guide us. We
say a Species operates nothing, as it does not exist, but in Individuals: it
was not homo in specie that begot Geo. Whitehead, or Will. Pen, but some
unhappy individual Man, to be a Plague and Pest (God permitting) to our common
Christianity.

3. Because this Rule is uncertain, and mutable. A Rule ought to be fixed and
steady: as we ought to have a rational Evidence that it was constituted so to
us by a sufficient Authority (which their Light within has not) so a Rule
ought to be a certain standard to measure by, that never alters, as is the
Scripture, the same for 1600 years together: but their Light within, how often
has it turned even to every Point of the Compass?

Some years since their Light within taught them, that the Scriptures were
Dust, Death, Serpents meat; but now it seems it teaches them that they are
given by inspiration, and they are the Holy and Sacred Scriptures: A few years
since it told them their own Writings were to be preferred before them, but now
we know not what Wind has turned the Cock, they are the best Books in the
World.

Sometimes it has strictly forbidden to go to Law, An Account from the Child
of Light, p. 19.
Now as for our selves (say they) so many as walk in Christ Jesus, we have one
Judge and Lawgiver appointed to us by Christ Jesus; and we may not go to law
with one another as Men, being come to Christ. But in Serious Search P. 43.
it gives them a liberty; it says, some of them are necessitated to make use of
the Law to maintain their just Rights and Properties. It was never christ's
Faith to sue and contend, says Naylor, Living Faith, p. 7. We sue no Man at the
Law, but are sued by them, Shield of the Truth, p. 3. But Tho Elwood's Light
within taught him otherwise; In civil Cases it is no injustice, says he, for a
Man to recover his Due by Law, Truth prevailing, and detecting Error, p. 361.
see Christianity no Enthusiasm, p. 108. cap. 7.

Sometimes their Rule is against fighting with a carnal Weapon, as in their
Declaration to King Charles the Second; but we have reason to think their Rule
will direct them to other things as soon as they have opportunity. J. Pennyman
in his Remarks upon Christ's Lambs defended, p. 1. cites a Quaker Minister
saying, We direct all Peopel to the Spirit of God in them; and if that leads
them to fight, I have nothing to say against it: this is in a Quakers Book
where Foreign Letters are recorded, p. 4. Whitehead in his Lambs Defended owns
it, p. 34, 35, 36, 37. see the Remarks p. 4. Burrows in a Declaration in the
Name of all the Quakers, Printed 59.
says, he might command 1000 and 10000 of his Saints in that day, to fight in
his Cause, as the Pensilvanian Quakers did for their Sloop; but P. 8.
then it was as Magistrates, not as Quakers. Wars belonged to the Jewish
Administration, See Leeds, p. 145.
which had its End, says Geo. Bishop in his Looking-glass, p. 203. Quakers deny
that it is lawful for Christians to fight and kill one another in fighting.
Barclay in Q. no Popery, p. 100. But others of them have both allowed and
followed Wars; and John Tompson, owned by others as a Quaker, was Master of a
Ship, fought stoutly, and killed many of the Dutch; Tyranny and Hypocrisy
Detected, p. 22. see Christianity no Enthusiasm, Cap. 7. p. 108.

The Spirit in Quaker Plainness, p. 23, 24. tells them, the Distinction between
the Father and the So^ is not only nominal, but real. The Spirit in G. Fox
tells us another story, that Christ is not distinct from the Father. Gr. Mist.
142. Quaker Plainness, p. 24.


The Spirit in Whitehead teaches him, that God the Father, and God the Son were
Coworkers. But in his Light and Life, p. 47. we see the Light face about again,
What nonsense (says it there) is it to tell of God being Cocreator with the
Father?

In Quaker Plainness, the Light tells us, p. 24. the title of Person without
us, is too low to give to Christ; but their Spirit in Pen's Sandy Foundation,
p. 15. changes its note, saying, the Son for many hundred of years in person
testified. Thus the Spirit teaches one thing to day, and another thing
tomorrow, and if it chance to hit upon it, the same as at the first again.

John Swinton, as we are told ( Tyran. and Hypocr. detected, p. 39 -- 42. and,
Spirit of the Hat, p. 35) wrote a Paper in the express Motion of God, who
justified him in every tittle of it; and yet after this about four or five
years, he retracted and denied the Spirit in which 'twas wrote, saving, 'Twas
sit for the fire, and was done in an hour of temptation and weakness; the
account is large and deserves reading, says the learned Author of Christianity
^o Ent^^^. p. 112.

Sure the Christian must do his business very ill* that goes by such a waxen
leaden Rule that bends every way, and sits it self either to strait or crooked,
as you please; things are true or false, just or unjust by that Rule, according
as fancy or interest sways it; it has authorized Tyrannies, and changes of
Tyrannies, to be all from God Almighty; and when they obtained it, fawned upon,
and flattered them as much as lawful Governments of late, which before it had
condemned as Antichristian, as one observes.

4. The Light within cannot assure us of this Fundamental Principal of the
Quakers, that the Light within is to be our Rule, a general Rule to all of us,
as Pen asserts, because that Light tells none so but Quakers: besides, that is
to bear witness to it self, and resolves it self into this Argument, It is so
because we are sure it is so: which is the ground that every Man has for his
Error; for every one that holds it thinks he is sure of the Truth of it, his
Inward Light tells him so. Judgment fixed, p. 268.
G. Whitehead commends Ben. Furly's Letter of Retractation, where he says, That
Actions of Men are sometimes influenced by good and evil Spirits, tho they
perceive it not: So then they may casily think all Actions are influenced from
the good Spirit, having no certain measure to try the Spirits by; and neither
Pen nor Whitchead can tell (for want of such a Standard) any more than Furly,
when they are acted by a good Spirit, and when by a bad.

5. To conclude, If the Light be our Rule, we hope no Quaker will think amiss
of us for what we have wrote against them, for every Man has the Light within
him, and must act according to it, which we seriously declare we have here
done; and if you should say what we have wrote is false and erroneous, How
could we help it? It seems our Light ought to be our Rule to square our Actions
by, which (God knows) we have done exactly.

2 ly. We shall prove the Affirmative against Quakers and Papists, that the
Scriptures are such a Rule as we spoke of before, tho this Truth be
sufficiently vindicated by our Divines against the Romanists, and lately by G.
Keith in his Deism of W. Pen; yet we shall, ex abundanti, cast our Reason into
the Balance.

1. Then if matters contained in the Scriptures be such a Declaration of the
Mind of God, that whosoever believes and practices neither more nor less as
necessary to Salvation, shall be saved, then they are a Rule of Faith and Life
to them to whom they are given; but they are so: Ergo. Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of
the Lord is perfect; viz. Such a Declaration as thus bounds us on both sides,
or it could not be perfect if it did not bound us thus, viz. give Salvation to
him that believes all things it makes necessary, and nothing more as so:
Without doubt the Scripture is such a Rule; according to their agreement or
disagreement to it, all things are right or wrong in Spirituals; for if a Man
deviate from it in any thing it makes necessary, he is wrong and perishes; and
if he touches it, and squares with it in all such Points, he is right, and shall
be saved; hence 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration from
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction and Instruction; that
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished, etc. Howghil denis the word
( is) to be in the Text, he tells us it is an addition of the Translator, and it
should be thus, All Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable, etc.

No Atheist or Papist could be more industrious to find out every little
Criticism, that they think may weaken the Authority of the Scripture, as if
there were some Scriptures that were not of Divine Inspiration, speak out Man:
Are there any such Scriptures, yea or nay? and tell us which they are, and
rescue our Faith from its bondage to such an Impostor.

Thou Wretch, to go about to take away the Bread of Life from us, that Divine
Nourishment of our Souls, and think to feed us with thy whipped Bubbles, We could
better spare the Sun than this Candle of the Lord, and have nothing left to
guide us but the Quakers Snuff, or a few Sparks from their Forge; know then,
tho (...) be not expressed in the Text, yet the Conjunction (...) is there, tho
thou have made so bold as to leave it out to make the better sense of thy
Blasphemy: should thou have put in that Conjunction, what nonsense would it
have been; it would have been thus, all Scripture given by Inspiration, and is
profitable; the copula and, methinks should couple like Sentences; and the
former part of the Text cannot be a sentence without a Verb: and if it must be
like Sentences, the Verb in the former part must be is as in the latter; and so
it runs as we well translate it, is by Divine Inspiration, and is profitable:
rather than the Scripture should be a perfect Rule, Howgil would make it
perfect nonsense.

2. The Scripture must be our Rule, for we are to try all things by it, and
hold fast that which we find straight and right: nay by that we are to try the
Quakers Rule it self, 1 John 4. 1. we are to try the Spirits; What, must we try
the Spirit by the Spirit? it is evident we are to bring it to some Rule or
Balance, to find out its just weight and rectitude, for there are many Spirits
that walk now about, and haunt our stuary ground, the Spirit of Muggleton, Fox,
and Naylor; and there is one Spirit to be sure that challenges it as its right
to possess it and dwell there: and by what rule shall we determine the
Controversy but by Scripture? there is none of these Pretenders can challenge
any greater Authority over our Faith than others, only the Scriptures, which
are the Letters missive and circulatory of the Spirit of God to his Church,
have such a right, which have their Authority confirmed by such a Seal as
cannot be counterfeited by Men or Devils, and therefore may oblige us to
believe them, and that Spirit which agrees with their testimony.

It Is utterly false what Smith says, That the Spirit was the rule to them that
Primmer, p. 10.
gave forth the Scriptures. We say not the Spirit it self, but the dictates of
the Spirit, which were as much a rule to them when written, as when spoken to
them.

This does not exclude the Spirit from having any thing to do to direct us what
to believe and how to live; for the Scriptures are the Spirits Rule, given to
guide us by: Besides, the Spirit of God opens our Eyes (too much closed up
since the fall) so that we may the better perceive and believe the things
contained in the Scripture, and stir up our affections to embrace them: observe
the Rule our Savior sends us to, Mat. 21. 42. Did you never read in the
Scriptures? Ver. 22, 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. Acts 8. 35. He
began at the same Scripture, and preached unto them Jesus. Acts 17. 2, 11. Paul
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures. Acts 2. what a long Sermon St. Peter
preaches there, from the 14 th almost to the end, all out of the Scripture.
Luke 24. 17. as also 32. he opened to them the Scriptures, Moses and the
Prophets were the Text he preached on. Ver. 46. he carries their attention to
what was written. Joh. 7. 38. He that believes on me (not as the Light) but as
the Scripture says. John 19. 37. another Scripture says, all along they are
sent to the Light without them, to see what the Scripture says. John 20. 9.
their want of Faith in Christ's Resurrection is attributed to their ignorance
of the Scriptures; strange, the Light could not have informed them. Philip
corrects not the Eunuch for poring upon, and scraping in the Scriptures, as
Fisher does in his Velata Revelata, p. 845. Such Men, says he, as the Scribes,
are ever scraping in the Scriptures, neither does he call them to mind the
Light within: Away with this dead Letter, this Dust will choke you, this
Serpents Meat will poison you. Ver. 35. he opened his Mouth, and began at the
same Scripture, and preached Jesus. But when shall we hear a Quaker begin a
Sermon from a Text of Scripture? By the way, you see a Man may preach Jesus
from the Letter, Acts 18. 24. Apollo was mighty in the Scriptures, the
Scripture was the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. by which the mighty Man
and Evangelical Hero hewed down the Enemy before him, they were not able to
stand before the Dint of his Scripture-charge, he mightily convinced them out
of Scripture, ver. 28. Paul in his Dispute about Justification, Romans 4. 3.
cries, What says the Scripture? Romans 11. 2. Wot ye not what the Scripture
says? he brings all his Proofs from the Letter of Scripture, Romans 15. 4. all
our comfort flows from those Wells of Salvation; all written for our Learning,
that we through comfort and patience of the Scriptures might have hope. And
should these envious Philistines be suffered to stop up these Wells? 2 Timothy 3.
15. Paul commends Timothy that from a Child he had been well acquainted with
this Rule; so that he became a Workman that needed not be ashamed. The
Scriptures you see in the Apostles days, as many as were written, were the only
Rule they appealed to. Fox jun. for above 200 Pages has vehement Exhortations
to mind the Light, but not a word of reading the Scriptures in that whole Book;
Esa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this word, they may pretend the Spirit of God, and a Light within if they will,
but they have no light in them, says the Prophet. That such an one as W. Penn
should please himself with such a Gimcrack, as to say in his answer to Faldo,
By the Law and the Testimony are meant God and Christ: seeing then, William, we
are saved by Christ, we are saved by the Law: It Is much Mr. Pool should forget
to grace his Synopsis with this Criticism; if thou had any respect for
Scripture, sure thou would not dally and play with it so wantonly.

We conclude then that the Scriptures are a Rule to them they are given to, and
'twas never denied by any in the Christian part of the World, but Quakers,
besides Atheists, Deists, and Papists, and we envy them not the Honor of such
Company.

Whitehead says, p. 23. l. 7. They don't slight the Scripture; nay, p. 17. l.
4. They acknowledge them to be divine, and prefer them before all other Books in
the World. We do them wrong to lay such an heinous Crime to their charge. Alas
poor Quakers! to be so hardly censured, when they call the Scriptures Dust,
Serpents Meat, killing, and deadly, this is all for the profound Veneration
they have for Scripture.

When they say their own Speakings are of equal Authority, nay to be preferred
before them, nay the Scriptures may as well be burnt as their nonsensical
Scriblings: This is yet for the great respect and honor they bear to the
Scriptures.

When they tell us the Scriptures have no authority of themselves, not so much
as that golden Legend of Father Fox's Journal, unless we have a C^mmand again
from within; that is, they have no authority, unless we think they have: nay
when they say it is Blasphemy to say they are the Word of God, and they are no
rule at all to us: All is for the wonderful deference they have for those
^^^^ed Books.

For shame ^ir, after all the Wounds you have given to the Scriptures, to add
Mockery and Scorn to Stripes; and after you have spit upon them, reviled and
buffeted them, to put the Purple and the Crown upon them, as the Jews did upon
their Author; after such Indignities, to cry out, O how we love and honor
them! after the Treason to bestow the Kiss!

See Will. Penn's Courtship to the Scripture Re^^inder, p. 1^^.
but especially Sam. Fisher's Additional Append. p. 21.
: He calls the Scripture a Nose of Wax, and it is capable of being made no
other, a Character he took from the mouth of a Jesuit, Andradius; but Quakers
we hope like it never the worse for that: We could easily show you that all the
Arguments that Fisher and Pen use to prove the Scriptures are not the rule of
Faith, are the same the Papists have used this 100 years; if they had been 7
years at School at Rome, they could not have spoke Italian plainer than they
have done. A little further Fisher tells us, he and the Quakers have put it to
the question, how it may be known infallibly that the Scripture is all of God,
and not a cunningly devised Fable. He tells us of the uncertainty of
Translations, the various Lections, and the loss of many Portions of them,
which they needed not have taken such pains about, for the Papists have done
that before; and Penn in the forecited place has mustered up a great many more
such Popi^^ Objections against the Scriptures, which were cast in our dish by
Papists, and as often answered before Quakery was born; but all that you must
understand is said for the great respect they bear to the Scriptures.

Reader, if thou desire to see more of such respect to the Scriptures, see
Parnel, p. 16. You Teachers are doting upon Scriptures without, with your dark
Minds, with the blind Pharisees seeking for life where it is not to be found.
P. 18. We can do all things without the Scriptures, or any thing without.

Solomon Eccles coming into a Church at London, naked and besmeared with T --
d, carrying his ^ands fu^l of the same Filth, compared it to the Bible which
the Minister carried in his hand into the Pulpit.

Fisher in his Velara Revelata, p. 845. says, Such Men as the Scribes are ever
scraping in the Scripture, to find God, yet never know him, nor see his Shape.
To call our love to the Scriptures a sensele^s Dotage, to compare David's Honey
and Honeycomb, as he calls the Word, to a stinking Excrement, and our reading
the Scriptures to a Brute's scraping or rooting in a Dunghill, must needs
manifest a mighty respect they have for those Writings. By the way, does not
Fisher deserve to be accounted Angelicus Doctor, for talking of the Shape of
God? how glad would some Papists be if he could show it them, that they might
draw his true Picture by it? Lorreto Market would go near to be spoiled by it,
and most of her Votaries would come thronging hither sure to worship an
Original.

But as a further Testimony of their respect for Scripture, hear what Smith
MorningWatch, p. 22, 23.
says, Reading in the Scripture that there were some that met together,
exhorted one annother, edified and comforted one another, they observe and do
as near as they can what is the Saints practice, and so conceive a Birth in the
same Womb, and bring it forth in the same strength that others do; these are
Bastards and not Sons, for these adulterous Births have provoked the Lord and
g^^^^^ed his Spirit. What an hellish Sm^ak is this, a Belch sure from the
bottomless Pit; to say that our meeting together according to Scripture,
Examples to exhort, comfort, and edisy one another, is no better than going to
a Brothel-house, for there can be nothing but Bastards got by it, and
adulterous Births: This may pass for another Quaker-Panegy rick upon Scripture.

Penn calls Searchers of Scripture (as Faldo quotes him, p. 113. and in his
Answer Penn does not deny it) Lettermongers. We suppose, though he differ in
expression from his Brother Smith, his intention is the same, he means
Whoremongers, or Bastard-getters. All these Quotations have we brought to prove
Friend Whitehead's Assertion, That Quakers have a marveilous Honor for the
Scripture, though we believe he^ll hardly be so grateful as to give us thanks
for our pains.

In a Testimony from the Brethren in London, met 66 together, signed
Farnsworth, Parker, Whitehead (see Brief Discovery, p. 11. l. 5) they say, If
any difference arise in the Church, we declare and testify that the Church with
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, has power without the assent of those
that differ, to hear and determine the same; and if any of ours will not submit
so to be tried, nor submit to the Judgment given by the Spirit of truth in the
Elders and Members of the same, being consistent with the Doctrine of such good
ancient Friends as have been and are found in the Faith, agreeable to the
witness of God in his People, viz. the Light within, then we testify in the
name of the Lord, that he or she is to be rejected and joined with Heathens and
Infidels. Mark we pray, if he or she kick against their Judgment, consistent
with the Doctrine of ancient Friends, and agreeable to the Light within: Here
is no notice taken of the Scriptures, how agreeable or disagreeable soever it
be to them. And p. 23. l. 26. yet Whitehead has the face to say this makes
nothing against them. It seems to be a small fault or none with G. to take away
the Commission God has given to the Scriptures to be Judge of Controversys in
matters of Faith. The Question, G. is not whether the Church has any Power in
matters of Religion, which is all thou provest from Mat. 18. 17. and we know
none deny it.

1. If it be exercised about indifferent matters in Discipline and Worship, we
allow her not only a Judgment of discretion to discern what is fit to be
imposed, but also an authoritative Judgment to oblige her Members to obedience,
or else she would have less Authority over her Members, than every Master has
over the Servants of his Family.

2. As for things that are necessary to Salvation, we think our selves only
obliged to submit our Faith and Practice to the Authority of God in the Holy
Scriptures, and not to the Authority of any Church pretending to Infallibility,
meeting together in Treat or in Gracechurch-street. So then that which we find
fault with you for, is a profane neglect of Holy Scriptures, in determining
matters of Faith or Doctrine: that your Church should censure its Members only
for this cause, that you will not submit to the Authority of the Churches
Judgment, consistent with the Doctrine of ancient Friends, and agreeable to the
Witness of God in them; and that all this while here is not the least mention of
the Scripture. The reason of Submission to the Doctrine of their Church is, it
seems, its consistency with the Doctrine of ancient Friends, and the Witness of
God in them. The Judgment of ancient Friends, and a whimsical Witness called
the Light within, fetched from Terra incognita, must be set upon the Bench, and
authoritatively judge and determine all; and the Scriptures must be turned out
of office for some disservice sure they have done the Quakers. Accordingly
Keith was sentenced as an Heretic, not from Scripture, but from Friends Books:
So Jennings told him to his Face, He was not to prove his Heresy from
Scripture, but from Friends Books; and the question was not now, who was the
best Christian, but who the best Quaker: and therefore they produced a Book of
W. Pen's, instead of Scripture, to prove Keith an Heretic, and no Christian:
And indeed it would be a hard task to prove a Quaker to be a Christian, if they
had not somewhat else to prove it by than Scripture. See G. Keith's Heresy and
Hatred, printed at Philadelphia, 1693. The Truth of this Story Whitehead only
questions, he dares not deny, p. 24. l. 6. Now, George, is all this nothing to
the purpose, as thou pretendest? Do not all the Protestant World, but our newly
espoused ones, and the Papists, resolve their Faith into the Authority of God
in the Holy Scriptures, and not into the Authority of a Montanus, and his
Pa^^clete, or the Roman Pope, with his Council, or Cardinals, or his Holy Gh^st
he could send about in a Male, or the Authority of our English Pope Fox, with
his Pigeon whispering Divine Doctrines in his Ear, like another Mahomet? This
was a deadly Blow at the Head of thee, George, tho thou cunningly dissemblest
it: Thou were loath any one should take notice of thy broken Pate.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Person of CHRIST.
BRief Discovery, p. 12. l. 10. charges Fox in Readiness Errand, etc. p. 14. for
saying, Christ is the Substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is a Figure: and
in Truth defending Quakers, p. 20, 22. Christ's coming in the Flesh is but a
Figure. To this Whitehead, p. 24. l. 33. They mean by Figure an Example. The
same says Father Fox, Readiness Errand, p. 8. He is the Example and Figure, which
are both one. Whitehead proves it, because (...) in Greek frequently signifies
Example. But, George, what sense is here? The coming of Christ was an example,
tho it be good enough, Christ come in the Flesh is so. Again, what if (...) in
Greek signify Figure, and Example, must Figure in English signify so too? What
if Liber in Latin signify a Child and a Book, must a Child in English signify a
Book too? Did ever any understand by the English word Child to be meant a Book,
or by the English word Figure to be meant a Pattern? Had he said Christ's
coming in the Flesh was (...), it might have been understood to have meant
Example, because that word is often interpreted so; but the word Figure never.
George, why should thou thus dodg and shuffle with us? for once be so
ingenuous as to own your ancient Testimony, or openly disown it, That Christ's
Flesh is a Figure of Christ within. So Hubberthorn, and also Fox, Saul' s
Errand, p. 14. and Pen in his Rejoinder, p. 336. says, Those Transactions of
Christ were as so many facile Representations of what is to be accomplished
Truth desending Quakers, p. 20.
in Man. And Whitehead himself learnedly proves it, because Christ was
transfigured, which could not possibly have been, as he argues with great
Quaker Subtilty, if he had not been a Figure. He says again, Men need not be
directed Light and Life, p. 8.
to the Type for the Antitype, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to Jesus Christ, or
his Blood, where our Jerusalem Christ is but a Type: And what could he be the
Figure or a Type of, but a Christ within, as W. Pen above plainly? And
Whitehead cannot name any thing else, but their Christ within to be the
Antitype; and so all that Christ did and suffered must be a Figure of what is
done within; the Shadows of the Law that typified Christ were but Shadows of
Shadows, See further for this purpose, G. Kei^h' s 4th Narra^. p. 41, 42, 43,
44, 45.
and Figures of Figures; and the Person of Christ, his living and dying at
Jerusalem, were no benefit to us, but as they figured and typified this Christ
within: He taught as a Figure, died and rose again, and sits at the Right Hand
of God as a Figure. And thus by making Christ without a Figure, they have made
him a very Cipher.

Well, but tho Whitehead owns Christ's Flesh to be a Figure, he storms at it,
p. 24. l. 25. when we affirm that he should say, Christ's Flesh is but a
Figure. George, we have not that Book at present by us; we'll let that go as it
will, we are sure W. Pen speaks plain enough in his Sandy Foundation, p. 26.
Christ is but our Example. And again ( ibid.) He Is but our Pattern. And
Whitehead owns Figure and Pattern are the same thing, viz. synonymous, p. 24.
l. 33. But thou may say this is by consequence only; because Pen says but an
Example, therefore he must say but a Figure. Tho this consequence sufficiently
affects G. Whitehead, who says, Figure and Pattern are all one; yet see a
little further: Pen says plainly, C^r^stian Quaker, p. 97.
The Paschal Lamb was not the Figure or Type of the outward Christ, but of the
Light within, of which Christ himself was but a Figure. Whitehead does not deny
Truth and In^, p. ^4. l. ^.
but Pen has the very word [ but] there; he only denies that was the Quakers
Doctrine, or that it was his. But George, was not this also the Doctrine of
Hubberthorn? and did not thou stoutly defend the same in Truth defending
Quakers, as the Gag for Quakers, p. 67. l. 8. charges thee to have done? And is
not that an owning of what Hubberthorn asserted, That Christ is but a Figure?
But to compound the matter, supposing the word [ but] be not in thy Truth
defending Quakers, if thou will confess those Expressions of Pen and
Hubberthorn were blasphemous, we will ask thee pardon for the Mistake,
contenting our selves to have proved that you have owned him often to be a Figure
of Christ within, without the word [ but]: for then he must be either the
Figure of himself or of another Christ within, or only of some Graces and
Influences Christ sheds in our Hearts, which are figuratively Christ: All which
are Absurdities too gross for any but a Quaker, that would also advance Christ
within to be that Principal, and render Christ without as a Shadow only.

Brief Discovery, p. 12. l. 17. quotes Great Mystery, p. 206. saying, The
Apostles preached Christ crucified within, and not another, him that was raised
from the Dead, th^^ Lord Jesus Christ within, he that was manifest in the
Saints, that was he, and not another; for the other is the Antichrist. If there
be any other Christ than he that was crucified within, he is the false Christ;
and he that has not that Christ that is risen and crucified within, is a
Reprobate; the Devils and Reprobates may make a talk of him without. Whitehead,
in his Antidote, p. 28. says, We may believe the History of that outward
Christ, but not trust in him as an Object of our Faith; and that the Light
within is sufficient without any thing else. Pen, Reason against Railing, p.
32. allows only such an historical Faith. And, Truth defending Quakers, p. 65.
Whitehead says, We are not to confide in Christ without us.

Reader, we have so many Quotations of that sort that offer themselves to us
out of their ^ooks, that they are even ready to suffocate us with the stink of
them. (...) ( Satan's Design discovered, p. 19, 25.) says, By preaching Christ
in (...) the De^^^ gets his work done here on Earth.

Bailey, how rarely does he comment upon Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Where Christ sits
P. 596.
at the Right Hand of God. Did Paul, says he, speak Truth and Honesty to the
People, think you? or did he mock them when he bid them seek things that are
above; or did he speak of Impossibilities to them? For if he meant up there,
where the visible Moon and Stars, the visible Heavens are, how was it possible,
or wherein was it any ways profitable for them to seek things up there, or what
things were they there to seek? How! has Heaven nothing worth seeking after?
when there is hardly any thing else worth seeking, so long as God and Christ,
and Saints and Angels inhabit there. They that do not diligently seek after
things above, may (unless they repent) find a place too hot for them below.

Whitehead says, Quakers do not find that God and Christ above the Clouds,
Light and Life, p. 40.
as the Baptists imagine, at such a distance: for they never ascended thither to
seek their Christ there themselves, to find him; and so they are like to be
without both, while they tell us of a God and Christ beyond the Clouds, where
they cannot come. Whitehead says again, We have no Scripture His Nature of
Christianity, p. 41.
proof, that Christ exists outwardly at God's Right Hand. What or where (says
he in a scoffing manner) is God's Right Hand, is it visible or invisible? Ah,
George, there is a time a coming when such Scorners of the Right Hand of God
may find he has a Left Hand for them. This is very the marrow of Quakerism,
and runs almost through every of their Writings: Christ within does all.

We have not done yet with their Christian Testimony of a Christ without them.
Smith says, The false Ministers preach Christ without; in the Folio Primmer, p.
8.
Edition lately printed they have added the word [ only] for very shame. Fox
says, The Devil is in thee, and thou say thou art saved by a Christ without
Great Mist. p. 250.
thee. Ah, George, we cannot but be concerned for thee (tho we know thou have
as great an art in gilding over false Coin as any) to think what thou will do
with this impudent and brazen-faced Blasphemy, how thou can wash it over, so
as to make it pass in so quicksighted and prying a World as we live in: If we
should help thee out a little, thou must say nothing; for we would not truly be
thought to be of the Trade. It Is but putting the word [ alone] into this
Quotation, As the Devil is in thee, if thou think to be saved by Christ
without thee alone. Thou may use the same Artifice with some other of thy
Quotations, and they may pass pretty well a while, till they be worn a little,
or those troublesome Fellows, the Snake, Keith, and Bugge, shall bring them to
the Touchstone: However, having so Divine a stamp upon them, as Fox, Whitehead,
and Bailey, with this Inscription about them, Tremulorum decus and tutamen; no
doubt but they will go currently enough among the Friends, tho they were all
Brass. We cannot but throw another into the Scales to make good weight: It Is
Howghil's; he says, All you that have wearied your selves in P. 39.
seeking, amongst Graves and Tombs, for a Savior; I say unto you, while you
look without you, your Eyes may consume in their Holes, and your Expectations
fail. Sure this word outward is a great offense to the Stomach of a Quaker; an
outward Word, and outward Sacraments, and an outward Christ. If they would also
lay aside their outward Meats, outward Drinks, outward Clothing, the
Controversy would soon be at an end.

Before we pass from this point, we must mind the Reader, that G. Keith was
prosecuted in Pensylvania for preaching Christ without, as well as Christ
within. Two of their Ministers witness this against him, and no other false
Doctrine was charged upon him. The very truth is, it is this Christ without us
is the only Savior who saves, as by the merit of his Death, so by effecting
the Graces of the Spirit in us, which are not substantially and personally
Christ, but called so by a Metonymy, as the Effect for the Cause: And Christ is
not predicated of a Christ within, and a Christ without, univocally; for the
Nature of Christ is only communicated to the Person of Christ without, while
the Name is only given to Christ within, to his Graces and Image, by a Figure.
So that here are not two Christ's; for Christ without is only personal,
substantial, Christ within figurative. There is a King at Whitehall, and there
is a King in the Parlour; but not two personal Kings, only one that is
personal, and the other that is figurative, being his Picture only, which is
called so. And therefore to say we are saved by another Christ than that which
is within, does not infer two personal and substantial Christ's, but a
substantial one and a figurative one, viz. his Image, Graces, and Influences,
called so by a Metonymy or a Metaphor. And now to say, They are no Ministers of
Christ that preach Christ without us, and The Devil is in thee, if thou
think to be saved by a Christ without thee, and Devils and Reprobates may
make a talk of him without, are Blasphemies sure we can make no blacker by any
aggravation. As to what Geo. Whitehead says concerning these Exprestions
wanting their due Points, and putting the words, that was crucified, in a
Parenthesis, as well as several others in this Quotation, we have spoken to in
the Epistle to the Reader.

But behold more frightful Apparitions still, which that Worthy Person the
Author of The Snake in the Grass, in his most admirable Defense thereof, takes
notice of, Part I. p. 131, 132. and Part II. p. 108. Buroughs calls our Christ
we pray to, an Idol God, and a dead God: Sword of the Lord drawn, p. 5.
Atkinson, an Imaginary God, and a Carnal Christ; and Lawson, as Cassin charges
him, p. 36. tells us, That the Lord Jesus, whom we profess, is accursed. Fox
quotes the very Page of Cassin in his Great Mystery, p. 142. and answers it;
but denies nothing of this Charge, That he should say, our Jesus is accursed.
And yet the Jesus whom we 1 Cor. 1. 2, 3.
worship, is that Jesus whom all the Christians in the World, and all the
Angels of God worship. The Apostle says, Such an one speaks not by the
Spirit of God, that calls Jesus accursed. Vox faucibus haeret: Our Pens are
ready to drop out of our Hands, while we are only repeating this Blasphemy.
Whenever the Devil has one too big for his own Mouth, for fear of choking, he
has ever some Quaker or other (who never keck at it, tho never so great an
one) to mouth it for him. Great God, to suffer such Venom to be spit upon thee
by such a speckled Creature; for such an one to curse our King and our God, and
yet look up, and not to be struck dumb at the uttering of such a Blasphemy! The
Impunity of such a monstrous Villainy, if we had doubted of it before, were
alone enough to convince us there must be a Judgment to come.

CHAP. IX.
Of WATER BAPTISM.
BRief Discovery, p. 13. charges them with blaspheming the Ordinances of
Christ, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. Smith says, Primmer, p. 6.
Our Baptism, Bread and Wine, are the Pope's Invention. Pen says, Reason
against Rai^ing, p. 108. 109.
Water Baptism is no more in force than Circumcision. Fox says, P. 4.
Our Baptism and Sacraments are Cain's Sacrifice. Fox says, News come out of
the North, p. 1^.
Your Baptism is carnal, and their Communion is carnal. Whitehead says P. 26.
l. 12.
in his Answer, Your Water, Bread and Wine is carnal.

Thou have indeed, George, a notable art in giving answers nothing to the
purpose; for the Authors before cited say, Our Baptism, our Sacraments, our
Communion, are carnal, and Cain's Sacrifice, and invented by the Pope: Now
Water, and Bread, and Wine are not those, but the outward part of them, which
with the inward and spiritual Grace make up the Sacraments; and hence they are
not carnal but a spiritual Ordinance. He tells us again, that Will. Smith says
only, that Infant Baptism was of the Pope's Invention. Good Reader, see the
Primmer as above quoted, The Child's Question was not concerning
Insant-Baptism, but how it was concerning Baptism, Bread and Wine; Why Child,
says the Father, as to those things (those things sure were the things in
question) they arose from the Pope. We matter not what he says afterward, it is
that place we charge with blaspheming Water Baptism, an Ordinance of Christ.

Whitehead justifies Pen for saying, Water Baptism is no more in force than P.
27. l. 3.
Circumcision; he tells us it is to be rejected, because it is shadowy, and of a
perishing nature: he knows we do not hold that Water, Bread and Wine are our
Sacraments; what then if they perish, as long as the thing signified, which is
the best part of the Sacrament, does not so? By such an Argument we might prove
the Passover must presently have been abolished, for the Lamb was a perishing
Creature, to be slain, and eaten up immediately; but sure there was somewhat
signified by it that lasted a little longer, even till the coming of Christ in
the Flesh, as the thing signified by the Elements of our Sacraments will abide
till Christ's coming to Judgment.

In fine, one says, Baptism and our Sacraments are carnal, Cain's Sacrifice:
Another says, Baptism and our Sacraments were from the Pope: Another, they are
no more in force than Circumcision, and therefore to be laid aside. Our
business therefore shall be next to prove, they are Ordinances of Christ, and
the neglect of them is a contempt of an Ordinance of Christ, and their
scurrilous Reflections upon them a blaspheming Christ's Ordinances; and because
Waterbaptism is a Sacrament they raise most and their chiefest Arguments
against, we shall speak to that first.

We know the Cry is, Give us plain express Scripture for Water Baptism: Nothing
will pass with them for Scripture proof but what is express. John Stubs, in his
Epistle before Whitehead's Divinity of Christ, has these words; Do the
Scriptures speak of three Persons in the Godhead, in these express words? let
us see where it is written; come do not shuffle, give us plain Scripture, let
us see in what Chapter is printed Abstract, Relative, and Concrete; while it is
evident enough that Scripture-Consequences are as good proof as express Texts
of Scripture: Do you think the Lord Jesus knew how to dispute with the
Sadduces, and prove a Doctrine out of Scripture? Prove if thou can, say those
Cavillers, the Resurrection of the Dead from Scriptures. Christ presently
proves it out of Exodus 3. 5, 6. as we find Mat. 22. 32. where his medium is
God's saying, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. If some of thy
Brethren had been by, and heard our Savior offer such an Argument out of
Scripture to prove the Resurrection, would not they have retorted briskly, Good
Sir, what is this to the Resurrection? give us plain Texts of Scripture that the
Dead shall rise again: would not they have presently given it out (tho the
Sadduces we find had more modesty) how shamefully they had run down and baffled
our Savior; and that he had not a word to say for himself, not one word of
Scripture to confute them with, because he brought nothing but Scripture
consequences against them. We would know what express Scripture you have for
your Negative (as well as for several other Doctrines) that WaterBaptism is not
an Institution of Christ, and yet it is a Doctrine that Quakers believe to be
Divine, which yet they only endeavor to prove by Scripture-consequence, tho
horridly forced and strained. Now let us see whether we can offer better to
prove our Water Baptism.

1 st. The first Scriptures, for we shall here give you two together, are John
3. 26. They came to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou bear Witness, behold the same baptizeth, and all Men
come to him. And, John 4. 1, 2. The Pharisees heard how that Jesus made, and
baptized more Disciples than John, tho Jesus himself baptized none, but his
Disciples. Here we see Water Baptism was instituted by Christ long before his
Death, to be an initiating Ceremony, whereby Jewish Converts were admitted into
the Society of Christians; so that we find our selves obliged to prove these
four things:

1. That it was Water Baptism that was spoken of in these Texts. 2. That hereby
Christ admitted Converts into his Society. 3. That they were only Jewish
Converts that were so admitted at first. 4. That all this was done by Christ's
Command, and so was his Institution.
1. That 'twas Water Baptism spoken of in the 3 d and 4 th of John; that it was
an outward Baptism, and not a Baptism of the Holy Ghost, is clear, because the
Pharisees, and John's Disciples too took notice of it: so that it could not be
a thing inward and secret, but somewhat outward and obvious to men's
observation; nay that it was not only outward, but by Water too, is as
apparent, because we see it in those Texts of St. John compared with John's
Baptism: the Pharisees, as well as John's Disciples are here offended, that
Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John, whose Baptism was undeniably
such. The words in John the 4 th without an Ellipsis, are read thus, Christ
baptized more Disciples than John baptized; and what reason can we have for
interpreting baptizing in the last place in a different sense from baptizing in
the former, especially since the exception taken, John the 4 th, was by the
Pharisees, who neither cared for, nor knew of any other Baptism than that of
Water? It had been an odd comparison for a Pharisee, Jesus baptized more with
the Holy Ghost than John did with Water, who had never heard of that spiritual
Baptism; and had they heard of it, the Pharisees could never have had that
honor for our Savior as to think him so Divine a Person as to be able to
baptize with the Holy Ghost, whom they also so maliciously reproached and
persecuted. Further it is said, Jesus himself baptized not; can it be said that
Jesus himself baptized not with the Holy Ghost? 'twas that chiefly wherein his
Commission to baptize did excel the Baptist's, that he should baptize with the
Holy Ghost, who indeed had only power to do it: so that it must be meant with
Water.

2. That hereby he made Disciples to himself, that is, entered them into the
Society of Christians; it is evident he did not disciple them for John, or enter
them into the Society of his followers; for John's Disciples would not have
been so much offended then, for such multitudes Christ had brought into their
Master's School: John 3. 25, 26. they were envious, and looked upon it as a
competition between their Master and another new one set up amongst them;
Rehold (say they to John) Christ baptizeth, and all Men come to him, ver. 30.
He quiets their discontents, by saying, He must increase, while I must
decrease; it had been an odd way of John's being diminished, to have such
multitudes of Disciples brought into his School by Christ. Again, it is evident,
he did not by his Baptism d^sciple them to John, because John's Disciples and
Jesus's were under a different Government, Mat. 9. 14. and the Disciples of
John were offended at it, that they should be tied to so severe Rules of
Mortification, as frequent Fastings by their Master, while the Disciples of
Christ enjoyed a greater liberty, thy Disciples fast not. Again it is evident,
he did not by Baptism disciple them for John; for this would have lessened
Christ, and made John the greater of the two, and Christ would have been but
John's Minister and Chaplain, to bring him in Profelices, and John must have
increased, and Christ must have decreased thereby. Again, the Disciples of John
that turned Christians, were sain to be baptized again, Acts 19. to ver. 7.
Ver. 3. they had been baptized with John's Baptism; ver. 5. they were baptized
again in the Name of the Lord Jesus; so then Christ's Baptism could not be
John's. Again it is evident, John's Disciples and Jesus's were not the same,
John 1. 35, 37. for two of John's Disciples left him, and followed Jesus; they
being then different Societies, there must be a different admission to them.
Again, this Baptism, as all other Baptisms were, was used as an initiating sign
into a distinct Society under another Master; the Jews that were baptized unto
Moses, were Moses's Disciples, John 9. 28. and those whom John baptized were
the Disciples of John; and why should not they whom Jesus baptized be the
Disciples of Jesus? It Is therefore very idle for the Quakers to say, this
Baptism of Christ was the same with John's, and so was temporary as his was;
they might as well have said, it was the Baptism of Moses. Thus have we proved
the second, That Christ made and baptized Disciples to himself, and not to John.

3. That they were only Jewish Converts that were admitted to Christ's Baptism
at the first, for as yet Christ had not extended his care any further than the
Jewish Church, till after his Resurrection, only to the lost Sheep of the House
of Israel; and of these he baptized, and made Disciples, as M^ses and John had
done before.

4. The last thing we are to prove is, That the Biptism of Christ mentioned in
those Texts, was not a bare practice of Christ, in compliance with either Jews
or John's Baptism, but an Institution and a Command of Christ: Our reason is,
because it is said, John 4. 1, 2. Jesus baptized more Disciples than John; the
Jesus baptized not, but his Disciples: And it cannot be understood how Jesus
did what his Disciples did, unless they they did it by Christ's Order or
Command; if they had run on headlong without an Order from Christ, it could not
have been said that Christ baptized, but the Disciples had baptized upon their
own heads. It Is not said Christ baptized, and no more, for then it might have
been looked upon only as the practice of Christ; which is not per se obligatory
without a Precept: but it is said Christ baptized, howbeit no^ Christ but his
Disciples, to let us know there was not only bare Practice, but his special
Order and Command to his Disciples, without which they would not have done it,
nay Christ would not have suffered them, neither could it have been said that
Christ baptized, if they had baptized without his Order; but it is ordinary to
attribute that to the Prince himself, that is done by another according to his
Command and Order; and therefore Christ not doing it himself, if he did it all
(as the Scripture says) he must do it by commanding others to do it.

2 ly. The next Scripture is Matthew. 28. 19. Go teach and baptize, etc. We shall
prove that this was the same Water Baptism that Christ had instituted, John 4.
He only here renews the Command, whereby he doubles the Obligation to, and
inlarges the Commission of the Disciples, now to go and disciple all, both Jew
and Gentile, all Nation^^ and our reason why it must be the same, is, because
we have a word in Mat. 28. (...), that signifies the very same that (...) does
in the 4 th of John, to make Disciples, and the same word (...) used there too:
neither is there any reason why Christ should set up a different Baptism for
one and the same end to make Disciples, from what he had appointed before to
make Disciples by; had he intended so, he would certainly have given some
caution, being about to institute a Baptism of another kind, lest we should
mistake this new and more glorious Baptism of the Spirit to be no more than
that other elementary one he had commanded before, and they had been used to to
that very hour. He repeats the Command again, because the first Commission
would not serve his purpose, seeing he was to ampliate and enlarge the Terms;
having just now laid down his Life for all the Nations of the World, he puts a
Clause into their Commission now, to instruct all Nations in the Rudiments of
his new Religion, and then baptize them, that they may be the more capable of
the benefit of his Sufferings.

3 ly. The next Text proving Water Baptism to be instituted of Christ, is Act.
10. 47. Can any one forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, who have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Here are several Arguments to prove
Water Baptism was an Institution of Christ.

1. The Holy Ghost was received before as preparatory to this Baptism; so that
the Baptism in the Text could not be the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, therefore
of Water.

2. Can any one forbid it? If any of these Gentlemen had been present, would he
not have started up immediately, Can any one forbid? Good Sir, tell us who ever
commanded us, when or where were we bidden to dabble the Disciples with a
little Popi^h HolyWater? you an Apostle of Christ, and peremptorily enforce
things upon the Disciples that are not now in force, (as our dear Brother W.
Pen has testified) to offer up such a carnal Cainitical Sacrifice to God, and
tell People it is an Ordinance of Christ: behold we stand up here, in the Power
and the Spirit of the Lord God, to witness against thee. And we know not what
St. Peter could better have replied to them, than St. Paul once said to the
Corinthians, What I have received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you; and
it being a Command of our Lord and Master, you are impudent Servants to forbid
it, if the practice had been nothing but an exercise of Liberty, and pure
Condescension, as W. Pen P. 127. l. 20.
says in his Reply to the Answer to his Key, if it had not been settled by
Authority.

3. St. Peter issues out an Authoritative Command, that they should be
baptized, v. 28. he commanded them to be baptized: The imposing such a Command
upon the Disciples, would have been an usurpation upon their Christian Liberty,
as the practice of it would have been superstitious enough, if he had not had
Divine Authority for his Warrant.

4. He commands them to be baptized, not (...), as in Matthew. 28. 19. and Acts
19. 5. but (...), that is, by the Authority of Jesus; and the Holy Ghost by
varying the Expression here from that in those Texts, seems purposely to
countenance this Interpretation: to command a thing to be done in the Name of a
Person, was ever thought to be by his Authority; 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. (...), I have
judged in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together,
and my Spirit, with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver, etc. In the
Name, and in the Power and Authority, are here all one.

4 ly. Another Text is Acts 22. 16. Ananias said to Paul, Arise, why tarriest
thou? and be baptized; for, etc. Anani^s leaves it not here to Paul, as a
matter of Liberty or Condescension to the Jews; here is a peremptory Command, as
in the foregoing Citation, Arise, and be baptized, and that quickly too, why
tarriest thou? And this must be WaterBaptism, for he must arise, and put
himself into a posture to go to some place of convenience, as a Brook or River,
to be baptized in, and not tarry in the least; he should not need to have got
up and traveled in such haste for the Holy Ghost, who is not limited to any
place or time.

Again, this was a Baptism he had in his own Power, as that was in the Power of
the Disciples in the former Citation, or else they would not have been
commanded to have been baptized; it had been both a folly and injustice to
command them what they had no power to do: now the Baptism of the Holy Ghost
was not in their Power, they could not give themselves that Baptism, nor St.
Peter, nor Ananias neither; and if it had been the Baptism of the Holy Ghost
that was spoken of in this Text, it had been a more proper method for St.
Peter, Ananias, St. Paul and the Disciples, to have fallen upon their knees to
God, and have prayed that he would bestow that heavenly Gift upon them, rather
than bid them be baptized and take it themselves, as Peter and John had done,
Acts 8. 15, 16. they prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost.

5 ly. Another Text is John 3. 3, 5. Except a Man be born again of Water and
the Holy Ghost, etc. Whatever be the sense of being born again, we are sure
that Water is Water, and not the same in this place with the Spirit of God; if
it were so, the words would have this ridiculous sense, Except a Man be born
again of the Spirit and the Spirit: further, if they were the same thing, a
Copulative were needless, which ever uses to join two different things
together, and not the same thing to it self; and if it be Water Baptism, it
must be of Christ; besides, there would never have been affixt such a Reward to
it if it had not been a Duty.

2. We have a great many Scripture-Instances for the Practice of Water Baptism,
besides those before named; sure they will not say, but that the Apostles
baptized as Christ commanded them, in J^h. 4. and Ma^ih 28.

1. The first Scripture is, 1 Cor. 1. 14. Crispus and Gaiu^ were baptized with
Water, for St. Paul would not have thanked God, he baptized so few of them with
the Holy Ghost; and those many other Corinthians, Acts 18. 8. cannot be supposed
to have been baptized any otherwise than those their Fellow Citizens.

2. The second Scripture, is Act. 19. 3, 5. Unto what were ye baptized? He does
not ask whether they were baptized with Water, he did not doubt of that; no^ by
what, but unto what? They answer, Unto John's Baptism* As soon as they were
better instructed, they were baptized again into another and better Service,
into the Name of the Lord Jesus, by such Water as they had been baptized with
before: For he sc^upled not the Water they had been baptized with, but only
asks into what Discipline or Society, John's or Christ's?

3. The third Text, is Acts 8. 38. the Eunuch was baptized with Water; for
Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the Water. In the same Chapter, v.
1^. Simon himself believed, viz. seemed to do so, and he was baptized too: they
will not say sure, such a Wizard as he was baptized with the Holy Ghost* In
ver. 1^* 16. he prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost; for as
yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were ba^t^^ed into the Name of
the Lord Jesus. We think we shall not need to prove, that Water Baptism has
been the Practice of the whole Christian World, to this day, it is sufficient we
have shown several Commands out of Scripture, for Water Baptism, and also
several Instances wherein it has been practiced in the Apostles times; but not
one single Instance can we give in the Scripture, where its said* Go, and
baptize, or be baptized with the Holy Ghost; not one Text, where the Baptism
practiced in Scripture, is called the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. It would have
been a very gracious Condescension to our Weakness, if by the Baptism of Water,
so often mentioned in Holy Scripture, there had been nothing meant but the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, to have delivered it to us in more plain and express
Terms, and called it in some place or other, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and
told us 'twas not Water Baptism, was commanded or practiced, since we, poor
ignorant Creatures, are so apt to take Water for Water, and a Command for a
Command, and had always been accustomed to that of Water: Besides, such a
continued Chain of Practices from Christ's Ascension to this day, must needs
inser either Christ's Institution, or their gross Superstition. We have shown
before, that this Baptism was not John's; and if the Apostles were the Authors
and Beginners of such a Practice, we would be glad to know whether it were in
their own wills or no, whether they had a Revelation and Command in themselves,
from the Spirit of Christ within. Edw. Burrows says, For you to go P. 47.
without the moving of the Spirit in your own wills and strength, God hares
this, and upon this is his wrath. And Whitehead says, To baptize, preach, and
pray, P. 22. l. ^.
they that perform these Acts in their own wills, without the moving the
Spirit, they are not accepted therein, but rejected of God. We hope they will
not say that the apostles baptized in their own w^lls. and it was but a carnal
C^^nitical, popish Sacrifice, they offered herein: If they had not a Command in
themselves, supposing they had had none from without, they were
Will-worshippers; and if they had, they must have it from Christ.

Again here was such a Privilege annexed to this Water Baptism, Regeneration,
Remission of Sins, Titus 3. 5. Joh. 3. 2, 5. Acts 2. 38. and 22. 16. as proves
it to be more than the dabbling the Face with a little common Water, as they
profanely scoff, a Privilege could never have been joined to it but by Christ's
Authority. Again however it might have been practiced in compliance* it could
not have been imposed upon the Churches by Command (he commanded them to be
baptized) of any Authority less than Christ's, without great Superstition.

Further we prove, that all the Scripture Instances cannot be meant of Baptism
with the Holy Ghost, because Baptism with the Holy Ghost in some measure, was
always preparative to that Baptism; no doubt there were further improvements of
the Measures afterward, that were the Gifts of the Holy Ghost accompanying
Water Baptism, and they were to expect the Holy Ghost in the falled and most
ample measure after Christ's (...); some measure of the Holy Ghost was always
required to sit and (...) Men for it And when it is said Acts 8. 16. as yet be
was fallen upon none of them, it cannot be meant the Holy Ghost was not come
upon any of them in any measure, at all before; the Quakers themselves will not
say so sure, who tell us the Light and the Spirit are in every one, that was
evidently spoken, as appears in the 2 Uses following of the Gift of Miracles,
that Simon so ambitiously affected. See Act 8 12 (...) they believed, they were
baptized. 37. If thou believe with all thine heart. Acts 2. 41. T^^y that
gladly received the Word, were baptized. Act. 16. 14, 15. Lydia, as soon as her
heart was opened, was baptized. 33. The laylor and his whole House, as soon as
converted, were baptized streightway; all this could not be without some
previous Gift of the Holy Ghost to them, to put all out of doubt See Acts 10.
47. Can any forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, who have received
the Holy Ghost as well as we? Farther, Baptism was appointed as a means whereby
the inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost was given; and therefore the
Scripture-Baptisn was not the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 38. Be
baptized, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, as also Fphes. 5.
26. that he might sa^ctifie and cleanse it, with the washing of Water, etc. and
Joh. 3. 5.

Farther, Water Baptism was appointed by Christ, as an initiating Sign whereby
Believers were to be admitted into Christ's visible Church, and no Man can be
admitted into a visible Society, by a Sign that is invisible, as Baptism with
the Holy Ghost is: By Baptism we list our selves into Christ's Company, take
the Mil^ary wath of Fidelity to him; and being baptized, we are reckoned
Christ's Soldiers and Se^v^^^s, Joh. 4 1. He baptized, and made Disciples, made
them visible Disciples by baptizing them; which could not be by Baptism with
the Holy Ghost, which is altogether secret and invisible; the ^f^e as s^on as
ever Men were converted, they were baptized* Acts 22. 16. Why tar^^est thou,
etc. So Lydia, as soon as her heart was opened Acts 16. 14, 15 so he Jailor,
ver. ^3.

(...) Baptism was the outward Sign, Mark, o^ Character, appointed by Christ,
whereby the S^c^e^y of Christians are known and distinguished from all other
Societies in the World: It were strange if any Society should be distinguished
and known from an their, by that which is invisible, as Baptism with the Holy
Ghost is.

1. It Is evident the Church must be a visible Society, being a City upon an
Hill, Matih 5. 14 The Quakers themselves are a Society, distinguished by some
Marks and Characters, o^ how should we k^^w who were of the Quaker Church, and
who not? They have their Marks I say, but far from Christ's Appointment they
are yeaing and ^^ying and loudly decrying the outward visible Marks of Ch^^^^s
Institution. The Disciples of Moses, as they were distinguished by their
Circumcision, and therefore they were called by Horace, Curti Judaei; so by
their Baptism* and John's Disciples by their Baptism, and Christ's by his: This
was the Badge and ^^very the Christians wore, to let the World know whose
Servants they were* and that they were not ashamed of their poor Master that
gave it them; therefore when they were baptized, they were said to put on
Christ, Gal 3. 17 and when Men renourced their Christianity and turned Turks,
they laid aside this Livery, and took up (...) Circumcision, and spit at the
mention of the Name of Christ, and from thence are accounted true Musselmen; so
that Quakers by rejecting Water Baptism, ar^g^^ half way to Turkey.

There was a memorable Advertisement from Dorsetshire; it is before the Answer
to Mr. Den's Quaker, no Papist, in the Gag for Quakers, of a strange Discovery
made o^ many Witches in and near Sh^rborn, they were near 200 of them at one
Meeting, most of them Quakers, and Anabaptists; it tells us 3 Men and 2 Women,
formerly Quakers, committed to Dorch^ster Goal, where they were Prisoners at
the w^iting of that Advertisement, confessed upon Examination, and since their
Commitment, to sundry Persons, who have visited them, that when the Devil first
appeared to them, and tempted them to be Witches, before he would admit them
into that Sacred Ord^r, he caused them to renounce their Baptism; and truly the
Devil had some reason for this, to make them tear off the Livery of their old
Master, his greatest Enemy, before he took them into his Service; besides in
Baptism they had renounced him, and all his Works; and he thought it necessary
such a Covenant should be cancelled, before they entered a new League with him;
and if Quakers had doubted the Truth of this, in those days, they might have
gone and visited their Friends in Goal, as hundreds did, and been satisfied
from their own mouths. The Devil, in our days, need not put most of our Quakers
to the trouble of renouncing Baptism, who never received it, and so are in a
more appropriate disposition to be taken into that Service. Margaret Bradl^,
and Mary Langhorn, perhaps might commence Witches without such a Solemnity*
these Quaker* Witches would have taken away the Life of their Brother-inLaw
Winder, by a false Accusation at Carlisic Assizes; they were eminent Teachers
amongst the Quakers, neither did they ever disown them for their Villainy: See
Snake, 305. 306, 307. and no doubt there have been hundreds more such
Instances, that have bewitched multitudes into horrid Ravings, Yellings,
Foamings and Convulsions, as soon as they have come into their Meetings: You
may believe in every one of them, as well as those of Sh^rborn, the principal
Article of the Contract was, if ever they received it, to renounce Baptism.

Oh how Converts of old, in Times of Persecution, would crowd to Baptism*
though they burut for it; they would run through the Fire to Water Baptism,
ambiti^us of the honor of being known to be Christ's Servants, which they were
by b^ing baptized. Had Quakers lived in those days, they would never have been
known to be Christians, by a little yeaing and naying only for a Mode of
Speech, their Christ being no such Man as the Heathens were incensed against,
nothing but Meekness Patience, Temperance, Chastity, etc. which the Heathens
were great Admirers of. No Brother Heathen would never have hurt a Quaker, they
are these wicked Christians the Quakers cry out of as their Persecutors, as the
Christians cried out of the Heathens, Quakers and Heathens, are too good
friends to fall out for a Yea and Nay.

As for their Objections out of Scripture, if need had been, we could have
brought most of them as Proofs of the Doctrine they have brought them to
oppose; their Goliath Argument is from the 1 Cor 1. 14, 15, 16, 17. I was not
sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. We shall not need to prove, that
this is Water Baptism here spoken of, having proved it before: Besides they
acknowledge it; which I believe they would never have done, but only that they
might screw an Objection out of it against Water Baptism; for hence they
observe to us. Paul an Apostle was never sent to baptize with Water, or
otherwise, why should they not yield the same word signifies the same thing in
other places? By the way let us premise, when a Doctrine is proved by such
Arguments, the Command of Christ, the Practice of the Apostles, and the whole
Christian Wo^ld to this day, it is not to be overth own by one Objection out of
Scripture, that may bear a sense as well agreeing with that Doctrine, as the
sense that opposes it. Our Arguments should first be answered; which because
they cannot do, they busy themselves in finding out difficulties: If this were
enough, the Being of God, and Existence of Souls, Doctrines as demonstratively
proved, as any in the World, might be overthrown; for the Atheist has found
difficulties enough to puzzle and perplex them: But though this way of theirs
be a very fallacious Artifice, yet we stall no be afraid to grapple with their
Objections, this mighty one in particular.

But why does St Paul thank God he baptized so few, if an Ordinance of Christ:
It Is evident he baptized some; and if he had not been empowered by Christ to
baptize, I would have been presumption in him to have bapazed any body. But why
so few? As in the 15th. it is answered by himself, lest any one should say, I
baptized in my own name. You may observe from v. 10 how childishly they began
to range themselves into Sides and Parties; one was for Paul, another for
Apollos, as if they had only baptized, and made Disciples to themselves, to set
up as many Sects of Christians, as they had done of Philosophe^s, under their
several Masters. Ver. 13. Do you think, says Paul, you were baptized into the
Name of Paul, or Peter, or Apollos? I thank God, says he, as it happened, I
baptized none of you, that you may have no pretense for such a Schism under my
Name; he does not thank God they had not been baptized, but that he had not
done it, for the abovesaid reason: But you will say then, su e here was a great
stress laid upon Water Baptism, because there were so few thus baptized: A
Consequence indeed! because he baptized so few, therefore there were no more
baptized. May not a Man as justly infer the contrary, though there have been
multitudes of them baptized, yet I have baptized but few of them, especially if
you compare this place with Acts 18. 8. where a great many other Corinthians
were baptized as well as Crispus and Gaius. But ver. 17. St Paul says, Christ
sen: him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. We answer, every Apostle,
besides a general Commission, had commonly a particular Mission: Their general
Commission gave them Power and Authority through the whole World to preach; bu^
because that had been too numerous a Parish, and it would have been impossible
for them to have executed those Powers, by p^eaching to every Person in the
World, it pleased God by a secret Motion and Impulse of the Spirit, to send
them into several Quarters, one to the Gentiles, another to the Jews, one in^o
Spain, another into the Indies, to preach there* for the more orderly and
effectual execution of those Powers in the World. St. Paul had Power and
Authority in his Commission to baptize all, as well as preach to all; but that
these Powers might be executed in the best manner, such as might tend most to
the Glory of God, and the Edification of the Church, it being impossible he
should preach to all, and baptize them too, by a particular Instinct of the
Spirit, to appoint and order him to lay out his Abilities chiefly in preaching,
that being a Work of greatest Difficulty and Importance, his Talent also lying
most for that Work. And St. Paul might have said, I was not sent to preach the
Gospel to the Jews, viz. by my particular Mission, as he says here, I was not
sent, viz. by a special Mission to baptize them: That the Acts 5. 20.
Apostles had such particular Calls and Missions, as well as universal Power
and Acts 8. 25. 26.
Authority, it is evident from the Scriptures. Acts 9. 11.


Or it may be Answered the common way, I was not sent chiefly to baptize: That
Acts 16. 10, 9.
was not the chief Part of his Commission, but to perform the more necessary
and Act. 19. 20. 22.
difficult Part of it, to preach, to dispute with, and convince Gain sayers;
for our Acts 23. 11.
greater Parts and Abilities, as also greater Courage, was required then to
baptize; 2 Timothy 1. 11.
yet he carefully deputed others for that Service, and so might well enough
have been said to have baptized too, as Christ, 4 Joh. 2. and Peter also, Acts
10. 48. having commanded them to be baptized, it was certainly impossible the
Apostles should have been able with their own hands, to have baptized such
Multitudes they converted, Christianity had spread over all the Quarters of the
known World before the Apostles left it, and could Twelve Men be thought
sufficient for such a Task of Baptizing? And is it not agreeable to Reason,
that when a Person has a Commission authorizing him for two eminent different
Services, that are impossible both to be performed by him alone; to interpret
the Meaning of that Commission, to be, that he should lay out his Time, and
Strength, in the most necessary, and important Service, and depute some others
for the rest, seeing it may as well be done by other hands as his?

What a stop and hindrance would this have been, if the Apostle, had slayed
every where to baptize their Conve^ts* n^y* (...) was impossible, they being so
great a P^t of the World, yet sometimes they did it you see, when it was no
impe^^ment to them in their main Design: Had it not have been in their
Commission to have done it at al., they had greatly sinned, if all the Children
of the Province of Canterbury, were brought to the Archbishop to be baptized
by him, he might not say, when I was made ArchBishop of this Place, and sent to
this See. I was not not sent to baptize the Children of this numerous Province,
though I have a Commission to baptize as well as any Parish-Minister of the
Province, but chiefly to exercise a Patioral Care, of Government, among them.

See Genesis 45. 8. It was not you that sent me hither, but God. Though they sold
him into Egypt, but it was principally God's doing.

1 Timothy 2. 14. Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was in the
Transg^^ssion, viz the Chief in it.

Mat. 9. 13. I Will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Jer. 7. 22. I spoke not unto
your Fathers, nor commanded them, concerning Burnt Offerings or Sacrifices, but
I commanded them, saying, Obey my Voice. Yet God had commanded those Cities
under pain of Death. The meaning is, they were not the chief part of the
Command, but rather the Off^^^ng and Sacrifice of a broken and cont^i^e Heart;
'twas the inward part that was signified by this, that God chiefly required of
them, and when the outward was performed without the inward, he tells them, he
never required it at their hands, see Isa 1. 11. Suppose the Quakers should
deny, that outward Sacrifices were ever commanded by God, or that the Jews did
ever practice them, and they should interpret all that is said of Sacrifices of
the inward, as they do of Baptism, and should produce the Texts above quoted,
and the First of Isa* to prove God did not command them, which are more clear
and positive against outward Sacrifices, than that one Text they have brought
out of the Corinthians is against WaterBaptism: If they should not be convinced
by those numerous Texts might be brought out of Exodus Genesis Numb. etc. with the
Practice of the Jews from Moses's Time, for the Proof of the one, as by those
plain and pregnant Texts cited by us, together with the constant Practice of
the Apostles, and all the Christian World to this Day, for the Proof of the
other, we shall despair of ever finding out a Method of convincing them, but as
one says, that of Bedlam: Sure enough, if the Quakers had such Texts as these
forementioned, against Water Baptism, what Shouts and Triumphs should we hear
of? If God had said he never commanded Water Baptism, he was weary of it, his
Soul hated it, yet had they found them, they would have proved no more against
outward Baptism, than the other did against outward Sacrifices, Come G.
dissemble no longer with us, the true Reason, if thou would deal plainly with
us, why Water Baptism is rejected by you, is not because the Scripture commands
it not, but because you have no Command in your selves about it; and as for
that Dry, Dead Letter, that Nose of Wax, the Scriptures, as you call them; no
matter what they say to us, without such a Revelation: What have we to do with
the Command that was to the Apostles? They are dead and gone, and the Command
of baptizing all Nations died with them. But yet methinks, as the Apostles were
bid to baptize all Nations, all Nations were required to be baptized, and all
Nations are not yet dead, and gone; and therefore there should be some left
alive, to baptize them, unless the Apostles were commanded to baptize when dead.

CHAP. X.
Of the LORD's SUPPER.
NExt we shall Vindicate the Supper of the Lord, by Bread and Wine, from their
profane Contempt, that also according to them, is but a Trick of the Pope's to
cheat the People with, a Shadow, for Substance, Carnal, Cainitical, and to be
discharged the Service as well as the Passover,

P. 713.
Brief Discovery, All which Abuses are justified by the common Voucher for P.
26.
Quakers, G. Whitehead. One would think the Words of St. Matthew, 26. 26, 27,
28. as also St. Luke, 22. 19. 20. should be plain enough to determine this
Controversy, While they were eating, viz the Pas^over, Christ took Bread, and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciple^, and bid them take and
eat, for it was his Body, viz. The Sign or Symbol of his Body: He also took the
C^p, and blessed it, and gave it them, and commanded them all to drink of it;
yea, this was his dying Command, which ought to make the greater Impression
upon us, if we truly loved him, plerique postr^ma memin^re: Yea, he condescends
to give a Reason (though his Command is Reason enough of its self) such an one,
as adds to the Obligation of the highest Authority, the Obligation of the
greatest Gratitude, for that is the Blood of the New Testament, which is sh^d
f^r many, say Christ, for the Remission of Sin^. St. Luke tells us, it was to
be a Commemoration, Ordinance, Do this in remembrance of me. St. Mark, 14 23
says, They all dr^^^ of it. St Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 23. says, he received the same
Ordinance from Chr^^^ and that it was to continue till Christ's coming to
Judgment; for they were to th^^ forth the Lord's Death till he come, why is it
else called the Lord's Supper, but because the Lord himself instituted it? Ver.
20. And upon this Account he aggravates their Profaneness. 22, 23. Because it
was an Abuse of an Ordinance of Christ, and threatens it terribly. 27, 28, 29,
30. He lays the Guilt of the Blood of Christ upon them, threatens them with
Diseases, and Sicknesses in this World, and Damnation in the other: Harsh
Sentences, for eating a little common Bread, drinking a little common Wine,
unworthily; besides, what a solemn and serious Preparation is here required?
28. But let a Man examine, etc. We cannot think such a strict Examination of our
selves is required of every one before he eats his Dinner, and that for want of
it he should be damned. Ver. 27. 'Twas not for drinking of his own Cup, or his
Friends, but the Cup of the Lord, unworthily; And must such a solemn Ordinance
of Christ's be dressed up with such disgraceful Titles, upon its forehead,
Popish, Carnal, Cainitical, to expose it the more to the Scorn and Contempt of
their Vulgar, and Rabble Quakers.

Sect. 14.
Whitehead in Answer to the Snake, and in his Innocence and Truth, etc.
stumbles at the Word Sacrament, and says it is not to be found in Scripture,
applied to these P. 26. l. 14.
Mysteries. But G as long as Sacrament is a Word apt enough to express the
Nature of the thing, why should thou make such a stir about a Word, and show
thy self as Pedantical as a pert Schoolboy, with his Unde derivatur? Where
can thou find Infallibility, and Friend, Meetings etc. expressly in Scripture?
Yet thou contendest very earnestly for these things. We are sure the Word
Sacrament is as Scriptural, and more expressive of the thing we use it for,
than those you use to express an Order of Men by, set apart for Holy
Ministration, viz. Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Witches, Devils, Beasts,
Bloodhounds, Moles, Tinkers, Sodomites, etc. Can any thing be more expressive
of the Nature and End of this Mystery, than a Word that signifies to bring an
Holy Thing (such is the Death of Christ) to our Minds: But G. if thou will, we
will compound with thee for this, we'll not be such Logomachists as to fall out
for a Wo^d; give us but the thing, and call it, if tho^ wilt, by its Scripture
Name, the Lord's Supper.

Antidote against the Snake, p. 112.
He tells us again, Till he comes, is meant, till Christ comes spiritually into
our hearts; and Christ was not then come so to the Corinthians, and that was
the Reason of the Celebration of this Ordinance was continued so long. We had
thought Christ had been come to every Man alive, for he enlightens every Man
that comes into the World; and therefore is come to all. But he says the
Corinthian^ were not then the purest Christians; yet we doubt not, but some of
them were as pure as the Quakers: We may presume so far^, of Paul, and Apollos,
Cris^us and Gaius; and it were hard, if Christ had not appeared spiritually, to
any one of that great Multitude baptized with them, Acts 18. 8. Yet St. Paul
speaks to all the Corinthians, What I have received, that I have delivered unto
you. We hope also the Disciples of Christ, who all received, had some little
appearance of Christ in them, as much as W. Pen, and thy self; and some
Primitive Christians, and Martyrs, might be almost as pure as you, whoever took
it, even when going to their Last Home, at Death, as their Viaticum, as a
Cordial to comfo^t and revive their Spirits, and fit them for their Last
Conflict, at a Stake, or Furnace. Truly G. the purer Men are, and the more
Christ be come into their hearts, the more worthy they are: The Apostle
intimates, such are the fittest to participate of this Ordinance, which you
wickedly affirm it is but to continue till we are so. The Apostle exhorts, at
the Peril of most dreadful Judgments, to as great a Measure, and proficiency of
Grace and Holiness, as they can attain to; so let them eat, and so let them
drink, etc. No, says G. When they are come to that measure, they need not do
it. One would think such Men have most reason to remember the Death of Christ,
who have felt most of the comfortable Effects of it themselves; unless they
will say, because they have Christ within them, they need no Shadows or Images,
to remember him by; or because they have Christ Crucified within themselves,
they need not send their Thoughts, and Meditations, a Pilgrimage to J^rusalem,
to reflect upon the Pain^ and Agony, the Contempt and Scorn, was sufffered New
Catechis^, 134.
there* Smith says, We believe that Christ in us does offer up himself, a
living Sac^^fice unto God for us, by which the Wrath and Justice of God is
appeased Primmer, p. 8.
toward us. Again Smith, They are false Ministers, that preach Christ without.
We that are pure Quakers, (which the Corinthians were not, it seems, not a Man
of them) have Christ and his Death within us, What need we trouble our Memories
1 Cor. 5.
about Calvary, or J^rusalem? The Lustful, Atheistical, Schismatical and
Drunken 1 Cor. 15.
Corinthians, man have leave to remember, and show forth his Death (because he
1 Cor. 11.
is not yet come to them) if they please. Whitehead says, They were to wait 1
Cor. 1.
for the coming of Christ, to make them better. No doubt of it G. and the
better Answer to the Snake. 112.
they were, the Apostle^ say, they would be the fitter to receive these
Mysteries, S^. Paul exhorts to worthy Receiving* neither does he set a Measure,
or Limit to their Worthiness: We a^e confident ^e never ^e^red they could be
too worthy, though now ^^ d^^s ^^^s the eminency and h^ighth of Worth, in some
sort of People, that keeps them from receiving* as having now no need of it.
Whitehead at last yields, There might Answer to the Snake* 172 (...).
be a good ^^tention, in the first Proposals and Practice of the Memorials of
Christ^, Death among the Corinthians to remember and show forth Christ's Death,
till they knew more of his Life* ^o set forth in an unblameable state. G. if we
understand thee ^ight, thou meanest that unblameable State that Christ arrived
to: And therefore your perfect, ^inless Quakers, who have arrived to that State
they need not trouble themselves any more with the Blood of Christ, having no
more Sins to purge, or pardon, they are come to the unblameable State, and
therefore they remember it no more, unless it be in scorn, to thank him for
nothing, as by and by you may ^^e. What can this ^end to, but to evacua^e and
render of none effect to these unblameable Men, the Death and Blood of Christ
without them, therefore they have laid aside the Ordinance for the
Co^^emoration of it, a mean and low Dispensation, a mere Shadow, now the
Substance is come into them: Whatever they say they mean, this must be their
lewd Atheistic^^ Thoughts* if they agree with their Words.

Whitehead, ibid. Wonders at our urging Christ's Celebration of the Lords
Supper, as Obligatory, forasmuch as we do not imitate that Last Supper in all
its Circumstances. He mentions only One, and that is the Passover, with which it
was attended, which we do not celebrate with the Supper.

He might have gone on, and reckoned up many more Circumstances, if he had
pleased: We do not Celebrate in that Habit, that Posture, the same Time of the
Day, nor to the same Number, nor to such Apostles. But then good G. you must
forbear to Administer another Ordinance, which is your Preachments, in Breeches
and Doublets, and Cravats: You must get the Sandals, and the Seamless Coat*
which were without doubt, the Habit Christ preached in; the Substance of an
Ordinance may be the same, though it appear in various Circumstances. As George
Whitehead would be the same, with his Whigg and Beaver, out of a Barber's Shop,
washed and combed, as for a Wedding; the same I say, as if he should the next
day appear Polandinus, n. 68, 69.
like Prophet Eccless, all over besmeared with Excrements; or as his Brother
(...) going in a Rapture from Paris to (...) that stood up to the Neck in mi^e
and filth, to represent to his Companion, ^he fi^thiness of Sin he lived in.
But G. we have a little more to say upon this Point, That Christ himself
allowed it should be received Ans. to Snake, p. 112.
without the P^ssover; for, Did not Paul Celebrate the Supper of the Lord
without it? And, Has he not told you he Celebrated it as he received it?

Answer to Snake, p. 112.
Whitehead says, Christ's last Supper was a consummation and fulfilling of the
Jewish solemn Feast under the Law; though that be precarious enough, yet if
that were granted, must the Lords Supper therefore have its end, and determine
presently? the quite contrary may fairly be inferred, that it ought not: the
Antitype that consummates and fulfils the T^pe, always continues after the Type
is vanished. The Passover is abolished, but Christ our Passover continues for
ever; the legal Priesthood might be a Type of the Spiritual, under the Gospel
the former is done away, we hope the latter will stand awhile notwithstanding
your Quaker rage against it: Can any one understand what thou meanest by
consummating and fulfilling, unless to put an end to them, by somewhat that may
abide, except thou think the Supper of the Lord came for nothing but to
destroy these Feasts and die.

Ibid. p. 114.
He says again, it was condescended to, because of the weakness of many: That is
a very good Reason why it should continue still, because there will be
Weaknesses among us, while we are on this side Heaven, for all the arrogant
boasting of our Perfectionists. And we hope you will not grudge at the
Ministration of this Ordinance unto us weak ones.

Ibid.
He says again, he will not condemn them who are conscientiously tender in the
practicing that which they believe to be their Duty, viz. the receiving of the
Sacrament. What, not condemn them George, for receiving so religiously a
Carnal, Cainitical Ordinance, instituted by the Pope? But ( ibid.) thou
desire they may come under that higher Dispensation of spiritual Communion.
Only we have one Question to ask thee before we part: Was that Sacrament
commanded by Christ or not? if not commanded, thou oughtst to condemn the
Administrator and Communicants too, as superstitious Will-worshippers, for
setting up a way of serving God, that he never appointed; and if it were
commanded, thou ought not only to forbear censuring, but highly approve of
the Zeal of those that duly and conscientiously receive this Ordinance.

He confesses ( ibid. p. 115.) The Abuse of the Substance or Mystery does incur
Damnation, grievous Diseases, if you rest and stick in the shadow, and neglect
the Substance. Here we are very good Friends again, and so we shall part with
him; for it is very true, to stick in the Shadow, and neglect the Mystery, does
incur Damnation: But does not this allow us to use the shadow, or we could not
stick in it; no George, I hope we shall not stick in it, tho we use it as a
means to obtain the Mystery. Ah George! thou wast not in this good mind, when
thou wroted'st that accursed Book, which thou called'st Light and Life; where
thou vilified'st the Mystery, the Blood of Christ, laughed'st and jeered'st at
it, as an useless and unprofitable thing. See p. 64. The shedding of the Blood
of Christ, let out by a Spear, was the Act of wicked Men, and the Spear an
Instrument of Cruelty, which to lay the meritorious cause or stress of our
Justification upon, is false Doctrine. He might have known it was not only the
Act of the Soldiers, but Christ's own Act also; ^lay down my Life for my Sheep,
and lo^ I come to do thy Will, O God; it was not the murderous Act of the
Soldiers, but the voluntary Resignation of himself to the Will of God, that
made Christ's Death a Sacrifice, he gave himself a Ransom for all.

See Reader, if thou durst look upon such a Gorgon's-head, such monstrous
Blasphemi^s; we cannot but be astomshed while we are a writing them: See Light
and Life, p. 52.
what Sport he makes with the outward Blood. I pray, says he, what is the Price
so much talked of, that both satisfies God, and saves Man? The saving virtue of
the outward Blood of Christ, he counts a Tale and a Story People have gotten by
the end to talk of; though the Scripture says, we are bought with a Price, and
we have Redemption through his Blood; this is but a little Scripture tattle and
prate. He says further, Whereas so much mention is made of the Bloodshedding,
and so much Efficacy and Virtue seems to be derived from it. Mark, it only
seems to be derived from it. Alas poor deluded Christians! How have you been
cheated by the Evangelists and Apostles, and a Company of Hireling Priests,
ever since the Apostles Days, to cause you to rest and rely so confidently upon
a Sunbeam or Shadow, to catch at an Apparition or a Phantasm, a mere Semblance
and Appearance.

But further, if you turn in you shall see greater Abominations than these. Is
it not (says he, ibid.) a Spiritual Supernatural Virtue, Power and Efficacy,
that cleanses, saves, and justifies; if it be, how then can it proceed from
the shedding of the Blood outwardly? If it perished and be not in being, Page
16. Where is the Blood? is it in being or no, or did it sink into the Ground
and corrupt? How then does it cleanse, justify, redeem and save? Page 17. That
Blood that saves is in being, and not corruptible; for we are not redeemed with
corruptible things.

Thou may remember George, The Lamb was slain, Rev. 13. 8. from the
Foundation of the World. He was not actually crucified from the beginning, but
the virtue and merit of his Death might reach to the beginning of the World,
though not then in being; and why not to the end of it too though not in being?
The Purchase may be enjoyed either before or after the Payment of the Price;
and if it be not in being, we may enjoy the benefit of it by Faith. He asks
again, p. 55. whether any thing be of Eternal Merit or Worth, that is not
everlasting; and then scoffingly upbraids us, as not being well agreed what
Blood of Christ we should assign that Virtue and Efficacy to, whether to that
which was let out of his Side by the Soldier's Spear after Death, or that Blood
that dropped from him in his Agony: and at last confidently resolves, that the
Blood of Christ that cleanses us, etc. is the Life of the Spirit, and that this
is the Blood of the Covenant. Here we have the outward Blood of Christ thrown
out of Doors by Whitehead, as if it were but the Blood of an Ox or Sheep let
out at the Shambles, only because the Scripture speaks so much of the Blood of
Christ, and we must not affront its Testimony too much: They tell us of an
inward Blood of Christ, a Blood never heard of before, neither in Scripture,
nor any of the Writings of Christians from the Apostles times, till Satan in
these last Ages of the World opened a Vein in Fox's Crown, and so furnished us
with plenty of it,

Ah how willingly would you be rid of the outward Christ, as well as the
outward Blood of Christ; as the Jews Joh. 9. 22. they would have thrust him out
of their Synagogues long ere now, but for fear of the People, though in effect
they have cast out Jesus of Nazareth as well as his Blood, only dressed up one as
Michael dealt with Saul, a counterfeit Phantasm, as like him as they can, which
they call a Christ within. Ah George, thou will one day find it better to have
remembered the Blood of Christ at our Communion, with Raptures of Joy and
Thankfulness, than thus to have remembered it in your Light and Life, with Scorn
and Contumely. No wonder you abandon and explode the Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, which was instituted as a Commemoration of the outward Blood of Christ;
which if it were as thou have wickedly represented it, would not be worth
remembering.

God open thy Eyes, and give thee Repentance; for belching out such Blasphemies
against that Blood, and grant that thou may feel the Virtue of that which
thou have so much vilifyed, and experience the merit of it in the pardon of thy
so great Blasphemies.

What G. Whitehead says, p. 27. ult. touching their giving Liberty to all, is
so little to the purpose, that nothing need to be returned to it; the Charge
(in the Brief Discovery, p. 13, 14. quoted from the Spirit of the Hat) standing
firm against them: Fox saying, What! Liberty to the Presbyter? No. To the
Independent? No. To the Baptist? No. Liberty is in the Truth, (which if it has
any sense must be this; no Liberty to any but those that are in the Truth)
equivalent to that of the Papists (as the Quotation takes notice) who say,
What! Liberty to the Sectary? No. To the Heretics? No. No Liberty out of the
Church, say they; No Liberty out of the Power, says Fox; which amounts to the
same: as one Quaker wrote to another in their bemoaning Letter called the
Spirit of the Hat; which plainly refers to a Liberty from external Coercion and
Force, because it speaks of such a Liberty as they could give to, or take away
from Presbyters, Independents and Baptists. And therefore when George Whitehead
says in answer hereunto, there is no true Liberty but in the Power and Spirit of
the Lord; and William Pen calling it a Spiritual Liberty, is nothing to the
purpose, Spiritual Liberty being wrought within, not given by Men without, that
which no mortal Man can give or take away; neither do Presbyterians,
Independants, or Baptists (whatever Power the Quakers may come to) fear their
Spiritual Prisons, Chains, or Fetters, but their material ones. And whereas
George Whitehead shifts to another corner, telling us in canting words, it is a
Liberty in truth; and adds, it is for Unity, Society and good Order against the
Spirit of Strife, Division and Separation: What is this to Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists, who were the persons spoken of? Were they ever
taken into your Society, or did they turn Quakers, that you should be concerned
at their making any Division or Separation from you, under pretense of Liberty
of Conscience? All this is to amuse the Reader, and lose the true Case in hand;
which was to show that the Quakers, had they as much Power, would afford as
little Liberty to Dissenters from them, as any of the Persecuting Priests, or
Powers of the Earth, as William Pen calls them, yea even as the Papists
themselves; of which Instances enough might be given would it not swell this
piece too much, which has already exceeded the Limits we designed it: Some are
given by the worthy Author of the Snake in the Grass, 3d Edit. p. 63, 64, etc.
But we leave this, and proceed to another Head.

CHAP. XI^.
Of Government.
SEditious Principles against the State is the second thing we charged them
with; the bare Representation of which would, we had hoped, have prevailed with
any (who designed to clear this People of Blasphemy) to own the Ma^ignity of
such Passages as those, which the Brief Discovery quoted from their Authors:
but we find our selves deceived herein, George Whitchead, coming forth as a
Champion, prepared to vindicate and defend them, making their Authors Prophets,
and their Sayings prophetical Passages touching Government: but whoever shall
consider the dire Effects, those wild Prophesies of Munster, Phifer, John
Matthias, John of Leyden, and the rest of that Gang, had upon the Civil
Government of those places they came unto, will acknowledge there is great reason
to discourage such an extravagant Spirit, whatsoever Pretenses it makes to
prophetic Inspiration: For how did these Prophesies not only lead them into
all Impurity (as we have shown) but incited the People to run upon their
Magistrates, and deprive them of all Authority and Power; and none have
followed them more in those pretended Prophesies and Revelations than the
Quakers: and that their's were not so influential upon the English Nation, as
the others were upon Munster, and other places, is to be attributed to that
Sobriety of Temper the greatest part were induced with, and that Freedom from
Arbitrary Opprassion the others were liable to; as also to their Experience,
what a Condition for several years they had been brought unto by turbulent and
unquiet Sects. Our first Charge is, That they are Enemies to Kingly Government;
and this the Passages we quoted from Buroughs, George Fox, and others, did
clearly evince; nay, not only their Aversion to Monarchy, but to the Person of
King Charles the 2 d. as a Review of them will make manifest.

Edward Buroughs speaks thus ( p. 244.) The Lord is risen to overturn, to
overturn Kings and Princes, Governments and Laws: -- And he will change Times,
and Laws, and Governments, and there shall be no King ruling but Jesus, nor no
Government of Force, but the Government of the Lamb, nor no Law of Effect, but
the Law of God; all that which is otherwise shall be ground to Powder. And ( p.
507.) he says further; But as for this People ( i. e. the Quakers) they are
raised of the Lord, and established by him, even contrary to all Men, and they
have given their Power only to God, and they cannot give their Power to any
Mortal Men, to stand or fall by any outward Authority; and to that they cannot
seek, but to the Lord alone. What says George to all this? truly he dares not
recite it all; but after he had gone a little way, stops as if he had seen a
Spectre. The Lord is risen to overturn, to overturn Kings, Princes, Governments
and Laws, and he will change Times, and Laws, and Governments, etc. and there
he is at a full stand, hoping his Reader would never meet with more of it: And
those, he says ( p. 28.) were prophetical Passages, wrote 1657, and yet spoken
in the present tense, the Lord is risen, not will arise: very true George. Some
of us can well remember to our Sorrow, how the Lord in his Wrath did then rise,
and for the Punishment of our Sins did overturn (by such wicked Instruments as
the Quakers, who gloried in their having a hand in that overturning-work)
Kings, Princes, Governments and Laws. Edward Buroughs prophesies, says George
Whitehead; but it is of things past, or present, which he saw accomplished when
he wrote them, and there in wisely cautioned the Quakers (would they have
heeded it) never to go beyond their Ken; and had they done so, without
foolishly venturing upon things to come, neither they, nor their Prophesies,
had been exposed to so much Shame and Scorn as they have met with. But suppose
these Prophesies were of things to come, such Generals coming to pass would no
more establish Buroughs a Prophet, than it would have done John Lilburn, and
others, who foretold the downfall of their Enemies; but if any Revolutions had
happened for 20 years after, in any parts of the known World, they should have
been brought in to have vouched him a Prophet of the Lord; for George Whitehead
would have his Reader observe, That these Prophesies were directed to all the
World, under the Title of a Standard listed up, and an Ensign held forth unto
all Nations: a large Province indeed, for him to pretend unto, when he gave not
the least sign to any of these Nations, by which they should be convinced, that
he was commissioned as a Prophet from the Lord unto them; whereas all Persons
of old that pretended to be Prophets, came attested with some sign or wonder,
as we have shown before: And yet ( p. 46.) says George Whitehead, Edward
Buroughs was a Man truly inspired with the Spirit of God, and of Prophesy (tho
God never gave the World a convincing Proof thereof) but what may not such
Enthusiastic Persons vent to the People, under the pretense of Prophesy, if
the Character of a Prophet may be allowed them, without giving any Evidence
thereof, if for such stuff as this Buroughs must be said to be inspired with
the Spirit of Prophecy? What shall we say to Anna Trapual, who exceeded both
the Quakers, and most of the other Pretenders in exce^sive Fastings, and in
foretelling several things that came to pass afterward. -- She would fast
sometimes 9, 11, 14 Days. -- She was told by the Spirit, of the Soldiers See
the Cry of a Stone, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. and p. 20, qa^ted in Christianity no
Enthusiasm, p. 96, 100.
coming to London; she had a Vision of the Scots everthrow before Dunbar; of
the Fight with Holland; of the dissolving the Long-Parliament; and several
Visions of Oliver's being Protector, which she was troubled at; and foretold
Gidcen's ( i. e. his) being laid aside: yet after all she brands the Quakers,
as a delirous deluded People. -- Let them tell him ( viz. Oliver) of his Sins,
and tell him with Humility and Tears; not as those deluded Spirits, that go
running about the Streets, and say, we have such Visions and Revelations, who
come out with their great Speeches of Vengeance, Judgments, and Plagues: Oh but
thine who come from thee, thou give them Humility, Meekness, Bowels, Tears,
(which was indeed most like to the true Prophets, Jer. 9. 1.
who were mightily affected with the Miseries they foresaw coming upon a
People) but how cheap and mean is Prophesy made by such as Fox, Buroughs, and
others of their Order assuming it. Let the Reader please to observe what
trifling things they advance as Prophesies, rather than lose the Honor of
being accounted Prophets: Upon the proclaiming King Charles 2 d. some Queries A
Visitation of Love unto the King, and the Royalists. p. 4, 5.
were sent to the Quakers, which this Edward Buroughs answered. The first
Query was, Whether you, or any of you, that did pretend to Inspiration and
Revelation, did foresee, or was it revealed to you, that ever Charles Stuart
should be proclaimed King, to reign in England any more? Now rather than be
thought in the dark here, see what he reckons up for Visions and Revelations
from God. This, says he, was not contrary to that, which some of us have seen.
For thus much was said by George Fox, in a Letter to Oliver Cr^mwel: What, and
if for and because of thy Wickedness in the sight of God, he should raise up
the Cavaleers, and make them Instruments in his hands to accomplish his Wrath
upon thee, even like as he made thee once his Instrument to overthrow them.
Here, says Buroughs, the thing was believed to be possible; and it is now
come to pass, even as was seen and believed: Spectatum admissi risum ten^atis.

Was ever such things called Visions and Revelations before? Because the thing
was possible for God to do (though it was not done in Oliver's Days, which the
passage in that Letter seems to refer unto, nor yet neither during his Son's
Rule and Government; God was pleased to make others, and not the Cavaliers
Instruments in his hand against his Sons) therefore that was a Revelation to
Geo. Fox, that K. Charles II. should return to his Crowns again; (if Fox had
such a Revelation, he was strangely disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, in
writing as he did to the Presbyterians just before the Restoration, as you
will see by and by:) such another Prophecy we have in the next words given
forth by Buroughs himself; and yet the Letter was wrote December 1659. when
almost every one, but such blind Beetles as these, did foresee it: But what
said the Oracle then? It tells the Cavaliers, That the same Spirit of Pride,
Oppression and Idolatry was entered into their Enemies, and did live in them in
as high a measure as it had done in the Cavaliers; and their Iniquities were
well nigh finished, and the Lord would one way or another correct and rep^ove
them. But mark it, the Prophet was presently at a loss: for whether (says he)
the Lord will ever make use of you (Cavaliers) to reprove them, as he did of
them to reprove you; this I determine no^, but leave it to him who can do
whatsoever he will, by what Instruments he pleases. -- A most wonderful
Revelation, that God should some way or other rebuke notorious, open, and
universal wickedness, especially in Men of Public Place and Station, when St.
Paul tells us the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of Men; and we have so many instances thereof from
Scripture and our own Experience -- But his Prophecy gave little hopes to the
Cavaliers, since he reminds them therein, that though they had made many
attempts to be revenged on their Enemies, they had not prosper'd; the Lord had
hitherto always defeated them, and bowed them down under a People as unworthy
as others; and Chapter Stuart must either be converted to God (he was it seems at
that time wholly estranged from him) and ruled by him, or else he can never
rightly rule for God in this Nation; and then he did believe it was not
impossible, but that he might be a Rod upon them that had once smote him. Who
would not travel a great way to be resolved in his Doubts by such a famous
Prophet? Truly, had the Oracles of the Heathens been no clearer, or more to the
purpose than these Prophesies, the Priests of Apollo would have had but a
miserable Trade of it; and yet says Buroughs, it appears that these things, in
a great measure, were foreseen and prophesied of. -- And yet he presently after
tells them, that his Prophecy was nothing but a rational Observation of things;
for 'twas, says he, verily believed that such a thing would be; your Enemies
having so acted and proceeded as to destroy themselves, and so bring you in
over their heads; though they little intended the thing, yet the effect of
their proceedings could hardly prove otherwise than to destroy themselves, and
make room for you; and these things I observed, says he. So that all the
Divine Revelations hereof shrunk at last into a prudent and rational Guess,
which he made upon their indiscreet management and ordering of matters. Such
another Prophet was Stephen Crispe, who seeing the Nation engaged in a
dangerous War, and London at the same time suffering by a dismal Fire (
September 1666.) began to foretell a sad time coming upon all the Inhabitants
(except his own Party) and positively says it shall be before seven times
(which the Friends no doubt, understood to be seven years) should pass over
them: for thus he speaks, Friends, I am the more drawn forth at this time, to
visit you with an Epistle, An Epistle to Friends concerning the present and
succeeding Times, p. 13, 15.
because the Lord has given me some sight of his great and dreadful Day and
Workings in it, which is at hand and greatly hastens, of which I have something
to say unto you, that you may be prepared to stand in his Day, and may behold
his wondrous Workings amongst his Enemies, and have fellowship with his Power
therein (to be sure they must join with their King and assist him against his
Enemies.) -- And as concerning those succeeding times, the Spirit of the Lord
has signified that they will be times of horror and amazement to all that
have, and yet do reject his Council: for as the Day of his Forbearance, Warning
and Inviting have been long, so shall his Appearance amongst those that have
withstood him, be fierce and terrible; even so terrible, as who shall abide his
Coming, for the Lord will work both secretly and openly, and his Arm shall be
manifest to his Children in both. -- And because of the hardship and sorrow of
those Days, many shall seek and desire Death rather than Life. Had this been
the Day of the general Judgment, who would have doubted the truth of what was
here said? but as they believe no such particular Day shall outwardly be, so
'twas a Day that should come upon the wicked Inhabitants of this Nation, who
had so long withstood the Warnings and Invitings of their Teachers; whereupon
he proceeds, Ah! My heart relents and is moved within me in the sense of these
things, and much more than I can write or declare, which the Lord will do in
the Earth, and will also make haste to accomplish amongst the Sons of Men, that
they may know and consess that the Most High does rule in the Kingdoms of Men,
and pulls down and sets up according to his own Will, and this Men shall
do [mark that] before seven times pass over them, and shall be content to give
their Glory to him that sicteth in Heaven. That is, if we may interpret so
great a Mystery, all Kings and Princes shall be forced to yield up their
Crowns, Scepters and Coronets into the hands of the Quakers King, that he may
give them to his Servants, for the Meek must inherit the Earth; and he assured
them 'twould not be long. -- Before seven times pass over the wicked, they
should be forced to yield up all to the Most High, who pulls down and sets up
whom he pleases, It were endless to trace these Men in all their Follies of
this kind, who so extremely doted upon uttering Prophecies, that they could not
write a Pamphlet without giving a cast of their Skill herein. We will mention
but one passage more, though that alone is sufficient to confound these Persons
for ever, and make them ashamed of such a Lying Spirit, as has all along
possessed their Prophets: One Richard Crane soon after his Majesty's
Restoration, wrote a Piece Rich. Crane's Strict Account of Bab. Merch. printed
for Tho. Symons at the Bull and Mouth, etc.
styled, A Strict Account of Babylon's Merchants, etc. where he welcoms the
Loyal Clergy (who had suffered so long and so much for their King) with these
Presages (no doubt out of great affection to his Majesty, for they were then
become the only Royal Loyal Men of all the Dissenters, and had ever been so, if
you will take their own word) Go to, ye Merchants of Babylon who are now
bringing forth and exposing to Sale your old Cankered, Rusty and Moth-^a^^n See
Will. Mather's Answer to the Switch for the Snake, p. 10. in the Appendix.
Ware; you gather some heat from the Sun (K. Charles II.) that is newly risen,
and from it receive some small Vigor, and are like the Insect, and Reptilia of
the Earth, who creep out of their holes at the Sun's warmth, by which they are
vivified. -- Yet know such are not permanent, but the withdrawing of the Sun's
heat from them, soon return to their holes, and some perish; you may take this
as a Figure, there is a Cup prepared for you, being mixed with Plagues, Woes,
Miseries, Sorrows, Torments and Eternal Burnings, which you shall not pass, for
you are found from the Lord worthy, and a treble Portion is to be given unto
you. -- In some things you parallel Simon and Elymas the Sorcerer; you are
discovered and known to be as you are, viz. Antichrists, Deceivers, Sorcerers,
and Ravening Wolves; Flames, Flames, Flames of Fire is prepared by the Lord to
consume you as dry Stubble. -- Woe is me for the Day which I see is coming upon
you from the Lord, and all them you have made drunk by puttng your Bottle of
Poison to their Noses, who have drunk deep, and so are become one in Nature
with you: It had been better you had never been born; it had been better for
you that you had been strangled in your Mothers Wombs, and still-births had
been presented to them, than living Children into their Arms. Oh! What shall I
say concerning you? God's Everlasting Decree is sealed against you: Burnings,
Burnings, Burnings with unquenchable Fire is your Portion from the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth. -- Oh! I have seen Eternity, I have seen Eternity, and a
dreadful Day is very near at hand to be revealed: Oh, the overflowing Scourge!
Oh the Besom of Destruction! Oh the Plagues and Vengeance that is to be poured
out upon the wicked in this Nation, both Priests and People. Howl, howl*
Hireling Priests of all Orders, for the Wine Press of the Wrath of God Almighty
is even near to be trod, into which you are to be cast, for the Lord God has
spoken it, and he will not repent; a treble Portion, a treble Portion of the
Plagues of God Almighty you are to have above all others. Thus this famous
Quaker-Prophet Divined about Forty Years ago, but with what truth the Event has
shown. And now Reader, it is strange any Person should at this time of Day style
the Issues of these hotheaded Persons Prophetical Passages, when Divine
Providence has so ordered matters, as to encourage every one to hiss them off
the Stage. We very well know what little reason there is to expect Prophesies
in these latter Days; nay, that a Rational Intellectual Christian Casaubon of
E^thas. 2d Edit. cap. 3. p. 270, 171.
Knowledge is (as the Learned Dr. Mer. Casaubon observes from Aquinas) to be
preferred above all Prophecy, to whom Maimonides (the Aquinas amongst the
Rabbis, as he there calls him) does agree in many places of his More Nevochim,
making Rational Intellectual Divinity the highest degree of Prophecy; who has
also a Chapter (of very good use, to keep Men from running themselves out of
their right Wits) touching Moderation to be observed in Contemplation: The Man
who can enjoy his natural Wit and Reason with Sobriety, and yet affects
Raptures and Alienations of Mind, has attained to a good degree of Madness
without Rapture, which makes him so much undervalue sound Reason, the highest
Gift of God, Grace excepted, which is but the Perfection of Reason, or the
Reformation of Corrupt Reason, as the same Learned Man speaks ( Cap. 2. ult.)
And that the Quakers, who so much affect Defense of the Snak in the Grass, Part
1st. from p. 42. to p. 72.
these things, are all of them touched with Madness, is proved beyond any just
contradiction, by a Worthy Author. It has been the Fare of these Modern
Prophesies to continue in vogue but a short time, by reason of their evident
failure as to Truth, discovered by the Event and Issue of things; for a
Miscarriage, but in a Cicumstance, is enough to make the whole Prophecy
suspected of Imposture, whereas never one word which God spoke fell to the Sea
Numb. 23. 19. Josh. 23. 14. 1 Samuel 3. 19. Es. 14. 24. Hab 23. Mat. 5. 18.
ground, as the Scripture most abundantly assures us; and for this reason
perhaps the Seventy chose to render Vrim and Thummim by (...) and (...),
Manifestation and Truth, because especially by these two were God's Oracles
distinguished from the Devil's; God's being eminent for Perspicuity and Truth,
and the Devil's for Obscurity and Falsehood: God has given us this Character to
know a False Prophet by, Deuteronomy. 18. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the Name of
the Lord, if the thing follow not nor come to pass, this is the thing which the
Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously; and
therefore we may rest assured, that what God speaks with his Mouth, he will
fulfill Mr. M^de in his 93 Letter to Mr. Hartlib. lib. 4. p. 878.
with his Hand, 1 Kings 8. 15. Famous for a while were the Predictions of
Grebner, but what esteem are they now of? A Learned Man tells us the Year 1572
(when the new Star appeared in Cassiopoia) was the Epoch, or beginning of his
Prophesies, and he ended them at the Year 1613, which he supposed to be the Day
of Judgment (having no other ground for it, than the Numeral Letters of the
Latin word Judicium, which in all makes the Number.) He prophesied great
matters of Henry IV. of France, (which proved clean contrary) of Queen
Elizabeth and other Princes which never came to pass. -- Men are prone to
believe any thing they would have, and any words which seem that way they lay
hold of, says that Judicious Man upon them: How did the Predictions of those
three pretended Prophets (Kotterus, Christina, and Drabicius) delude the Sea
Dr. Spencer's Vanity of Vulgar Prophesies, cap. 1. p. 6, 7, 21. cap. 5. p. 85.
People for a while, and (which was much to be wondered at) that Excellent
Person also Joh. Amos Comenius, whose other Works praise him in the Gates, that
he greatly Reverenced their Persons, Recorded and Published their Visions and
Prophesies, under the specious Title of Lux in Tenebris. But God has clothed
all those with Shame and Confusion, who have relied upon the Prophesies of such
Men, by frustrating the Tokens of these Liars, making the Diviners mad and
their Knowledge foolish, Isai. 44. 25. And we earnestly wish and pray that the
Quakers and all others, who are fond of them, would at length own the folly and
danger hereof, in either assuming to themselves or attributing to their
Teachers a Divine Prophetical Influx and Inspiration, when there is all the
evidence imaginable, that the Father of Lies, and not the God of Truth was the
Author of these spurious Prophesies, that by the false he might derive a
suspicion upon the true ones, or abuse the Minds of Men with vain Hopes or
panick Fears: Oh, let not any of us, who own our Savior for our Prophet,
receive the Devil for our Oracle; if we be sick or weary of things present,
shall we resort to the God of Ekron (by attending to any Prophecy of his
incitation) for Quiet and Resolution? Can the Devil be thought able to answer
any Questions concerning things to come? Isai. 41. 23. Chap. 44. 7. Or is he
willing, if able, to do it with any fair and single Intentions? Have the Beams
of the Sun of Righteousness put out all the Fires on his Altars? Have the Glory
and Power of the Divine Oracles and Miracles spoiled his great Trade of Lying
Oracles and Wonders, and shall our Credulity and Vanity encourage him to drive
this secret and little Trade of Prophesies? The particular advice God gavethe
People by Jeremiah in a like Case, deserves now Jer. 27. 9.
to be recommended to them: Hearken not to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners,
nor to your Dreamers, for they prophecy a Lie unto you. And it is worth our
Consideration, that those who in these last Ages have pretended to them, are
Men either extremely Ignorant, or very Vicious, or strangely Fanciful, or
Hypocondriacal; for Men that are best disposed by their great Wisdom and
Holiness, as also by the Evenness and Serenity of their Tempers to receive
these influences of the Holy Spirit, do neither feel nor desire them whilst
they consider those vehement Transports, Consternations, Tremors, Enigmatical
Visions must create great uneasiness to them; which the faculties of those Holy
Men who were actuated by the Spirit in order to Prophecy, most frequently
underwent thereby, which makes them value it as a happiness, that God has
delivered us to the Conduct of that sure word of Prophecy the Holy Scriptures,
and the Dictates of clear and renewed Reason.

But to return to the Quotation out of Buroughs; George Whitehead to excuse
him tells us p. 29. That what Prophesies are for Christ's Kingdom they must
own, viz. that he shall rule the Nations, and in the midst of his Enemies, and
that the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of God and his
Christ; which, says he, the Holy Scriptures do expressly warrant and testify.
But how idle and impertinent is this, when he knows none of us (Priests or
People of the Church of England) who do not own the Scripture-Prophesies
concerning the Kingdom of Christ, or the Government of the Lamb, whenas we
assert them in a great measure fulfilled already, since so many Earthly Kings
have willingly submitted to the Spiritual Government of our Lord, acknowledging
his Scepter above theirs, and yielding themselves freely to be his Subjects;
yea, counting it a greater honor to be Membra Ecclesi^, Members of his Body,
than Capita Imperii, Emperors of the World: but we never read that the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ should be so troublesome to Earthly ones, as to
extirpate and overturn them, or that the Scepter of the Lord Jesus should, like
Aaron's Rod, swallow up the Scepters of all Earthly Princes, as Buroughs
asserts. But now George, if thy fright be over, let us survey the other part of
the Quotation: There shall be no King ruling but Jesus, nor no Government of
Force, but the Government of the Lamb; nor no Law of effect but the Law of God.
-- Canting words that signify nothing but to inspire People with a disgust of
the Government, if it does not set up Quakers in Authority over the rest: But
pray resolve us, did not Christ reign whilst Constantine, Theodosius,
Justinian, and other Godly Kings and Emperors ruled, who were Nursing Fathers
to the Church, and brought their Glory and Honor into it, who swayed their
Scepters in Sub-ordination to their Savior, and exercised their Authority for
the promoting his Religion? and now could he truly say (in opposition to such)
there should be no King ruling but Jesus, nor no Government of Force, but the
Government, etc. since all that which was otherwise, viz. the Heathen
Persecuting Power, was by the means of Constantine ground to Powder; and why
might not Jesus be said to reign when K. Chapter II. came to the Crown, who
professed his Religion, restored his Church to her pristine Glory, and owned
himself a Member thereof? let George Whitehead tell us in good earnest, whether
he thinks with his Brother Buroughs, that there ought to be no other
Government in the World, but that of Jesus? and we urge it the rather because
the Letter (our Scripture) tells us that Jesus Christ was pleased to own
another Government, to which he himself paid Tribute and Obedience, and
disclaimed all Temporal Authority, saying, My Kingdom is not of this World, and
therein taught his Disciples and Followers what to do, even to submit to those
Rulers in whose Dominions they are born and live, and not withdraw their
Obedience out of pretense that they are Subjects to him, as Buroughs does in
the following part of the Quotation. As for this People (the Quakers) they are
raised of the Lord, and established by him, even contrary to all Men, and they
have given their Power only to God, and they cannot give their Power to any
Mortal Men, to stand or fall by any outward Authority. Words not only
Seditious, but direct Treason against the Government of any Kingdom; as if it
were in the Power of any Natural-born Subject, under the pretense of being a
Christian, to withdraw his Allegiance from his lawful Prince, contrary to the
Doctrine both of St. Peter and St. Paul, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether to the King,
or to Governors sent by him, for so is the will of God; the w^i^h well-doing
(i. e. with the constant practice of Obedience to them) ye may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men; as free, but not using the liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness (as redeemed by Christ, but not making that a pretense for
disobedience to the Magistrate, that because you have given up your Names to
Christ, you cannot give your Power to any Mortal Man, to the service of the
King or Government) but as the Servants of God. Honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear God, honor the King. Thus St. Paul exhorts the Roman
Christians; Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, which Romans 13. 1.
how can they be, if they withdraw their Obedience and Assistance when called
for, and say they cannot give their Power to any Mortal Man, to stand or fall
by any outward Authority? when as the same Apostle adds, speaking to the
Christians, Ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, (for fear of the
Magistrate's Power) but for Conscience sake (out of regard to the Command of
your Lord and Master Christ, who have made Obedience to Magistrates a part of
his Religion); and therefore, herein they rebel not only against the Law of the
Land, but against the Law of Jesus, whom they pretend to be their King and only
Ruler: But King and Parliament can make no Collars for the Necks of Quakers,
they are established contrary to all Men, and to any outward Authority they
cannot seek, but to the Lord alone; though now they can creep and cringe to
Parliaments as well as any other.

The next Citation is from George Fox, who p. 31 of his Great Mystery, says,
That the Quakers are in the Power of God, and in the Authority of the Lamb,
above all Houses, and into Houses creep nor, but are upon the Throne: Not
standing about the Throne as Angels do, those daily Attendants on the King of
Glory; but they are upon the Throne, as well as Christ: and who knows but ere
long they may crowd him out, and reign alone? But this, says George Whitehead,
"is no doubt meant Spiritually, not Literally: Then the Sense must be this,
they are above all Spiritual Houses, and into Spiritual Houses creep not, for
they are upon a Spiritual Throne, for otherwise their being upon a Spiritual
Throne can be no reason why they should not creep into Material Houses; for all
Quakers, as Whitehead here owns, are upon a Spiritual Throne, and yet can
nestle into these Material Houses, and some very fine ones too: We are
therefore afraid, George, thy Brother Fox had a farther design even at these
Material and Earthly Thrones. But says Whitehead p. 29. l. 9. He must mean
Spiritually, for they are not upon an Outward Throne; No, God be thanked for
it; but Burroughes in a Declaration tells us, They are the right Heirs to it;
it is their Right of Inheritance, they are Kings de See the Declaration in the
Brief Discovery, p. 22.
Jure, though not de Facto; it is their Heirship to possess the utmost parts of
the Earth, and doubt not, ere long, to tumble down the Usurpers out of their
Thrones, though at present they must bear. It Is true, the Scriptures every
where encourage the Servants of God to persevere in their Christian Course,
with the hopes of a Crown and Kingdom, but the time of their Reign is not yet
come, they are not already upon the Throne; but Quakers it seems are, and
therefore it must be a different one from that promised by God hereafter to the
Saints. As an evidence of the truth of what George Fox said, Whitehead quotes
Job 36. 7. with Kings are they, (viz. the Righteous) on the Throne, and are
exalted; but George's are Kings upon a Spiritual Throne: and is not this Text
then cited very pertinently to prove Quakers upon a Spiritual Throne? The truth
is, they cannot stay for the promised Kingdom after Death, Kings they must be
presently, and a Throne they must now possess; but whether Eternal, Spiritual,
Material or Figurative, they know not; so His Letter is at the end of the Snake.
Coal tells George Fox, He was a King and ruled in Righteousness, and of his
Kingdom there was no end. But E^ihu going upon this Principle, That God could
not be so severe to them that were dear to him, insinuates that Job must be a
Hypocrite, for God uses to exalt his Friends and true Servants unto Thrones,
and not throw them upon Dunghils; he makes them even Companions for Kings, and
by way of Hyperbole says, they set them upon the Throne with them; the
expression is Figurative, for it is not said they are Kings upon the Throne, but
on the Throne with Kings; meaning in short no more than what is expressed in the
close of the verse, they are exalted and honored even by Kings, though we do
not remember Quakers ever so honored by any, save by the late King, some of
them being admitted, though not to sit with him on's Throne, yet in his Closet,
and lean too much on his Bosom.

Brief Discovery, p. 15. quotes Truth defending the Quakers, p. 9, 10. wrote by
Whitehead and George Fox Jun. who being asked, whether they did not say, That
the Magistrate, who made Acts of Parliament, and does not receive them from
God, as Moses, does act contrary to the Law of God: They answered, The
Magistrate that is sent of God, he receives the Law from the Mouth of God; and
he is the Prophet whom Moses spoke of, Deuteronomy. 18. 58. An Answer notoriously
shuffling: The Question being, whether the Magistrate, that is sent of God
receives the Law from God, as Moses? The answer is, if sent of God he receives
the Law from the Mouth of God; but does not say as Moses. No doubt, thou were
sensible, George, that the Laws of Magistrates are not accompanied with those
Appearances of Terror and Amazement which Moses's Laws were; and therefore [as
Moses] must be dropped. Well George, we will abate thee the thick Cloud, the
Thunder and Lightning, the Smoke and the Tempest ( Exodus 19.) with which
Moses's Law was attended. Must every Law of the Magistrate be from the Mouth of
the Lord, as Moses's was, or else he that made it is not sent of God? then
every Law of the Magistrates, even that for burying in Woollen, may be
prefac'd: God spoke these Words, as well as the Ten Commandments, or else the
Magistrates that make them are not sent of God. And th^^ all the Magistrates in
the World are exaucthorated by a dash of Whitehead's Pen, who made Laws which
came not from the Mouth of God, as the Ten Commandments did. Our Magna Charta,
and other Statute Laws may oblige us surely to Obedience, tho not of equal
Authority to our Bibles. But Whitehead complains, the last Words are
mis-quoted; instead of he is the Prophet, it should be, he hears the Prophet
whom Moses spoke of. We had the Book it self when we wrote the Quotation, tho
now it be out of our hands; and cannot but wonder, that three of us together,
should be so dimsighted, as not to discern, he is, from he hears: Howsoever
George, the Objection we make, is, thou see strong enough, without any
support from that Passage. We desire therefore thy clear and positive Answer,
whether the Magistrate be sent of God, who makes Laws, and yet does not receive
them from God, as Moses. This is what was objected against thee, and thy
Companion Fox Jun. that you had affirmed formerly; and tho Friends may be
satisfied, yet do not believe that wise Men will think thou have conquered the
Objection (as the French use to conquer our Fleet) by running away from it.
There is a bloody Charge laid against George Fox, in the Brief Discovery, p.
16. where out of his Book, called several Papers given forth to Presbyterians,
etc. (just before the Restoration of King Charles II.) these Passages are
cited; Friends, to all you that desire an Earthly King in England, etc. whether
Presbyterians, or others. -- Did the Elders of Old, in the Days of Christ, or
the Apostles cry up any King but Christ, to have any King to rule over them but
Christ? And does not the Priests and Presbyterians cry for an Earthly King, and
will have Caesar? -- And do they not in this crucify Jesus? Are not all these
Elders, which will dote so much on an Earthly King, Traitors against Christ? Do
you read, that there were any Kings since the Days of the Apostles, but among
the Apostate Christians? for Christ is King alone. I say, that is the false
Christ, that does not live upon the Head of Kings. They that be true Elders,
never go about to set up an Earthly King over them to rule. Herod the King was
mad at the Child Jesus. -- There is the Fruit of Earthly Kings. -- And has not
this been witnessed in England? etc. Ignorant and foolish People that would
have a King. And what Work J^shua made with Kings; how he brought them out of
the Cave; a fit place for them, -- and all these Novices Christians, that are
crying up Earthly Kings. -- And we know, that th^se Kings are the spiritual
Egyptians g^t up since the Days of the Apostles. We are concerned George, to
think how thou can wash thy great Apostle c^^an from these Stains; thou
may crack thy Brain, and strain thy Conscience too, and yet be forced at
last to give him up, as a most seditio^s Villain: No doubt these Passages were
a mighty Evidence of the Quakers Affection to Monarch^; and in particular to
the Monarch, which was then returning, Charles II. and yet in the May
following, Buroughs wrote a Pamphlet, stiling it a Visitation of Love unto the
King, and those called Roya^ists, as if they of all Men had been the most
tender, and indearing of all his Subjects. And there he says, That George Fox
did foresee and believe, that he would return as our King unto us, which
wonderfully agrees with his Usage of him in these Quotations; as the Jews
Hosannah in one place, did with their crucify him in another. But to be plain,
these are Passages as full of Venom and Poison, not only against Earthly Kings
in general, but the late King Charles in particular, as possibly could be; for
when the Presbyterians joined with the Royalists, and God had bowed the Hearts
of them all, as the Heart of one Man, to bring back their King, what could be
more mischievous and malicious, than to tell the Presbyterians, who were very
active in this Affair; That in this they crucified Jesus, and were Traitors
against Christ; and that the true Elders never went about to set up an Earthly
King over them to rule, for Christ is King alone? And truly our bold George
(tho daring enough) yet durst not encounter with this fell and monstrous
Dragon, the very sight of him daunts his Courage, so that he keeps at a prudent
distance; and tells us only in general, that Fox, in rallying thus upon Earthly
Kings, meant only such as were persecuting Kings: Alas! that you should so much
mistake my Friend and Brother, George Fox, he good Man, made no Reflection
herein upon King Charles II. tho indeed 'twas he the Priests and Presbyterians
doated so much on, and were so desirous to see in England once again; he meant
all this only of such as were Persecutors, like Herod, who was mad at the Child
Jesus, such Kings as the Gentiles, or Heathens would set up, such as Tophet of
Old was prepared for; I am persuaded, he never intended to reflect upon any
good Kings; for I have known him speak well, and give good Commendation of our
present Kings, says George Whitehead. A mighty favor, and pity but it should
be recorded to Posterity. Well then; when Fox inveighed so bitterly against
Kings, it was only persecuting Kings he aimed at, says his Brother George
Whitehead; and the serious Reader (as he calls him) ought to note, That he has
a right to interpret his Words the best way, as he told him, p. 11. But let the
World judge of the Folly and Falsehood of such a Vindication, when we have opened
the Charge in all its Branches.

First, To all you, says Fox, who desire an Earthly King in England, whether
Presbyterians, or others. Here Is no mention of a wicked persecuting King, but
an earthly one; neither do we know any, either Presbyterians, or Episcoparians,
that are very fond of a wicked persecuting King, tho they can patiently submit,
when it pleases God for their Sins to place such an one over them.

Secondly, Did the Elders of Old, in the Days of Christ, or his Apostles (says
Fox) cry up any King but Christ? as if Paul had never appealed to one on Earth
besides Christ; nay, and Christ himself had not owned another, and commanded
tribute to be paid to him, tho he was a Persecutor; and Christ himself was
condemned to be scourged and crucified by his Viceroy.

Thirdly, But Fox goes on; the Priests and Presbyterians cry up an Earthly
King, and will have Caesar. The Quarrel you see, is against an Earthly King, not
against a wicked persecuring one, or else he must make them the same; and so
all Earthly Kings are Nero's and Dioclesians.

Fourthly, He adds; "And do they not in this crucify Jesus? The Phantasm of a
Christ within the Quakers, by defending and upholding our Earthly Kings, we do:
Hereby we keep the Quakers Jesus out of the Throne, which we suppose is the
Crucifixion they mean.

Fifthly, He proceeds: Are not all these Elders, that will dote so much upon an
Earthly King, Traitors against Christ? This sure speaks them to be against
Kings themselves, tho never so well qualified; for he does not say, wicked
persecuting Kings, but only Earthly Kings: so that all who obey them, are
Faux's and Catesby's, Traitors to King Jesus: but it would even make an Enemy
pity them, to see what a miserable shift poor George is put to, that he might
defend this Clause of his Brother Fox. He tells us p. 29. That we vary in our
Citation hereof, from the Author of the Snake; we saying the Elders, and he the
Christians, that will dote so much on an Earthly King, are Traitors against
Christ. But could George Whithead think to blind his Reader, by throwing such
Dust as this in his Eyes; what injury to the sense and aim of the Quotation is
this? especially since George Fox used both the Words; saying, Are not all
these Elders, Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly King, Traitors
against Christ? And our using the Word Elders, and not Christians, opened a way
for thee to escape (had it thou discerned it;) for the Scripture tells us of
such Elders as were indeed Traitors against Christ, who would have no King but
Caesar, Joh. 19. 15. which no doubt thou would have returned as an answer to
us, had'it thou been aware thereof: but Bernardus non videt omnia, the most
quick-sighted see not always every thing before them. Let Us proceed to the next.

Sixthly, Do you read (says he) That there were any Kings since the Days of the
Apostles, but amongst the Apostate Christians? A most infamous Brand upon all
the Martyrs, and Confessors of old; and upon all the devout Christians in
Constantine's Days, who are by this severe Censure, marked as Apostates, for
owning any King but Christ, for Christ, says he, is King alone; it is not
persecuting Kings he here objects against, but all Kings whatsoever. Nay,

Seventhly, He tells us, That is the false Church, that does not live upon the
Head of Kings. Then We to the Church of England, who teaches her Children to
sit at the Foot, and not ride over the Heads of Kings; and well is it for the
Church of Rome, who has more than once kicked off the Crowns of Princes. A most
excellent, and distinguishing Note of the true Church, and would do well to be
added to the other Notes of Bellarmine, in the next Impression. For they (says
Fox) here, that are true Elders, never go about to set up an Earthly King to
rule over them. Which shows what Kings are here meant; when he says, That it is
the false Church, that does not live upon the head of Kings, of all Earthly
Kings, tho some of them may be so very devout and religious as to bring their
Honor and Glory to the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 24.
and be nursing Fathers to the Church of Christ.

Eighthly, Herod the King was mad at the Child Jesus; -- there is the Fruit
(says he) of Earthly Kings; they are all a Company of persecuting Herod's, who
would murder the Child Jesus if they could, Dragons that stand by to devour the
Man-child as soon as it is born; and send out a Flood (a Flood of Persecution)
to swallow him up. Here is such an (...), such a Panegyric upon Kings, as we
defy any Milton or Goodwyn, Ludlow or Amynter; yea, any infernal Orators to
pattern.

Ninthly, Poor England, says Fox, can testify this, what bitter Enemies they
have been to Christ Jesus, witness Edw. 6 th, Q. Elizabeth, K. James 1st, and
K. Chapter 1st, and can we expect better from K. Ch 2d? (for he it was who then was
upon his Return, and is not this a most base Slander and Defamation of our
English Monarchs, who since the Reformation (except one or two, and their
Reigns were but short) have been great Exemplars of Piety, or else of Goodness
and Compassion, so that we may pray to God to continue us but such whilst we
continue a Nation, and we shall still be the happiest People of any we know
under the Sun. But, says he, has not this been witnessed in England? Oh yes,
often have these good Men the Quakers born their Testimony See Snake p. 206. 3d
Edit.
against Kings, as persecuting Herod's, who were mad at the Child Jesus, and
therefore were they cut off in wrath, as Buroughs speaks, and therefore
foolish People that would have a King.

Tenthly, Our Friend George Fox would have us remember Joshua, and how he dealt
with Kings: Oh! For a Joshua, (a Cromwell, or Lambert) what work he made with
Kings; he brought them out of the Cave (a fit place for them) to Execution, as
we know who was brought out of his Prison to the Scaffold: A most wicked
insinuation, that all our Kings were like the Canaanitish Race, which God had
marked out for Destruction, and fit only to be immured in a Cave or Dungeon, or
like Bajazet, to be shut up in a Cage, and never to be led forth but in a
Halter.

Lastly, Fox tells them, These Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians, got up since
the Days of the Apostles, hard Taskmasters, under whose Bondage we have been
held a long time, and shall never be freed till a Moses, some eminent Quaker
(it may be William Penn's Son) undertake our Redemption, and lead us to Canaan;
for what a fine Prince would he make, as one of the Amsterdam-Quakers said,
pointing to him, as he walked by his Father's side to the Stadt-House there,
attended with a numerous Train of Quakers: (See Defense of the Snake 2d Part,
p. 174.) and what are these Kings but Egyptians, whom we must have drowned in
another Red Sea?

Now what say thou, George, to these Eleven Articles of Treason and Sedition
exhibited against thy Friend George Fox? We thought 'twould be too fulsom for
thee to swallow the Charge whole, and therefore have minced it, that thou
may taste the sweetness of it bit by bit. Thus spoke their Oracle George
Fox, nor do we paint him in any Colors but what he then appeared in; and let
the Reader but impartially weigh both the things and the time they were written
in, and see if he can make any better of it. But Whitehead's best plea is his
last, p. 31. l. 19. he tells us these Offenses were pardoned by diverse Acts of
Indemnity. Pray, says George, let this be observed at last George, Thou art
fain to plead thy Pardon; did ever Man flee to Sanctuary that was not conscious
of his guilt? A Pardon, though it frees from Punishment, yet it plainly infers
the desert of it: This George, we do observe as thou biddest us, and you have
found to your comfort, the Government have observed it too, neither they nor we
have ever gone about to hang you for your former Treason; what we desire is,
that you would only ingenuously acknowledge the desert of them.

And farther, Was it not a sweet Complement to the House of Lords (a part of
the Ancient Government of this Realm) to be saluted by the same Person (writing
to the Council of Officers) thus, What a dirty nasty thing is it to talk of a
House of Lords amongst us? Here Is the Right Honorable the House of Lords (part
of the Fundamental Constitution of the English Nation) bespattered, and
besmeared by the soul Mouth of an inspired Rabshekah, for such a vile Person to
insult upon the Great Princes and Noblesse of a Kingdom, because at that time
cast and kept out from a share in the Government by a Rebellious Rabble, speaks
him fit to converse with nothing but the Mob, and to be Chaplain to Captain
Tom: He that will pretend to sweeten this, may next undertake to perfume the
Jakes: George Whitehead, who uses not to be very nice, holds his Nose and gets
away as fast as he can, answering this Charge by even saying nothing to it. But
notwithstanding this spite they had to the House of Lords, we remember them
creeping and suing to them, that their Yeas and Nays might be taken for an
Oath; 'twas, no doubt, a great Provocation to Quakers, that their Word, or upon
their Honors, might not be as good a Testimony as any Lords of them all, which
cannot be forgiven by them that are in the Spirit of their great Apostle George
Fox, who in Construction called them dirty Peers. But the Priest must not so
escape the Lash of this great Censor George Whitehead, who says, These Men (who
wrote the Brief Discovery,) in their Margin, have noted the Quakers as against
Kingly Government, Page 32.
against the House of Lords, the House of Commons, against Judges, Justices and
Constables, against Lawyers and Lords of Manors; they should (says he) rather
have added against Covetous Persecuting Priests, but this they omitted, it
touching them to the quick. -- Good Man! the Men who wrote those things, are
known to be as little of a Covetous, Persecuting Temper, as any of the Meek and
Lamb-like Teachers amongst the Quakers; one of whom Preached and Commanded in
the Name of the Lord, that all the Cavaliers that were then Prisoners (taken in
St. George Booth's George Bishop's Book of Warnings, printed in the beginning
of the year 1660.
business) should be put to death: Harmless Man! that never wished them ill for
all this; for the same Person tells the King. Archbishops and Bishops the very
next Year, That they were fellow sufferers with them, and had great good will
toward them. -- But alas, there was Corruption, says George Whitehead, p. 32.
in the Monarchy, House of Peers, House of Commons, amongst the Judges,
Justices, Lawyers; and 'twas the Corruption, not the Sea Defense of the Snake,
part 1. p. 86, 87.
Office George Fox spoke against, if you please to believe Whitehead: Truly we
find no Government will please the Quakers long, because there is Corruption in
all, and so there will more or less, whilst Men are Men; but we judge them of a
very turbulent and unquiet Spirit, that will therefore be content under none.

But for a while we must leave the Civil Government and pursue another Game
whereunto we are led: Now slay the Priests of the Lord, --

-- Neve foret Terris securior arduus ether,
Affectasse ferunt Regnum Coeleste Gygantes.
Heaven's no more safe from Giants fury now,
Than once the Kingdoms of the World below.
Let the Tithes and Glebes be sold; says George Fox, and given to the Poor; a
small Box of Ointment for our Savior, a slender Portion devoted to Christ and
his Ministers, and yet repined and grudged at by these Wretches. What need such
waste say they? and to palliate it, they are taken with a Judas-fit of Piety,
to bestow it upon the Poor, although God hates Robbery for an Offering; neither
can a pretense of Charity ever hallow or sanctify such a villainous and profane
Sacrilege. They had cursed us sufficiently before, Number. 23. 9.
these Balaams not standing upon that nicety which their Brother Balaam did.
How shall I curse whom God has not cursed? but from every place without either
fear of God or reverence for Man, from Hill to Hill, from Pisgah to Peor, have
they poured out the most bitter execrations against the Servants of the Most
High, though to their great grief they found Nos non habemus Deum sequacem,
that with all their Offerings they could not bribe him to their parts, our God
not being a God that will lie, who has promised to be with us to the end of
the World; God has blessed, and all the Balaams in the World cannot reverse
it: They have called us Greedy Dogs, Wolves, Babylon's Merchants, Gormondizing
Priests, and doomed us to the Pit and the Lake; but now they find their
causeless Curses have done us no hurt, our Innocence proving a Sovereign
Antidote against the venomous bites of these Vipers; they are for trying
another method, and it is a blow at the Roor, which they doubt not but will do
the business, and that is the taking away our Maintenance, the denying us Oil
to feed our Lamps, which will then go out of themselves. Oh! these Priests,
these naughty Priests are they that spoil our designs, like St. Ambrose's being
in the Room, hindered all the Conjuring, and therefore we must Plut. in Demost.
get rid of them some way or other: Demostenes's Apologue will suit our Case
very well; When the proud Macedonians insisted vehemently upon the Athenians,
delivering up their Orators into his hands, who had dissuaded the Citizens from
a Surrender, he tells them the Wolves offered to make Peace with the Sheep,
upon condition the Sheep would give up all their Dogs to them, who never left
bawling and barking; so that the poor Sheep could not take a minutes rest; the
silly Sheep gulled with such specious pretenses, yielded to the motion. You may
imagine how the Wolves were overjoyed at the News, who could now rend and tear,
and feast themselves without interruption: Oh! it is these waking Priests that
discover us, we cannot break into the Fold, but they are presently opening upon
us, we cannot steal a Lamb from thence, but we hear them bawling incessantly;
there is no good to be done till these Priests be either hanged, or starved,
this Whitehead, ( p. 32. l. 21.) neither denies nor palliates, but a upbraids
the Priests for having so tender a sense for so much Injustice; "I suppose,
says he, this most touches and offends some Priests concerned; indeed George,
it could not but concern us to have a Company of Banditi, and Thieves break in
and rob us of all we have; but, blessed be God, there is a better watch kept
over the Church by God, and the Government, than to suffer her to be plundered
and spoiled by such a Crew. That Quaker who wrote a Persuasive to Moderation,
printed 1685, speaks as if he had forsaken such Company, and resolved to live
honestly for the time to come; he will have nothing to do with the Priests Lands,
or Goods: Far be it from me (says he in his Preface) to solicit any thing in
diminution of the just Rights of the Church of England, let her rest protected
where she is: This Man if not honester, is yet wiser than his Brethren, in
kindly yielding us our Tythos and Glebes, that he cannot keep from us. Next all
the King's Parks and Rents must be sold for the relief of the Poor, and
White Hall with all his great Houses, and all the Steeple Houses made
Almshouses for the Blind and Lame; it is some comfort they have provided us
such good Company, they intend to starve King and Priest together; and we
verily believe that Tithes, Glebes, Whitehall, the King's Parks and Rents,
whenever they go, will be sold at one time; God preserve us from Quaker Rage,
who like mad Folks fly upon every one they meet, and are fitter to be confuted
with Chains than Arguments; for when our Bell and Dragon had devoured the Lands
of the King and Church, the Monster was not satisfied without a second Course
of Lords Fines, and Lawyers Fees: Let the Fines which belong to the Lords of
Manors be Fox to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, p. 5, 8.
given to the Poor, says George Fox, and away with Cap-men and Coif-men,
Twenty Shilling Counselors, Thirty Shilling Sergeants, and Ten Groats
Attorneys, which will not tell Men the Law without 10 s. 20 s. or 30 s. These
Gentlemen of the Long-Robe are best able to plead their own Cause against such
Scoundrels as understand nothing of the Charge of an ingenuous Education,
besides the great Pains and Study must be undergone, to fit Persons for such a
worthy Employment. But Priests and Lawyers are reckoned by them as the Sea
Whitehead, p. 33.
great Oppressors of the Land, as George Fox jun. speaks, and if any Lawyers be
now offended thereat, we leave them to plead their own Cause, says Page 35.
Whitehead, if they can.

But Whitehead tells us, some were rather for Commonwealth duly qualified,
Page 31.
than a Monarchy that was oppressive and persecuting. A Commonwealth, if duly
qualified, would it seems, please some very well: But how shall we get one duly
seasoned for the Palate of a Quaker? as for Baptists, Presbyterians,
Independents, Episcoparians, they deny them all; it must be such an one, as is
dressed up, and is served in, from Grace Church Street. Oh delicious
Government! This, no doubt, would go down, rather than this oppressive
persecuting Monarchy.

There are some, it seems, amongst them for a Commonwealth, duly qualified;
then if they could get Monarchy laid aside, you cold make a shift with some
other Government, besides that of Jesus; tho Fox, in his several Papers, says,
Christ is King alone; and News cut of the North, tells us, Jesus Christ Page 18.
will rule alone: yet some of you we see can be content, that Christ should
make room for a Commonwealth, to govern but by no means a King.

But Whitehead would put us off with this, That many honest Men were Page 31.
lin. 17.
rather for a Commonwealth, than for an oppressive, persecuting Monarchy (tho
by the way we must tell him, that the Primitive Christians were not so nice of
their Skins, but could submit to be scratched, and rent by a tearing Bramble,
when set over them by God, as well as cheared by the fat and resreshing Olive:)
But what is this to the purpose here? Is not Fox's Outcry Judge. 9.
against Earthly Kings? Peruse again Fox's several Papers, and News out of the
North, as before quoted, and see if thou can find the least Title of a
persecuting Monarch mentioned their: Besides, may not a Commonwealth be as
prosecuting as a Monarchy? withous doubt; and therefore George, it was warily
said, That there were some for a Commonwealth, whilst others more agreeably to
their first Apostles Principle, could willingly throw off all, that their
Christ might be King alone.

See Pennyman's Quakers Contradictions, sect. 17. p. 6.
Whereas they had been charged with great Inconstancy, like the Polypus,
changing Colors, according to every thing that was next it; for Oliver now,
for Richard afterward, then for the Committee of Safety, then for the Rump,
the Council of Officers, for any thing that is uppermost. Whitehead to excuse
them, gives us an Instance in Samuel, who could calmly pay his Allegiance unto
Saul, tho before he was against it, and displeased at the Peoples desiring a
King.

Page 31. l. 30.
But the true Case was this; The People were under a Theocracy God, was their
King; and by desiring an Earthly King, they rejected the Rule, and Government
of God, which Samuel was bound in Duty to deter them from; and yet when God had
said to Samuel, Hearken to their Voice, and make them a 1 Samuel 8. ult.
King; he submitted as became him, and anointed Saul. And could they have shown
us such a Command from God, to set up Oliver, the Ru^p, the Committee of
Safety, etc. whom they adored alternately, as their Idols: We shall cease to
reproach them for the Agility of their Consciences, in turning so quick at
every Change. There was once a famous Doctor ( Andrew Pearn by Name) Master of
Peter-house in Cambridg, who had a Conscience so flexible, as to comply with
every Governor which was uppermost. King Edward, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth;
he caused a Fane to be set upon the Chapel, with a Crown on the top of it, and
A P wrote on the sides; and being told, how nimbly A P turned about with every
Wind; he answered, A P never turned, but when the Crown turned too: A P could
not turn so nimbly, but A Q can turn as fast, and give the same reason for it
also, if they say, these some had a Command from the Spirit, their Light
within; we think such a Spirit deserves to be looked narrowly to, tho but in
some of you since it is so changeable, that it can creep, and cringe to any (
Wat Tyler, or Jack-Straw) that has but Power enough to ravish the Crown from
the right Owner, (and will but cherish this Nest of Vipers under their warm
Wing) tho they have no other Title thereunto, than a Highway-man has to the
honest Travelers Putse, the greatest strength, and most outrageous boldness.
But can you forbear smiling at Whithead's boasting of the Non-Resistance, and
Passive Obedience of the Quakers, in bearing pariently so many Fines and
Imprisonments in the late Times; which is no more Evidence of it, than what
Raynard gives us in his Chain: How passive soever their Obedience was then:
It Is yet remembered, how active their Rebellions had been in the Days of Oliver,
and the Rump, the Glory of which they were as loath to lose then, as of their
Passive Obedience now, and theresore boasted of it.

But alas! says George Whitehead, There was Corruption in the Monarchy, E.
Burroughs's Advice to the ^arl. 1659. but this Paper is it seems left out in
his Works reprinted 1672. See Pennym^n's Quakers Contradictions, sect. 20.
House of Peers, and Commons, amongst the Judges, Justices and Lawyers, and
'twas the Corruption, not the Office, which George Fox here speaks against:
It Is not, we confess, good Breeding, to give the Lie to any Man; but should we
do it to him in this thing, our being necessitated thereto, would be a just
excuse, having no other way to answer him; and we appeal to any, who will but
impartially read what is cited out of Fox and Buroughs; how they brand all
Earthly Kings, without exception, good and bad, as Arbitrary Usurpers, with
House of Lords, and Commons, chosen by the People, railing at that Method, tho
called the Birthright of the People, and owned as the right Constitution of
that part of the Government: As George Fox Jun. does in his Works. Had not
Buroughs a very loyal Heart, when he said, 'Twas through Ignorance that the
People subjected themselves to Hereditary Governors, -- or to the Government,
standing in a single Person successively? -- and our Nation has been under the
Bonds of Slavery in this respect, etc. But we would fain have G. Whitehead
consider, what work his Explication ^makes of G. Fox's Reasonings; when Fox
said, Did any Elders, in the Days of Christ, or his Apostle, cry up any King?
he meant; did any of them cry up the Corruption of a King; when he says, Do not
the Priests and Presbyterians cry up an Earthly King? he meant the Corruption
of an Earthly King; and when he said, That Kings are Spiritual Egyptians; he
meant the Corruptions of Kings are spiritual Egyptians. Deliver us from such
trifling, it is both a tiresom and useless Employ, to be engaged in pursuing and
catching Flies.

We come now to George Fox Jun. who vented as much Rancour against chusiug
Members of Parliament, by the Voices of his People, as his Talent enabled him,
and yet endeavored to be vindicated by his Brother Whitehead. Page 32, 33.
A Parliament, chosen by the Voices of the People are not (says he) like to
govern for God, or the good of his People (no doubt he knew a much better way,
that none but Quakers should come to the Poll) and this he spoke from the Mouth
of the Lord too; for this that I declare to you, the Lord by his Spirit, of
Wisdom and Understanding opened in me. This Method of See the Brief Discovery,
p. 17.
the Peoples choosing their Representatives, by a Majority of Voices, was, you
see, infinitely displeasing to God (if we believe Fox) tho nothing seems more
reasonable to us, than that they, who act in our stead and name, should be
chosen by us. But besides, particular Revelation from God, touching this: The
Scriptures, he tells, are point blank against our English Usage herein; and if
you will, says he, believe them, then may vou see, that a Parliament chosen by
most Voices, are not like to act for God, or the good of his People. Well,
let us hear what the Scriptures say herein; he names three. The first is John
15. 19. If ye were of the World, the World would love his own; but because ye
are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World (to be sure these
Words, because ye are not of the World, etc. refer particularly to the Quakers,
they are not of the World, but chosen out of the World;) therefore the World
hates you. In our Saviours' Days, the World was made up of Jews and Gentiles,
who soon show themselves most bitter Enemies to the Christians; but is England
made up of such? do these choose Parliamen-men for us? no doubt then,
Christianity would soon be decreed against, and Judaism or Heathenism by Law,
be established: But what does this make against us, when the whole Kingdom owns
the Christian Religion, and none are chosen but the Professors thereof? Is he
not a rare Prophet to this Nation, as he styles himself, thus to interpret the
Scripture to them? His next place is Matt. 7. 13. Wide is the Gate, and broad
is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be, which go in thereat.
This we are sure is wide enough from the thing it is quoted for; and if we come
not nearer in the last, we must get a Quakers Translation of the Bible, to find
something for their turn* Romans 9. 27. is his other place; Tho the Number of the
Children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall be saved. He that
can read here, that a Parliament chosen by most Voices cannot act for God, and
the good of his People, must look through a Glass, unknown to all Interpreters,
since the Apostle's Days, to the time of the Quakers. Most prodigious Boldness,
to father all this stuff upon the Spirit of the God, and the holy Scriptures,
and make the World believe, that this wise Constitution of our Ancestors, in
electing Members by the Voices of the People, was condemned by them: he had a
mind, no doubt, the Army should interpose, and hinder the Commons from their
free Election; for to them in particular, did he direct his Message. But we
cannot but remark the Wariness and Wisdom of George Whitehead, in this
particular; who, tho he would willingly speak a good word for his Friend, (for
certainly, Page 33.
George Fox, Jun. says he, had an honest intent, in what he wrote of this
Subject) yet thinks not fit to go too far in this Matter. Pray observe, says
he. That I do not in the least design to oppose the People's fair and lawful
Elections, according to the true and just Intention, and Constitution of
Parliaments: No truly George, thou did therein very wisely; for that is a
nice Point, and dangerous to touch much upon, at least at present, it is too
early a day to promote such a design as yet, we must be quiet, till the blessed
time of our reign is come, and then we'll damn all the ungodly Privileges,
which the wicked call People's Birthrights, and make as great havoc of their
Charters, as was done in the late Reign: we'll closet every Man of them, and
make them promise to give their Votes for our Light within, that we may have a
Parliament to govern for God. Thou were more plain and ingenuous with us
George, p. 64. Where thou say, Thou would not be understood in anywise,
to oppose the People's legal and just Rights to Elections: No George, whatever
thy meaning and intention be, we know thou would not be understood so,
whatever Faux and Catesby designed against the Government; yet good Men, they
would not be understood to have designed any such thing; such a design is to be
a Dark-Lanthorn Business. If thou would not be understood, thou might
even have kept it to thy self, and not so foolishly have opened thy very Heart
to us, in justifying thy Brother Fox, who so not oriously opposes the Peoples
choice. But how then can thou vindicate thy dear Brother, who positively
asserts, that a Parliament chosen by the Voices of the People, is not like to
govern for God, or the good of his People? (if not, then to be sure he would
have them chosen some other way:) Nay, says he, The choosing of Parliament Men,
according to the Custom of England, which is called its Birthright, stands in
respect of Persons, and not in Equality: Oh! this is a very unequal, and unjust
way of choosing Parliament Men. And we see, says he, The People have been in
great blindness, in contending for Parliaments so chosen (a blind buzzardly
People, that will be always contending for this way, and not let the Saints
choose alone, who only have right to do it.) I must deal plainly with you, says
he, (and we think very unmannerly too, but according to the Quaker's guise) in
the sight of God, who has made me a Prophet to this Nation. This was rare and
delicious indeed, fit for the season 'twas written in, when there was no King
in Israel; and so every Man wrote, and said what was right in his own Eyes: But
now it may be dangerous to speak it over again; and therefore, says George
Whitehead, pray observe, That tho I would help our Friend at a dead lift, I do
not in the least, design to oppose the Peoples fair and lawful Elections,
according to the true and just Intention, and Constitution of Parliaments. No;
we now pretend great Honor to Parliaments thus chosen, tho our Brother George
Fox ^ail'd against it in his Days as intolerable. And we reprinted his Book
(to keep up his Testimony against this way of choosing Parliaments) several
Years after King Charles returned, and we are not altered in the least, our
Principles being no other now, than they were at first: Indeed we may see Cause
otherwise to word the Matter; but our Intentions are the same as George
Whitehead tells us; which Words we leave to the Consideration of wise Men,
notwithstanding all his Palliations of them. But Burroughs's scurrilous and
unsavorory Language is not to be vindicated by all his Endeavors, stiling the
Ministry the Brief Discovery, p. 18.
Whore that rode upon the Beast, and the Kings and Parliaments of England, the
Beast that carried her; for 'twas they, that by Laws, settled the Maintenance
of the National Ministry, and not the Usurpers in the late Times, who were more
ready to take it away, and wanted not Encouragement from the Quakers, who with
great Impetuousness urged them unto it.

Whitehead' s Truth and Innocence vindicated, p. 35.
He further rells us, That when G. Fox had rung such a dreadful Peal in the Ears
of Kings, Rulers, Judges, Justices, Lawyers and Constables, that they must all
down and cease, and that the Saints should sing, rejoice, clap their Hands and
be glad thereat, because the Lord Jehovah would take the Government from them
and reign; yea Jesus Christ would rule alone, and all those should be cut down
with the same Power that cut down the King that Brief Discovery, p. 19.
reigned over the Nation. Whitehead tells us this was wrote in the Year 1655,
and he appeals to the whole Nation, whether the Tree of the then Government in
England has not been cut down and removed. A most wise and worthy Observation,
designed if he could to blind the Readers Eyes with; for Fox's Prophecy (as
George Whitehead calls it, p. 34.) was that the Government should be taken from
all these for Jesus Christ to rule alone: The King that reigned over the Nation
was cut down, and all Rulers, Judges, Justices, Lawyers, and Constables were to
be cut down, with the same Power which cut down the King, and never to have
these any more; then we were to have another Earthly King, for Jesus Christ was
to rule alone. And we appeal also to the whole Nation, whether we have not all
these Officers still, Rulers, Judges, Justices, and Constables, every Branch of
that fruitless Tree (as he called it) blessed be God, we have them spring from
a better Root, though he had so thoroughly blasted them with his Thunder. Did
George Fox design hereby to make way for King Charles II. to come and rule over
the Nations, in the room of his Father, (who was cut down) and erect the same
Government, which he had done? we trow not; for the Lord Jehovah was to reign,
and Jesus Christ was to rule alone. As for the King who had once reigned over
the Nation he was cut off, and by Fox's several Papers given forth (taken
notice of p. 16. of Brief Discovery) they desired no more Earthly Kings; and
indeed they made no more of Crowned Heads, than of Quoif-men and Cap-men, whom
they packed after him.

Whereas the Quakers presented a Declaration to K. Charles II. 1660. against
all Plotters and Fighters, saying therein, All bloody Principles and Practices,
we, as to our own particulars, do utterly deny, with all Outward Wars, and
Strife, and Fighting with Outward Weapons for any end, or under any pretense
whatsoever: And this is our Testimony to the whole World, etc. George Whitehead
takes it very ill that we should make this Marginal Note against it -- Which
Government, ( viz. by Kings) that they might not support, they declare against
the use of the Carnal Weapon; but what more natural when as they not only used
the Carnal Weapon before (to support the Rebels) in fighting against K. Chapter I.
but boasted of their Services therein, as more extraordinary than other Men's,
one of them being better at that sport than seven others, and might be turned
to seven other Men; and this they did besides their Estates (if they had any)
paying their proportion in Taxes and Customs, which is all the support they now
afford the Civil Government (as he acknowledges;) and which thousands amongst
them cannot do by reason of their Poverty, and therefore ought to support it by
their Personal Assistance, when called thereunto, but now they declare against
fighting with Outward Weapons, and this they say is their Testimony to the
whole World. -- But their Light dictated this to them but just then, as Edward
Buroughs confesses; for several of them had been engaged in the Parliament
Service in the Wars, But we are now (says he) better informed than once we
were, for though we do now more than ever In his Visitat. of Love to the King,
p. 10.
oppose Oppression, and seek after Reformation, yet we do it not in the way of
Outward Warring and Fighting with Carnal Weapons and Swords. So that we may
observe, by the way, that all their Principles are not now the same they were,
when they were first a People, as Jos. Wyeth asserts (see Brief Discov. p. 26.
27.) and another of them who tells us, God is the same, Truth is the same, his
People the same, and their Principles the same; for they were once for fighting
with Carnal Weapons, but now says Edward Buroughs, they are better See George
Keeth' s 4th Narrative, p. 30, 31.
informed; and we do certainly know and so testify to the World (as they say
in their said Declaration to K. Ch.) that the Spirit of Christ which leads us
into all Truth, will never move us to fight and war against any Man with
Outward Weapons, etc. And yet, alas! They not only may be, but it is evident
they are mistaken herein; for now they can fight with Carnal Weapons, as we
have a famous Instance in the printed Trials of George Keith and others in
Pensilvania. It fell out that some Pirates took a Sloop of the Quakers, which
put them into great distress how to regain their Sloop, and yet preserve their
Principle of not fighting with Carnal Weapons; but that was impossible, as the
Case now stood, and truly they might lose all their Sloops, and all their Goods
too, if they would not oppose Force to Force, which at last was resolved upon,
and by so doing, they retook their Sloop, and made some of the Pirates
Prisoners. Nay, in a Letter sent to Dan. Leeds by a Person of Note, which he
printing in his Trumpet (p. 145.) an account is given him touching one Walter
Clerk, an Ancient Quaker Preacher, and now Governor of Rhode-Issland, That he
had given several Commissions to Masters of Vessels, and Privateers to fight
the French, and also had Commissioned the Officers of the TrainBands under his
Government, sometimes heading the said Train-Bands himself, on his lofty
prancing-Steed, Soldier-like, citing for his Defense Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, etc. And Edward Buroughs himself says, We have chosen
the Son of God to be our King, and he has chosen us to be his People, and he
might command Thousands, and Ten thousands of his Saints at this Day to fight
in his Cause, etc. (as in Brief Discovery, p. 22.) But he adds, We cannot yet
believe that he will make use of us in that way, though it be his only Right to
rule in Nations, and our Heirship to possess the uttermost parts of the Earth;
but for the present we are given up to bear and suffer. Against these Passages
was this Marginal Note made [And may reassume it, viz. the use of the Carnal
Weapon, when they shall judge it meet] which Geo. Whitehead says look like a
very invidious Design ^^^^^ise Suspicion and Jealousy in the Civil Government
against them; but let any one judge whether it be not an Inference proper from
these and the like Citations out of their Writings. Such Passages may well
awaken the Government to ^^re and caution, that we suffer not by the Pretenses
of Meekness and Humility in such Me whose Teachers have laid down Principles so
destructive, and that was the only reason of our mentioning them: When as the
Quakers by their renewed Declarations, and pretended Messages from Heaven,
would not suffer Oliver to rest, but resolved to put him upon fighting work
enough; and had he been as enthusiastic as they, his Sword must have been
sheathed in the Bowels of all the Nations round about him: For thus did they
rave, O Oliver! arise and come out, let not another take thy Crown, but let thy
Soldiers go forth with a free and willing Heart, that thou may rock Nations
as a Cradle: and then comes forth the broad Seal of Heaven which they affix to
the Commission they brought him, This is a Charge to thee in the presence of
the Lord God. Prodigious Madness! which one would think could proceed from no
Society but that of Bedlam.

P. 21.
This passage and the next (cited in the Brief Discovery) Geo. Whitehead cannot
disown, but says he has not the Books: but it matters not, for he can answer
them without Book, i. e. nothing to the purpose, saying, Oliver and his
Officers and Army had a day and Power given them, and so had Nebuchadnezzar and
Rabshakeh with his Hosts. But he very well knew the design of quoting them, was
to show how eager the Quakers once were for using the carnal Weapon, and what
dangerous Beautefeu's they had been, who endeavored to kindle a Fire that
should consume Nations and Kingdoms; yea to manifest with what a Gust and
Relish they remembered the Slaughters made of the Royal Party, all the Glory of
which they gave to Oliver: For thus Geo. Roffe (in his Book styled, The Ibidem.
Righteousness of God) speaks to Oliver Cromwell: Thus says the Lord, I have
chosen thee amongst the thousands of the Nations, to execute my Wrath upon mine
Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword with which I fought for the Zeal of my own
Name, and gave thee the Enemies of my own Seed to be a Curse and a Reproach for
ever, and made thee an Instrument against them; and many have I cut down by my
Sword in thy Hand, that my Wrath might be executed upon them to the uttermost.
'Twas sure a mighty pleasure to some Persons to be satiated with Blood! God
grant them better Tempers, and no opporunity to be so gratified for the future.

Brief Discovery, p. 21, 22.
As to Geo. Fox's Letter to the Council of Officers complaining that many
Quakers were disbanded out of the Army who had been mighty serviceable there;
and Eurroughs's Declaration in the Name of all the Quakers, telling the Nation
how dreadful they were to the Wicked (to the Cavaliers to be sure, who, as
Whitehead says, were for Swearing, P. 38.
Cursing and Damning, etc.) and what right they had to possess the utmost parts
of the Earth, tho for the present they did bear and suffer: To these, being so
notoriously obnoxious, Geo. Whitehead is pleased to say nothing, but according
to his shifting way tells us he has P. 39.
answered them in another place. ( viz. in Christ's Lambs defended; a most
proper place to do it in, for these were meek Lambs indeed, but fought like
Dragons, since as Geo. Fox there says, they could turn one of them to seven
Men, and had rather have one of them than 7 others) but upon perusal it appears
so frivolous that we think he was ashamed to repeat it the 2 d time to the
World, which he has not in other places been nice or shy of doing, especially
where so much Learning was shown, as in his Discourse, about Truth and Innoc.
p. 25.
(...) and (...).

CHAP. XII.
Of their ASSEMBLIES, etc.
GReat care is used to preserve their Assemblies, their Fund or Exchequer, the
Register of their Sufferings, etc. from having an evil Eye cast upon them by
the World; telling us (for reflecting upon these) that we seem to be influenced
by some treacherous Judas's or envious Apostates; and that we might not mistake
whom they meant, he immediately mentions Mr. Bugg and Mr. Keith being quoted by
us as to these things. As for what we have cited from Mr. Bugg's Books, if he
has wronged them in that, or by false or forged Quotat^ons, we desire they
would ^ar^^^est it by a particular Notation of them, and then appeal to the
Honorable House of Commons, to whom he has tendered several of his Papers, that
they would inflict a condign Punishment on him: But we are well ^ffured that
his Truth and Sincerity herein will abide the Test of their severest Scrutiny.
G. Whitehead knows he had lately an opportunity (could he have made good his
Accusations) of exposing Fr. Bugge before several of those Worthy Members in
the House of our Rt. Reverend Diocesan in London; but what did he get by the
Attempt but shame and confusion before so great a Presence? And as for Mr.
Keith (who is now received into our Church, and deservedly respected by all the
Members thereof) his excellent Learning, and, which is better, his great
Modesty and known Sincerity, sets him as much above those that defame him, as a
Chalice of pure Gold is in price beyond sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.
However, let us see what Defense he is pleased to make for the things we
reflected on.

P. 39.
Concerning their Assemblies, he here in good conscience affirms, That they are
all Religious P. 41.
Meetings; and afterward particularly says, That their monthly, quarterly, and
yearly Meetings, with their first Day and weekly Meetings, are upheld in the
Name of the Lord for his Worship and Service. So then all their Meetings,
monthly, quarterly, yearly, with their First Day and weekly Meetings, are
Religious ones; and if so, how can they answer their not having them all open
and free for every one to come into, that have a mind to do so? Is there not a
Clause in that Statute (which gives them Liberty) that provides expressly for
this? Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any Assembly of Persons dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in
any place for Religious Worship with Doors locked, barred or bolted, during any
time of such meeting together, all and every such person or persons that shall
come to, and be at such Meeting, shall not receive any benefit from this Law,
but be liable to all the Pains and Penalties of all the foresaid Laws recited
in this Act for such their meeting, notwithstanding his taking the Oaths, and
his making and subscribing the Declaration. Yes; but George Whitehead answers,
p. 43. As to the Door of our yearly Meeting being kept by some Person or
Persons, this we hope is no Offense in it self, the Door not being locked,
barred or bolted, as prohibited. But, George, is it not clearly the design of
the Act, P. 41.
that all Meetings for religious Worship (as thou expressly say your yearly
Meeting is, as well as the others upheld in the Name of the Lord for his
Worship and Service) should be free for every one that pleases to come unto
them? And does it not as much defeat the intent and aim of the Act to have the
Doors secured by persons who shall hinder any from entering, as to have them
locked, barred, or bolted? Thou have, we see, a tender concern for the Letter of
human Laws (tho the Letter of the Divine Law is but Dust and Death with you)
but this is shamefully to baffle the meaning, whilst thou strictly observest
the Letter of the Law, it designing all Religious Meetings should be open, not
clandestine and secret; that nothing blasphemous, heterodox or profane should
be published there, but present notice might be taken thereof: yea, that under
the pretense of Religious Worship there should not be any caballing against
Church or State, which is always done privately, and in the dark. But this
intent of the Law you defeat by setting persons about the Door, that none but
whom you please should enter in: and because the Door is not locked, barred or
bolted, you conclude you make no breach of the Law, tho your cunning herein has
deceived you, if any would proceed to try it; it being a Maxim with that great
Coke's Inst. (...) ^.
Lawyer, That Cases out of the Letter of a Statute, yet being within the same
Mischief, or cause of making the same, shall be within the same Remedy that the
Statute provides. But that we may note your Inconsistency herein, we observe,
that in a Book called A just Censure, you P. 26.
say, These meetings are not intend^^ for Worship: So that as it serves your
turn, they are either Religious or Political. If we speak of your Fund, for
maintaining of which you raise Money by Collection, Oh! then it is a Religious
Meeting for the care of your Poor, and nothing else: for you have no mercenary
Teachers, they singer none of it; tho we could, and that from good hands, tell
you other things: But if we tell you of the Doors being guarded by men set on
purpose to keep People from entering in, then it is no Religious but a Civil
Political Assembly, not intended for Worship.

Brief Discov. p. 22, 23, 24.
As to what we cited from Mr. Keith, Geo. Whitehead puts us off to The. Elwood's
Answer hereunto; and to be even with him we refer him to the Reply made by an
excellent Pen to Tho. Elwood, viz. the Piece called Satan disrobed, which his
Friend Tho. Elwood never thought fit to make any rejoinder unto, and we would
advise him as Friends never to undertake it. What we observed further, that
when the King and Parliament were so gracious as to include the Quakers in the
Act for Toleration, it was with this condition, That nothing therein should be
construed to exempt them from paying of Tithes (nay, Brief Discov. p. 24.
as we have been credibly informed, their leading Men did then promise some of
the Bishops that their People should duly and honestly pay them) yet
notwithstanding in their yearly Meeting 1693. they order that all Godly care
should be taken against the grand Oppression and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes,
etc. This Geo. Whitehead does not in the least deny (to show their Gratitude
and Ingenuity for the Favors received) but labors to strengthen their
Testimony by some of the Marty^s, who were he says of their mind herein,
especially one Wm. Thorpe: This Wm. Thorpe was indeed a zealous but ignorant
Man, who lived in the Beign of Henry the 4 th, but was no Martyr. As if our
Lord had not said upon a like occasion, The Labourer is northy of his Hire; and
Luc. 10. 7.
St. Paul had not sufficiently confirmed the Ministers Maintenance by asking
the Corinthians 1 Cor. 9. 1, 4, 5, 6.
these short but smart Questions: Am not I an Apostle? And if so, how comes my
Condition to be worse than the rest of that rank? Have not we Power to eat and
to drink, to be maintained s^mtu Eccl^si^^, at your cost whom we have preached
unto? Nay, have we not Power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other
Apostles, particularly the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas? Have not we as well
as they a right to carry about our Wives and Families, and have them maintained
by the Churches we come unto, as Peter and others? Or I only and Barnabas, have
not we Power to forbear working? Why should we be denied the Privilege common
to all the rest? See Clem. Alex. lib. 3. lib. 7. Stromat. and Eusebius. from him,
lib. 3. cap. 30. of his Eccles. Hist. as well as Modern Writers, Piscat.
Parcus, Crellius and Slicting. in loc.
Nay he adds v. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
matter if we shall reap your carnal things? shall we not deserve Meat and Drink
and other necessaries at your hands, when by our Ministry ye are enrolled in
the Book of Life, and made Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven? Do you count it such
a mighty thing that you afford us and our Familys Maintenance? truly it is no
such great matter. But this Argument is too large to be entered upon here, and
we the rather wave The Author of the Snake in the Grass.
it, because it is not only done already, but promised by a worthy Person to be
considered, which is already come out with respect to the Quaker Arguments
against it, in a Treatise by it selt.

Touching a Register kept of their Sufferings (inflicted for the breach of the
Laws) 'twas so evident and notorious, that Geo. Whitehead could not deny it;
for their yearly Epistle 1693. found fault with their Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings for not sending up Brief Discov. p. 25, 26.
full and complete Records thereof, and charged them to take more care for the
future. But it seems they were too full to be true; for Mr. Pennyman, who was
one of them about 20 Years, was greatly scandalized at the false Returns which
were made, which tho proved to be false, they entered in their Register as true.
And whereas the worthy Author of Satan Disrobed had observed and remarked this,
viz. That in this Register there were many groundless and many downright
Falsehoods, which it is fit the World should know, because they took great care
to swell this Register, and had threatne (...) publi^^ it to afterages; Geo.
Whitehead cries out, Pray observe, what a likely Story (...) is, h^w should
Truth and Innocence, p. 44.
he know what is recorded in such a Register, if he never saw it no^ read it,
as (...) presume he has not? whenas he might have easily satisfied the Reader
(...) Author came to know it, if he would but have cited the whole Quotation,
(...) him in the Words following, that Mr. Pennyman gave the World an account
there^^ (...) ^^ad seen, read, and found fault with their unrighteous Practice
therein: and yet Geo. Whitehead, good man, knew not how the Author of Satan
disrobed should know this, when t^^ ^^^ter part of the same Paragraph he cited,
declared it (who so blind as those that will not see?) and then he makes his
Reader believe that 'twas all a sham, just such a^ ^ne as he would put upon us
in the following lines: for that Person having said they threatened to publish
this Register of their sufferings to after-Ages; No says Geo. Whitehead, it is
^n aspersion that the Author of the Snake, and Satan disrobed, has unjustly
cast upon us, and it is not the first neither, for I know of none amongst us,
says he, who have so threatened to publish it to after-Ages. And you may be sure
there is none have done so if this great Cenfor Librorum know not of it, few
coming-forth without being submitted to his Examen: But are there none then?
recollect thy self good George, and blush if thou can Judas and the Je^s, p.
41.
at so notorious an untruth, when we believe thou can not but know that Wm.
Pen says; Our faithful Chronicles of the Bloody Tragedies of the professing
Generation will tell future Ages other things. And in his Rejoinder, p. 410. he
says, New Provocations ^nay give Occasion for their Register to come abroad to
the Nation more compendiously than ever. And R. Barkle^ as he Anarchy, p. 42.
glories that through their Faithful Testimony in the hands of the Lord, That
Antichristian and apostatized Generation, the National Ministry (most meek and
Lamb-like words) has received a deadly blow by our discovering and witnessing
against their forced Maintenance and Tithes, which we have testified by many
cruel Sufferings of all kinds; so he adds, As our Chronicles shall make known
to Generations to come. This, we think, threatens the Nation with a dreadful
Storm at last, which has been so long a gathering. But to make the Measure of
what the Quakers have suffered heaped up, pressed down, and running over, we
desire George Whitehead to insert in their Register what those Friends suffered
which Trumpet sounded, etc. c. 10. p. 91, 92, etc.
Dan. Leeds has given him an Abst^^ct of from the hands of their own Brethren
about Delaware, at Burlington, and other Places in East and West Jersey; and
see if Quakers, when they have Authority and Power, are not as very Persecutors
as any Professors or wicked Cavaliers. Oh! their Sufferings, their Sufferings
must perpetually ring in our Ears, since (if Br. Dise. p. 26.
you believe their great Buroughs) they are greater and more unjust than in
the days of Christ or of the Apostles, or in any time since; for, says he, What
was done to Christ or to the Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in great
part by the du^ Execution of a Law, etc. Which is so horrid and blasphemous,
that the repeating of it makes us tremble, notwithstanding what George
Whitehead says so largely in excuse, at least in mitigation, thereof: but his
Reader would have thought him much more a Christian to have utterly censured
and condemned such vile and wretched Expressions, than made the least Apology
for them; and so we are sure, would any Church of England-man have done, had he
found such a wicked Passage in any of the Writings of those of his own
Communion. But we would desire G. Whitehead, as much as he contemns Fr. Bugg
and his Postcript to the Brief Discovery, seriously to consider the Parallel he
gives between the Quakers Sufferings and those of the Apostles and Martyrs, and
tell us if there be any Comparison. These things we cannot but reflect upon,
there are many things of a public Nature which we have purposely omitted, and
some that we have but gently touched upon, because we leave them to the Wisdom
and Prudence of our Rulers in Church and State, fince what Inf^^ence they may
have upon our Peace and Quiet, is their Province and not ours to take care of.

To the Clergy of the Diocese of Lincoln.
WHereas Francis Bugg has been very Useful by his Writings, in detecting the
Blasphemies and Immoralities, and confuting the Errors of that Unbelieving
Party in this Nation called QUAKERS, I do hereby recommend Him to your Favor,
and his Writings to your Perusal; that by them you may see how much you are
concerned to be watchful over the Souls committed to your Charge, that they be
not infected with the Contagion of those damnable Doctrines taught and
published amongst them; as also to endeavor the Recovery of those ignorant and
well-meaning People that have been deluded by the cunning Insinuations, and
false Pretenses of the Leaders of that Party, who lie in wait to deceive, and
use all Art and Diligence to spread their Errors, and increase their Numbers;
in which they are very apt to pride and boast themselves.

I do also desire you to represent the Services of the said Francis Bugg in
this kind, to the Gentry, and others, that are well-disposed, to encourage
those who endeavor to defend the true Christian Religion against the Teachers
of such Blasphemies and pernicious Errors. This Fr. Bugg has done with great
Expenses, as well as great Trouble, Traveling about, and Printing, and giving
away several useful Books; of which you may have Account from himself and
others.

Ja. Lincoln.
May 24. 1700.
FINIS.

