SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE APOLOGY OF Dr HENRY MORE FOR HIS Mystery of
Godliness.

By I. Beaumont Master of St Peter's Coll. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

(...) 2 Timothy 3. 9.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. 1665.

CVM pridem, procurante quodam Bibliopola Cantabrigiensi, in lucem prodierint
perniciosa dogmata, eaque non pauca, cum Magistratuum Iure, Ecclesiae
Anglicanae doctrina ipsaque Christiana Fide nimium pugnantia, sub specioso
tamen vocabulo Mysterii Pietatis: ea propter, ne incautiores Tyronum in hac
Academia animi forte Corrumpantur, virusque latius serpat, opportunae istae
observationes Antidoti ergo,

Imprimantur.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Dr MORE's APOLOGY FOR His Mystery of GODLINESS.
MY chief purpose being to show the Invalidity of the Drs. Apology touching
the Ten Objections made against his Mystery; I shall trouble the Reader only
with some few brief Notes upon what the Luxuriant Author has premised before
his particular Answers to those Objections.

First then, in his Preface to his Reader, he says [No ingenuous person will
think the Repute of the Proposers any thing diminished by this just, but
necessary Recovery of mine own: though I have so fully cleared the Objections,
and that out of the very Treatise they are raised. For the Learning, Parts and
Judgment of the Proposers are so confessedly eminent to all that know them,
that nothing but want of leisure of reading my whole Treatise, and comparing
one place with another, could have put them in a capacity of misunderstanding
those passages they have objected.]

Here he confidently pretends to have cleared all the Objections; and kindly
speaks a good word to save the Objectors credit. His Confidence concerning his
Performance, will soon appear ridiculous enough; and his Courtesy to the
Objectors, no less insolent. For before he has fairly acquitted himself, he
falls to apologize for them: and what is that Apology, but under pretense of
Courtesy, to brand them for busy medlers, in taxing an innocent Author before
they have duly considered his book? But by this trick he would at once slily
evade the whole Business, and make his Reader believe, that the Question in
controversy is, what is the Result of his Opinions, upon Comparing the several
Parts of his Book one with another. Whereas the Objector only challenges him
for delivering false Doctrines in the places cited in the Objections. If he has
different Doctrines in other places, let him answer for enterfering with
himself. In the mean while, the Objector knew not which of such repugnant
Doctrines Dr. More did in his heart allow: but this he knew, that false
Doctrines broached in any part of his Book, were truly scandalous, and deserved
to be Objected against. However, I make no great doubt, but the Doctor will
find by this following Assertion of the Objections, That the Proposer of them
had both leisure to read his whole Treatise, and to compare one place with
another.

As for his Intimation [by which he vainly affects to make his Apologies
Conquest the greater] That the Objectors were many, and eminent for Parts,
Learning and Judgment: in both those Particulars he abuses his Reader, for the
Objections were drawn up and framed by one Person, not by diverse, and that one
[I can assure him] very far from eminence in Learning, Parts, or Judgment: yet
as mean as he is, he hopes to make it appear that the Doctor does nothing less
then Clear those Objections by this Apology.

But did he in earnest account his supposed Objectors, to be Eminent for
Learning, Parts and Judgment? how then could he think, that Men eminently
learned and judicious, could have charged him with writing Doctrines seditious,
desperate and heretical, in the Book wherein [as he vaunts in this Preface]
there is nothing but sound and true? for, his excuse he makes for them, will
neither serve his turn, nor theirs; seeing Men confessedly eminent for
Learning, Parts and Judgment, cannot be supposed to pass such a Censure,
before they had fully read, and particularly Compared the parts of his Book.

He adds [Wherefore Reader, whilst thou perusest the ten ensuing Objections
with my Answers thereto, thou art not to fancy thy self a spectator of a
Battle betwixt professed Enemies, but of an amicable Concertation betwixt such
as are real friends, as well one to another as for Truth her self: They of the
one part showing nothing but a due zeal and commendable jealousy touching the
Doctrines in my Mystery of Godliness, that it may appear to all that there are
none other there delivered but such as are sound and true; and my self on the
other part as diligently demonstrating that I have committed no error in what
I have written, and that the places objected against, have nothing in them
contrary to Scripture, Reason, or the acknowledged Faith of the Catholic
Church.]

The Objector is indeed no professed enemy to Dr. More; but to his gross and
dangerous errors, he is as hearty an enemy as the Dr. can imagine: and
accordingly he was well content that a friend should privately acquaint him
with the Objections, and christianly admonish him to retract, and satisfy the
University [where his Book was conceived to have done the most mischief] by
renouncing his erroneous Doctrines; which might have been done in a few
ingenuous words: and more then so, would not have been required. But the Dr.
would needs draw these private Objections to the public stage; and here in his
very entrance you see how he struts, quite forgetting humane frailty and common
modesty. What he has got by it may appear in these ensuing Observations.

The Concertation which he proposes to his Reader betwixt the Objectors and
himself, is wondrous pretty: namely that they on the one part zealously
endeavor to make it appear, that he has delivered no Doctrines but such as are
sound and true: and that he on the other part, diligently demonstrates that he
has committed no error in what he has written: that is, Both he and they are
doing one and the same thing, and proving Dr. More to be perfectly Orthodox.
Does not this look like a conflict betwixt two Parties? yet for such, his
Reader must account it, and withal he must be content to swallow it for true,
that the Objectors zeal aimed at no other end then what the Doctor here
assigns. But I (who best knew my own intent) can assure him of the contrary:
for being clearly satisfied that the Doctors book swarmed with dangerous
errors; my Zeal was kindled to object against it; and I doubt not but he will
find by what follows, that I never meant (whatsoever he is pleased to tell his
Reader) to endeavor the proving that there are no Doctrines in his Book but
sound and true.

Yet in his jolly conclusion of his Preface, he tells us, that the Result of
this Collision is A farther recommendation to the World of the Usefulness of
the above said Treatise: so resolvedly fond is he of that Book; though as to a
considerable part of it, the only usefulness that any sober Reader can
discover, is such as S. Paul intimates, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies
among you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

Upon CHAP. I. and II.
IN his first Chapter he propounds certain Rules, by which he would have us
believe that he governed himself in his management of the Truth of our
Religion: though it be hugely suspicious, that those Rules were not minted till
he hammerd this Apology. However, I wonder the less at his wild way of
Writing, if he be so unlucky in his very Rules of Direction concerning it, as I
find him in his first, which is this: [1. He must be sure not to deny any thing
which he whom he would convince, does hold and allege upon clear and solid
Reasons: 2. And especially he must be tender of denying it as repugnant to the
Christiam Faith; 3. Unless it be plainly and really contrary to the infallible
Oracles of holy Writ.]

Here he supposes, That a Man may have clear and Solid Reason for what he
holds; and yet that his Tenet may be plainly and really contrary to the
infallible Oracles of holy Writ. The Scripture then may be contrary to Reason
which is clear and solid: And if so; the Doctor can have small hopes of
prevailing upon his Men of a rational genius, unless he grants them, that
Scripture is not Infallible. Yet he adds, in his assertory Exposition of this
Rule, That [such Reason as is really repugnant to the Oracles of Divine Writ,
is not true Reason; nor those Interpretations of Scripture true, that are thus
repugnant to Reason.] And what is this, but Contradiction? viz. Clear and Solid
Reason may be plainly and really contrary to Scriptures; and yet, That Reason
that is truly repugnant to Scripture, is not true Reason. Why also, may not
those Interpretations of Scripture be True, which are repugnant to True Reason,
if clear and solid [that is, true] Reason may be plainly and really contrary to
the infallible Oracles of holy Writ?

In the sixth Section, he affirms it to be demonstrable, out of Genesis 1. 6. That
the Firmament reaches but to the upper Waters, that is, the Clouds: and that
because the Firmament was made in the midst of the Waters to divide them. I am
so well acquainted with the Doctors Logic, that I always suspect his Discourse
to be impertinent, where he talks loudest of Demonstration. How can he
Demonstrate, that by the upper Waters, is meant the Clouds? Is It not more
likely to be Demonstrable, That as yet [namely on the second day] there were no
Clouds, the Sun being not then created? Nay is it not said Chap. 2. 5. that
there was then no Rain, but a Mist ascended from the Earth to water it? had
there been Clouds on the second Day, what needed this Mist [be it what it will]
afterward to rise out of the Earth and perform the Office of Rain in watering
the ground?

In the same Section, he defines the object of the Creations Story in Genesis,
to be, not Mundus Philosophorum, but Plebeiorum; only suited to the sense and
imagination of the ruder People. I make bold therefore to ask this profound
Philosopher, Whether it be suitable to the sense or Imagination of the ruder
People, that Fowls, as well as Fish, should be the Offspring of the water, V.
20. especially seeing many Fowls cannot live either in the water, or upon it?
Also, That Day should be created with Evening and Morning, V. 5. and that there
should be three such days before the Sun was made to divide the day from the
night, Ver. 14, 15, 16? yet these Narrations are part of that Story. But who
knows not Dr. More? and that this Fancy serves but to countenance his
Cabbalistick Imaginations touching the Creation?

And yet, what if the ancient Masters of the Jews were of a quite contrary
Opinion concerning this story; and accounted it written, not for silly
Plebeians to read, but for men of acute and mature judgment? will their
Authority bear no sway with the Doctor? That they so accounted, sure I am, S.
Jerome [in the Proem to his Commentaries upon Ezekiel] does abundantly witness:
his words are [ Aggrediar Ezechielem Prophetam, cujus Difficultatem, Hebraeorum
probat Traditio. Nam nisi quis apud eos aetatem Sacerdotalis Ministerii, i.
tricesimum annum impleverit, nec Principium Geneseos, nec Canticum Canticorum,
nec hujus voluminis exordium and finem, legere permittitur; ut ad perfectam
scientiam, and mysticos intellecius, plenum humanae naturae tempus accedat.] If
the Object of the History of the Creation were [as the Doctor says,] Mundus
Plebeiorum, and a Comprehension of the world no farther, nor in any other
manner, than is agreeable to the sense and imagination of the ruder People: the
Jews foully mistook it, when they ranked it with the abstrusest and most
difficult parts of Scripture; and permitted none [no not their very
Philosophical Wits] to read it till 30. years of age.

Sect. 11. He says, [If this be not the Rule that the sincere and discreet
Christian is to take up touching Philosophy; it is indifferent for him to take
the contrary.] I mention this, but as an example of the Doctors rational way of
Arguing; which is just as good as this: If I may not make Avarice my Rule, it is
indifferent for me to take the contrary, and follow Prodigality. Or this: If I
cannot pass from Saint Mary's to the Schools, by going Northward; it is
indifferent for me to take the contrary way, and to pass thither by going
Southward.

Sect. 12. In fine [I have above noted the Object of the History of the
Creation in Genesis, to be rather the Mundus Plebeiorum than Philosophorum, as
plainly limiting the sensible World, by the distance of the Upper Waters or
Clouds.] Since he has forgot what he noted above, I must here mind him, That
Sect. 6. he said expressly, That the Object of the Story of the Creation, was
not the Mundus Philosophorum, but the Mundus Plebeiorum. Which I take it, is
not the same with his present phrase, [ Rather the Mundus Plebeiorum than
Philosophorum.] But, bating him this his staggering from the Positive to the
Comparative; since he will needs be repeating this Fancy, I must also add, That
there is not any sorry man, even ex Plebe, but will loudly and justly laugh at
him for it: For ask but the plainest Peasant who has eyes in his head, and
manifestly sees that the Clouds interpose between the Sun and us; whether he
believes not that the Sun is above the Clouds? If he believes this, (and it is
impossible he should believe otherwise,) how can he once dream, that the Clouds
are the outside, or limit of the sensible world? Nay farther yet: What will
those Peasants say to this Position of the Doctors, who live upon such high
Mountains as that they see the Clouds below them? can they be persuaded that
the sensible World is limited by the Clouds?

His second Chapter, is an Account concerning his bringing Pre-existence into
play in this Age. As also, a Vindication of a certain Passage (for he would
have the Reader think there was but One, though indeed there were diverse) in
his Cabbala from the suspicion of Anthropomorphitisme; as he calls it. Now
though Objections were ready framed concerning these Points also; yet they not
happening to be any of those Ten which were delivered to him out of my List: I
shall at present forbear to examine this part of his Defense, and the Weakness
of it; and choose rather to hasten to those Ten which are the chief subject of
his Apology, and with which he begins his third Chapter.

Upon CHAP. III.
Touching the First Objection.
THese Objections (says he) were sent me from an able hand, digested into that
Number, Order and Words, which I shall set them down in. They are in number
Ten, and all taken out of my Mystery of Godliness.]

To profess that 'twas an able Hand that sent them: is no more than he had
signified in his Preface; but he must needs be at it again: partly for the
magnifying of his own Victory aforehand; and partly, under pretense of
commending his Antagonist, to expose him (as he hopes) to the greater scorn.
For, if all be true which he alleges in his following Apology, the Objector
can never escape being accounted the most pitiful Fellow that ever perused a
Book. It Is fit therefore, that this be referred to the Readers judgment between
us.

His solemn saying, They are in Number Ten; is to those who know the story,
sufficiently ridiculous; for these Ten were not sent him as the whole Number,
but only as a part or specimen of the Objections. Many Tens were then in
readiness, collected out of his Mystery of Godliness: but 'twas thought fit by
a few, and those happened to be Ten, to try what he meant to do; it being
friendly signified to him by that Person who delivered them, that many other
Particulars were prepared to be Objected. And indeed had I foreseen that Dr.
More would presently hasten to Print those Ten, I should have drawn them up in
form more suitable for the public View, and have pressed them something closer
than I have done. Yet let him enjoy that advantage; as they are, it will appear
that I had just ground for the Objections; and he none at all for his
confidently pretended Justification. Thus much is evident already, that the
Doctor would have the world imagine, that these Ten were all that could be
picked out of his whole Book. He will find it much otherwise when occasion
serves.

The first Objection he sets down thus: [ L. 5. C. 3. Sect. 1. He says, It
cannot be conceived, but that Christ's Body assimilated it self to the Regions
through which it passed in his Ascension, and became at last perfectly
Celestial and Aetherial, Organized Light, not Flesh and Bones. C. 4. Sect. 1.]

In Answer to this, he says, Sect. 3. [If the Objector understand Terrestrial
flesh and bones; is it a fault to deny it?] The question here ought to have
been, What Dr. More, not what the Objector means by flesh and bones? The
Objector knows there are Bodies Terrestrial, and Bodies Celestial: but he denis
that Christ's Body, though now Celestial, consists not of true flesh and bones.
He denies that it is now turned to Organized Light. But the Doctor will needs
be proving what was not denied, namely, That Glorified Bodies cannot be
Terrestrial Flesh and Bones. And thus he argues, in relation to his
Philosophers, for whom he mightily pretends to fish.

[How harsh will it seem to them that are for the Prolomaick Hypothesis, that a
Body of Terrestrial Flesh and Bones should bore its way through the spears
more hard than Crystal, for many myriads of miles together, till at last it may
ascend above all Heavens, and sit at the right Hand of God? And for them that
are Copernicans or Cartesians, and hold the Heavens all of them of a fluid
subtle substance, how incongruous must it needs seem to them also, that an
heavy Terrestrial Body of Flesh and Bones should inhabit and live in so subtle
and piercing an Element, whenas the Air upon the top of some Mountains is too
thin for our Lungs, and that the purer Heavens are so subtle, that they would
nimbly take apieces and consume to Atoms any such Terrestrial consistency of
Flesh and Blood as is here spoke of? To say nothing of the incongruity of so
earthy and heavy a Body, having no proportionable (...) to walk upon.]

Is not this very goodly Argumentation, especially in a Professor of Theology?
Could Dr. More forget, that both the Resurrection, and Ascension and residence
of Bodies in Heaven, are not achieved by any natural ways or means, but solely
by the supernatural Power of God? Let the Heavens then be solid or fluid, this
can be no bar or hinderance to what God is pleased to effect. Nor can his
Philosopher, whether Ptolomaick or Copernican, count it Harsh, unless he thinks
it rational to question Gods Omnipotency. Which if he does, the Doctor may
fish long enough before he will catch him into the Belief of any of these
Points.

But by the way: Is the Doctor sure that Ptolomy did ever assert the spears to
be more hard than Crystal? Or must Copernicus or Cartesius be counted the
Fathers of the Opinion concerning the fluidity of the Heavens; which was
maintained not only before Cartesius, but before Copernicus was born? Again,
How came the Doctor so well acquainted with the fierceness of the subtle
Heavens, as to affirm that it will so nimbly take apieces and consume to Atoms
a Terrestrial Body; since St. Paul knew not whether 'twere in the Body or out
of the Body, that he was raped into the third Heavens? which by the Doctors
Philosophy he might have known: for had he been raped in the Body, his Body
must have been turned to Atoms. Lastly, If Christ living here in his
Terrestrial Body, found the Water a proportional (...), why might he not by the
same divine Power find the liquid Heavens a proportional (...) also?

This third Section he concludes thus: [I thought fit, according to my first
Rule, not needlessly to deny any thing rationally solid in my Antagonist, but to
grant that the Body of Christ in Heaven is not Terrestrial Flesh and Bones, but
of a more refined nature. For the Apostle says expressly, 1 Cor. 15. That Flesh
and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.] And what is all this to the
Objection? Does that charge him with saying, That Christ's Body now in Heaven is
Terrestrial Flesh and Bones? No, but that he says, It Is not Flesh and Bones,
but Organized Light. He might have dealt with his Antagonist according to the
Rule he talks of, though he had not denied Christ's Body to be still Flesh and
Bones, or affirmed it to be Organized Light.

But the truth is, those words of his are slye, (the Body of Christ in Heaven
is not Terrestrial Flesh and Bones, but of a more refined nature.) Why says he
not (but Celestial Flesh and Bones?) Even because he would not retract his
Error charged in the Objection: So that I cannot believe he means any thing
else by ( a more refined nature) than Organized Light. Hereupon he concludes
with that of the Apostle: Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

But had he added the next words, which are part of the Apostles sentence, (
Neither does corruption inherit incorruption) he had betrayed how little St
Paul favors his design. For by Gods Power the Terrestrial Body shall of
corruptible be made incorruptible, and then it may inherit the Kingdom of God.
For corruptible flesh and blood cannot inherit, (and such is our flesh and
blood before the Resurrection) there being no proportion between Corruption and
Incorruption: But (as he adds V. 53.) this Corruptible must put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality. Whence it is evident, by
the Apostles Doctrine, that the same Flesh and Blood which before was
Corruptible, and at the Resurrection, or final Change, is made Incorruptible,
shall reside in Heaven. For he says not, This Corruptible shall vanish, or
perish; but, It shall put on Incorruption: remain therefore still it must. So
that the Doctor needed not to have amused his Reader with a tedious Discourse
(as he does in the following part of this Chapter) to prove, That Glorified
Bodies are Angelical, Spiritual, and Celestial; for still they may nevertheless
be the same Flesh and Bones they were here in this life, though never so much
Refined, Immortalized, and Beautified by the Power of God.

Sect. 4. [Christ argues thus, Luke 20. 36. They cannot dye, (...) for they are
equal to the Angels, which would be scarce an Illustration, much less a Proof
and convincing Illation, unless it be understood in the sense I above
intimated. For it would be but a Languid kind of reasoning, and of small
satisfaction, to conclude the sons of the Resurrection immortal, because they
are immortal, as the Angels are immortal; that looks like the proving idem per
idem. And yet this would be all, if they were equal to the Angels only in that
thing.]

Be it granted, that Christ compares not the sons of the Resurrection to
Angels, only in respect of Immortality; for the comparison stands also in
perpetual celibate; which alone is mentioned S. Matt. 22. 30. Yet still, by
this acute Doctors leave, it is no languid Reasoning, nor looks it like the
proving idem per idem, to argue that the sons of the Resurrection cannot die,
that is, are Immortal, by asserting them to be (...); for seeing Angels are
Immortal: These also must needs be Immortal, who in reference to their Duration
(for the text in S. Luke, which the Doctor has chosen, instances in this, as
well as in celibate) are (...). Christ argues not that they are therefore
Immortal, because they are Immortal as Angels are Immortal (this is the Doctors
saucy and blasphemous detortion of our Lords Argument,) but, that they are
Immortal because they are exalted to that condition of life which Angels enjoy;
and which doubtless is Immortal. To say, that such a thing cannot sink, for
it is just like a cork; such a thing cannot rot, for it is equal to an Adamant:
would be no languid reasoning, nor proving idem per idem.

That which the Doctor drives at in this 4th section is to prove that humane
Bodies after the resurrection shall become equal to the Bodies of Angels: and
he says expressly [Nor can the condition of their Bodies be left out, as
touching the nature and glory of them, but a Son of the Resurrection and an
Angel must be in every such regard all one.] Now if it be granted him that men's
bodies shall become of the same Nature with those of Angels, he presumes that
they cannot be flesh and bones. But first I must ask him who talks so
confidently of Angels Bodies, where he finds in Scripture that they have any
proper and natural bodies of their own: that they assume bodies in which they
appear to Men, and that their actions or offices are represented to us by
corporal Descriptions; is in condescent to our weakness, whose apprehensions
depend so much upon sense. But if this would prove Angels to be naturally
clothed with Bodies; the like may be concluded of God himself, to whom
scripture (in compliance with our Infirmity) attributes corporeal parts. Again,
if the Doctor will fix upon the Bodies of Angels, mentioned in Scripture, upon
the account I have intimated: he may do well to remember that in those
descriptions Angels are generally represented with wings; and some of them with
4. some with 6. wings apiece; That Ezechiel, chapter 10. affirms, that the living
Creatures which he saw by the river of Chebar, were Cherubims; which Cherubims
had the soles of their feet like those of Calves, their hands under their wings
like those of a Man; and for their faces, each of them had 4. one of a Man, one
of a Lion, one of an Ox, one of an Eagle. Now to which of the Angels will the
Doctor have the sons of the Resurrection be like? to those who wear one pair of
wings; or, to those who wear two; or, to those who have quadruple faces? But if
he fancies for the Angels any other shapes, or vehicles, then what he finds
mentioned in Scripture: why must we believe that he does not dote? or what
reason have we to build any thing upon his Imagination of matters so far above
his reach?

But all this while he forces the Text in the word (...), which is plainly
restrained in the Evangelists, to celibate and Immortality. Nor does the word
it self require the sense he pins upon it; for men in heaven may be Equal to
the Angels, though not in all respects: and we know that Christ is Equal to the
Father touching his Godhead; yet inferior to the Father touching his Manhood:
that when the laborers S. Matt. 20. 12. tell their Master ((...), thou have
made them equal to us) they meant no more then Equal in Wages. Besides; if (as
the Doctor affirms) the nature of humane bodies in heaven must be all one with
that of Angels; it will be hard for him to show that he leaves any distinction
between Angels and Men hereafter. Nay it will follow, that, though Christ at
his Incarnation took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham;
yet that distinction is now out of date, and instead of the seed of Abraham he
is joined to the race of Angels, wearing no longer the body derived from
Abraham, but one of the same nature with those of the Angels: Which seems to me
a new Transubstantiation, and (for ought I have yet heard) first minted by Dr.
Henry More.

And yet (after much needless talk about the Lucidity and Angelicalness of
Christ's glorified Body) in the 7th Section, he seems in good part to have
forgot what he wrote in the 4th for he says [ Calvin seems to be afraid of the
Opinion of the Body being spiritual, as employing a substantial change, or, as
the schools speak, a specifical one: which would most certainly clash with our
Saviors having the same Numerical Body he suffered in. But according to the
truth of Philosophy, there is no specifical change in the most contrary
Modifications of Matter imaginable, but only Accidental.

And what then means all this long stir, about Terrestrial flesh and bones? If
the change be not specifical; then the Nature of humane Bodies is not changed
to the Nature of Angelick Bodies: And if the change be only accidental, then
the glorified Bodies of Men in Heaven, are, and must be the very same Flesh and
Bones they were on earth, only enriched with nobler Accidents: then is Christ's
Body the same Flesh and Bones which it was in this life. Indeed the Doctor
himself, Sect. 8. grants (upon what ground, let himself look) that The Body
which is now truly Earthy may, if God will, become in a moment as perfectly
and physically Heavenly, and remain still the same Numerical Body. If it so
remain, it must remain Flesh and Bones, and the same Flesh and Bones, it was
before.

One would now expect, that what he has here granted, should persuade him to
acknowledge his rashness in saying (as was objected) Christ's Body in heaven to
be Organized Light not Flesh and Bones. Yet Sect. 11. where he comes to solve
(as he says) the Objection, his words are [What harshness is there to call
that Body Light, that is to say, a Luminous or Lucid Body; which for its
brightness exceeds the Sun it self, according to testimony of holy Writ? Or
what Incongruity to say it is Organized, it being so according to the common
consent of the whole Church, and the meaning of the Scripture?]

You see the Doctor will needs maintain, that 'twas not Harsh to call Christ's
Body Light; that is to say, a Lucid or Luminous Body. So that in his
Dictionary, Light, and Lucid or Luminous Body, are one and the same thing; and
they must signify accordingly in an high Point of Religion, rather then he
should seem to have spoken so much as Harshly. Christ's Body is granted to be
Lucid and Splendid: but it is not therefore Light, or splendour. Dr. More is
philosophical: but no man (especially if he reads this passage) will yield that
he is Philosophy it self. Yet admit it were not Harsh merely to call Christ's
Body, Light: that is not the case here: for the Doctor not only calls it
Organized Light; but affirms also that it is not flesh and Bones. Which in
effect, is to affirm, that instead of Flesh and Bones, it is now nothing else
but Organized Light. And whether this sounds not Harsh, let Christian Ears
judge.

To say, That Christ's Body is Organized, is indeed, as the Doctor pleads, no
Incongruity at all. But with fine Legerdemain, he would make his Reader think
that this was part of the Question. Wherefore he very gravely vouches it by the
Common consent of the whole Church, and by the Meaning of Scriptures. Whereas
the Question is, whether if Christ's Body be Light, it can be Organized? for
Light is a similary thing; but an Organized Body must consist of parts
Dissimilary: nor can the Doctor with all his cunning, make out (though he
attempts it afterward in this Chapter) how Christ's Body can consist of Flesh
and Bones, with other corporeal Ingredients, and be furnished with humane
Organs; if his whole Bodies mass be Light. Luminous and splendid it is: but
that this Brightness swallows up the proper distinctions of his Parts and
Members which he had here on Earth; and Organizes him anew in Heaven; this I
deny.

Moses his Bush, when all of a flame, continued the same Bush with all its
several branches and twigs. When Moses his own face shined, it was not become
Light, but only Lucid; still the distinct parts of it remained as really and
truly the same as before. In Christ's Transfiguration on the Mount, his face did
shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light; S. Matt. 17. 2 But
still it was his face, both of the same substance, and Organized in the same
manner as before; though it so shined as not before. For if it were turned to
Organized Light, was not his Raiment turned to Light also? and will the Doctor
venture to say that this Raiment was not at that time, of the very same
substance and matter, and of the very same distinct parts it was of before? But
in short, the Description of Christ's glorified Body taken out of Apoc. 1. 13.
(which the Doctor cites as for his own purpose Sect. 6.) mentions his Head
and Hair to be white as wool or snow; his Eyes as a flame of fire; his Feet as
burning brass; his Countenance as the sun shining in his strength. What mean
these several Comparisons of diverse parts of his Body to such several things,
if all his Body had been nothing but Light? Wool, Snow, yea and burning Brass,
are far short of the Sun shining in his strength: but, supposing all his Body
to be Light, his Head, Hair and Feet must have shined like the meridian Sun, no
less then his Countenance. However, the Doctor cannot deny but here remained
Christ's Head, Face, Feet, and consequently his other Parts, wherefore all
these, in Him who was then also truly Man, must needs be of humane substance
Flesh and Bones.

Sect. 12. Upon a fancy of his own he thus proceeds: [It never came into my
mind to imagine that his Body melted into mere Air; but that it being
terrestrially modified and organized, kept the exact shape still and feature,
but that all cloggings of the terrestrial modification were quelled and
abolished.] The Objection was, that he made Christ's Body, Organized Light, as
that is opposed to Flesh and Bones and being now well warm in his Apology
touching this Point, he professes that he did not make it mere Air. Is not this
mightily pertinent! Yet indeed I must confess that he who puts Organized Light,
for a Luminous Organized Substance; may as well be allowed to put mere Air, for
pure Light.

But Sect. 13. touching his having denied Christ's Body to be Flesh and Bones,
he thus apologizes (Where I oppose a Body of Flesh and Bones, to that lucid
Body of our Savior, I understand Natural flesh and bones, not Glorified: and
therefore I do not deny that there is Glorified flesh and bones in this
illustrious Body of Christ) Thus (he says) he understands now: But did he so
when he wrote his Mystery? If he did: ought he not to have expressed that this
was his sense? especially seeing his Words on which the Objection is founded,
carry a sense quite contrary? Might he not here with more credit, have
acknowledged Rashness, or Indiscretion, in that expression touching Organized
Light, not flesh and bones? But notwithstanding this Interpretation of himself,
the truth is, he is far enough from a just defense of what he wrote in his
Mystery: for though he would now seem to grant Christ's Body to be glorified
flesh and bones; yet this proves not that Body to be Organized Light: and if he
will needs stick still (as he does) to that phrase of Organized Light; he
destroys what he grants: for that which is Light, cannot be flesh and bones.
Besides, how little the Doctor gets by his distinction of Natural flesh and
bones, and Glorified flesh and bones, in this case; does readily appear: seeing
not flesh and bones, and Glorified flesh and bones, are still a contradiction
after all is said.

Indeed, in his very next words he plainly discredits (so fickle is his
judgment) what just before he pretended to profess; for he adds [I demand by
what Creed that has the assent of the Universal Church, we are required to
believe that the glorified Body of Christ consists of Flesh Blood and Bones, it
seeming at the first sight so contradictious to the express words of the
Apostle, as well as unsuitable to the nature of the Heavens, which Philosophers
now a days conclude to be universaly Fluid: and if they were not, the
Incongruity would seem to them still more harsh, as I noted at first? Here the
Objector is silent.]

That the Creeds are the Comprehensions of the Points of Faith to be believed,
and not the Laws or Canons which Require us to believe; is known even to the
Mundus Plebeiorum: though the Doctor here supposes otherwise: but I urge not
this (...). What thinks he of the Apostles Creed? has not that the assent of
the Catholic Church? There it is said, that he whas Born of the Virgin Mary,
(and born, surely with flesh, blood and bones) that he was Crucified dead and
buried, and rose again: nor will the Doctor deny but he rose with the same
flesh, blood and bones: but He that rose, Ascended into Heaven: He that
ascended into Heaven, sits on the right hand of God: There therefore
(according to the Creed) He sits with Flesh Blood and Bones; else he that
sits there, is not the same who was Born, Crucified, Buried, Rose again, and
Ascended. It follows then, in the plain and natural sense of the Creed, that
the glorified Body of Christ consists of Flesh Blood and Bones. And let the
Doctor when he has better considered it, tell me whether he will grant, or can
deny this. I need not add, that both the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds exactly
follow that of the Apostles in these particulars. Nor did I make account it was
any ways requisite for me to signify thus much in the Objection; or that the
Doctor would ever have propounded any such Demand concerning the Creeds: Which
makes me something wonder at his triumphant conclusion (Here the Objector is
silent.)

That Christ's glorified Body consists of Flesh, Blood and Bones, seems (says
the Doctor) at first fight contradictious to the express words of the Apostle.
He must here mean the words he cited sect. 4. namely (flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God) 1 Cor. 15. 5 c. But if he takes in the following
words (neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption) and those ver. 53. (this
Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality)
it will be so far from seeming Contradictious to the Apostles Doctrine, that it
will appear to be by that very Doctrine clearly confirmed. As for his other
pretense, that it seems unsuitable to the nature of the heavens: I have noted
the Vanity of it already, in the former part of this chapter.

Immediately after his crowing over the Objectors silence, he thus proceeds:
[Nor can I well divine where the stress of this opposition will be fixed,
unless upon the 4th Article of our English Church, which yet he (viz. the
Objector) has prudently declined, as of doubtful Interpretation.]

The Doctor is mistaken: I declined not the Article at all (much less as
judging it to be of doubtful interpretation) no more then I declined the
Creeds, though I urged them not in the Objection. But that Dr. More can make
any thing (though never so clear) to be of doubtful Interpretation, if he may
but be the authorized Interpreter, will appear by the Colors he puts upon this
Article: which runs thus:

Christ did truly Rise again from death, and took again his Body, with flesh
and bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's Nature
wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sits until he return to judge
all men at the last day.

And the Doctors descant upon it, is this, sect. 14. [That this Article may
make any thing for the inferring or affirming that the Glorified Body of Christ
has flesh blood and bones, it must imply that Christ from his first Ascension
into heaven, to the last day, does sit there with a Body of flesh and bones.
But this is but one sense of the Article: for it may only signify that, etc.]
I cannot but note here by the way, the wildness and repugnancy of this Doctors
discourse. He grants the premised sense to be one sense of the Article; and yet
immediately adds, that the Article may only signify what he is now about to
tell us. If it may only signify this; how is the premised Interpretation one
sense of it? But he proceeds; [For it may only signify, that Christ did
indeed, as is most certain, take again his Body with flesh and bones, as
appears in that experiment of Thomas, and that he did Ascend therewith into
Heaven: But the Article does not say that He does sit therewith, that is, with
a Body of flesh and bones, until he return to judge all men at the last day.
And if it do not say this, it does not gainsay but that the Body of Christ
which shone so radiantly about S. Paul when he went to Damascus, had neither
flesh nor bones properly so called. Wherefore the sense of the Article not
determined by any Authority, leaves us free in this point: nor do I think that
the Penmen thereof, observing how cautious and considerate they are in that
Restriction of (all things that appertain to the perfection of Man's Nature) did
ever intend that the Belief of flesh and bones in the now glorified Body of
Christ, should be an essential part of this Article. Nor does Mr. Rogers number
it in the Propositions which he lays out as comprised in the same.]

These last words concerning Mr. Rogers, are so extravagant and impertinent, as
nothing can be more, for who ever believed Mr. Rogers his Analyze of the Church
Articles, to be authorized or owned by the Church? Besides, will Dr. More
himself own and profess all that Mr. Rogers delivers in his exposition of the
Articles? But the spite is, in this very Particular Mr. Rogers makes against
him: for the 2d Proposition he draws from the 4th Article, is this (Christ is
ascended into Heaven) which having named, his very next words are (In saying
how Christ with his Body is ascended into Heaven, and there sits and
abides, we do agree with the Prophets, Evangelists, etc.) the evident meaning
whereof is, that Christ with the same Body with which he ascended into heaven,
does sit and abide there. And this Mr. Rogers presumed to be the sense of the
Article, though he formed it not into a Proposition by it self.

But for the Doctors Comment upon the Article; what indifferent man will not
straight conclude it to be most unreasonably forced? for, What Body of Christ
now sits in heaven, but that which Ascended into Heaven? and the Body that
Ascended thither, the Doctor himself grants to be flesh and bones, by the
experiment of Thomas. If he fancies that this Body was changed into Organized
Light, after its Ascension, (as here he must do to make good this
Interpretation) he then clashes with his own professed. Tenet, that Christ's
Body assimilated it self to the Regions it passed in his Ascension. That which
was changed after his Ascension, was not changed in his Ascension. But though
contradictions are no news in the Doctors Theology, he might have dealt more
mannerly with the Church Article, then I shall now show he has.

He pleads that the Article does not say that Christ sits in Heaven with a
Body of flesh and bones till he return to judgment. This first is a slander:
for the Article having said, that Christ rising truly from the dead, took again
his flesh and bones, (yea and all things else, whether blood or spirits, or any
other parts, appertaining to the perfection of Man's nature) it adds, Wherewith
he ascended into heaven, and there sits until he return to judge all men at
the last day. This one would think were plain enough.

But see how the Doctor infers [And if it do not say this, it does not gainsay
but that the Body of Christ that shone so radiantly about S. Paul when he went
to Damascus, had neither flesh nor bones properly so called.) The best of it
is, the Article, God be thanked, does say what the Doctor says it does not say.
But admit it had not in express terms said it: yet still in sense, and by
necessary consequence, it might have gainsaid that Christ's Body which shone
about S. Paul, had neither flesh nor bones properly so called. besides, if
Glorified flesh and bones, be not properly flesh and bones; what are they then?
are they properly any thing else; and yet still flesh and bones, But if they be
properly flesh and bones, why may they not properly be so called? Would the Dr
speak out, there is small question to be made, but he would still affirm that
Body of Christ, not to be a Body of flesh and bones consisting; seeing he
ventures to conclude that the Article leaves us free in this point: and that the
Penmen of it, never intended the belief of flesh and bones in Christ's glorified
Body, to be an essential part of this Article: of which Conclusions, the former
appears already to be grossly calumnious; and I shall by and by show the latter
to be little better. Mean while, I little doubt but if this liberty of wresting
and publicly perverting the Church Articles, be permitted to this Doctor;
there are few Heresies which his skeptical Theology may not find a way to
patronize; and that under color still of fair and plausible Consent to those
very Articles.

The Reason he intimates for his saying that the Penmen of the Article intended
not the belief of flesh and bones in Christ's glorified Body as an essential
part of it, is that cautious and considerate Restriction of (all things that
appertain to the perfection of man's nature) But if this were a just argument so
to persuade him, there should be contained in that Restriction something to
fignifie that there was no such Intent in those Penmen but neither is there any
such thing there contained; nor indeed could there be: for first, in that
General (All things pertaining to the perfection of Man's nature) the
Particulars of flesh and bones, had they not been premised, would naturally
have been included: and therefore 'twere very strange to Imagine them shut out
by those Words: but secondly, the Penmen had in the former part of the Article
most expressly by name professed that Christ at his Resurrection reassumed his
Body with flesh and bones; Wherewith, they after say, he Ascended and sits in
heaven. Wherefore it is impossible that the Restriction should prove that they
intended not the Belief of flesh and bones in Christ's glorified Body should be
included in the essence of the Article. It is plain, their intent was, to
deliver here the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, and session in
Heaven: and as plain that they meant to determine with what Body Christ Rose,
Ascended and sits in heaven: and this Body they tell us, was his Body of flesh
and bones. Unless therefore we believe Christ's glorified Body now in Heaven to
be flesh and bones; we believe not that with his Body of flesh and bones he
Rose, Ascended, and sat down in Heaven: If we believe not this, certainly we
believe not something that is essential in the Article. And now, whether the
Penmen intended this point, of Christ's glorified Bodies being flesh and bones,
as essential to this Article, or no; let the Reader judge.

But all this while the Doctor abuses us, or rather the Article, by calling
that clause (all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's nature) a
Restriction for the Article, having named, Body with flesh and bones, it
immediately subjoyns (and all things appertaining, etc.) which surely in common
sense is rather an Ampliation then a Restriction.

Having thus mocked the Church Article; he would in the next, the 15th Section,
seem pretty good friends with it; for he says, [But suppose the intent of the
Article was to take in this also, That the Glorified Body of Christ had not
only in its Ascension, but still has, and ever will have, till he return to
judgment, a body of flesh and bones; provided they be Celestial and Spiritual
flesh and bones, (as it is without Controversy a Spiritual and Celestial
body,) that would break no squares with my Apprehensions and Concessions. For I
do in the very Text of my Treatise acknowledge this Glorified Body of Christ to
be Organized Light.]

But this is in truth only a new Mockery of the Article, to say, That because
he acknowledges (a well-favoured word, that: as if the Thing had been
propounded to him, or any body else had held that Opinion; when indeed it is a
Whimsey of his own.) Christ's Body to be Organized Light, therefore it sollows,
that this Body has bones and flesh. If it be Light, let the Doctors fancy
organize it as he pleases, he can never prove it to be flesh and bones.

And yet immediately after his saying, that he Acknowledges it to be Organized
Light; he adds, as an exposition of Organized Light, [ That is to say, Though
at distance Christ be surrounded with gleams and rays of inaccessible Light and
Glory, which invelops his Body, as an Atmosphear of perspired Vapors are
rightly conceived to surround the body of every man, especially being a little
more then ordinary warmed; yet if any Mortal could get within this so refulgent
Photosphear (as I may so call it) or Orb of Glory and Brightness, and approach
so near as to see the frame and feature of so divine a Body, etc.] What Is this
but to overthrow, in effect, what he acknowledged before; by making a Body of
Organized Light, to be a Body encompassed at a distance with with an Orb of
Light and Glory. A stock or a stone may be surrounded at distance with an Orb
of Light; but that stock or stone is not therefore a body of Organized Light.
Wherefore this kind of Talk argues the Doctor to be at a loss what to say
pertinetly, and therefore he flutters about in repugnant expressions; being
only resolved not to say what he ought, that is, Never to acknowledge that he
has spoken amiss.

In the Sixteenth, which is his last Section; after a most needless pudder, to
show, that there is a Spiritual or Celestial Flesh, as well as Natural, (which
who denies?) he adds [For my part I must confess, I do not know but the
Celestial and Spiritual Flesh (according to a known Aphorism of the Hermetick
Philosophy) is more truly flesh, then that we wear in this life.] Let the
Doctor grant it to be but as truly flesh, and I am content, But then he must
grant, That his calling it Organized Light, not flesh and bones, is
inconsistent with this or any Concession, which is an Affirmation, That it is
truly fiesh; much more, that it is more truly flesh then that we wear in this
life. For whatsoever is truly flesh, is truly flesh; and therefore cannot be
truly said to be Light; or to be Not flesh.

One thing more I must observe, namely, That the Doctor upon every Page of this
long Chapter, sets this in Front as the Title of it, (His Answer touching the
Lucidity of Christ's Body after his Ascension.] But was that Lucidity the Point
in question? Does the Objection charge him with delivering that as an Error?
No such matter in the least: The Objector is as forward to profess Christ's Body
to be Lucid, as the Doctor. It Is pretty sport then, that he should so solemnly
proclaim all the way, That he Answers what was never Objected.

And now to conclude; It appears touching this First of the Ten Objections, 1.
That the Doctor admits the words charged upon him, to be his own. 2. That in
his Asserting them, he runs deeper into the mire, and plunges into several
Absurdities and Contradictions. 3. That he shamefully perverts the Article of
our Church concerning the Point in Controversy. 4. That though he would seem
to allow Christ's Glorified Body to have flesh and bones, (which he expressly
denied in his Mystery; as is noted in the Objection,) yet still he overthrows
what he so allows, by adhering to his beloved Fancy of Organized Light.
Nevertheless he stoutly rubs his Forehead, and doubts not to Conclude, That
his Apprehensions concerning the nature of a Glorified body, are in every
regard Unexceptionable; and that he has sufficiently cleared this first
Objection. Wherefore he marches Victoriously to the Second.

Upon CHAP. IV.
Touching the Second Objection.
HERE he Prefaceth by an Account of those Four Chapters in his Mystery, where
he Treats of the Resurrection. The drift and scope of which Chapters, he says,
(Sect. 2.) is only this: Namely [To defend the Article of the Resurrection, in
the Substantial, Useful, and Indispensable Sense thereof. Viz. That we shall
at the last day be revived into visible and corporeal Personality, wherein we
shall feel our selves to be the self same men, and as really to have the self
same bodies, and seem as much to others to have so, as ever we felt our selves
to have the self same body, or appeared to others to have so in this life.
Which, without all Controversy, is the most plain, palpable, and indispensable
substance of this Article, and the only sense that is evidently comprised in
any of the Creeds of the Church, or any Articles of them. This therefore is the
Province that I undertake to make good against the assaults of the Atheist;
This the solid and indispensable Truth that I defend in these Chapters against
all his Cavils and Objections. Not denying, in the mean time, that it is the
same numerical body that rises again in the Resurrection, according to the
nicest Notions of the Schools.]

Suppose his drift and scope were, as he here now professes: yet if in his
Discourse he vent any thing contrary to the Truth of the Resurrection; his
pretended Drift or Scope will not excuse him: unless he thinks it enough to
say, What soever I wrote, yet I meant well. Nay though in some places he should
deliver the true Doctrine touching this Point; it were no Proof that he has
not delivered the False: but only an Evidence of his being a Contradictous
Writer.

We shall, says he, at the last day, be revived into visible and corporeal
Personality, and feel our selves to be the self same men, etc. This he says
here in his Apology; but he said it not in his Mystery; and therefore it
answers not the Objection. But this is not all, for, having affirmed this to be
the only sense which is evidently comprised in any of the Creeds of the
Church, or any Articles of them. He adds, That in the mean time he denies not
that it is the same Numerical body that rises again, according to the nicest
Notions of the Schools. He pleads that he denies not this; and that is all: but
even in this his Apology he is careful not to profess it; though the
Objection pressed him to do it. Nay he plainly distinguishes the sense of the
Schools, from the sense evidently comprised in any of the Creeds. Thus
therefore I argue; The Notions, yea, the nicest Notions of the Schools, in the
Article of the Resurrection, cannot amount to more then this: That the very
same Numerical body that dyed, shall really, truly, and perfectly rise again.
Now if this Notion or Sense of the Resurrection (which he cunningly would
appropriate to the Schoolmen, and that as a superlative Nicety) be plainly and
necessarily collected from the Creeds; then it is evidently enough comprised in
them. that it is so collected, I prove thus: The Apostles Creed (and so the
rest) avows the Resurrection of the body: but the body rises not again, if it
be not the very same Numerical body that dyed; take Numerical in the strictest
sense it is capable of, for the body that dies, is really, truly, and
perfectly a Numerical body: And how can the same body rise again, (as here the
Doctors own words acknowledge it does,) unless it be really, truly, and
perfectly the same Numerical body which dyed? So that what he craftily terms
the sense of the Schools, must unavoydably be the sense of the Creed; and
therefore is unreasonably (that I say no worse) by the Doctor distinguished
from it. The truth is, the bare word, Resurrection, in the Creed, does
naturally and irrefragably import the perfect and absolute Numerical Identity
of the body that rises: which if the Doctors Theology cannot digest, he had
best mend the Creed, and instead of those words, (I believe The Resurrection of
the body,) put in (I believe the Resurrection of some part of the body, or, in
some respects,) or what else he fancies.

Indeed in his 4th Sect. of this Chapter, he pretends to prove that Resurrectio
has no such necessary importance: his words are, [The Atheist makes a fresh
assault from the sense of the word Resurrectio; as if it employed the rising
again of the very same Numerical body in the strictest Scholastic sense. To
which is answered, First, That Resurgere in Latin implies no such thing
necessarily; but that as a City or Temple, suppose, being rased to the ground,
and from the very foundation if you will, is truly said to be rebuilt, and so
is deemed and called the same Temple and City again, though not a stone were
used of the former Structure; provided only, that they be rebuilt upon the
same ground according to exactest Ichnography; That being a stable character of
their Identity, that they are built upon the same lines they were before. So
though the same Numerical matter were not congested together, to make the same
body at the Resurrection, yet the stable Personality being in the Soul, this
body that is united with her, and built as it were upon that stable unchanging
ground, does ipso facto become the same body as before; as it was said to be
the Temple or City, that is rebuilt upon the same plot of ground again, and in
the same lines as before. Which is consonant to the generous Assertion of that
learned Knight Sr Kenelm Digby, who I well remember, somewhere in his Writings
speaks to this sense: That the soul being once divested of her present body, if
she had afterward a body made out of one of the remotest Rocks of Africa or
America; this body upon vital union with the soul, would be the same Numerical
body she had before. Which is also agreeable to the sense of several
considerable Philosophers and Schoolmen, Avenroes, Durandus, Avicenna and
others; who contend, That Individuation is from the Form only, and that the
Matter and suppositum is individuated from it.

Does not this look like the Discourse of one who clearly believes the sense of
the Catholic Church concerning the Resurrection? I shall make bold a little to
scan it. What he says of the Latin Resurgere, I deny not; Eversaque Troja
resurges, is Ovids words; and Res Romanae resurgent, Livies, but are such
Resurrections, proper or figurative? if proper, they must needs import the
restitution of the same Numerical things; and not of things like them, or
things in their stead. I demand therefore: Are the words in the Creed, to be
understood figuratively, or properly? I hope not figuratively: This would let
the Latitudinarians loose to make rare sport with all the Articles of our
Faith; but if properly, then does Resurrectio necessarily signify what I
before affirmed. Suitable whereunto is that of Tertullian (adv. Mar. l. 5.)
Resurrectionis vocabulum non aliam rem vindicat, quam quae cecidit. Wherefore
to the Doctors Comparisons of a City or Temple rebuilt upon the same lines, but
of other Materials; I answer: Such a City or Temple is properly and more truly
said not to be the same (but another City or Temple in their rooms) then to be
the same. And if another body be raised again (for thus repugnantly must I
speak to follow the Doctor) instead of that which dyed, it may more truly be
said not to be, then to be the same body. Suppose the second Temple at
Jerusalem were erected upon the very same lines with the first; can it properly
and truly be said to be Solomon's Temple, and not rather another in its stead?
Suppose Aelia to have been built upon the same Ichnography where Jerusalem
formerly stood; Hadrian the Emperor (who named it Aelia) would hardly have
been convinced by the Doctors discourse to believe that this City was properly
and truly Jerusalem, and not Aelia.

2. Whereas he says, The stable Personality is in the Soul: it is most true
that it could not be the same Person after the Resurrection, without the same
soul, but the Question is not concerning the sameness of the soul, but of the
body; and if the Person who dyed, consisted of two essential parts, viz. soul
and body; it cannot be the same Person after the Resurrection, unless it
consists of the same two essential Parts.

3. To say that a new body (not of the same Materials with the old, but quite
other,) does, by being at the Resurrection united to the soul, become ipso
facto the same body as before; is in all common sense and reason an evident
Contradiction: for it makes it to be the same, and yet not the same.

4. Whether Sr Kenelm Digby ever wrote what the Doctor affirms of him, I know
not. He cites not the place, but leaves us to trust his memory: which I should
the willinglyer do, did I not know how apt the Doctor is to forget himself.

5. In making this fancy of his, consonant to the sense of great Philosophers
and Schoolmen; he abuses both them and his Reader. For the reason he
alleges, is, because they contend, That Individuation is from the Form only,
and that the Matter and Suppositum is individuated by it: But this is far
enough from proving what he pretends; For, the soul being the principal part of
the suppositum, it may justly be said to Individuate it; and if we should
grant, that the soul is invested at the Resurrection with a body new and of
quite different Materials from that which dyed, there were no doubt in that
case, but the Individuation were from the soul. But it follows not, that
because it Individuates that body into which it is then put, that therefore it
makes it the same Numerical body with that into which it is not then put. Upon
the Doctors hypothesis of Another (which yet he thinks he has here found a
trick to make the same) bodies being united to the soul at the Resurrection,
there is no doubt but there emerges an Individuum, and that by virtue of the
soul thus united; but is it the very same Individuum it was before? that is the
Point in Question now. If it be the very same, it must consist of the same
essentials, the same body and soul, it did before it dyed: but that it does
not; for the soul is supposed to Individuate another body, and not that which
dyed. This Fancy therefore is a mere Sophism, and would with indignation have
been exploded even the Pythagorean School it self: for what had their
Metempsychosis signified, if upon the souls change of bodies, the same
Individuum had remained? or how could Pythagoras have said,

-- Trojani tempore belli,
Panthoides Euphorbus eram? --
But the Doctor annexes a second Interpretation of Resurrection, and will have
it signify only Vivification, or Re-vivification, and thereupon without any
more ado pronounces, That the Objection from the word Resurrectio, is utterly
defeated. No haste Sir; it is so far from being utterly defeated, that it is
plainly confirmed by this your Interpretation. What I pray, is that which is
Revived at the Resurrection? Is it the soul, or the body? Not the soul, I hope:
and if the body be revived, it must be that body which dyed: unless you will
have us believe, that another body is revived which never dyed; and that
whatsoever dyed of the body, never lives again. But you will scarce ever
prevail with men in their right wits to profess, That the old body is revived,
because a new body exactly like it is substituted in its room, and united to
the soul of that old body which is the Principle of Individuation.

Sect. 6. He produces certain passages out of his Mystery, to prove that he
contradicts not nor decrys the more curious and nice Opinion of the Schools, in
the Numerical Identity of the body. His first is, the Description of the
Scholastic state of the Resurrection, namely, [That we shall have the same
Numerical bodies in which we lived here on earth, and that these very bodies,
the molds being turned aside, shall start out of the grave.] To which says he,
I presently subjoyn, This Doctrine the Atheist very dearly hugs as a pledge, in
his bold conceit, of the falseness and vanity of all the other Articles of
Religion.] Then he concludes [Wherein it is manifest by my inserting in his bold
conceit, that I am so far from denying the Doctrine of the Schools, that I
check the Atheist for doing so.]

Yes, marvellously manifest! surely those inserted words (in his bold conceit)
may by very easy and natural construction, refer to them which follow (of the
falseness and vanity of all other Articles of Religion,) for it is a bold
Conceit in the Atheist, to think all other parts of Religion vain, though he
should esteem this Doctrine of the Schools so to be. But how heartily the
Doctor checks his Atheist here for his bold Conceit against the Schoolmen, may
be guessed by those words of his in the Eighth Section of this Chapter, [I
decline the averring it to be the same Numerical body, in the ordinary sense of
Numerical according to the more rigid sort of School Divines.]

To his next passage he proceeds thus, [Again Sect. 7. where speaking of this
more punctual Position of the Schools, I write thus: These and such like are
the Arguments of those that would overthrow Religion upon this advantage, as
they deem it: and something they drive at that seems to tend to a persuasion of
some kind of Incongruity and Incredibility in the matter, but it will not all
amount to an utter Impossibility.] Here again I am so far from rejecting or
condemning the Opinion of the Schools from being altogether untenable, that I
intimate, that the advantage that the Opposers have is not so great and
down-bearing in it self, as in their esteem and conceit; for I say, (upon this
advantage, as they deem it.) Besides that I suggest, that all the force of
their Argument against this Position is but a Tendency, and that a seeming one,
toward a persuasion of but some kind of Incongruity and Incredibility; but I
flatly deny, that it will at all amount to a real Impossibility of the thing.
And what is at all possible with God, is with him easy, for as much as he is
infinitely Omnipotent.]

The Result of all this, does only afford us another Argument against the
Doctor; for if the Opinion of the Schools has in it no real impossibility; If
the advantage the Atheist takes from it be only imaginary and built on his own
Conceit: If all the force of his Arguments against it amount but to a Tendency,
(and that a seeming, not real Tendency,) toward a persuasion of but some kind
of Incongruity and Incredibility: Then it is evident that the Doctor has no
just ground to decline it, unless he can produce something against it out of
Scripture: for what could be pretended from Reason, is presumed to be in the
Objections he makes the Atheist propound; and they, by his own confession, come
in effect to just nothing. But had he been provided of any thing out of
Scripture for this purpose, I doubt not but we should have heard of it from him
in tono tertio.

But he proceeds, [And again in the very last clause of this Chapter, I express
a special care of reserving the Notion of the Schools untouched and entire, in
these words (But what I answer, I would be understood to direct to the Atheist
and Infidel, permitting them that already believe the substance, which I have
righty stated above, to vary their fancies with what circumstances they please.

Truly I believe, that in some sense he has special care to leave to the
Notion of the Schools Untouched. Indeed he professes (as I have noted already)
to Decline it. But whether this be out of Tenderness, or out of Dislike, it is
easy to discover. Only he would seem wondrous kind, and generously gives us
leave, provided we believe the substance, to vary our fancies as we please
about the Circumstances. And what if he had not vouchsafed thus to Permit us?
did our Liberty depend upon his Permission? when that appears, we will thank
him for it. Mean while, I must be bold to note here a piece of the Doctors
fraudulent Art: The Point in hand is, Whether the same body rises again; I
mean, Numerically the same in the sense of the Schools; the very same it was
before it dyed and was consumed in the earth, air, water or elsewhere. Now the
Doctor makes this Point no part of the substance of the Article touching the
Resurrection, but only a Circumstance. So that a man may rightly believe
whatsoever is substantially and indispensably the sense of that Article, though
his faith be not determined in this (as the Doctor would have it esteemed)
Circumstantial Particular. For though in the Account he gave us of the Articles
substance, Sect. 2. he seems to say, That we shall at the Resurrection have
really the self-same bodies which we had in this life: yet in the Fourth
Section touching the word Resurrectio, he blurted out what he truly means by
any such Expressions; namely [That though the same Numerical matter be not
congested to make the same body at the Resurrection; the stable Personality
being in the soul, this body that is united with her, does ipso facto become
the same body as before.] Wherefore let a man but believe that at the last day
the soul shall be united to a body of the same form and fashion with that which
dyed; and by Dr More's Theology, he believes all the substance of the Article
concerning the Resurrection: for he believes that the same body rises again,
because this new body by being joined to the soul, becomes ipso facto the very
same body which was joined to it in this life. And let such a man never scruple
that this new body is not of the same Numerical matter or substance with the
Old; for that is only Circumstance, and no substantial Part of the Article of
the Creed. Let but the Doctor have a Patent thus to Interpret the Creed; and I
see not but he may soon Interpret away the whole Truth and Substance of the
Christian Faith.

Yet in his Conclusion of this 6 section he doubts not to say [This is enough
to clear me from all suspicion of Heterodoxness in point of the Resurrection:
and it would be but superfluous farther to allege how expressly I declare
(chap. 7. sect. 2.) that I do not deny the possibility of the same numerical
body, no not in the most strict though needless meaning of the Schools.]

I believe the ingenuous Reader will scarce be of his opinion, that what he
has hitherto said, is enough to clear him. But why do I call it an Opinion?
when in the style of it, it is a definitive sentence passed by himself for his
own justification; and that (which is the sport of it) before he has so much
as set down the Objection made against his Heterodoxness in this Point; much
less applied his Answer to it, for this he does not till he comes to his 7th
section of this chapter.

But if the Doctor be not heterodox in this Point; how shall we maintain the
holy Fathers of the Church to be Orthodox? Take a specimen of their Judgments.
S. Iren. l. 5. c. 13. In quibus (vidue Filius and Lazarus) resurrexerint
corporibus? in iisdem scilicet in quibus and mortui fuerant: si enim non in
iisdem ipsis, nec iidem ipsi qui mortui erant, resurrexerunt. And a little
after: Quod est humilitatis corpus quod transfiguravit Dominus corfirmatum
Corpori gloriae suae? Manifestum est quoniam Corpus quod cst Caro, quod and
humiliatur cadens in terra. Tertul. lib. 5. adv. Mar. Si Carnis resurrectionem
negantes retundit Apostolus, utique adversus illos tuetur, quod illi negabant,
Carnis scilicet Resurrectionem: and again Corpus est quod amittit Animam, and
amittendo fit Mortuum: ita Mortui vocabulum Corpori competit: porro si
Resurrectio Mortui est, Mortuum autem non aliud est quam Corpus, Corporis erit
Resurrectio. -- surgere potest dici and quod omnino non cecidit, quod semper
retro jacuit: Resurgere autem non est nisi ejus quod cecidit. And lib. de
Resurrect. Praecipit, cum potius timendum qui Corpus and Animam occidat in
gehennam, id est, Dominum solum; non qui Corpus occidant, Animae autem nihil
nocere possunt, id est humanas Potestates. Adeo hic and Anima immortalis nature
a recognoscitur, quae non possit occidi ab hominibus; and Carnis esse
Mortalitatem cujus sit Occisio: atque ita Resurrectionem quoque Mortuorum
Carnis esse, quae in gehennam nisi resuscitata non poterit occidi. Theodoret
Heret. fab. l. 5. (...) Again upon those words of the Apostle ((...) etc.)
(...). S. Epiphanius in Ancorat; sect. 92. (...) And here is. 64. (...) S. Chrysostom.
de Resur. (...) S. Jerome in his Epist. to Pamach. Quoniam spiritus carnem and
ossa non habet, sicut me videtis habere: and proprie ad Thomam: Infer digitum
tuum in manus meas, and manum tuam in latus meum, and noli esse incredulus, sed
fidelis. Sic and nos post resurrectionem, eadem habebimus membra quibus nunc
utimur, easdem carnes, and sanguinem and ossa. I might be infinite in Citations
of this kind out of the Fathers: but these may suffice. And whether theirs, or
Dr Mores judgment in this Point, be more venerable, I leave to the Christian
Reader to resolve.

For what he says it would be superfluous to allege out of his 7th chapter
sect. 2. I have again perused that section; and all I find looking this way,
are these only words [The very point and sting of this scoff against the
Conflagration, is also a presumptuous mistake, as well as that against the
Resurrection, though I deny the Possibility of neither] This is short of what
he points us to. But his words immediately there preceding, in the close of the
first section are these: [We having plainly showed, that the Mystery (of the
Resurrection) implies nothing more then this, That the same individual Persons
shall be revivificated body and soul, and made happy with eternal life. But the
same individual Person, does not involve any necessity of the same numerical
Body; as has been shown at large.] By which it is not difficult to discover
what his judgment is concerning the Resurrection of the same numerical Body;
that is, as I and any man understands, One and the same Body. You see he here
professes that the same individual Person involves no necessity of the same
numerical Body; and in the forementioned passage he terms the meaning of the
schools, a Needless Meaning; if it be with him, as he affirms first and last,
needless and of no necessity, then he affirms that it is not, nor ought to be
held any point of faith, That one and the same Body shall rise again. Touching
his saying that the Resurrection implies that Body and Soul shall be made happy
with eternal life: I must mind him that he makes very bold with Christ, who
teaches us that the Resurrection is the way to Misery, as well as to Happiness,
S. John 5. 28, 29. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they
that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Condemnation.

After the Doctor has made this long prefacing flourish, he now at length is
pleased to set down the second Objection, which is this: He faith, [That it
cannot be proved out of scripture, that the same Body shall rise again from the
grave. This takes away the Resurrection of the Body: for this cannot be, except
the same Body rise again] Then he adds The Quotation of the place from whence
this Objection is taken, is here omitted: but I question not but that it aims
at that passage chap. 4. sect. 3. book. 6. which runs thus: I answer farther as
concerning Scripture it self, that I dare challenge him to produce any place of
scripture, out of which he can make it appear, that the Mystery of the
Resurrection, implies the Resuscitation of the same Numerical Body. The most
pregnant of all, is Job 19. which later interpreters are now so wise as not to
understand at all of the Resurrection. The 1 Cor. 15. that Chapter is so far
from asserting this curiosity, that it plainly says, it is not the same body,
but that as God gives to the blades of Corn grain quite distinct from that
which was sown, so at the Resurrection he will give the Soul a Body quite
different from that which was buried; as different as a spiritual Body is from
a natural Body or an Heavenly from an Earthly.]

First I desire the Reader to take notice that this last clause (as different
as a Spiritual Body is from a Natural Body, or an Heavenly from an Earthly) is
not in his Mystery, but here demurely thrust in by the Doctor; he knows why.
Touching the Place in Job, and the wise Interpreters who understand it not at
all of the Resurrection; he confesses sect. 9. That in that speech he had an
Eye to Hugo Grotius his gloss upon the text. He is all the Interpreters he is
pleased to mention: yet that very Hugo Grotius is the Man, whom in his
Interpretation of the 13th and 17th of the Apocalpys, the Dr (in his late Book
of Antichristianism) (extremely vilifies: for example, lib. 2. cap. 3 sect. 1.
he says [That Grotius his expositions of these chapters, are harsh and
unapplicable; and that he has left the plain road, and rushed through hedge
and ditch, and pulled up all fences, to gather a nosegay of flours that both
smell ill, and immediately wither in his hand in the very gathering of them.]
Yet though Grotius be an Interpreter that can leave the plain road (as indeed
he does upon this place of Job) yea and behave himself in his Comments like a
man right down frantic: the Doctor to serve his own turn, and bolster up his
own innovating fancy, can put him in the balance against all ancient
Interpreters.

Now against Grotius his authority in this Point, I offer not only the
Ancients (for example S. Ierom, who in his Epistle to Paulinus speaks thus of
Job, Resurrectionem corporum sic prephetat, ut nullus de ea vel manifestius vel
cautius scripserit. Scio, inquit quod Redemptor meus vivit and in novissimo
die, etc. where he repeats this whole place. Also in his Epistle to Pammachius
having set down the Text, he subjoyns: Quid hac prophetia manifestius? nullus
tam aperte post Christum, quam ille ante Christum de Resurrectione loquitur.
Also S. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 29. Ruffinus in Symbolum; with Origin,
Philippus Presbyter, S. Gregory the great, and venerab. Bid, upon the place:
but after them. Aquinas, Lyra, Hugo Card. Munsterus, Castalio, Clarius,
Codurcus, Dionys. Carthusianus, Borrhaeus, Oecolampadius, Brentius, Pellicanus,
Osiander; and, that I tell them not by the clock, one for all the moderns, the
most learned and judicious Bp. of Winchester Bp. Andrews. Nay Mercerus himself,
though he opened Grotius the way to his Opinion, yet honestly confesses in his
Comment upon Job, that Nostri fere omnestam veteres quam recentiores hunc
versiculum cum duobus sequentibus ad resurrectionem referunt, quam hoc loco Job
astruit. Here Is almost all, both old and new, of the Christian Commentatours
granted us. Besides, the Church of England, in her office of Burial, uses
those words of Job, as meant of the Resurrection: though the Doctor in his 9th
section endeavors to evade her Authority, by making those expressions bear
only a Type and similitude of our Rising again: not considering that they who
thus divert this famous Text from the ancient Interpretation to their own new
fancies, not only take from our Church one of the most ancient and venerable
proofs of the Resurrection, but also of our Redeemers Incarnation, whom Job
says he shall see with his eyes, and not another. For matter of Authority then
we have abundantly enough against what the Doctor produces.

Consider we therefore Grotius his Reasons for his Interpretation, as the
Doctor cites him [His gloss upon the Text Scio quod Redemptermeus vivit, etc.
is this: Haec verba, and quae sequuntur, Iudaei nunquam ad Resurrectionem
retulere, cum tamen omnia rimentur quae aliquaam in speciem eo trahi possunt.]
This is first but a Negative Argument; if it were true: that it is not true,
may appear by Mercerus (whom in this question me thinks the Doctor might trust)
who upon the place says thus: (Quod side Resurrectione futura hic loqueretur
Job, non erant haud dubie id praetermissuri Hebraei qui and ipsi^
Resurrectionem credunt. At ne unum quidem ex sex aut septem Hebraeorum
Commentariis invenies qui eo referat) This implies that though there be not one
of six or seven Comments of the Jews which thus apply it; yet some few there
are who do and this is contrary to Grotius his assertion, that Iudaei Nunquam
ad Resurrectionem retulere.

But Grotius goes on [Christiani non pauci eo sunt usi (...) probandam
Resurrectionis fidem; sed ut id facerent, coact^sunt in versionibus suis multum
ab Hebraeo discedere; ut notatum Mercero, aliisque. Hebraea sic sonant: Scio
ego Redemptorem meum vivere, and illum postremo staturum in campe^ Etiamsi non
pellem tantum meam, sed and hoc (nempe arvina^ quae sub pelle est) consumerent
(morbi scilicet) in carne tamu^ mea videbo Deum, (i. propitium experiar) Deus
Redempta dicitur quia pios ex multis malis liberat. And presently after
Postremum in campo stare, est victoris. Sic Deum dicit victo rem fore
adversariorum suorum: neque vero ei esse impossible corpus ejus putredine
prope exesum restituere in priorem formam; quod and fecit Deus.]

One would have expected here from Grotius a most punctual version of the
Hebrew; but such it is not in the 26th ver^ (...) being exactly rendered, sound
in Latin thus (Et postquam pellem meam contriverint hanc) which ^ Arias
Montanus his version: with which if we compare tha^ of Grotius (etiamsi non
pellem tantum meam, sed and hoc consumerent) it is obvious to see that he
himself does multum (...) Hebraeo discedere. Indeed let Montanus his
translation of the 25, 26, 27. verses (which is the whole place in controversy
be examined, and it will appear a close and exact Translation: and yet by that
version of his, the place may very aptly be understood of the Resurrection: so
little need they who thus understand it, be Coacti (as Grotius would have us
believe) in versionibus suis multum ab Hebraeo discedere. Lastly, Grotius his
interposition of several words, which certainly are not in the Hebrew, to make
out his sense; look back something unhandsomely upon his premised words,
Hebraea sic sonant.

Now for the 1 Cor. 15. the Doctor affirms it to be far from asserting this
Curiosity. The point was, The rising of the same body: this he gravely calls a
Curiosity: and thereby again prompts us to conjecture what is his bosom sense
of the Article of the Resurrection. Nay he pronounces it to be so far from
Asserting it; that it plainly says it is not the same body. If S. Paul says
so, and says it plainly; how dares the Doctor say plainly (as he often does,
though in a fraudulent sense) (that It is the same body? But his saying so, is
in other places: and he can take the liberty to say one thing in one place, and
the contrary in another. In this place he makes the Apostle say that God will
give the Soul a Body quite different from that which was buried, as he gives
the blades of Corn, grains quite different from that which was sown. And hereby
he makes S. Paul compare not only the Body to the Grain, but also the Soul to
the Blade. Yet bate him this ridiculous boldness with the Apost'e: his whole
comment upon the Text, forces the comparison beyond the due bounds: the words
are these sect. 37.

[That which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
grain, etc.] If this be strictly to be taken, it will necessarily follow, that
the Body of Man sown in the earth, shall not be, that is, shall not rise again:
but this cannot be the Apostles meaning; for this he says sect. 44. [It is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body] Raised therefore again it
is. His scope evidently is this: to make the Corinths understand that by virtue
of the Resurrection our bodies shall of Animal become spiritual; of corruptible
and mortal, incorruptible and immortal: for this clearly appears by the sequel
of his discourse. To facilitate this, he premises a simile, and tells them,
that in sowing of grain, they sow not the body that shall be, but, for example
(...) bare grain of wheat or other corn, this seed comes not up again bare corn
(for there lies the stress of the simile) but in another condition, clothed by
God with all the furniture and ornament of the spica. Yet the Apostle adds that
it has still (...); God gives it its own body; wheat comes up wheat, and rye,
rye. Semblably when Man's body is buried, it is not the body that shall be; for
it is sown an animal, corruptible, mortal body: but at the Resurrection God
makes it a spiritual, incorruptible, immortal body; and gives to every Man
(...) still, his own body; his own, though refined and spiritualized. And thus
far the simile fairly holds, and being but a simile, must not be pressed in all
respects as if it were a mathematical Parallel. For if the Doctor will thus
urge it, he must make it appear, how corn is sown in Corruption, and comes up
in Incorruption: for so also is the Resurrection of the dead, V. 42, which
also, will force him to grant, that corn comes up Incorruptible, supposing the
simile were strictly to be pressed in every particular. All therefore that can
be proved from hence, is, that Man's body at the Resurrection is not the same in
condition and Qualities that it was when it dyed, though it be numerically the
same in kind and substance.

Besides, the Doctor makes bold to affirm, in the Apostles name, that, of the
body of Man (viz. it is not the same body: (he should have said, It is not that
body that shall be) which the Apostle speaks of the body of Grain: and which he
brings not as a perfect parallel, to demonstrate, but as a simile to
illustrate; according as I have noted above.

Now therefore I return to his challenge, which was this: [I dare challenge him
to produce any place of scripture, out of which he can make it appear, that the
Mystery of the Resurrection implies the Resuscitation of the same Numerical
body.] The Challenge, as daring as it is, I lay hold of, though not made to me:
and (besides what I have said already in asserting the place in Job,) could
well and safely enough Answer it in St Ieroms words, in his Comment upon
Ezekiel, Chap. 37. where speaking of the Resurrection of the body (and he
understood the same Numerical body) he says: ( Scimus Testimonia in quibus
nulla sit dubitatio, in Scripturis sanctis reperiri. Ut est illud Jobi,
suscitabis pellem meam quae ista sustinet. Et in Daniele, Multi qui dermiunt in
terrae pulvere resurgent, isti in vitam aeternam, and isti in opprobrium and
confusionem aeternam. Et in Evangelio: Nolite timere eos qui corpus
interficiunt, animam autem non possunt occidere; timete autem eum magis qui
potest and animam and corpus perdere in gehennam. Et Apostolus Paulus: Qui
suscitavit Iesum Christum a mortuis, vivificabit mortalia vestra Corpora
propter inhabitantem Spiritum ejus in vobis. Et multa alia.) So far St Ierom,
and far enough to gravel our confident Doctor.

I might add that signal place (which I have formerly mentioned) St Io. 5. 28,
29. ( All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, to the Resurrection of condemnation.) Is not this Text plain? or can the
Doctor tell us what can be plainer? if all who are in their graves, shall come
forth at the last day; then does the Mystery of the Resurrection imply the
Resuscitation of the same Numerical bodies: namely, of those very bodies which
were interred in those Graves:

But I will rather insist upon 1 Cor. 15. that very Chapter, which, if you will
credit the Doctor, plainly says, It is not the same body: Consider therefore
the 53. V. (This corruptible, (...), must put on incorruption; and (...) this
mortal must put on immortality.) Those words, this corruptible, and this
mortal, (for the (...) in both places, makes them Determinative and
Emphatical,) must be meant of that Individual Numerical body which shall dye,
or be changed. But this Numerical body shall put on incorruption and
immortality; that is, shall be invested with those Modifications, instead of
corruption and mortality. Therefore this Numerical body, after the Resurrection
or change, must needs be the same Numerical body that it was before. Else this
corruptible, and this mortal, cannot truly be said to put on incorruption and
immortality, if the body it self in its individual substance be another as well
as the array.

Sect. 8. he says, [Wherefore to this Objection, I now briefly and
particularly answer;

First, that it is not of faith to believe (a pretty phrase if you mark it: but
I guess his meaning) that every body that is said to rise at the last day,
should rise out of the Grave; since all bodies had not burial.] Will the Doctor
yield, concerning such bodies as had burial? if not, what is this Answer but an
Impertinency? Indeed he was conscious, and therefore presently waves it
himself; and thus proceeds:

[Secondly therefore I say, that I do not affirm, that it cannot be proved out
of Scripture, that the same body shall rise again, but the same Numerical body:
for I acknowledge that would take away the Resurrection indeed, if the body
that is said to rise, were not in a very due sense the same. And I think it is
very duly the same, if it be acknowledged as much the same with the body that
was buried, as that body was with it self during this terrestrial life. Which I
do freely acknowledge it to be, though I decline the averring it to be the same
Numerical body, in the ordinary sense of Numerical, according to the more rigid
sort of School Divines.]

This is his main answer. Now it had been but fair, if mentioning the
Schoolmens Notion of Numerical body, and making it his Fence so often as he
does, he would at length have told us, what that Notion is, and how the rigider
and the softer sort of School Divines differ about it. But he was shie of
exposing himself more openly to the lash. That Notion, (as I have noted
already) cannot amount to more then this: That one and the self same body that
dyed, shall really and truly rise again; and if it does not so rise, I have
proved that there cannot truly be a Resurrection of the dead. It is therefore a
vain Doff to pretend, that he only declines the rigid sense of the Schools.

Yea, but he grants the body shall be as much the same, as it was with it self
during this terrestrial life. And what would you more? so much more, as would
amount to plain and ingenuous Dealing: for I question not but this is a trick,
and a ready outlet when need shall require; by the help of which he may
comfort his Proselytes, and tell them, they need not boggle or be troubled at
this his seeming Concession, which he meant but as a blind, wherewith to fool
such rigid men as the Objector; for they must remember, that the body in this
life is often changed, and between daily spending and repairing, is no more the
same in a few years, then that Ship which was so often mended and patched, that
none of her first Materials were left. Wherefore to grant, that the body at the
Resurrection is as much the same with that which dyed, as that was with it self
in this life: is in effect, to grant no sameness at all.

Wherefore to drive him from this starting hole, first I demand of him, Whether
his own body be Numerically one and the same to day, that it was yesterday? I
easily imagine he will not affirm that he has every day a new body Numerically
distinct from the former. How many weeks then, or months, or years is it since
he had not the very same body which he now wears? I suppose his Answer will be,
That the change was made by such insensible degrees, that the precise time when
it was finished cannot be named; yet nevertheless, sure he is, that in the
decurse of time, his body is so changed, that it remains not Numerically the
same it was before. Here therefore it will be convenient, to consider the
condition of a still-decaying still-renewing body, and what is the true
Numerical Identity of it.

Some things naturally persist in their beings without capacity of decay, and
therefore need not the help of any Reparation: such we suppose Angels, and the
souls of men to be. Other things are made by the Creator, in a condition
subject to spending and wasting, so as it is requisite to their Continuance,
that they be supplied and maintained by nutriment. Whence, as the nature of
Angels and souls of men is Permanent, so the nature of these things is fluent;
and it is truly said of man in respect of his body, that he never continues in
one stay: for this mutability is suitable to his very nature. Hereupon it
follows, That the Identity of the body may in this corruptible estate well
consist with, nay, does properly include in it this fluency; no less then the
Identity of the soul includes in it constant Permanency. Nor can the body cast
off this corruptibility or mutability, till by the Resurrection it puts on
incorruption as well as immortality, and becomes fixed in an undecaying
Consistence. For any one therefore to infer, that the body continues not the
very same all the life long, because all the life long it spends and is anew
repaired; is to infer, that it is not the very same body, because it perfists
in a condition proper to its nature, whilst a natural and not yet a spiritual
body. If then it be the same fluent Creature all the life long; it must be
Numerically the same: seeing the Identity of any singular thing can be no other
then Numerical; but it is all the life long the same fluent Creature, and the
individual body of one and the same man: whereby it is apparent, that during
this terrestrail life (as the Doctor speaks) it is the same, yea, and
Numerically the same with it self. But I argue further.

In what age, condition or stature the body shall at the last day be raised, I
pretend not to define. But certain it is, that it must be raised in some one
age, condition and stature, as it shall seem good to God Almighty. Let the
Doctor now ingenuously tell us, Whether he believes that the body so raised
shall be at the Resurrection, as much the same body that dyed, as that body was
the same with it self in this life, whilst it was actually in that very age,
condition and stature in which the raised body appears. For example, suppose
the Doctors body at the Resurrection be just such (bating imperfections of
distempers, and the like) as it was at his age of 30 years; shall that revived
body be as much the same with that which the Doctor wore at his age of 30
years, as the body which at that time he wore was then the same with it self?
Surely it was then Numerically the same with it self, in the strictest School
sense of Numerical which is imaginable. Wherefore the Doctors specious
acknowledging it to be as much the same body, as that body was the same with it
self, during this Terrestrial life; is pitifully vain, if he denis the body to
be truly and Numerically the same body all this life long: and much more, if he
denis the raised body to be most perfectly and Numerically the same (accidental
imperfections, corruptibility, and mortality excepted,) with that which the
body was in this life at that age, and in that condition and stature in which
that raised body shall happen to be restored.

But all this while, what he has alleged in this his Second Answer, is new;
nor does he pretend those words to have been in his Mystery, as they ought to
have been, if they must serve for his Apology. In the progress therefore of
this 8th Section he would have us think, that he had written in his Mystery
sterie what is tantamount; and this it is: [ That the same men that dye and are
buried, shall as truly appear in their own persons at the day of Judgment, as
if those bodies that were interred should be presently actuated by their souls
again, and should start out of their Graves. And to give an Instance, they
shall be as truly the same persons, as Lazarus when he rose body and soul out
of the Grave after he had lien there Four days together. And I think Lazarus
was sufficiently the same both soul and body.]

Yes he was so; and Numerically the same: which I pray good Doctor take notice
of; and withal, of your own Contradiction: You will not grant, That the bodies
at the Resurrection shall in the Schools strict sense, be Numerically the same
with those in this life: Yet you affirm, That the same persons shall as truly
rise as Lazarus, when he rose body and soul: and that was in as strict a sense
Numerically the same, as the Schoolmen can possibly imagine.

But now I consider it again, I doubt not but the Doctor smiles at my charging
him here with Contradiction: though I think most Readers would have done the
same. The truth is, antiquum obtinet; his Concession which at first blush seems
frank and ingenuous, is but a demure piece of fraud.

First, He instances here, not in all that dyed, but in all that dye and are
buried. This was the very thing he cavilled at in his first Answer: but here it
is for his purpose to use it; that his pretense of holding that men shall be as
truly the same persons at the Resurrection, as was Lazarus when raised body and
soul from the Grave; might be glibly swallowed, and thereupon he be thought to
have granted sufficient concerning the Resurrection of the same body.

Secondly, He says (those men shall as truly appear in their own persons at
the day of Judgment.) He says not In their own bodies. Nay he intimates the
contrary, by adding (as if those bodies that were interred, should presently be
actuated by their souls again, and should start out of their Graves.) As if
they should, is in plain English, that they shall not; For to say, Those men
shall as truly appear in their own persons, as if those bodies that were
interred, should be reactuated with their souls, etc. does not acknowledge (but
rather deny) that those bodies which were interred, shall either presently, or
ever at all, be actuated by their souls again in the Resurrection. What is his
meaning then, you will say, in affirming that they shall appear in their own
persons? I will tell you; and I must thank himself, for giving me the scent by
which I smell it out, in what he delivered before, in his 4th Section. There he
informs us, That [though the same Numerical matter were not congested together
to make the same body at the Resurrection; the stable personality being in the
soul, this body that is united with her, and built as it were upon that stable
and unchanging ground, does ipso facto become the same body as before.] Thus
you see how in the Doctors Theology, men may at the Resurrection be the same
persons, and as truly consisting of the same body and soul as was Lazarus when
raised from his Grave; and yet they may have other bodies united to their
souls, then those which dyed and were buried; because those other bodies, by
virtue of their union to the souls (in which is the stable Personality) ipso
facto become the same bodies as before.

In his 10th Sect. he finally pleads thus for what he wrote in his Mystery, [It
was necessary for my design, who to the Philosopher avow my Religion to be
Rational, not to make my self look like a fool to him to whom I pretend my self
so rigid an Adherer to Reason, by swallowing down needlessly such things, as I
can find neither faith nor reason to require of me.] I should be glad to hear
(for as yet I cannot) of any one Philosopher whom this Doctor has converted;
but that he has perverted many Christians, is too true, or he is grossly
slandered. Suppose that what he says, were necessary for his design in that
Book of his Mystery: yet I cannot see what necessity he had in this Apology
(which he makes not to unbelieving Philosophers, but to Catholic Christians)
to contradict the Belief of the Catholic Church; and to profess (touching the
perfect Numerical Identity of the body at the Resurrection) that it is needless
to swallow it; and that neither faith nor reason require it of him. Not faith:
so he denies what I noted and proved above, That this Point is necessarily
included in the Creed. Not Reason; though it be a Contradiction to say, That
the same singular body (for of such is the Question) rises again, and yet not
the body most truly and Numerically the same that dyed.

The truth is, there was all the reason in the world, that even in dealing with
his Philosopher, he should plainly have owned and asserted this Point: for no
Philosopher who enjoys the use of his Reason, can ever imagine the Resurrection
of the dead body to be possible; unless the body raised, be supposed to be one
and the very same with that which dyed. Yet the Doctor (if you will believe
him) had he not done as he did, thinks he should have made himself look like a
fool to his Philosopher. What he has now made himself look like, both to
Philosophers and Christians who shall consider these passages, I forbear to
say; and shall rather advise him (seeing he is so jealous in this Point, of
making himself seem a fool to Philosophers) to remember, That the foolishness
of the Christian Faith, is wiser then the gravest Philosophy; and that it will
be found at last, that all Innovations in any Belief of any Article of our
Creed, is the short reasoning of unreasonable men.

But his very last words are these: [For my own part I doubt not, according to
my private thoughts, but there will be a Recollection of as much of all that
corporeal substance we wore in this life, as will be requisite to make our
bodies again the same.] And what is this to the Objection? what are his private
thoughts he tells us of now, to what he publicly delivered in his Mystery
some years since? Is there any such thing there, as he seems to profess here?
If so, then these were not his private thoughts at the Writing of his Apology,
but published to the world with his Mystery: if not, his Apology here is
insignificant, unless he maintains and makes good what he wrote there, (which
he neither has, nor can,) or else Retract both that there, and a good
confident word in his Preface here, namely, that he does Demonstrate in his
Apology, That he has committed no error in what he has written before.

Indeed this his last Concession bears a show of much more then he has
hitherto granted; and may perhaps by some be thought a sufficient Profession.
But if it be sincerely said, and be sound and Catholic, why without more ado
had we it not at first? Why spared he not those prolix needless Discourses in
this Chapter, to assert the integrity of his belief in this Point? For my part,
according to my private thoughts, I doubt all is not right. Latet anguis in
herba: and I am the rather inclined to this jealousy, because upon narrower
Examination of the Words, I find them truly capable of such a sense, as shall
not in the least signify what in their outside they may seem to carry, namely,
That of the corporeal substance we wore in this life, there shall be a
Recollection sufficient to make our bodies again the same they were before they
dyed: but on the contrary, shall import, that not any parts at all of our
former corporeal substance, shall need to be recollected at the Resurrection.
For the wary Doctor has in this specious Concession contrived a Trap-door by
which he may at his pleasure give us the slip; and satisfy his Disciples, that
he has said nothing here, but what is consistent enough with the Principle
they wot of.

That Trap-door lies in those words, (as will be requisite,) for it is evident
by what I have noted above, that the Doctors Opinion is, That no Recollection
of the corporeal substance (or any parts of it) which we wore about us in this
life, is requisite to make our bodies again the same: seeing stable Personality
proceeds from the soul, and (to use his own words, Sect. 4.) though the same
Numerical Matter be not congested together to make the same body at the
Resurrection, yet the body that is united with her, does ipso facto become the
same body as before. Whereas therefore he grants, That as much of the corporeal
substance as will be requisite to make our bodies again the same, shall be
Recollected: he grants nothing at all to the purpose, since his declared
Judgment in this very Chapter is, That no such recollected substance will be
Requisite. Nevertheless, in the front of the next Chapter he bravely
pronounces, [We have, I hope, by this time produced more then enough, in
satisfaction to the Second Objection.] More then enough indeed; but whether
satisfactorily to the Objection, the Doctor must not be Judge; no more will I;
but leave it to the Reader.

Upon CHAP. V.
Touching the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Objections.
WIthout any Preface (and we are much beholden to him for that kindness (he
sets down the Third Objection thus: Object. 3. He makes Episcopacy a Faction,
and so against Gods word, Praef. Sect. 19.

To this he Answers, first [It is a short Objection, but a very smart one (were
it true) and plainly contradictious to several passages in my Preface.] Suppose
that several passages in his Preface did contradict this; yet that argues not
but what is here objected may be true: for Contradictions are no News in this
Doctors Writings: as has, and shall farther appear. But he proceeds:

[For in the 21th Sect. I write thus: That Episcopacy simply in it self, is not
Antichristian.] Excellent! The Doctor has Notions of Antichristianism by
himself, as may appear by his Mystery of Iniquity. And in what sense he will
here have Antichristianism understood, if he be put to a pinch, is uncertain.
However, by the way, Episcopacy is very much beholden to him for pronouncing it
to be not Antichristian; nay, Not simply and in it self Antichristian. And
because he has pronounced a difficult point, and of great consequence, he
goes on to prove it. The sum of his Proof is: [Because it was in use in the
most pure times of the Church, when she was most pure and exactly Symmetral.]
By which Argument he ought positively to have pronounced it to be simply and in
its self Christian. But this would have proved a trouble some block in the way
of what follows in that Preface, and is here repeated by him as a second step
of his Answer, Viz.

[That upon an Account of Reason, and of the nature of the thing it self,
Episcopacy joined with Presbytery, is better then Presbytery alone.] Why says
he not, That Episcopacy alone, is better then Presbytery alone; and better then
Presbytery joined with Episcopacy: if he would not be by some understood to
prefer Presbytery? Besides, who ever heard of that Hodgpodge which the Doctor
here commends: Namely, The Government Episcopal, and the Government
Presbyterian, (which are repugnant the one to the other) jumbled into one
Government? Yet this Thesis concerning his Chimaera, to wit, That (Episcopacy
joined with Presbytery, is better then Presbytery alone,) he goes on to prove
at large in his Preface; and right tediously repeats it here in his Apology.
Which done, he crows thus, [If any one has any thing to say more material for
Episcopacy, then this, let him speak.] So that if you will believe Doctor More,
he presumes, That no mortal man can produce any thing more material for
Episcopacy, then to prove, First, That it is Not simply and in it self
Antichristian. Secondly, That If joined with Presbytery, it is better then
Presbytery alone.

His third step is in these words, [Lastly, At the close of Sect. 22. I do
expressly declare, That there is not any effectualler means imaginable, to make
the people believe in good earnest, that Religion is worth the looking after,
then to find themselves looked after so carefully and affectionately in
reference to Religion, by persons of so honorable Rank and Quality.] In that
Section of his Preface, he speaks of the ample and honorable Revenues of a
Bishop; and then gives a large Character of high personal sanctity in him:
after which, he closes with those words before cited. But the Doctor may
please to know, that this Discourse comes not home to Episcopacy, I mean, to
the Order and Government it self. For Episcopacy is Episcopacy, though it be
not adorned with ample honors and Revenues; yea, though those who are admitted
into it, happen to be persons no ways admirable for virtue and holiness of
Life. If therefore he asserts and magnifies a Bishop, only as he is a person
of honor and of virtue; he will not be seen at all to acknowledge any single
Reverence due to his Office, and him, as he is a Bishop, which is very wisely
done. Besides, suppose Presbytery erected and publicly professed, may not many
of the Elders be persons of honorable Rank and Quality, and of ample Estates?
And would not the People be highly affected, to find themselves taken care for
in reference to Religion, by the chief Burgers, the Justice, the Lord of the
Manor, the Knight, the good Lord or Earl? Wherefore the Doctors arguing for
Episcopacy upon such accounts as those, will but make Presbyterians smile.

Well, but for all this, he will needs conclude this first Section of this
Chapter, with this Affirmation, [All which passages ( viz. the three I have
noted) are perfectly Contradictious, to the Charge this third Objection lays
against me.] Contradictious! and perfectly Contradictious! Is it not strange, a
man who trades so much in Contradictions, should mistake other Commodities for
that Ware; and no better understand what passages are perfectly Contradictious?
The words in the Objection are, (He makes Episcopacy a Faction.) Of his three
passages, the sum of the first is, (Episcopacy simply is it self is not
Antichristian.) Does this contradict, and that perfectly the words of the
Objection? If so, then by no means they can be both true. But I am of opinion,
that the Doctor will grant me, That Episcopacy may be a faction, though it be
not simply and in it self Antichristian. What thinks he of Calvinism,
Arminianism, Presbytery? are none of these Factions? if any one of them be (and
that all of them are so, I can force the Doctor out of his own Writings to
confess.) I demand, Whether it be simply and in it self Antichristian? If he
dares affirm this, how comes it to pass, that he discovered not the Mystery of
Antichristianism (against-which he thunders in his late Book) in that Faction?

His second passage is (That Episcopacy joined with Presbytery, is better then
Presbytery alone.) Compare this with the Objection, (he makes Episcopacy a
Faction:) are these two perfectly contradictious? Though the joining Episcopacy
with Presbytery, should make it better then Presbytery alone. Still for all
this, (if nothing else hinders) it may be a Faction, namely, One Faction made
up of two. Suppose Presbytery joined with Independency (which are as capable of
being jumbled together, as Episcopacy and Presbytery,) be better then
Independency alone; that Presbytery will still be but an augmented Faction.

His third passage is so far from being Contradictious to the Objection, that
all the Horses in the Town cannot draw it near being so. For it respects not
Episcopacy it self, but such a particular Bishop as the Doctor Characters; and
such an one as perhaps can no where be found.

But after all this, I must mind him, That though these his passages had
indeed been perfectly contradictious to the Objection; yet had they not been
any Answer to it, for the Objection was not founded upon them, (as he well
knows) but upon another passage, which shall presently come in play. And though
I should grant him, that he speaks right in one part of his Book; yet that
justifies not what he speaks wrong in another, but only manifests his own
contradictions.

In his 2 Sect. he proceeds to the place out of which the Objection was raised:
which having propounded with more Appertinences then needed, he makes this
jolly challenge [Now let any one judge whether I call Episcopacy a Faction or
no] Content Doctor; let any one judge, provided he has but the use of common
sense and reason. These are your words, in the Preface to your Mystery, upon
which the Objection was built: [ Every faction will be content to be Millenists
(a pretty piece of presumption by the way, that all the parties he afterward
recites, will swallow his Millenian opinion) upon condition that Christ may
reign after their way or mode: that is, in Calvinism, in Arminianism, in
Papism, in Anabaptism, in Quakerism, in Presbytery, in Episcopacy, in
Independency, and the like] Is it not plain, that having named Faction as the
General, he descends to enumerate Particulars; and among them, counts
Episcopacy? If this be not to call Episcopacy a Faction what is? Indeed he
offers at an evasion; which yet amounts only to Dignum patella operculum.
First he says [He propounds not all those ways as false and illegitimate] the
more shame his: for if he counts them not all Illegitimate, why did he muster
them all under the Title of faction? for whatsoever is faction, is doubtless
Illegitimate. Besides, the Objection was, that he called Episcopacy a faction:
and whether he counts all those ways false and illegitimate, the Objector
regards not: it is Episcopacy only on which he pitched.

But that he did not propound all these ways, as such, he would thus prove
[Since those that do so apparently contradict one another, as Calvinism and
Arminianism, Episcopacy, Presbytery and Independency; some of them must be
true. As either Calvinism or Arminianism, in such points as they contradict one
another, must be true. And so of these ways of government, some of them must be
Right: for it is intolerable wrong to have the Church destitute of all
Government] If some of them must be Right, I demand again, what made him
presume to brand them all with the name of Faction? But his way of arguing
here, is wretchedly fallacious: for it follows not, that some of these ways
which apparently contradict one another, must therefore be True or Right. Do
not Independency and Presbytery apparently contradict one another in the point
of Government. Is therefore one of them True and Right? Had he reckoned up all
sorts of Government, he might plausibly have urged, that some one of them must
be Right and True: but he knows his Enumeration is not complete; and therefore
he closes up his list with those words [and the like.]

Nor will his next clause (As either Calvinism or Arminianism, in such points
as they contradict one another, must be true] serve his turn. For 1. though
some points in one of those parties may be true; yet others may be false: and
so that party, in the complex, not be true. 2. The Doctor, according to his
wont, slips from the Question: for the Question is not of any particular Points
of Doctrine in this or that sect; but of the whole sect it self, and that
chiefly in Relation to Discipline and Government: and this he must needs grant
me, or else recall his last clause (for it is intolerable wrong to have the
Church destitute of all Government.) Now he that enumerates sundry kinds of
Government, must not merely for so doing (especially when into the bargain he
terms them factions) be thought to hold any one of them to be Right; because
it is possible that all that he reckons up, may be wrong. Nor, in case any one
of them so enumerated, happen to be indeed the Right; does it follow that he
appears to believe it so to be; unless, having made his enumeration, he
accordingly declares his Judgment about that particular: which how far Dr More
was from doing, let the place in question speak.

It is true in the beginning of the next (the 3d) Section, he says (he has
already affirmed Episcopacy to be in the number of good things) but where did
he affirm this? In his Preface to his Mystery? why then does he not give us
some inkling of the place? I confess in his Apology, in the foregoing Section,
something he says whence it may be collected that he there supposes Episcopacy
to be a good thing: but he knows the Objection was never made against his
Apology.

To come therefore to his next pretense; which follows in the 3d Section and
runs thus [This is all that can be elicited out of this Paragraph (he means the
19th Section of his Preface, to which the Objection relates) touching
Episcopacy; not that it is a faction, but that it may be factiously and
partially managed; that is, unmeasurably, and disproportionably prized, (as
this Paragraph imports) as if the whole Millenian happiness consisted in
Episcopacy: that is to say, That People may so dote upon one good thing, that
they may be dead to, and careless of the flourishing of all the rest, and set
up their staff in that one. Which though it were Episcopacy it self, it would
be a factious and partial affection, and would fall short of the end of the
Gospel, which does equally aim at the cherishing of all things that are
essentially and indispensably Christian, such as I have enumerated in this
Paragraph in my description of the happy ages to come.]

Thy patience good Reader, whilst I survey these extravagant impertinent lines.
Still the Doctor is at his old trick, his (...), and slinks from the Point in
hand. The Question is not, whether out of that Paragraph it may be elicited
that Episcopacy Is a Faction: but whether the Doctor calls it so or no, in that
Paragraph; and this, by his favor, may be elicited out of it.

2. Episcopacy, as such, denotes nothing less then Partial or factious
management: but the Doctor in that Paragraph speaks of Episcopacy, As such,
namely, as different from Presbytery, Independency, etc. How then can he here
pretend, that he meant only the factious management of it? Besides; is it not
worthily said, and Doctor like, that the factious management of Episcopacy, is
Episcopacy?

3. That he says It may be immeasurably and disproportionally prized; that is,
in his language, factiously; would be well considered: for peribit sorex
indicio suo. If you will trust himself for his meaning, it is this [that people
may so dote upon one good thing, that they may be dead and careless of the
flourishing of all the rest, etc.] as is before cited. And what, in Gods name,
is all this ad Rem? He is here speaking of Episcopacy as a government of the
Church; and he would have us think that he believes now, and did believe when
he wrote that Preface, That this is the Right and true Government; and that
therefore though in his Preface it stands in the List of Factions, yet he meant
thereby no more, then that it may be factiously managed, that is, immeasurably
prized. Excellent! It may be factiously managed, therefore it is to be ranked
amongst the grossest Factions. But what may be, may not be: Episcopacy may not
be factiously managed; and in the essence of that Government there is nothing
factious, but signally the contrary. It would pose the Doctor to show any time
wherein it was factiously managed: the very constitution of it being the
properest Antidote against faction. Nay to give him his own interpretation of
factiously, let him show if he can when or where it was Immeasurably prized by
the People. Particularly I demand, was it so prized, and factiously managed at
the time when he wrote his Preface? he cannot, sure have the face to affirm
this. Why does he then obtrude this supposal for his Apology? Yea but though
it were not then so overprized, happily it may be hereafter. May it so? God giant
say I, that it ever be prized so much as it ought to be! But I deny, that it
can ever be Immeasurably prized: for the highest value that can be set upon it,
is to esteem it The most incomparably excellent Church Government, and of
divine Institution. Now this estimation of it is no more then due and just; as
will upon Occasion be verified malgre all that Dr More can muster up to the
contrary. Nor will this estimation render People dead and careless (as he
slanderously intimates) of the flourishing of all or any of the rest of the
things that are essentially and indispensably Christian. For the due esteem of
a Divine Institution, is no hinderance to Faith, Devotion, Purity, Innocence,
Faithfulness, Charity, Obedience, mutual Condescension, unspotted
Righteousness, Peace, etc. which are the Duties he mentions in his description
of the happy Ages to come. People therefore may set up their staff in this one,
without any danger: for the Question here, is of Churchgovernment: and if
People embrace that which is incomparably the best, they may and ought to set
up their staff in that, and in that alone, notwithstanding any of his Arguments
to deter them from it.

For as for his Cavil in the former Section, drawn from 1 Cor. 1. 12, One says
I am of Paul, another I am of Apollos and therefore A good thing may be
factiously followed: it is but another of his wonted Cheats. 1. He makes
following of Persons, in that Text, to be following of things. 2. He
substitutes that for the Corinths fault, which was not. They were not to blame
for following Paul, Apollo, Cephas, or Christ; but that some of them followed
some one of these in contradistinction from the rest. Now to follow Paul in
opposition of Apollo; Apollo, in opposition to Cephas; yea or Christ himself in
opposition to his Apostles; is plain faction. For as God sent Christ, so Christ
sent his Apostles; and the Church is built upon Christ as the corner stone, and
on his Apostles, as foundation stones laid next to him. Wherefore he that holds
not Communion both with Christ, and his Apostles, but picks out some one of
them to adhere to, in Contradistinction to the rest, is guilty of faction. Now
Bishops succeeding Christ and his Apostles; if any shall adhere to this or that
Bishop in contradistinction to the rest, it is faction, but to adhere to
Episcopacy, in contradistinction to any other Church Government; or to prize it
as the most excellent above all other; is so far from being factious, that it
is perfectly the contrary.

If the Doctor will still reply, that some men may so far Dote upon Episcopacy,
as to think that their magnifying this only Government will serve their turn
as to Religion, without Faith, Hope, or Charity. I must retort, that I am not
to answer for Doaters: and as for men in their wits, they can never think so. I
have heard of some who fancied that Faith alone would save them: but never of
any who dreamt they should be saved merely for preferring and adhering to
Episcopacy, before any other Church Government. Sure I am, that the noblest
examples of Piety in all ages of the Church, have been those who were Honourers
of Episcopacy: and if some Episcopal men (as they call them) be now vicious, it
springs from some other root, then their being Episcopal.

Lastly, I observe that all this part of the Doctors Apology runs upon the
Peoples immeasurable prizing of Episcopacy: and this he will have to be the
partial or factious Management of Episcopacy. Risum teneatis! I for my part
thought, that the management (whether good or bad) of Episcopacy, had been by
the Bishops: but Dr More informs me that the people manage it.

In his 5. Sect. I presume he found himself at very good leisure: for he gives
us good store of verses out of Spencer, wherein he says, he describes the
effect of the extirpation of Episcopacy, upon the Presbyters themselves. And I
care not if I be so idle upon this Opportunity of thrusting some verses also
upon the Reader: which Dr More I hope will not take amiss, seeing I borrow them
out of his own Poem entitled The Life of the Soul, and printed A. D. 1647.
There in his 2d Canto he thus describes the Kings Chapel, representing the
Altar, by a green Turf, Stanza 58. the Tapers, by Torchwort, and the Pulpit and
Cushion by an hollow Oak and moss. Stanza 59. The Choristers on either side,
and Boreas for the Organ above, Stanza 60. the Eagle, or King in his lofty
Cabinet at the west end. Stanza 61. Then that he may not seem to forget the
Bishops, he brings in one of them, for the Preacher, in these lines:

62
After a song loud chanted by that Quire
Tuned to the whistling of the hollow Wind,
Comes out a gay Pie in his rich attire:
The snowie white with the black satin shined,
On's head a silken Cap he wore ulin'd
When he had hopped to the middle flore
His bowing head right lowly he inclined
As if some Deity he did adore,
And seemly gestures make courting the Heavenly Power.
63
Thus cring'd he toward the East with shivering wings,
With eyes on the square sod devoutly bent.
Then with short flight up to the Oak he springs,
Where he thrice congied after his ascent
With posture changed from the East to the Occident;
Thrice bowed he down, and easily thrice he rose:
Bowed down so low, as if it had been's intent
On the green Moss to wipe his swarthy Nose
Anon be chatters loud, but why himself best knows.
By this stuff, there will be no great question made, but the Doctor, was in
reference to Episcopacy, the very same in verse An. 1647. which he is in prose
in that Section of his Preface An. 1660. But now he hastens as he says, to the
4th Objection, and I will be at his heels. Objection. 4. [He affirms, that
Church Discipline should comprehend only the generally acknowledged Articles
of the Christian faith, and plain indispensable duties of life. Which
overthrows all authority concerning things Indifferent. Pref. page 18. 19.]

To this he answers [All that those passages contain which are here referred to
touching this matter, is in the 18^h page in this paragraph: That the main end
of Church Government and Discipline, is the countenancing and promoting the
Christian life, and an holy observation of such precepts of Christ as do not
make men obnoxious to the secular Power by transgressing them; to keep out also
Idolatry and every Error and superstitious Practice that tends to the
supplanting or defeating the power of the Gospel; and that therefore we ought
rather to be solicitous about managing this Government to the right end, then
to disturb the peace of the Church by an overscrupulous examination of the
exterior frame thereof.]

Before I follow him farther, I must needs set a note upon what he begins to
broach here. The Churches power, he says, is mainly intended to countenance
and promote the observation of (such of Christ's Precepts, as do not make men
obnoxious to the secular power by transgressing them) Hence it follows, that
such precepts, even of Christ himself, as do make men obnoxious to the secular
power by transgressing them; are no part of those precepts whose observation
the Church is chiefly to countenance and promote by her power and Discipline.
In case therefore the Civil Magistrate, being a Religious and Godly Prince,
lays his strict commands on his subjects, to be diligent observers of both
Tables, and chiefly of the weightiest matters therein; injoyning them to live
in all Godliness, Temperance, Justice, Charity, Peaceableness, and Obedience to
that Government both civil and ecclesiastical; with addition of sanctions of
severe punishments on all profane drunken, riotous, filthy, seditious, factious
livers; Because these precepts of Christ (for that so they are, I hope the
Doctor will grant) must in this case always make men obnoxious to the secular
power by transgressing them; therefore the countenancing and promoting of an
holy observation of such Godly Temperance, Justice, Charity, Peaceableness and
Obedience to Governors ecclesiastical and civil, is no part of the main end of
Church Government and Discipline. What a strange discipline pleases this Man!
How much the more is the Church Discipline bound to countenance and promote the
observation of those such Precepts of Christ, which the Magistrate knowing to
be the chief, makes it his chief care also; although by transgressing them, the
transgressors will be obnoxious to the secular power? Besides; why in
promoting the observation of Christ's Precept of fleeing, and keeping out
Idolatry (which the Doctor in the next word instances as a part of the main end
of Church Government) may not (by his leave) that very Precept (under Godly and
religious Princes) make men obnoxious to the secular Power, by transgressing
it? And so he would, and would not, almost in the same breath, have that a part
of the main care of Church Governors. And now I will attend him in his Dance.

He adds [To keep out also all Idolatry and every Error and superstitious
practice that tends to the supplanting or defeating the power of the Gospel.]
Be it so: grant this a main end of Church Government. I hereupon demand,
whether that Error that infers Schisms, Distractions, and the greatest
uncharitableness; be not a principal way of defeating the power of the Gospel?
If it be, then those Governors who manage the Church Government so as to
oppose strictly, and stoutly suppress that Error that infers schisms, etc. do
manage it sutably to a main end thereof. But the Error of the Brethren who
winch and kick against Church Government, most sadly has of late, and always
will in some degree hereafter after, infer Schisms, etc. Therefore strictly to
oppose and stoutly to suppress that Error, suits a main end of the
Church Government. How miserably impertinent then are the Doctors last words
[Therefore we ought rather to be solicitous about managing the Government to
the right end, then disturb the peace of the Church by an overscrupulous
examination of the outward form thereof.] The Right End of Church Government,
is, the preservation of unity in the Church: and is Unity, or the Peace of the
Church, disturbed by any, though the exactest examination, even of the outward
form thereof? Let the Doctor examine it, as much as he will; the more the
better; for had he duly examined it, he would have showed more manners toward
it.

But the sport is: the Doctor here supposes himself to be one of those that
manage the Church Government. [ We ought, says he, rather to be solicitous
about Managing the Government to the right end, etc. ] and therefore whatsoever
blame he casts upon the management; he casts upon himself. It Is true, when he
is in his Tub, he thinks himself fit to direct the whole Christian Church; and
sutably inscribes the 19th Chapter of the 6th Book of his Mystery,
Advertisements to the Guides of Christendom: but though he be (...), God be
thanked he is not (...) none of those whom it concerns to manage the
Government; for this belongs to the Bishops, not to him, or to the People.
Which being notorious and clear; does the Doctor fear that these Governors
themselves will so overscrupulously examine the outward form of the Government,
as to disturb thereby the Peace of the Church? Logi.

He proceeds [And again in the same page at the end, in this parag. reaching
also into the following page, [That the first and chief point is, to make a
right choice of the Object of this Church Discipline: which is to comprehend
nothing but what is sound and purely Apostolical, that is, The indisputable
Truths of our Religion, such as we are sure to be the mind of Christ and his
Apostles; namely, The generally acknowledged Articles of the Christian faith,
and plain and indispensable Duties of life. For these are such as deserve to be
held up with all possible care and strictness: Other things so gently
recommended that no conscientious Man may be pinched thereby.]

If the Reader here ask, The first and chief point of what? he may guess if he
can: for the Doctor tells him not, either here, or in his Preface. He cannot
reasonably mean, The first and chief point of Church Discipline; for the Object
of that Discipline must be made choice of and fixed by the Author of that
Discipline, before the Discipline it self can be exercised: and is therefore in
the nature of the thing, precedent to the Discipline it self. Yet what else he
should mean who can divine?

But what if he asks also, Who should make the right choice of the object of
Church Discipline? I see not upon the Doctors grounds, what possible Answer he
could give, without first supposing That the Church was for some time without
Government and Discipline, and in that time was to deliberate what Object to
choose: for till she had an Object of Government resolved on, she could have no
Government. Indeed by the obvious sense of the Doctors words, one would think
that when he wrote them, the choice of this Object was not made, or not made
aright. But whether the Doctor knows, or will know, so much or no; the
Christian Church never stood at a gaze or muse, touching the Object, and the
right Object, of her Government and Discipline.

Yet let us hear from this Oracle, what that Object must be, he says [It must
comprehend nothing but what is sound and purely, etc. i. e. The generally
acknowledged Articles of the Christian Faith, and plain indispensable Duties of
life.] What he means by Articles of Faith generally acknowledged, who can tell?
If he means, such as were received by all Churches and Councils, reputed sound
Members of the Church Catholic; he should have done well to have expressed it.
But he has so ordered his words, that if it may serve his turn at a pinch
hereafter, he can notwithstanding what he writes here, wave or deny any such
Articles when the Church shall require his Assent; because some Heretics or
other have opposed them, and so they were not Generally acknowledged.

As for indispensable duties of life, (which is the second part of his object,)
it is but just to ask him, what are such? or how there can be any such? for if
(as he lays for a Principle) the main End of Church Government and Discipline,
be the countenancing and promoting the Christian Life, in an holy Observation
of such Precepts of Christ, as do not make men obnoxious to the secular Power
by transgressing them: Then, in case a secular Princes Laws shall lay hold of a
Christian, by reason of any one, or of all Christ's Precepts; the main end of
the Church Governors Office, makes it not their duty to countenance and
promote the Observation of any such of Christ's Precepts. And is not this in
effect to make all the Precepts of Christ dispensable upon occasion? Could the
prime Vizier now persuade the Emperors Subjects to embrace this Doctrine, it
would much easier bring the grand Signiours design to pass, then all his
Armies. Now I can devise no imaginable Evasion for the Doctor, but in that word
(the main end.) Whence perhaps he will pretend, that one end, though not the
main, of Church Government, is to promote the Observation of Christ's Precepts,
whether they make men obnoxious to the secular Power, or no. But will he dare
to stick to this? Will he profess, that to promote the Observation of Christ's
Precepts, is a petty end of Church Government, and by the by? If he does, yet
even this fetch will not clearly carry him off, For,

First, He makes a distinction of such of Christ's Precepts as render men
obnoxious to the secular Power, from such as do not.

Secondly, In respect of the later sort of Precepts, he teaches, that it is
the main end of Church Government, to promote their Observation.

Thirdly, Therefore he necessarily leaves the former sort in a looser
condition, and dispensable by the Governors. For certainly what is
indispensable, belongs to the main end of their Government; But if they may
take their liberty, touching those costly and dangerous Precepts of Christ, and
be not indispensably bound to promote and press their Observation, (and that so
they are not bound, the Doctor signifies by his Distinction) it follows, that
they may in this case dispense, and leave the people to save their skins or
purses, by making bold with Christ's Precepts.

Well but however, the Doctor grants the ground of the Objection to be truly
alleged: only he would persuade us that this overthrows not all Authority in
things Indifferent. For, Sect. 7. he says, [The premised passages administer
matter for a due solution.] And then he adds, That in saying (the object of
Church Discipline, is to comprehend nothing, but what is sound and purely
Apostolical: viz. the generally acknowledged Articles of the Christian Faith,
and plain indispensable Duties of Life.) His meaning is, [That we should not
make the lesser things and the more dispensable, and such as are but of humane
Institution and Determination, the main object upon which Church Discipline is
exercised; but the general acknowledged Articles of the Christian Faith, and
plain and indispensable Duties of Life, such as we are exhorted to by Christ
and his Apostles. For this is really for the Glory of the Gospel, the security
of men's souls, in the conduct of them to Heaven; and also for their comfortable
abode here upon earth.] Is not this pretty? His Position was, That the Object
of Church Government must comprehend nothing but the generally acknowledged
Articles of Faith, and indispensable Duties of Life. Does not this apparently
exclude all things else? Yet he professes here, that he meant only, That
those should be the Principal and main Object. So, he said One thing; and, if
you will believe him, he meant Another.

But that he meant not thus, is evident enough by the words he added in that
former Paragraph, viz. (Other things (suppose the lesser and more dispensable,
as being of humane Institution) are to be so gently recommended, that no
conscientious man may be pinched thereby.) Now if all things besides Articles
of Faith and indispensable Duties of Life, must only be Recommended; then must
they not be Commanded; and so they will prove no object of the Churches
Discipline. Nay the Doctor will have them Recommended, yet but Gently, (does
not this look like an Act of Discipline?) and so as not to pinch conscientious
men. I know who will owe him immortal thanks for this Doctrine: which (if it be
sound) any Nonconformist may pretend Conscience, and cry out of being Pinched,
and then he ought to have his liberty.

But the Doctor forgets not to interpret this passage also, and in effect he
tells us, that by Gently Recommended; his meaning was, Commanded. For thus he
expounds these words, [Other things so gently recommended, that conscientious
men may not be pinched thereby; that is to say, That the like severity is not
to be used in things that are not of so indispensable a nature.] And who doubts
of this? but to Recommend, and Gently, and so gently as no man may be pinched;
is, I take it, No severity at all, (nay no Discipline at all) so far is it from
being a like degree of severity to that which is used in points indispensable.
Nevertheless, by Gently Recommending; the Doctor meant, a less degree of severe
Discipline. He has most aenigmatick meanings.

Nor can I pass by those other words of his without a note, [For this (viz.
that the Articles of Faith and indispensable Duties of Life, should be the
object of Discipline) is really for the glory of the Gospel, the security of
men's souls, in the conduct of them to Heaven, and also for their comfortable
abode here on earth.] It seems then, in the Doctors Judgment, That the due
observance of Ecclesiastic Laws in things indifferent, is not really for the
glory of the Gospel, nor for security of men's souls in the way to Heaven. Tell
the people this; and with what better Argument for Schism and Faction, can you
furnish them? for why should they trouble themselves to submit to that which is
not really for the Gospels glory, nor their safe passage to Heaven? Dr More
teaches them (if they will but have wit enough to understand him right) that
their Disobedience to the Churches Laws, is no real impediment of their
salvation, or of the Gospels glory. Nay this is not all: Do the people desire a
comfortable abode on earth? the same Doctor has kindly signified to them, that
the like Disobedience is no real impediment to this neither.

And let him not pretend, that I here wrest his words to an odious sense: for
if there be any sense at all in that part of his Argumentation, I have done him
no wrong. If obedience to the Churches Laws, be really for the Gospels glory,
the promotion of our salvation, and our comfortable abode upon earth; as in
truth it is. Then ought it to be held up with all possible care and strictness,
and to be a part of the main object of the Churches Discipline. But the Doctor
argues, That the Articles of Faith and indispensable Duties of Life, are only
that main object; For this (viz. that they only should be the main object) is,
says he, really for the glory of the Gospel, etc. which Reason of his, is no
Reason, unless less he means, That the other is not really so: seeing if it
were really so, it might by his own very Reason, be part of that main object.

In the same 7th Sect. he thus proceeds: [I think it is pretty plain already,
that I do not affirm, that Church Discipline should comprehend only the
generally acknowledged Articles of the Christian Faith, and plain indispensable
Duties of Life.] His words were, That it is to comprehend Nothing but them.
These words are more then pretty plain; and he cannot deny that so he wrote.
How pretty plain then is it which he says here, let any one judge who is
capable of understanding a Contradiction.

But still he is confident, that he did in his former Book, establish and leave
entire Church Authority in things Indifferent. Which says he, ( Sect. 8.) [No
man could make any question of, did he but compare one part of my Preface with
another; as that which occurs Sect. 13. at the close, etc.] Had it been true,
That in some part of his Preface he does establish that Authority, or leave it
entire, (which he will hardly prove,) yet the Objection was justly made: for
why may he in any part of his Book undermine or deny this Authority? I could
weary the Reader with instances where this Doctor writes repugnantly to
himself. Is it therefore justifiable in him to write what he lists in one place
against the Church, because in another place he does or may seem to write for
her? What is this, but to give his Mother a Bit and a Knock? But in these
Repugnancies, his Proselytes know well enough which is indeed his meaning: They
are not to seek where he speaks what he would have them believe; and where he
speaks what may preserve him from being obnoxious to the secular Power. Or if
any of them be so dull as not to discover this, and therefore may take offense;
the Doctor may full as rationally Apologize for himself to his offended
Brethren, out of one sort of passages in his Writings; as he does to his Reader
here out of the other sort.

But let us see, what he would have us here compare in his Preface, viz. [That
which occurs Sect. 13. at the close thereof: (There shall be nothing held
essential or fundamental, but the indispensable Law of the Christian Life, and
that Doctrine that depends not upon the fallible Deductions of men, but is
plainly set down in the Scripture; other things being left to the free
Commendation of the Church, ensnaring no man's Conscience, nor Lording it over
the Flock of Christ) and still holding on in the next Section (which certainly
they do, that call those things Antichristian that are not, and thereby make
more Fundamentals, then Christ and his Apostles. Which Error is the very
effence and substance of Antichristianism, and of that grand Apostasy of the
Church.]

Having said this, he falls into his wonted fit; for he adds, [Can there be any
thing more express and pertinent for the Vindication of the Power and Liberty
of the Church, in appointing things Indifferent then this?]

Yes surely, good Doctor, there may. All that you leave here to the Church
touching things Indifferent, is, to Recommend them. It had been more express
and pertinent, if you had left her Power to Command them. But to see the
unluckiness of it; The Doctor here makes the Doctrine touching the Churches
Authority in things Indifferent, to be contradistinct from those Doctrines
which are plainly set down in Scripture: Whereas Scripture Commands in several
places, Obedience to our spiritual Governors; which Obedience necessarily
includes in the object of it things Indifferent; unless the Doctor can show us,
where such Commands are limited and restrained to things Essential and
Fundamental. And in truth, that is most properly said to be Obedience to our
spiritual Governors, which is done in things Indifferent for things Necessary,
are the express Commands of God; to which we owe Obedience whether our
Governors urge them upon us or no.

The next passage he would have us compare, is in the close of the 14th Sect.
[But it is manifest, that all the zealous Corrivals, etc. ] What is here, to
prove the Churches Power in Indifferent things? he blames those who decry
things for Antichristian, which of themselves are innocent and of an
indifferent nature: and those also, who obtrude Opinions that are worse then
Indifferent. Where by the way you may observe, That this exact Doctor first
speaks kindly of things Indifferent; for he vouchsafes to style them Innocent:
yet in the next Line, talks of Opinions worse then Indifferent, that is, worse
then Innocent. But his blaming either the one or the other, either the Decryers
or the Obtruders; makes nothing for asserting the Power of the Church in things
Indifferent; seeing either of those sorts of men may be blameable, whether the
Church has any such Power, or no.

Lastly he adds, [And at the close of the 15th Sect. where having first
suggested, that nothing can so well secure the peace of the Clergy, and make
them impregnable, as the using of their Power, and the exercising of their
Discipline, in the behalf of such Truths and Rites as are plainly and
confessedly Apostolical; and the being more facil and easy in additional
Circumstances, and quite cutting off all useless and intangling Opinions; I at
last add, Which one plain and generous Rule of Government, is the most
effectual means imaginable of making the world good, etc. --) which Clause
cannot be made good, unless there be in the Church a Power of appointing and
determining the Modes and Circumstances of public Worship Which since they may
be various, and yet all sorts of them decent, and therefore indifferent which
to choose; it is assuredly left to Authority to determine the choice, and
others ought to submit thereto. Let all things be done decently and in order.
So abundantly evident it is, That it never came into my mind to take away that
Right of Commanding things Indifferent, from public authority. And thus I
think I have fully satisfied this 4th Objection.]

Art thou not satisfied Reader; and fully, touching the 4th Objection? The
Doctor would have the Church facil and easy in additional Circumstances:
therefore he asserts her Power in determining things before Indifferent. Nay he
would have her quite cut off useless and intangling Opinions: and is not this
also, To exercise Power in Indifferent things? As for the Clause he speaks of,
it may be made good, without granting any such Power in the Church.

For 1. Useless and intangling Opinions, are not in the class of things
Indifferent, but plainly condemned by Scripture: wherefore to cut off these,
supposes not such a Power touching Indifferent Points.

2. The facility and easiness of the Church in additional Circumstances; argues
not any such Power, but rather implies the contrary: namely, that she has no
right strictly to Command, but only gently to Recommend.

But all this while, the Doctor only manageth a sly juggle, and pretending to
compare the places of his Preface, he gives us instead of a faithful honest
Citation, a mangled and adulterate one. Here you see his words run thus [ --
cutting off all useless and intangling Opinions, I at last add, which one plain
and generous Rule, etc.] But in his Preface, next after intangling Opinions,
and immediately before, which plain and generous rule, etc. he has these
Lines: [For hereby will their Opposers manifestly be found to fight against God
and his Christ, while they contest with his Ministers, who urge nothing upon
the people, but what was plainly taught and practiced by himself and his
Apostles, whose ways and Doctrines are so sacred, that they ought to be kept up
with all lawful severity. The Doctor knew this passage would but
ill-favouredly grin upon the Bravado he meant to conclude with; wherefore he
wondrous wisely omitted it. For if Church Governors are to urge nothing upon
the people, but what was plainly taught and practiced by Christ and his
Apostles; then are they not to urge things in themselves Indifferent; and if
they may not urge them, what does their power signify? Object. 5. ( He terms
Christ's Divine Nature, that Passive contemptible Divinity which lodged in him,
lib. 5. c. 1. sect. 5.)

The Doctors own words were, That passive contemptible Divinity which lodged in
him. Upon these the Objection was founded. His Answer here in the 9th Sect. is,
That by Christ's Divinity, he means Christ's deiform Humanity. And that this was
his meaning, he first appeals to his 4th Book, 12th Chap. Sect. 3. Now though
he had spoke soberly in his 4th Book, this cannot justify him for speaking
wildly in his 5th Book. However let us hear his words, and see whether they
will be his sufficient Compurgators. [How should it ever come into the mind of
a mere natural man, to think of an humble, passive, soul-melting,
self-afflicting and self-resigning Divinity lodging in any person: or if it
did, etc.] then he adds, [Can it come into the mind of any man to think, that
I understand this humble, passive, self-afflicting and selfresigning Divinity,
of the second Hypostasis of the Trinity, the eternal and immaterial logos? but
I compare here the Character of Christ with that of Apollonius, who affected a
kind of Divinity: and philostratus endeavored to set him out accordingly.]

The Objector never charged him, That he spoke those words, of the eternal
logos; nor did it come into his mind, so to think. This clamor therefore of
the Doctor [ Can it come into the mind of any man, etc.] is impertinent. But I
must be bold to tell him, That though in the next (the 10th Section) he
expounds those words of (that most lovely and amiable Divine Spirit lodging in
our Savior) yet to term that Divine Spirit, by the name of Divinity, ill suits
with the Theological Dialect: and besides, may be very scandalous to his
Philosophers, at whose Conversion he pretends that Book does very much aim. Nor
will it less scandalize them, that he calls Divinity, deiform Humanity; or
deiform Humanity, Divinity. Such Notions and Phrases, are very likely to
startle his rational Monsieurs; and perhaps cause the enemies of the Lord, not
only to mock, but to blaspheme, when they hear a grave Professor of Theology,
interpret Divinity to be Humanity, though with any annexed Epithete.

Next he repeats (in his 11th Sect.) the whole Section cited by the Objector;
vouching it to have no other Meaning then what he declared touching the former
place in his 4th Book. I will not swear for Dr More's Meaning, of all the men I
know living. Look we therefore to the words, [He whom they numbered amongst the
Transgressors, and took to be the vilest of men, because he was not
recommended by any thing that the Animal life likes and applauds, (as nobleness
of birth, the power of popular Eloquence, Honor, Wealth, Authority, high
Education, Beauty, Courtship, Pleasantness of Conversation, and the like.)

Stay stay Doctor, you must not run away with this. What was not Christ
recommended by Nobleness of Birth, who was descended of the noblest stock in
all the Nation where he lived? Not by the Power of popular Eloquence, I mean,
such Eloquence, as mightily, even to admiration, prevailed upon the people,
though the Gospel notes that the people pressed to hear him, S. Luc. 5. 1. that
the common people heard him gladly, S. Marc. 12. 37. that the Pharisees
Officers sent to apprehend him, were so ravished with his discourse, that they
durst not seize him, but acknowledged to their Masters, That never man spoke
like this man? S. Io. 7. 47. Not by Authority, though he taught as one that had
authority, and not as the Scribes. S. Marc. 1. 22. Yea though he commanded and
forced tempests and devils to obey him? Not by Beauty; who (though despectus
and ignobilis quando pendebat in Cruce, as St Ierom notes upon that in Esaias 53.
2. yet) was fairer then the children of men, Psalm. 45. 2? Not by pleasantness
of Conversation: though he came not in S John Baptists severity, but eating and
drinking, St Matt. 11. v. 18, 19? Nay more, Lib. 5. C. 11. S. 9. he denies,
that Christ had the knowledge of Philosophy. It is strange how the Doctor
should slump into this ugly humor of impudent vilifying our blessed Lord, even
where he pretends to magnify him! but now lets hear the rest.

[He is I say, notwithstanding this general contempt from men, very highly
prized by him who is the infallible Judge, whose ways are not as our ways,
nor his thoughts as our thoughts; but that he might conform our apprehensions
to his own, raised Jesus from the dead, bringing that passive contemptible
Divinity that lodged in him, into a deserved victory and triumph.] If by
Divinity here, he means (as before he affirms he does) Christ's deiform
Humanity: besides the wild uncoothness, and unsavory scandalousness of the
Expression. I demand how Christ's Humanity (dressed with the Epithete Deiform,
or what else you will) can be lodged in Christ? for he says this Divinity,
that is, his Humanity was lodged in him. As the Soul and Body are one Man; so
the Divinity and Humanity are one Christ. Now is it good sense to say, the body
of such a man, is lodged in that man? yet just the same sense is that in the
Doctors expression.

But the entire Section considered, he presumes that many passages in it will
evince, That he could not mean the divine nature of Christ, by his Divinity:
and if so, the Objection charge him unjustly. I answer, The Objection
expressly charge him, not with what he meant, but what he said. He said, the
Divinity lodged in Christ, was passive and contemptible: Now neither the
Objector, nor any sound Catholic Christian knows of any (...), any Divinity in
Christ, but his divine Nature. I grant, Christ's Humanity abounded with divine
Virtues; and that it was anointed (as the Doctor in his Reply mentions) with
the Oil of Gladness more eminently then his Fellows: Yet still it was but his
Humanity, and not to be styled by that name which signifies his Nature as he is
God. Again, I grant, that by these Virtues and this Unction, he was (...) as he
was man; yet that participation of the divine nature, is no ground to call his
Manhood, Divinity. For imagine Dr More never so virtuous, and thereby (in Saint
Peter's phrase) Partaker of the Divine Nature; were it tolerable therefore to
say, That he has (...) lodged in him? or that his Nature (which is Humanity)
may therefore be styled Divinity?

Lastly, Concerning his calling the Divinity which was lodged in Christ,
Contemptible; he answers, [That he does not term it, in the other sense,
Contemptible, but condemn others for accounting it so.] What is that other
sense? he has not yet mentioned two senses of Contemptible; thither then it
cannot be referred. Wherefore it must be the other sense of Divine Nature in
Christ: and so I conceive his meaning is, That he called not the divine nature
of Christ (or his Divinity) that is, his deiform Humanity, Contemptible. Now
what is this, but plainly to deny, what he plainly said? for let him understand
it in what sense he will, Contemptible was one of the Epithets which he clapped
upon it. Had he said, Contemned, who would have quarrelled with him? for our
Lords enemies did most notoriously contemn him: but their crime was, that they
Contemned him who was not Contemptible. The Scripture tells us of some who
despised God: will the Doctor therefore call God Despicable?

To conclude, The Doctor cannot deny the words which the Objection charges him
with, to be in the place cited by the Objector. Nor did the Objector make any
Comment upon or inference from those words; but barely represented them, upon
supposal that Christ's Divinity, was Christ's divine nature. Whether the Doctor
has made all whole, by expounding and denying; viz. by expounding Divinity to
signify deiform Humanity, and by denying that he called it Contemptible,
though he did so call it, is not difficult to determine.

Upon CHAP. VI.
His Answer touching Nestorianism.
HE begins this Chapter thus, [It will contribute nothing to our purpose to
take notice of Nestorius his person, how he was first a Monk, etc.] to the end
of his first Section.

And I pray, is not this a very pertinent beginning, when he himself
confesses, It will contribute nothing to his purpose! What ayls the man then
to abuse his Reader with stuff which he tells us aforehand has not the least
affinity with the business in hand? I see not what could move him to this
pitiful vanity, but his ambitious humor of testifying his great Reading, and
therefore of stuffing his Books with any Notes he has picked up (whether out of
Authors or Indexes I will not determine) though nothing to the purpose.

But then Sect. 2. he prepares himself to give a punctual account of the nature
of Nestorianism, out of the ancient Greek Collections of Ecclesiastical Canons,
as they are in the Edition of Iustellus.

Surely had he intended an honest and punctual account, his readier way had
been to take it out of Nestorius his own Assertions, produced and read in the
Ephesinc Council, which condemned him.

Then having in the 3d Sect. brought a Citation ex lib. 1. Codic. Tit. 1. In
Justinians Rescript to the Constantinopolitans; he says, Sect. 4. [Out of
which it is manifest that Nestorius his Heresy was, in that he held No real
and physical Union as I may so speak (such as is betwixt Body and Soul) betwixt
Christ and the Word; but that the Word, and Humanity of Christ were really
disjoined.] Observe how shie the Doctor is: As if it were some question whether
he might so speak: and how is that? it is indeed but as S. Athanasius speaks in
his Creed [As the reasonable Soul and Flesh is one man, so God and man is one
Christ] and what is this but a real and physical Union, such as is betwixt the
Body and the Soul? the reason of this shiness, will appear hereafter.

Mean while, suppose Nestorius held no real and physical Union of Christ's 2
Natures, such as is of our Body and Soul; i. e. an union into one Person. Yet
he professes, in his forementioned Assertions produced in the Council, an
Union, and that a very close one: his words are tetradio 15to [(...). Let us
therefore hold the inconfused conjunction of the natures; let us confess God in
Man; let us adore Man who by conjunction to God Almighty is together worshipped
with him] Which I here set down that we may by and by see upon examination,
whether what the Doctor writes in his Mystery, will amount to any nearer Union
then that which Nestorius himself pleads to have acknowledged. He adds other
Citations, 1. Out of Photius. 2. Out of the Collection of the 6 Ecumenical
Councils by an uncertain Author. 3. Out of the Synodicon, and then concludes
thus, in the close of his 7th Section: [Out of all which it is exceeding plain
that the Heresy of Nestorius consists in this, that he divided and cut quite
asunder the Humanity and Divinity of Christ, into two separa^e Hypostases,
making Christ a mere man and so denying the Incarnation of the Word, the
Godhead of Christ, and the honor that accrewed to the Blessed Virgin, etc.] I
see so little to our Question in his Citations, that I will spare my self the
trouble of searching whether he has faithfully produced them or no; and be
content to take them upon his word.

For by the Doctors leave, these passages affirm not that Nestorius held two
separate Hypostases in Christ, though the Doctor would pin that sense upon
them. All that may seem to favor his Assertion, is in the first Citation;
which says, That Nestorius cut and divided Christ (...) into two Hypostases:
but it says not, Into two separate Hypostases. Nor could it truly say so,
seeing it appears by Nestorius his own words (which I have alleged above) that
he professed a (...) of the two Hypostases: and where there is (...) there may
be distinction indeed, but not separation. Wherefore those following words in
the Citation out of Photius, (...) and (...)) must signify only distinction,
and by no means separation, (namely, that God and man were not united in one
Hypostasis, though otherwise they did most closely cohere,) unless Photius
understood Nestorius his mind, better then Nestorius himself.

In the next place, Sect. 8. for perfectly quitting himself of Nestorianism,
(which heresy he falsely presumes that he has truly stated,) he brings several
passages, opposite (as he says) thereunto, out of the 1 Book of his Mystery,
cap. 5. and Book 5. cap. 17. and Book 10. cap. 6. But what is all this to the
6th Objection founded upon Book 6. cap. 15? If he happens to speak Catholickly
in some places, is that a justification for his speaking the contrary in
others? Let us therefore now see what he says, (after this long Proem) to the
Objection it self; which is this, as he sets it down in the 10th Sect. of this
Chapter. Object. 6. ( He brings in an humane person of Christ, lib. 6. c. 15.
sect. 1. p. 258. and afterward, without any mincing, calls it so ten times in
that Chapter, and several times afterward.

The Doctor having produced this Objection, falls upon a piece of ingenuity;
which being a rarity, I will do him so much right as to note it: For he says,
[I will also add, what was hinted to me at second hand out of Book 9. Chapter 2.
Sect. 6. where I declare, How that the Humanity of Christ, and the eternal
Word, may be Hypostatically united, without any contradiction to humane Reason
unsophisticated with the Fopperies of the Schools, and both their Hypostases
remain still entire. And afterward in the same Sect. I bring in Christ, as made
up (if one may so speak) of the second Hypostasis of the Trinity, and of that
Humane Person that conversed at Jerusalem.]

Where by the way, I must mind him, That in this ingenuity, he also betrays a
piece of boldness, which I know not how he can answer: Namely in his
Magisterial stamping upon the Schoolmens Writings the name of Fopperies, and
such as sophisticate humane Reason. For though those Authors were men who
could have answered for themselves with more acute and solid Reason, then the
Doctor could oppose them: yet that is not all. King James of blessed Memory (a
Prince of as great judgment, surely as Dr More) has recommended and enjoined
the Reading of the Schoolmen to our University. The same injunction was renewed
by the glorious Martry K. Charles the First: and also by our present Sovereign
K. Charles the Second. Which makes me much wonder, with what face this Doctor
could tax the Schoolmen with Fopperies, and sophisticating of humane Reason, in
the matter of the hypostatical union of the Word and Humanity of Christ. For be
it, will he say, in the matter of Transubstantiation, and Worship of Images,
etc. they have sophisticated; Yet to turn off every thing (when he wants a
starting hole) as the same Numerical body raised again, and in Christ but one
Person, not two Persons, under the Notion of School Fopperies; is as good as to
leave nothing wherein these three Kings could well recommend them to our
studies. Who knows not that there is an allowance or abatement to be made for
humane Errors, in most humane Authors recommended to us? And though our
University Statutes order Platos, Aristotle's and Plinies Books to be publicly
taught; yet they suppose them not to be in all parts free from Errors. We
understand therefore, that those sacred Kings commended the Schoolmen to our
studies, so far as they clash not with the Doctrine of ours and the Catholic
Church.

But in his next (the 11th Section,) he undertakes to show all these passages
to be blameless; but says he must first settle the true Notion of Persona and
Hypostasis. To do this, he first defines Suppositum to be [A singular,
individual substance, completely existing by it self, but not incommunicably,
though incommunicately, i. as yet not actually concurring as a potential
principle to the making up of Eni unum per se.]

Truly he takes a fair liberty, to make definitions of his own, and then
examine his Doctrines by them. And here he has minted a very pretty one,
witness those words (not actually concurring as a potential Principle,) but let
him have it. He proceeds:

[I need only add, That Hypostasis in the concrete sense, is the same that
Suppositum; in the abstract, subsistentia: and that subsistere is sometimes in
the very language of the Schools, said of an individual substance, although it
exist dependently upon another Suppositum, as in the Humane Nature of Christ.
And lastly, for Persona, it is nothing but Suppositum Rationale.] Let him have
all this too, to please him.

Now he answers to the Objection, Sect. 13. thus: [I do not bring in an Humane
Person of Christ, without any mincing of the matter. For at the very first
naming of the terms, I both modestly and cautiously ask leave in these words:
Now that the Humane Person of Christ, (as I may so call it) is not to be laid
aside, etc.] Most acutely! The Objector says not, that Dr More brought in the
Humane Person of Christ without any mincing of the matter, at the first naming
of the terms; but expressly says, That he so brings it in Afterward. Now the
Doctor proves, that he did not so bring it in, because at his very first naming
of the terms, he inserts this Parenthesis (as I may so call it.) Is not this
Answer direct and apposite?

But he would persuade us, that by this Parenthesis, he modestly and cautiously
asked leave. How modest a Creature this Doctor is, appears, as by the general
strein of his Writings, so by his particular censure of the Schoolmen, and
impudent reflection upon three Kings at once, which I noted but now: And how
cautious, is too too legible in those foul and dangerous Opinions into which he
has plunged himself, no man forcing him thereunto. Nay, to see the unluckiness
of it, in this very particular, where he boasts of both, there is neither
modesty nor caution. He says he asked leave; but of whom did he ask it? or did
he Modestly and Cautiously stay for an Answer, to know whether such leave would
or might be granted him? suppose I should here say, That Dr More is (as I may
so call him) a Nestorian Heretic: you will easily think the Doctor would be
offended, though I should plead that. modestly and cautiously asked leave, in
those words (as I may so call him) But the Doctor should have known, that it
was not lawful for him, or any other Christian, to use any expressions which
are of an heretical import, especially in such high points: And for so doing no
leave can modestly be asked; seeing it is Impudence to desire Liberty of
speaking what is Heresy, or what may vehemently and justly be suspected
thereof. Nor can any such leave justly be given, though it be asked.

He proceeds [I interserted those words ( viz. the Parenthesis mentioned) as
being well assured in my own judgment, that whatsoever might otherwise be a
suppositum of it self, if it once concur as a Potential Principle with some
other Hypostasis for the making up one Hypostasis, it loses then the proper
Nature and Definition of an Hypostasis; it being then not actually such, but
potentially, and in that sense only it can be called an Hypostasis: and there
is the same reason of Persona.]

Reader, would you know the Doctors Drift in these words? It is to prepare you
to swallow what he says Sect. 14. viz. [That though he names 2 Hypostases in
Christ, yet he understands the Humane Hypostasis to be but improperly so
termed] to wit, Because it concurs as a potential Principle with the Divine
Hypostasis, for the making up one Hypostasis. A quaint Fetch! the Doctor
frequently named the Humane Person of Christ: and now we must believe that he
meant it improperly: yea though by his own confession he declared, in the
forecited place Book 9. chapter 2. Sect. 6. that both the Hypostases in Christ
remain still entire. Entire, and yet Improperly? But still, the very ground of
his Fetch, fails him: For first it supposes, 2 Hypostases actually such; namely
in this point, the Divine actual Hypostasis, and the Humane actual Hypostasis:
for upon their Concurrence into one, he says that they lose the proper nature
and Definition of an Hypostasis. But they cannot lose what they had not; and if
they had the proper Nature and Definition of an Hypostasis, they must needs be
Actual Hypostases. Secondly he supposes these two Actual Hypostases to concur
into one third Hypostasis; and that hereupon either of the two which did thus
concur, though they cease to be actually two Hypostases, yet Potentially they
continue such; and in that sense (i. e. improperly) may still be termed
Hypostases. Now let the Doctor show us, How Christ's Humanity was once a
complete entire Hypostasis by it self, and afterward concurrent with his
Divinity to make up the Hypostasis of (...), by which Concurrence it lost the
proper Nature and Definition of an Hypostasis, it being then not actually such,
but potentially: otherwise his premised Devise will stand him in no stead.

His second Answer is, that he was necessitated to use this Term, because of
the Familists with whom he disputed, etc. This necessity, if such, was made by
himself: for who necessitated him to dispute with the Familists? But the Doctor
can never persuade sober men that there is no disputing with Heretics, unless
the Disputer makes bold to speak like an Heretic himself. If the Familists
would, as he here pretends, have melted the Catholic expression into a
Mystical meaning; it concerned him, not therefore to change that Catholic
expression, but so to fortify it, that the Familists might not have been able
justly and rationally to have avoided it. Yet this is not all: I must have
leave plainly to tell him that his dispute with the Familists was not the thing
that necessitated him to call it the Humane Person of Christ; and that this is
both a frivolous and ridiculous excuse: for his dispute with them is in his 6th
Book, from the 12. chap. to the end of that Book: but in his 9th Book, Chap. 2.
Sect. 6. he again calls it the Humane Person of Christ, though he meddles not
there with the Familists. Wherefore, for his using that phrase, there was some
other motive, which I doubt not but himself well wots of.

His third Answer (in the same 13th Sect.) runs thus: [It brings nothing of
Nestorianism in with it, because though I name the Humane Person of Christ
alone, yet I do no more (...), then he that names the Humane Nature of Christ
alone, does (...) which if they were cut asunder, would most certainly dissolve
the Hypostatical Union also.] The ground of this Answer is Photius his saying
that Nestorius did (...) but the meaning of those words, is only this: That
Nestorius acknowledged not the two Natures, Divine and Humane, united in one
Person; but made them two Distinct Persons: Distinct, I say; not separate; as I
have noted above: for Nestorius professed a Conjunction, though not a Personal
Union; and if the Doctor stands strictly upon (...) and (...), as if Nestorius
had cut the whole, and rendered one part here and another there; he obtrudes
upon him what he never thought of. Besides, (...), is but (...), as Hesychius
tells us; and this Nestorius did, though he did not separate them: and this Dr
More seems to do, in his Answer to the Objector, if he justifies (as he does
justify all in his Preface) what he says he wrote lib. 9. cap. 2. [ I bring
in (says he there) Christ as made up (if one may so speak) of the second
Hypostasis of the Trinity, and of the humane Person that conversed at
Jerusalem.] If one may so speak, is but a necessary mollifying of the foregoing
word (made up of) not of what follows without any mollifying (of the second
Hypostasis of the Trinity, and of the humane Person that conversed at
Ierusaelem. Now whosoever distinguishes really (though he do not separate) the
second Hypostasis, i. e. Person, of the Trinity, from the Humane Person that
conversed at Jerusalem; speaks that which is Heresy: and if after idoneous
admonition he does defend (and say he demonstrates) that he has therein writ
no Error, may be judged an Heretic; though he do add, that Christ is made up
of these two (but as one may so speak) for Nestorius himself would have
forwardly concurred in such a modification: Made up of them (but as one may so
speak.)

But the Doctor pretends that in naming the humane Person of Christ alone, he
does no more divide Christ into two Hypostases, then he that names Christ's
Humane Nature alone, does divide him into two Natures; which were it done, that
is, were his two natures cut asunder, it would most certainly dissolve the
Hypostatical Union. I cannot say whether this Plea be more bold or vain. Most
bold it is to dally in such great Points, and childishly to argue from the
words (...) and (...) used about Christ's Person; as if they imported such a
cutting asunder as is made by a knife when it divides a stick into two pieces.
And most vain it is: for first, Christ's two natures though united in one
Person, are still two really distinct Natures; wherefore he who names one of
them alone, does not thereby cut asunder the Personal Union of both; no more
then he who names Dr Mores Body alone, or his Soul alone, cuts asunder the
Union of his Body and Soul in one Person: but he who names an Humane Person of
Christ alone, in distinction from a Divine Person of Christ (as the Doctor here
does) most undenyably divides Christ into two persons, and infers (as much as
lies in him) the dissolution of the Hypostatical Union of two natures in one
person. And should any Man so far dote, as to speak of the Person of Dr Mores
Body, and the Person of his Soul; who doubts but such words would import a
dissolution of that one Person which results from the Union of the Doctors Soul
and Body?

Sect. 14. he adds [Though I say that the Hypostases remain entire: yet my so
expressly affirming them Hypostatically united, shows plainly that they do not
remain Entire separately, but united unconfoundedly.] And does not Nestorius
himself acknowledge that there is (...), an Unconfounded Conjunction of the two
Natures? How differs this from the Doctors conclusion, that the two Hypostases
remain not Entire separately, but united unconfoundedly? Nestorius was as far
from separating the (...) from the Humane Nature, as Dr More. Nor can the
Doctors affirming that the two Hypostases are hypostatically united, though
those two Hypostases remain Entire; be any excuse for him, unless he will bring
an impossibility for his Apology: for, to be hypostatically united, is to
become One Hypostasis; but if the two Hypostases remain Entire, they are
certainly two Hypostases, and not only One: unless the Doctor has any trick
to prove that two, in the very same Notion can be one; and one two.

Sect. 15. he concludes with this jolly vaunt [I have not departed from the
very language and sense of the Councils, and Athanasius his Creed, in
adventuring to say, that the Humane Person of Christ Jesus concurs with the
Divine Hypostasis, which confessedly all men will grant to be well rendered here
the Divine Person for the making up one Christ] Truly to use the language of
the Councils and S. Athanasius his Creed was no such high valor in a Doctor of
Divinity that he should term it an Adventure. But to prove his Consonance with
the Councils, he shows that the Greek Church calls the three Hypostases, as
well (...), as (...) and (...). Hence he infers, that the Council of Chalcedon
manifestly allows a concurse of the Divine and Humane Hypostases, for the
making that one Person which is called Christ. The Councils words he cites, are
((...) (but in Binius his Copy it is (...) (Bin. (...) (Binius omits (...))
(...).] The sense he pins upon the Council, he draws from those words [(...).]
Where he will have (...) to be meant by (...).

To this I answer: though some Greek writers be granted to use (...) for (...).
It follows not that the Council of Chalcedon uses it so here. Nay that it does
not use it so here, is evident by comparing the premised words with these in
question: those words are [(...)] then immediately follows [(...) etc.] which
later words are an Illustration and Assertion of the former: the (...), the
Difference of the Natures [viz. of the Divine and Humane) is not (...) taken
away by the Union; but the (...) (viz. the Property of each Nature by which
they are differenced from one another; namely the one being impassible the
other passible, etc.) is (...) preserved, and (...) it is concurring into one
(...). The Council must understand, that to be (...) Preserved, which it says
was not (...) taken away: that which was not taken away, was (...) the
Difference of the Natures: therefore this (...) this Difference of the Natures
is that (...) which is (...) and (...) Preserved, and concurring (...) into one
Hypostasis. Observe then the Doctors boldness, who in his Translation of this
Citation, which he subjoyns to the original; renders the word (...), the
Hypostasis or proper subsistency. And let me add, that (...) when they are
really diverse and distinct in one and the same Divine Nature, each of them with
that one common Nature or Essence, is a person by himself: but (...) [or (...)]
may well be said (...) for there are three really distinct persons in one
Nature: and here there are two really dictinct Natures in one Person; but not
two really distinct Persons in one Person.

See now whether he has any better luck in vouching his language to be suitable
to the Athanasian Creed. He says, Sect. 16. [It is no Soloecism to call the
Humane Nature of Christ an Hypostasis; the words of the Creed declaring him to
be Perfect God and perfect Man, (...). And then defining what is meant by
(...), there is added (...), not (...), of a reasonable soul and humane flesh
subsisting, not consisting. And can there be (...) and not Hypostasis? -- But I
must confess (...) is used here in a less proper sense: but it being used, and
I understanding (...) when I apply it to the Humane nature of Christ, in no
other sense then the Creed, I think I am wholly irreprehensible for so doing.
And thus the whole imputation of Nestorianism has vanished into a mere (...),
or less.] O impregnable Doctor!

First I note that he builds here upon the Greek of the Athanasian Creed, and
if that ground be sufficient, I could furnish him out of it (as it is Printed
in St Athanas. his Works A. D. 1627. at Paris,) with a place more express for
his purpose then this he has pitched on. For where the Latin reads it, Unus
omnino, non confusione substantiae, sed Unitate Personae: the Greek runs thus,
(...), by unity of Persons, or Hypostases, in the plural. But Baronius, ad An.
Christi 340. will tell him, That St Athanasius wrote this Creed originally in
the Latin, not in the Greek language. Let him therefore who put it into Greek,
answer it, if he differs from the Latin.

Secondly, Whereas in the Latin it is Perfectus homo, exanima rationali and
humana carne subsistens: the word subsistens cannot properly or improperly be
understood for Hypostasis or Persona; but must only signify what we mean in
English by Being or Consisting, though in our Liturgy it be rendered
subsisting. For it follows in the Creed (Unus non confusione substantiae, sed
Unitate Personae,) which is spoken of Christ, as he is God and Man. Wherefore
St Athanasius determining in this clause the Divine and Humane Natures of
Christ to be one Person; he cannot be imagined in those precedent words (ex
anima rationali and humana carne subsistens) spoken of the Humane Nature, to
have any ways meant that Humane Nature to be Persona, unless we should fancy
him to write Repugnancies in his Creed.

Thirdly, If the Doctor would justify his calling Christ's Humanity, the Humane
Person of Christ, by this Creed; he should show us where the Creed calls it so.
Had he only said that Christ's Humanity is of a reasonable soul and humane
flesh subsisting: who would have quarrelled with him for that Expression? for,
that Subsistere in the Primitive Churches Latin did often signify no more
then Esse, appears by Job 7. 21. Lam. 4. 17. Esa. 17. 14. Ierem. 10. 20. Job 8.
22. and 3. 16. and 7. 8. (to add no more) in the Vulgar Translation.

Thus the Doctor has by his Apology much mended the matter. Had not the
better way been, to have honestly acknowledged his Unadvisedness and Error in
calling it the Humane Person of Christ? and to have imitated Him who ingenously
said, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo? But this would have grated too fore
upon his obstinate (...).

CHAP. VII. Upon the 7th Objection.
Touching Gods conveying a false Persuasion into the mind of his Creature.
HERE the Doctor paves his way by certain Aphorisms of his own forging; and if
he has not made them home to his own purpose, it is pity but he should hear
of it. His first Aphorism is this, [That nothing but Conviction of Conscience
in a soul that is sincere, can be properly the Promulgation of any Law, Will,
or Command of Gods to that soul.] And the reason he gives, is [Because he that
is sincere, is willing and ready to know and do any thing that is the mind of
God he should do, and does his best endeavor to know it and do it. -- Whenas
on the contrary, he that is not sincere, but false to the present light he
has, and knowingly and wittingly sins against his own Conscience; such a man
may justly be likened to one that stops his ears and will not hear the Law of
his Prince: which it being in his power notwithstanding to hear, the Law is
justly deemed to be promulgated to him.]

Because a sincere man is ready to know and do Gods W^ and Law, is therefore
that Will and Law not promulgate^ to that man, till his Conscience is
convinced? A very strang^ Reason! How, in Gods Name, can any man's Conscience be
convinced of Gods Law, before the Law be promulgated and made known to that
man? Can he be convinced of he knows not what? If then he must first know it,
before he can be convinced of it, then must it first be Promulgated. And it
(...) must first be Promulgated, then his conviction of Conscience (which
ensues thereupon) cannot properly be (as the Doctor affirms) the Promulgation
of it. How else could the Doctor say, That the Law is justly deemed to be
Promulgated to the Unsincere man, though he stops his ears and hardens his
heart against it? for if to receive, and in conscience yield to the Law, be the
proper Promulgation of it to any man; it must be so to every man: and the
Doctor deals but hardly with his unsincere man, if he gives him not leave to
plead, That because he is not convinced in his Conscience, therefore the Law
was never Promulgated to him. Nor can the Doctor evade this, by his comparing
the unsincere man to one who stops his ears, and so does not actually hear the
Kings Law Proclaimed, though he be present at the Proclamation. For first, did
the Doctor ever know any man come to a Proclamation, and stop his ears when he
is come? Secondly, Suppose him so vain and wilful as to stop his ears; yet by
that very act he acknowledges the Proclamation, and that the Law is
Promulgated to him that he might hear it if he would. Thirdly, Though his ears
were open, yet his heart mean while may be shut; and he may actually hear the
Proclamation, and yet not count himself in conscience bound to obey the Law
Proclaimed, as the Kings Law. This Law in that case is undoubtedly Promulgated
to that man, though his conscience be not convinced: Indeed the Doctor grants
as much himself in the close of the forecited words.

Wherefore that he may not be thought to overthrow his own Aphorism, he adds
[It is peculiar to the sincere and unfeignedly conscientious, that no Law or
Command of God be deemed as promulgated to them, unless their consciences be
convinced. As a man cannot in nature conceive, that any speech or voice came to
any man's ear, who, though listening and expecting, yet could not hear the least
whisper thereof.] Is this peculiar to the sincere? for what reason? Nay there
you must pardon the Doctor, if you will be content to take a simile in lieu of
a reason, he is for you. Well then, be it granted, That the voice came not to
that man's ear, who listening for it, could not hear the least whisper of it.
Apply this to the case in hand, and what will result? namely, That the Voice or
Command of God came not to the sincere man's ear, because though he listened for
it, yet he heard no whisper of it. And what then? why just so (by the Doctors
inference) it is peculiar to the sincere man that no Command of God be deemed
as Promulgated to him, unless his Conscience be convinced.

Reader you may laugh if you please; but the Doctor is still confident, and
concludes [This principle methinks is so clear, that no man should doubt of
it.] What, not doubt of it? no; though it makes conviction of Conscience, which
is naturally subsequent to the Promulgation; to be properly the Promulgation it
self?

His 2d Aphorism is, [That where there is no Law Promulgated, it is no sin or
transgression to act or profess the contrary.] He restrains not this to his
sincere person, as he does the 1st and 3d Aphorisms. But if by Promulgation, he
means such a conviction of Conscience as renders a man ready to obey; his
Aphorism is false: For by this Rule, no obstinate Kicker at Gods declared Law,
should be a sinner. He would be asked also, What is the sense of those words,
(...) act or profess the contrary.) The contrary to what? to a La^ not
Promulgated? for that only was premised to his Aphorism. Now a Law not
Promulgated; is, as to us, no Law; and in this case, just nothing: here
therefore the Doctors contrary, is, contrary to that which is not; or, contrary
to nothing.

His 3d Aph. [That a full and firm conviction of Conscience in a soul that is
sincere, is the Promulgation of a Law or Command from God to that soul.] Sure
the Doctor has huge delight in multiplying Aphorisms. He had told us in his
first, That nothing but conviction of Conscience in a sincere soul, can be the
Promulgation of Gods Law to that soul. And here he erects a new Aphorism, to
assure us, That this Conviction, is that Promulgation.

His subjoyned Reason also, viz. [That Conscience is the ear of the soul,] he
had annexed to his first Aphorism: but it seems, not home enough; wherefore
having there said, that it is As it were the ear of the soul; here he calls it
the very Ear of the soul: and then adds, [That the soul cannot receive a
Command from God any otherwise, then by being fully and firmly convinced, that
this or that is his Command. This is as it were the Kings Broad Seal, by which
she is warranted to act.]

Let us suppose Conscience to be the souls ear; and examine the case by
Analogy: When the ear receives a command, that command must first be spoken or
Promulgated to the ear; else how can the ear imbibe it? wherefore the ears
receiving it, cannot be the speaking or Promulgating of it. Semblably, if the
Conscience receives a Command of God (which it does, faith the Doctor, by being
convinced that it is his Command,) that Command must upon necessity be some way
or other Promulgated and signified to the Conscience, before it can so receive
it; for this ear of the soul cannot possibly hear that Command, before it be
spoken. It follows then, That the Consciences conviction, or reception of it as
the Command of God cannot be the Promulgation of it. The Promulgation is one
thing, and precedent; the Conviction another thing, and subsequent. The Command
is Promulged that the Conscience may be convinced: not the Conscience
convinced, that the Command may be Promulged. At high-noon it is not day,
because this man opens his eyes, and sees and is convinced that it is so: Nor
night, because that man shuts his eyes, and perceives nothing but darkness. The
Sun beams are displayed, though both of them should shut their eyes: and that
one of them sees and is convinced that it is day light; only argues, That the
Suns Rays are diffused, but it is not the very diffusion of those Rays.

Lastly, Whereas he says, that this conviction is as it were the Kings broad
Seal, by which the soul is warranted to act: He says, but what does As it were
confute himself; for doubtless conviction is something within us: but the Kings
broad Seal which warrants a man to act, is certainly something without him.

His fourth Aphorism, [That nothing that has any real Turpitude or Immorality
in it, can justly be pretended to be the Voice or Command of God; or that which
is really and confessedly Moral, not to be his Command, either to the sincere
or unsincere.] To prove this, he adds, [For the Light and Law of Nature, and of
eternal immutable Morality, cries louder in the soul of the sincere, then that
it should admit of any such foul Motions; much less as from God; or be ignorant
of what is so plainly Moral, as this Aphorism imports. And for the unsincere,
since he stops his ears against that most holy and evident Law, his false
delusions and obduracy in wickedness, are most justly imputed to himself.]

First, I see not why the Doctor here supposes the unsincere man to stop his
ears against Gods most holy and evident Law; seeing the Law he speaks of, is
(by his own confession) the Light and Law of Nature: which Law the unsincere,
though he obeys not, yet cannot but be convinced of, as truly as the sincere.
Though he holds the truth in unrighteousness, yet still he holds it; because
that which may be known of God, is manifest in him, for God has showed it to
him, Romans 1. Seeing it is the Law of Nature, and Light of Nature, it must be
graved and displayed upon his Nature; and he cannot be ignorant of it, or avoid
it by stopping his ears; but is, as the Apostle speaks, without excuse (not
because he fortified himself, and left no passage for the Law to enter at; but)
because when he knew God, he glorified him not as God.

Secondly, the Doctors Principle being, that it is not inconsistent with Gods
Nature to convey into man false persuasions; least he should be urged with the
horrid consequences of that Tenet, he endeavors here to prevent it by telling
us in this 4th Aphorism, That nothing that has in it any real Turpitude or
Immorality, can justly be pretended to be Gods command: and therefore he hopes
that we cannot charge him with making God the Author of Sin in man by reason
of any such false persuasions conveyed by him into man's mind. But alas, this
shift will not serve: for, it God may be the Author of what is not true, who
can be assured that what all the World has hitherto counted real Turpitude and
Immorality; is so indeed? the Rule by which the World judges of Turpitude and
Immorality, is the Light of Nature and the Moral Law; and who is the Author of
this Rule, but God? how then shall the World certainly know that this is a True
Rule? not because God made it; for, by the Doctors new Divinity, God may be the
Author of that which is not True: Nor by the assistance of any creature, for
doubtless it is as possible for the creatures to deceive us, as for the
Creator; nor can they inform us of any thing more then their Creator (who may
deceive them also) is pleased to let them know. Talk not then of Real
Turpitude; all Turpitude will prove but Imaginary, and founded only upon
supposition, That God, who might have made the Moral Law a false Rule, did make
it a true one: but how to evince that supposition to be an absolute Truth, is
perfectly impossible upon the Doctors Principle: of which Principle, the
consequents are full of such portentuous universal confusion, as excuses the
whole rabble of former Heresies; and indeed affrights and amazes my Meditation.

Sect. 3. He propounds this by way of question [Whether a full and firm
conviction of conscience in the sincere, touching a Religion in which some
things are incorporated that be false, but without any moral Turpitude, and of
that nature that no moral sincerity may be able to discover the the falseness
of them, can be rightly said to be the command of God to that Soul, whether for
trial or Punishment] Then, after a sally from it in the 4th and 5th Sect. he
says in the 6th [That this Question will necessarily put as upon these three
Disquisitions. 1. Whether it be competible to the nature of God, to convey a
false persuasion into the mind of his creature. 2. Whether it be competible to
him, to convey a false persuasion as may oblige the persuaded to act or profess
according to this persuasion, Religiously and Conscientiously: (this will come
up very close to the 7th Objection to be propounded.) 3. Whether this false
Conviction or Persuasion, may rightly be called the Command of God to such a
person thus persuaded.] Of these three why might not the Doctor have spared the
third, which seems plainly enough included in the second? for if such a false
persuasion conveyed by God, obliges man to act accordingly; it must needs be
the Law or Command of God to that man. But the multiplying of disquisitions,
makes but the mist the thicker which he studies to cast about the 7th
Objection. And yet the truth is, his question is liable to some other
Disquisitions, which he was not willing to discover.

For first, I ask why he supposes such falsities in a Religion, as no moral
sincerity may be able to find out? Moral sincerity is able to ask, seek and
knock: and they who ask, shall have; they who seek shall find; to them who
knock it shall be opened. And divine wisdom says Prove. 8. 17. ( Those that
seek me early shall find me) 2. Why he supposes that God may convey a false
persuasion into the sincere Soul, and that either for Trial, or Punishment? for
why should God Try, or punish by falsehood, when he may as well do it by Truth?
And of all men why should he thus try, (I mean by falsehood) or why thus should
he punish him whom he knows to be sincere already? These supposals are little
to the Honor of the Divine Majesty: nor could they possibly be made but by
such a Theologue as Dr More.

But I now follow whether he leads me. Against the first of his 3
Disquisitions, he grants 2 considerable Arguments: the the first [That it is
repugnant to Gods veracity: the second, that it is destructive of our belief of
God in all things, if we once admit that he will convey a false persuasion to
us in any thing.] In order to answer these Arguments, he first produces several
Texts of Scripture touching this point, with expositors opinions of them: he
begins with Romans 11. 32. (...). But how does this concern Gods conveying a
false persuasion into men's Souls? Let the end or intent of this Act of God,
interpret the act it self, the end is (...) that he might have mercy upon all:
and does God convey a false persuasion into them that he may have mercy upon
them, especially that false persuasion being in points of Religion? whatsoever
then is meant by (...), it cannot be a conveying into them falsity of religion.

But he adds [Upon which Text, Vatablus, sub imperio says he, and potestate
Incredulitatis sinit esse, and facit ut ad tempus repugnemus gratiae, ut rubore
tandem perfusi sitiamus ejus misericordiam. The Apostle here treats of the Jews
incredulity touching Jesus his being the Messiah.] It seems he likes this
comment, which only of all others he produces: and yet he confutes it by what
he annexes of his own to it: for Vatablus restrains not the words (as he ought,
and the Doctor does, to the incredulous Jews. Ut sitiamus includes himself and
other Christians. Secondly if God facit ut repugnemus gratiae, God is the
Author of sin; unless the Doctor dares say, that it is no sin to resist Grace.
Thirdly, to resist Grace, cannot be the way (as Vatablus pretends) to make us
thirst after mercy, but quite the contrary. Has not this Text, and comment,
done the Doctor good service?

His next Text is, S. John. 12. 39. 40. Therefore they could not believe,
because that Esaias had said, He has blinded their eyes and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. Here he falls upon the same
impertinency as in his former Text: for these words are spoken, not of sincere
persons: who are propounded in his Question, but of the unsincere and wicked
Jews. Besides, was there no Moral Turpitude in these men's obstinate resisting
the means of Salvation? if there were, it is not pertinent to his Question.
Lastly, there needs no other Answer but Clarius his comment, added here by the
Doctor himself, significat illos non potuisse credere, ob excoecatam mentem and
obstinatum animum; idque Deum suo ipsorum vitio and culpa permisisse. Does this
infer, that God conveyed into them a false persuasion, and that so as to make
it his command, and oblige them to act sutably thereto?

Then he says [It is not altogether impertinent to add the example of Gods
assisting Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 18.] It seems his conscience told him that it was
something impertinent, though not altogether. Let the Reader consider the
place, and he will soon find it so much impertinent to this question, as not to
deserve an answer.

Next he comes to what he calls a more eximious instance (and so it may soon
be) 1 Kings 22. touching Ahabs going up to Ramoth Gilead, v. 19. And Michaia
said, hear thou, etc. to the end of the 22 Sect. This says the Doctor is a
very notable example of what is declared in a more general way by the Prophet
Ezechiel, chap. 14. 9. And if the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a
thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet. Upon the back of this he heaps a
large comment of Cornelius a Lapide; which concludes thus Aliter ergo permittit
mala Deus, aliter Homo; Homo Negative, Deus positive. But I must pray the
Doctor to excuse me, if I trouble not my Reader with answering that which
concludes in terms apparently contradictious. However, sure I am, that S.
Austins credit is better then Lapide's and he says, lib de great. and lib. Arb.
cap. 23. Quando auditis dicentem Dominum, Ego Dominus seduxi prophetam illum;
and quod ait Apostolus, Cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult, obdurat: In eo
quem seduci Permittit vel obdurari, mala cjus merita credit: in eo vero cujus
miseretur, gratiam Dei, etc. Whatsoever false persuasion was in Ahab, or in a
false Prophet, God was not the Author or conveyer of it into them, but the
Just Permitter.

Yet since the Doctor makes this such an eximious Instance, I will add
something farther concerning it. First, was Ahab a sincere person? If not; how
is his example pertinent to this Question? the like may be urged touching
Ezechiels false prophets. Secondly, what was Ahabs persuasion of kin to any
point of Religion? Thirdly. how could that persuasion be a command of God
binding him religiously and conscienentiously to go up to Ramoth Gilead; when
God sent Michaia a true Prophet, to assure him that if he went up, he should
not return in Peace? I much suspect, that this Instance is eximious in a sense
different from what the Doctor pretends, and that it will appear eximiously
Impertinent.

The Description of the whole business from v. 19. to the 22. is in a
theatrical form suited to humane apprehension; and must not be literally urged:
the main drift being to show that Ahabs Prophets were deceived by a lying
spirit, upon Gods permission: and that as certainly, as if the transaction had
been managed in such a manner and with such circumstances, as the Text
represents it in, for the better complying with the capacity of them whom it
concerned. Nevertheless, to gratify the Doctor, I will put it upon the issue
of the very literal sense of this story, whether God conveyed a false
persuasion into Ahab, or no.

God being seated in his Throne, and his Court standing about him, he asks
thus: [Who shall persuade Ahab that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead?]
Here it is plain, that God meant not to convey that persuasion into Ahab
himself: for he inquires for some else to do it. After several spirits had
delivered their opinions, one on this manner and another on that; forth comes
one who undertook the business. God asks him wherewith he would persuade Ahab?
he answers, [I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets] here he plainly takes the whole Action upon himself: but yet he
had no power to execute it, till God gave him leave: whereupon God replies
[Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also: Go forth and do so.] Thus the lying
spirit offering his readiness (that is, if God hindered not) and God declares
that he will permit it, and foretells the event. Ahab might have been persuaded
by Truths; therefore God first propounded, who will go and persuade Ahab, etc.
But Ahab also might be persuaded by a lie, and that God permits, leaving a
wicked spirit, to his own wickedness; and by permitting that, resolving to
punish Ahabs wickedness with his Ruin. Nothing appears in all this transaction
which proves Ahabs false persuasion to have been conveyed into him by God; but
that it was solely performed by that lying spirit, who did but his kind in
deceiving. And seeing Ahab had for a long time despised Gods true Prophets, and
hearkened to false ones, it was the decorum of divine Justice to suffer his
Ruin to proceed from false prophets inspired by that lying spirit. Yet still
at the same time God sent his true prophet Michaia, who informed Ahab of the
false prophets lie; that it might appear (to the shame of all such as Dr More)
That as the Devil endeavors to convey false persuasions; so God interesses his
spirit only in the conveyance of true. And I presume the Doctor will grant,
that Gods spirit was in Michaia; that if Ahab had hearkened to him and been
persuaded by him, this persuasion had been conveyed by God; That however,
Michaia's prophecy was to him in the nature of a command from God not to go up
to Ramoth Gilead: And if so; then the persuasion conveyed into him by the lying
prophets, could be no persuasion or command of God: unless we dream that God at
the same time, concerning the same thing, and to the same person, can be the
author and conveyer of persuasions or commands, expressly contrary to one
another. Suitable to what I have said touching the carriage of this business, is
the account Theodoret gives of it: Haec est Prosopopaeia quae docet divinam
permissionem: non enim verus Dominus and veritatis Magister jussit ut
deciperetur Ahab: per haec docuit Propheta quod spiritus Deceptionis impiis
hominibus utens tanquam instrumentis, falso promittit Victoriam: hoc autem fit
Deo permittente: nam cum prohibere potuit, non prohibuit quoniam indignus erat
Ahab cujus curam gereret.

Now for the forementioned place in Ezech. 14. 9. If the Prophet be deceived
when he has spoken, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet] Though it
appertains not to the Doctors Question, (as I hinted before) yet concerning the
scruple it may seem to afford, I answer: Take it in the strictest sense the
words will truly bear, it follows not that God did any more, deceive this
prophet in Ezechiel, then he did those prophets of Ahab; namely by giving leave
to a lying spirit to deceive them. It was his Justice upon that wicked Prophet,
to leave him to be inspired and acted by the Devil. In brief, hear what
Theodoret says upon the place, At non est justi judicis proprium, and decipere
prophetam, and errantem punire: non ergo secundum efficaciam ait se prophetam
in errorem inducturum, sed secundum permissionem: i. e. Cum possim statim
illius mendacium redarguere, sustineo, and divina lenitate usus permitto ut
dolo utatur, quem voluntate non necessitate exercet.

The Doctors last instance, is that of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart [Who,
(says he) was so intoxicated with a false persuasion that his Gods and his
Magicians would be able to stand it out with the God of the Hebrews etc. God
having given him up to this Delusion] I take him at his last words: God gave up
Pharaoh to this Delusion. Pharaoh obstinately hardened his heart against God;
and therefore God is said after that to harden Pharaohs heart. How? by
conveying into him that false persuasion? No: but, as the Doctor here himself
acknowledges, by giving him up to this delusion. I grant, our English chap. 7.
13. seems to say that God first hardened Pharohs heart: but the Doctor is not
ignorant, that in the LXX it is (...) and that the original (...) is Roboravit
se, or Roboratum est: which word occurrs again v. 22. and is there rendered by
our Interpreters, not, He hardened Pharaohs heart; but, Pharaohs heart was
hardened: Which version is nearer to the Original. So also it is, cap. 8. 19.
and 9. 35. The Doctor therefore might have spared the long ado he makes about
this word: especially seeing, let this Hardening be how it will, yet Pharaoh was
no sincere person, and to such alone the question is by him restrained.

After all this, as the result of his premised Citations and considerations, he
thus concludes in his 11th Section [God may, and sometimes does, convey a false
persuasion into the mind of man, certainly and effectually though
permissively, which was the first Disquisition contained in the main Question.]
I wonder not that the Doctor thinks it lawful for him to convey a false
persuasion into the Readers mind, when he holds that it well enough becomes
God himself so to do. That the Doctor endeavors thus to convey it, will appear
if the Reader will but look back and mark whether this were (as here he
affirms) his first Disquisition. He propounded it in his 6. Sect. in these very
words whether it be competible to the nature of God, to convey a false
persuasion into the mind of his Creature) Compare now and you will find,
first the former words of the Disquisition changed, and instead of (it is
competible to the Nature of God) i. e. God may do it) these words (God may, and
sometimes does it.) Secondly you will find all those words, (certainly and
effectually, though permissively,) thrust in here, of which there was not one
syllable there. And yet he doubts not to say, that this was the first
Disquisition. If he makes no bones of right down affirming what is false, I
shall look how I build upon his words hereafter.

But the sense of this intruded Piece, is against all sense: for does God
operate that himself, which he does not operate himself, but leaves to be
operated by others? Though upon Gods Permission, the effect certainly follows,
by the diligence of wicked Agents let loose; Yet to say therefore, That this is
an effect operated by God himself, will fetch in God to be certainly the
Author of all the Sins in the world: Seeing no Sins are perpetrated but what
God permits; and upon his permission, or leaving the Devil and wicked men to
their own swinge, all Sins that are, do certainly and effectually come to pass.
This Consequence of his Doctrine the Doctor may do well to think on at his
leisure.

Lastly, I must agian mind him, That all his Examples produced out of
Scripture, whether of the obstinate Jews, or the Assyrian Army, or Ahab, or the
lying Prophets, or Pharaoh; are concerning men who were not Sincere. Yet his
main Question was touching conviction of Conscience in the sincere: So that had
these Examples indeed proved, That God conveys a false Persuasion into the
Unsincere; yet they had been far enough from making for the Doctors purpose.

In his 12th Section he proceeds to [The Objections against this Conclusion, as
if it were repugnant with Gods Veracity, and destructive of our Trust and
Belief in him.] To Answer this, he is put to his Reserve of Juggling, and
strangely casts about. I must have patience to Transcribe his Tricks; which are
these, [As Gods exercising sometimes his Severity, sometimes his Mercy, which
are two opposite Modes of the divine Justice, bears no repugnancy at all with
either Attribute; it being upon several Occasions and Subjects: So for God to
make use sometimes of his Veracity, sometimes of that Policy which his
practical Wisdom (whereby he Acts in the Administration of the affairs of the
world) thinks convenient, and which clashes not either with his Justice or
Goodness, is not at all harsh or incongruous, provided it be upon distinct
Occasions and Objects. For indeed the Occasion and Object altering, the
Exercise of the Mode of this or that Virtue must change; or else it will hardly
prove any Mode of Virtue at all. As if severity should be used upon one who was
a fit Object of Mercy. If any Judge should act after this sort, it would loose
the title of severity, and take on the face of Cruelty: So if Veracity should
be used in such a case as required due Policy conformable to Justice and
Goodness; it would loose the appellation of Veracity, and deserve the style of
Unpolitickness. As for example, if a man was thoroughly assured that such an one
with his company came with a murderous intention to his house to kill an
innocent Person, it may be his native Prince, that had made an escape from the
murderers; and that he could not any way secure him from those barbarous
Pursuers, but by making them by some device or other, to believe he was gone
from the house; if instead of this necessary Artifice he should in plain terms
tell him he was there, were this that virtue of Veracity, or not rather, at the
best, an instance of most dangerous and mischievous folly. For it seems a
strange Virtue that is devoyd of all Goodness, and that must needs be the
Handmaid of the greatest Injustice, of Murder; yea, of the most execrable
Parricide. Wherefore in such cases as this, it does not clash with the Virtue
of Veracity, not to speak the truth, since Veracity has no due Object here,
and so would prove no due moral Action. Nor can he hold his tongue (we will
suppose) but by exposing his own life, and betraying the life of his Prince.]

First, He makes Severity and Mercy, two opposite Modes of Gods Justice. This
is odd, for the Office of Justice is to do right to All, and give them what
they truly deserve: If Severity does no more nor less then thus, it is the same
with Justice; if it does more or less, it becomes Injustice. And for Mercy, how
is that a Mode of Justice! for Mercy deals not with All as they deserve, but
more kindly then they deserve. Those whom Justice would and must Condemn, Mercy
finds a way to Save.

Secondly, He says that Gods exercising sometimes his Severity, sometimes his
Mercy (the Objects being distinct) bears no repugnancy at all with either
Attribute. I suppose his meaning is, That thereby Gods Severity and Mercy are
not mutually repugnant. And what then? Why then it follows in like manner,
says the Doctor, That his exercising sometimes his Veracity sometimes his
Policy (provided it clash not with his Justice or Goodness) is not at all harsh
or incongruous, the Objects being distinct. Why observes he not the due manner
of the Apodosis in his Comparison, which should have run in this manner, [So
for God to exercise sometime his Veracity, sometime his Policy, bears no
repugnance with either Attribute,] but slips into those words, [It is not at
all harsh or incongruous] I can at present imagine no Reason but this: He had
intimated that Veracity and Policy are two of Gods Attributes, by naming Mercy
and Severity to be so; for to them, as to this Point, he compares Gods Veracity
and Policy, and with this he would slily have run away; wherefore he forbears
expressly to term these later by the name of Attributes; least it should too
much startle, and probably scandalize his Reader. For though we readily grant
Veracity, yet we as readily deny Policy to be an Attribute of God. No true
Christian, but adores God as Supremely Wise; but to call him a Politic God, he
counts it a profane diminution. And Dr More, in making his God a Politician,
will give some men occasion to suspect, that all his Religion is but Policy.
Who knows not, that Craft or Policy is only useful to supply the defect of
Power? for he who has Power sufficient to effect whatsoever he pleases; needs
no help of Policy to compass his Designs. Wherefore though to men it may seem
useful; yet it cannot be so to God, whom we believe to be Omnipotent. What we
weak mortals want of the Lion, the Fox often supplies; but the Lion of Judah
cannot without blasphemous derogation be affirmed to need any such shift; and
if he needs it not, why does the Doctor obtrude upon him a needless Attribute?

Thirdly, Having made Mercy and Severity two opposite Modes of Gods Justice,
and brought in as a parallei to them Veracity and Policy; he should have done
but honestly to have told us, of what Virtue in God this Veracity and Policy
are the two opposite Modes: But here he leaves us to seek.

Fourthly, Though Gods Mercy and Severity (as to different objects) be not
repugnant, but may well consist in the same God: yet Veracity and Fallacity
(for the Policy the Doctor fastens upon God, is neither better nor worse, would
he speak it out, them down right Fallacity) can by no means be consistent in
him. And the Reason is this; God exercises his Mercy, by forbearing to
exercise his Severity or Justice; which forbearance infers no repugnancy: But
he does not exercise Fallacity by forbearing to exercise Veracity, if he
deceives any one, he does an act positively and essentially repugnant to his
Veracity.

Fifthly, The Question here was, Whether it be repugnant to Gods Veracity to
convey a false persuasion into his Creature. As an argument that it is not
repugnant, the Doctor tells us that Policy is not repugnant to his Veracity;
and what is this Policy, but his conveying of a false persuasion? So he very
profoundly proves idem per idem: Namely, That to convey a false persuasion, is
not repugnant to Gods Veracity, because it is not repugnant to Gods Veracity,
to convey a false persuasion.

Sixthly, He supposes that in some cases, there may not be a due object for
Gods Veracity, and therefore it were unpolitickness in God, if he should
exercise his Veracity there. Yet in his main Question, which occasioned this
disquisition, the object is the sincere person; and it is strange that such a
person, of all others, should not be a due object for God to deal Veraciously
with.

Lastly, His comparison of a man harboring his Prince when persecuted by
bloody Rebels; is most miserably impertinent in this Question concerning the
most Wise and Almighty God; unless he will also suppose, that this God can be
put to such straits, as he supposes that man to be: which supposal includes
such impudent Blasphemy as I tremble to think on. Surely were that man in Gods
condition; were he Omnipotent, he could not be straightened by any necessity
either of lying or speaking a lie, thereby to secure the life of his Prince
lurking in his house.

After this, he distinguishes between speaking a lie, and speaking what is
false, and counts this the best distinction for salving their Credits, [Who
from the example of the Hebrew Midwives, whom God rewarded for the fair story
they told the Infant-murdering Pharaoh, have concluded it lawful in some cases
to lie.] But how will he prove that God rewarded them for that story? The text
is this, Exodus 1. v. 21, 21. (Therefore God dealt well with the Midwives; and
the people multiplied and waxed very mighty. And it came to pass, because the
Midwives feared God, that he made them houses.) Moses having Verse. 20. told us
that God did therefore deal well with them: least we should presently fancy,
that it was for telling that fained story; he gives us the true reason, Verse.
21. namely, Because they feared God. The fear of God made them forbear from
murdering the innocent Infants; and this Piety God crowned with a correspondent
reward; for he built them houses, that is, raised and established their
Families, because they conscientiously refused to destroy the Families of the
Israelites.

He adds [Simply to speak what is false, has no Immorality in it at all:
otherwise, no man might dispute or pronounce a false Axiom. And if an Axiom
spoken that has neither any conformity with the mind of him that speaks, nor
with the thing it pronounces of, is not morally evil; that Incongruity betwixt
enuntiated falsity and the mind and the thing, has no moral evil in it. What
moral evil then can it have in it, when it is enuntiated for a good end, and in
very congruous Circumstances?] Still extravagant. The Point in hand, is not
concerning the mere simple pronouncing of what is false, but pronouncing it
Ammo decipiendi, on purpose to convey a false persuasion into the hearer, and
making him believe that to be true, which is not true; and this I trow, has
some Immorality in it: nor can the specious pretense of a good end, excuse what
is morally evil.

[Wherefore, as it is said of unity, (which yet is one of the divine
Attributes,) Nibil Boni est in Unitate, nist Umtas sit in Bono: So I say of
Veracity, Nibil boni est in Veracitate, nisi Veracitas sit in Bonum.] I pray
Doctor, was it ever said of that Unity which is one of the divine Attributes,
that Nihil boni est in Unitate, nisi Unitas sit in bono? That Nisi supposes it
possible, that the Unity spoken of, may happen not to be In Bono: but is this
possible touching the Unity of the divine Nature? You might therefore more
wisely and mannerly too, have spared your ill-looking Parenthesis. Besides
would you have imitated that sentence, as you pretend, you ought to have said,
Nihil Boni est in Veracitate, nisi Veracit as sit in Bono. But you were aware
that there would have been but small sense in those words, and nothing at all
to your purpose: therefore notwithstanding your premised (so I say) you do not
say so, but quite another thing, namely, In Bonum, for In Bono.

[And that goodness is the measure of all moral perfection in man, as it is
certainly the most sovereign Attribute in God, and the measure of all what we
may by way of Analogy, call moral Attributes in him. Neither can any thing be
rightly termed an act of Severity, Mercy, Policy, Veracity or the like, unless
it participate of his Goodness, and involve not in it more evil then good; so
that in what objects or occasions that would happen, the goodness of God would
not fail to make use of such a Mode of his Justice or Wisdom, as were opposite
to that which would create so much Inconvenience.] How marvelously little makes
this discourse of Gods Goodness, to the Doctors purpose! unless he supposes,
that the Divine Goodness may suffer, if we hold that God cannot convey a false
persuasion into man's mind. But is God any thing the less good, because he
cannot deceive man? If Gods Veracity be always strictly exercised, and no
Policy admitted in his Actions, what evil or inconvenience could hence ensue;
seeing he is, notwithstanding, still Almighty, and can by no Exigence be forced
to stand in need of Craft or Fallacity to maintain his Goodness?

Now at length, having cleared the field, (just as you have seen) the Doctor
victoriously concludes, That what he has said [If duly considered is more then
enough, for the proving that Gods conveying a false persuasion into the mind
of his Creature, Permissione certa and efficaci, may not clash at all with the
Divine Veracity.] But first, Those words, Permissione certa and efficaci, were
not in the Question propounded, but jugled in here, he knows why. This is his
old trick, but so pitiful an one, as will only make him debere ludibrium
pueris. Secondly, If they had been in the proposed Question, they had only
made the Question ridiculous, by supposing that to be Gods Act, which is but
his Permission; for the appendent Epithets Certa and Efficaci, will no way mend
the matter; as I have proved already.

In his 14th Sect. he advances against the 2d Objection, and says, [As for
the 2d Objection, as if this supposition were destructive of our faith and
trust in God; as if this once admitted, we could never know when he spoke
truth, or were in earnest with us, i. whether the Religion we are at present
persuaded of be true; the Answer thereunto is not far to seek. I say therefore,
that though a false Religion were the Command of God, it is no let or
hinderance to the sinding of the True: For though it be his Command, yet it is
not with those circumstances that his absolute and enuntiative Command is. Such
as the superlative Holiness and unimitable Miracles of the true Prophet,
express voices from Heaven giving testimony to him; his rising from the dead,
and his visible ascending into those mansions of Glory; and finally, the
perfect congruity of the whole Religion to the exactest Reason, and its having
nothing in it repugnant thereto; the being attested to by illustrious
Prophesies, both many and at great distances from the event, with the like
advantages, which no permissive Command of God can be circumstantiated with.]

Indeed such Answers as this, need not be far to seek: for the Point is this;
Whether, admitting a false Religion to be the Command of God, we can know when
God speaks truth, and whether the Religion we are at present persuaded of, be
true. He says, The admitting this, is no let or hinderance to the finding the
true Religion: And why? Because such a command is not so circumstantiated as
his absolute enuntiative Command is. Here I first demand, Why he thus
distinguishes Gods Commands? for the Command in Question, is by himself
supposed to be a full and firm conviction of Conscience conveyed by God into
the mind; this cannot be, unless the Command be given and signified to the
mind, that is, unless it be some way or other enuntiated; and indeed it cannot
be convinced how God can give a Command, if it be not enuntiative. Then for
absolute, this Command is such also. For the Doctor supposes it to be a
Command touching Religion, nay to be Religion it self; and will he have it not
absolute, but conditional? If he will, yet this cannot serve his turn; for he
affirms, Sect. 15. that this false persuasion conveyed by God (which is the
Command) does necessarily oblige the party persuaded, to act conscientiously
thereupon; and if it does so it must be absolute. The Doctors distinction
therefore is repugnant to his own Doctrine.

Secondly, It is easily evincible out of the Doctors own concessions, that the
admitting of this Principle must needs be a ^ett or hinderance to the finding
the true Religion: for let this Command or false Persuasion be circumstantiated
as the Doctor pleases, yet still it is a Command conveyed into the mind of
man, and with such circumstances, that even in a sincere soul, it begets full
conviction of Conscience, that it is indeed Gods Command. Now the Conscience
being thus convinced, no Circumstances of any other Religion, can operate upon
such a soul, to believe it to be true: and the reason of this is plain, for the
soul is already satisfied, that the Religion she has embraced, is Gods
Command; she cannot therefore (especially if she be sincere) listen to any
thing repugnant to the Religion she has already entertained. For all
Circumstances of that other Religion, cannot possibly mount higher then to
prove it to be of God, and to be his Command strictly obliging the Conscience:
But this soul being convinced that her present Religion is such, she can have
no just reason to change it; and may well and honestly suspect, that the
pretense which another Religion makes of proceeding from God, though never so
full and specious, is yet indeed but fallacious, and a Train fairly laid to
deceive her. And is this no let or hinderance to the finding of the true
Religion! for my part, I have been considering it, and must profess, that I am
not able to fancy any hinderance so great.

As for the particular Circumstances which he mentions of the Christian
Religion, (viz. The superlative Holiness, etc.) we may suppose the whole
History of them known to an honest moral Jew. Now if this Jews Religion may be
granted to be conveyed into his mind by God, and thereby be Gods Command to
him; well may he neglect those Circumstances, and rest securely upon what is
Gods Command, viz. his own Religion as it is opposite to the Christian: for why
should he believe or regard any thing contrary to what he is convinced in his
Conscience to proceed from God? If it be replied, That in case this Jew would
but hear such Reasons and Arguments as may be drawn from those mighty
Circumstances, they would prove to him that he is in an Error, and ought to
reform his erroneous Conscience: He may by Dr More's Principle readily Answer,
That though his Religion could be proved an Error, yet still it may be the
Command of God; and that for his part, he is convinced that so it is: wherefore
whilst Gods Command sounds in his soul, he holds it impudent impiety to disobey
it. As for Reasons and Arguments, they can signify nothing to him; for a
persuasion conveyed by God himself, may include falsity; much more may any
Reasons and Arguments which men can muster up to persuade him. For it is
demonstrable, that if God may convey a false persuasion, then may any thing
made by God, whether Angel or Man, whether Reason or Sense, make a false
Representation. Thus except it be granted, that God be of immutable Veracity,
and can neither deceive nor be deceived, there neither is nor can be any stable
grounding upon any thing in the world as true. I might here mind the Reader,
of the Doctors varying the terms of this Objection: but I hasten to follow him,
for he immediately adds, That [ By purification of our minds, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, and by free and unprejudiced Reason, a man shall
(with Gods assistance) be fully able to distinguish the Permissive Command of
God, from his absolute or enunciative; and know at last that the former was for
trial or Punishment, but that now he is under his most perfect and absolute
Command indeed.]

The vanity of his distinction between Gods permissive, and his absolute or
enuntiative Command, I have noted already. Now it was well the Doctor forgot
not here to put in (with Gods assistance) else he who by his own industrious
wit discovers a falsity in the persuasion introduced by God, might be thought
cunninger then God the Author of it; but if God must help him to do it, the
case is altered. And yet perhaps the Policy of that God might notwithstanding
be questioned, who contrives and conveys a false persuasion, and then assists
men in discovering his own deceit.

But now the means which he prescribes for attaining the knowledge of the true
Religion is such, as is not within the sphere of the Party concerned: for this
Party is one in a false Religion, and conscientiously Convinced that it is
true. Can he purify his mind and perfect holiness? Can he attain to complete
sanctity in a false Religion? If he can, then it is most certain that
unprejudiced Reason (though indeed it be ridiculous to suppose, as the Doctor
does, that such a man's Reason should remain unprejudiced whilst he
conscientiously holds a false Religion,) will rather persuade him to set up his
rest in that Religion which he is already convinced to be Gods Command, then to
seek another contrary to it. For what reason can move him to imagine, that a
Religion conveyed to him by God, and such as by it he perfects holiness in the
sight of God, is not that Gods absolute, but as the Doctor will needs have it,
his permissive Command?

Again, What is the sense of Gods permissive Command in this case? is it that
God effectually permits a lying spirit to instill that false persuasion into
man? Even this will not amount to make it Gods Command, unless we grant every
sin which the tempter persuades us to, to be Gods Command also. But if it be,
(as the Doctor in the first Question propounded it) competible to the Nature of
God, to convey a false persuasion; then may God do this immediately by himself:
and how then is such a persuasion his permissive Command? Does God permit
himself to Command? Or does he Command permissively? Or is that Command which
obliges the Conscience religiously to act (for so the Doctor affirms this to
do) only a permission, or a Commanding permission; or what in Gods name is it?

Well, the Doctor nevertheless concludes, in the close of this 14th Sect. [That
this his supposition is no prejudice at all, but a mighty advantage to
Christianity: for were but mankind persuaded that for ought they know, the
present Religion they are under, may be but a permissive Command imposed upon
them for punishment or trial, it would engage them not to immerse themselves so
much into the world, but to live holily, and meditate seriously on divine
Matters; to Pray servently, and seek diligently what is the true Religion
indeed, which undoubtedly would confirm the Christian more strongly in his
Religion, (truth the more it is tried, gaining the greater Empire upon the
minds of men) and were the next way to turn all men that made serious use of
this Principle unto Christianity. Thus have I fully cleared the first
particular disquisition comprised in the main Question from the chief
Objections made against it.]

Here the Doctor speaks of mankind, Christians and not Christians; and affirms
it advantageous to Christianity if they were all persuaded that for ought they
know, their present Religion may be but Gods permissive command, i. e. not the
true Religion: this prompts all the world to be Cartesians in Religion, and
suspect all Principles which they had before believed, yea though Christian
Principles for the doing of which, could the Doctor prevail with them, he
doubts not but it would engage them to abandon secularity, to live holily, to
meditate seriously on divine matters, to pray servently and seek diligently
what is the true Religion indeed. But how knows the Doctor that this effect
will follow? his credit is not so good as that we take his word for a warrant:
and does not sad experience tell us that many Christians (seduced by such
Leaders as the Doctor) growing thus disquisitive as to doubt that the
principles of their Religion may be false, have instead of growing unsecular
and holy, turned grossly carnal, profane, and little less then atheistical:
instead of serious meditation, fervent prayer, and diligent search for the true
Religion; made a mock of Devotion, and sacrificed themselves to idleness,
pleasure and vanity?

It is true, we are to Try all things: but that is before we receive them, not
after. He who turns from any other Religion to the Christian, ought to try and
be fairly satisfied concerning the Christian, before he ingages in it: but
having so engaged, then he is not to unravel all again by doubting of what he
had upon just grounds embraced; unless he means to be a perpetual weathercock.
As for those who are educated in the Christian Religion, and never were engaged
in any other; it is very useful to exhort them to so much meditation and study
in it, as to enable them to give a reason of the hope that is in them, and to
stop the mouths of gainsayers: but to tell them that it is for their advantage
to be persuaded that for ought they know their Religion may be false, is a
certain way to make them for a while to believe no Religion; and a probable way
to render them secure and perfect Atheists: for, upon such a persuasion, they
are so far from being engaged to live holily, to pray fervently, to wean
themselves from the world, etc. (as the Doctor would pretend) that they are
rather engaged in the quite contrary. And my reason is: because all these and
such like parts of piety, are parts of that very Christian Religion which such
men are persuaded may for ought they know, be not Gods Absolute, but his
Permissive Command, that is, not True but False.

If it be replied, that such duties as those, are taught us rather as we are
Men, then as we are Christians; I mean by the law of Nature and right reason;
and that therefore our suspending our Belief of our Religion properly as
Christian suspends not our Belief of being obliged to those Duties: I answer:
First, those Duties are all incorporated in the Gospel and more expressly
taught us in Christ's Law, then in the l^ of Nature. 2. As I suspend my Belief
of the truth of Christ's Law, so I may suspend my Belief of the truth of Natures
Law, and suppose that this as well as that, is but Gods permissive command. 3.
Not to be immersed in the world, is to be mortified: to live holily, or as he
expressed it before, to perfect holiness in the fear of God, is to be entirely
spiritualized: And these are properly Christian Virtues.

Now touching them who are not Christians, the Doctor affirms that the serious
use of this his Principle [ viz. That for ought they know, their Religion is
false, i. e. only Gods permissive command] is the next way to turn all men to
Christianity.

Indeed to persuade them, that for ought they know their present Religion may
be false, is a fair step toward their i^ quiring after the true. But to
persuade them so upon Dr More principle [ viz. That their Religion may be
false, though it be Gods command, and though their consciences be convinced
that it is his Command] is not the way to Christianity, but to Atheism, or at
least to an indifferency in Religion little better then Atheism. For, grant the
Infidel this ground; and by what arguments will you press him to turn
Christian? the best which Dr More can suggest are I guess, those which he
hinted in this Section, i. e. The superlative holiness and unimitable miracles
of Christ: voices from heaven giving testimony to him; his Resurrection, his
Ascension, his being attested by prophesies at great distance. To these or any
the like, the Infidels answer is ready, viz. Dr More has assured me that God
may be the conveyer of a false persuasion: why then should I not conclude that
all these strange stories you tell me of Christ, may also be false? for why may
not you, or any men whatsoever, deceive me, as well as God?

Yea but if you will purify your self, and perfect holiness in the fear of
God, and use free and unprejudiced reason, you shall by Gods assistance find
those stories to be true. To this likewise his answer is at hand: How know I
that all you now say, is not a train to convey a false persuasion into me? I
cannot in any reason be more assured of your Veracity, then I am of Gods: and
your pretended Veracity here, may be nothing else but Policy. But whereas you
tell me I shall discover the truth by Gods assistance: what am I the nearer, or
how can I trust to that staff, if God himself may be the Author of a false
persuasion; and if he, no less then you, may in this case, for ought I know,
exercise his policy, and not his veracity?

The second Argument therefore (which I also take from Dr More, in the
mentioned place) must be this: That Christian Religion holds perfect congruity
to the exactest reason, and has nothing in it repugnant thereto. To this the
Infidel may thus reply: if God may deceive me, exactest reason may deceive me.
Or if your God can deceive, and reason not; then shall reason be my God: only
I would desire you to inform me where exact reason dwells, and how I may come
acquainted wit it. If it be that which cannot deceive, I am sure it dwells not
in me, for I dare not think my self privileged with that veracity which you
deny to God: and how you can prove that it dwells in you, is past my
imagination. Had you told me that God cannot deceive, and that he has set up
the candle of reason in man's soul; I should have counted the dictates of this
reason to be infallible: but seeing you teach me that God the prime fountain of
all things whatsoever, may convey into man's mind that which is false, you
leave me no certain bottom to build upon: And therefore I had best even at a
venture be content with the Religion I have happened to be in, whether right or
wrong; and not trouble my self about the needless entertaining of a new one,
which for ought I know (or you either, upon this your ground) may prove a false
persuasion.

And thus the oraculous Doctor has cleared, yea and fully cleared (but we want
some new Dictionary to teach us what clearing signifies) his first particular
Disquisition. Sect. 15. he thus proceeds [The second was, whether it be
competible to the nature of God to convey a false persuasion in things
practical, and which religiously and conscientiously oblige the party thus
persuaded, to act accordingly, or abstain from acting.] This he decides
affirmatively: for he adds, that [ Ahab was thus deceived by Gods effectual
permission of that lying spirit that profer'd his service in that affair: for
the belief of that sure success which he thought was promised him from God, was
plainly of that nature as to oblige his conscience to fight the Lords battles
against the uncircumcised.]

Upon supposal of his former conclusion, viz. that it is competible to Gods
nature to convey a false persuasion into the the mind of his Creature, (which
conclusion I hope I have made appear to be shamefully false) I will grant him,
that such a persuasion does conscientiously oblige the party persuaded, to act,
etc. But I have already proved that this was not Ahabs case, and that it was
not God but the Devil who deceived Ahab: he must therefore give us some other
instance: and that he does in the very next words.

[Moreover that example of Gods conveying that persuasion into Abraham, that he
would have him to sacrifice his son, is beyond all exception: for it is
manifest that Abraham was so persuaded, by both what he did in the history, and
what is said of him Heb. 11. 17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up
Isaac, accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, from
whence he also received him in a figure. And if he had not been persuaded that
he was indeed to sacrifice him, it had been no trial of his faith: but God
never intended he should sacrifice him, and therefore this persuasion he
conveyed into him was false, but did most indispensably oblige his conscience
to act, for the giving of a proof of his wonderful faith in God.]

The Doctor may exercise his wonted confidence; but for all that, I must tell
him, he is much mistaken, (as confident men use to be) and that this example is
not beyond all exception. First he argues that Abraham was persuaded that he
was to sacrifice his son, because unless this be granted, it was no trial of
his faith. I ask, of what faith? the Doctor would have us think, it was that
faith, by which Abraham believed this to be Gods command: and was this such a
singular exploit of faith, as to render Abraham so eminently famous? what is
more frequent then for saints to believe that to be the command of God, which
God commands them? the strangeness of the thing commanded alters not the case:
it may perhaps stagger the person commanded in reference to the performance of
it; but it obstructs not his belief that it is God indeed who gives such a
command, unless the thing commanded be apparently repugnant to some known law
of God. Here I easily imagine the Doctor will greedily reply, that this command
was such, as being inconsistent with Gods Law against Murder. Now therefore I
see I must tell the Doctor some news; and this it is.

That this command of God was not contrary to his Law against murder: nor had
Abraham murdered Isaac, though he had actually sacrificed him: for, God had
expressly promised him before, that in Isaac should his seed be called. Genesis
21. 12. This promise Abraham firmly believed, and doubted not but Isaac should
infallibly propagate his seed: wherefore, chap. 22. upon Gods command (though
most strange and unexpected) to sacrifice Isaac, Abraham in most noble
confidence of Gods Veracity, makes no demurrs, but prepares to offer him; not
having the least scruple but God could and would make good his word; for he
fully accounted that he was able to recall his son from his ashes, and to raise
him up even from the dead, as it is Heb. 11. 19. To Murder (which Gods Law
forbade) is to take away man's life without just Authority, and so to take it
away, as utterly to destroy it: but Abraham now had Authority given him by the
Lord of all; and he knew and believed, by virtue of Gods promise, that though
he sacrificed Isaac, yet he neither should nor could finally destroy his life.
Certain he was, that this sacrificing of him, was not quite to make an end of
him, but only to open a way to Gods miraculous asserting his former Promise.
And this, this was the signal trial of Abraham's most steady and glorious faith:
Not the trying whether he believed that command of sacrificing Isaac, to be the
command of God; but whether he firmly believed the former promise, that in
Isaac should his seed be called. And indeed thus much is clearly enough legible
in the mentioned, 11 Heb. where the Apostle first sets this note upon Abraham's
faith he that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten son of
whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called, v. 17, 18. and then
he adds in what his faith consisted Accounting that God was able to raise him
up even from the dead, v. 19.

Secondly though the Doctor offers no other proof, that Abraham was to
sacrifice his son; yet I freely grant it him. But was this a false persuasion?
He believed that God commanded him thus to do, and that it was his duty to
obey. Is there any falsity in this? I, but the Doctor urges that God intended
not he should sacrifice his son actually; yet had conveyed into him a
persuasion, that he did intend he should actually sacrifice him: and this
persuasion of Gods intent was false.

I answer, 1. Abraham was persuaded that God commanded him so: and what reason
had he to look any farther. 2. Suppose he were expressly persuaded that God
intended he should actually sacrifice his son; which yet God intended not:
nevertheless he knew and was persuaded also, that if God stopped him in the Act
of sacrificing by a countermand; then he intended no more but that he should
with unfeigned obedience willingly and readily offer himself to slay his son.
Wherefore his first persuasion ( viz. that God intended he should actually slay
his son) was conditional; namely, provided that God himself did not interpose
in the Act by a new command, and so accept the sincere will, for the deed. Now
this conditional persuasion, had not the least falsity in it; nor was Abraham
any ways Deceived by it. God did not deceive Abraham; but Dr More deceives
himself.

Nay father; what if Abraham did actually offer up his son? what if God
acknowledges, the scripture attests, that he did so? what then becomes of this
false persuasion so eagerly pressed by the Doctor? But God says to Abraham
Genesis 22. 9. seeing thou have not with held thy son, thine only son, from me,
and the Apostle says expressly Heb. 11. 17. By faith Abraham offered up Isaac;
and he who had received the promises offered up his only begotten son: not
(prepared to offer) but (did offer) that is actually: and this is here twice
for fail affirmed in the same verse. Abraham's sincere will, is by God accounted
for the very Deed.

If the Doctor still retorts, that Abraham understood not aforehand that God
would accept the Will for the Deed; and that his willingness and readiness was
all that God intended: but on the contrary that he was then persuaded that he
ought to shed his sons blood on the Altar; and that in this persuasion he was
deceived by God. To this, my former answer concerning Abraham's conditional
persuasion, is sufficient, But I add, had he been persuaded, that he ought
(absolutely, without any condition, and exclusively of any thing that might
happen and intervene to the contrary) actually to shed his sons blood: how will
the Doctor prove, that God conveyed into him this persuasion? for if God did
convey it, then must God be supposed to persuade Abraham, 1. That the readiness
of his will would not serve his turn. 2. That though any thing intervened, be
it a countermand from God in the very Act, yet he was bound to neglect that
countermand, and to execute the first injunction. Dares the Doctor suppose that
God thus persuaded Abraham? Besides, what if Abraham came into such a
persuasion as is premised above, by not considering the first or second now
mentioned, neither affirming nor denying, nor thinking of either? must it be
that God caused Abraham so not to consider them? Thus Abraham might possibly be
persuaded that in event he should actually slay his son, and yet God not so
persuade him, or any more then that it was Gods will he should really go and
obey by doing on his part what was commanded. Imperative words are spoken to
the Will, what he should will to do, not predictive of what should in event be
executed.

To conclude, God himself intended that Abraham should actually sacrifice his
Son, unless he interposed a Command to the contrary, (for thus we are forced to
distinguish in Gods Acting, to make it intelligible to our selves,) and of thus
much was Abraham persuaded; in which persuasion there was no falsity. That God
intended also to interpose a contrary Precept, the event assures us is true:
But this argues not Abraham to have been falsely persuaded in this Point; for
God had conveyed no persuasion into him touching it, either true or false. The
sum is this: Abraham was certainly persuaded that God intended he should
sacrifice his Son; unless before the striking the fatal blow, the same God
interposed a countermand. Whether God would so interpose he knew not: and when
God did actually interpose, Abraham found not himself any more deceived by God,
then if he had not interposed.

The Doctors Addition out of Siracides, Chap. 4. Verse. 17. may well amount to
what the Apostle says, Heb. 12. 6. (Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every son whom he receives,) but can never prove that God tries men
by impressing falsity upon their minds. The Reader may please to view the
place, for I hasten to his

16th Section, where he comes to his 3d Disquisition, and says, [The third is,
Whether such an effectual, though permissive false persuasion from God thus
obliging the Conscience to act, or abstain from acting this or that, may
rightly be called the Command of God?] His old Art here again. In the 6th Sect.
where he propounds this disquisition, it is in these terms, [Whether this false
conviction or persuasion may rightly be called the Command of God to such a a
person thus persuaded.] What terms he now inserts is evident. But however he
resolves the question roundly and briefly, saying, [I think it is evident that
it is of right so called,] viz. the Command of God.]

And truly well he might, if we grant him (what he presumes we cannot deny) his
conclusion of his former Disquisition. His Tenet there is, That it is
competible to the Nature of God to convey into man such a false persuasion, as
does of its own Nature necessarily oblige him to act conscientiouslly
thereupon. These are the last words of his 15th Section. Now if it oblige a
man, if of its own nature it oblige him, if it oblige him necessarily to act,
it must needs be supposed to have the nature, and so to deserve the name of a
Command. This 3d Disquisition therefore might (as I noted at first) have been
well spared, did not the Doctor take much felicity in unnecessary Scribbling.

But his word Permissive, which he has crowded into this Disquisition, seems
something to trouble his stomach; wherefore to ease himself, he makes his
Reader object that, if it be Permissive, it is no Command. To this he makes
this pretty Answer: [Here I am very willing to compound with the Opposer, and
to determine it only A Permissive Command.] But the Compounder presently
suspected that the Reader would count his Composition pitiful nonsense:
immediately therefore he adds, [Which is not so bad syntax, as it may seem at
first sight, but very good and warrantable sense.] Alas, the syntax is not to
blame, but looks well enough at first sight: all the fault lies in the
Contradiction of the terms. Let us see therefore how the Doctor warrants and
makes good (very good) the sense. Why this he says he will do by this obvious
Illustration, [Suppose some mighty Prince should knowingly and wittingly by
connivance permit the Keeper of his Broad Seal to Sign some Commission or
Command, to such or such parties in some Province of his Empire to act thus or
thus, but not contrary to any of his Laws promulgated to that Province, so that
they cannot make the least scruple concerning the legitimateness of the
Instrument. I demand if these Parties that receive this Broad Seal, do not
receive a command from their Prince; and ask further, Whether it be any more
then a Permissive Command. I do not mean Permissive in counterdistinction to
Injunctive, (for that indeed were not so good sense) but an obliging injunction
from their Prince, and yet coming to them only by his Connivance and
Permission. This I understand to be a Permissive Command, and such as will
secure the Parties from all blame and harm from the displeasure of their
Prince, they having his Broad Seal to authorize their Actions; nor have any
other Authority violently to hinder their proceedings, till they have a certain
and infallible injunction from the Prince himself, not only Permissive, but
Oral and Positive so to do.]

It is a great part of this Doctors trade, when he is destitute of solid
Arguments, (as needs he must be) to maintain gross Errors and Nonsense; to
attempt the feat by Comparisons. But of all that I have happened to read, I
remember no Writer who uses this kind of Proof with so bad luck.

Here he first compares God to a Prince, who willingly and wittingly by
connivance, permits the Keeper of his Seal, etc. This falls short of the
Question, which is, Whether God himself conveys a false Persuasion or Command;
not whether he Permits another to convey it. And by the Doctors instance in
Abraham, his Opinion appears to be, That God himself immediately (without the
intercurrence of any Keeper of his Seal) does convey a false Persuasion or
Command. Besides, what false persuasion is conveyed into him who receives
Commission from the Keeper, as the Doctor supposes? Is it that he thinks it to
be the Princes Command which he receives? Nothing less, for he were falsely
persuaded, if he did not think so, seeing no Prince does more certainly and
legally Command, then by his Bread Seal. But the truth is, a Keeper of his
Princes Broad Seal, may possibly set that Seal dishonestly to what he ought
not. But Gods Broad Seal cannot be set to ought, but by himself. For Gods Broad
Seal, are such Works, as none but himself can set or work; and therefore they
are his Seal. So that the comparison comes not up to the main thing in
Controversy, Whether God himself can convey a false persuasion into man's
mind. What any other Officer does (he not doing it,) is not in this case Gods
Act or Conveyance, nor to be held as such, though in earthly Princes it may.

Yea, but the Doctor supposes that the Prince did not expressly bid his Keeper
Seal such a Commission, but only wittingly and willingly connived at it, and
that therefore it is his Command no more then Permissively. I answer, If
Commissions or Commands under the Princes Broad Seal, be (as they are) most
truly and legally his Commissions and Commands; and if such a Commission or
Command be not issued by the Keeper surreptitiously, or of his own head, and
against the Princes Mind and Laws, but so as the Prince himself prudens and
sciens does wittingly and willingly (as the Doctor here supposes) give way to
the issuing of it; this is as much to all intents and purposes the Princes
Positive Commission and Command, as if he had Orally in the most express words
imaginable joined his Keeper to Seal and Issue it. This example therefore
affords not the least parallel to the Doctors Chimera of a Permissive Command
from God; nor does it prove the terms to be good, much less very good, and
warrantable sense.

Had I leisure to be sportfull, I would scan those pretty words of his,
invented as if on purpose pro Ridiculo and Delectamento; [I mean not Permissive
in contradistinction to Injunctive, for that indeed were not so good sense, but
an obliging Injunction from their Prince, yet coming to them only by his
Connivance and Permission; this I understand to be a Permissive Command.]
Wherefore let some body else ask him, First, How Permissive can be understood
to be Permissive, and yet not contradistinct to Injunctive? Secondly, How that
can be an obliging Injunction, which comes but by Permission and Connivance?
That the sequel involves him in inextricable nonsense, who can help it; seeing
the Doctor will rather venture to speak any thing, then yield that he has
spoken amiss?

Sect. 17. He says, [Wherefore having rightly stated and cleared the three
Particulars of the Question propounded, we shall now be bold to infer the whole
Conclusion in this 5th Aphorism.] Reader, how rightly and clearly he has
performed what he here boasts, do thou judge; mean while I follow him to his
5th Aphorism, which runs thus; [That a full and firm conviction of Conscience
in a soul that is sincere, touching a Religion into which some things are
incorporate that be false, but without any moral Turpitude; and of that nature
that no moral sincerity may be able to discover the falseness of them; is
rightly said to be the Permissive Command of God to that soul for either
punishment or trial.] I see how loath he is to leave his trick of intruding
more terms in the Conclusion, then he propounded in the Question, for instead
of these words in his Questistion, Sect. 3. [Can be rightly said to be the
Command of God,] here he says, [Is rightly said to be the Permissive Command
of God.] But let this pass. Having produced his Aphorism, he presently falls a
crowing in this fashion, [This Assertion, I hope, to all indifferent Judges,
will appear both true and modest.] That it is true, is falsely said, which
appears by what I have alleged against his Proofs of it. That it is modest,
whatever the Doctors hopes be, it will never seem such, till the world can so
far dote as to believe, that one repugnant thing does signify another; that to
Command is to Permit, and to Permit is to Command. That Permissive may signify
Injunctive; and Injunctive Permissive: That Boldness of Innovations may
signify Madesty, and vice versa; and that therefore the one may without
impudence be used for the other

Well, but as True and Modest as it is, he dares not trust it abroad in that
garb which in his foregoing Sections he took such large pains to trim it in:
His Conscience pricked the man on to say something more, though God knows just
nothing ad rem. He pleads that he [understands not this Perswaswasion or
Command of God in any false Religion, in a Positive sense, but only
Permissive: and means not that in such a case God as it were rises off from
his Seat to act or speak, but only by letting the course of things go on, and
giving no stop to secondary causes, such a persuasion as from God is conveyed
into the mind of man permissione certa and efficaci.]

Does not this interfere with his alleging Abraham's example as most
unexceptionable for his purpose? did God there only let the course of things
proceed, without putting a stop to secondary causes? But that which I chiefly
observe here, is his staggering quite from his principle, in those words, [Such
a persuasion as from God is conveyed into the mind, etc.] Now it seems, it is
but as from God; not from God. As from God, and that only by his letting of
the course of things go on; and thus Gods conveying of a false persuasion into
the minds of men, is defended by denying it, by conveying it away out of that
which he will defend, and yet that persuasion must still be conveyed, that Dr
More has not conveyed any error in his Writings.

Nor stays he here, but by a strange giddyness reels again to his former fancy;
for he adds in the later part of this 17h Sect. That God conveyeth a false
persuasion into the mind of his Creature, [Not by a positive particular
exertion of his power upon the Creature, but only by an effectual permission
of secondary causes.] But this only intangles him in a farther absurdity, (as
I have somewhere hinted before, and must, since the Doctor here leads me to it,
declare again:) For if Gods permission of secondary causes be Gods Command,
then God Commands all the sins in the world. The Doctor therefore must be
content to grant, that Gods Permission is no more then permission; and not
jumble Permitting and Commanding together, in his contradictious Notion of
Commanding Permissively. For if he thinks to get off by calling this Permission
an effectual Permission, his device will fail him, seeing the sins which God
permits, are effectually permitted, (if he will so speak,) else they could not
be acted upon his Permission. But this effectualness is not from any positive
operation of God, but of those the Doctor terms the secondary causes, namely,
finners themselves. Now though God knows that if he withdraws his restraining
Goodness, those secondary causes will certainly produce sinful effects; yet he
may in his Justice, and for reasons known to himself, withdraw that his
restraining Goodness: nor can he therefore be charged to be an effectual
concurrer to those sins, seeing those second causes are supposed to be free
Agents, and only biassed to perverseness by their own prevailing Corruptions

In his 18th Sect. he sums up what he had premised in five Particulars: in the
fourth whereof he falls upon a new shift to palliate the odiousness of his
Position, viz. [The Injunction and Command may rightly be conceived to lie
rather upon that part of the Religion that is unexceptionably true, then upon
what is erroneous.] He supposes thus much truth in the false Religion conveyed
by God, as to acknowledge one true God, and life to come, and a blessed
immortality for those that serve him in sincerity and truth. As for other
points it may be erroneous, but says he, Gods Command may rightly be conceived
to lie rather upon that part which is true, then upon what is crroneous. I will
grant him more then thus, for I affirm that Gods Command cannot rightly be
conceived to lie upon any part of the Religion, but that which is true. But if
the Doctors Position were true, it must be granted to lie not only on the true
part, but on the erroneous also; for he holds that conviction of Conscience
touching a Religion in which some falsities are incorporated, is the Command of
God: this Command therefore respects the whole Religion of which the Conscience
is thus by God convinced; and how can a man so convinced, be able to understand
that Gods intent was to Command him this part of it, rather then that, when he
is persuaded in his Conscience that all of it is Commanded? The greatness or
the smallness of Points in that Religion will not vary the case; the Question
being not which Articles are of chief consequence, but whether all, both great
and less are true and obligatory, as proceeding from God.

But the Doctor will needs be declaring this his fancy by a knack, in which I
have observed him marvellously unfortunate; I mean, by a simile. Will thou have
patience Reader, till I repeat it? [If the command of a Master to his Servant
should run in this form of a discreet Axiom; I will have you wait on me at such
a Meeting, though your cloths be old or out of the Mode. The great stress of
the Command lies upon that indubitable point of duty the serving his Master,
which he will not dispense withal, though the Servant be not in the best mode
accommodated for it, and it may be it is his Masters pleasure that as yet he
should not. But he has a full warrant, and no man ought to hinder him from
serving in that garb he is. The like may be said of that habit of mind it a
Religionist which is not yet devoid of error and ignorance, but joined with an
irreprehensible sincerity that he is to serve God, though in that less seemly
and less perfect habit, and that his Master has so commanded him to do, and
that therefore no man may rightfully hinder him.]

That which the Doctor calls, The habit of mind in the Religionist, not devoyd
of error and ignorance; he should by his own Doctrine have called, That
persuasion of Conscience instilled by God touching a Religion into which some
falsities are incorporated; which persuasion religiously obliges the party to
act accordingly. But this would have spoiled the Play, and too much disfigured
his fine simile. However, there is no help but thus it must be, or else his
example of the Master and Servant cannot be applied to the present case.
Hereupon he must suppose, that the servants old unfashionable Clothes, are such
as his Master purposely put upon him, and such as in putting on him, he
commanded him to wear at such a Meeting. Now upon this supposal, how indiscreet
and ridiculous is that Command in form of a discreet Axiom, [I will have you
wait on me though your Clothes be old and out of the Mode?] that is, (I will
have you wait on me in those Clothes, though they be the Clothes I have put on
you; and in putting them on, commanded you to wait upon me in them.) But much
more ridiculous will the counter-part be; for by the Laws of this simile, God
must be supposed to say thus: (I will have you serve me in this false
persuasion, though it be a false persuasion which I have conveyed into you, and
in conveying it Commanded you to serve me in it.)

After he has abused the Reader (and indeed himself,) with eighteen tedious
Sections of this kind of stuff; he says, Sect. 19. [Now I conceive my self
well appointed for a sufficient Answer to the 7th Objection in terminis, which
is this. Object. 7. [ He says, That God may and does infuse into men false
persuasions in matters of Religion; instancing in Turcism and Judaism, which
contradict the Christian Faith, t. 10. c. 10. p. 517, 518.]

To this he first Answers thus, [I no where in those Pages, nor any where else,
affirm that God infuseth a false persuasion into men. That Scholastic word
infusion sounding quite contrary to my meaning; as if he infused falsehood, as
he is said to infuse Graces, by a special and positive operation upon the
mind; whereas I have already fully declared my self, that I understand all
that which I have spoken concerning Gods conveying a false persuasion into a
man, in a Permissive, not Positive way.]

Seeing the Doctor is thus nice, I will suppose the word convey to be in the
Objection instead of infuse; for certain I am, that he here makes a distinction
where the Objector made no difference. And what has he now got by it? for God
may as truly be said to convey Grace as to infuse it; and as truly to infuse a
false persuasion as to convey it. Nay his conveyance of falsehood into the
mind, must needs be an operation, and a special positive operation; no less
then his infusing of Grace into the mind: if that falsehood by him conveyed
does as the Doctor affirms, oblige the Conscience; for no obligation can arise
from a permission, but from some other word of him that can oblige us, or
something impressed or infused into the mind.

As for his adding, That he understands (and has fully so declared) all he
has spoken about Gods conveying a falsity, in a Permissive, not Positive way:
Besides the repugnancy of the thing it self, I ask where he did thus declare
himself? In this Apology I grant, but not in that place of his Mystery, where
he delivers the Objected Doctrine. I find not there so much as the mention of
Permission, to mitigate the business. But these words I find, [When can God be
said to Command a person, if not then when he conveyeth a practical persuasion
so unto him, that there is no place left to doubt, but that it is his Command?
for if he spoke to him face to face, there could be no greater assurance of
receiving a Command from him.] And these: [The simple falsities in Religion,
are not sufficient to detect that such a Religion is not Commanded to such and
such persons by God himself.] And these: [If thou will be so humoursome for all
this, as to deny that such a conviction of Conscience so stated as I have
stated it, is the Real Command of God in every particular, namely, in the
apprehensions which are false, etc.] By which last words it is plain, That the
Command may not rightly be conceived to lie rather upon that part of the
Religion that is unexceptionably true, then upon what is erroneous, (which yet
was the Doctors last shift, Sect. 16.) but must equally lie upon the whole.

Let us suppose then, that the Doctor has now found it the safest course (the
Laws being settled as they are,) to declare himself in his Apology as he says
he has done. What is this to his former Book? unless he also professes, that
in it he delivered Doctrine which cannot be maintained, and which is indeed
incapable of the sense he says he now understands that Doctrine in? Since a
Command it was, if any thing can be called a Command; for so he said, When can
God be said to Command a person, if not then when he conveys a practical
persuasion so into him, that there is no place left to doubt but that it is his
Command?] These words now justified in his Preface (with all that he has Writ)
cannot be minced as now he would in his Apology, without Retracting them; of
which honor it seems he judges himself unworthy.

Touching Turcism and Judaism mentioned in the Objection, he answers thus,
[Though I do not stick to instance in Turcism and Judaism, nnd that in such
things as they contradict the Christian Belief in; yet again I reply, That it
is only in things that have no moral Turpitude in them, and that I suppose an
invincible ignorance in them that are thus persuaded, and that the conveyance
of this persuasion in respect of God, is not Positive but only Permissive.]

I must also again Reply, That there is not the least intimation in the place
where he handles this in his Mystery, of Gods conveying such a persuasion not
Positively but Permissively. Secondly, Touching moral Turpitude, (of which I
have said enough before,) it is easy to drive him from that starting hole,
though he makes frequent use of it, and wonderfully pleases himself in it. He
instanceth in Turcism, as a false Religion conveyed by God into his Creature;
but this Religion includes some points of moral Turpitude as gross as any
imaginable, no less then Points of bare falsity. And this Assertion, though the
Doctor would here seem so squeamish as to abhor it; yet I desire no other
witness then himself to affirm it: for in the next Chapter, Sect. 9. he tells
us that this is a Precept in the Turks Luna, Occidite homines quousque omnes
Mauri fiant; which he says, Is a Precept against the Light of Nature and
indispensable Law of Morality. And in the 5th Book of his Mystery, Chap. 10.
Sect. 1. he says, That this Precept is both in the Luna and Alcoran, and
argues from it, That Mahomet was no true Prophet, because of his Laws to
butcher all men that would not presently turn to his Religion.

If the Doctor here retorts, That the particular instances he made in his
Mystery of Turcism and Judaism, only respect Christ's dying on the Cross, and
his Resurrection; in the former of which the Turks Belief, in the later the
Jews, is opposite to the Christians; and that those particulars include not
directly any moral Turpitude. I Answer, Though that be granted him, yet he
denies not in his Apology that his discourse in his Mystery supposes, that
the Turks Religion may be conveyed into men by God; and if so, then may all the
Precepts of that Religion be conveyed by him. Indeed no Turk who truly
professes Mahomets Religion, and sincerely seeks God in it, (as the Doctor
supposes men in a false Religion may do,) but is persuaded that Mahomet was a
true Prophet; and being so persuaded, he must needs embrace all Mahomets
Precepts, (even such as this we speak of,) as the Precepts of God. Whence it
follows, that if God may be the conveyer of Turcism, he may be the conveyer of
what includes moral Turpitude: wherefore for the Doctor to suppose that God may
convey Turcism, and yet to pretend that God does not convey what has in it
moral Turpitude, is apparently to contradict himself.

Thirdly, Concerning invincible ignorance in the persons thus persuaded, he is
not content with what he had said, but to make all sure adds, [Here I suppose
invincible ignorance, and that the Jew or Turk had lived out of all opportunity
to be rightly instructed in the Christian Religion, but are sincerely minded
toward the truth where ever they find it.] What will not this Doctor say,
rather then acknowledge that he has erred! His instances in the Turk and Jew,
were (as I even now noted) That the one denies that Christ dyed on the Cross;
the other, That he rose again from the dead: which persuasions were by his own
Doctrine, conveyed into them by God. And here he tells us, that he supposes
invincible ignorance in this Turk and Jew; why so? namely, because though they
had a sincere mind to the Truth, yet they lived out of all opportunity of
being rightly instructed in the Christian Religion. Did they so? how then came
they to know these two Articles of the Christian Creed, the Passion and
Resurrection of Christ, and so stiffly to oppose them, as peremptorily to
conclude them false? Certainly they must have heard of them before they could
condemn them; and if they had opportunity to hear of two Articles, they might
at the same time have had opportunity to have heard of the rest; nay, upon
their supposed sincerity toward the Truth, they would diligently have sought
full information; whereupon, they from whom they heard the two Articles, might
have instructed them, or directed them to instructers. If therefore they were
ignorant of the other Articles, it is evident that their ignorance could not be
invincible, but was plainly wilful. And the truth is, the Doctor fowly
enterfers with himself, in supposing those men to deny two Articles of the
Creed, and yet mean while to be sincerely minded toward the Truth wherever they
find it; for in these two Articles they met with it, and yet obstinately
opposed it. And sure there is moral Turpitude in the Jews, by moral wickedness,
forgery and subornation, endeavoring to suppress the witness of Christ's
Resurrection: and the present Jews are the justifying heirs of their Ancestors
rampering with and debauching witnesses. Unless we think, that to bear false
witness (against the witness of God Almighty) concerning his raising his Son,
be no moral Turpitude.

Yet for all this, the Doctor concludes in an high Rant, [So that this 7th
Objection, though it seems at first sight of a dangerous aspect, yet is easily,
safely, and sufficiently answered out of what I have premised:]

Whether so or no, let the Reader now determine; and withal observe, That the
Doctor rather then confess himself to have written an error, will needs
maintain that God can be the Author of falsity. Though the truth is, by his
own Tenet, he cannot be sure but all his own Doctrines are false, and conveyed
into him by the same God, who may be the conveyer of errors in Religion.

CHAP. VIII.
Touching Liberty in Religion.
THis chapter he begins thus [the 8th Objection is touching Liberty of
Conscience: which right I confess is a very close consectary from the 5th
Aphorism of the foregoing chap.] And what wonder? for he that is acquainted
with Dr Mores Theology, will easily perceive that the drift of his desperate
and blasphemous Opinion in the 7th Objection, is chiefly, if not solely, to
usher in this Liberty of Conscience. That 5th Aphorism was this (that a full
and firm conviction of Conscience in a Soul that is sincere, touching a
Religion into which some things are incorporate that be false, but without any
moral Turpitude, and of that nature that no moral sincerity may be able to
discover the falseness of them, is rightly said to be the permissive command of
God to that Soul, for either punishment, or trial.]

Now, says the Doctor, if such a man as this [whom he also supposes to be of a
peaceable unpersecutive temper] may not enjoy his own, because the spirit of
God has not so thoroughly illuminated him, as to bring him to the full and
exquisite knowledge of the truth; it will bring in a principle of badder
consequence then the protection of innocent men from perfecution for conscience
sake, namely that of Dominion being founded in grace.]

How full of fraud this supposition is, will in good measure appear hereafter.
Mean while I wonder how this should bring in the principle of Dominion being
founded in Grace: the Doctor is so far from telling us how, that he offers not
one word about it. Let me ask therefore: May not the Magistrate who urges the
law upon the Doctors sincere unconforming brother, and thereby denies him this
Liberty of Conscience, be himself a wicked ungratious person? Dr More must by
his own principles think him so, for that his very Urging of the law. Is this
man therefore not truly and lawfully a Magistrate? I guess the Doctor dares not
say so. Well then, if he be a true and lawful Magistrate, this his very
pressing the Law upon that sincere Brother, proves that Dominion is not founded
upon Grace. But on the contrary if he be not a true and lawful Magistrate,
because he ungratiously uses his Power against that Brother, let but the Doctor
say so, and I will soon evince from thence, that in the Doctors own judgment,
Dominion is founded in Grace. Nay it is too apparent, that, were the Doctors
grand principle allowed, and were his sincere unpersecutive Brethren to be
exempted from the Magistrates coercive power in things indifferent; this were
no unlikely way to introduce the tenet of Grace being the foundation of
Dominion. They who might not be commanded, would soon think it belonged to them
to command: if their sincere piety sets them above the Laws of their
Governors, it may readily prompt them to think they are above their Governors
themselves.

But to make sure of a backdoor by which to evade the ugly and unsufferable
consequences of his Doctrine; he very gravely, in his 3d Section gives us a
long Character of his sincere person whose Conscience he would have left free,
which also he thrusts upon the stage again, though (as he says) in a more
contracted draught, Sect. 11. Whilst his Thesis sounds high for faction and
sedition, he plots to bring himself off by contracting the subject of that
Thesis to so small a point that he might seem to leave in it no room for Danger
or Disturbance. And this he does, by presenting his sincere person in such a
strange dress, that in the close of his 11th Sect. he professes [Very few such
are to be found in a whole province, yea in a whole kingdom: scarce so many in
number as the gates of Thebes, or the mouths of the River Nilus.] So then there
are scarce seven such sincere brethren in a whole Kingdom: and the number
being so inconsiderable, what danger of any seditious consequences from them,
though they be allowed their liberty?

A very well-favoured plea! But, first, Had the Doctor this Opinion when he
wrote his Mystery of Godliness? did he then so largely patronize the point of
liberty, only in intuition of six or seven persons who possibly might be found
(and possibly not) in the whole Kingdom? this he will scarce persuade any part
of the Kingdom to believe.

Secondly, Who sees not that such a person as he describes, is a mere figment?
he makes him unblameable in his conversation; and yet supposes him out of
Conscience not to submit to embrace the Church Discipline: if so, then he must
be a Separatist: if a Separatist, he gives offense to all honest obedient
conformable Men; he breaks the Churches Unity; he opposes his private judgment
against the public judgment of his superiors even in things of an
indifferent nature: and therefore by the Doctors leave, he is not of
unblameable conversation. He makes him also impregnably loyal and faithful to
his Prince: yet supposes that his Conscience leads him, not to observe his
Princes Ecclesiastical Laws. He makes him of complying Conscience in all things
that his Conscience discerns to be indifferent and not against Gods Word: and
in saying so, he necessarily supposes that his sincere Brother finds something
commanded by our Church (for I hope he will not deny but he includes our Church
in his discourse: else why did he not except it?) which is against Gods Word.
And yet sect. 11. page 546, 547. whereas he would have an oath taken by
pretenders to sincerity, That nothing moves them to depart from the Church, but
mere conviction of Conscience; he adds, that upon search in the Church of
England, no man could in judgment and conscience take that Oath, and leave the
Church: which must needs suppose that this Church commands nothing against the
Word of God. Lastly, He makes him of an unshaken Belief in all the essentials
of Christian Religion; and yet not satisfied that he must obey the Church
exercizing that authority in things Indisterent, which Gods Word has given
her, although he only thinks, but cannot prove the Churches commands to be
against Gods Word.

If there be any such sincere Brother amongst us; what can we imagine he
boggles at, but some Ceremony, a Surplice or Hood, the use of the Cross, a set
Form of Worship; or some such thing Indifferent in it self, and determined by
his lawful Superiors whom God has enjoined him to obey? In this case, if
that Brother be persuaded (as the Doctor supposes) that such or such a
particular is against Gods Word; this persuasion has no just and reasonable
ground: yet the Doctor will have him left at liberty, because the persuasion is
conveyed into him by God, and so obliges his Conscience. I wish the Doctor
would here be so ingenuous as to tell us in sober sadness, whether he believes
that God would thus deceive so excellent and accomplished a Christian in all
other points, as he characters this Brother to be?

But that is not all: for I think it not amiss fully here to declare the gross
absurdity of this Tenet. The same God in his Word commands that all things be
done decently and in order: but they cannot be so done, unless some in the
Church have power to determine things Indifferent: those therefore who are the
inferiors are bound in Conscience to submit to their Governors in such
determinations: this is plainly and undenyably Gods will. But this sincere
Brother is persuaded that the things so determined, are against Gods Word: not
that he can make it appear either by sound reason, or by any clear place of
Gods Word so to be, (for then it might appear so to others) but that his
Conscience tells him so. And the Doctor would have us believe, that this false
persuasion of his Conscience, was conveyed into him by God. Observe now what
follows hereupon, viz. That God by some fallacious reason, or some obscure
piece of Scripture, or some pretense of such obscure Scripture; persuades this
highly virtuous man to believe contrary to sound reason, and to plain
scripture, is this (...)? Also, that God persuades this sincere Christian, to
boggle at the authoritative definition of a Christian Church, grounded upon his
evident command. Lastly, that God who injoyns humility to all christians, does
nevertheless persuade this Christian to oppose his own private judgment,
(though founded upon no just and true ground either of reason or scripture)
against, and prefer it before the public and well-grounded judgment of the
Church.

Sect. 4. he says [The drift of my whole discourse, is more properly directed
toward a Decision of such causes as concern nations of several Religions. And
therefore they do very distortedly who misinterpret my management of this
controversy which does really include in it so notable an interest of
Christian Religion in general, to the particular disinterest of any church
whatsoever, unless it be the Roman: which is so exceeding corrupt, and yet so
pretendingly infallible, that I must confess nothing can be so formidable to
her, as this right of Liberty of Conscience, though in such unexceptionable
circumstances as I did even now describe it.]

His description with unexceptionable circumstances, I can no where find: this
therefore is but one of his usual bold sayings. Indeed all he has talked here,
is but another of his shifts; and as vain as the rest. For, 1. How can the
proper drift of his discourse tend to the decision of cases touching nations of
several Religions? The liberty of conscience he pleads for, is liberty, not for
nations of several Religions, but for particular men under the Christian
Religion, and that in some particular Church: else what means his long
Character of his sincere person, whom he makes a Christian, and who must
therefore be in some Christian Church or other, which may allow him that
liberty the Doctor presses for? yea and this sincere person, he himself grants
to be Rara Avis; so far was his drift from aiming at whole Nations.

Secondly, How can Nations of several Religions be concerned in this point?
What is the liberty of conscience in Turks, to that in Christians; and vice
versa? should Dr More have that liberty granted him or denied him here, what
would that be to the Mahometans? Nay suppose such liberty allowed among the
Lutherans; how would that concern the Calvinists?

Thirdly, Though the Doctor would have the contrary believed; yet I must tell
him, that this liberty would prove a great disinterest to some (nay to any)
Church, besides to the Roman. For let his position once be granted: That the
sincere brother must be allowed liberty of conscience. Surely it is fit the
magistrate should know whether he whom this liberty is to be allowed to, be
indeed sincere, and not a demure dissembler, How shall he know this? the Doctor
I presume will answer, that he may know it, by the other part of that persons
character which represents him for eximiously virtuous: or by the oath (which
he mentions page 547.) that he departs from the Church in mere conviction of
conscience, and not on secular design, etc.

For the first (...), it is not sufficient. He that keeps the whole Law and
offends in one point, is guilty of all: for he that said do not commit
Adultery; said also do not kill: now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou
Kill, thou art become a transgressour of the law. It is S. James's doctrine c.
2. 10, 11. He that sincerely fears God, has respect to all his commandments,
and is most certainly far off from continuing wittingly in disobedience of any
one; for all of them being given by one and the same God, he who embraces one
and rejects another cannot be thought to submit to that which he imbraceth, out
of sincere loyalty to his Master, but for some ends of his own: else why does
he not obey in this as well as in other particulars? Now God has plainly
commanded obedience to our spiritual Governors; nor is there any exemption
from their commands but where they evidently appear to be against the word of
God. (And that any commands of the Church of England are clearly repugnant to
Gods word, the Doctor is now wise enough, and we know why, most hugely to deny)
I infer therefore: He who keeps the whole law, and yet offends in this one
point of obedience to lawful superiors in things not forbidden by Gods word;
is guilty of all: (especially if it be not one act, but an obstinate habit of
disobedience.) For he who said thou shall do such and such things, said also
thou shall obey thy lawful superiors; now if thou do such and such things,
and yet obeyest not thy lawful superiors, thou art become a transgressour,
that is, guilty of all. If then S. James's Logic be good, this sincere brother
of the Doctors, who deliberately and peremptorily refuses obedience to his
superiors, cannot be thought a truly sincere and cordial servant of God;
whilst under pretense of a law conveyed into him by God (which it is impossible
he should prove to the Magistrate,) he opposes an evident known Law of the same
God.

2. As touching the Oath; the Doctor says (in his Mystery of Godliness page
525.) That it is very useful and justifyable, upon men's relinquishing the
public worship of God in the Churches. But against this way of trial, it may
be objected: That the same sincere person holds not himself free to take an
Oath. I know the Doctor in the same page sternly pronounces, that if any one
refuse thus to swear, Without question, it is not Religion but some fathomless
depth of knavery that lies at the bottom. Will his friends, the Bartholomew
Coniessours, thank him for this censure. But hereby he contradicts his own
grand principle, that the Dictate of conscience is Gods command to every man:
for I hope Gods command is not a fathomless depth of knavery. Such refusers may
allege this for their refusal, that Christ plainly said, swear not at all. How
knows the Doctor, that these men do not believe in their Conscience that these
words of Christ are by them truly understood, and rightly applied? if so: then
they are Gods immediate obliging command to them, to refuse that Oath. If he
will renounce his dogma, and grant that all dictates of conscience are not
conveyed by God, so as to prove his commands and become obligatory, (for surely
some consciences are erroneous and ought to be rectified,) he may have ground
to condemn those refusers: otherwise he condemns himself: for these refusers do
nevertheless believe a Creator, a providence, a life to come with rewards and
punishments, etc. which are the conditions he requires in him to whom he would
have liberty of conscience allowed. ibid. page 516.

It remains then, that if the magistrate cannot certainly know, whether such a
brothers pretended sincerity, be real or no; he can have no just reason to
allow him his liberty of conscience against the just law; nor can this liberty
of conscience, be such a brothers Right (as the Doctor affirms) seeing it is
inconsistent with that authority of the Magistrate, which by Gods word is a
lawful authority. And it being Gods revealed will, that all men should be
subject to that authority in things not contrary to his own declared commands;
this brother is necessarily subjected to Gods power in the Magistrate; nor may
he disobey, but where he is sure that the Magistrate commands contrary to God:
and sure he cannot be, but by the plain dictate of scripture, or of Natural
Reason: if he allege either of these, it is presumed that the Christian
Magistrate will hear him: if not, he can plead no right of freedom against the
Magistrate.

Perhaps he will here object, that we find in scripture, liberty of conscience
allowed to the weak, Romans 14. 1. etc. 1 Cor. 8. 7. and 12. To which I answer:
was that liberty allowed in points which the Church had then decreed to be
obeyed by all her members? If it were, let him show it to have been so. If it
were not: (and who ever said it was?) what is that objection to the present
case of the Christian Churches? Again; when men were converted from other
Religions to the Christian by the first preachers of Christianity; what wonder
if they were not totally converted at the first: but retained their former
persuasions for a while in some particular points? But as for such who never
were of another Religion, but were always brought up in the Christian Church;
the case is different: if these men's conscience be debauched by corrupt
persuasions, it is their own fault; nor is there reason for them to expect such
liberty as may be indulged for a while to converts from another Religion: but
rather like truants who run from the school, they are to be reduced by the
discipline of the school.

But before he concludes his 4th Section, the Doctor is again at his
comparisons, though he has the worst luck in that trade of any Man I know: he
says [ It is no more unseemly for Governors to permit something to them (
viz. the sincere brethren) peculiarly, then for a tender Mother to indulge
something to a child that breeds teeth, or any other ways weak and sickly: or a
master of a family to permit, if not to provide, some proper accommodation for
those of his family apart, whose infirmities or constitutions make them less
fit to dine and sup at his common table: for this is no diminution of his
authority, but a more discreet and commendable exercise thereof.]

The Question is touching liberty of conscience, which the Doctor vouches to be
the right of a sincere person. Now by these comparisons he would show, that it
is not unseemly for the Governors to permit him that liberty: that is, If the
Governor permits such a Man that which is his right, he does not unseemly. Can
any thing be more impertinent! the Governors part, is, not to permit and
indulge, but to defend and assert men in their right: and when he does thus, it
is but a cold commendation to say, he does not unseemly; for indeed he does
most seemly.

But I would ask the Doctor, whether in any secular Oeconomicks he has read or
heard of, he meets with a law prescribing all children and members of the
family to be used alike in all the respective parts of the domestic
discipline, without making allowance for sickness and infirmities which they
cannot help? I presume he never did. But in the family of the Church, the laws
of discipline relating to several orders of Christians, are notorious; and none
of them make any allowance for sincere weak-conscienced Brethren; because the
Church is well assured that her laws are consonant to Gods word, and therefore
even in conscience to be obeyed by all her children; whose pretended
infirmities are only such as they may themselves help when they will but
vouchsafe to be rightly informed that the things commanded were indifferent,
and not against Gods word. So that if the case be duly considered, here is no
ground at all for the Doctors comparisons.

At length, Sect. the 5th not denying but this his tedious preamble was only
talking at large, he comes to the Object. 8. Which is in these words, [He
says, That Liberty of Religion is the common and natural Right of all Nations
and Persons, l. 10. c. 11. p. 521. And the sovereign Power of God sets the
sincere Religionist free from external force and power, ibid. p. 520. By the
sincere Religionist he understands, Every one that really believes there is a
God, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him. But more is required in
such a sincere Religionist, then is to be found in the Turks. This overthrows
all Laws for Church Government and Discipline.]

His Answer he thus begins, [First I confess it is my Opinion, That Liberty of
Conscience is the common and natural Right of all Nations and Persons. But I
have also added, That this Right is forfeitable; and I have restrained this
Liberty to such conditions, that I think it is impossible to doubt but that so
much Liberty as I have left is their most unviolable Right.]

It seems the Objector has not wronged him in the first Particular, he
confesses it; but he pleads his adding that this Right is forfeitable. This
perhaps might be plausibly pleaded for the Right of particular Persons, but is
the Right of whole Nations, nay of all Nations forfeitable? Good Doctor teach
us to what Magistrates they can forfeit it, or who will be left to take the
forfeiture.

Yea, but he has Restrained this Liberty to such Conditions as will make it
most unviolable. Truly I remember not, that either in this Apology, or in the
Chapters of his Mystery, which he Apologizeth for, he has at all restrained
the Liberty of Nations, which yet is the first part of the Liberty he here
speaks of. As for his restraining the Liberty of particular persons, how little
that will help him, I have partly shown already, and shall have occasion to
declare farther when I come to his 8th Sect. of this Chapter.

Next he sallies out to some sayings of the ancient Fathers, which he counts
more free and full touching this Subject then any thing that he has said. They
who know any thing of the Discipline of the Primitive Church will easily
suspect that the Doctor here slanders the ancient Fathers. But lets view his
Citations, one is out of the Council (he tells us not which) of Toledo, another
out of Tertullian. The first forbids any one to be forced, i. to be a
Christian. The second professes That Christianity does not revenge it self by
the Sword. What he crowds these sayings in for, I profess I know not. After
this he tells us that Grotius, out of whom he borrows these Quotations, [Cites
also the constitutions of Clemens, Athanasius and Chrysostom to the same
purpose, who expressly exclude force and compulsion in bringing men over to
Christianity.] And what of this! Did those Fathers therefore think Liberty of
Religion to be the common and natural Right of all Nations and Persons? (...)!
Have Infidels Right to be of a false Religion, because Christians have no Right
to compel them to the true? The Church judges not those who are without, but
those who are within: Those who are without God judges, for all their
pretended Right to Liberty, and to him they must answer it for their adhering
to a false Religion in spite of all the means his universal Grace and
Providence uses to reclaim them. But how palpably all this discourse of the
Doctor is extravagant from the Question, appears by the close of the Objection,
(This overthrows all Laws for Church Government and Discipline.) The Objector
meant not to trouble him farther then by hinting to him, That if Liberty of
Religion be all men's Right, Church Government must signify nothing, for then
might Christians shake off that yoke at their pleasure. And how is the not
persecuting and compelling of Infidels pertinent to this Point?

Sect. 7. He thus proceeds, [Secondly, As for that Addition out of Page 520. it
is no new Charge, but contains Reasons for the former Assertion; namely, That
considering the sincerity of the Religionist, wherein he is so faithfully and
unfeignedly obliged to the Sovereign Power of God, he is not harshly to be
dealt with by any inferior Power; he having that integrity and sincerity,
which I understand all along in this Subject, and have more explicitly
described in my Proof of my first Aphorism in the foregoing Chapter; as also
where the case is more particular in the 3d Section of this.]

What is this, but to suppose, and run away with, what neither has, nor can be
proved; namely, that the Sovereign Power of God obliges men's Consciences (by
conveying false persuasions into them) to resist the Truth, and to oppose that
Power which the same God himself has confessedly instituted. The Doctor also
falls here from Nations to particular Persons, and yet pretends that this
Addition contains Reasons for the former Assertion, which Assertion related to
all Nations as well as to particular Persons: But it is plain, by his
references to his first Aphorism of the former Chapter and the 3d Section of
this, that he lays the main stress of his Apology upon the sincerity of the
Religionist. And how I pray shall the Magistrate be assured that this
Religionist is indeed sincere? It is the Question I asked before, and must
repeat where I meet the Doctor obtruding his crambe.

But he adds Sect. 8. [By the sincere Religionist, I understand more then is
recited in the Objection; for a man may not cast off the Belief of a God, and
of a life to come, and yet be exceeding far from being sincere, as you may
easily understand out of the formentioned description.]

What reason the Objector had to describe the Doctors sincere Religionist, as
is set down briefly in the Objection, appears out of his own words in his
Mystery, lib. 10. cap. 10. In the Contents of which Chapter, his first is this
in terms: [That in those that believe there is a God, and a Life to come, there
is an antecedent Right of Liberty of Conscience, not to be invaded by the Civil
Magistrate.] And in the beginning of the Chapter he explains himself thus: [For
those that seriously make a profession of the existence of God Creator of all
things, and of his Providence, and acknowledge that there is a life to come,
wherein the wicked shall be punished and the virtuous rewarded; it seems to me
that there does naturally accrue such a Right to these men of freedom in their
Religion as is inviolable, and such as the Power of the Magistrate ought not to
invade, unless there be some perverse mixture in it that forfeits their Right.]
Where by the way, observe how the Doctor confounds himself in his sincere
Religionist; for he supposes that there may happen to be some perverse mixture
in his Religion, that is, he may be perverse, and yet sincere.

To his pretense here alleged, I must crave his leave to reply; That whereas
he now in his Apology gives us a new Character of his sincere Religionist; and
then wipes his mouth and says, (He understands more by the sincere Religionist
then is recited in the Objection,) is mere Boys play. The Question is not, what
he now understands, but what he wrote in his Mystery. Had he now acknowledged
that what he wrote there was rashly written, it had been something.

He proceeds, Sect. 9. [I willingly grant, that it will be hard to find any
such sincere Religionist, as I understand and describe among the Turks, it
being a Precept in their Zuna, Occidite homines quousque omnes mauri fiant.
Slay and kill, till all men have become Mahometans; which is a Precept against
the light of Nature and indispensable Law of Morality, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris.] This Answer respects that part of the Objection,) but more
is required to such a sincere Religionist, then is to be found in the Turks.)
And the Doctor tells us it is hard to find such a Turk. Hard? why not
Impossible? For if their Religion contains Precepts contrary to the Light of
Nature and indispensable Law of Morality, (as he grants it does,) they who
sincerely profess that Religion, must endeavor the practice of such Precepts.
And yet the Doctor in this 10th Chap. Sect. 3. of his Mystery instances in the
Turk and Few, as persons whose Religion was conveyed into them by God.

Indeed he here adds, [That this Turk forfeits his Right of Liberty of
Religion, by this poisonous and wretched Principle.] If so, no Religious Turk
can have any such Right; and would the Doctor have that Right belong only to
such Turks as are not true to their Religion, that is, to Hypocrites? are these
the sincere ones?

To that in which the main force of the Objection (he says) consists, and
which runs in these words, (This overthrows all Laws for Church Government and
Discipline,) he thus models his Answer, Sect. 10. [First, That there is a
mavelous incommensurability of things in humane Affairs; and that we may as
well expect that the Diameter of a Circle should be Symmetral to the Periphery,
and the Diagonal of a square to the side thereof; as that one thing, or one
truth should serve all turns and all occasions: nay, though it were in our
power to mint Truth as we please, and to set that stamp and title upon whatever
Proposition would serve our turn best; yet we should find that it would not
serve all emergencies, nor fit all occasions, nor be exempt from all
exceptions.]

He Cants! he Cants! will many an honest Reader here cry out. Indeed we may
well wonder what he means; for though one thing will not fit all occasions, yet
one Truth will and must; for Truth is and can be but one. But those last words,
That though we had power to mint Truth, yet it would not be exempt from all
exceptions; mind me of what I have read in a modern Author, which I think it
not unseasonable here to insert. That Author though a private person, having
minted and delivered for current certain Rules for public Worship in a
Christian Church; doubts not to conclude, That if those be observed, (It will
not be easy to imagine what is wanting to a due and unexceptionable filling up
of all comely Circumstances of that public Worship that is fit to be practiced
by professed Christians, unless you would bring in also Images and Pictures.)
In this man's Judgment it is possible enough (at least for him) to mint
something which is unexceptionable, that is, Exempt from all Exceptions. And if
the Reader longs to know this so wise and able Author; truly it is even Dr
Henry More in his Mystery of Godliness, lib. 10. cap. 14. sect. 16.

But I ask the Doctor, What are the Truths here in Question? They must be
either touching the Fundamental and Indispensable parts of Religion; or
concerning things in themselves Indifferent, and variable upon just occasion,
Touching the former, I hope there can be but one Truth, which must always
persist the same: And touching the later, The Church does not determine and
appoint them irreversibly, but suits them to time and place as she sees most
expedient; never imagining, that one Form is by absolute necessity fit to serve
all occasions and possible Emergencies. Yet still this one thing is true, this
one Truth will serve in all change of occasions, that the Church has a Power
in all occasions and all turns to judge what is fit; and has Power in things
Indifferent to determine and command what she sees meet; And they who are given
to change, must not make their own changeable humors (sincerely changing very
often) a plea of Exemption from their Superiors Lawful Commands. Hitherto then
the Doctors Answer amounts to nothing. Let Us see what follows.

[As for example, because this Proposition, That Liberty of Religion is the
common Right of all Nations and Persons, does not please; take the opposite to
it, That no Nation or Person can claim Liberty of Religion as their Right. Will
not this prove as Incommensurable to humane Affairs, and be laden with as great
Inconveniences?] Here he slips the Collar, and leaves the Question. For the
Question was, Whether that former proposition of his were true or no; and now
he would only have it supposed, that it does not please, and therefore he
neither styles nor pretends to prove the opposite proposition false, but
inconvenient and incommensurable to humane Affairs. But how proves he this
Inconvenience? why he makes account thus.

[For if no Nation or Person have any Right to profess any Religion but what is
in all Points True, then will every Nation (since they are persuaded of the
truth of their Religion, otherwise they would not be of it,) presume they have
Right of Persecuting any other Nation that differs in Religion from them, they
so easily conceiting every different Religion false, which is to set the world
together by the ears.]

It was kindly done of the Doctor to help me to an Answer to this his proof in
the proof it self. If every Nation be persuaded of the Truth of their Religion,
because otherwise they would not be of it: then cannot this Nation imagine but
that other Nations professing Religions different from this are persuaded that
the Religions they profess are true. And why should the Doctor think, that one
Nation should count it either reasonable or advantageous to it self, to
persecute another Nation for professing what their Conscience tells them is the
Truth? What were this but to make that persecuting Nation utterly stupid and
insensible of what is for her own Peace and Interest? for by this Principle,
such a Nation publicly professes it lawful for all other Nations of different
Religions to invade and persecute her.

But he adds, [Again, If no private Person have the Right of Liberty of
Religion, then is he bound up to the Religion of his Prince and Nation, be it
what it will; for if he may judge, his Right is reserved to him.] I grant, that
every man ought to be satisfied in his Conscience (and the Doctor may if he
will call this Judging,) of the Religion he professes. Yet this reserves him
not a Right of Liberty in Religion; but only supposes that he has a Right of
trying, examining, and using his best judgment in order to the satisfying of
his Conscience: which Right if he duly uses, it will certainly fix him in the
True Religion, whether that Religion be professed by his Prince and Nation or
no. (...) Prove, or Try all things; Hold fast that which is good, says the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Here is a Right to Try, Examine and Judge; but no
Right of Liberty in Religion for all that. This trial is only in order to the
Holding fast that which is good. God will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. If this be Gods will; (and I hope
Dr More when he thinks well of it, will not deny it) that all men should come
unto the knowledge of the Truth, i. e. of the Christian Religion, then is the
pretended Right of liberty in Religion, flatly against Gods will. To fancy then
that private persons are bound up to the Religion of their Prince and Nation,
be it what it will, because such persons have no right to be of what Religion
they list, is ridiculous: seeing the King of Kings has determined the case,
and signified it to be his royal pleasure that all men should come to the true
Religion, which can be but one.

His last inconvenience is that [All Atheists and profane Persons will make
their Markets to the full; there being no Obstacle to them to what ever
enjoyments of this life; but the sore and unsupportable burden not only of
falling short in their fortunes, but of cruel persecution, will light upon
those only that are conscientious, and have the fear of God before their eyes.]

First, Touching Atheists and profane men, I demand how this follows? If it be
granted that No man can claim Liberty of Religion as his Right, then says the
Doctor, Atheists and profane persons will make their markets to the full, there
being no obstacle to them to whatever enjoyments of this life. A mavelous
clear consequence, and suitable to the Doctors Logic! Take therefore the
opposite Position which is his own, viz. (Liberty of Religion is the common and
natural Right of all Persons.) And tell me if that Consequence will not be much
clearer; for hereupon the wicked Person having Right to what Religion he lists,
will never scruple to profess any thing that may best consist with his temporal
Advantage; for still he professes no more then he has Natural Right to
profess.

As for the Conscientious, this will expose them (he says) to persecution.
Suppose so. Is therefore the Position (That no Nation nor Person can claim
Liberty of Religion as their Right) incommensurable to humane Affairs? St Paul
says, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Dr More would prevent this, and therefore likes no Positions that
will occasion Conscientious men to be persecuted. But what thinks he of the
Religion planted by Christ? was that Incommensurable to humane Affairs? I hope
not. Yet he assured his Apostles, that it would expose them to the hatred of
all the world. Did Christian Religion not teach us a reward in the life to
come, the Doctor might count it, (as he does this later Position,) to be of
very partial and injurious consequence; but upon supposal of this future
reward, neither this Religion nor that Position can be justly so accounted.

In the next, the 11th Section; though I were so well aware of the Doctor, that
I thought he could not have cheated me, yet I must confess I was down right
gulled; for thus he begins, [But to answer more closely and satisfactorily to
the purpose.] This Preface rowzed me to an expectation of something not
impertinent at least; but the sum of all I find is but this that he himself
says, [That Right of Liberty of Religion, as he has stated it, overthrows not
any due Laws of Government in any Church, nor opposes any Interest but the
Roman; and that Reformed Churches need not fear, but it will rather enlarge
their Jurisdiction then overthrow their Laws;] And the Reason he subjoyns is
this, [For what hinders men from coming over to the Truth, but those Babylonish
Chains of barbarous and Antichristian Persecution?]

Is this close and satisfactory to the purpose, as was promised? First, Let me
ask the Doctor, Whether he ever heard of greater complaints of Persecution from
those who lived under the Roman Church, then from those who lived under the
Reformed Church? yea under the Reformed Church of England, which he, tacking
about, has of late so highly magnified? Secondly, If this Right of Liberty in
Religion were granted, let us consider how the Jurisdiction of the Church of
England would be thereby enlarged. Did the Doctor never hear of such things as
Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers, Latitudinarians here in England? Are not
these a pretty round company? make they not a great (I dare not say, how great)
part of the Nation? and are they not sincere and hearty enemies to our
Church Government, or proud despisers of it? Now let all these be allowed a
Right of Liberty, and who doubts but they would soon have Governments and
Disciplines of their own? whereby so vast a part of the Subjects of our
Churches Discipline being taken away, it is very strange how her Jurisdiction
should by this device be Enlarged. And how cordially Dr More desires the
enlargement of it, let it be guessed by the goodly means he would have used for
that purpose.

I, but he will tell you now, That he means not that all those Sects should be
allowed their Right of Liberty. Indeed he may tell us so now, when he sees it
is not safe for him to say the contrary. But I have already showed, that his
sincere Religionist (for whom he pleads this Liberty) is not the same here in
his Apology with him whom he holds forth in his Mystery. Besides, if this
Liberty be (as he says) the Natural Right of all Persons; none of all the
Rabble I have named, but will make good his Title to it, against any forfeiture
the Doctor can pretend. For what is every man's Natural Right, is his Right
given him by God the Author of Nature, and therefore part of Natures Law. How
then can any man forfeit what he holds by the Charter and Law of God and
Nature, only because he conforms not to the Churches Order in things which
were in themselves but Indifferent; unless he makes the Churches Law more
sacred then Gods? I say, in things in themselves but Indifferent; for which of
those forementioned Sects will not readily profess that they embrace all the
Essentials and indispensable Precepts of Religion? And to tell them that
Obedience in things Indifferent is Commanded by God, will nothing prevail with
them, seeing they are taught, that this is inconsistent with the exercise of
their Natural Right of Liberty; and therefore any such Command infers no
Indispensable Duty, because this would destroy that Original Right which they
have by the Law of God and Nature. They may obey if they please, but if they
have no mind so to do, that Natural Right will bear them out.

His next pretense in the Clause immediately subjoyned is this, [Again, when
there was no external force nor compulsion to make men Christians, as there was
not for some hundreds of years, were there no Laws for Church Government and
Discipline all that time? Wherefore Liberty of Religion does not take away or
overthrow all Laws for Church Government and Discipline, but rather keeps men
from making any disallowable and scandalous ones, which was one reason that
kept the Church from that Antichristian Lapse all the time before the Empire
professed Christianity. But external force imprints Truth and Falsehood,
Superstition and Religion alike upon the dawed spirits of men.]

Mavelous close and to the purpose still! for I see, that in the Doctors
Dialect, Close signifies Extravagant, and To the purpose, quite beside it. His
business was to have showed us, That the Laws for Church Government are not
frustrated, though men be allowed Liberty of Religion. By which men, who
understands not men entered into Christianity and living under Christian
Governors? To prove there is no such Frustration. he appeals to the Primitive
times, when Infidels were not compelled to turn Christians; which
notwithstanding, there were in those Times Laws for Church Government and
Discipline. Whereas his Proof should have been, That the Primitive Church
compelled none of her Members by Censure to obey her Commands; but gave
Dissenting Brethren their Liberty, and only exercised her Jurisdiction upon
Assenters. But he knew he could never make out this Proof, and therefore
wondrous wisely and demurely walked aside from the Question. At length he
concludes, That External force imprints Truth and Falsehood alike, etc. But
what he means, or how this sentence coheres with what was premised, let them
divine who are more at leisure then I.

To his Thirdly; in which he refers us to his Answer to the 4th Objection I
will repeat nothing, but make the like reference; desiring the Reader to review
if he pleases my Reply to that his Answer.

In his Fourthly he says, [That this Right of Liberty of Religion is
forfeitable, by mixing therewith such Principles as are contrary to good
manners and civil Right, or repugnant to the very Principle of Liberty we speak
of. Which forfeiture is so large and in a manner Universal, that in the very
Chapters of this Subject I acknowledge the Theory I plead for hugely
unpracticable. So that there is room enough and too much left in the world, for
the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.]

Enough, and too much room for the Churches Jurisdiction? God desires that the
Church may reach to all Nations; which cannot be, except her Discipline and
Jurisdiction be co-extended to the same limits. Dr More grudges, and thinks
this Jurisdiction has enough, yea, and too much room already Perhaps he will
expound his meaning to be, That in regard of the great multitudes of such men
as mix with their Liberty Principles contrary to good manners, and are thereby
liable to Ecclesiastical Censures, the Churches Jurisdiction has a larger
Subject then would be wished. But this will not excuse him, for though there
were no men professing Principles contrary to good manners, yet the Churches
Jurisdiction would not be of the less extent: seeing her Power is exercised,
not only in the Censuring of the Bad, but also in the Encouraging,
Meliorating, and Perfecting those that are Good. For God gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, etc. for the perfecting the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. But grant this Expression of
his were of no such ill aspect, yet his other words will sufficiently betray
him. For

First, If his Theory be hugely unpracticable, what meant he to trouble the
world with it; especially so largely as he has done? Secondly, If the
forfeiture be in a manner universal, then by the Doctors Censure, it is in a
manner universally true, That men hold Principles contrary to good manners and
civil Right. But I must take the boldness to think, That his charging in a
manner all the world with this foul Crime, is so far from good manners, that it
favors neither of Modesty, Truth, nor Charity; but is indeed, what Michael
durst not bring against the Devil himself, A Railing accusation. Yet I wonder
not much at it; for since he patronizeth Liberty of Religion, what marvel is it
that he assumeth such Liberty of Censure? But abate him all this, and examine
his device of forfeiture, which he seems to have provided as his safest
backdoor.

First, He who holds a Principle repugnant to this Principle of Liberty needed
not have been counted among those who forfeit their Right in this Liberty; but
should rather be reckoned among those who will not allow it. For if he pretends
such Liberty to be proper to himself alone, he only renders himself
ridiculous. Consider we then, (Those who mix with it Principles contrary to
good manners and civil Right) And it will easily appear, that by so doing they
forfeit not that supposed Right of Liberty in Re^gion, for this their Right the
Doctor makes to be natural: Now no Right of Nature (nor indeed any other Right
that is truly such) is forfeitable, but by some offense to which some Law
appoints that forfeiture as a Punishment. Let the Doctor then show us, what Law
either of God or man is extant, by which the mixing Principles contrary to good
manners or civil Right, makes any man forfeit his Right of Liberty in
Religion. Many Laws may be produced, which appoint other Penalties for those
who profess any thing contrary to civil Right or good Manners; which Penalties
such Professors must undergo, be they the forfeit of part or of all their
Estate, or of their civil Liberty, or of any of their Limbs, yea, of their Life
also: but till some Law appears, which makes their Penalty to be the forfeit of
their Liberty in Religion; that Liberty cannot truly be said to be forfeited.
The truth is, The Doctor cannot in all his huge reading show us any such Law:
for why should any Law ever be made for the forfeiting of that which is not?
Wherefore this backdoor is a mere figment, nor can the Doctor ever make his
escape through it.

His Fifthly; only thrusts in his repeated Character of his sincere
Religionist; by which it is evident, that all this Right of Liberty in
Religion, for which he makes himself the Advocate, must concern such as are
Christians: and that therefore all his Discourses against forcing men to the
Christian Religion, were nothing of kin to his present Question, but crowded in
only to amuse unwary Readers.

His Lastly contains his own devised knack of an Oath, whereby to discover
Hypocrites and Pretenders to Sincerity. But of both these I have spoken
sufficient, upon occasions given me by the Doctor already.

His 12th Section is an Applauding of himself, that he has wrote nothing, but
what tends to the more successful Management of the Churches Authority. His
Thirteenth, A Discourse touching the Knowledge of God. His Fourteenth and
Fifteenth, A Redargution of those who pretending the Unction of the Spirit,
disobey the Churches Authority. His Sixteenth, An Invective against Persecuting
Men for Heresy, who hold all things plainly determined by Scripture. In which
Sections, though the Doctor be sufficiently repugnant to himself, yet because
all of them are either so pitifully loose, or so miserably remote from the
propounded Objection, (to which he ought to have confined his Reply,) I forbear
clogging my Reader with any Observations upon them. And this the rather,
because the Doctor himself being Conscious of his unreasonable Extravagance,
has by the power of unusual sudden Ingenuity been forced to acknowledge in the
Front of his next Chapter, That he fears he has overmuch expatiated in his
Answer to the eighth objection.

CHAP. IX.
HAving undertaken to be brief, touching the two la^ Objections, he thus sets
down the 9th. Object. 9. He sharply inveighs against all Church Government and
Governors, no where excepting ours; nay directly says that our Church is not
quite emerged out of the general Apostasy, lib. 5. cap. 17. sect. 7. page 206.
and page 211. The Reformers having separated from the great Babylon, have built
less and more tolerable ones, but not to be tolerated for ever.

Here being weary, it seems (and well he might) of his own preambulatory
ambages, he arms his forehead, and without any more ado, answers [First, that
I do not speak against any Church Government, no not so much as Presbytery,
much less Episcopacy; but on the contrary I have spoken for it in my Preface.
So far am I from sharply inveighing against that Government, or any else.]

The Objection was, for his inveighing against Church Government, and
Governors. In his answer he takes no notice of the second part of the charge
(viz. the Governors) but slily passes that over; as if reviling lawful
superiors were a thing inconsiderable. But I shall by and by make it appear,
that his Invectives strike at both Government and Governors, and that, with as
contumelious unsufferable Impudence, as I think the heartiest Schismatic or
Fanatic could wish, But first, because he confidently appeals to his Preface,
let me reminde the Reader, that there the Doctor ranks Episcopacy with the
worst of Factions, Presbytery, Independency, Quakerism, etc. That he professes
(page 19.) that Episcopacy simply in it self is not Antichristian: And page 20.
That Episcopacy joined with Presbytery, is better then Presbytery alone. Is not
the Author of these passages, one who speaks for Episcopacy?

Now for his bold affirmation, that he speaks not against any
Church Government, I crave the readers patience till I rake up some of his
dirt. Page 526. of his Mystery, he says [Now our Religion is wrapped up in so
many wreaths of hay and straw, that no man can see nor feel the edge of it.]
And if thus wrapped up; by whom is it done but by the Governors of the Church?
Does not this strike at both the Government and the Governors? Again page 492.
[Freely to profess what I think in my own conscience to be true: The most
universal and most fundamental mistake in Christendom, and whence all the
corruption of the Church began, and is still continued and increased, is, That
conceited estimation of orthodox Opinions, and external ceremony, before the
indispensable practice of the precepts of Christ, etc. Instead whereof there is
generally substituted curiosity of Opinion in points imperscrutable and
unprofitable; obtrusion of Ceremonies numerous, cumbersom, and not only
needless, but much unbeseeming the unsuspected modesty of the spouse of Christ,
etc. This self chosen Religion in all the parts of Christendom (though it be
such as a wicked man may perform as dexterously and plausibly, as the most truly
righteous and regenerate) being so highly extolled and recommended to the
people, is almost an irresistible temptation to make them really and morally
wicked.) And page 496. [That I may not seem to slander the state of
Christendom, I mean of the whole visible Church in what nation soever under
heaven, if we may believe Historians, there is none, neither Greek nor Roman,
Lutheran nor Calvinist; but will be found guilty of this fault.]

If this be not to inveigh against Church Government; and universally too; for
all Christendom is his scene; What is? seeing the tragical miscarriages he thus
charges upon all the Christian World, must lie at the doors of the
Church Government, and Governors; or no where.

Again, in his Preface, page 28. falls he not foul upon the Governors, [Who,
says he, instead of holy love, etc. -- with zeal scalding hot seek to hale and
force other men by external compulsion to their foolish and useless Opinions
and Ceremonies, etc.] for here he must mean the Church Governors, seeing they
alone have power of compulsion, Ibidem [It is injustice and barbarous cruelty
to afflict men for what they cannot help, and in what they do not sin: and it
is plain rebellion against God to wrest the scepter out of his hand, by which
he rules in the Consciences of Men, and to usurp this Empire to themselves.]
Here he makes the Churches censuring her factious, schismatical, or heretical
members, to be Rebellion against God. Yet this man in veighes not (if you will
take his own word) against any Church Government. More such stuff I could rake
up out of his Mystery; but that I am loath too much to turn the Readers stomach.

But he goes on, and in his second Sect. of this 9th Chapter, pleads thus: [If
any one will call my free and zealous Advertisements to the guides of
Christendom, sharp invectives; that does not change their nature: they are
still wholesome reproofs and advertisements, not Invectives: forasmuch as they
proceed from no Hatred nor Ill will, but out of a sincere affection to the
truth, and a desire of promoting the true interest of the Kingdom of Christ in
the world.]

Truly a spade must be called a spade; and if any one will call it a fan of
feathers, that does not change its nature; for it is still a spade, and not a
fan of feathers. If the Doctor will call Invectives, Reproofs and
Advertisements, that does not change their nature; they are still Invectives,
and not Reproofs or Advertisements. And indeed if this kind of language be
only Advertising or Reproving, it is impossible there should be any such thing
as inveighing.

I, but it was not out of Ill will, but out of sincere affection to the Truth,
and a desire of promoting the true interest of Christ's kingdom. Doctor, I know
not your heart; I leave that to God: but this I know, that a good meaning and
intent cannot justify a bad action: and therefore you may do well to consider,
how you will answer for having spoken evil of Dignities, to him who is the
author of them. What you add for your justification out of scripture, is so
far from mending the matter, that it only shows how boldly you dare abuse Gods
sacred word.

First you tell us, that S. Paul bids Titus exhort and rebuke with all
authority, chap. 2. And charges him to rebuke the Cretians sharply. chap. 1.
And what of this? I pray did S. Paul give any such kind of charge to Dr More?
Titus was Bishop of Crete; and S. Paul commanded him to exhort and rebuke
offenders in his Diocese: what could be properer? Does this authorize you, who
are no Pope, I trow, no pretending Universal Bishop, but a private person,
Fellow of Christ's College, and not Master of his whole Church, to Rebuke all
the Bishops of the Christian world?

Then you go on thus [Is it not also said Isa 11. He shall smite the earth with
the Rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
Which our Savior Christ does even in his true and living members also, as well
as in his own Person; his spirit in them kindling their zeal, and directing
their words to the just reproof of ungodliness. And I am sure I inveigh against
nothing (if it can properly be called inveighing) but what is confessedly
wicked and ungodly.]

Here you presume, that you are a true living member of Christ, and that
Christ's spirit kindled that zeal, and directed your words in these Invectives.
If so; then your words are sacred, and infallibly true, because proceeding from
the Direction of the Holy Ghost: but that they are such, all the wit you have,
will never persuade men in their wits, to believe. May not any railing sactary
say as much for himself, if this will serve? may he not vouch himself for a
true living member of Christ? may he not call his passion, zeal, and father it
upon the Spirit of God? and yet will not all sober persons count that such a
one Blasphemes? Because some lymphatick Pulpiteers of late, were wont to broach
what wild rebellious, antichristian Invectives would seem most to promote the
Cause; and then in their concluding Prayer, tell God Almighty that he had
taught them thus and thus: was the Auditory therefore bound to believe that
Gods Spirit was the Author of such stuff? I hope not. Christ may indeed, when
he pleases, Commissionate his true living members to do him such service as you
intimate: but for all that; if you can show no Commission for such employment,
but the zeal of your private spirit, kindled (as you are pleased to imagine) by
the Spirit of God, you will be counted no better then a furious Enthusiast. As
for your jolly vaunt, that you are sure you inveigh against nothing but what is
confessedly wicked and ungodly: it is but like your self: for it is apparent
enough by the foregoing Passages which I cited out of your Mystery, that you
inveighed against the Government of all the Churches in Christendom and that
the Government of all the Churches in Christendom, is confessedly wicked and
ungodly, who but Dr More would affirm?

His next words are [Is it not the command of God to Isaiah, Cry aloud, spare
not, list up thy voice like a Trumpet and show my people their transgression,
and the House of Israel their sins? And does not the same Prophet complain of
blind and ignorant watchmen, of dumb Dogs that cannot bark, sleeping, lying
down, and loving to slumber? And if it be a fault to be thus dumb, certainly it
is a virtue to bark and give warning; though that canine eloquence must needs
sound harsh to their ears of whom our Savior has foretold (The thief comes
not but to steal kill and destroy) answerable to those (...) and (...)
mentioned in the Apocalypse.] Is not this wonderously to the Doctors purpose?
God commanded Esaias, a known Prophet to show Israel her sins: but when or were
did God command this Doctor to do the like; or is he a known Prophet, sent to
the Christian Israel? Esaias complains of Watchmen, who were dumb dogs; for
Watchmen were in public office, and ought to have given warning: But does he
complain of private Persons for being silent, and refraining from public
Invectives against all the Governors and Government of Gods whole Church! And
here take notice of the Doctors strong Logic: If, says he, it be a fault to
be dumb, certainly it is a virtue to bark and give warning: and hereby he would
prove that it was a virtue in him thus to inveigh or bark. What fresh-man will
not smile at this wretched sophism; and presently retort, that it is a fault to
be dumb, in those who ought to bark, but not in those whose duty calls them not
to it: That it is no virtue in such an one to bark who was not appointed to
that employment, but both by barking usurp the office that belongs to others:
That if Dr More were commissionated to bark, it were a fault in him to be dumb,
and certainly a virtue to bark: That if he be not commissionated, silence would
better have become him then barking.

Now touching his last clause (though that canine eloquence must needs sound
harsh to their ears, of whom our Savior has foretold, The thief comes not
but to steal, kill and destroy,) Are not all the guides of Christendom much
beholding to him for it? for he makes no bones at all, of pointing them out as
the very men of whom Christ foretold; namely as thieves, whose business is to
steal, kill and destroy. Those they were, against whom he used his canine
eloquence; and who but they are the men who, above all others, must count that
eloquence harsh? They therefore (if you will believe the Doctor) and every one
of them without exception, are murderous destroying theives.

But he adds [And again in Isaiah, Those that say to the seers, see not, and to
the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things;
they are stigmatized with the title of a Rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not hear the Law of the Lord. For the Law of the Lord is as
fire, and the word of God, a sharp two-edged sword. All which I think, is
Apology sufficient for sharpness of rebuke if it be rightly placed.] They are
stigmatized, who forbade the seers to see, and the Prophets to prophecy right
things. This I grant: and what then? Those seers were by their office bound to
see; and those Prophets to prophecy right things: hence it follows that they
were much to blame who forbade them to do their duty. And how does this
concern Dr More? Is he a Prophet, or a seer, or any thing analogous,
constituted over all Christendom? If he were so; (as, God be thanked, he is
not) did any one command him not to see? did any one command him not to
prophecy right things, but smooth things? Again, I grant Gods Law is as fire,
and his word a sharp two-edged sword: are Dr Mores dictates and expressions
such? Yet he very manfully concludes, that in his opinion, what he has here
produced out of scripture is a sufficient apology for sharpness of Rebuke, if
it be rightly placed: his meaning is, that it is a sufficient apology for his
own Invectives. First he should have proved (what he only supposes) that his
Invectives are rightly placed. Secondly though this justifies those who had due
commission sharply to rebuke and inveigh, where there was just reason so to do;
yet it is far from being a sufficient apology for those who arrogate to
themselves the liberty of being universal Censors.

Sect. 3. To that part of the Objection, that he no where excepts our Church;
he answers [That as he no where excepts her, so he no where nominates her.]
This he needed not to have told us: for that he no where nominates her is
plainly enough supposed in the very words of the Objection. But because he did
not except her in his taxing all Churches in general, he therefore plainly and
undenyably included her. If I should take upon me generally to stigmatize all
presumptuous and illogical impertinent writers; though I nominate not Dr More
who is apparently enough one of that tribe; yet if I except him not, I do
certainly comprehend him in the number of those whom I stigmatize.

Sect 4. He says, that he farther answers [It was needless for me to except
our own Church; for providence it self had excepted her, in that she
disappeared, and was wholly under the hatches, when I wrote those
Advertisements to the Guides of Christendom.] Sutably to this he says in his
6th Section, upon the same account, [That the English Church was out of sight,
if not out of being, that is, politically dead, when he wrote this.] Good God!
where is this Doctors ingenuity! for it matters not when he wrote this stuff;
but when he Printed and Published it. The Book the Objections were framed
against, is his Mystery of Godliness, Printed and Published, after his
Majesty's return; which return he mentions in his Preface to that Book, dated
from his Study at Christ's College in Camb. Iun. 12. 1660. Did the Church of
England then disappear; was it wholly under the hatches? Did not his Sacred
Majesty; did not the venerable Bishops; did not the Universities; did not the
Cathedral and Collegiat Churches; did not Millions of the People publicly own
and profess it? Under the hatches then it was not: at least not wholly under
and out of sight. The Doctor is not so pur-blinde but he might have discovered
it, had he had a mind. Yet here he thinks to put off all, with this putid
shift, that the Church appeared not at the time when he wrote. Suppose he had,
during the Rebellion, wrote a Book against the King; and for the asserting him
who was much of his Opinion concerning liberty in Religion, and touching the
Government and Governors of the Church, I mean the most infamous Oliver (whom
I doubt not but the Doctor knows who it was that affirmed to be the most wise,
valiant, and religious Prince in Christendom.) Suppose also that he had
ventured to publish that Book, after the Kings Return, it had been strange
impudence, you will say: But the Doctors Apology had been ready against any
Objector, viz. That when he wrote that Book, the King disappeared, was wholly
under hatches, was politically dead. But more of this point, when I come to his
6th Section.

To that part of the Objection, which charge him with saying that (our Church
is not quite emerged out of the general Apostasy,) he answers [Though those
words may seem at first sight to intimate so much, viz. (wherefore out of a due
humility and modesty, suspecting our selves not to have emerged quite out of
this general Apostasy of the Church) yet I am sure it is a mere (...), like
that which follows, (Again as for Idolatry, cannot we find also that among our
selves? I do not mean covetousness only, etc.) Where I think no man will say,
I am one of the number, if he read the whole paragraph. Wherefore I do not
speak of the English Church, of which I profess my self a member, but of such
faults of the reformed Churches in general, whether common to them all, or not,
as occurred to my mind, the English Church then disappearing, both in such a
sense as I intimated before, and also as Alcibiades his patrimony in Socrates
his Map of the World: so universalized were my thoughts in that meditation, nor
could they be fixed on our English Church, since the things that I allege, are
incompetible to her, as I have proved in my vindication of her.

A pretty fetch, or Cheat if you will! to say, we may find Idolatry among our
selves; does not argue that I am one of the Idolaters: Therefore, To suspect
our selves not to have emerged quite out of the general Apostasy of the
Church; argues not a suspicion that Our Church is still in that Apostasy. What
Consequence is this, where the expressions run not parallel? Had the Doctor
said (We may suspect our selves not quite emerged out of the general Crime of
Idolatry, it had answered to the former expression viz. (We may suspect our
selves not quite emerged out of the general Apostasy of the Church:) but then,
by his leave, he had given just occasion to suspect that he himself was not
quite free from Idolatry.

Again, whereas he says [I do not speak of the English Church, of which I
profess my self a member,] what can be more ridiculous? The Question is,
touching what he spoke, lib. 5. cap. 17. sect. 7. of his Mystery. Now I demand:
Did he when he wrote that, profess himself a member of the English Church? if
he did not; though since then he finds it more for his ease and safety to
speak in a contrary strain, and mightily to extol this Church, what is this to
the purpose? If he did, let him prove it; for I have great reason to believe
otherwise. Besides it is not very probable that he professed himself a member
of that Church which to him appeared not, but was wholly out of sight, and
politically dead.

As vain is that which follows, viz. (that he speaks of such faults of the
Reformed Churches in general, whether common to them all or not, etc.) can any
faults be not common to all, that is, particular to some Reformed Churches; and
yet be the faults of the Reformed Churches in general?

To his pretense that the Church of England was then disappearing, I have
answered already; and shall reply farther, in his 6th Section. But whereas he
professes that his thoughts could not be fixed upon the English Church; I
expected he would have given her disappearance and dead condition, for one
reason: but that had spoiled his plot, as being inconsistent with that reason
which he annexes, viz. ( that the things he alleges, (namely the crimes
generally charged upon the Churches) are incompetible to her: as he has proved
in his vindication of her.) For herein he must suppose our Church to be then
extant: else how could any thing be said to be either incompetible or
competible to her, by any man who meant to speak intelligibly? Lastly, the
sport still is, that he refers us, not to his Mystery, which is the sole
subject of our controversy, but to his vindication published diverse years
since: might he not abuse her there, though he extols her here?

But now after all his shifting, I shall plainly prove that in the mentioned
place of his Mystery l. 5. c. 17. sect. 7. he understood also the Church of
England: and that by his own words precedent, and subsequent. First in the
close of the 6th Section of that Chapter, he says [Those divisions of Churches
which were made about an hundred years ago, and which immediately became the
Churches of this or that Polity; if those alterations then had been into a way
purely Apostolical, it had plainly been the enlivening of the witnesses, and
the calling of them into heaven many years before the expiration of the 1260.
days. Which is a strong presumption all is not yet right, and that the
witnesses are not yet alive, nor the Woman yet out of the wilderness.] Then
immediately follow those words of his 7th Section (Wherefore out of a due
humility and modesty suspecting our selves not to have emerged quite out of
this General Apostasy, etc.] I grant he may comprehend other Reformed
Churches, in those words (our selves) but the Church of England he necessarily
must include, if he speaks after the rate but of common sense especially
considering the time he premised of the divisions of the Churches of which he
discourses.

Secondly, to make all clearer yet, by his subsequent words in the 8th Section
of that 17th chapter [We will be prone enough to acknowledge this against
others, viz. in those dominions where Popery has so great a stroke: but it is
more to our advantage to examine also what is amiss at home: for it does not
follow that because the number of the Beast is not upon us, that we do not
bestianize; nor is it the purple spots, but the disease, that is mortiferous.]
What is amiss at home, surely cannot point at Churches abroad; at least so as
to exclude our own.

Sect 5. He grants he has said something wherein she may seem consequentially
concerned, viz. (his concluding from the highest Epoche of the 1260. years,
etc.) I have discovered enough wherein she is directly concerned: and therefore
mean not to trouble my self with tracing him in his Apocalyptick computes, to
examine what he calls a concernment consequential. Only the Reader may take
notice that the Doctor here in some measure grants, what hitherto he has
endeavored to Deny.

This Section he concludes thus [If I have been injurious either to the
Protestant Reformation in general, or to our English Church in particular; I
have, I think, made abundant amends in my Synopsis Prophetica (Pref. sect. 16.
17. 18. and Book 2. chap. 22. Sect 13.) to which I refer the Reader for fuller
satisfaction.] The Doctors conscience heaved fair, and would fain have made him
ingenuous: but that unlucky If, (if I have been injurious) blasted the Credit
of his acknowledgement: for I hope it appears by what I have said in these
Observations upon his Apology, that his If, might and ought to have been
spared. As for the abundant amends he boasts of; I easily believe he talks high
things of our Church now, and would not stick to be hyperbolical in her
encomium; for there is main reason for it: the wind is turned. But I must tell
him, that if he obstinately persists in defending all that he wrote in his
Mystery, (particularly, those things which these Objections point to) without
the least confession plain and direct, that he has said diverse things rashly
and falsely; his professions in his Synopsis (be they what they will) can
signify little to any sober men who are acquainted with his Mystery.

Sect. 6. In answer to that part of the Objection (The Reformers having
separated from the great Babylon, have built less and more tolerable ones, but
not to be tolerated for ever.) He brings upon the stage the whole Paragraph out
of which it was cited: (and which being prolix, and, God knows, little to his
purpose, I forbear to transcribe) after which he adds, [What ill construction
can be made of this Paragraph or any part of it, in reference to our English
Church, I must confess, I cannot easily divine: for the English Church was out
of fight, if not out of being, when I wrought this, that is to say, it was
politically dead.]

Though I have touched already upon this pitiful disingenuous evasion, in his
saying that [when he wrote this] (not, when he printed and published it) our
Church was out of sight: yet seeing he will needs offer it again, it is not
amiss to say something farther. It seems, had the English Church been in sight
when he wrote this, the ill construction made of it in reference to that Church
had been just: what condition therefore it was then in, let us now consider. I
suppose, in favor to the Doctor, that he wrote his Mystery during the time of
our Churches famous Persecution. If it were then persecuted, it was not quite
out of sight; and dead and gone: for no man persecutes that which there is no
hope to discover: the Persecutors saw their game, and reached it too; and that,
till the very year of his Majesty's Return. The Doctor cannot be ignorant that
the Church stood all that while established by law, and was therefore, by his
favor, not Politically dead, but alive. It was notorious also that the
Bishops, notwithstanding the flagrancy of the persecution against them, did
every one of them nobly stick to their profession: so did very many of the rest
of the Clergy; and thousands of the Nobility Gentry and Commons; choosing
rather to part with their Estates and Liberties, then with their Religion: in
which holy bravery they persisted, till Peace, together with his Majesty,
returned to the Church and Nation. It is true, the free exercise of their
Religion was violently overborn; Horses, Presbyterians, Independents, and such
like things having invaded and taken possession of the public Churches: yet
still it was well enough known, that the Religion was professed (and that with
more then ordinary zeal) in private Congregations; that the Churches daily
service was there solemnly used, and the Sacraments reverently administered:
still many were ordained by the Bishops: still the Fasts and Feasts of the
Church were observed by thousands: still some Proselytes, much moved by the
pious Constancy of our Confessors, were gained to our Religion; And had the
question been then asked, where is the Church of England? it might truly have
been answered, it was in England still, though unworthily and sadly oppressed:
had the Doctor then sought for it, or any else who had lost it, they might have
found part of it in the Tower, part in Newgate, part in Winchester-house, part
in Elyhouse, part in Peter-house, and other Prisons: to say nothing of several
constant Congregations in and about the City. Nay all the country over they
might have retrived parts of it, had they but inquired for Persons notorious
enough, I mean those whose profession of our Religion had exposed them to
tyrannous sequestrations and plunders. Yet because our Church (though still by
Law established, still maintained by so many religious Confessors) was
barbarously persecuted, Dr More could take no notice of any such thing as the
English Church: with what Church did he [who was then in Orders, and had
solemnly engaged himself to the Church of England) communicate all that while?
Not with ours, that is plain enough: though he be now, upon the reflouirshing
of it, fallen into a fit of magnifying it more (I believe) then ever they did
who suffered so much for it.

But he proceeds [For other Reformed Churches, which also are so laudably
repurgated from the grosser corruptions of the great Babylon; of what ill
interpretation can it be to exhort them to perfect the good work which is
begun, and more carefully to cleanse out of the old leaven, etc. for thus they
shall cease to be any longer so many lesser Babylons, cities of division and
confusion, and so clear up at length (according to the design of him that
called them out of that great Babylon) into one holy City of God.]

I profess not to meddle with other Reformed Churches: nor do I count the
Church of Englands case and theirs to be one and the same. Yet I cannot but
observe the weakness of this Apology: First, by Old leaven, he must needs
understand Popery; and this he supposes still to remain in those Churches. I
believe they will scarce thank him for his supposal; but rather give him flat
defiance for it. Secondly, He taxed those Churches for having built less
Babylons and more tolerable, but not to be tolerated for ever. What did they
Build, but the frames and constitutions of their Government and discipline?
These, says the Doctor, are little Babylons, and not to be tolerated for ever.
And yet he would have them perfect the good work they had begun, that is the
little Babylons: but were these good works? and must they be perfected? why,
this may make them great Babylons: the wiser course, sure, is to leave them
imperfect, and little as they now are. I, but his following words ( more
carefully to purge out the old leaven) argue that he would have whatsoever is
Babylonish, be purged out. Be it so: but then let him look how to reconcile
those words with them which precede, viz. (to perfect the good work they had
begun) for that work (as the Doctor has ordered the business) was, the
building of less Babylons; which work cannot be perfected, if all that is
Babylonish must be rooted up.

In his 7th Section, he goes on touching the Reformed Churches, presaging that
God [will not tolerate nor connive any longer at their childish squabling about
nutshels, counters and cherrystones.] These, if there be any dependence and
sense in his discourse, must be their little Babylons: so that his long
tragical Invectives were, upon the matter, made only against Boys-play. Mean
while those Churches are much beholding to the Doctor, who makes them a company
of silly coxcombs, whose most serious business (for such sure, is their
Reformation) amounts to no more then squabling about such childish toys and
trifles, as nutshels, counters and cherrystones.

His 8th Section he thus begins [I have, I hope, by this time abundantly
satisfied the 9th Objection, we come now to the tenth and last. It is well he
does not define, but only hope so. Whether his hopes fail him or not, I leave
to indifferent Judges; and follow to the 10th Objection, to which he replies in
this 9th Chapter. Object. 10. He says that the Laws of God, are like words in
an unknown tongue, till the conscience be convinced, lib. 10. cap. 10. as I
take it. Whence it necessarily follows, that it is no sin to act against those
Laws, if a man believe it lawful. Then those who thought they did God good
service in killing the Apostles, were no sinners in doing it.

(As I take it) said the Objector: which he would not have said, nor trusted
his memory, but reviewed the place and set it down positively, if he had
intended that his Objections as they were given to the Doctor should have been
published. What the Doctor has got by his publication of them he may thank
himself for. In the mean time, it so happens that the Objector charged him not
wrongfully in that particular: else he should have heard of it.

This, says the Doctor, [seems to be a smart and stinging Objection] and he
says so with scorn enough: for he presently adds [That it reaches not the
right state of the Question] A great fault, I grant, If true: the very fault
which I have so often detected in Dr Mores writings. To prove it therefore, he
cites that passage in his Mystery, whence the Objection is taken, and subjoyns
thus: [where it is plain that the most essential part of the state of the
question is omitted, by leaving out (in those that are sincere) and that
therefore the Objection, though very strong, yet cannot touch or harm any
position of ours by those formidable consequences, according as the question is
by me stated in this 10th chapter, both in respect of the person, and also in
respect of the matter of the command. Sect. 9 For I suppose the person sincere,
and what I mean by sincerity I have fully explicated under my first Aphorism,
and it is needless here again to repeat it. And for the matter of the command,
I suppose it to be such things as are not discoverable by the light of nature,
such as the belief of matter of fact done many ages ago, and Religious
precepts and ceremonies thereupon depending. But I have expressly declared in my
4th Aphorism extracted out of this 10th chapter, that nothing that has any
real turpitude or immorality in it, can justly be pretended to be the voice or
command of God, to either the sincere, or unsincere. Out of all which we are
abundantly furnished to answer this last Objection. I say therefore, that such
Laws of God as are merely positive, or depend upon historical or miraculous
Revelation, are like words in an unknown tongue to him that is truly sincere,
till his conscience be convinced. This I say, and this is all I have said in
that 10th Chapter.]

How his sincere person serves the Doctor for a subterfuge I have shown
already, and need not repeat it. And that what he affirms to be all that he
has said in that 10th chapter, is not all, I could easily evince, were it
requisite to the present point. But fully to gratify him, I will take into the
question both the person, and the matter of the command, which he desires; viz.
the sincere, and that which has turpitude and immorality in it: and then I
hope the formidable consequences mentioned in the Objection will touch the
Doctors position.

For the person; his Tenet is (which he repeats in his 10th Sect. of this 9th
chapter) [That the light and law of Nature and of eternal and immutable
morality cries louder in the soul of the sincere then that he should admit of
any such foul motions, much less as from God, or be ignorant of any
indispensable morality, as if it were not his command.] But what thinks he then
of S. Paul before his conversion? Was not he zealous and hearty in his Religon?
he says himself, Phil. 3.6. that he was touching Righteousness which is in the
law blameless; that is, according to the knowledge which he then had of
Religion, his deportment was so exact that it could not be taxed with any
wickedness. Whereupon he faith 1 Timothy 1. 13. that though he had been (a
blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; yet he obtained mercy, because he
did it ignorantly in unbelief) he did it not for want of sincerity and
uprightness of heart in his present persuasion but only for want of knowledge.
Well, and what was it he then did? one particular was persecution of the
faithful, and that to the death: Act. 22. 10. he confesses that he assented to
S. Stephens death: and doubtless he verily thought that herein he did God good
service; accounting S. Stephen an enemy to the true Religion. Yet this act of
his was a sin; for which (it being done ignorantly, notwithstanding the moral
law printed in his heart) he afterward obtained mercy. It appears then, that a
person most sincere in his way may in blind zeal run upon heinous sins, and
such as Dr More holds to be against the moral law; viz. (to use his own words,)
The killing of good men under pretense of heresy against the Iudaical
Religion. Now what can be the reason of such zeal, but because this sincere
Zelot counted that he obeyed Gods Will in this Action? It follows therefore,
That the Law of Nature cries not so loud in the sincere soul, but that such a
soul may sometimes admit such foul motions, and that, as proceeding from God.
This for the Person.

Now for the Matter of the Command, viz. Things not discoverable by the Light
of Nature; and these he supposes to be such as have no real Turpitude or
Immorality in them. For says he, Any thing that includes such Turpitude or
Immorality, cannot justly be counted the Command of God. Here I must reminde
him of the example of Abraham's being commanded to kill his innocent son. This
Act in the Doctors Opinion (for I have declared mine own about it already) was
against the Moral Law; and therefore by his Rule Abraham could not justly count
it the Command of God, but must have judged it a Trick of the subtle Tempter.
I may add, Gods commanding Israel to plunder and spoil the Egyptians, which was
against the 8th Commandment; as also his commanding them to invade the
Country, seize the Possessions, and destroy the lives of the Canaanites, who
never had done them injury. Would the Doctor have allowed the Israelites to
dispute these Commands; to object that they were against the general Law of
Nature, Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. and that therefore they included
Turpitude? I hope not. God is Lord of all things, and may do what he will with
his own; yea, even with his own Laws. He has not bound his own hands by
binding ours, and giving Laws to Nature; and if at any time he thinks fit to
countermand such Laws, his infinite Wisdom and Justice have sufficient reason
for so doing, whether man understands it or no. The Moral Turpitude of
violating the Law of Nature, is not imputable as such to any man who has
certainly received Gods Command to violate it; for whatsoever is Gods Command,
is by being so necessarily free from inferring any Turpitude, and most
undoubtedly Just and Right. So that though the Action examined by the standard
of the Moral Law common to all men, would include Turpitude, yet Gods
particular Law to the contrary does wholly justify it. (But then we must
always remember, that the Moral Law being his revealed known Will; it must be
our Rule till we assuredly have his Will revealed unto us to the contrary.) Now
I infer, ad hominem, I mean, as to Dr More, If God be above the Laws he has
made for us in general, and may in particular cases (for such only concern
this Querie) command contrary to those Laws; then does that contrariety not at
all prove such a Command not to be the Command of God. This for the Matter of
the Command.

And now having premised this, I will as I promised (that the Doctor may have
as fair play as himself can with) take into the Question his sincere Person;
and such Matter of the Command as is not discoverable by the Light of Nature,
viz. as himself terms it, The belief of matter of fact done many ages ago, and
Religious precepts and Ceremonies thereupon depending; and Laws merely
Positive, or such as depend upon History and miraculous Revelation, and not the
eternal Moral Law of God, (for these also are his phrases.) Nay, I will take in
whatsoever else he can desire me, provided it be but a Command of God derived
to the ears of the supposed sincere Man. His Position will then be this at
least, namely, [ That the Laws or Commands of God (such as are described, or
any else that are certainly his Laws and Commands) are to the sincere man like
words in an unknown tongue, till his Conscience be convinced.] And what has
the Doctor got by this new Model of his Position? for still the consequence
mentioned in the Objection will be good, viz. [That it is no sin in that
sincere man, to act against those Laws of God till his Conscience be
convinced.] And so will the result of that consequence added in the Objection
also, viz. [ That those men sinned not, who thought they did God good service
in killing the Apostles.]

For first, it appears by the example of St Paul, that those men might be
sincere and right-heartily zealous in their Religion 2. The Laws of Christian
Religion were in the Doctors sense Gods Positive Laws, for which those men
persecuted the Apostles; and which they themselves ought to have embraced,
having heard them from the Apostles. 3. Though they heard them, they were not
convinced in Conscience that they were Gods Laws, but quite the contrary; and
this appears in that they thought they did God good service in persecuting the
Apostles for them. 4. Being not convinced in Conscience that they were Gods
Laws; by the Doctors Principle those Laws were but like words in an unknown
tongue, and therefore obliged not these men to obey them. 5. If these men were
not obliged to obey them, then they sinned not in disobeying and resisting
them; nor in persecuting the Apostles to the death, for asserting those Laws
against the Jewish Religion, which they were in Conscience persuaded to be of
God; and for the defense of which their Religion, they were likewise persuaded
in Conscience, that this their persecuting them, was doing of God good service.

But the Doctor tells us also, [That invincible ignorance makes an Act
involuntary, and that therefore there is no inconvenience to admit, that the
transgression or non-observance of these kind of Laws in him that is thus
invincibly ignorant and unconvicted of them, (as we suppose the truly sincere
to be) has not the proper nature of sin in the sincere, though in the
unsincere it may. This non-reception of Truth or Inconviction may be Trial,
Punishment, or fatal Defect; but the nature of sin it properly has not, as
being wholly and perfectly involuntary, and absolutely out of the reach of the
party to help it. For the nature of sincerity is to do all we can, and no man
can do any more. Whence I will easily admit, That it is no sin to act against,
that is, to transgress or not observe such Positive Laws of God, while a man
stands unconvinced in such circumstances as I have described, firmly believing
that it is lawful for him not to observe them, and being fully persuaded that
they are not his.

First, Is it not pretty sport, that he makes the transgression of Gods
Positive Laws to be sin in the unsincere persons, but no sin in the sincere? I
have heard of an Opinion, that God sees no sin in his Children, and I have
often wondered at it; but this fancy of the Doctor goes much higher: God not
only does not, but cannot see sin in them, for there is none in them to be
seen; that which is sin in others, being no such thing in them.

Secondly, He says, That non-reception of Truth in the sincere (which is
indeed, as himself is forced to confess, the transgression of Gods Positive
Laws) may be Trial, Punishment or fatal Defect.

1. For Trial, Can any sober man believe that God would make that a trial of
his faithful sincere Servant, which puts him necessarily upon resisting Truth,
and not believing but transgressing his own Laws? This the Doctor holds that
God does by conveying into that person a false persuasion. But if he narrowly
examineth the business, he will find that this cannot possibly be any trial of
such a man's Obedience, more then conveying a true persuasion would be; so that
he makes God the Author of falsity merely gratis. Besides, this trial which
the Doctor supposes, is in truth no trial at all; for is any man's Obedience to
God tried by his non-reception of Gods Truth! gerrae.

2. For Punishment, It is very strange, nay down right incredible that God
should punish his sincere and excellent Servant (for such the Doctor makes
him,) who does all he can to know the Truth, by putting him in such a condition
through false persuasion that he cannot receive the Truth; and this that God
who has promised that they who ask, seek, and knock, (that is, do what they
can) shall not do it in vain.

3. For fatal Defect, what means the Doctor by this! Is his fate any thing
different from Gods Providence? if not, why does he make this a distinct branch
from Gods proceedings with men? but if it be, he may in Mahomets School find
patronage for it, but not in Christ's.

Touching the invincible ignorance in his sincere man, what could more vainly
have been pretended? for in the close of the words I last cited out of the
Doctor, he represents this man as one who firmly believes that it is lawful
for him not to observe such or such Positive Laws of God; and is fully
persuaded that they are not his. If he so believes, and be fully so persuaded,
it is certain that those Laws came to his knowledge; for he cannot believe or
be persuaded touching any thing of which he is wholly ignorant. All the
Question that remains is, Whether these Laws which he now hears and knows be
Gods Laws or no? And what hinders him from believing them so to be if he has a
mind? What invincible Obstacle stands in his way? Not fate, I trow; nor any
perverseness of his own, for he is supposed to be sincere, and to do all that
he can for embracing the Truth; which Truth is now before him, and ready for
his acceptance. I cannot imagine what the Doctor can here reply, but that God
himself interposeth by an irresistible false persuasion in that man's soul, and
thereby bars out his own Laws which stand ready at that souls door, else the
man's ignorance was plainly vincible. Now if God thus interposeth, (which no
Christian ears will hear without horror) I have no more to say.

The Doctor adds, [It is not the firmness of our conviction or inconviction,
that will warrant an act from becoming sinful, but the perfect sincerity of
the party; in that this conviction to what is false, or inconviction to what is
true, arises not from any fault of his, but is invincible ignorance, and in
such things as the most exquisite morality of mind cannot arrive to the
knowledge of.]

Here he very fairly overturns his own foundation. His Principle was, [That
nothing but conviction of Conscience that this or that is the Will of God, is
properly the promulgation of his Will to every particular soul; otherwise it is
but as the recital of a Law in a language the people understand not, and
therefore can take no hold upon them.] They are his own words, and those which
occasioned this 10th Objection. Now the proper promulgation of Gods Will, does
certainly warrant an Act from becoming sinful. But this promulgation is, says
the Doctor, nothing but conviction of Conscience; wherefore nothing but
conviction of Conscience warrants an Act from becoming sinful. And what is
this but point blank contrary to his present Affirmation, [ That that which
will warrant an Act from becoming sinful, is not the firmness of our
Conviction.]

The only warrant he will allow, is the perfect sincerity of the Party. I had
thought, that Gods Law it self had been both the Rule and warrant in this case.
But that Rule and warrant, the godly Doctor makes no bones to slight and throw
aside. But what reason gives he why that sincerity must be the warrant? namely,
because [ This conviction to what is false or inconviction to what is true,
arises not from any fault of his, but is invincible ignorance, and in such
things as the most exquisite morality of mind cannot arrive to the knowledge
of.] Touching that fond pretense of invincible ignorance, I have said enough
already. But were that ignorance really such, and truly invincible, and in
those things which the most exquisite morality of mind cannot arrive to know;
I see not how it concerns the present Controversy, for the Question is not
touching such Commands of God as never come to the sincere man's ears; but such
as though he hears them (and thereby knows them) yet he believes them not (as
the Doctor states the case) to be Gods Commands. If he would use all exquisite
moral diligence, he might find cause to believe them; but because he hearkens
rather to a contrary persuasion in his own mind, therefore he believes them
not.

But after all this, I must mind the Doctor that in his Reason for his 4th
Aphorism, chap. 7. sect. 2. He says expressly, That the souls being convinced
that this or that is Gods Command, is as it were the Kings Broad Seal, by which
she is warranted to act. How will this consist with his Affirmation here, That
it is not conviction or inconviction that will warrant an Act from becoming
sinful? If conviction be the warrant by which she may Act, inconviction also
is the warrant by which she must refuse to Act. Nor can this warranty proceed
(as here he says it does) from the perfect sincerity of the party. But as I
have already often observed, contradictions are in this Doctors Writings so
frequent, that I am past wondering at them.

He concludes thus, [This (namely what I last cited out of him) is the true
state of the Question, from which therefore the killing of the Apostles can
fetch no excuse, for it is impossible that one of so sincere a heart and
moralized mind as I suppose in this Controversy, should be invincibly
ignorant, that to kill such holy and harmless men as the Apostles would be
Murder, or something extremely like it; and for those that are unsincere and
immoral, sin always lies at their own door. And this I hope will fully
satisfy this last Objection.] Plaudite, Murder or something extremely like it?
How comes the Doctor so kind to the not invincibly ignorant slayers of the
Apostles, as to allow them this disjunction? surely it was down right murder,
and not something extremely like it.

But the Question was, [ Whether the Laws of God are like words in an unknown
tongue, till the Conscience be convinced, and that in a person sincere.] Here
he makes the true state of the Question to be [ Not that the firmness of
conviction or inconviction will warrant an Act from being sinful, but the
perfect sincerity of the party.] Whether this be not a palpable varying of the
Question let any man judge. Let us see therefore, Whether the killing of the
Apostles may not fetch an excuse from that which is indeed the Question, or
rather from the Doctors Position which is the ground of that Question.

First, Those who killed the Apostles might be (as St Paul was before his
Conversion) sincere in the Jewish Religion. Secondly, If they were in
Conscience persuaded of the truth of their Religion in opposition to the
Christian, (as the Doctor upon his own Principles cannot deny but they might
be,) then they believed in their Conscience, that the Apostles were not holy
and harmless men, but deceivers, opposers of Gods true Religion, and
introducers of a false one. Thirdly, if they so believed, they did not count it
murder but justice to kill the Apostles; or (as the Text says) they counted
they did God good service by it. Now for their excuse or rather justification,
I produce the Doctors Position, [ That in sincere men, Gods Laws are like an
unknown language, till their Conscience be convinced.] What will the Doctor
object against them? any Law of God which forbade them to kill the Apostles?
but they were not convinced that such Law was the Law of God: their Conscience
told them the contrary, namely, that they fulfilled Gods Will, and did him
grateful service in killing them. Will he reply, That this error of theirs
was not invincible ignorance, but such as by true sincerity they might have
helped, and that therefore they sinned? This will not serve, for how if that
error were conveyed into them by God for trial or punishment, and obliged them
to act accordingly? that so it might be, the Doctor upon his own premised
Principles must not deny; and if so, then no sincerity could withstand that
effect. Or will he pretend, That they ought to have believed Gods Will preached
to them by the Apostles, his true commissioners for that purpose? This will not
do neither, for their Conscience being not convinced that what the Apostles
preached was Gods Will or Law, it was (to use his own words) but like an
unknown language, and therefore could take no hold upon them.

In his 10th Chapter the Doctor looks back upon his Atchievments, surveys his
Conquest, and counts his Spoils; particularly magnifying himself in his
reflection upon the sheer Baffle he has given to each Objection. Then (as a
wondrous pertinent Close to his Apology for himself) he falls upon a huge
Expostulation with the Sectaries, who yet need not desire any better weapons
for their own defense, then he has furnished them with in his Mystery. If the
Reader will follow him in that his glorious March, he will show as much
patience in so doing, as I profess indignation in forbearing.

FINIS.

