To the HONORABLE the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament.
PROPOSALS Humbly Offered to Raise Five Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum, to
make Good the Adulterated and Defaced COIN of this Kingdom, without hurting the
Subject; by drawing it from all parts of the Kingdom, Dominion of Wales, etc.
which will not only be a great Convenience to all manner of Traders, Gentlemen,
and others, but also mightily Propagate and Increase Dealings of all kinds.

This, I humbly conceive, may be done, without great Difficulty, by taking the
Methods following: And I hope to Answer, rationally, all the Objections which
may be Offered against it. The Proposals take as follow: (Viz.)

WERE there Four Grand Chambers of Accounts Erected in London, Imprimis.
(being the Metropolitan City of the Kingdom) to answer all Counties in
England, Wales, etc. and those nominated the Principal or Grand Chambers of
each County, or Division; and let them have power to fix a Petty Chamber in
every Post-Town, or Town of Trade, throughout the Kingdom, etc. Providing for
every Principal, or Grand Chamber, a Different Stamp, with Numbers, to be kept
with every Petty Chamber, so fixed as aforesaid: And let all Gentlemen,
Carriers, Chapmen, and Hagglers, be strictly Prohibited from Traveling with
any Sum or Sums of Money (more than to Defray their Traveling Charges:) But so
often as occasion offers, let each, and every Person, pay such greater Sums of
Money into any of the Chambers, from whence it may be Remitted to any place, as
desired, with as great Expedition as the General Post can reach it: The party
having his Money so Remitted, paying for the same Three Pence per Pound, or
something more or less, according to the distance of place from whence it shall
be so Remitted.

Secondly, IT is supposed (by common Computation) there are Six Millions of
people in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, etc. (which if so) they
cannot subsist, one with another, for less Charge, in Meat, Drink, and Apparel,
than Seven Pounds per Annum each person, which amounts to Forty Two Millions
Yearly expended in the way of Trade and Commerce, which at Three Pence per
Pound, Annually paid for such Returns, or Transmittances of Money, as
aforesaid, amounts to the Sum of Five Hundred Twenty Five Thousand Pounds per
Annum, besides the large Sums that are expended in a Year for Household Goods,
Plate, Jewels, etc.

Thirdly, SUPPOSE a Merchant, or any other Trader, or Dealer, sells his Goods,
Cattle, or Wares, in any part of the Kingdom, etc. receiving his Moneys for the
same, being the Sum of a Thousand Pounds, more or less, he or they paying such
Sum or Sums into the Chamber next adjoining, may have it remitted to any part,
without running any Hazard, paying into the said Chamber for the same, the Rate
of Three Pence per Pound, more or less, according to the distance of place from
the said Chamber; and upon payment of his Moneys into the said Chamber, he
shall receive a Bill of Return indented; the Office or Chamber filing another
of the same Date; and a third so agreeing with the two former, shall be sent to
the place where he intends to receive his Moneys, with advice to pay the same
to the said party, or his order, upon sight of the parties Bill so mentioned,
making such payment in good Current Coin of England; and upon payment thereof,
to give his Receipt, indorsed upon the said Bill, for so much Moneys, as the
said Bill expresses to be due; by which means every Petty Chamber may be able
to adjust his Accounts with the Grand Chambers of London, as often as they
shall be required to do the same.

Fourthly, AS to the Furnishing the said Chambers with Cash sufficient to
answer such Ends, I presume the Moneys Collected for the King's Tax; The
Excise, and other Moneys already Charged, and to be Charged, by Act of
Parliament, with Moneys payable for all manner of Goods or Commodities through
the Kingdom in parts remote, being paid into the said Chambers, in each Town or
County, as aforesaid, in order to be Remitted to other parts of the Kingdom;
may (as I humbly conceive) answer the ENDS Proposed with all Objections that
shall be made against it.

Fifthly, WHEREAS it is thought the Mint cannot Coin above Twenty Thousand
pounds per Week, there will be some Years before the Cash of the Kingdom, etc.
can be Re-Coined: NOW I conceive, that Forty Thousand pounds will be sufficient
Fund to begin this Undertaking; each Chamber in London, signifying to their
several petty Chambers throughout the Kingdom, etc. to send up to London all
the Large Moneys they can pick out of their Cash, in order to have it
Exchanged, at the Mint, for MIL'D MONEY: So that the Mint may by kept in Full
Employ of Coining; and New Money from time to time shall be Transmitted back,
or otherwise paid to the Proprietors, (of the Old) where they shall desire it;
which will make the first Years Coinage to sustain no great Loss; The second
Year not much more, and the Third not much greater than the precedent: So that
the Profits in the Stock of this Bank will not much lesson the first year;
possibly something more the second, and not much more the third: From whence I
Conclude, There may be a sufficient Fund to Answer the Loss of all the abused
Cash; which I take to be little less than Two Millions.

Sixthly, FROM all which, I humbly conceive, That by this Method (in a
reasonable time) the Cash of this Kingdom may be wholly Re-Coined, Trade, and
Commerce highly advanced; Gentlemen's Estates much improved, besides the
Convenience of having their Rents safely and quickly Transmitted them, to any
part of the Kingdom remote; the great loss of many by High-Way-Men totally
prevented; the Post Office much advanced (and many more accrewing Benefits and
Advantages to the Government, and Subject, produced) than can, at present, be
seen into, and too large here to Enumerate: And supposing the Mint shall be
able to Coin Forty thousand pounds per Diem, Care may be taken to supply the
Mint with old moneys, or Bullion (that if possibly so much can be Coined in the
time) all may be Completed in a Year, or two, at the furthest; from the time,
Offices or Chambers of Accounts, shall be so fixed as aforesaid.

NOW rationally to prove the same in every part, and to make the whole Matter
more plain and easy to be Understood, (by the meanest Capacities of all
Traders, and Dealers of what kind soever, who will be Accomodated in such
manner, as is before proposed) I shall endeavor to demonstrate how the same
may be done with ease, as may be observed by the Methods following, viz.

1 st. SUPPOSE the Four Grand-Chambers so Erected in London, be substituted for
Four Divisions, viz. East, West, North, and South; and so Dividing the Post and
Market Towns into four Divisions, throughout the Kingdom of England and Wales
etc. placing Clerks in each Chamber of London, Distinctly for each County; each
County having a Different Seal, and the Clerks of the Post, and Market Towns of
the same County, having like Seals with the Clerks of the same County in the
Grand Chambers of London, to be kept by them, with Numbers in their Books, of
All Returns, from Place to Place, with the Indentures. I suppose it may make it
easy to be Adjusted on all sides: And the Directors of the Grand-Chambers in
London, may, with ease, Inspect All the Returns which shall be made by the
Country Chambers.

2 dly. I Presume no Person Questions the Numbers of Souls supposed to be in
England, Wales, etc. but rather that they may be more, taking Infants to be
included in the same: All which, help in the Consumption of Goods, that shall
be bought and sold, and Transferred from place to place, throughout the Kingdom.

3 dly, and 4 dly. ALL Dealers in any Town, Carriers, Haglers, etc. are to be
Prohibited Traveling the Road, For if any person shall adventure to Travel
with Sums, of Money, after having such Conveniences provided for their so Safe
and Easy ways of Remittances; I Judge the Countryought not to be Liable to make
good their Mome^^s Lost by Robberies after such Bold and Daring adventures.
with Money more than will defray their Traveling Charges, as I intimated in my
first Paragraph, except such petty Chapmen, who shall Travel the Country thirty
or forty Miles, round, in order to buy up Goods, as Wool, etc. buying two or
Three Todd in one place, and three or four in another, where they can meet with
them: For it is not to be imagined, such Chapmen as these shall have their
Moneys remitted, by reason of the great uncertainty in what place they shall
buy their Goods: But my meaning is, That such Persons, who bring their Goods to
a Certain Town or Market, selling them for considerable Sums; and such Persons,
who shall carry their moneys to a Market or Fair to Buy with. (As for Example)
A Person living at Exeter, or any other place, hearing of a parcel of Wool to
be sold at Northampton, or any other place Cross the Country, though far
remote; The said Party, paying the moneys, he intends to lay out, into the
Chamber of the Town aforesaid, the Clerk of that Chamber, sending up the
Advice-Indenture, to the proper Clark of the said County, He shall Remit the
moneys to the Chamber of the said Town, with as much Expedition, as the Post
can make: And in like manner, may all Gentlemen's Rents, or moneys for Portions,
and Purchases be Transmitted throughout the Kingdom.

AND what shall be wanting in the Country Chambers, let care be taken by the
Chief Chambers in London to send down, with all imaginable speed, and so having
a due Correspondence each with the other, they may easily perceive what stock
each, and every Chamber in the Country has by them; so that by returning New
Moneys for Old, My meaning is, that all the Cash in General shall be Exchanged
for New, excepting such as shall appear to be Brass or Copper, being the
Profits arising from the Chambers will hear it, for should it be otherwise
Managed, it may prove a Fatal consequence, in almost Starving (if not entirely
Undoing) a great Number of Poor Families throughout the Kingdom; and it may
prove a cause of great Desorders, the greatest part of the Coin now going
abroad, is so generally Bad.
they may keep an exact Balance on all occasions, in all places, and at all
times throughout the Kingdom, during the time our Old Money shall be
Re-Coining, or longer, if it shall be so approved on, and thought requisite, by
which means each Town may have a Bank of money by them, which, (as I conceive)
will be no small Increase of Riches throughout the Kingdom, causing all
Manufactories to flourish much more than hitherto they have done, the failure
of which is thought to be for want of moneys among them, which has occasioned
many Country People to try their Fortunes in London, where money is more
plenty, which has much depopulated the Country, thereby damnifying very much
both Gentlemen's Estates, and done great injury to all manufacturies.

FURTHER, There are several Principal Towns and places of Trade, as Exeter,
Norwich, Colchester, Hull, Leeds, etc. wherein the Goods are bought by the
Inhabitants of the said places, and there vended, which moneys, with the Kings
Revenues, being paid into the Bank of the said places, must inevitably be
equivolent to the manufuctures made in the said Towns, and vended elsewhere:
For suppose each of those do vend and make great quantities of Woollen
manufacturies, being the Staple Commodities of the Kingdom, the more they make
the better, being the greater number of People must be employed therein: And we
find by experience, That by the Wisdom and Providence of God, Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Shopkeepers, Merchants, etc. are so promiscuously inter mixed in
Towns and Villages among Handicrafts, being subservient one to another, as
different members of one and the same body; and supposing there are Twenty or
Thirty Thousand Souls in each Town or place: These must all be Fed and
Clothed, with all things according to their several Ranks and Qualities, and,
by consequence, must Trade in Linen, Woollen, Silk, etc, and in all Grocery
Wares, Wine, Oil, Tobacco, Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, Glass, etc. and in all
sorts of Grain, Cattle, Fruits, Dies, and Druggs, without which, no place can
well subsist. Now let the Traders of the said Towns, and Villages nigh
adjacent, pay into the Banks of the said places, all the moneys they shall
receive for the Goods vended by them: The prime cost of all such Goods
consumed, together with the Money Collected for Excise, the Land Tax and
Customs being paid into the next Chamber, or Bank, in or nigh the place, must
make a sufficient Fund of Moneys in all the Banks of each County, Town, or
City, to answer all Goods and Manufactories that shall come out of the
Countries, being the prime Cost of materials are allowed for: But if any
Merchant or Dealer suppose the Manufactures made in the Countries, and sent
abroad, are of greater value than the prime Cost of Goods, that are bought and
consumed in the Countries; I beg to know how it happens, That such Town or
Country has not gained the greatest part of the Kingdoms Wealth; which, if any
person satisfies me in, I shall look upon all my pains, and serious thoughts,
about this Project, to be vain imaginations, and shall desist further to urge
it.

AND further, I conceive it will be the interest of all Country Gentlemen and
Traders, to lodge what Moneys they can spare from their immediate occasions in
such Chambers of Strength and Security, so set apart by the Chief Burghers of
each Town, where it may remain, in order to have it Exchanged in its turn for
New, with their security for the same, to be forth coming upon demand: And so
soon as the KING's Money shall be paid into any of the said Chambers in the
Country, Which will occasion the Paying in of the Kings Revenues into the
Exchequer with more Expedition by the Sub-Collectors, being the first Charge
laid upon the Moneys given His Majesty, which will save the Government 100000
l. per Annum. so much more being now paid for Collection; going through so many
Hands.
it may be drawn off here from the Chief Chambers in London, at the pleasure of
the Lords of the Treasury. I have been the more prolix, in order to explain,
and rationally to prove my Propositions laid down in the Third and Fourth
Paragraph, which I hope will be rightly understood.

5thly. WHEREAS, at the Common rate of Coinage, it may be some Years before All
the abused Cash of the Kingdom may be Re-Coined; It makes me suppose, that
Forty thousand pounds will be a sufficient Fund to carry on this Work: But if
this Honorable House thinks fit to have it done with more speed, it will be a
sufficient Fund (for a Credit) to carry on the Work more expeditiously; which I
humbly conceive, will be more for the Interest of the Kingdom, being the longer
it shall be Re-Coining, the more it will be Clipped and Adulterated.

6thly. I humbly conceive it may be highly improved, in like manner as the
Post Office has been since the first Establishment thereof, which will conduce
much to the good of Trade, both in City and Country: For if A. B. or. C. suffer
for not having Returns of Money, according to expectation or desire, certainly
the greater part of the Alphabet must sensibly Feel it one way or other: But
this Method being taken, It must, by consequence, lessen the Interest of money,
highly advance Lands, increase in incom of the General Post Office, I presume
by modest Computation, it will add a Third part more to the Incomes of the same.
and preserve many Men's Lives, who frequently Suffer by the Hands of Justice,
having so many opportunities of Clipping, and Committing Robberies; which has
much lessoned the Number of People in this Kingdom, who might have been useful
to the Government, and more especially during this time of War.

Lastly, This I humbly conceive (if approved on by His Majesty, and the
Honorable Houses of Parliament) may be worth Five hundred thousand pounds, per
Annum. or more, without hurting the Subject (as I have set forth in the
Preamble) paying no more for their Returns of Money, than they commonly now do
upon occasion of such Returns by Carriers, or otherwise. Therefore, the Terms
in my Propositions being so easy (and the Service of so great value) I hope no
Man can rationally Grudge, at, (obtaining so great a Benefit by it, For I
clearly conceive, both City and Country will Improve and Encourage such an
Establishment, as shall make Moneys Circulate upon all Occasions to their great
advantage.
in) having their Moneys made full Weight, and Current, without any scruple, etc.

AND seeing the Bank of England has been Approved of by the Nation in general,
I would not propose the Setting up of these Chambers in every City or Market
Town, could I imagine it any way prejudicial to so worthy an Undertaking: But
these being only intended for making Good the Adulterated and Abused Coin of
the Kingdom, by observing such Methods as I have before laid down; I cannot
perceive wherein they can any way Prejudice that Great Bank. This will be a
certain Fund for Credit, and not a Bank of Credit, as the Bank of England is;
from which I humbly conceive it will in no wife disoblige those Gentlemen
concerned in that Bank already Established: For I really Imagine (that should
not this Honorable House approve of my Proposals herein) yet my Labor will
not be lost in furthering the Advantages of that so well Methodiz'd Bank.
And this being Proposed for the Public Good, I hope it will not be Postpon'd,
but rather meet with that Encouragement from the Government, as may render it
Useful for the Matter intended; which will not only be a Great Benefit, but
also a Great Honor to the Kingdom, in having it is Coin such as may be Taken
without Exceptions, These are my present Thoughts about the Matter, which I
hope may be Heartily Received, to my Encouragement, for the Great Pains I have
taken about it; which, if it so happen, I shall PROPOSE another Method for
Raising Ten Hundred Thousand Pounds worth of Bullion, which shall be Affected
in as little time, as the Chambers can be fixed: Which Bullion may be Converted
into Coin for His Majesty's present Occasion, and the Profits arising by those
Chambers may be sufficient to carry on the Work of Re-Coyning the Abused Cash
of the Kingdom.
So that the WORK may be carried on with Ease and Expedition. And I hope the
Objections that may be raised against my Proposals, are so Rationally Answered,
as with Ease to be understood; relating to the Re-Coining of the Cash; the
Advance of Trade; the Improvement of Estates; the safe and quick Transmittances
of Rents; and the Benefit accrewing to the Post Office, etc. (In which, if I am
mistaken) I humbly submit to the Great Wisdom of this Honorable House, to
Pardon me herein; and to Accept of my Sincere, though weak Endeavors (for the
Public Good) and beg leave to Subscribe

Your HONORS most Humble and most Submissive Servant, Daniel Beeckman.

England, including Wales, divided into Four equal parts, (viz.) Northern,
Midland, Southern, and Western.
THE NORTHERN to be Northumberland, Bish. of Durham, Cumberland, Westmoreland,
Lancashire, Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and
Staffordshire.

THE MIDLAND to be, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire,
Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Middlesex,
Huntingtonshire, Cambridgeshire, Hartfordshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex.

THE SOUTHERN to be Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Southamptonshire, including the Isle
of Weight, Guernsey and Jersey, Wiltshire, Barkshire, Dorsetshire,
Sommersetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall.

THE WESTERN to be Wales, Monmouthshire, Herefordshire, Gloucestershire,
Shropshire, and Cheshire.

December the 12th. Numb. (1.)
1695.
DEbtor, Check
entrusted to my Care, A. B. Clerk of the Chamber of Exon. 1000 I. by C. D.
Clothier of the same Town, Do no wrong to any Man.
to be paid in London, on sight of the Party's Bill, matching with the
Advice-Indenture sent you.

December the 12th. Numb. (1.)
1695.
REceived then of C. D. of Exon. Clothier, the Sum of 1000. l. with Poundage
for the Return, made payable by you E. F. Clerk of the said County, in London,
drawn by me, Debtor to you for the same; as Witness my Hand and Seal, the day
and year first abovewritten,

A. B.

Nam Yna ot Gnorw on od.
THis Advice-Indenture, Numb. (1.)
shows the Check of a Bill drawn by me A. B. December the 12 th. 1695. for
1000. l. to be paid by you E. F. agreeing with Number and Check, and place your
self Creditor to me for the same.

Do no Wrong to any Man. The WORD, etc. 1. IN the main Design of my Proposals
no difficulties attend them, for it will be a great Ease to persons Traveling
the Road, to forbear carrying Sums of Money along with them, when they may
carry a Bill, which will procure them what Sums they desire to receive in any
part of the Kingdom.

2. AND if this Honorable House will be pleased to Prohibit the Exportation of
all manner of Bullion, and set a price thereon, putting a stop to its further
rise, during the time of Coinage, the work may begin, and Five Shillings worth
of Silver may be put in a Crown-piece; and so proportionable in lesser pieces,
allowing only for Coinage as is usual.

By which means will be made plain Two Mysteries.

First, THE reason why Gold and Silver have risen so high.

Secondly, THE cause of Bullion being so scarce.

AS to the First: All Goldsmiths and Refiners will be Obliged thereby, to send
their Silver Bullion to the Mint, in order to have it Coined, as of late they
have done their Gold, which should they not do, it will not be worth their time
to give the full rate so set, as those Chambers of Accounts may for the Nations
Benefit.

AS to the Second: If the said Goldsmiths and Refiners shall omit sending their
Bullion to the Mint, as aforesaid, then it will plainly appear, they send to
Foreign Parts to buy up Gold, thereby to make an extraordinary Profit, which
may in some time much lessen the Stock and Wealth of the Kingdom, being the
Bullion, or Coin in silver, so exported, exceeds the worth of Gold imported;
which I take to be the cause why Guineas have risen to so great a Value, and
the reason of such scarcity of silver.

BUT Persons may Object, should the Exportation of Bullion be Prohiited, how
shall the Army abroad be paid, during the present War, being be soldiers must
have silver either in Bullion or Coin, without which they cannot subsist.

Ans. With all humble submission to this Honorable House:

I conceive the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, etc. are blessed with as
many useful and staple Commodities, as are in any parts of the world, ( viz.)
Wool, Lead, Tin, Leather, Shoes, Boots, Stockings, and many more, too large to
enumerate: And being neither Bullion nor Coin can be eat, drank, or wore, why
should these Commodities he sent abroad? I presume, the Army may be maintained
with considerable Advantage to the Nation, if duly weighed and inspected into,
increasing a great Trade, and benefit to our Handicrafts of all sorts, and
thereby keeping them in full employ, which would lessen the price of all such
goods in general.

AND should so many Goods be bought up as would amount to the Sum fixed on by
this Honorable House, for the maintenance of the Army abroad, they may procure
a Credit in Holland, or Flanders, or in any City, or great Town in those parts,
where such Goods shall be consumed, being bought here at much easier rates,
than they can be afforded at in those parts.

FOR I find by Bills of Entry in the Custom-House, That great Quantities of
such Goods are sent to Holland, and other parts adjoining, which must either by
consumed in those places, to which they are consigned, or else they are sent
from thence to other parts remote.

THEREFORE, should Factors be employed in England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. to
Buy up such Goods: And likewise Factors placed in Holland, Flanders, etc. to
whom they should be consigned for the KING's use, they may be sold with
advantage, to raise Moneys sufficient to pay the Army in those parts.

AND should not the said Factors be able to vend so many, as to supply the
KING's occasions in paying his Army, yet the said Goods may be a sufficient
Fund to borrow Moneys on, either from the States of Holland, or from the
Burghers of Cities or great Towns in those parts, at Three Pounds per Cent.
which Moneys so borrowed may be re-paid as often as such Goods shall be vended.

NOW supposing the Kingdom pays but Eight Pounds per Cent. in the return of
Coin, by this means Five Pounds per Cent. will be saved to the Nation, should
such Goods be sold only for the prime Cost, which will cause a great
Consumption of our Commodities, and keep our Coin and Bullion at Home; and it
may highly discourage the common Enemy, when it shall appear we make an
Advantage in Trade by the War, in vending our Commodities, and preventing the
Exportation of our Coin and Bullion.

AND when the Re-Coining of the Moneys shall be completed, Bullion may be
permitted to rise and fall, as at other times, not exceeding the Money Coined,
by which means it will prevent the melting down of Cash by Workmen, and the
Exporting it into other Nations; which will lower the Interest of Moneys more
effectually, than any Bank whatsoever can do.

NOW my Proposals being no further intended than for the Service and Benefit of
the Kingdom in general, by a Method of raising 500000 l. per Annum, without
laying a Tax upon the Subject, and procuring them ready Moneys to be paid upon
all occasions in any part of the Kingdom: As also the saving of Moneys in
returning the KING's Tax; and by how much ready Money in all Payments will be
better and fairer in Dealings, I humbly submit the consideration thereof to the
great Wisdom of this Honorable House, who may Order the KING's Money to be
paid in such Methods as before Proposed, which (as I humbly conceive) may
Answer such Good Ends.

These Proposals I intended to have presented to the last Session of
Parliament, but could not complete them before the Prorogation.

FINIS.

