THE Revelation OF GOD and his GLORY SOUNDED FORTH For the opening the Mystery
of the Seven SEALS, on the Book of the WONDERS of GOD in the hand of the ANGEL.

BEING A True and Faithful TESTIMONY Of the Enochian Prophecy Of the Rise and
Fall of ANTICHRIST, And of the Restoration of ZION to its Primitive Glory.

London, Printed in the year 1665.

The EPISTLE To the READER.
I.
LEt the Impartial Reader seriously weigh what is herein set down, and rashly
pass no Sentence on a Work of this concernment; neither scruple at the Form and
Method in which it is come forth to the view of all sorts of Spirits, wherein I
cannot expect so kind entertainment, in matters of such nature, as to have all
Men speak well of it, or of me therein, because then had I my Reward with men.

II.
For my whole and sole aim and intention in this work (as far forth as I know,
and am made sensible of my own frame and temper of Spirit) is and has been
other ways grounded and founded in Truth, than to seek other Honor and Glory
than what is of, and comes from GOD; wherein I have a Witness both in Heaven
and Earth, which I might call to bear Record with and for me, that I
considerately love not vain ostentation, or to boast over the Weak, by soaring
aloft out of the reach of their Capacities, that something else than the Spirit
of GOD should be exalted in the Temple and Throne of Gods DIGNITY.

III.
Because then might I expect that God should glory over me, in the WORK of
DESTRUCTION: Though I know in the following Treatise much is come forth in an
unpleasant form and dress, to the curious search of some that may count
themselves wise; and it will be accounted (at the first sight thereof) rather
FORM and SHADOW then SUBSTANCE; and many will be ready to judge the truth of
its Concern locked up in SIMILITUDES, and sealed in an unknown Tongue, in that
through good Experience of the Enemies Work, I am taught not to be too prodigal
in opening Terms, wherein some have suffered and come to a loss, by such means,
and the Truth it self is thereby made of low esteem in the EYES of many proud
and haughty Ones.

IV.
Therefore have I employed my Endeavors (under the workings and motions of the
Spirit of God, wherein many Mysteries of truth pertaining to the Establishment
of his Kingdom, have been revealed in and unto me) that I might leave no room
for contention, to feed the snarling nature of those dogged qualities in such
that are gone out of the patience and content of God, where the Charity of Life
is abounding, wherein Covenant is kept with the LORD, in that Spirit which
particularly opens and reveals the Mysteries of Truth, in all to whom it
pertains to know the same.

V.
And though such that hunger after Advantages (in that SWINE-like Nature, which
is ready to return again, and rend those that cast their Pearls before them)
are in the nature of the Harlot, who is not to be fed with the portion of a
true Matron, neither is Childrens Bread to be cast before them, in that
adulterating spirit (which opens the Quiver out of which the Darts of Disdain
are sent forth, do fly abroad) and yet shall not the Truths of God always
continue clouded or obscured in silence, as a Treasure hid in the EARTH.

VI.
But the Time is come that the oppressed Life has gathered strength, and the
groans of the Sufferer have made way for the resurrection of the slain; and the
Poor and Despised does and will arise over all the contempt it has met withal
in its Way onward to the Land of REST; and the Disdainful are ashamed to see
the Beggar taken from off the Dunghill, and such exalted in the Favor of God,
that were of low degree in the Eyes of the Admirer of the Persons of Men,
because of advantage, who have said, Sit thou here, and be my Footstool, since
thou have no Gold Ring, nor gay Garment; else depart, and be thou warmed and
fed: but therefore are the Rich afflicted, and the Full are given up into the
Tormentors hands.

VII.
For a Day is already appeared, in which the simple have been preserved in
their Way, and they shall grow in the Favor both of God and Man, through all
opposition they meet with, by the fierce and cruel HUNTERS, for their Prey: And
those that have said, Come up higher, and sit thou here, because of thy
covering and outside Garment; shall themselves be seen naked and hungry, and
in want of all things, and many shall behold their shame; for they shall no
more wear a rough Garment to deceive, or through austerity appoint places to
such that may serve their Interest: but the Voice of the LORD shall be heard in
the EARTH, calling and inviting many to the great and last Supper of the LAMB,
who shall have on the Wedding Garment of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is of
great price with the Lord.

VIII.
And this covering will never prove too narrow, neither shall it be ripped off;
though such may come up in an appearance of Glory, to manifest the end of the
Worldly Sentence that is gone out against them: but seeing fiery trials are
come, wherein all Foundations are to be searched into, that every Birth may
live in, and receive the Reward of that which it has been sown in and to, and
that it may appear whether they can endure and hold out in the time of
affliction: Blessed are all they that have found out, and are builded on the
unmovable and lasting Rock of Ages, and Foundations of many Generations, that
have passed before them: for I have seen many good beginnings in the Work of
God, wherein his Grace and Love was and is sufficient to perfect and finish the
same, had it been trusted to, wholly and fully.

IX.
But such that have leaned to their own understandings, have given heed to
lying Vanities, and have forsaken the FOUNTAIN of endless Mercies and
Refreshments, having still that of their own reserved, (which they are very
loath to part from) that separates between GOD and them: these have begun well,
but who has hindered them, that they are so ready to sit down by the Way in a
false Peace and Rest? wherein they come short of perfect Satisfaction in God,
looking on a self-sufficiency, in something done as an Act of the Creature
without the assistance of the Spirit of GOD to keep in the way of Peace.

X.
For their beginning was in and by the Spirit of GOD, why then seek they to be
perfect by the Flesh, and in a Name of Profession of Truth, while they have the
approbation of such that have convinced the Understanding of that which is
Truth in the Judgment of Creatures? but in a time of the trial of their Faith,
the ends of the World are manifest before them, and then is there a running to
and fro, to increase the Knowledge of the WORK of GOD, as it is in themselves,
though many have learned in this day to add to their Faith, Virtue and
Patience, and all good Fruits of the Spirit of God, because of the Experience
of the Work of Faith, which through Patience they are kept in the sense of, in
the midst of Fiery Trials; and they hold fast the begettings of God thereby, in
a confidence of good in him.

XI.
And then as they increase in Knowledge, it is on a good ground and foundation,
that has learned them to rejoice in the FLAMES of DEVOURING FIRE, whose
devouring QUALITY cannot reach their SENSE with any BITTERNESS of its Sting;
but through Patience and Submission thereto, it is made sufferable, and the
Cross is made easy therein, and the BURDEN light, because of a quenching
property in that love, against whatever makes the Judgment of God to be
unsufferable Torment to his Creature: for part of their Knowledge is, that it
is not only given them to believe, but to suffer for the namesake of God,
though in the beginning of the Work of Faith, the belief that was wrought by
the Spirit of God in them, is a Convincer of sin, under which there was and is
a suffering in the nature that has contracted the guilt thereof on the Soul,
by unity of Spirit therewith, even the Spirit and God of the World.

XII.
Further, knowing and being persuaded, in patience to wait for the perfecting
of the Work of God in the Heart, in that Faith and belief of the love of God
therein shed abroad, that they are kept sensible of a good experience of the
Work thereof, having the Testimony of a good Conscience to manifest the same in
the World; these can show their Faith by its Works, and have a birth thereof
that makes not ashamed of a good CONFESSION among Men; and the fained Humility,
and appearances of Love, from the untimely Fruit of the Womb, that can never
come to see the glory of the Sun of this day, withers in its way: for that
which can endure and hold out to the End, works by the love of God, that has
begotten into a lively hope, concerning the Resurrection from the Dead, having
a Life tinctured in the Souls reach after true Charity in God, and Love
unfeigned, which is the highest attainment in a Christians state, and the
greatest Gift that can be attained by men under the Bond of Perfection.

XIII.
Sealing the Work in which God does glory and delight, in that which is made
able to pass through the stroke of Death, to leave an Earnest of the
expectations of the Creature (after the day of Redemption) in that which is
much more precious than that of Gold that perishes: But how have I seen many
in this day, loading themselves with the Fancy and Imaginations of their
disquieted Mind? and then being burdened with a Fear and Jealousy that arises
from the Unbelieving Heart, and distrustful ground, they are ready to cry out
of the Burden of the Lord, whereas their own words and thoughts are become
their Burden; who have taken that on them, which God never laid on them; and
yet they make the concern for the Lords sake, that lays no more on any than
they are made able to bear in the Life of Patience.

XIV.
And in this ground stand all the several Separations, and hasty receivings
into Fellowships, with sudden hands laid on Proselytes; for herein is the
ground of prejudice, swayed by the creaturely affection: yet in this mind may
be maintained a fierce and fiery Zeal, for the opiniatedness, that may often
call for fire to come down from Heaven, and to have Vengeance and Plagues
speedily executed on such against whom their Spirit is bent: for having wished
evil in their Hearts, and mischief against the Persons of such (toward whom
they cannot admit of any CHARITABLE thoughts) they proceed in a hasty Prophecy
of their utter confusion, and then would they rather that both Soul and Body of
the subject (over whom they seek to be avenged in that rejoicing) should for
ever perish, than that they should be found False Prophets: so evil a thing it
is to be engaged in a Spirit of Enmity and Envy.

XV.
But such Extremities many have this day put themselves on, through rash
censure, and then run back to former Ages and Generations of the World, for a
President and Example to help them out, as they think; whereby they often are
ready to plead the lawfulness of cursing their Adversary, who stands not
justified in their sight and approbation, because ELISHA was once acted in that
Ministration, through the heat and zeal of his Spirit; it being so far from
their nature, to live in that which is waiting for the Worlds redemption from
sin, and reconciliation to God, that they rather strengthen their FURY in the
expectation of utter Consumption and Destruction on all that cannot for wraths
sake stoop to their persuasions; and it is the end of such willings, to see a
People perish in their sins.

XVI.
Because of that misinformed Zeal, under which their Spirits are acted,
against the Enemies and Foes of that Cause for which they have found the life
imboldened toward God, according to the quickening of his Spirit, as tinctured
with that Power before which the Heavens have opened, and do shut; and in the
like desire THEY are moved, as was HE before whom Fifties were destroyed, whose
Spirit rests Judgment on a Ground wherein God has prepared Messengers to go
before his face: But considering the difference in Administrations, that Zeal
which runs out after an Object to maintain the heat of Spirit against which
it is enkindled, is not now held and retained in the like Cause and Ground as
that in which it first appeared.

XVII.
For God is gone out of that Administration, as acted toward the Persons of
Men in their Generations, and cannot own any glory therein, but as that which
had a Testimony of his day in the Prophecy thereof, wherein the Messengers went
before his Face, in a sense of that terror that was come on the Wicked World;
because such that wear the soft Clothing are got into Kings Houses, and they
shall no more wear a rough Garment, or prophecy in their Sackcloth Robes;
therefore whom would men go out to see? since Times are come, that the
Sacrifice of the Rebellious savoureth of the Work of Death, and there is not
fire enough to kindle the combustible matter, in the House, on the top of which
they are exalted; while the Displeasure of God continues unawakened in the
Pleasure and Will of Men that bring Wood, but where is the Flame of that other
Spirit which God requires? even of Reconciliation to Himself, in the Life of
Forgiveness, in that which is able to Appease and Quench the Wrath and Rage of
the devouring Enemy, and make Friends in the Well-Beloved Life.

XVIII.
Yet where is Love and Forgiveness enough to heap Coals of Fire on the Heads of
Enemies, the Gift has been first left at the Altar, and such are in the way of
Reconciliation to God and their Brother, and have their Sacrifice salted with
Salt, and do find Acceptance before God, without any loud Cry to the Worlds
BAAL, or Lord, as did the Priests in Days of old; and they awaken nothing
before its time, but are waiting on the Power of what is already kindled and
awakened against Self, which is Gods Displeasure, wherein the ENEMY has been
strengthened for a time.

XIX.
Thus desiring, if it be possible, to live in peace with all Men, no Spirits
can be awakened in the wrathful Principle to their hurt, because such things
are not easily allayed again in their heat and sting; for the Executioners of
Gods Displeasure, as destroying Angels in God, rejoice in the Power of Death,
taking occasion by Sin to tempt, and then to accuse, as sin has taken occasion
by the LAW, (once ordained in the hand of Angels) to revive a strength of
Condemnation, under the Power of Death, wherein the Devourer and Destroyer
imployeth his Instruments in the Working of Concupisence, like a roaring Lion
seeking to betray under his Baits and Snares, as a ground of Enmity and
Revenge, in which he lurketh with accusations, after he has once conquered
under the Power of his Dominion, and to condemn before God, that the Patient in
Spirit may be delivered into his hand for torment, the time he has to sift and
try them.

XX.
For I have always desired of the Lord, to keep out of the ground and Cause of
Just Offense to any, and to avoid occasions of Enmity, which is so ready to
spring up in the distempered and discomposed Minds of Men of unruly Passions,
who have let in the SEED of Discontent against the Dealings and Proceedings of
God, either in Themselves or Others, wherein many are both seeking and taking
occasions unjustly against those they are out of Charity with, because of a
mind filled with prejudice and gainsayings, though to me such things are no
whit strange, in that I know there is no temptation suffered to work against
the life of God in any, but what was common to the Saints in days of old, who
with the Temptation have found out a way to escape the evil and danger thereof.

XXI.
Yet am I clear herein, that I have not sought to hide the Counsel of God from
any, by delivering forth the truth of what I have received from GOD, in an
UNKNOWN Tongue, wherein I could keep my Conscience void of offense toward GOD
and Man; but there is a Spirit which is Worldly wise and subtle, yet covered
with Religious pretenses, which is at this day seeking Pre-eminence in the
House and Temple of God, and that is it which I desire to live and act out of
the reach of, in what form, or by what name soever they may be called;
therefore from such I keep in the Clouds, and from thence must I in the Truth
hereof, and the Truth in me descend to their Capacities, as way is made
therein, through the fulfilling of the Prophecy.

XXII.
But though this is and has been my Care and Conscience toward God, and love
to the Creation of him that formed his Workmanship in the Womb of Nature, and
curiously wrought the form wherein he rejoices, in the Mothers Belly, not to
seek or give any just occasion of offense to Jew or Greek, or cast a stumbling
Block in the way of the Gentiles, in which the House of Israel remains under
sufferings; yet as far forth as I am redeemed out of the ground of hurt, which
works in the excess of Love or Fear of the Creatures, I question not but my
LIFE will be preserved through all in my Way, and out of the reach of evil
Tongues, in the bewitching faculty of prejudice, that swells with Envy.

XXIII.
My Bow's bent being wholly drawn against the persecuting Spirit of the World,
about Religion and Worship of God, under what name or pretense soever such are
covered, who seek to keep the Innocent under the sufferings of Cruelty, in the
Holes and Dens of the Earth, that are filled with a People more righteous
before God, than themselves; though it was Isreal's Choice to have that Dominion
established, wherein they might be like unto other Nations of the Earth, which
is given them in the Ministration of Wrath and Fury; and in all Forms of
Government he has come forth higher than the common People by the Head, as
King in Nature; and though he hunt for his Prey, as a Partridge on the
Mountains, yet does God watch over and preserve his own, through all
conspiracies of ACHITOPHEL, which shall come to naught.

XXIV.
Notwithstanding many are hereby given into the Hands of the Tormentor, for the
destruction of the Flesh, whose Spirits are saved alive in this day of the
Lord, and they are now coming forth in that Power which has conquered the
strength of the old Deceiver, which is ready to betray with a Kiss of Flattery,
and they are made able to trample on the Dominion of Death and Hell (in the
worldly Spirits Excommunications, and Banishments, and sensual Separations
(having not the Spirit of God) in a patient, suffering, and bearing Principle,
that cannot rejoice to see and behold any evil in others, but mourns over
such that are left to themselves, and the pernicious ways of that Will, which
is deserted by God, in the ground and Principle of the Life's operation, though
in his Sufferance they live, and move, and have their Being, while they grow in
that which is past feeling of his Love, and are dead to the apprehension of his
Power, in the motion of which they were first quickened, as given up to a
reproved and reprobate sense.

XXV.
Therefore let the goodness of God to his Creature, lead to Repentance (as that
which shall leave all Men without Excuse before him) which is the only way to
bring out of a perishing Estate, under which the Worlds are fallen, wherein his
LOVE and MERCY makes sensible of the Danger, concerning which they are
forewarned, that as God comes to leave any to themselves, in the danger of
their own Pernicious Ways, so in like manner they be dealt withal by them that
profess his Name and Truth, and none to continue contending with the World in
the wrathful Principle, for it is not lawful striving with any People out of
the Power of God, in the Ministration of his Love, because all wrathful furious
drivings and strivings are under the Power of the Destroyer, and it is the
Devils strength to lead into the same, though therein Divine Justice comes to
be exalted over the Creature (in the execution of Vengeance that repayeth
double to all the Rebellious.)

XXVI.
Let the stiff-necked consider therefore why many have been given up unto
Satan, and delivered into the Tormentors hands for a season, while Destruction
and Contempt has come on the Glory of the Flesh, which is stained: for the
Hunter after mischief shall fall in his own Snare and Gin; and the Trap he has
laid for the Innocent, shall take hold of his Feet in the Way he is walking,
when the wronged comes to be apprehended on a Hill that is higher than that on
which the Enemy and Destroyer has been exalted; and into the Hands of the
PURSUED is put a sharp Instrument, the strength of that Reason whereof the
World is robbed and bereft, (even the Sword of Goliath, and Spear of their
Adversary) with which they shall wound the Head of RAHAB, and the Dragon, and
thereby they shall do EXPLOITS.

XXVII.
Though they are kept from using it in a time of advantage, yea, I have seen, I
have seen, while the Envious have been hunting abroad, the Pursued have been
led into the Tents of those that are Mighty in Battle; and the Man of War has
been found sleeping over his Master, until a Lap of his Garment (with which the
Envious has covered the Cruelty of his Spirit) is brought forth into open
view; and the Cruse and Spear at his Beds head, can now be shown to his shame,
because the Blood-Avenger has kept the Innocent from putting forth his Hand to
touch Him that had once the Anointing Oil on his Head, that had the favor of a
Lot in Israel, when the Spirit of God rested on Him, that made it a Proverb, Is
the Son of Kish also among the Prophets?

XXVIII.
But the Cry of the Poor is heard, that has been compassed about with
Tormentors, who has said in his heat, What shall I now do? for behold here
comes a whole Army, and I have no Sword but that of Goliahs, and the Lord has
said, Take it, for there is none like it: and it shall be known that a
Stripling is engaged in the Lords Battle, and is able to make war against
Isreal's Enemies, though he could not use the Sword in his own defense, neither
dares he be too bold in the exercise thereof abroad, lest the bruised Reed
should be broken, and the smoking Flax quenched, before Judgment is brought
forth into Victory (at home, where the War is begun, by such that are engaged
in the Lambs Battle.

XXIX.
Therefore in the Mystery of what is herein treated of, is the depth of
whatever has relation to the concern both of SOUL or BODIES Welfare, in the
Knowledge and true understanding of its state; and the universality thereof, is
a Testimony worthy to be heeded in the General or particular Concern, because
of the relation it has to the true and right Information of the Mind of all
that are capable of benefit therein, through a pointing property at that which
gives unto the Reader a sense of the Day, in which many in old time were made
Prophets and Messengers, and have largely testified and prophesied thereof, in
the Restoration of all Principles of Nature it has possessed and inhabited in
the BODY, into its first Glory, which is the MYSTERY of the Second
Resurrection, in those in whom the Power of the first Death is weakened, and
over whom the second Death has no power.

XXX.
For the Life of JESUS is manifest in their mortal Flesh, discovering the Glory
of which they are made Partakers, in a Kingdom everlasting, and World without
End, because of their Faith and Belief in the changing and renewing Power of
GOD, wherein the JUST do live, and witness Redemption from the Sting of SIN,
and Strength of the LAW (which is the Power of Death) and the GRAVE has not
Dominion over the Soul; therefore you that profess Scriptures, contend not
against the Verity and Infallibility of the Testimony hereof, because for your
sakes and satisfaction I am constrained in some cases, to use such Words, that
the RECORD of TRUTH is sealed by, in the Testimony of the PROPHETS of GOD in
former Ages and Generations of the World.

XXXI
Neither let it scruple any (on the other hand) that I use not an exact FORM
and METHOD of Scripture-Terms, but am often constrained to apply the bent of my
Spirit toward such significant terms as are brought to my Understanding in the
exercise of the VISION; for the Words are but an outward Sound and Declaration
of what has relation to an inward and invisible Work, in the Heart of the
Creature, through the Salvation of the Soul from Death: but I see it hard for
many professing SCRIPTURES, and the Knowledge of the TRUTHS of GOD therein
declared, to own it nakedly, for its own sake, and yield and bend to the
disposings of God, in matters of such concern; for then would it be consented
to, in what has relation to the Minds Information, without respect to the
Persons of such that are found differing in Judgment, concerning outward
Circumstances in Gestures, or PRINCIPLES in DOCTRINE, while in the End and Aim
there is a respect to Truth in the Heart.

XXXII.
And there will be a joining in the Acceptance, against whatever has relation
to Controversies, in a state of disobedience against the Spirit of God, in
which the WORLD is endeavoring to settle a Rest: and hence have I seen the
Complainer vexed with Burdens of his unruly Passion; but that God may more and
more unseal the Fountain of endless Good and Happiness (in the Knowledge of the
Glory of his Kingdom, that is everlasting) is my Souls desire, that Truth and
Righteousness may be set up in the WORLD, and the Glory of the ANCIENT OF DAYS
(proceeding in the increase of the Knowledge of GOD) may run down like a River,
and cover the Earth like as the Waters cover the Sea.

XXXIII.
And as this has its due acceptance in the Heart of the Upright and Unbiassed
in Censure and Judgment, for the sake of the Controversies among men, about
their Opinionatedness concerning the Truths of God contained in the Scriptures,
with which the World is filled) they will more and more come to see into its
service, and the end for which it is given forth, which will make way for the
opening and discovery of many precious Secrets, pertaining to the Restoration
of Nature, in its depraved Body of infected Elements, that are generated under
a Power of Corruption, that Creatures may come to see into the Mystery of what
is contained in many words therein, that has a signification very intricate to
the common sense of private Interpretations thereon, which the limitting spirit
of the WORLD is apt to tie up the Faith of their Communicants in, because of
the vulgar acceptance it has in the Heart of a Multitude: But the
Encouragement I find for the prosecution of what is remaining in this Tract
(wherein I am taking view of my passage through those Forms of Nature in which
I am imbodyed in time and place, is centred in an higher Object, than the
Readers well or ill Acceptance.

XXXIV
Though I am satisfied in the end thereof, that coming to be seen into, will
cause many to say, Now I know thou speak no more unto us in PARABLES, but
have plainly showed us of the Father. But among the Multitude, how hard a thing
is it to believe well of future Events, either in general or particular
Concerns? so narrow is the Heart of the Creature tied up in his Generations,
and cannot see the good of any thing in Posse, though that which is in Esse,
Self is continually laboring for Interest in; yet consider the want of Faith
in the World, concerning any Help and Deliverance to the Oppressed (after which
they have fixed Expectations) shall not always keep down and hinder the day we
groan after, but it shall come when Faith is scarce to be found on the Earth,
and Deliverance shall spring up to the Afflicted, (as well concerning outward
Oppressures as inward, when they are left as Men without hope.

XXXV.
But none of those that are in the fanning Love, and outside shows of Humility
in appearances, under any pretense whatever, of a universality of Spirit (while
in a sensual Separation they continue rending themselves from the Body of
Fellowship [in God] wherein is the holy Order of Saints) will be able to stand
and hold out the indurance of the Trials that are come into the Worlds; though
for a Time they make Parties, and have Headships in the Divisions of Men, about
Opinionatedness; for it is that every thing may appear in its birth, that the
Mystery of Iniquity has been suffered to work: and the Selfish Love (in
appearances of Humility) is one with the Spirit of the WORLD, in which it is
grounded and founded, and the day has made it manifest.

XXXVI.
For it is not lo here! or lo there! will now hide the Professor, neither A.
nor P. in Profession, or that thou have Love or Zeal in thy Heart, but what art
thou joined to, in the exercise thereof, that leveneth NATURE into a Principle;
it is that which will discover whose Side thou art on; which I long since have
had a perfect sight of; and that both the fearful and unbelieving of God and
his Goodness, that for want of Zeal to God (in the Cause and Case in which they
once have appeared) seek to cover their dead mind in a habit of Love and
Forgiveness, and while filled with the Power of Death, they move and reach
after a sense (in others) under which they would be apprehended to live; and
also the Proud and Presumptious who are heightened in a fierceness of that fiery
Zeal) could be content to persecute for their OPINIONATEDNESS, with Tongue or
might of Arm, and both will join hands to conclude the matter, under which a
Mystery does work.

XXXVII.
This is already seen; and that Doctrines of Truth may be received and
believed, that have Universal Principles, and yet retained in a narrow empty
Heart, whereby the Cause for which the Just does suffer, is maintained in a
Ground that is evil to the Life of Jesus who lights every man, etc. and
therefore the Nature of what springs from thence, effects that which is
contradictory to good sense: but I leave the Issue thereof to God, who is the
Highest and Chiefest GOOD; whereby the Creature (who is the Subject on which it
does work) may come to grow into Unity of Spirit with Him therein, wherein Time
and Place is measured and comprehended, in the incomprehensible Beauty of
Holiness, which shines in and over all his Works, and stands in the
excelling Properties of that Virtue that transcends the worth of all visible
created things, which are all to perish in that state of Corruption under which
they are brought forth BEAUTIFUL into MANIFESTATION, that many may come to
comprehend, with all Saints, what is the height and depth, and length, and
breadth of these things, as they are in JESUS.

XXXVIII.
But the order of what has relation to a Public Good herein, depends on a
Ground that has the Truth of all Prophecy opened, in the concern it has to
both outward and inward man, of which a large Testimony is already given forth,
in the passage of all those that died in the Faith of the Day, many are become
Witnesses of, and do see and possess great Glory therein, through a sense of
Redemption and Restoration, come unto, and come up in the Worlds, in its
Principles, in the several and respective States, where many have been found
wandering from Satisfaction, (in the progress of the Work, which leads up unto
God) and therefore concerning the Times and Seasons, for which the Vision is
set, and made to speak, thou shall count a year for a day, from the Creation of
the Worlds in the Generations of ADAM, according to the days of the Life of
ENOCH, which were 365 years, wherein is the ground of all Prophecy
comprehended, in number and figure, that is now made able to utter its voice.

XXXIX.
And it will appear to be the fifteenth day of the fifth Month, of the
sixteenth year, since the Creation of the Worlds (in the Generations of Adam,
to this present year 1665.) wherein thou shall count in each month 28 days and
parts, between New Moon and New Moon, counting the beginning of the Month from
the Phasis, or first appearing-time thereof; and from the fifteenth year the
Worlds stood divided in that which rested the Judgment of GOD (which is brought
thereinto) on its fourth part, or North Quarter, over which the Eagle has had
Power (in the time the Dragon remained bound down in the bottomless Pit) with a
chain of the Angel of GOD, while those that had received the first Fruits of
Joy and Comfort (in the Spirit of God, and that are made partakers of the first
Resurrection) have reigned in the Dominion and Power of God, in that which has
quickened the Spirit of the Souls of the once dead in Sins and Trespasses, as of
those Spirits in Prison, unto whom the Preacher of Redemption is become
manifest.

XL.
And by fifteen degrees of the Sun (according to which it has gone ten degrees
backward on the Worlds, and in which the Days of the Month, and Months of the
Year are equally divided) thou shall be made able to measure the Worlds in what
is discernable, and whence Glory descends into Nature, from the Equinoctial
Pole, according to its Elevation; counting in the Diurnal Motion of the Wheels,
wherein a Day stands for a Year (in its figure) according to the times and
seasons under which the Worlds have multiplied their number, to the Generations
that are come to possess the Substance of the Wilderness Travel, where Moses
says, I appoint ye a Year for a Day, etc. for fifteen Minutes of one degree of
the Sun, to make one minute of an hour of the day (each hour being fifteen
degrees of the Sun) but in the Annual motion in the Wheels, by ONE degree of
the Sun there is signified a year, and in a month is signified five minutes, as
does one minute signify six days, and some odd hours) of a degree of the Sun,
which has four minutes of an hour to every degree of the Sun in its diurnal
Course of Motion.

XLI.
But wherein the fifteenth year made its Revolution (in the first month of the
sixteenth year) as the Sun came to enter the first point of Aries,) on the
tenth day of the Month, the first or Spring-Quarter of the Worlds growth,
stands manifest in the Signs of the Times, while Glory ascends the three
Vernal Signs of the Zodiac in an inward World) called Aries, Taurus, and
Gemini, and from the eleventh Day of the Fourth Month, did the Sun enter the
first point of Cancer (in its degrees) wherein is revealed the Summer-Quarter)
with the Rays and Beams of scorching Heat, dispersed through Leo and Virgo, the
Heart and Bowels of Nature, this being the fifteenth day of the fifth Month,
from the time that the Power of the Dragon has been loosed out of the
bottomless Pit, in the form of those Beasts like unto Goats, called Locusts,
wherein he had given up his Power unto the Beast with seven Heads and ten
Horns, for the thousand year, which is the time he was bound.

XLII.
For from thence count thou the beginning of the five months, that torment has
rested and seized on a third part of men, in this fourth part, or North-Quarter
of the Worlds, that have the mark, and name, and number of the Beast, and the
first Woe is manifest therein, because the Devil is come down in great rage
among men, and the Inhabitants of the Earth are therefore terrified and afraid,
by the sounding of the fifth Trumpet of God (after which these evils have
followed the Worlds, in the casting down out of Heaven the Accuser of the Just)
to the awakning a sense of what is thus come on and into the fourth part of the
same, wherein the Beast has made his Seat; but the second Woe follows what is
awakened out of the bottomless Pit, whence a sense of torment rests on those
men, from the sounding of the sixth Trumpet on that Great River EUPHRATES.

XLIII.
Wherein a sense of the destroying Power of God, exalted in the Angels of the
four Beasts that stand on the four Corners of the Earth, to hold the four
Corners of the Winds, and whose Power is to withold those Winds from blowing,
is come into the renewed World, (under the Redeeming Power of God) through the
Sounding of the seventh and last Trumpet of God on the Air, from the time that
the Commandment of God went forth, for the again building up and restoring
Jerusalem, in which the Mystery of what pertains to the Kingdom of God, is
come to be fulfilled and finished; therefore a third Woe comes, and shall stand
manifest, from the concluding of the fifth month, wherein the fourth Beast with
the Face of an Eagle, shall give up his Power, which are the seven last
plagues, to come on the Earth and Worlds, (even seven Golden Vials, filled with
the wrath of God and the Lamb) unto the seven Angels of God, that are come
forth of the Temple to sound.

LXIV.
For in the number of Years in thirty two Jubilies (since the great Prophet and
Minister of a better Tabernacle and Temple than that which is built by Man,
finished his Testimony therein) and in the sixtieth Jubilie, since the
beginning of those Offerings wherein was the daily Sacrifice, which has been
made to cease in time; those seven Angels of God that came forth of the Temple
of God, with their seven Golden Trumpets, have been manifest in the Parts and
Quarters over which they have sounded; it being the tenth day of the Fourth
Month, from the awakened sense (that came into those Parts of the World over
whom the Trumpets had sounded) of the torment of those Women that sat weeping
in the North Gate, over TAMUZ.

XLV.
So that counting four minutes of an hour to one degree of the Sun, (in the
Diurnal Motion of the Wheels) and fifteen degrees of the Sun, for an hour of
the DAY, wherein the Heavens (in Man) are brought under fiery Trials, by the
sounding of the Trumpets of God, in the Angels of his Covenant, on all the
Glory of Worlds, (in its third part of Earth, and Waters, and Sun, and Moon,
and Stars, that stand manifest in what thereof is smitten, according to the
breaking forth of the day) it is now 120 degrees of the Sun, from the fifteenth
Revolution of Years in the Heavens, according to the fifteenth Year that the
Forms in the Heavens have remained a Testimony of what was finished in the
lively Patterns themselves, that have their figure in the Tabernacle of
Witnesses.

XLVI.
And reckoning from the tenth day of that first month, (wherein the Sun made
his appearance in the first degree of the Ascendant;) from the sixth Hour of
the Day, which was his hour of rising in three minutes of ARIES, to make his
Right Ascension over the Heart of the Orient (in the fire of the Meridian) from
the twelfth hour, or Midday, called Noon, wherein he gave fourteen degrees to
the Succedant; it will now appear to be the last hour of the Day that many are
called to be Fellow Laborers and Workers together with God, in his Vineyard,
counting the Suns rising in the degrees of the Meridian, from the first degree
of the Ascendant in Aries, according to the motion of the Moon in her passage
through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

XLVII.
For the Sun increasing the strength of 22 minutes in ten days of the first
month, to make his rising to be the fifth hour of the 11th day of the second
month (in his passage through the Houses of his Ascendant, Succedant, and
Cadent) in the Vernal, or Spring-Quarter, there being thirty degrees in each
House of the Heavens, (according to the Signs they have in the Zodiac of the
Moon) the Suns setting is made in the seventh hour of the day, and further
increasing strength, for timely rising, in his passage through Taurus, that is,
the second House of his Dignities, governing the left part of the Meridian in
the middle of the Spring, wherein the Dominion of the House is in the Neck and
Throat of NATURE, over Melancholy, and the Earth (in the Succedant) he makes
his rising to be 10 minutes past four in the Cadent, on the eleventh day of the
third Month.

XLVIII.
And the eleventh day of the fourth Month (wherein the Sun enters the first
minute of Cancer, to make the Summer-Quarter, as he rises in the degrees of
the Meridian) 47 minutes past three hours from Midnight, he makes it the
longest day in the Year (in this Latitude, and under the Horizon in which the
Works of Wonder are to be finished and fulfilled) and then the Sunsetting is
as long after the eleventh hour of the eleventh day (which is Noon, or Midday)
as it rises before twelve, to make an Evening of the day; according to the
hours wherein many have been bidden, and are called and invited to a Feast,
through the ANGEL of Strength, and Prayers of the JUST unto God, that He might
send forth Faithful Laborers into his Vineyard.

XLIX.
For that which is come into and on the Earth and Worlds, in its fourth part,
or North-Quarter, will continue to magnify and exalt the four destroying
Angels of Strength, that are loosed out of the great River EUPHRATES (by which
Europe has been compassed about) until the end of seven Months and five days;
though in the time of the sounding of those Trumpets, the Winds have been
suffered to blow [on the Earth] by those that have held their corners, as four
Angels standing on the four Corners [of the same;] and the Spirit of God has
and does yet strive with a Generation and Generations on whom the fierceness of
Gods wrath (in the Plagues of those Vials) is to be poured forth, and is come.

L.
And the Creature Mankind imbodyed in this third Principle, in which he is
called the Microcosm, or little World, is that third part of the Macrocosm, or
great World, as it stands divided into its four parts or Quarters, wherein
the Eagle has had Power over the North Quarter, or fourth part of the Worlds,
where those Trials are manifest, under which the Lion came first forth, with
four Wings of the Foul on his Back, in which were Golden Feathers, with the
names of 36000. Men in each Golden Wing, while the striving continued between
the four Winds of the Heavens, on the great Sea, and from the loss of dominion
therein, in the plucking of the Lions Wings, wherein came forth four other
Beasts, and took head (in the Nature of that which separated the Man from the
power in which he was first planted and placed) the Kingdoms of the Earth and
World became dispersed abroad the same.

LI.
Until the great Bear or Leopard (who hereby purchased the strength of those
four Wings) had them also taken away; and the Man came to regain his dominion
over all the Works of God's Hands, as Lord in the substance of what is already
communicated to his understanding: and through those four first Beasts, that
now have taken unto them (each of them) the six Wings of the Cherubims (every
one in their order calling to come and see) the Mystery of what is come forth
to the Trial of the Year, Month, Day, and Hour, over which they have Power and
Dominion in their Angels, the Glory of the Father is hallowed, having in each
Wing two thousand Feathers and names of Men, which makes the Glorious Host of
God in the Heavens, Numerable in their Tribes, and according to the Families of
those scattered Nations, over the face of the whole Earth.

LII.
Which are the dispersed Army of God, and goodly company of that Mighty Host
in the four Wings of the living Creature, by which they stand figured forth
144000. (of the first Body, in which God has his sealed Number of Instruments,
that are engaged in the Lamb's Battle, as the MEMBERS of what has continued
like unto dry Bones in the Valleys:) And for the exalting their Angels in the
Heavens, their destroying power over the Earth and Worlds is loosed, out of the
great River (over which the winds of the Heavens have striven and blowed, while
their destroying Power was bound.)

LIII.
But now are the Winds in the Hands of the Angels, to be withheld from
blowing, and the Spirit of God from striving any longer with the Creature
Mankind, (by the Prophecy of the Witnesses, or sounding of the Trumpets of
God, committed to the Angels) and the whole Worlds shall be smitten with
Plagues, through that which is thus loosed out of the bottomless Pit, wherein
the Earth has been covered with those Beasts, (called Locusts) and they have
overspread the same, in its third part smitten by the sounding of the five
first Trumpets,) and that which is awakened by the sounding of the sixth
Trumpet, has command in and over those four Winds of the Heavens, to withold
them from blowing as often as they please, because God will not always strive
with Man, who is but flesh.

LIVE.
And when the Earth is quiet and still, according to the silence that has been
in HEAVEN, for the space of half an hour, and the Worlds begin to settle in the
ease and content of the flesh; then remember what I say; for before this day,
there has come Wars, and rumors of Wars, and the smoke of the torment of
those Men, (on whom Judgment has rested under the Power of the Beast) shall be
seen and known to be the SEAT of the Beast, in a fourth part of the great
World, that has yet hitherto escaped Death, in what came on that third part
thereof, (in the little World Mankind) like the fume of a boiling Furnace,
whence has ascended the thick Cloud of Darkness, that fills the Heavens, and
the Power of the DRAGON, who had delivered up his Seat and Throne unto the
Beast, for the time he remained bound in the bottomless Pit; (But that now is
loosed in the sounding of the three last Trumpets) is a Spirit working Miracles
in the Earth, in the execution of the three last WOES that are come thereinto,
for the awakening and rising up of three therein, that do bear witness for GOD,
of what has been crucified and slain in the Streets of the great CITY of the
Worlds.

LV.
And into those Kings of the East (that have their Power again revived, and
their Heads healed, which is a second Beast come out of the Earth, with two
Horns of a Ram, pushing three ways, to wit, West, and North, and South, shall
enter those three Unclean Spirits of the Beast, Dragon, and Whore, like Frogs,
through the drying up of the Waters, in the great River EUPHRATES, in the
Worlds Sea) they shall come over the same, and into the place where God has
settled his glorious City, and they shall strive to defile and overcome the
Holy Land (between the Seas) but the end shall come with an over -- flowing
Scourge, and great Flood; and out of the Mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and false
Prophet, shall great things be performed and done.

LVI.
Yea, all these things have a lively Character of the Truth hereof, recorded in
the Heavens, by the Verity of Just Measure in time and Place, for God is not to
be limited to time and place in his Work, or to the prescription of men; but
he has a time and season for every work, according to which he has determined
and decreed an order, wherein they are all to be fulfilled and brought to pass,
according to the measure by which they are measured and weighed in their day;
and the times and Seasons of their fulfilling have been in the Fathers hands,
until the hours thereof became made known to the Son of Man who is in Heaven,
in that which communicates the sense thereof unto, and in the World, in whose
behalf he came to lay down his Life ( in the Body of Flesh which he took up for
the reconciling of the World unto the good will and pleasure of the Father.

LVII.
And the Star that is fallen from Heaven (as an Angel that has the Key of the
bottomless-Pit) I have beheld, and do see the returning of such torment (come
on those men that have the Beasts mark) on his Seat, that shall fill it with
Pangs, and many shall blaspheme God, because of those Pangs that are come on
them, that have defiled the Temple of God, created to be his House of Praise,
though now made that over which the Great Whore has reigned, that sits on
the Kings of the Earth; and this shall be known in the time that the beloved
City becomes encamped about by the great Armies of the Aliens.

LVIII.
And concerning all these things, the times are coming that they are to be
fulfilled, and in Europe will FALL suddenly a great Prince; but England be thou
still in thy Dominions, until GOD come to exalt, and set up His TRUTH over all
the Powers of Darkness; for thy striving for Conquest by the Sword, and to get
into Dominion, is but vain.

LIX.
In that the Powers of the Air must heighten their glory, before it can be seen
what is smitten therein, under the Power of the Eagle, or King of the North
(that has reigned more years than the King of the South) and therein remains
the Holy Seed; and let him that has Wisdom number and count those days past,
and yet observe that which is to be fulfilled to make up the expiration of the
time; and let it not be hard to believe well, of that which crosses thy
expectations, that thou should be filled with the distrust of GOD and his
Goodness, and put an evil Construction upon that which answers not thy
Opinionatedness.

LX.
And in the reading hereof, the God of Life and Peace open your Understandings,
and bless and keep all in his Fear, that those Sparks that have been raked
under the Ashes of what was once enkindled in a consuming Flame, may be blown
up into a second Flame, the Light of which I desire never more to see
extinguished and put out, as it keeps burning in and against Self; for it is
nothing else that burns up the Combustible Matter that has been brought into
the Temple of God. And in this does my SOUL continue praying to GOD: Amen, and
Amen, says

Thy Friend in all Love, R. B.

A TABLE Of the Contents of the CHAPTERS.
The First Part: Describing,
Chap. 1. The Vision of the Wheels. Chap. 2. The Diurnal Motion in the Wheels.
Chap. 3. The Mystery of the four large Hours in the Day, and the four Watches
of the Night. Chap. 4. The degeneration of all Forms in Nature. Chap. 5. The
Government of Nature, under the Power of four Beasts. Chap. 6. The seven
Nations of the World, as they came forth imbodyed in the Forms of Nature. Chap.
7. The manner how they became thus imbodyed. Chap. 8. The operation of the
Vision, in the opening of the Heavens. Chap. 9. The exercise of the Power of
God over the mind, wherein the Vision of these things wrought. Chap. 10. The
power of the Waters in the Vision of the Wheels. Chap. 11. The nature of the
World in its Principles. Chap. 12. The manner wherein those Vessels were beheld
unburdened, that arrived from off those Waters, separated into four Heads.
The Second Part. Greeting to the FOUR CHURCHES in EUROPE. Describing,
Chap. 1. The coming forth of those four Beasts. Chap. 2. The motion of the
Wheels in their seven turns. Chap. 3. The Forms of Nature, under the renewing
Power in God. Chap. 4. The effect of the descending of Angels into the Forms of
Nature. Chap. 5. The order of those four Angels loosed out of the great River
Euphrates. Chap. 6. The Restoration of the Heavens in the Worlds. Chap. 7. The
form of the Temple which settled therein. (...)
Reader, these material faults in the Printing having escaped the Press, thou
art advised to correct them with thy Pen.
IN page 21. line 8. for dark read black. p. 23. l. 6. for (...) r. (...) p.
27. l. 17. for (...) r. (...) p. 84. l. 6. r. a for the. l. 9. r. about 2
hours. p. 91. l. 21. r. forth for for. p. 106. l. 10. dele and. l. 16. d. as a.
p. 107. l. 10. for the r. that. p. 124. l. 14. for Kisu r. Kisleu. p. 133. l.
11. d. Spirit. p. 134. l. 5. r. thee in this. p. 154. l. 5. r. and in a great,
p. 162. l. 1. r. in the hand of the Angel. and l. 13. for came r. run. p. 171.
l. 2. f. nor r. neither. p. 173. l. ult. r. that which f. which that. p. 197.
l. 8. f. though r. through. p. 206. l. 10. f. Elil r. Elul. p. 211. l. 5. f.
Sagitarius r. Sagitars. and l. 12. for poison r. potion. p. 234. l. 7. f.
Atnium r. Ethaim. p. 240. l. 13. after Heavens, r. rod on the Rainbow. p. 241.
l. 8. f. diveing r. dividing. p. 249. l. 17. r. and in the ground. p. 253. l.
4. f. yet r. that. p. 290. l. 3. r. rareing f. raving. p. 294. l. 10. r. put
(it) on, etc. and l. 17. f. own r. once. p. 291. l. 1. f. each r. the. p. 359.
l. ult. f. ome r. come. p. 365. l. 12. f. known. r. sown. p. 370. l. 19. f.
toward r. from. and l. ult. f. Aries r. Leo. p. 379. l. ^3. dele which. p.
384. l. 3. r. in or before. p. 371. l. 13. f. nineteen r. thirty nine.

The Introduction.
I.
IN the year 5594, according to the most just and true account of the Creation
of the Worlds in Adam, and in the thirty-second year, after the thirty-second
JUBILEE, since the finishing of the Testimony of that great Prophet, in his Body
of Flesh, who came forth into appearance and manifestation from the Worlds
account, 1664. being the year of his Incarnation, who was the Glory and
Welbeloved of the Fathers Soul, conversing with men in the substance of that
Power, in which all the Works of God were finished from the beginning, the
perfection of whose Nature, had glory, in what was effected in the SIX days
work of Creation, through the glorifying cause of all beings in Nature.

II.
In the year aforesaid, the REVELATION of JESUS, the Son of the living God,
came unto me, even unto me, a Native of England, sojourning among the scattered
Nations and ungathered Families of the Captivity of Judah, waiting for the
Earths return, to bring forth new fruit unto God, throughout the four Quarters
thereof, which I am commanded of God, to communicate to the Generations of the
Worlds amongst which I am fallen.

III.
Unto whom be Greeting and Salutation, from your Brother in Tribulation, and
Companion in all afflictions (for the Seeds sake) whom Bonds have daily
attended, both inward and outward, while for the sake of many and great
Nations, the travel of my Soul continues, that my groanings and labor in the
Lord, may procure the joy and rejoycings of as many as have a heart open to
receive the benefit of what is brought forth through great conflicts.

IV.
And from the Spirit of Jesus, is my Souls enlargement, to the disconsolate
Babe of Hope, and in the Authority of God, I have a hand reached forth to the
helpless, toward whom my tender Bowels are moved, that they may partake of
this VISITATION, which is given for the sake of many and great NATIONS; This
great Salvation of God being revealed to all them that are made partakers with
him in the Faith of God's Elect, in which the like precious Promises do work.

V.
To all the People of God, whether gathered or ungathered, my love reaches
forth; though most especially to the scattered Nations over all the Earth, that
are the Household of Faith, in which it is not only given them to believe, but
also to suffer for his Names sake whom they profess: Love Mercy and Peace,
together with all fruits of the Spirit of God, to the Brethren of him, who is
come to possess the Life of Patience, under the sufferance of the Spirit of
this World, through the Revelation of JESUS the Son of God, by whom the whole
Glory of the TEMPLE of God was brought forth, into which entered the Host of
the Heavens, the SEVENTH day, wherein God came to rest in the finished
settlement of that in which all labor ceased, as to the working power of his
Spirit, in the frame of the Creature and Creation, that is become the
workmanship of the Father.

VI.
I am filled, I am filled, with the motion of his Power, in the workings up of
his informing Spirit, that sends forth its sound through an Earthen Vessel;
and in as much as its concern is Universal, the peculiar relation and respect
which it has unto People of those Generations, is the breathings of Life from
a follower of the Lamb of God; And the Life of the JUST, in his Name that is
faithful and true, and full of long-suffering; and that which is certified
concerning these things, is what will assuredly be fulfilled, and shortly come
to pass.

VII.
Therefore blessed are they that can read or hear, and in whom there is a heart
inclined to understand the MYSTERIES herein, wherein the Testimony of TRUTH is
confirmed amongst the CHURCHES, in the Spirit of Jesus; unto which Churches in
the WORLDS, in their divided quarters, JESUS (who is the Author and Finisher of
the Faith of God's Elect, whose Nature had glory in raising up that Body out of
the Grave, and from the power of Death and Destruction, in three days) is now
dispersing bowels (in which are the Fountains of all good) that have been
sealed and shut up, but are now freely set open for sin and for uncleanness,
for Judah and Jerusalem.

VIII.
And thus says the Ancient of days, the AMEN, the FIRST and the LAST, (who
has glory in the Work of God, through the Redemption of Souls up unto himself)
come wash and be clean, for he that is faithful and true, has yet a little
while a gathering Hand and Arm stretched out toward you all; and the Bride
says, Come, as has been the Voice of the Spirit of God, which by many has
been rejected; But yet hear what the Spirit says unto the CHURCHES.

IX.
Unto the Churches of ASIA, and the ANGELS of these Churches, says the Beloved
of God; O yet gather, if it be possible, and behold, the Wing of Mercy and
everlasting Salvation hovering over you! your works have been tried in the
fire, and hitherto they have not made weight in the Balance of Gods Sanctuary;
neither are they able to stand before him, but are like the STUBBLE in his way,
and are driven before the Bow of his Fury.

X.
Yea unto thy PRINCES, says the AMEN of all Glory, in Heaven and Earth, bend
your Necks to the Yoke, and learn to Plow, else sorrow will be your portion. To
thy PRIESTS I say, Howl and Lament, and be threshed upon the FLOOR, by him that
can handle the FLAIL; to thy PROPHETS, I say, Take the Cup and drink a mighty
draught; for as ye have had your fills of Pleasure on the Earth, so shall you
drink your full Portion of sorrow, howling and lamentation.

XI.
I know all thy works and thy doings, for the secrets of thy Heart are not hid
from me, thou exalted HORN of ASIA; PERSIA and MEDIA, are the strength of thine
ARM; ye Daughters of K'TURAH, therefore be ye wakened in time, and behold how
the ASSYRIAN is broken on the right Hand and on the left.

XII.
And unto the ANGELS of the Churches (Mystically) in AMERICA, in thee are a
People whom God will yet gather to his Praise, but thou will be broken as a
Potters Vessel, and turned on a fiery Hearth; Thou have of the Captivated
TRIBES and scatterd-broken-off-branches bound in Chains under thy quarter; let
them forth, for the mighty Day of God is Proclaimed, and come.

XIII.
Unto the Angels of the Churches in AFRICA, write what is ready to befall them,
in the Day and Hour of their Exaltation; Since thou wast lifted up, thy day is
measured, and when thou wast cast down, thou have been warned. Yet once more
hear; pity the Captives, and give of thy Bread to him that comes under the
smiting of the South Wind, lest when the awakened North Wind returns its blown
Breath out of the Bellows of the Almighty, it make thy burden more then thou
art able to bear.

XIV.
Thy Feet must tread on Mire and Clay, and in like manner will Feet be set over
thee; But thou the darkest of Countries, I have many NAMES to be gathered out
of thee, therefore hasten and return, when thy WORK is done; and remember that
thou art warned of what shall come to pass, lest on the one hand thou should
be heightened in the day of thy Exaltation, or left without information of that
which will befall thee when thou art cast down: for as thou do unto others
(to wit, the Captivity of the North) so will it be done unto thee, in the
return of measure and weight.

XV.
Say not any more, I am strong, for one of thy PRINCES is strong above thee;
and the Daughters of thy Land, that have made up thy agreement with the King of
the North, will not retain the ARM, nor prevail in thy strength and Dominion,
though thou carry away Captive the Inhabitants of that Land, whose King has
reigned more years then the King of the South.

XVI.
Repent therefore quickly, is the Voice of the Angel, lest I come and smite
thee unawares; and remember when that is loosed and awakened, which has been
compassed about by PISON and GIHON; he that invadeth a strange Land, shall
place his glorious Habitation between the Seas, that the scattered TRIBES may
behold the Glorious City, which they have been seeking, and come forth into the
NORTH, to see a place prepared in the Kingdom by the Father; for ASIA has
fallen, and is turned to Idols, and has given heed to lying Vanities.

XVII.
But both of you shall be purged together in a fiery Furnace, until your
supplication for Mercy be made able to prevail; therefore let thy Princes
consider, for whom the controversy betwixt two great Kings does work; and thou
that were raised up for the making known the Power of God, and the Vessels
fitted for destruction, know that thy time is numbered to fill up the TWELVE
years, wherein the King was subject to K'DORLAOMER.

XVIII.
I counsel thee therefore, in the Seed capable of gathering, that thou come
forth from among the Robbers and Spoilers of my People; and let not thy horn be
exalted, because of the King of the North, that is delivered into thy hands
(for a season) for both your hearts have been set to do mischief, and ye have
spoken lies at one TABLE; but that little space that is given thee to repent,
is to humble thee, that thy Soul may live, and thou not die in thy Iniquity.

XIX.
Now let him that is hungry come, and let all that are thirsty come and drink a
mighty draught, at the Fountain of endless Mercy; for this is the day of Mercy
proclaimed toward a stiff-necked People, a Rebellious House; This is your day
and hour to repent and return to God, and there is not another season for
Mercy, or to mend that which is amiss; for ye are become a wicked People: but
he that has an Ear may hear, though the hardened must remain in their guilt,
and the unclean be unclean still.

XX.
For the spot of the LEOPARD cannot be washed off, nor the skin of the
Ethiopian changed; and the filthy must have time to fill up their measure,
that it may be known that they are left without excuse, who have slighted
timely warning, when the hour is come that they are concluded in the WILL of
that which continues filthy still.

The FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. The beginning of the REVELATION; describing the Vision of the WHEEL
in its Motion.
I.
ACcording to the space of time (before mentioned) as I was waiting upon the
Lord, with my heart deeply exercised, in his fear and dread, the glory of what
for a long season I had been visited with, descended upon me in a Tempest and
WHIRLWIND; and I beheld until the Tempest was over, yet the Whirlwind remained,
whilst I was taken into the Habitation of Wonders; and the Glory of the Angel
of God compassed me about, in the form of TWO WHEELS, moving one within the
other, as a Wheel within a Wheel.

II.
By which means I came to the sight of TWO WORLDS, standing the one in the
other, in the manner and form of the Wheels, moving the one in the other, as a
World within a World; And while I was thus beholding the Vision thereof, the
Power of the LIVING CREATURES, that moved in the Wheels overcame me; for the
Spirit of the Living Creatures that moved in the Wheels, was in the Wheels; and
it rested on my left Arm, in form of a STAR, and quivered in the Blood of my
Body, betwixt the skin and flesh of my left Arm, for many days continuing thus
upon me.

III.
For in that in which the Worlds were settled and sought rest, there was a
continuance and abiding under subjection to such Power, though fallen from what
it was in the first work of Gods Creation of all FORMS into being, (for the
first FIVE days, I thus beheld it) and in every of these five days, I saw a
change and alteration in the Face of the HEAVENS, which was like unto WATERS.

IV.
Whose way and course I observed, until the whole frame of the Worlds became
like unto a SEA of GLASS mingled with Fire; and in the midst of these Waters
broke forth a CLOUD, which moved up and down like a Man's HAND; and the Form of
a Man was wrought up through the Cloud, traveling in the Heavens with his
Hands on his Loins; in whom was a sense of pangs and hard labor, from whence I
beheld a struggling and striving on the Face of the Waters, as from the WOMB of
ETERNITY, of TWO NATIONS to come forth into appearance and manifestation.

V.
And from the Heavens, I heard a cry of pangs and hard suffering, because of
the labor and travel which the Body of NATURE was subjected under, for such
sufferings sake; which was like to the sorrow of a Child-bearing-WOMAN, who had
brought to the Birth, but had not power to bring forth, until the appointed
time of deliverance from the Father was come.

VI.
But as the Womb of Eternity became eased of its suffering and hard labor, the
struggling and striving rested, and seized on the Body of Nature, wherein the
Travel remained and continued until the END of TIME and PLACE; For on the Face
of the Waters, on which the SPIRIT of God did breath (while a Cloud of darkness
was over, and covered the face of the mighty Deeps) was hidden the form of all
CREATURES, thus come forth.

VII.
And the Womb of NATURE was also opened in and before me, in which instant was
made intelligible to my understanding, the working of all forms in Nature, that
strove to come up in the bodily Frame and Temper, that stood in the ground and
cause of such suffering.

VIII.
And the NAME of the FIRST DAY was called LIGHT, because in it the Light and
Darkness were separated and divided; and in this day came forth all that stood
hidden in the Womb of Eternity, in the form and likeness of WATERS, that were
of a distinct quality and operation in the creaturely being, until the Word of
God had commanded them into form through the work of Creation.

IX.
For as the division and separation of such Powers-work through the WORD of
God, wrought up the Will of the Worker into appearance and manifestation, the
WATERS had their enlightening quality and property in the separated beings,
shining out from the Face of that which gathered together in the Heavens, from
the three that therein bare Record; yea and in the work of the first days
separation, which was betwixt Light and Darkness (in these Waters on which the
Spirit of God breathed in the light-part of the Waters, which was the Face of
the Heavens therein) there became exalted the HEAD and FACE of a Man (for a
season;) and in the darkness, or dark parts, which is the dark parts thereof, I
saw working hiddenly the form of a FIRE-DRAKE, or Serpent, called Satan, and
the Dragon the old deceiver of mankind, who was got behind God, in the coming
forth of his Glory in his Son or Image.

X.
And the Waters that came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, out of which sunk
all forms in Nature, that took being in the earthly frame and form, being
gathered together into one PLACE, became an overflowing scourge and inundation
of miseries, and were like unto a great SEA, which was the gathering together
of all that came forth out of many Fountains and Rivers (of Water.)

XI.
Which thus I beheld, until the SECOND DAY was passed over, wherein was made a
separation betwixt Waters and Waters, that thus came forth out of the Womb of
Eternity (in a Mystery.) And in the Womb of Nature was the MATRIX of conception
brought into a working frame, wherein the SPERMATIC Vessels of the SEEDS
ingendrings opened the Gates of Glory into an inward world, where the Kings
Daughter was, whom I saw all Glorious within.

XII.
And the separation that was made betwixt those Waters, was a Power of firm
glory in its working frame, as a FIRMAMENT placed in the out-spread Air,
wherein every thing came forth in its DUALL number, through divided qualities;
and the name of the SECOND DAY was called EXPANSUM or (...), because of what
came thus forth in the out-spread Firmament.

CHAP. II. A Description of the DIURNAL Motion in the Wheels, in the coming
forth of all forms in Nature into manifestation.
XIII.
THus beheld I the form of the Heavens, like unto WATERS, but of a more
CHRISTALLINE and transparent brightness, than the SUBLUNARY Waters; for they
were not Waters of such a gross and terrene Body, as is centered in and on the
EARTH, in the harshness and astringency of depraved Nature, fallen under the
power of Corruption; but they had a peculiar quality (in the HEAVENS) through
the work of Separation, in the Principles of the WORLDS, being of an
enlightening Nature in which the POWERS of all Caelestial Bodies were moved and
BURNED over me, as an inkindled flame, mentained in the UNCTUOSITY of the life's
Operation, in the Body of Nature.

XIV.
For the ground of all being in the Creature and Creation of God, in its
sinking condition, became corruptible EARTH, in the fallen state and condition
of the imbodied being of Creatures and Things, wherein the Earth centered and
settled its rest in the Creature of God, in what stood in and out of the WATERS;
and out of the Bowels of the Earth issued FOUNTAINS and Rivers of Waters, which
ran in the several Streams and Channels of the Earths (...) thus fallen under the
power of Cor^^^^on; And the whole returned and met in the Ocean Seas, which
became the Womb of Nature, in that they stood in the wide and open courses of
the Earth and Worlds, which notwithstanding was drawn up into the Heavens,
through a purgation by fire.

XV.
But as all PROPERTIES and Principles came into the Womb of Nature, in which
the contest wrought betwixt THREE, that labored to come forth imbodied in form
in the creaturely being, I beheld the Womb of Eternity shut against the Third
and LAST, that was in the cause of such strife and contest, who notwithstanding
wrought up his way to come first forth out of the Womb of Nature.

XVI.
And in the Heavens I beheld the form of a great RED DRAGON, sucking into his
Belly the HEART of these Waters, which was their Fatness and Unctuosity, like a
River of OIL, wherein was an inkindled fire that burnt inwardly, and was
mentained and strengthened by the oyliness and fatness thereof; together with
the combustibleness of the material qualities, engendered under the Power of
Corruption, for destructions sake.

XVII.
And in the light of what continued thus burning and inflaming, I beheld an
innumerable company of divided ESSENCES, which shined in the Heavens like STARS
above, and PLANTS beneath; wherein was a tincture that wrought and moved in the
Essence of each; the one in and by the other, as the Wheels wrought one in the
other for TWO DAYS.

XVIII.
For in the contest in the Heavens were THREE, though only TWO came forth
imbodied in the creaturely being, out of the Womb of Nature, so incorporated
into form, under the power of corruption fallen and sunk, that wrought up their
way out of all the powers of the Heavens, so to come forth.

XIX.
And after the finishing of the third DAY, which was (...) BEGOYM, because of
what came forth in the Dual number, I beheld a perfect separation made in the
WHEELS motion, betwixt that which is DIURNAL and NOCTURNAL, which was the
motion in and of the inward Wheels, for in the Wheels was both a Diurnal and
Annual Motion; and in the Power that wrought up its way and work through the
course in and of Nature; All Principles of Nature came forth in their separated
and divided being.

XX.
In which I beheld FOUR large hours in the day, each hour containing three
computed hours of the natural day; And in the NIGHT were FOUR Watches, in the
which the ANGEL and the Watcher came down, and the order of the Night-Watch I
beheld, from the evening of the Day, until the first Cock-Crow, which was after
the conclusion of the FIRST WATCH.

XXI.
At length I beheld until a perfect separation was made in the Wheels, and
between PRINCIPLE and Principle in the WORLDS; And in the SECOND WATCH of the
Night, which was Midnight, an ANGEL and a WATCHER came down before me, in the
form and appearance of a MAN; and with an Iron Instrument he smote me on the
HEAD with both Hands, for he had the Face of a good man, and lifted up both
hands to smite me.

XXII.
And I submitted to the Hand and stroke of the Watcher; and lay DEAD IN MY
BLOOD until the Night-watch was over, wherein the HOLY ONE came down, (for it
was the hour of the Bridegrooms awakening, and the coming of the Son of Man)
and the conclusion of the second Watch was when the COCK had crowed TWICE: and
in the DAWNING of the DAY the Womb of the MORNING was opened in and before me;
and after the THIRD Cock crow, all Powers in the Heavens were shaken, and the
Body of Nature was taken in a trembling state and condition, for it was the
conclusion of the Third Watch.

XXIII.
Wherein all self-confidence became judged to be the TRUTHS denial and
resistance, after the Cock had crowed Thrice; because the day began to DAWN,
and the DAY STAR to arise in the Heart of the inward Worlds, whereby the
stumblings had been raised, by that which became a ROCK of OFFENSE to both the
Houses of ISRAEL.

XXIV.
And the FOURTH COCK-CROW, was after the Days breaking forth, wherein the Rock
and Foundation of true confidence in God was raised up, by turning Satan behind
the back of God's Glory, in the renewed day of the Son of Man, which brought
forth the Keys of him that unlocked the Treasury in the Heavens; After the
building of the CHURCH of God, became settled on that raised Rock, on which the
LION was made to tremble, by the Crowing of the Cock, before the Day dawned.

CHAP. III. Wherein the effects of the four large Hours of the Day, and the
four Watches of the Night, in the inward Worlds, are described.
XXV.
AND in the HEART of the WATERS, which became like an inkindled flame, burning
in the order of the Eternities holy Will and working Power, was HARSHNES in
what wrought for Separations sake; like unto Fire mingled with Blood in a
Mystery, which became bound in the form of the Heart of a LION, under which I
saw the Bowels of Creation also comprehended in a state of Darkness to the
VIRGIN in Nature, who sat mourning as one disconsolate, with an EAR of WHEAT in
her right Hand; and the cry was from a solitary place.

XXVI.
The separation in the Heavens being made betwixt the two great Lights, by
which the day and night was ruled, and the first that came forth out of the
Womb of Eternity, into the Womb of Nature, had slain his Keeper; for he was a
monstrous shape and form of the Beast in Nature, with the Head and Face of a
RAM, the Neck and Throat of a BULL, the Wings of an EAGLE, the Breast of a
CRAB-FISH, the Heart of a LION, the Bowels of both MAN and BEAST, but downwards
like a SCORPION.

XXVII.
And he sat on all the FORMS in Nature, which became this Beasts seat; who went
THIRTY DAYS backward in the Rings of the outward Wheel, after he had slain his
Keeper; for by the struggling of TWAIN, the VIRGIN in Nature was slain, which
the man should have kept alive, who was made Keeper of his Virgin, that had the
Face of Man both Male and Female.

XXVIII.
And by him was slain the Face of a Man, who was exalted in the Principle of
Air, in the glory of Angels, in an Angelical Paradisical being and state; After
the Virgin in Nature was thus lost and became slain, in the place of Conception
and Field of Nature, whereby the Creature Mankind became as made a little lower
then the Angels, subjected in that state wherein the Creation of God was
brought forth.

XXIX.
So that as NECESSITY came to work in a Mystery, through the ground of what was
brought forth in the created Forms in Nature, it became a LAW in Nature, under
the power of which every Creature was brought, for the grounds sake, that thus
stood under subjection to the Power of God; and that a man might be brought
forth to till and tear up the ground (under which I beheld the subjection of
all forms in Nature) after all the works of God were seen to be good.

XXX.
And then as the Keeper of the living had the glory of the Life of God in
Nature subjected in hope, the groanings and waitings of the Creation became a
longing expectation of God afterward to be revealed; whereby he that remained
with his Face exalted in the Air, was made the Keeper of the Vineyard of his
Brethren.

XXXI.
For as the Work of God became imbodied in the Creaturely being, from the Womb
of Nature, I beheld the form of a Man (who was that GOOD Man that smote me on
my Head) casting SEED into a Ground; in which I saw the working form and frame
of all these things, and he afterward fell asleep. And a SECOND man also came
forth, and he likewise cast in Seed into a GROUND, scattering it in the Air
toward the NORTH- Wind, of which some fell on the good Ground.

XXXII.
Whereby the Face and form of a Man, who came forth out of the Womb of
Eternity, became the SECOND, who was embodied from the Womb of Nature, and was
slain in the Field of Conception, by the FIRST and LAST that became thus
imbodied from the Womb of Nature; by which means the Face of FOUR Beasts in
Nature became exalted in the Heavens; and the WOMAN was taken from him whilst
he fell asleep, though like a good man he had first sown his Seed, before the
envious man came.

XXXIII.
Yet was it not then good that the Man should be alone, under the workings of
that NECESSITY, in the LAW of Nature, for he had neglected his own Vineyard,
that was overgrown with Nettles, Briars, Thorns, and Weeds, whereby sin and
the concupiscence of the Flesh took occasion to work in the Members of him, who
was the Tiller and tearer up of the ground of Corruption, into which Death
entered, who came first forth out of the Womb of Nature, because of his need
for the MEET HELP.

XXXIV.
And this became the FOURTH day in Nature, but it was the first day in the work
of Creation, in Celestial Bodies, called TREM, for it was FULL time and tide
in turning the Worlds about backward, wherein all that came forth imbodied from
the Womb of Eternity, took form from the Womb of Nature, in the changeable
being, through a Government that God had settled over all, that should come
forth thus imbodied in form.

XXXV.
For the night came over all glory in the first Creation of God, so that the
FIFTH day of the Work of God in all forms of Nature, was the SECOND DAY of
God's Holy Weeks; concluding a cessation from all labor, in what was brought
on the Creation of God, by means of the Curse come over mankind, in his
Exercise of these the Creatures of God.

XXXVI.
And there arose a WEST-Wind, out of which flamed a Sword of the Cherub, which
drove the form of the Man (that I saw) EASTWARD; and he went his way, so that
the FIRST which came forth out of the Womb of Nature, in which the Creature
became thus imbodied into form, took being on the FIFTH day, in such state as
the Creature and Creation was fallen under, in that form wherein he came forth.

CHAP. IV. How all forms in Nature began to degenerate, into the monstrous
shapes of deformed Beasts.
XXXVII.
AND the ANGEL of God said, Come up hither, and I will show thee the MYSTERY of
all those WATERS; and of that which came forth out of the Womb of Eternity,
from whence all those Waters came, and whither they shall return; and until the
end of the FIVE days, I beheld the working-frame of what stood manifest from
the Womb of Eternity. And I saw all the Earth overspread with Creatures and
things; yet nothing was moved out of the ground, under which it was subjected,
by the Creating power, that wrought for manifestations sake, until the end of
FORTY DAYS.

XXXVIII.
And there was also, from the THREE that bare Record on Earth, a SECOND great
LIGHT that ruled the Night, in the glory of the Terrestrial Body, borrowing a
luster from the Suns clarity; For as I traveled through a great trance of the
minds perplexity, I beheld the whole frame of the works of God, from the
beginning, to the END of time and place, as of TWO and TWENTY days labor,
wherein I saw the Sun and Moon stand in a distance of course, two and twenty
Degrees of the Suns Motion, that wrought up their glory in and through all the
Powers of Nature, unto which the life of the Creature was subjected, under a
change in time and place.

XXXIX.
Which became the Glory of the Sun, of the day of the Son of Man, in and
through all Celestial Bodies, comprehended in the forms of Nature, as a great
Light, whereby the great and LAST day was ruled, and overruled, in which God
is working up his Eternal Glory, through what is come forth into manifestation
in time and place, dignifying the Creator of all forms into being, that is able
to reveal the Mystery of satsfaction to Divine Justice, through what appears
magnificent, in works of Wonder.

XL.
For all Motion in Wisdom, from the beginning of FORM, through the WORD of
Life, was the Creators Glory, without any consideration of a dividual Will in
Creatures, though sinking and fallen from the glory of the Creator of all forms
in Nature, so subjected under a state of Corruption.

XLI.
And as the FIFTH day became subjected unto the Government of that, under whose
power all forms in Nature were brought forth; I saw a THIRD PART of the Stars
in the Heavens, moved from the WEST to the EAST, for the Glory of the Sun in
the midst of the Heavens, suffered the Motion of what drew TWO (and as it were
both) WAYS, as the Clouds of Darkness came to intermix their darkning quality,
in the Air, between the Original Cause and Center of such Glory, in its shining
Properties and Virtues, and the Creatures sense, wherein the Luster became
apprehensive.

XLII.
And God beholding all Forms in Nature, in the state of Subjection, wherein
they were placed in Creation, as labor came to be felt, coming up into the
Body of Nature, after Gods forming and finishing of Work, on all that came
forth out of the Womb of Eternity, he became moved for his Creatures sake, that
second time, which creature remained subject, in the ground of the Life's first
motion, to the unmovable power, from which SELF could not separate him,
without the yielding of his own WILL.

XLIII.
But the MAN in divided qualities, who was thus made Keeper of the Vineyard of
his Brethren, came forth as a WAYFARING Man and Pilgrim in the Earth, whose
Face was exalted in the Principle and Region of AIR, and in the World was his
Body afflicted, wherein he lost his way (as a stranger) to his Journeys end,
(though attainable) and sought it with Tears, for Rests-sake.

XLIV.
Yet for FORTY DAYS was he tried in that state, whether or not he could live
without the food of that which drew the LIFE under the power of corruption; And
for FORTY WEEKS was the form of Nature subjected for Generations sake, (after
it became thus degenerated into its Principle) for the replenishing the Earth
anew, in the state under which the Worlds were fallen.

XLV.
For all that came forth from the Womb of Eternity in FIVE DAYS, took form
from the Womb of Nature on the FIFTH day of Gods Glory, in the Body of
Creation, and came forth imbodied in the Creaturely form, whereby it was
separated in its own Region and being, as a peculiar SOURCE in the SPHERE
wherein it was brought forth, thus imbodied in form, over which the WHEELS
moved, in their SEVEN TURNS and overturnings.

XLVI.
And all properties in the outward Wheel, came forward in the Annual Motion
thereof, but that which came forth in its DIURNAL Motion, went BACKWARD from
the first moving cause of all beings in Creatures and things, though it was
also forward in the course and race which it had to run, which in reference to
the INWARD WHEEL, was SIDEWAYES from EAST to WEST, whereby the Wheels came to
move through the whole frame of the Heavens, both EAST, WEST, NORTH, and SOUTH,
in its course, which was of thirty years, of thirty months, of thirty days,
and thirty hours.

XLVII.
But the course in the Inward Wheel, was of TWELVE YEARS, making a separation
of all that came forth in the twelve hours of the day, in the light whereof it
was given for man to work; and TWELVE HOURS of the night, (that came stealing
on Men and all other Creatures) wherein no man can work; and of the Twelve
MONTHS of the year, whereby the hours of the day became multiplied into their
number, separating between Winter and Summer.

XLVIII.
And this was the ground of all ANNUAL Motion, in the Wheels, which from the
fifth day came FIVE YEARS forward, wherein God had glory in the work of
Separation, in its divided Properties and Qualities, that made SEVEN REVOLVES
in a Week, a Month and a Year, of a natural Day, of TWELVE HOURS, divided from
the night.

CHAP. V. Describing the Government of Nature, as it was brought forth under
the Power of four Forms, in the first FOUR BEASTS.
XLIX.
THen I saw until the BEAST himself had taken unto him FIVE HEADS and NINE
HORNS, on each Head was a Horn, but on the Head in the midst of the four, which
was the fifth Head, were FIVE Horns; and over his Heads and Horns past
THIRTY-FIVE DAYS, and a course in the Moon was exalted for a season, but the
Beast was driven EASTWARD; and he came forth again, and received a Wound on the
Head, which was in the midst, but the Wound was healed up, and he was driven
from the Face of the Earth; and I said, Whither is he gone? To which the Angel
replied, He is gone into the EAST, until THIRTY DAYS: divide what comes forth
in FIFTEEN YEARS.

L.
But Day and Night being separated in both Worlds, in which the Two great
Lights were moved about in their overruling Power, the glory of the Power of
Supremacy in GOD became manifest in both grounds (to wit, the ground and cause
of both the DAY and NIGHT) for the man whose Face was exalted in the Principle
of Air in the Heavens, magnified the sufferance of God, by his Spirit for a
season, against the Creature and Creation of God, which became a MARRED IMAGE
of the IDEA in all Forms in Nature, though it was the Workmanship of his Hands.

LI.
And the Glory and Luster of all STARS, distinguishable in their Operation and
Qualities over Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, became exalted forms which
had TINCTURE among the dignified Virtues in Natures Course, and Bond of
Equality in Government, out of which the DRAGON made up his Tail in the
division of the Heavens, which were moved about, and drew the Creature under
the power of Destruction.

LII.
Though the Body of Light and Glory, through which the Suns Luster came thus to
shine, was and is UNMOVABLE, except thus in its suffering, wherein it did move
as it was MOVED, and no otherwise; for it was not moveable from the Eternal
CENTER in all beings, (which is unalterable) but from (or in) Nature, whereby
the fullness of all glory remained incomprehensible, but the WORKER was therein
apprehended in a shadow, and the glory of God seen darkly, as in a Glass.

LIII.
For after all forms in the work of Creation were finished, according to what I
saw come forth out of the Womb of Eternity, the WHEELS came to move over these
forms in Nature, which stood subject to the Power of God, in the CHANGE which
was come into the WORLDS; and the name of the FIFTH DAYS work in God, was in
the Heavenly Language, the ORB of MAHALALEEL, in which the QUINTESSENCE of life
strove in a Mystery, among the forms of Nature.

LIVE.
But as the Worlds continued sinking in their state and condition, wherein I
beheld all things and Creatures, thus brough forth; that THIRD which abode
exalted in the Region of Air, could not come into form in that creaturely
being, without great hurt and wrong to the Body of Nature, therefore were all
forms in Nature corrupted into MONSTROUS SHAPES, through the striving and
struggling which I saw in the Air.

LV.
And as that which came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, was brought FIVE
DAYS forward, for manifestations sake, I beheld a Principle of Corruption and
Destruction that came to be allowed, to work up its Power in a Mystery, through
and over all forms that were come into being, in the OLD WORLD, which remained
suffering under those THREE, and under that, through which these Two became
imbodied from the Womb of Nature, (in the Creaturely form and being, in that
FIFTH DAY) who were separated into the Principles of AIR and WATER thus made
distinguishable.

LVI.
For of the THREE that strove to come forth out of the Womb of Eternity
imbodied in the Creaturely form and being, there were but only Two that became
incorporated from the Womb of Nature, though there was the MULTIPLICITY of
FORMS and the variety of ESSENCES concerned therein; And as I beheld the effect
of what came forth, through the contest in the place of Conception, the
BEHEMOTH possessed the SEVENTH PART of the Worlds, in which the WATERS were
held, even as LEVIATHAN possessed the Waters themselves.

LVII.
Yea through the drying up of the THIRD PART of the corruptible Waters on the
THIRD DAY, that which abode in the Air, in which the Firmament was placed,
became a mighty and Potent PRINCE and GOD of the WORLDS, which impregnated on,
and blew up the stern-harsh-FIRE, in the enkindled qualities of Divine Justice
against the Creature, by whom SIN took occasion to work up the power of Death
(over the Body of Nature) through a Law in the Members, wherein the
concupiscence wrought, against the Law of the Mind, under which the Nature of
all Creatures was brought forth and subjected, through the contrariety of the
Spirit of Enmity, that tinctured the ELEMENTAL qualities of the Worlds, with
the harshness thereof, against the regulating power of order.

LVIII.
For that which sunk in the fall, became imbodied again, in form anew, after I
had beheld the dispersing abroad of all that came forth out of the Womb of
Eternity, in its fallen Properties and Qualities, which settled in the Created
being of all powers of Nature in the imbodied form, which was brought forward
into BEING, under the power of Corruption, over which I beheld the motion of
the WHEELS, until it became EQUINOCTIAL.

LIX.
And it was SIX DAYS forward, and six days backward, in what was wrought up
into FORM, through the operation in Properties and Qualities of what was
endless, in the WORLDS, wherein the FOUR BEASTS which I beheld, came forth into
manifestation; and these four had the Face of a LION, and the Face of a CHERUB
(or Calf) and the Face of a MAN, and the Face of an EAGLE; and they moved in
the WHEELS, over all that came forth imbodied in FORM, while place and time
endured.

LX.
And thus did I behold, until all that came forth thus FALLEN in the bodily
frame, was again returning and centring in an Eternal Rest and Quiet IN THE
LORD, where it became immovable, steadfastly abounding in the good Fruit of Joy
and Rejoicing, wherein the Creator of all forms in NATURE had first planted it;
and therein had God finished all work and labor in the beginning of CREATION,
which is become the Seventh DAY in NATURE, to that which remains capable of
entering into Rest, that is formed therein, which is the ground of torment and
disquiet to the Spirit of the WICKED ONE.

CHAP. VI. Describing the coming forth of the first Seven Nations of the Worlds
into the forms of Nature.
LXI.
THese are the Generations of the the WORLDS, in the day that God created the
HEAVENS and the EARTH, when he beheld it without form and void, for it was an
Emptiness and dark NOTHING, before he Created it into FORM; through the power
of the Word of LIFE, in which God willed the coming forth of that which was to
replenish it in time and place.

LXII.
Wherein all that was brought forth, in the Dominion of Innocence; In ADAM, was
a subjection to the forming part of the IMAGE that mankind was stated in,
according to the Mind and Will of the Spirit of GOD in him REVEALED, whose
conditions for Good or Evil, are concerned in what he rules in and over.

LXIII.
For the Earth was not now, without form, nor in its voidness and emptiness,
but was filled and replenished with Creatures and Things, which were created
beautiful in their place and season; and the World was set in their Hearts, the
beauty and glory of which, did wither and pass away, as the flowers of the
Field; And all that stood IMBODIED, under the power of corruption in time and
place, was consumed, so that the Works of God in that STATE, could not be
beheld from the beginning to the end thereof.

LXIV.
And the Government of God, through the power of all Properties (in the
ELEMENTAL WORLDS) was manifest in those Four forms of the BEAST in Nature,
wherein the effect of all produced from the FIERY HEAVENS, was comprehended for
Governments-sake, in the form of a LION, and there came a Voice from the HEART
of the fire, as from the Heart of the LION, let the Earth keep silent, while
the Islands renew their strength.

LXV.
For darkness came over all that stood manifest in form (wherein the Creature
sought to glory in the imbodied will of SELF-EXCELLENCY) which was moved
toward the PIT of perpetual SILENCE, to inhabit the NOTHINGNES through such a
REVOLVE in the turning about and overturning of the Worlds in the motion of the
WHEELS.

LXVI.
And over the face of the mighty deeps was a thick Cloud, and over the PEOPLE,
who are the unstable Waters, was the gross thick darkness, and the Nations of
the Earth were angry, and moved at this coming forth of the Lord. And I beheld
the Worlds in their divided Qualities and Properties, wherein was preparation
for a NEW Heaven and a NEW Earth; and the Face and form of the MAN whom I saw,
went both forward and backward in the Heavens, according to the form and frame
of the Worlds, in the VISION of the Wheels, from those FIVE DAYS wherein I
beheld the MOON striving to increase her recovered strength toward NEW MOON,
to the reducing of that which was lost in the KALENDS of the Months.

LXVII.
And until the end of NINE and TWENTY days, I saw the IDES of the Month in a
Mystery, working up a form to the new created being of all things substantial
in an eternal existence. And the Face and form of the Man, whom I beheld
exalted in the Heavens, was turned toward the South. For he was not able to
behold the illustrious breaking-forth of the glory of the DAY that was risen
upon the Earth.

LXVIII.
And the form of the Man whom I had seen placed in the GARDEN, was divided into
TWAIN, to wit, into Masculine and Feminine, through whom the Heavens came to
multiply their forms in the Dual number over the Earth, whereby the strivings
in the Earthly Womb came to be, through these Two NATIONS.

LXIX.
For by reason of a settled subjection in the ground of Nature, from which the
Man took being, (to wit, out of the LIMUS of the Earth) there had not come
forth a Man to till and tear it up until a Second motion from God did work and
operate, after all his works were finished in the DIURNAL MOTION, which became
the NIGHT of the FOURTH DAY in Nature, or FIRST DAY of God's glory in the
Celestial Body, (betwixt the Principles whereof a Separation was made) which
had a great LIGHT to rule its darkening qualities.

LXX.
And through the working properties in Nature, which had the Annual Motion, the
preparation of a SECOND separated day in NATURE came up in the Resurrection of
Glory in the JUST, wherein the partakers of glory in a FIRST Resurrection were
planted together in what the SON of MAN wrought up into the World through
suffering.

LXXI.
And the Motion of Separation in the Turns of the WHEELS, came forward, until
the midst of FIVE DAYS; And I numbered the days of the continuance of the
FIRST MAN, that came forth imbodied from the Womb of Eternity (to keep and
dress the Vineyard wherein he was placed) which were 930 days, or Two years and
Seven MONTHS, which work was settled among the forms in NATURE, and therein made
destinguishable.

LXXII.
And I beheld the course of the SUN, of the Glory of the Day of the SON of MAN,
moved FIVE MONTHS backward, to bring forward the SEVEN MONTHS, under which the
BODY of NATURE stood subjected, for a change sake, in the separation of the
THREE PRINCIPLES, that became imbodied in the Two NATIONS, that strove in the
WOMB of NATURE, to bring into appearance and manifestation the WORKS of WONDER,
through which the man tra^l all the two YEARS and SEVEN MONTHS, under the
workings and motions of the power of DEATH.

CHAP. VII. Describing the manner how those seven Nations, came forth thus
imbodied in FORM.
LXXIII.
AND those SEVEN NATIONS, that strove in a Mystery, came forth in the Two
GENERATIONS, that degenerated from the glory of his DAY, in which day his Sun
was divided after that, of ONE, the MAN was become TWAIN, standing in the midst
of that wherein he was brought forth, wherein I beheld the course of the Sun of
his Day, steared through Two WORLDS, and the MOON became exalted thereby, in
the changeability of her way and course; by which the Body of Nature was
afflicted, to the subjecting the Woman's will and desire, to BODILY PANGS, in
which was indurance and suffering to the Creature of God; And as the ORDER of
Nature, grew under corruptible courses in the WORLDS, the shining of Glory ( in
both WORLDS,) was a luster in the frame, standing still TEN DEGREES, to bring
back and recover what was lost in the course of Degeneration.

LXXV.
And on the Suns coming into Virgo, which is the Virgins Night-house, in the
BOWELS of GLORY in the HEAVENS, of an INWARD WORLD, I beheld the form of Two
SUNS placed in the Firmament of the Fathers Glory; for the ECLIPS of the Sun
was very great, while this LABOR continued in the Body of Nature, wherein that
which was divided from the Man, came forth in the midst of the FIFTH MONTH,
(after the Works of God were finished) but counting those days wherein the Sun
stood at a stay, and the five days wherein the Virgin in Man's form, was slain,
it was the concluding of five MONTHS (under that which moved neither forward
nor backward for a day.)

LXXVI.
And as the forms of NATURE stood thus divided and separated, I beheld the
Woman traveling in the Heavens, to bring forth into being what became imbodied
from the WOMB of NATURE; and the Body of Nature came under SUFFERINGS, by the
twain with whom she was in labor, in the production of which, the one came
forty five days before, and the other forty five days after her forty weeks,
under which the course of Nature was subjected.

LXXVII.
And for SEVENTY DAYS, did the Moon prevail again, in the Woman's labor for
strength toward a Second Birth, which was thirty days, after the Sun had
recovered strength in the course, under which the WORLDS were subjected, in the
frame of all forms in Nature, for it was the expiration of the FIRST YEAR; and
FORTY DAYS after, the Woman again conceived a MAN, whose glory came forth in
the SECOND YEARS WORK.

LXXVIII.
But in the conclusion of labor to the Creature; In the first year, the Body
of Nature stood divided in the Creaturely Form, (wherein I came to the Sight of
the Mystery of what stood unrevealed to the World, under Characters of Blood)
the wonderful frame of the Works of God (in the Book of Life) wherein he is
well pleased, was thereby written in the sealed Testimony of the Spirit of
Prophecy, committed to the Hand of the Angel of Strength; And the course of the
Sun wrought in a MYSTERY of distance from the MOON, in the changeability of
what it effects over the Body of NATURE.

LXXIX.
But the exaltation of Beauty, in the luster of what the Creature was Planted
in, (according to the Seed of its Birth) was a moveability in its GLORY,
toward the Head of NATURE, which broke forth in the Head and Face of a RAM;
for after the Seal of God, on the day of the FOUR BEASTS in NATURE came to be
taken off the Book of Life, in which sense stood manifest, the virtue of the
Wonderful and Miraculous frame of his Spirits working, (in its various
dispensations) yet the destroying power of the four Angels, that stood on the
four corners of the Earth, was bound in the great River EUPHRATES, until their
Year, Month, Day and Hour came to be revealed to the Glory of a
Wonder-working-God.

LXXX.
And on the tenth day of the first Month of the second Year, the Sun came up
again in his course, and entered the first Point of ARIES; and as the Woman
also recovered her strength, she was delivered of that for which she traveled
on the second day of the second Month, as the Moon was entering her House of
Exaltation; for that which she labored to bringing forth, was five Nations,
which stood separate among the forms in Nature, in the second years Revolution,
which was thirty days onward in the year; and from the ground of destruction,
to the first FORM in the Woman, was Seventy days; it being effected Forty
days before the Revolution of the first Years.

LXXXI.
This was a fifth Man in his Nation, come forth into Form in the Creaturely
being; And on the first Day of the fourth Month, the Woman was again delivered
of a SIXTH MAN, formed in his Nation in the Creaturely being; as the Sun came
toward Cancer, (the Breast of Nature) in which the Moon stood exalted nine
degrees in Taurus, before the Sun entered the first point of Cancer, in which
the Sun was greatly Eclipsed.

LXXXII.
But the last day of the ninth Month, the Woman was delivered of a seventh Man
in his Nation, wherein the Bow-man was concerned, for he rode in the Chariot of
NATURE, as a great PROPHET, who continued a just year, and was not, for God
took him to himself, (in the Revolution of the Heavens) until the times of
Restitution came, for the delivering up of what had been retained in a Mystery;
and through the loosening of the Angels in the great River Euphrates, the
Bow-Man came forth manifest, in the house of the Angels Exaltation, (to wit,
the ninth House of Mansions in the HEAVENS.

LXXXIII.
And the eighth Day of the eleventh Month, the Woman again conceived and
brought forth an Eighth Man, formed in his Nation, who saw the end of the old
and first Worlds; And after the revolution of the Second Year, I beheld the
Moon regaining strength and glory from the course of the Sun, from which she
borrowed her light; And on the second day of the fifth Month of the third year,
the Moon was strong in her own House of Exaltation, whereby the Sun suffered a
third Eclipse, on his coming into the Heart of Nature, which is the House
wherein he glories as his own.

LXXXIV.
And the Woman was delivered of a ninth Man in his Nation, for the bringing
forth of whom the first seven were destroyed in their Nations, yet in him was a
Seed preserved to replenish the Earth anew; and into the renewed Habitation of
Wonders in the Translations of the Body of Nature (working among the forms of
Creation) the substance was taken and gathered, but from the Heavens was a
Voice, The young Man's wound has cured my hurt.

CHAP. VIII. Describing the wonderful operation of the Vision, in the opening
of the Heavens, testified through the Judgment of God, against what came forth
imbodied in Form, in those seven Nations.
LXXXV.
THrough the striving of three Nations, from the Womb of Eternity, two
Generations of Men continued laboring under what was degenerated into the
imbodied FORM for Generations-sake; And between those three was two Months for
the separation of each, in their Revolution, wherein the Virgin in Nature
suffered, by the power of Death, that entered the Creation of God.

LXXXVI.
On the last day of the Seventh Month, of the third year, died the first Man
that became imbodied in FORM from the Womb of Nature, as the Virgin in Nature
lost her Crown, and the Woman also come to suffer Death, in Two Generations of
Men, concerned in the contest in the Heavens; but the cause of such pangs and
sufferings that rested on the Body of Nature, was a fallen ground in the
Earthly Principle, which stood in and out of the WATERS, as a fourth part of
the Elemental Worlds; and it was the last FORM, under the power whereof the
Life of the Creature remained suffering.

LXXXVII.
For the Seventh FORM in Nature, that became imbodied in the Creaturely being,
was exalted on the Earth, which proceeded from the FIERY Heavens, from whence
the Man took his dominion, who was taken up unto God, and was not, on the last
Day of the ninth Month, of the third Year; And the THIRD that proceeded from
the Man, imbodied from the Womb of Eternity, and that took being amongst the
Forms in Nature, died in that FIRST Principle, after the conclusion of the
Eleventh Month, and was dissolved in the Earth.

LXXXVIII.
But those Two by whom the Woman in Nature came to suffer Death, who were slain
by the hard labor, under which the Creature and Creation of God remains
groaning, died also in the Earth, in the Fourth Year; The One on the Sixteenth
day of the Second month; The Other on the sixteenth day of the Fourth month;
And a Fifth Man imbodied in Form, died on the Thirteenth day of the Twelfth
month; The Sixth, on the nineteenth day of the Seventh month of the Fifth year;
And the Seventh, on the Twenty-fourth day of the Seventh month, which from the
finishing of God's Work, into that wonderful frame, in the Generation of the
Heavens, was the Seventeenth day of the seventh month.

LXXXIX.
For that which came Seven days and seven years Forward in the motion of the
WHEELS, was brought under five months trial, both by WATER and by FIRE, (being
that which came forth manifest in five Days) and grew up under the Revolution
of Seven Months, as the forms of Nature were moved backward, under the power of
Destruction; that through the dissolution of that which came into being, fallen
under the power of Corruption, that which is Heir of Immortality might arise,
and come to possess a Crown of Rejoicing in God, through the work of
Restoration of those forms in Nature, into their Eternal Existence, that have
a substantial being in the first forming cause of an IMAGE to the work of
Creation.

XC.
And while the VISION of God was on me, and the ANGEL of God was talking with
me, I saw the Man that was driven out of the Garden of God, (which is the Glory
of the World in its Paradise) came again onward in the way from which he went
toward the rest of SELFS Annihilation, that had caused the bodily form to come
under the power of death, who (notwithstanding that he remained imbodied in
Principles fallen and sunk under the power of Corruption and Destruction in the
forms of Nature, did yet abide in the WORLD, and the World in him, until
Paradise, that was lost and died from him, and he from it, began again to
spring up in the place and condition wherein he was put; as considered in that
state.

XCI.
And from the Heavens I heard a Voice, Death and Destruction; I am become thy
Grave, and O Grave, I am become thy Plague; But dread and fear compassed me
about as with a Garment, for the miraculous workings of the Power of God in the
Vision had bended me, until all faculties of my mind became subject to that
invisible sense, from whence my Spirit received the Illuminations of that which
sought to come forth, though for a trials sake to my patience, the
understanding of that which came up in the MOTION, was oft-times sealed before
me, after I began to write thereof.

XCII.
For as I was amongst a number of people assembled to wait upon the Lord, I was
taken in a TRANCE, and my knees smote together, trembling, because of the fear
of God in my Heart, and the terror of his Judgments on my Spirit; But on that
same night, as I lay on my Bed, I saw the form of a GREAT MAGISTRATE, and the
Honor and Respect which he had, was different from all the powers of the
Earth, for before him went the form of DEATH, as a man walking on his Feet, and
about him were great Attendance sounding Bells on every side; and they
continued thus to ring these little Bells, till he ascended a place of
Judicature, where he had great reverence and respect.

XCIII.
And amongst the crowd that bended to his power, I was acted in the like
posture; and being otherwise convinced in my Spirit, I was smote with great
dread, and sought ease by weeping and mourning; and coming to sit down by the
side of a Wall, I was awakened in a sense of the Agony which was upon me: after
which the glory of the SUN, through which I beheld the Wonders of God in the
Vision, came out of the HEAD of Natures Government descending toward its
HEART, (which was like the Heart of a LION) the Glory of which SUN, was exalted
in the Head and Face of a RAM amongst the forms of Nature.

XCIV.
And in the night season, being perfectly awakened, I was brought into an
enclosed ground, which was very dark, wherein boisterous storms and tempests
were arisen, for I was led somewhat out of my way in the conflict; and drew
toward a little Town, near my way, wherein I was cruelly dealt withal; and
though it was late in the night, yet I gave up in patience, and drew toward a
heap of straw in the way-side, whereon I lay down to rest me.

XCV.
And by the excess of Rain which began to fall, I was driven to leave that
place also, and went into the Fields again, where there brake forth before me a
WHITE LIGHT in the shape of a SHEEP, so far as I could discern it, which being
round about me in a flame, did surprise me with fear, whereby the form of the
ANGEL vanished; and before him went a noise like the crackling of the rotten
Hedge, which left me much in amazement, so that I could not find the way out of
the Field, or Enclosure, in two hours time, till I had given up in my mind, and
forgiven those that thrust me out, after which I found my way, and came quietly
to the Journeys end.

XCVI.
After which the Angel of God led me about the circumference of the Worlds, to
behold the surface thereof; and he brought me into a green Field, where I saw
the frame and form of the HEAVENS, and of the Natures of all Creatures in the
Worlds, and the WHOLE was like unto WATER; And there were a THOUSAND Hills, and
a Thousand Springs of Water; And in the same manner, as I was acted under the
exercise of the Vision, so appeared the form of the Worlds, wherein came forth
a great Number of WOMEN, who at last were reduced into SEVEN, and each of them
sought to lay hold on me, but I fled in great fear; and lost the sight of the
Angels Glory for a time.

CHAP. IX. Declares how I was exercised under the Power of the Vision.
XCVII.
AS I was carried by the Spirit of the Lord, into a great WILDERNESS, the Angel
of God, by whom the Forms of Nature were thus awakened in me, brought up the
appearance of that Wilderness-state, into manifestation, in which the Woman
continued laboring in the Heavens, which Heavens did multiply all forms in
Nature into their number and order, in which the power of Creation (in
individual Bodies) was separated in its being, into two third parts of such
forms, and the seventh part of the Worlds became corruptible Earth.

XCVIII.
From which one THIRD PART thereof was dried up on the third day, wherein
Nature had its operation over all Bodies brought into Form, in the Work of
CREATION, which was the TENTH PART of that which remained under the exercise of
TRIALS, both by FIRE and by WATER, and the two third parts of those WATERS were
comprehensible in their Qualities, from the fiery Heavens, whence the
circumference of the out-spread Firmament was filled with Airy Bodies, and the
Earth and Waters were replenished with living Creatures, which came under the
refining power of those renewing Faculties and Virtues in the forms of Nature,
imbodied from those WATERS.

XCIX.
But what came thus forth, in seven natural days, came under trial, in the
operation of three essential days, wherein the power of God was manifest for
the recovering of a SENSE in the Creature, of that work wherein God does glory
and is praised, which is the Resurrection of the Just, in the first and last
power of Creation, wherein Majesty is Exalted; and therein was manifest A
restoration to all forms in NATURE, fallen in the WORLDS, wherein the MAN, who
had caused destruction to the Body of Nature, was called to account in the
Trial, while suffering remained in that third PRINCIPLE, in which he was
imbodied.

C.
And as the WATERS were gathered together in their Course, into the seventh
part of the WORLDS, which had form in the Earth, those two living Creatures,
called BEHEMOTH or HENOCH and Leviathan, were separated into their being,
because it was so ordered in Wisdoms Counsellings, that they could not both
live together in one place; But according to the operation of the day in
Nature, in which they were brought forth, they possessed each part of the
Worlds, wherein the great WHALE had dominion in the moist part thereof, and the
Behemoth caused the Image of Giants in the forms of Nature, brought forth in
Woman, in the coming down of the Watchers into the Creaturely conceivance
(through that which possessed the Earth.)

CI.
For in the Firmament, placed between Waters and Waters, living Creatures were
multiplied (in Airy Bodies) from those Fiery Heavens; which Creatures possessed
that third part of the Worlds, in which the Waters were dried up from the Earth
sixty thousand furlongs in its circumference, which is the fourth part of what
remains measurable in the forms of Nature, wherein one third part of the
Waters is comprehended.

CII.
And as the way and course of what was Generated from the HEAVENS above, and
Earth beneath, was traced in the HEIGHTS and DEPTHS of the WORLD, there
appeared pourtraied forth (through the motion of the Wheels) in the Vision, a
GREAT CITY built on seven Mountains, which were seven Foundations on which it
settled, and the Mountain in the Midl of the Seven, which was the Seventh, stood
higher then the rest, on which was built and founded the tenth part of the City
which I thus beheld.

CIII.
In which place it was compassed about with Fowls of the Air, and wild Beasts
of Prey, wherein the Enemy, who is the power of Destruction, went about
continually seeking to betray and devour; but I could not conceive that those
BRUIT Creatures did build and rear up the Foundation of that City; therefore I
concluded in my mind, that some Men had been there to build its Foundation,
though their Houses were left unto them DESOLATE; And as I was thus musing in
my mind concerning these things, I came to apprehend my self a wayfaring Man,
and a wanderer in the World, groaning in Spirit to see the issue of what was
thus visioned for; I came again to behold the form of the Woman in the Heavens,
that continued in labor and travel, in that Wilderness-state, until the time
of her deliverance was come.

CIV.
And as she had conceived the Birth of Life, under the power of contrariety,
that wrought in the HEAVENS, through two Nations, on which the blessing of God
began to rest, the Woman prevailed in the World, for their bringing forthout of
the WOMB of Nature, though the forms in Creation remained fallen and sunk,
under the Image of the Beast (on those that have received his Mark, or have his
Name and number) while the Woman remained clothed with changeable rayments.

CV.
And on the tenth day of the fourth month of the fifth year, I beheld a great
Eclipse of the Moon also, which became divided in Cancer (the Breast of Nature)
for the burden of struglings and strivings in the Heavens, that had rested on
the imbodied being of the shoulders of Nature, wherein the Man took form, came
into the Breast of the Created being, wherein he stood imbodied, though driven
from the face or first beauty of the Earth, in that double-bodied Form, against
whom the flames of the Cherub turned every way, to preserve the way of the Tree
of Life.

CVI.
While the Face of the RAM in Nature, stood behind the Man, who was created
LORD in that Dominion, that form in Nature became therein, a House of
Exaltation, (to the Sun of his days Glory:) and while the Vision hereof
continued, and that the Angel of God was thus talking with me; I was pursued by
those living Creatures, in the form of Women, and I took my flight over the
Mountains, the entrances of which were wide and very broad, at my going forth
thereon, but in the conclusion they grew very narrow in the World (about the
circumference of which I was led.)

CVII.
But the forms of those Women were dispersed and fled into dissolution, as I
was in a great strait of my mind, through which the entrances led me (in my
passage,) and they were reduced into one in number, as I came through those
straits, wherein I beheld the parting of the great Seas, my way was so narrow,
that I could not pass any further, but in great danger of falling.

CVIII.
For the Precipice was very steep, (as I looked down toward the ground) which
was like a WALL of Stone; And being made sensible of the danger wherewith I was
beset in my way and passage, I was taken in great fear, and trembling seized
me, because of the terror of the Lord on my Spirit, until I came to sit down on
the dust of that Hill or great Mountain, in that I could not go on any further,
with security of life, and therefore sought to ease me, by mourning alone; and
there broke down and fell on my left HAND, the form of a tottering Wall,
whereby I came to the sight of a Pleasant Field, and therein continued for a
time.

CHAP. X. Describing the Power of those Waters in the Vision of the Wheels.
CIX.
AND as I continued separated from the comfort and enjoyment of good, in the
visitation of the Angel, there appeared before me a great and deep Pit, which
was very Green, yet like unto WATERS, and as I climbed up to the top of these
Waters, they appeared to be a great Mountain, that stood on HEAPS above the
Earth, though they still bore the form of WATERS, whose concavity swelled under
me, turning its hollowness into that Mountanous shape of Waters, (as I came to
stand upright on the top thereof.)

CX.
Wherein I beheld my pass ge over all these WATERS, and had nothing to support
me, but a Line in the Hand of the Angel, by which I was born up and kept from
falling; and the Angel of God brought me a LADDER, which he lifted up toward
me, while I came to see my self as on the top of a high House, driven thither
by the Woman's fury and rage, whereon I rather chused to dwell, then to come
down unto the Ground, and possess the Palace with the Brawling Woman; yet was
there a WOE remaining on the World, in the state wherein I beheld it overtaken
with afflictions.

CXI.
But I was to come down on the Ground, and the place whereon I alighted, was
like to a great CITY that stood beyond the Waters; and in the night season, as
I was laid down to take my rest, the form of the Woman was again awakened
before me, and there stood near her the appearance of a Man of fierce
countenance, with very long Hair, whom she instigated to disquiet me from my
rest, because I lay not straight in the Bed, and accordingly by violence I was
pulled out of the Bed, and was both Naked and Hungry, and mourned in Spirit at
the sight of her Discourtesy.

CXII.
And because she proffered to turn me out of Doors, and to dispossess me of a
Habitation, it was very irksom for me to come forth; but with yearning Bowels I
bemoaned the state under which I was fallen by her dis ourtesie, and refused to
depart WILLINGLY, without leaving the sense of my wrong upon her; after which I
was brought forth toward the place of my ABODE; and as I came before the Posts
of my Door, there was inkindled a great flame, and a fire broke forth, in the
midst of which was a Brass Pan, and under it was a Morsel baked, with which my
Body was refreshed, and I had a place of accommodation suitable to my necessity.

CXIII.
Thus was the truth of the Angels Visitation confirmed to me with signs of
deliverance, though a secret incredulity wrought against my life's peace and
satisfaction (in the conflict) with the sense of which I was daily beset, yet
durst not any more ask a sign, or tempt the LORD my GOD; but I afterward
beheld a great flame toward the South, and toward the East, and it being at a
great distance from me, the Angel of God lifted me up from the ground to behold
it, and my Head was born up as with a Man's Hand, and I had the sense given me
(secretly) of great calamities that should come from the South; And I again saw
the form of a fiery Furnace, in which was the Fat of fed Beasts, which boiled
up with a great scum, and it arose over the Furnace, and inkindled a great
flame in the House, which I expected to see consumed, but it was miraculously
preserved, and I had no hurt therein.

CXIV.
And the day from whence I beheld the multiplying of all forms in Nature from
the Heavens, was a day of gloominess and darkness, and thick Clouds broke forth
from the awakened tempests and storms, until the Earth was overwhelmed with the
scourge, that covered the same in the overflowing of its deluge, from the
Fountain of great DEEPS that were opened, and the great City that I saw was
overspread, even unto its tenth part, wherein the WORLD stood six parts under
the WATERS, and that sixth part was a tenth from the Heavens, in which all
forms in Nature became more narrow (to the Creaturely sense) through a
palpability in the WATERS.

CXV.
In which time the Waters prevailed over the Earth sixty thousand Furlongs, and
they abode thereon for the term of five Months, and Blood prevailed for sixteen
hundred Furlongs, unto the Horse-Bridles, from the Wine Press of the great
City; For after I came to see the appearance of two Moons, (in the Firmament of
the Heavens) I beheld the Worlds moved two ways, for the bringing forth of
those two Nations for which the Woman was in Labor, (in Her two days Travel)
and there were two days difference between them, as they thus came forth in
that which brought all forms in Nature under a power of Corruption and
Destruction.

CXVI.
Of the One she was delivered on the tenth day of that fourth Month, and of the
Other, on the twelfth day of the same Month, which through a backward drawing
in the Worlds, did cause the Month to be divided in the account of days; for
he that came first forth, drew the power of the Heavens Northward, whereby the
second, who came under the power of the Awakened South wind, and whose Face was
Southward, drew the Worlds under the power of the Waters, through which that
second Man was exercised in his Dominion, by the Increase and Decrease of the
Waters, for the full term of a Year, which I beheld in the accomplishment of
that sixth Year.

CXVII.
And in a Month and twelve days did they increase to their height, though they
continued prevailing on the Earth for five Months, and for seven Months did
they fall backward, the conflict of which Year I beheld, in which time I saw
the form of the two Men in their Nations, awakened in the Worlds, and wandering
in that Wilderness, both under the Denomination of VAGABONDS, for they appeared
like Wanderers and Wayfaring Men in the Earth; and there was a third Man in
form, that came forth in the condition of a Wanderer or Vagabond.

CXVIII.
The one of them I beheld flying from those Wild Beasts of PREY that possessed
that desolate Place, and that which he fled from, was the danger of pernicious
ways under the Beasts power, who made have to flee out of Babylon, lest he
should partake of her Plagues; and thus flying, he sought another and better
Country and City; but the other, by means of a discontent with the pleasure
and delight, in the state of the glory (in which that City and Country was
first Planted) hunted after another and better state then that (in which was
the first blessing of God) and so wandered from, and lost its first Habitation,
which was defaced under the Enemies power, and become fallen under the workings
of corruption and darkness; and thus by conforming to, and complying with the
Enemies Power, he became really a VAGABOND from the Lord, and from the Glory of
his City and Habitation, though in the World he may have a Habitation very
Glorious, and be Lord of a City in the Earth.

CXIX.
But the third that I saw, bore the AFFLICTIONS, and abode in the CAUSE
thereof, until he became hardened under the Enemies Power, and suffered the
sting of that which overtook him in the Wilderness, which rested in the GROUND
of DESTRUCTION to the first Beauty and Glory of God in the Work of Creation;
for having neglected his own VINEYARD, whereby his BROTHER was SLAIN, (who was
made keeper of his VIRGIN) and his Garden being thereby overgrown with WEEDS,
and Nettles and Briars, (the Thorns of Corruption) he was made Keeper of the
VINEYARD of his BROTHER; and the Keeper of the Living LAMB of GOD, and SHEEP of
that everlasting sold, having his Life made a Sacrifice unto GOD, as
Inquisition came to be made for Blood, when the Voice came, Where is thy
Brother? and he replied, Am I my Brothers Keeper?

CXX.
And so came the Man that was thus made a Steward over that which was his
Brothers right, (as his Birthright therein was lost and forsited) over which
Vineyard he was appointed as a Keeper and Dresser, as a Servant in the Minority
of the Heir and owner thereof, (in the Resurrection of that which was first and
is last, the Elder Brother of all that believe in the Spirit of the JUST) to
Challenge a SELF-INTEREST and PROPRIETY therein, and refused to give the Owner
Due and Right, but did beat the SERVANTS that were sent for the Last Fruits
thereof, and sent them empty away, and in the end slew the Lamb and Son
himself, and scattered his Sheep from the Flock and Fold of Everlasting Rest,
which became a daily Sacrifice unto God, in the suffering State and Principle,
to reconcile the WORLD unto himself, through the destruction of the evil
therein, in that Nature that says SECRETLY, Come let us kill the Heir, that
the Inheritance may be ours.

CHAP. XI. Describing the Nature of the World in its fallen Principles, through
the Bondage of the Power of Corruption.
CXXI.
FOR while I beheld both these Wayfaring Men, in that WANDERING conditon, the
WATERS did MULTIPLY in abundance, and became a GREAT SEA, and the Angel of God
showed me a VESSEL that was erected and built in the Heavens, in four Months,
in which was the Pattern of that Heavenly Form, which through the Government of
God was manifest, in the Heavens of an Angelical World; in that all forms in
Nature fell under the Power of Corruption and Destruction, (while I beheld Gods
and Lords many concerned in the dominion of those THREE PRINCIPLES in Nature)
because of dishonorable USES in which their LORD employed them, though the
whole three were comprehended in that which was built and erected in the
HEAVENS.

CXXII.
And the Lord-like Mind and Spirit, that could not suffer any thing to be equal
with it, or to balance that self-conceit (through which he sought to subject
all to his own Will) was betrayed, and is the Betrayer; from the lovely TENT of
the Plain Man, whereby he weighed and measured (in that selfish-will) what was
proper to his state, that would rule alone, and purchase an Authority and
Dominion that was absolute, that he might be chief in the WORLDS, though (for
pre-eminence sake) he ventured the destruction of Glory (in that state) under
the workings of which, the FIRST PRINCIPLE in Nature led the Man that was first
brought forth under a suffering condition.

CXXIII.
For the MAN who was become PLANTER of a Vineyard, under the Power of
Corruption, grew slothful therein; and as he was surfeited with the Fruit
thereof, I beheld his nakedness in the TENT wherein he was placed, though self
was exalted and rejoiced, because of what was brought forth from the Ground of
CORRUPTION, that was thus tilled and torn up (under the power of the Enemy) for
Materials, wherewith the CITY was built, thus pourtraied forth in the Vision;
therefore was that CITY called by his Name HENOCH, or the Son of Man in those
fallen Principles, who was become a discoverer of the nakedness of that (and of
himself therein) which was by Nature his FATHER, and a Revealer of the SECRETS
thereof, in the Forms of Creation, possessing a REGION in the Seventh Part of
the WORLD, that is separated from the MOIST.

CXXIV.
And this Third Principle in Man, and Third Man in those three Principles, who
were in the cause of Destruction to the GLORY of the CITY which I saw, (through
whom notwithstanding it became Built, under that POWER of Corruption) was acted
in and under the POWER of both Good and Evil, while the World continued in that
State, wherein was Winter and Summer, and Seed-time and Harvest; But in the
State under which the Worlds were FALLEN, and under which all Principles in
Nature were subjected, in the Dominion of the BEAST over mankind, thus
degenerated from the Image, in which he was planted; there remained a Second WOE
on the Creature, who being found flying away, fled on (and from) the Sabbath
Day and Rest of God, through that which sought to avoid afflictions, and
shunned to keep in the Way wherein a sense of sufferings grew, on that which
was come on the Body of Nature.

CXXV.
And a THIRD WOE remained on the WOMAN that was with Child, and upon her that
was giving SUCK, though the time had been wherein the SHEPHERD carried his
Lambs in his Arms, and gently drove those that were with young, until he became
SMITTEN for the sake of his Flock, (from whom he durst not fly in the Winter,
or because of the WOLF) and through the Life which he laid down for his SHEEP,
prevailed with the Father, against that which had hindered the Creature from its
entering into the REST of God, whereby a DART was struck through his SOUL, that
every Man might be driven to his OWN; and that the thoughts and secrets of many
HEARTS might be REVEALED; for he could not draw back in a time of DANGER, but
endured the contradiction of sinners.

CXXVI.
And as I came to behold a strong ANGEL of God, with a Sealed Book in his Hand,
he placed one Foot on the Earth, and the other on the Waters, and stood on
both, between the Banks of HIDDEKEL, and the great River EUPHRATES; and he
lifted up the little Book unto the Heavens, and went backward to the parting of
the great SEAS, where were two great PROPHETS clothed in Sackcloth, whose
Prophecy was (one thousand two hundred and threescore days) a TESTIMONY of
what remained under suffering, to the preparing the way of the JUST, that the
Son of Man might come to inherit the Glory of his Temple, and unseal the
Mysteries of the Lambs Power, in opening the Book of Wonders written in the
Heavens, while I beheld the prevailing of the Waters, until a third part of the
EARTH was covered thereby.

CXXVII.
In which time the WATERS were decreased from off the Earth, and the Angel of
God gave me a Reed of a measuring Line, to measure the Waters and the Earth,
over which they prevailed (in the World;) and I measured the Waters at the
highest, ten Cubits over the Earth, and five Cubits under the Earth, in the
circumference of which a Man might Swim as in a great RIVER; And from the
Heavens, as all forms in Nature were multiplied, I beheld on the great Seas,
until there appeared the number of seventy Vessels sailing over the same; in
the front they were seven, and in each row ten, and in the midst of the six
stood that seventh Vessel, which was the first, into which was gathered the
Patterns of all forms in the Heavens, where the Creation of God did multiply.

CXXVIII.
And the VESSELS that I saw were born up above the rage and fury of the WATERS,
from whence the out-spread Firmament was enlarged in the Air, seven Cubits
upward, and ten Cubits from the Waters downwards to the Earth, on which it
centered, which was sventeen Cubits to the Head of the Image which I beheld,
that stood before the seventh Vessel, which was in the midst of the six, in the
front of the seventy; And behind the Vessel was the form of a DOVE, with golden
Wings stretched abroad in the Airy Firmament, and the Image glistered like the
Sun, and had the tincture of fine Gold, where the property of the Heavens
beautified the Feathers, that took form in Nature on the living Creature.

CXXIX.
And from the face of the Waters, as they prevailed over the Earth, was fifteen
Cubits to the Center of the Earth, in its sinking state, and it was two and
twenty Cubits in the circumference of the height, wherein the WATERS prevailed
for the space of these five months that they covered the Face of the EARTH,
after which I beheld them divided into four HEADS, as they came to be dispersed
(by an East Wind) which compasses about the whole EARTH, in its divided
QUARTERS.

CXXX.
And as the Vessels thereon became eased and delivered of their Burden, in
that which fell under the Power of Corruption, in the contrariety of all
Elemental Properties, imbodied in the Forms of Creation (wherein I beheld the
perishing of the first WORLDS glory in natural MAN, through that fallen state)
the Heavens also were discharged of Labor and Travel, under which the BODY of
NATURE suffered (in those forms) wherein that which caused the Sun to go back
ten Degrees, became manifest (among those forms in Nature) through the
corruptible Ground.

CXXXI.
And in the separation of the WORLDS, over which the Waters (that were driven
in HEAPS Westward) prevailed for the space of their five months, the falling
back of those WATERS, (driven by an EAST WIND) was North and South, wherein the
VESSELS arrived in their order place and number, but every thing that the Enemy
had power over (in that Corruptible state) perished in the WATERS, yet was a
SEED preserved through all those Storms and Tempests, (the strength of which
continued a Month and twelve Days) to replenish the Earth in its renewed
state, which was five days backward to the Months Nones, and seven days
forward in its IDES, from the seventeenth day of that seventh month, to the
twenty fourth day of the Month.

CXXXII.
For from the New of the MOON in that seventh month, (wherein the Waters brake
first forth) to the new of the MOON in the eighth month, was twenty nine days;
which month called BULL or a BUBLING, because of what again sprung up in the
WORLD (after the falling back of the WATERS under the Power of Corruption,
through which the Fruits of the EARTH perished) was the Month from whence the
Heavens began to manifest the multiplied Forms in Nature, under a corruptible
State, which is MARCHESHUAM in the falling away, but in the bubling up of all
forms of Nature in the New-created-Being, and renewed State of the WORLDS, (in
that same place) it is the springs of the WORLD, that are refreshing and
restorative, through the open Fountain of an everlasting good.

CHAP. XII. Describes the manner how those Vessels were discharged of their
burden, (among the created Forms in Nature) as also the Four Heads of the River
in the dividing of the Waters.
CXXXIII.
FRom the Tempests and Storms that I beheld, in the increase and prevailing of
those WATERS, whereby the World was overspread and overwhelmed in its old
corruptible State; the Heavens were darkened, and all forms in Nature remained
under a Cloud, until each month in the year had finished its COURSE in the
Bodily frame, through the Revolution and change that is wrought up in the
Vegitative Being, wherein the TREE of LIFE came to bear twelve sorts of FRUITS,
changing its Fruit every Month, until its Leaves came to heal the NATIONS.

CXXXIV.
For that which divided between Principle and Principle in the Worlds, said,
let there be light in the Firmament of the Heavens, wherein the Waters are
gathered together unto their own PLACE, and Light shined from the Firmament of
the Heavens in those Waters, in the Separation of all darkening Qualities into
its NIGHT of Obscurity, which notwithstanding was overruled in the hour of
Darkness, until the second great Light broke forth in the subjected Qualities
of that Spirit in the Body of Nature, by, which the Night has been ruled.

CXXXV.
And those VESSELS that were fitted and prepared for the use of the Creator,
from the Heavens, were ordained to the service of the LORD and MASTER by whom
they were employed, and it was the Creators Glory to suffer them to be raised
up, whatever dishonorable uses they were employed to; which falling under the
rage and fury of the ENEMY, that first prevailed over the World, (by those
Waters) the Vessels (in which were God's Tents) were notwithstanding preserved,
and discharged of their Burdens, in the manner following (through all
opposition in the fury of what the Waters were raised unto.)

CXXXVI.
And whatever the body of Nature traveled under, the WOMAN was eased of, in
the discharge of what was carried on the Waters to a HAVEN of REST, of the
burden whereof the Heavens were discharged in the strength of the Storm, or
according to the decrease of the Waters, wherein a third part of those Vessels
which were drawn toward the SOUTH, came under a Trial by fire, and the seventh
part of the Earth was tried by Waters; but that other third part that was drawn
toward the NORTH, was reserved to a Trial (in the third and last day) by the
strength of Judgment in both.

CXXXVII.
Of the first Vessel, the Heavens were eased and unburdened on the first day of
the ninth Month, whereby the World was first planted, in that which has
overspread its QUARTERS; and the time wherein I beheld the Heavens to be
discharged, was two days after the last quarter of the Moon, in the eight
month, whereby the Work of God, in the seven days, wherein it was finished and
settled, recovered the Ides of that Month, after new Moon; and on the last day
of the ninth month (which was the first day after the first quarter of the
Moon) the Heavens were unburdened of a Second NATION, in bodily Form, into that
second Vessel; And in the conclusion of the ninth Month (called KISU, because
it did bring Tempests before it) the Waters were fallen back in the Degrees
whereunto it overflowed by measure.

CXXXVIII.
And on the third day of the eleventh month (which was the third day after
new Moon) the Heavens were unburdened of a third Vessel; but the tenth month
being concluded, which was called THEBET, because of comfort in bad times,
Israel (began to forget the days of her MOURNING; for the name of the Angel of
God was called HEBER, that had the conduct of that third Vessel; and the name
of that eleventh month was called SHEBAT, because a Judge was brought up in
that Vessel in the midst of the seven, that svvayed the Scepter in ISRAEL.

CXXXIX.
And on the second day of the twelfth month (which was two days after new
Moon) the Earth and Worlds became divided, in the dispersing abroad of the
Waters, which continued decreasing, until the end of seven months, whereby
the tops of the Mountains were beheld, and the Worlds came forward to their
day of Trial, wherein the WATERS settled about the form of the Earth.

CXL.
For from the time that the WATERS decreased, I measured them up to the Neck of
the GIANT in the Forms of Nature, after the measure of a Man, which is the
Angel; And I observed their order in the falling back, wherein the first Head
of the River (called PISON) compassed about the Land of HAVILAH, into which
fell the Golden Head of the Image; (after the River was divided into four
Heads) And thence came forth the ASSYRIAN, in the dispersing abroad of those
seven Nations that came out of the seven Vessels, according to the seven Months
of the YEAR, in which the WATERS decreased, wherein the Revolution of all
Powers in Nature (thus imbodied) came under a second Trial by Fire.

CXLI.
And according to the NATURE of the EARTH, in which the Worlds were settled (in
their sinking condition) there was GOLD and BDELLIUM and the ONIX STONE, and
that Gold was good, for it was Gold of OPHIR, wherein was discovered the Beauty
and Luster of what first fell, in the WORLDS backward course, and now was come
forward for manifestation sake; And under the second Head of the River, called
GIHON, which compasses about the Land of Ethiopia, that has its Spiritual
signification among the Names in Nature, fell the Silver Breast of the Image.

CXLII.
But on the fifth day of the first month (which was five days after new of the
Moon) a fifth Vessel came forward, in which the Heavens were unburdened, of
that which came forth manifest (in the Line of Blessing) to the discharge of
the Powers of NATURE in God, for whom the Bowels of the Earth were torn up,
that the replenishing forms in Nature might overspread it, (in the New Created
Being) and the name of the twelfth month was called ADAR, because of an
excelling Governor, that came forth to sway the Scepter in Israel.

CLXIII.
And on the fourth day of the second month, (which was five days after new
Moon) a sixth Vessel was unburdened (in the Heavens) through the discharge of
the Power of God in the Body of Nature; and he came forth under the conduct of
a strong ARM, wherein was displayed from the Heavens a Banner flying; and the
name of the first month was called JEHOVAH NISSAN, but among the forms in
Nature, it had a name in the Earth (...) because of the Green Ear.

CXLIV.
For on the third day of the third month (which was the fourth day after new
Moon) there was beauty on the new Created EARTH, among the Forms in Nature,
because of the Flowers that did shine bright, (in the finishing of that second
month, which was called ZIV. because of the luster (in the Heavens) but in the
Earth it is Jar, because of the Vail and Covering preceding. And I turned me
toward the place, in which I beheld the Form of the Image; and I beheld the
falling of the BRAS BELLY, under the third Head of the River, (called HIDEKEL)
and there was naught remaining but the stumps of the Image, which fell under
the fourth HEAD of the River, called EUPHRATES, in which it was bound down in
my sight with an Iron Bond, for the stumps remained in the Earth, until seven
times past over my Head, in which the Wheels were moved about, in their seven
Turns and overturnings.

THE SECOND PART. With greeting to the four Churches in EUROPE.
I.
SInce the WORLD is fallen under the power of Corruption, and Affliction has
overtaken the Inhabitants of the Earth, (in its divided Quarters) let this
Epistle be sounded throughout thy Borders (O ASIA!) wherein is Power
communicated to an Instrument in the Hand of God, to raise up and awaken the
sense of what has overtaken thee, (in the Glory of thy seven Churches, now
dispersed abroad over the Earth) that it may be known throughout the whole Land
of JUDEA, that our God is King in Israel, who is come to Rule and Reign in
RIGHTEOUSNESS, and is arisen as a Giant refreshed with WINE; for he has taken
unto him VENGEANCE for a Clothing, and is clothed with ZEAL as with a Cloak;
before his face goes a consuming Fire, and it is very tempestuous round about
him.

II.
For he has raised up unto himself a Horn of Salvation, which is a Witness
awakened out of the Dust, and from the Holy Place wherein it has slept in the
Earth, and has commended his love unto us (while we were yet sinners) having
laid down his Life for his Enemies, that he again might come to take it up, in
as many as are willing to join to his SPIRIT in the Work of Redemption and
Reconciliation of the WORLDS to himself.

III.
Whereby the Worlds are convinced of their SINS and their RIGHTEOUSNESS, in that
Life of Sufferance, wherein the Spirit of Reconciliation is manifested as a
witness against the Spirit God and Spirit of the World (in several sorts of
Judgment) for which the World is reproved, that remains in unbelief, and
continues joined to that cursed Spirit of Enmity, being subject to sore Trials,
(of Bondage and Captivity to the Spirit of Darkness) in which the Curse first
wrought, and therein is caused the groaning and waiting of the whole Creation
of God.

IV.
And thou O Europe, let this have its free passage throughout thy quarters,
lest I tear thy flesh with Thorns, says the Mighty One, that is High and Holy
in the midst of this the day of his Exaltation, as his Beloved becomes raised
out of the dust, (a beautiful Daughter of dejected Zion, whose glory has been
covered with Ashes, while she has sat mourning on the Floar of Corruption) and
all that are Enemies to my WORK, and stand in my WAY, shall be made like unto
ZEBA and ZELMANA, says the FORMER of great Nations, mighty and strong; for by
the Breath of his NOSTRILS, and through the BRIGHTNESS of his Appearance he will
consume and destroy the Man of Sin; and where will the WICKED appear? since the
Day of God is come on all the pleasant PICTURES, and upon all that is lifted up
above its SPHERE and ORB, to the staining of the beauty and glory of all FLESH,
that all high Oaks and sturdy Cedars, in LEBANON, may be made to bend to the
Power of God, which is the subjecter of all forms in Nature to their first
servitude.

V.
And unto the ANGEL of the Churches in EUROPE, write these things, (says the
first born of every Creature under the Heavens) The day and hour of thy Trials
is come, therefore let thy Rulers hear, and let thy Priests give ear, for their
Sacrifice has been defiled, while their Hands are full of Blood; in the right
Hand of thy Prophets is a lie, and they feed upon Ashes: Remember therefore the
Day of God, that has measured the Ground, in which thou have been exalted in a
time of prosperity, because of the night that has overtaken thy Glory; and say
no more, I am prosperous in that strength which is the help of Nations.

VI.
For because of transgression in JUDAH, the Land does mourn, and through the
iniquity of BENJAMIN, they are scattered in ISRAEL, and the ten Tribes have
lost their name, wherein the Glory of SAMARIA is rooted out of the Earth; Hear
therefore you that can, for if your breaking off was that which made way for
the reconciling the World unto God (in the Life of the Sons Glory) what will be
your reconciling again, but life from the dead? Oh alas that I am born to see
your Rebellion! ye stiff-necked people, and gainsaying house.

VII.
Ye have cast others out of your Synagogues and places of Worship; and now are
you cast off by all, and made a scorn to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and are
become a Song of the Profane: for wherein you have despised the Servants of
the Lord, and slighted his Messengers that were sent unto you, rising up early,
because the Lord did send them, God has given you up to be tormented by that
Spirit of despite: Yet are his Bowels again turned toward you, and though you
could not come up unto him, nor receive him that came down unto you, (to suffer
your contempt in a Servants state) yet in the last day of the Worlds
visitation, he has taken notice of your calamity, and has prepared a way for
your return, through the everlasting Gates of Glory set open, that the Nations
of the EARTH might enter in thereby.

VIII.
And unto the Angel of the Churches in ROME, (says the searcher of all Hearts)
what have thou done? for thy nakedness is discovered, and thy shame is seen,
though thou have imboldned thy self in the calamity of Nations, and in the
destruction of mighty People (great in their Generations) Alas for thee! that
have been cast out of the fellowship and community of a People that were more
ancient in Name to God, (then thy self) and in like manner have thou been found
casting out of thy Temples, and excommunicating from thy Church Fellowship,
such that for Conscience sake could not conform to thy invented and
superstitious Ceremonies.

IX.
But now what is come upon thee, that art rejected by thy lovers? For although
the time is come that God will laugh at thy calamity, and mock when thy fear
comes; yet is there pity to a handful of People (that are in thee) and the
yearning Bowels are toward that which is ready to die under such Oppressors,
(that are found in the cause of what has stained the Day of thy Excellency) my
Heart, my Bowels! I am pained for thee, in whose current are centring all the
divided streams, that have been boasting themselves in what has caused the
breaking off the Branches from the Root, in which they were first planted; but
they run in that wide and open way that leads to everlasting destruction, that
are boasting against the Root which first bore them. Oh that thou might be
yet helped.

X.
But you have hardened your selves in the way that leads thither, and therein
you are become blind, and cannot see the danger before you; Is Italy strong
enough to support thee? or what defense is the House of Austria to that which
is broke forth against thee? See you not the flames! the flames thereof in the
Heavens? and the glory of its brightness amongst the Stars in their
Constellations? I am weary, I am weary of your ways (says the Lord,) but what
shall I do unto such a People as this? And therefore let the German Princes
prepare, for he is come forth that has measured thy day, the glory of Imperial
Support cannot any longer defend the PAPAL Throne, on which Foundation thou
have been raised up in great Excellency, and exalted in mighty Pomp. Oh! how
has thy practice clouded the Glory of thy Profession? and because of a Spirit
of Cruelty, that has possessed the strength of thy Zeal (in a misinformed
mind,) how have thou laid a stumbling block in the WAY of the simple and caused
the Ignorant to despise the truth of sound Doctrine.

XI.
Do thou believe Purgation of the Body of Nature, from the cause that has
held it down under the Power of Death, wherein the Souls of the Righteous have
remained crying and groaning under the Altar of God? Why then continue ye in
the enmity and Spirit of Cruelty to the life of the Just (both in your selves
and others?) for where that Life is not refreshed and nourished, it dies for
want of strength, because it is the Souls strengh to be fed with the Bread of
Comfort in God, wherein it receives all blessing from him; and the Body also
without that Spirit is dead.

XII.
It is the living therefore that can praise God aright, in that power that
enters the Ear of the Dead, for whom they stand in Jeopardy every hour,
making their Supplications unto God, (in his Spirit) that breaks open the
Prison Doors, and is come to Preach to the Spirits in Prison, comforting the
sick and weak, that lies languishing under the Power of Death and visiting the
needy, in the day of its distress and calamity, through which the dead becomes
again raised up to life and immortality in GOD.

XIII.
Many things I have to say unto thee, because thou mixest thy inventions with
the Doctrine of Truth, and have exalted thy self in the superstition of those
gainsayers that perished before thee; great are the Trials that have overtaken
thee, and that which is come upon thee cannot be paralleled because of the end
of all things that is come up before the LORD. Have I not seen the going down
of thy Glory, among the Stars of the Night? surely it is set in the WEST, and
it has a SOUTH Cloud over its Beam; but from the EAST is the Morning broke
forth, and toward the NORTH does the Star shine, that has burning flames
mentained in the dissolution of such forms of Nature, that have caused an
exhaling in the excremental parts of the fiery Heavens.

XIV.
And unto the Angel of the Churches in the separated Islands in the North, the
transplantation of Europe) thy Names are many, and diverse art thou in the
persuasion of thy Judgment, in the Doctrinal part of Truth; And these are
become the Horns on the Heads of the BEAST in Nature, which shall hate the
WHORE, that has exalted SELF, in the destruction of the glory of two Tribes;
for ten Tribes shall return to behold that which has been healed up
deceitfully in the appearance of the RAM from the EAST, whose coming forth is
to ex lt his Horns, wherewith he shall be found pushing three ways, to wit,
WEST, and NORTH, and SOUTH.

XV.
And there will be striving in the EARTH, until a HOLY PEOPLE comes to sit
down in their own Land, for God is come down into the forms of Nature, and will
work as in the days of old, and every on that seeeth him, shall be affected
with his LOVE, and shall mourn bitterly over him, as his beauty comes to be
seen in the Earth, and overspreadeth the Worlds; but none shall be able to
awaken his displeasure against others, though he will cut off great and strong
Nations in his way, in his own time; and not for the sake of the Wishers of
mischief, that may inkindle a fire in the Center of the ground; from whence
their life does spring.

XVI.
But the Angel of my BELOVED, has given in charge unto the Daughters of SION,
that they awake not Gods displeasure, neither stir up the Beloved desire of the
welfare of all Nations before he please, for you that profess zeal against
Superstition, see that you stand not above the ground of Humility, from whence
charity does spring unto the distressed, which works the WILL of God, in the
manifestation of Glory, through the LIGHT of his countenance, that is lifted up
over the Nations, by the arising of the Sun of Righteousness, with healing in
his WINGS.

XVII.
For I am well assured of the love of God to his despised Remnant and handful
of little Ones, trampled on by all, and now set in the Front of the BATTLE, in
which Gods Cause has engaged them; though by the Mighty they are deserted, (as
left to the rage and fury of the Devouring Enemy,) And I have beheld also such
that have plenty in their own Houses, yet are they found covetously lusting
after one EWE-LAMB of the POOR; And shall they prosper? says the LORD, since
his Sword (which he has not drawn in vain) shall not depart from their House
until Jerusalem become a quiet Habitation for evermore; for an exercise has
sprung from their own Bowels, through a Rebellious Seed that flattereth in the
WAY.

XVIII.
But the ground of all this awakened Fury, did break forth in the Spirit of the
WORLD, in the Nature of sensual Separations, in the dispersed forms of the
Apostatizing Spirit from its first Love, by which the Faith of Gods Elect
works. But Gods intention is to purge his own House and Sanctuary first, that
his People may be white and clean from the Worldly Spirit of enmity and
bitterness, which springs from the covetous Root, that stands in the
lusting ground, wherefore the BEAST has power to exalt his HORN for a season.

XIX.
Therefore cease, Oh cease! ye MIGHTY of the EARTH, to strive against the Lord,
for ye have been contending with one another (in selfs concernment) until your
time of healing is well nigh spent in controversies; and now has God taken his
own cause into his HANDS, and has it in consideration, which he will plead for
the Meek of the Earth, in the Heart of their Enemies; And notwithstanding many
things are suffered for a Trial of their FAITH to God (who profess his Name and
Truth,) yet is it not to destroy them, but to purify and refine them, wherein
Judgment is still strengthened against that part which has given way to the
power and work of the Enemy, either in the Particular or General; And I am
assured deliverance will come in Gods time, which is, when his People are so
sitted thereby, that God can get himself a Name in their Salvation.

XX.
And alas! you Professors of Cristianity, that are quarrelling with each other,
about the formal part of your Worship; how have you lost your day, until you
are overtaken with a power of Darkness? have ye not been afraid of those that
should change your Laws and Customs, and bring in contrary Orders, wherein the
ROMANS Power was working to take away your Place? And therefore cast out you
have, and cast out you are, which is the ground of your fear; but you are not
in that Power, which can separate any from God, and excommunicate such from the
enjoyment of his presence (who have seen the end of Man's days Glory) though by
continuing in the Ground of Hardness, you may be in that which may separate
your selves from the enjoyment of good in that God which you profess.

XXI.
But oh ye hard-hearted! that have waited for the destruction of the Innocent,
that for Conscience Sake cannot bow to your Haman-like wills; what have you to
answer before God in this kind? that have caused any to stumble and turn aside
through your cruelty; I am burdened and grieved hereat says the LORD, and my
Soul is weary with waiting to do good to such an unthankful people; therefore
shall distress come on distress, and captivity will follow captivity until
ISRAEL come to know her self to be the WOUNDED that is fallen among THIEVES,
wherein the Priest and Levite have passed by, but a poor Samaritan has proved
the good Physician, as a healer of the Breach, and restorer again of a Path to
dwell in.

XXII.
For in the coming forth of all forms in Nature, I have seen thy state and
standing, thou poor and distressed People over the face of the whole Earth; and
though there is a Ground, wherein a fourth Beast, with the face of an Eagle,
has exalted power in the fourth Angel of God, that has stood on the North
corner of the Earth; in that which has called to his day, Come and see, yet a
DANITE has slain the Lion that was found in the way of the Philistines,
wherein I have seen awakend in all the powers of Nature a sense of such
Laborers under the Power of Corruption, who have swarmed together unto the
dead Carcass, until it has been filled with the sweetness of the Conquest; yet
lest self should thereby become imboldned, a greater glory is raised up in the
LIONS day, and an Angel of the Sun has proclaimed the Summons to all Fowls in
the Heavens, in the Trial of that which is brought out of the Heavenly Ark.

XXIII.
And from the Heavens is inkindled a fiery Constellation, flaming in that which
is sunk into the Creaturely perspection (from the highest Heavens) that causes
a burning discovery of that which dissolves the Excremental properties,
ingendered as a Star among the Powers of Nature; and through a discovery of the
Evening Wolf, (or little Bear) who is got before the LIONS Face, all shall be
effected, which pertains to the Ministration of Severity, in the appearance
of Glory (by the second Resurrection of what has slept its time) And where the
Carcass is, thither do the Eagles resort; let not Ephraim therefore envy
Manasseh, though she be not called to go up to Battle against the Midianites;
for the Gleanings of Ephraim shall be better than have been the green Fruits of
Manasseh.

XXIV.
Neither ought Israel to quarrel by the way, for before God has effected the
glory of the work he has begun, every one that makes mention of his NAME,
shall know himself, what he has been in his own strength, and there will not
need any fierce drivings in the Camp to scatter every one to his own; for
before Light shall shine out of any Vessel, the Pitcher must be broken; in
which Case, it will be Isreal's safety to take out a Lot from the URN (wherein
are three hundred bended Instruments) before thou aspire to put forth thy
Torch; for so did Israel of old, whom the Father drew, through the catching of
the Foxes that were tied Tail to Tail, that the firebrarnds which are between,
might be the Executioners of Gods fury on his Enemies; a great WOLF grew up in
their stead, as a Constellation, in which three hundred STARS are commanded
from the little BEARS Tail, in the Motion of the Heavens. This therefore is the
Sentence of the Angel of God to thy Northern Quarters, and inhabited Islands of
Europe and Asia, God has beheld your state, and you must be tried yet under
the SOUTH Wind, but the glory of the day will return to the KINGS of the EAST,
it is done, says the Lord, and their work shall end in that which prepares the
way before my Face.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Wherein is described the coming forth of the FOUR BEASTS in the Forms
of Nature, in the loosing of the Seven Seals from off the Book, etc.
I.
NOW that seventh Vessel, which had the fourth place among the forms in Nature,
was that from whence sprung the Glory of the Heavens, in the created being,
whence ASIA took ROOT, through what fell in the Earth; And as the Worlds became
overspread, the Waters which compassed about ASIA, on the left hand, enlarged
their course, whereby the Land of EUROPE (in the same Continent) was compassed
about on the right hand by the great River EUPHRATES, which became manifest in
the decrease of the WATERS.

II.
And I beheld on the four Corners of the Earth, the appearance of four Angels
of God, that held the four Corners of the WINDS, and they had power to
withold the Wind from blowing, and to smite the Earth with Plague; but their
Power had been bound down in the great River EUPHRATES, until the loosing of
the Dragons Power (out of the bottomless Pit) who had been also bound therein
for the space of a thousand years, in which the Holy Nations did arise in their
Glory and Order; and those four Angels were prepared for an hour, a day, a
month, and a year.

III.
And from Assyria (in whose fall arose the Mede and Persian, which are the two
Horns of the RAM in Nature) the Ishmalite took root in the fall of the Silver
Breast of the Image, for there was substance in the Neck of Nature in that
which descended from its Head, wherein the Face of the RAM was seen; but the
Yoke being cast off, the Spirit of God was made to suffer that which rested as
a BURDEN on the Shoulders of the imbodied Form; the sense of which came
downward in his Creature and Creation, and entered the Breast of the Created
Being.

IV.
For from the Heavens of an inward World, descended into the Bodily Frame a
pierced HEART, and from the multiplied Forms in Nature, there was moving on the
Waters, the great VESSEL that I saw, which rested in the EAST, where the Waters
first prevailed, wherein was the seventh part of all forms in Nature, brought
forth in that middle Row, to replenish the new Created Earth; And in the Hand
of the Lion was the Sealed Book, and the Seal of God was on his day, (to wit,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah) while the strong Angel of God proclaimed with a
loud Voice, Who is worthy to open the BOOK and loose the Seals thereon, wherein
the Wonders of God were written within and without.

V.
And in the opening and loosing of the first Seal on the BOOK, and on the day
of the first Beast in Nature, I beheld the coming forth of the great LION, that
stood Rampant in the WHEELS, among the forms in Nature, and he called to his
DAY, Come and see; And I beheld on the back of the LION four Wings of a Fowl,
in which were thirty six thousand Feathers in each Wing; and therein were
written so many names of Men, for the Wings were of Golden Feathers, and his
Face was toward the WEST.

VI.
But on the coming forth of this first BEAST, the Winds were moved, and greatly
strove on the face of the WATERS, which were gathered together in heaps on the
great SEAS; And in the Night season, there broke forth flashes of Lightning and
Fire, under the Roof of the House, wherein I was exercised with the Vision of
the WONDERS of God and his Glory which the PEOPLE saw, but understood not the
Mystery thereof; and great fear fell upon them, being not usually exercised
with things of that Nature; but I laid up all these things in my Heart, until I
came to know the meaning thereof.

VII.
And I cried unto the Lord with a loud Voice, What is the Mystery of all these
things that I have seen? For lo I am become weak and feeble like a little
Child, and have beheld until naught was remaining in the Heavens, but a Sealed
Book under the Power of a Strong Angel of God; and it has been taken to the
Learned to Read, but they said, Lo it is Sealed, and we cannot read nor open
the Book, or loose the Seals thereon, and also to the hands of the unlearned it
has been communicated, and they say, We are not learned, so that through the
power of the Lion it has been shut up for a long season, that has caused
weeping in the Heavens.

VIII.
And through the loosing of the Seals of God from off the Book of Wonders, that
was taken out of the Angels Hand, at the appearance of the Lamb of God, that
takes away sin from the WORLD, (and that was slain from the Foundations
thereof, that in the Fathers time he might come forth a Witness of the
fulfilling of the daily Sacrifice unto God) I beheld the Lamb with his seven
Horns full of Eyes, as the seven Spirits of God, that walks among the seven
Golden CANDLESTICKS, and are like unto seven Lamps of fire burning, which are
seven Stars in the Angel of God, whose form is like unto the Son of Man, and
who traveled among the Churches (who are saluted in their seven Angels) until
a second Seal on the Book became loosed in my sight.

IX.
And the second Beast, with the Face (and in the form) of a Cherub or Calf,
called to his day, Come and see; and I beheld on the EARTH the form of a great
BULL, and he came at his Liberty, and came toward me with Violence, breaking
over all bonds in his way; and though I had by me a Weapon of Defense, yet had
I not power to use it to that end, but was otherwise preserved from hurt of
that Wild Beast: But as the West Wind was reproved, as the Waters were moved on
the great SEAS, by the striving of the Winds, the second Beast roared, rearing
himself on his hinder Legs, whereby he stood upright, which was terrible to
behold.

X.
And I said unto the Angel of God, How long shall this continue? Then I beheld
the BULL cast into a deep and dark Pit in Nature, while the fourth Beast in the
forms of Government, in the Body of Nature, was set to watch over him, (by the
third Beast, with the Face of a MAN) for as the third Seal on the Book came to
be loosed and taken off, the third Beast called to his day, Come and see; And I
beheld from the Face of the Heavens, (wherein a course of Glory in the Sun of
the day of the Son of Man, was comprehended in the Heart of the Lion) that
night which was come into the Body of Nature, was dispersed, and the power of
the Heavens, over the forms in Nature, were divided into four Parts, in the
coming forth of the Worlds into manifestation.

XI.
Then appeared the form of a little BEAR, that arose on the LIONS side, and he
took three Ribs out of the Lions side, and held those three Ribs in his Mouth
for a long season; And from the Tail of the little Bear, (among the Signs in
the Heavens) the Power of the DRAGON was loosed, and appeared among the Forms
in Nature, who made up his Tail out of a third Part of the Stars in the
Heavens, which were drawn toward the NORTH.

XII.
And I beheld until the LIONS Wings were plucked from him, and he stood on the
EARTH like a Man, and a Man's HEART was given unto him, for out of the EAST came
the form of a RAM, with two Horns, and his pushing was three ways, to wit,
WEST, and NORTH, and SOUTH; and when he had lifted up the BULL out of the PIT,
he was caught by his Horns in the Thickets of the Earth; And in the Heavens was
the form of the WOMAN, exalted in the Bulls Eye, (called Oculus Tauri) And she
had in her Hand a Crown of twelve Stars, which was taken from her Head, and put
on the Head of the Lion.

CHAP. II. Describing the Motion of the Wheels, in their seven turnings, over
all that came forth into manifestation, in the loosing of the seven Seals on
the the Book, etc.
XIII.
BUT as the fourth Beast called to his day, Come and see, (through the loosing
of the fourth Seal on the Book) I saw the Face of an EAGLE in the Heavens, in
whose right Eye, the form of the VIRGIN in Nature was exalted among the Forms;
and the second great light in the Heavens, was comprehended in the Breast of a
great Bear, who had also the four WINGS of a Fowl on his Back; And the Winds
again strove on the great Seas, wherein the WATERS were greatly moved in the
coming forth of this fourth Beast.

XIV.
And as the MAN prevailed in the Heavens, I beheld all consumed, which stood
under the Power of the Waters, and the Name of the third Month was called
SIVAN, in the Nature of what was produced from the Heavens, whence came a Voice
from the Heart of the LION in the fiery Heavens, Let the Light shine into the
Earth, that that which is done may appear and be seen; And the form of the
Heavens stood divided, in a double Relation of that which is comprehended in
Day and Night, wherein the Day in Nature had its twofold Operation over all
forms subjected into being in that State, and the Clouds of the Heavens were
folded up together, wherein I saw the form of the RAM coming down out of the
Head of Nature, descending the right Arm of the Man (in the forms of Nature)
and there went up toward his Head the form of a HE GOAT, mighty and strong,
and there was labor in the Heavens, for the space of sixty one Weeks, from the
time that I beheld the prevailing of those Waters on the Earth.

XV.
For as the Heavens were discharged of this third Man in the Forms of Nature;
there was a great change and revolution in the Worlds, wherein the Winds came
again to strive, and the Storms and Tempests prevailed on the great Seas, and I
beheld until there arose an uncontrollable Wind, called EOLUS, which caused the
Foundations of the House, wherein I lay to shake; and the Fowls of the Heavens
made a groaning noise like a young Child, for the place was beset with terrors
of the Night; but the sound of the Voice, was like unto the Ringing of BELLS
under my Head, as I was laid down to rest; And I was charged by the Angel of
God, not to move from the PLACE where I lay, in which I was preserved from
hurt, until I beheld the Tempest over.

XVI.
Then I was led by the ANGEL of God, to a very high Mountain, on which I beheld
my self riding over the Land; and in the bottom thereof stood a great CITY, at
some distance toward which I was traveling, and there came forth the He Goat
of a year old, who was driven toward the WEST, in which I beheld him a escape
Goat, (for the yearly Sacrifice) and behind the form of the Man that I saw in
the Heavens, the RAM prevailed, (that was caught by his Horns in the Thickets
of the Earth) who became a daily Sacrifice for the Sins and Transgressions of
the first Covenant, which were committed in the times of Ignorance, wherein God
winked at them.

XVII.
And the escape Goat also grew, and became mighty and strong, and came forth out
of the WEST, pushing three ways, to wit, East, and North, and South, and he
broke and stamped in pieces those two Horns of the RAM, whereby the BULL was
lifted up out of the dark Pit in Nature; and as I was enquiring of the Angel of
God, how long also this should continue? He replied, Until the Heifer be
yoaked, and has learned to tread out the Corn, that it may be known the House
of Jacob is like a fire, and that the House of Joseph is the flame, and the
House of Esau the stubble, whom God will leave, nor Root, nor Branch; for
Ephraim shall learn to tread out the Corn, as one that is taught to Plow, and
Judah shall be enlarged in him, while God does ride and is exalted, but Jacob
shall break the Clods in pieces.

XVIII.
And while I was beholding the Glory of the ANGEL, I was dismounted from the
BEAST whereon I Rode, and sought to turn it down before me, as I apprehended my
self walking down the steep of the Hill; but the Beast could not go any
further, either up or down, and striving to turn him about, he fell to the
bottom of the Hill, which was very steep and terrible to behold; yet he came to
the ground without hurt, which was much more Admirable, and he ran toward the
CITY that I saw with great speed, leaving me for a season to wander on the
Mountain, which was on the fourth Month of the seventh year, for which the
Vision was set, and there did sit the form of Women weeping for TAMUZ, (...),
which is the Name of the month, in the discharge of the Heavens, but in the
Earth it is called Mazah.

XIX.
But through the opening and loosing of a fifth Seal on the Book of Wonders,
(taken out of the Hand of the Angel of God) which was on the Temple or House of
God, which had been made the seat of the BEAST in Nature; I saw and heard from
the Throne of God and the LAMB, a great cry and lamentation, How long Lord God,
holy and true, will thou suffer the Members of Christ to be joined to an
Harlot, and the Temple of thy Holy Ghost to be defiled, that our Blood may be
avenged on the Inhabitants of the EARTH; for from the Blood of Righteous ABEL,
until the Blood of Zacharias the Prophet (who was slain between the Temple and
the Altar) Blood has cried in thine EAR, to be avenged on such a wicked
Generation.

XX.
And there was also a Seal on the Sun of the Day of the Son of Man, which was
taken off in the opening and loosing of a sixth Seal of the Book; And all that
was in the Temple of God was smitten thereby, until I beheld the Sun turned
into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, and the Stars of Heaven withdrew their
Light, being shaken as with a mighty Wind, and they fell unto the Earth, as a
Fig Tree that casts her Leaves; and all dominion in the Powers of Nature was
terrified, by which that subdued the Government of all Authority, in the
Kingdoms of the Earth, wherein is the signification of the Birth of Kings and
Captains, and mighty Men, and Noble Men, and Bond and Free, that fled to the
Rocks and Mountains of the EARTH to hide them, and crept into the Clifts and
Dens for shelter.

XXI.
Then saw I the first turn of the WHEELS, which made a perfect division between
property and property of all SPIRITS, thus fallen under the Power of
Corruption, in the imbodied being of what stands manifest in three Principles
of Government over Nature (in time and place) for after I had beheld
destinction of Motion in the Rings of the WHEELS, and the separation of each, I
beheld their order in their turns, over all that became imbodied in the Ground
of Corruption, as it came forth out of the WOMB of Nature.

XXII.
And in this sirst turn of the Wheels, all that came out of the Womb of
Eternity rested in the Womb of Nature, though therein was a continual Motion,
(while time and place endured) whereby the VIRGIN in the Forms of Nature, came
under the sufferance of the Power of Death, and endured the bodily pangs, that
were opened through the way and course of Corruption, which caused the FIELD of
Nature and Place of Conception, to become a field of Blood, (through that which
strove there) in which state was placed the Man that was formed to be Keeper of
the Vineyard that he possesses in that corruptible state; so that in the second
Turn of the Wheels, all came forth distinguishable in that separated being of
fire, Air, and Water, that had received a tincture of Glory in each Principle.

XXIII.
Which according to those three PRINCIPLES, was in the Forms of Nature, wherein
the Man had both Soul, Spirit, and Body, formed under the Workings and Motion
of an incorruptible and immortal Power, to the renewing of all faculties of the
Mind, wherein Man is imbodied; And as it sought to settle under a Power of
Corruption, I saw, wherein it became a ground of all Motion, though a stilness
and silence was in the Original Center of all Creaturely beings, whereby the
four destroying Angels of God, were bound down under a course of Corruption, in
which the Enemy prevailed to ripen and hasten the day of everlasting Trials,
(in the sufferance of God's Spirit) and they were prepared in time, that came
up in the Hours of the day, and days of the Month, and months of the year,
into Number and Order, wherein the substance of what Nature was ordained to
manifest, is become measurable and intelligable.

XXIV.
For herein is made manifest a Government springing up from the Head, and
Heart, and Womb of Nature, through which the Body of Nature was placed in
subjection to an unchangeable and everlasting Power of renewing in God, whereby
I came to discern of those three in Heaven that bear Record, to wit, the FATHER
and Creator of all Spirits and Principles of Nature into being, and the WORD
through which the Creature was brought into the lovely form of Sonship, and the
Holy Ghost which is the Power of the Word in the Creature (as he is acted in
the Will of the Creator) and these three are one witness for God in the
Heavens, as a Sun of that Glory whereby the Creation of God is enlightened.

CHAP. III. Describing the Forms of Nature, as they are wrought up in the the
changings of the renewing Power in God.
XXV.
AND this was manifest in Terrestrial Bodies, through the three that bear
Record on EARTH, to wit, the Spirit of God which first breathed on the WATERS,
which is a power of all individual Spirits in Natural Bodies formed, and the
Waters themselves, on which it thus breathed, and the BLOOD inkindled in the
fire of Life, through which those Waters do ebb and flow, to the Creature that
has the imbodied being of Soul and Spirit; And those three also agree in one,
and are one Witness for God in Terrestrial Bodies, wherein the MOON has
prevailed to dignifie her course that turns Waters into the Blood of the
Spirit of Life, in that borrowed light wherein she has exercised her dominion
under the Power of Corruption.

XXVI.
This therefore did I observe in the Motion of the WHEELS, that the ground of
their Motion was everlasting, whereby that which had not any beginning in the
Will and Wisdom of Eternities Power of Existence, took being in time and place,
wherein every thing that was created into Form, became conceiveable and
comprehensible in the imbodied being of NATURE, as it stands thus fallen under
the Power of Corruption, wherein the Work of God has been narrowed to the
sense of the Creaturely capacity; and from the CENTER, in which is an eternal
stilness, will every man receive his reward according to his WORKS, and to what
he has sown in the Body of Nature, thus fallen under the trials of a cross to
the Creaturely affection.

XXVII.
Though every thing is brought forth in its order, which is again to be reduced
into its Center, as all Powers of Nature come to run their race, in what is
awakened and come forth in time and place, to the judgment of Eternity, against
all such Powers of Darkness; wherein I beheld the EARTH standing in and out of
the Waters from whence the Light shined in each principle, in which the
separation was made between the Darkness, which was expelled from the new
Created Forms in Nature, and driven into its Center, wherein the Creation
remained groaning under its NIGHT of sorrow, as in the fallen Properties that
proceeded out of the Womb of Nature, (in which Self became imbodied in the
Creature of God) which was and is the cause of the fall, and of all
degeneration in Spirits and Properties of Nature in those Principles.

XXVIII.
And out of this EARTH, sprung up all that lay hid under the Power of
Corruption, thus formed into being in time and place, which was a fourth part
of the WORLDS in form, as its two third parts were separated into the Waters
above, and under the Firmament, resting under the Government of those four
Beasts in the forms of Nature, over which the Wheels moved their third turn,
separating between all Creatures that abode in the Region of Air, and those
that rested on the EARTH, and in those Waters under the Firmament, who were
enlightened by the three Glories of the Father, that shined from the Heavens
above the Firmament, wherein the Worlds stood manifest in their renewed
Principles, after this third turn of the Wheels.

XXIX.
For the Seal of God being on his peculiar Number of faithful Ones (though
little in the Eye and esteem of the World) a Cloud of Darkness remained over
the day in which they had glory, until the seventh Seal of God was taken off
from the Book of Life, in which their names were written among the WONDERS of
God, whereby I beheld each Beast in the Forms of Nature, take unto him six
Wings, in which were six thousand Feathers, and six thousand Names of Men on
each Wing; and on each Beast were thirty six thousand Feathers and names of
Men, which became a great Army in the Heavens, of one hundred forty four
thousand names of Men, according to the four Wings of what came forth first
manifest on the Back of the LION, wherein each Wing of the Army in the Heavens,
was dispersed to its Quarters on the Earth. And the Wheels were moved about in
their fourth turn, over all Principles in Nature, thus come forth into form, in
its time of Trial.

XXX.
Which was very miraculous to behold, that through all this striving and
contest in the Heavens, not one Fether of those Beasts, was diminished though
the Wings of the Beasts in those forms of Nature, were suffered to be plucked,
and were taken from off the Back of those living Creatures, on which they
sought to rest and settle; And after an Angel of the Sun came forth in the
Glory of the Son of Man, there stood a second Angel of God, who daily
ministers at the Altar of God, and has power over FIRE, and he rode on a
WHITE Cloud; and I heard a voice from the Heavens, the number of Gods chosen
are Sealed, and they are faithful Witnesses and Followers of the LAMB; and I
beheld out of the Temple of God, Trumpets sounding forth Praises and
Hallelujahs to him that Rules and sits on high, until the four Angels of God
became loosed out of the great River EUPHRATES, and stood on the four Corners
of the Earth, and held the four Corners of the Winds from blowing.

XXXI.
But the Earth was exercised with great afflictions, and the Waters also, and
all that lived therein and moved thereon, were come under sore Trials, (in one
third part thereof) and the cry was very grievous, because of the burning Coals
that were taken from the Altar of God, and flung on the Earth, which caused
Tempests therein, and from the Heavens proceeded Thunders and Lightnings, and
great Hail, after all motion therein began to cease, and that I had beheld a
silence in the Heavens, for the space of half an hour.

XXXII.
For as the WINDS of the Heavens were at rest, wherein the Spirit of God ceased
to strive any more with his Creature, neither suffered the breath of its
Almighty Power to blow any more on that fourth part of the WORLDS, wherein the
whole Earth had corrupted its way before the Lord, that which bound the Nature
of the Heavens, from striving any more with mankind, gave way to the power of
destruction (in a Mystery) to increase its swelling Tempests over a third of
the Earth, out of which the forms of Nature were imbodied in the divided
quarter or fourth part of the Worlds.

XXXIII.
And I beheld until the seventh year past over my Head, and there appeared an
Angel of the Waters, whose power began to be prevalent over the South Wind, and
seven Kings of the South fell, and the KING himself, under whom the South Winds
wrought, was subjected by the dispersing abroad of those seven Nations of the
Worlds, through whom the Generations of the Heavens were multiplied; but two
days before the expiration of the seventh year, the Hands of the Angel grew
weak; for he went backward unto the parting of the great SEAS, and brought up
the Vessel that stood in the midst of the six, in the front of the seventy,
which was born about by twelve Bulls, six on the one side, and six on the other.

XXXIV.
And the Sun recovered the strength and glory of that which stood still in the
Heavens, to manifest judgment over a backward course in its Worlds, according
to the degrees therein, by which the Enemy prevailed over the Body of Nature,
to move the frame thereof under the Power of Destruction; And from the
expiration of the seventh year, was fifteen days, that the Vessel was
subjected in the strength of the Angel; for after I beheld the appearance of a
second Angel, with the Garment of the high Priest, on whose Head was a Crown,
and on the Crown a Cross, the form of the Crown was turned about, like the Moon
in its second Quarter, and had two Horns like unto the Letter X, wherein the
Leter X stood in the midst of the Crown, like unto two V A or V and A, and I
did read it one hundred and ten, as though I had read in a Book.

XXXV.
For from the beginning of the appearance of the second Angel, was seventeen
days; After which I beheld raised up out of the Earth, a Wall of Brass, and
its Foundations rested on two and twenty Pillars, that had on them two and
twenty names of Men, and the two and twenty Letters in the Hebrew Alphabet; And
on that WALL were twelve Towers, on which Towers were placed twelve Angels,
each Tower stood between two Pillars, and the Wall stood four square, wherein
there were three Gates on each side of the WALL; But the Tower on the
North-side of the Wall, toward the East Corner thereof (whereon was exalted an
Angel, who sat on a Beast in the form of an EVENING WOLF) had no Pillars for
its Foundations, for its foundations fell in the raising up the structure of
the WALL, and I beheld until the Foundation of the whole was removed.

XXXVI.
And an Angel came down from his Tower, on the East side of the WALL, toward
the South Corner thereof (who was exalted on the first Beast in the forms of
Nature, like unto a RAM) and he had made a breach on the WALL, against whom an
Angel (who was exalted on the form of a Beast, like unto an ASS) smote his
Foot; And the Glory of the Angel on the North Corner of the Wall EASTWARD (who
was exalted on that Beast in the form of an Ass couching down between two
burdens) saw that rest was good to the heavy laden, and they alighted from off
those Beasts whereon they were exalted.

CHAP. IV. The effect of the descending of ANGELS into the Forms of Nature.
XXXVII.
FRom the middle Tower on the Wall Eastward, did the Angel prevail in the
HEAVENS, who was exalted on a BEAST in the form of a LION, until the Angel that
came from the South Corner of the Wall, was held in a dark place, because that
self-will slew a man to dig down the Wall of Separation to ISRAEL, from those
Nations of the Earth, that were fallen into Idolatry, whereby they caused their
Seed to pass through the Fire to Molech and Ashtaroth, and followed the
invention of the HEATHEN, who thus continued worshipping in the Fire.

XXXVIII.
For wherein the West-wind prevailed, I beheld the form of the Cherub set up to
be Worshipped in the WILDERNESS, whereby the TABLES were broken that were wrote
therein, by the FINGER of God, that his Hand might more eminently appear
through that which was engraven the second time: for the Angel that was exalted
on this Beast, came off from his Tower; and there appeared another Angel that
came off from his Tower, on the East Corner of the Wall Southward, that was
exalted on a little Lion that roared toward the North, and the Woman that had
on her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, cast it down at the Foot of the Angel,
that rode on the Beast in the form of a CALF, and I beheld until it was put on
the Head of the Lion.

XXXIX.
And the Woman was exalted QUEEN of the South, but the Virgin Daughter of the
NORTH, stood afflicted in her Seed, sixty one weeks and three days, while the
Daughter of the SOUTH, made her self great toward the four Winds: And for
sixty eight weeks and four days, I beheld the four Winds striving in the
behalf of the Daughters of the North, and the form of the Temple that God had
builded and finished in the HEAVENS, descended in a Cloud into the City that I
saw, erected under the Power of Destruction, and in seven days was its
Foundation settled therein; in which time I beheld the form of the Wolf, who was
got before the Lions Face, enlarging himself in the power of the Lambs
suffering, whose Angel prevailed therein, until I beheld the form of the Beast
driven into the Wilderness, in which time I saw the linen EPHOD Worshipped.

XL.
And an eighth Angel came off from his Tower, sailing toward the Land of Rest,
to a Haven of Ships; and there was also a ninth Angel, who had in his right
Hand a Cup filled with goodly dainties, with which those that traveled over
the Deeps were refreshed; after which appeared a tenth Angel, exalted on a
ROEBUCK, who came leaping and skiping over the Mountains, with glad Tidings to
them that dwelt in the Valleys; for he proved a good Hind, and came home
betimes, giving goodly words; And I beheld until there stood only TWO Angels
exalted on their middle Towers, (North and South) and I looked toward the
Fields of the Earth, which were white unto Harvest, and ripe for the gathering.

XLI.
And the Angel led me into a Garden enclosed, (which was the Garden of my
Beloved) and I beheld how the Spiknard budded and grew up, and how the Vines
put forth their tenders Branches, and the Pomegranet, and all Spices
flourished, as the North Wind came thereon, (after the South Wind had blowed)
and the Daughter of the South had wandered from the Garden, after the bewitching
Vanities and Pleasures of the WORLD, as one charmed among Wild Beasts of prey,
and stung by fiery flying Serpents, and the devouring Creatures of that Field,
which afterward became healed by the lifting up of the BRAS, and those Women
came forth to reap the Fruits of the Earth.

XLII.
And from the Captivity of the South Wind, did deliverance spring up to the
Daughter of the North, on whose back rested the two WINGS of an EAGLE,
wherewith she had fled into the Wilderness, wherein she had a place prepared
from the rage and fury of the DRAGON for time, times, and the dividing of
times; for as the North Wind came to prevail, the Queen of the South was
removed out of her own Land, who wrought by craft and much subtilty, to corrupt
the Seed in the North; for therefore was the Daughter of the SOUTH given to the
King of the NORTH, wherein the Enemy prevailed over the Daughter of the North,
forty and two months, that the Holy City was trodden under foot, in which time
the TWO WITNESSES finished their Testimony, of one thousand two hundred and
threescore days, wherein they prophesied in Sackcloath.

XLIII.
Yet the King of the SOUTH did not retain the Arm, for one of his Princes was
exalted above him, (a man of fierce speech and dark countenance) though a vile
Person, who stood up in his stead; but the Hearts of both those Kings, (to wit,
of both North and South WINDS of the Heavens) were set to do mischief, and they
spoke lies at one Table, whereby the fourth part of the Worlds came under fiery
Trials, through this fourth turn of the WHEELS, which I beheld over the forms
in Nature, thus brought forth under the Power of Corruption, wherein the Waters
had prevailed that were smitten by those Trials.

XLIV.
And through the sounding of the Trumpets, the Earth was smitten in its third
part, wherein a third part of its Fruits withered and died; And I beheld until
the form of that third part became like unto a burning Mountain cast into the
Sea, which made its Waters like unto Blood, and there was Thundering, and
Lightning, and Tempest, (while the Mountain continued burning, with Bounds
placed about it) so that no Beast could come near it, but if he touched it he
was struck through with an Iron Dart that he died; neither was any to gaze
thereon while the fury continued.

XLV.
And on the Rivers and Fountains of WATER also, which did run in the several
Streams and Channels of the Courses in the Worlds (in their renewing state)
fell a STAR, called COR LEONIS, (the Heart of a Lion, or WORMWOOD) and those
Waters were made BITTER, and darkness came on all Celestial Glory in the
Heavens, wherein both Sun and Moon, and Stars of Heaven were smitten in their
third part, which became black, like Cloth of Hair, and Fire mingled with
Blood, and those Lights shined not in their third part.

XLVI.
And there fell from Heaven a second Star, called Sagitarius, who descended on
the bottomless Pit, in which the Power of the great Red Dragon and old deceiver
of mankind (Satan, and the Devil) had been bound, by the Chain in the Hand of
the Angel, and the Seal on the Pit, which a strong Angel of God had put thereon
(who had bound him down for a thousand years) was taken off, in which time I
beheld the Resurrection of the first Fruits of the Work of the Spirit of God,
which followed those that were made partakers of that first Resurrection, over
whom the second death had no Power, though the Devil went about to deceive
those Nations of the Earth, that he had power over; And the WHEEL moved about
its fifth time and turn, over those properties of Life, wherein the forms of
Nature remained imbodied (subjected to a Power of Corruption) in which those
four Angels remained bound, in that great River EUPHRATES.

XLVII.
Then came up on the Earth, the form of Beasts like unto GOATS; and their Faces
were like unto the Faces of Men, and their Hair like unto the Hair of Women,
and they had Tails like Scorpions, and Stings in their Tails, and their Power
was over a third part of men (imbodied in the Creaturely Being and forms of
Nature) the exercise of which Beasts was for the cleansing Gods Sanctuary, and
therefore had they power to exalt to Horn, that the Wound of the Daughter of
ZION (which had been healed up deceitfully, and daubed with untempered MORTAR)
might be thoroughly searched into; for the separation of that and those over
whom the Beasts had Power (on whom was his Mark) into their Mystery, in
reference to what was effected in those five Months; through which the Wheels
came again to move about (in their SIXTH time and turn) for the loosing of
their Angels, out of that great EUPHRATES; and the name of that fifth Month was
called A B

XLVIII.
Yet had not the BEASTS power to kill those men, in whom their dominion was
exercised, but to Torment them for those five Months, whose Wound was like unto
the biting of an ADDER in the Way, or sting of a Serpent (as when a Scorpion
strikes a Man) wherein the bruise on the WOMAN'S Heel was felt; for as the
Horse Heels (the Beast on whom the destroying Power of God in the Heavens, was
exalted) became bitten by the SERPENT, its Rider fell backward, and they lost
the first shape of Men; and through the Pangs of those Men, a night of sorrow
came over all their WORLDLY Glory; and I beheld their Wound like unto a
Plague Sore, which came on the THIGH of Nature, whereby many were made to seek
Death (because of their PANGS) but it fled from them, and they could not find
the way of Dissolution, though they sought it; for the Darkness that was on the
SUN and on the AIR, was like unto the smoke of a Furnace, and it was the Fume
of the Bottomless Pit, out of which the Nature of those BEASTS called Locusts,
was imbodied in FORM.

CHAP. V. Describing the order of those four Angels, that were loosed out of
the great River Euphrates, and came forth exalted on the four Horses of several
Colors in those forms of Nature.
XLIX.
THrough the sounding of the sixth Angel, on the great River EUPHRATES, the
power of those four Angels became loosed on the Earth, toward the four Winds,
as it stood divided (in its four Quarters) and the destroying Power thereof (in
which Death became Potent) was a strength in the North Winds of the Heavens,
over that fourth or North Quarter of the Worlds, as it stood thus separated in
its continent, over which those Winds were withheld from blowing or striving
therein (with his Creature;) and through the loosing of those four destroying
Angels, I beheld wherein their Power was bound, in that fourth part or quarter
of the WORLDS (compassed about by the great River Euphrates) for the space of
five years and five months, and five days, and five hours; wherein each ANGEL
became exalted on his Beast, in the forms of Nature, and those Beasts guided
the Chariot of Nature (wherein the ANGEL was exalted) according to the time for
which they were prepared, and wherein they were loosed, an hour, a day, a
month, a year.

L.
For in the year for which those Angels were loosed, I beheld seven Months,
wherein the dead were left to bury the dead; And from the expiration of those
five months, was thirty days, wherein the Angel that was loosed for his Month,
prevailed under the power of Destruction, and the name of the sixth month was
called ELIL, because of the Fields that were Reaped, wherein there was naught
found; And I beheld the ANGEL, who was exalted through the appearance of the
first Beast (in the form of a Lion) that came forth on his White Horse, on
which he rode, in the form of a MAN, with a BOW in his Hand, conquering and to
conquer.

LI.
And the afflictions that followed, came over that third part of the Worlds,
that the Dragon prevailed in, and had power over, through the Stars of Heaven
that he drew after him (wherein he made up his Tail from a third part of the
Heavens) And the Angel that was raised up in form, through that second Beast,
(with the face of a Cherub) rode on a red Horse, wherein he came forth exalted
in the Heavens, and he had a SWORD in his Hand, and came to take Peace from the
Earth, through the occasion of the fall of that first Star, on the Rivers and
Fountains of Water, which made a sharpness in the Springs of VIRGIN Earth, in
the Bowels of Nature.

LII.
And through the fall of this second Star, the face of a MAN became exalted in
the Heavens, in which third Beast the Angel of God came forth, riding and
exalted on his Black Horse, with his Balances in his Hand, wherewith the
Fruits of the Earth were weighed and measured forth to the Inhabitants thereof,
(who were found laboring therein under the power of Corruption) by just weight
and measure, according to every Man's works and doings in the Earth, a measure
of Wheat for a Penny, and three measures of Barley, and the Wine and the Oil
was not hurt, until a fourth Angel of God, who was exalted through a fourth
Beast (in the forms of Nature) with the Face of an EAGLE, had finished his work
that he had to do in the WORLDS.

LIII.
Who had power over a fourth part of the Earth, and he came forth on his Pale
Horse, like unto Death, and Death and Hell followed him, wherein his power was
executed by Pestilence, Famine, and Wild Beasts of Prey (on that fourth part of
the Worlds) until the whole power of the Heavens, became subject to the first
former; And I said unto the Angel of God, How long shall this continue, and the
power of this Beast prevail in the HEAVENS? To which the Angel replied, Until
the EAGLES Eye be plucked out, and he be made blind as in the day that he was
created.

LIVE.
Then shall the Accuser of the Just, be cast down out of the Heavens, and all
Power in Heaven and Earth, shall be delivered up unto the FATHER. And I beheld
until that fourth Beast came to deliver up his Power unto the seven Angels of
God, which was seven Golden Vials filled with the Wrath of God and the Lamb,
(to wit, the seven last Plagues to come on the WORLDS) and they came forth out
of the Temple of God, in the sounding of the seventh Angel, on the AIR, whereby
were finished the Mysteries of God's Kingdom: And therein I beheld in the
Vision, an apparition of the Horses, very dreadful and terrible, with
Brest-plates of fire and Jacinth, and their breaking down was as with an Iron
Rod, breaking and stamping in pieces strong Nations, mighty and great; and out
of their Mouths and Nostrils streamed forth fire, and Brimstone, and smoke, and
their Power was in their Mouths, and in their Tails (which had Heads like the
stings of Serpents) wherewith they came to hurt and destroy.

LV.
For they had Wings like a flying FOWL, and did fly along in the AIR, making a
great noise, like unto the rattling of Chariot Wheels, and on their Heads were
Crowns of Gold, and they had Teeth like unto Lions, who were called DAN'S
Horses, (through a sense of the bruise on the WOMAN'S Heel) but their Riders
were like unto Sagitarius, or men that had lost their shape and were fallen
backward, for they had not the use of their Legs; and the Captain of the ARMY
that I beheld in the Vision of the Heavens, had a name which signifies a POWER
in the DESTROYER, or a POSION; wherein I beheld his Followers, a great number,
being thousands of thousands, which no man could number, and until the end of
those months, they were not to hurt any Herb or green thing; for four Woes were
past, and two were yet remaining.

LVI.
And there was also of the LAMBS Followers, sealed a great number, which could
not be counted, who came through those two WOES to the Inhabitants of the
Earth, in its fourth part, wherein the Eagle had power, of which he was
discharged; And the Angel that I saw, had in his Hand, the Keys of the
Covenant of Love and Mercy, to the Faithful and Chosen of God, who took unto
them their Golden Harps, and stood on Mount Zion with their Harps harping, and
singing and praising God, who had brought them out of great Captivity, whereby
their Garments were made white (that were washed in the Blood of the Lamb)
whose names were written in Heaven, in the Book of the Lambs Life; for they
were preserved from the hurt of what was come into the Earth. And the Angel had
also in his Hand; the CHAIN wherewith the great Red DRAGON had been bound down
for this thousand years, out of which Pit those living Creatures were loosed.

LVII.
And as I beheld the BODY of Nature, in its afflicted state, I came to hear the
Voice of seven Thunders thundering; and their thunderings were to prepare a
ground in which the sense of things wrought; the first Thunder was from the
unconceivable WOMB of Eternity, which prepared a ground for the sense hereof in
the WOMB of Nature, which continued everlastingly thundering over the cursed
Ground, (in which the ^eed of Enmity had entered the Creation of God) And there
appeared the form of a VIPER, who had gnawed his way out of the Womb of
Eternity, to come into the Womb of Nature; yet was he shut up in the place of
Conception, as a third Principle of the Man, imbodied in the Creaturely being,
of whose birth was made a Separation in one hour, wherein came forth a
Generation of VIPERS at once in Man's form.

LVIII.
And the Angel of God led me aside, into the great Wilderness, and I there
beheld the WHORE magnifying her self for a season; and she rode on the scarlet
colored Beast, with seven Heads and ten Horns, which were ten Kings, who had
power with the Beast for an hour, (because of the Wound on his Head, which was
healed up again) by the coming forth of the Ram, from the EAST, who pushed
three ways, after I had beheld five Horns fallen from a fourth Head (that
stood in the midst of five) and unto this Beast did the Dragon give up his
Power, and also the first Beast, and the WHORE, which were the three Ribs, in
the Mouth of the Bear, in the NORTH, and they became three unclean Spirits,
like Frogs that entered this second Beast, who caused the Image of the Beast to
be again revived, and to be worshipped, that all men might receive his Mark,
else were they not to buy and sell with the Nations of the Earth, who received
his Mark and Names, and Number, on their right Hand or forehead; and they were
angry with those that could not bow down with them.

LIX.
And this was the Spirit of Devils, working Miracles in the Name of God, and
thereby they caused the Generations of the World to fear and dread; for the
Nations of the Earth repented them not of their great evil and wickedness, and
sorceries, and thefts, and murders, and worshipping of Devils, and bowing down
unto Graven Images, and of all Idolatry and Uncleanness, notwithstanding those
afflictions that were come into the Worlds: But a second Thunder also thundered
from the Throne of God and the Lamb, which came into the Temple of God, wherein
God had placed a Government over Nature, in those four forms of the Beast, and
all Foundations in HEAVEN and EARTH were shaken, for the preparing and raising
up a Ground for that immovable Rock and Foundation of many Generations.

LX.
And a third Thunder also thundered from the great River Euphrates, out of
which those four destroying Angels of God were loosed, by which those
afflictions came on a third part of those Men, who had not on them the Seal and
Mark of God and the Lamb, in whom a ground was awakened and raised up, which
made sensible of that which was come into those parts of the Worlds: And a
fourth Thunder thundered also from the Wilderness, in which the Woman had
remained traveling in sorrow, for the forty two Months, wherein the Holy CITY
was given into the Gentiles hands, to be trodden under foot, wherein the great
DRAGON stood before her, ready to devour that for which she was in Travel,
which was a Man-Child (who was to Rule the Nations of the Earth in a Rod of
Iron) whom he sought to destroy.

CHAP. VI. Describing the Nature of the WORLDS, in their raised and renewed
state, through a Restoration of the Heavens, etc.
LXI.
AS I came to behold the daughter of the NORTH, returning from the Wilderness,
(in which was her travel and hard labor) I saw TWINS of which she was
delivered therein; and the Children were nourished, for the space of forty
days, by the WOLF, who had fled thereinto, wherein they became great: And the
Queen of the SOUTH, who was come out of her own Land, (wherein she had been
fruitful and was exalted in the Bulls Eye) being delivered of a FEMALE Child,
her Seed was dispersed into the North, and over the four Quarters in the World,
wherein the Waters had prevailed over the Earth.

LXII.
And as she came to settle her self in the pleasure and ease of the Flesh, and
to delight her self in the Worldly Spirit, wherein she sought satisfaction, she
overlaid and slew the Fruit of her Womb (in the Seed of Life) through a
drousiness and carelessness that came over her Spirit, whereby she became dead
while she lived; and there appeared the form of two Children sporting
themselves in the Field of the World, for they were scattered from the House
of NATURE, whom the EAGLE beheld from his Nest, and the one of them was
caught by the Eagle, who envied the Eye of the Child, and by his Bill (which
was renewed) he pierced the sight of the BABE, and made it blind, but he was
frighted away, while there was yet life in the Child.

LXIII.
And the Women met in the Wilderness, wherein the Queen of the South, sought
to compass a Man (in the Seed of Life) under the Power of the North Wind,
because of the Brass Belly, in which the ETHIOPIAN was separated, that had
cured the Wound of those that had looked upon it, the Remnant of whose SEED
were multiplied over the Quarters of the World, that had escaped the sting of
the Serpent in that WILDERNESS, wherein Generations had perished, and the Face
of God was toward his Israel, to gather and deliver them from the Hand of
the ASSYRIAN, the second time.

LXIV.
For as those Women were sound striving about the living Child, who had escaped
the fury of the EAGLE, though it grew blind under the same there arose the
wisdom of a King in Israel to decide the matter through sound JUDGMENT, that
divided things aright, for the distinguishing of the true Mother, whose Bowels
yearned in tenderness over the Birth, in the time it stood under the censure of
Separation, wherein the HARLOT manifested her cruelty; And the venom rested in
the Eye of the Eagle, like unto the poison of Asps, though therein he grew
sharp and quick-sighted, while his Wings overspread the Body of Nature in the
Heavens, from whence I beheld him exalted in the Air, with two Heads, in which
the Seed of the North prevailed, though the Daughter of the South enlarged the
dominion of what proceeded from the Female Child; and she was established Queen
in that strange Land.

LXV.
And I beheld how the Image that had fallen in the Earth, grew secretly
invisible, under the power of Corruption, which increased its strength; in the
changeable ways and courses of the WORLD; wherein the Head of the RAM stood
exalted in the fiery triplicity of the Aerial Heavens, compassed about under
the Waters, that suffered the Power of Corruption, over which the Heavens were
moved, while from the Neck downward the Body of the Earth strove, to reign in
dominion over its Head, and in the Heart of the Earth, was inkindled a flame
from the Fiery Heavens, as it stood moved about in the midst of the Body of
Nature, which had the lower parts of the BEAST downward, but the Legs of a Man,
which stood at a distance in the form of the Letter A, as from the Shoulders
upward, there did reach toward the Heavens, the form of the Arms of a Man, and
both Arms and Legs, were partly Iron, and partly Clay.

LXVI.
And among the forms of all buildings which I had seen erected from the
Heavens, and standing in the Nature of the WORLD, I beheld until the Temple
(that in its first appearance was very glorious) was defiled with the Nature
and Spirit of the WORLD, and it became the seat of the Beasts, which enlarged
its power, in that which overspread the Foundation of the Earth, wherein the
great City (that I had seen) had begun to rest and settle its first glory (in
which the Worlds were planted) and the weight thereof, was the structure of the
Temples Beauty, which settled that which was therein finished on those seven
Mountains or high Hills, that became its Foundations, and they had an eighth
Mountain.

LXVII.
These are the Mountains on which descended the Form of what ever was first
built and erected in the Heavens, settled among the forms in Nature, wherein the
fashions of all glory in the Worlds are decaying, and are ready to pass away,
though it seems to be adorned with magnificence, with Towers great and
strong, and its situation very pleasant and beautiful, while the ancient breach
that has been made thereon in its ruinated state, many are seeking to prop up,
by worldly inventions; the discovery of which is become the torment of the
Worldly Spirit that has sought a Life therein.

LXVIII.
And the Angel of God showed me the whole frame of this building, and bid me
tell its Towers, and count its Foundations, and number its Mountains, and
behold its Situation, that it may be said in Generations to come, This is she
of whom we were forwarned: And while the Angel of God was thus talking with me,
I beheld the appearance of a living Creature, that weaved out of his BOWELS,
the form of the Heavens, and it stood in the Firmament, placed between Waters
and Waters, as between the Heavens and the Earth.

LXIX.
As to the living Creature, he had eight Legs, and through the Clouds of the
Heavens (which were over the face of the Waters) he weaved out of his Bowels,
Coverings, like unto the Spiders Web, which had their course and motion,
according to the frame of the Worlds, in their Corners and Quarters, wherein
his labor was in the Night, in the distance of Degrees from the Sun of the
Glory of the Son of Man, formed in the Clouds of the Heavens, which went
before, and came after the Sun of such Glory, (in which the Creation of God was
first formed and brought forth) who had his Star called HESPER and VESPER, as
Morning and Evening Stars; And I beheld and hearkened, until a Voice came from
Heaven, like unto those four Thunders which passed before me, which had an
interpretation among the sounds in Nature; and the Voice was, Over hundreds
they have moved a hundred times, as over ten thou movest, because of Wages that
have been changed ten times, but over one I am once moving; and the dividing of
times has discovered a time that was Man's glory to see and behold, while good
followed the WORLD, in the state wherein it was planted, though times are past,
in that wherein the Wheels have made a difference.

LXX.
And the fifth Thunder thundered, from the New Jerusalem, that descended from
above out of Heaven, as a BRIDE that is readily adorned for her Husband, the
Voice of which did reach into the great CITY, that is Spiritually called Sodom
and Egypt, where our Lord lies Crucified and Slain; Wherein I saw the fall of
that which was settled on five of those Mountains, and the sixth Foundation was
also shaken, that the seventh might come up and be revealed, and in that
seventh, were the seven manifest, from whence the WORLDS had bubled, through
the renewing of all forms in Nature, which were tried by Tempests, until Gods
goodness came up through that which swayed the Scepter in Israel, and brought
forth Judgment in the power of the Heavens.

LXXI.
For those seven Mountains, had the names of seven Months in the Years in which
God was manifest (in the work of Creation) according to the Power of his WORD
in Nature, by which the works of Wonder in GOD, are established through that
which wrought in a Mystery; And they are the Months in which God discovers
the going forth of the WORLDS, as they have their Foundations in the EARTH,
settled among the forms in Nature; and the Towers which settled, in that which
adjoined to the Body of that Temple (as Heads of the Beast) had the name of the
seven days in the Week.

LXXII.
Wherein the beginning of Beauty and Glory (revealed through the Foundation in
which it settled) rested its ruins on ASSYRIA, through which the forms of the
Towers were put forth, as a Banner displayed toward ASIA, and the name of that
first Mountain was (...), whereon stood a Man with both hands dipped in BLOOD,
and in his right Hand was a Sword, but I beheld until the form of the Man
vanished, and there was naught left but the Head and Face of the RAM, wherein
was erected the form of the TOWERS and from the second Mountain, which had the
name of the second Month called (...), proceeded splendour and brightness, as
the flowers of all increasing properties in the power of Nature, and from the
third Mountain, which had the name of the third Month (called (...)) proceeded
the Vail and Covering of Green Leaves.

CHAP. VII. Describing the form of the Temple, which settled its Foundations on
SEVEN MOUNTAINS of the EARTH.
LXXIII.
ON four of those MOUNTAINS, rested the Body of the Temple, according to its
Foundations, and the names of the Months, by which they were called, which
stood in the fourth part of the WORLD, (with its Corners and Quarters, East,
West, North, and South) according to the four Winds of the Heavens that were
moved from thence, with their four Angels exalted on their Towers from the
sounding of the sixth Angel on the great River EUPHRATES, through that which
prevailed in the fiery triplicity of the Heavens, over the Earth and Waters, in
their third part.

LXXIV.
Wherein the Vernal Quarter was Manifest, in a fourth Mountain, from whence all
Fruits of the Earth came under fiery Trials, to the scorching and consuming all
that stood on that foundation (in the Ground of such a Nature) whence it
received the name of the 4th Month (called THAMUZ) and on the fifth Mountain,
which had the name of the fifth Month (called AB) was manifest the Image of
Jealousy, from whence proceeded the fiery Zeal of that consuming power, which
prevailed over the Fruits of the Earth, until they became reaped, after which
was naught found, through the appearance of a sixth Mountain, which had the
name of the sixth month called ELVL.

LXXV.
And in the Temple there appeared the form of a WOMAN exalted in the Heavens,
on whose Forehead was written JEZEBEL, the Mother of Harlots; and I beheld
until naught was remaining, but the Palms of her hands (which the Dogs refused
to eat) yet did she reign as Queen of Nations, and had power over the Kings of
the Earth: and there appeared the Scarlet colored BEAST, on which her form was
exalted, who was very gloriously decked and adorned with Gold, and precious
Stones, and Pearls, and Purple, and delicate array, and on her forehead was a
name wrote, MYSTERY BABYLON, the Great, the Mother of all Fornication.

LXXVI.
And she was carried into the Wilderness, whither I was led by the Angel, who
showed me her Cities of Refuge; and there was a very great City, in which the
sixth Thunder thundered, from the power of all Motion in the WHEELS, which came
on the ground of all Principles formed in Terrestrial Bodies and beings,
wherein all powers of Nature were shaken, and moved about in the Wheels, which
carried every thing about swiftly, to its appointed place; And there was a
great Earthquake, through which the foundation of the City was shaken, and a
tenth part of the City fell, wherein were slain the names of seven thousand
Men, that those who escaped, might give glory to God on high.

LXXVII.
And on the seventh Mountain, which had on it the name of the seventh month
(called ATNIM was manifest the Angel of strength, over new Wines that were in
the Cluster; And I beheld until the EAGLE had given up his power, which were
the seven last Plagues to come on the Earth; and the power which that fourth
Beast gave up, rested in the Angel of strength, wherein there came forth TWO
WITNESSES of God, which are the two Olive Branches, and two Candlesticks, who
prophesied before the Kings of the Earth, clothed in Sackcloath for the space
of one thousand two hundred and threescore days, and their power was to open
and shut Heaven, until the days of their Prophecy were finished.

LXXVIII.
Whereby the way of God was prepared into the HOLIEST of all, and the Witnesses
were clothed in White, signifying that God was come into his TEMPLE, and all
sorrow was fled away, yea the times of mourning were come to an end, and all
Tears were wiped away from their Eyes, neither was sighing to be heard in that
land; but there was a separation made between the Courts thereof, where was
both inward and outward glory, according to its course, wherein the Witnesses
had prophesied, for the time that it was given into the Gentiles Hands to tread
under foot, accomplished in those forty two months.

LXXIX.
And as the Towers were shaken, in which the days of the week were multiplied,
into number and order, there was manifest the substance of time, wherein was
the Week in which the Witnesses thus fulfilled and gave up their Testimony to
the Father, and in the midst of the Week they came to seal their finished
Testimony, and ascended to Heaven in the sight of their Enemies, and great fear
came on all flesh; but from those Mountains, in which a third part of the Earth
was separated, in the trial by fire there sprung Flowers of Virginity, from the
bowels of TERAH, in that created form, in which the WORLDS were planted, whence
the frame of the WORLDS were overspread in those seven Nations, that were
multiplied from the Heavens, in that which escaped the rage and fury of the
WATERS, as they came to prevail over the Earth, until a barren Wilderness was
become again a fruitful Field unto God, and a fruitful Field suffered
barrenness in such that savv not the danger in their way, wherein they were
overtaken.

LXXX.
For where I had seen the Angel of God, with a Golden CUP in his hand, filled
with goodly dainties, he suffered the WOMAN that was gloriously decked on the
Scarlet-colored Beast in Nature, to take from him the CUP which she took into
her Hand, and filled with Fornications, and all abominations of filthiness,
with which she made her self drunk, and there was mixed with her Sorcerers,
the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of God, who were slain for the Word of
God, and Testimony that they held; and the Angel of God said, Come up hither,
and I will show thee the judgment of this great Whore, who sits on many
Waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and with
the Wine of her silthiness have made themselves drunken, from the Golden Cup
which she reaches to their Head.

LXXXI.
And there came a Voice from the HEAVENS, unto the Mountains on which the Whore
sat exalted, Arise and stand on your feet; and they appeared like unto a MAN,
standing on the great River EUPHRATES, and from thence moving about the form
and frame of the Heavens in the Worlds; and the seven Angels of God came out of
the Temple, and took the seven last Plagues, (which were the seven Vials filled
with the wrath of God, etc.) and they poured them forth on the whole frame of
the Worlds; and there was a great noise in the Heavens, which became divided
into three parts, and she came into the remembrance of God, and the Whore that
was exalted in the midst of her, was discovered, and her skirts seen.

LXXXII.
And there was joy and rejoicing in the Heavens, and thence proceeded Thunders,
and Lightnings, and Earthquakes, and great Hail, the weight whereof slew those
on whom it rested, and such an Earthquake was not since the World began, to the
moving and removing of all Foundations: And the appearance of the Angels that
came out of the Temple, was sparkling, like the fiery Heavens, and they were
clothed as with fire, and their Raiment shined like unto fine Gold, and on
their Heads were Crowns, and their Paps were girded as with golden Girdles.

LXXXIII.
But the seventh Thunder sounded through the AIR, the efect of which descended
on that great CITY, in which Babylon was erected; wherein the seven Angels of
God, that had sounded the seven Golden TRUMPETS, and who had power over the
Worlds, came forth from the holy Place, clothed with Heavenly Glory; for an
Angel of the Sun, who was manifest in the fiery TRIPLICITY of the Heavens,
together with all the glories of the Father, until the Clouds of HEAVEN became
dispersed, in that which was manifest in three Principles of the WORLD, wherein
the glory of the Woman's return from her travel through the WILDERNESS, was
revaled among the WONDERS of Heaven, to be the Celestial beauty of a third
Principle in which she was clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon under her
Feet, and on her Head was the Crown of Twelve Stars (that are moved about in
the ZODIAC of the Heavens of an Inward World.)

LXXXIV.
For TWO WOES are past, in the diveing of the Worlds, in their six Principles,
into two third parts, wherein five are comprehended in one third part of that
which is past, and they are fallen for the revealing of the SAMARITAN, in that
which is come forth against ASIRIA the second time, in which the Woman
continued joined to one that had buried five, yet was he not the HUSBAND to the
five wise VIRGINS, but he remained married unto her, in that foolish state
wherein the Law had dominion over the MAN as long as he lived, in whom the
foolish Virgins are concerned, to reveal a sixth that is past, and seventh that
is come, for the bringing forth of whom the Creature suffers death all the
day long.

CHAP. VIII. Describing the Power of God, manifested in the execution of the
seven last Plagues to come upon the Earth.
LXXXV.
THE BEAST himself, who is the Eighth, and who is the Son of Perdition, is now
revealed, in her that shall bury SEVEN, wherein the Harlot has lurked, unto
whom the Man has remained joined in one Spirit of the Beast, while the Temple
of God has been defiled, in such worship and bowing down to the Spirit of
defilement, and the glorying therein, is become an incestuous BED that
procures torment; because of the Resurrection, in which none can remain joined
to that Spirit, and possess the Glory in God's Temple, who is come to destroy
the defiler thereof.

LXXXVI.
For the three Angels of God, that have power over that which came on the
Worlds in their third part, through the sounding of the seven Trumpets of God,
that awaken the execution of Justice from the Heavens, are now manifest in the
three remaining Principles, that have a fourth part in their Quarter reserved
to those fiery Trials, effected in that which manifests the end of all
gloryings in the dominion of the fourth Beast in Nature.

LXXXVII.
Wherein the fiery Triplicity in the Heavens, through which those Angels are
revealed, has been covered as with a Cloud, until the Son of Man came to be
revealed, riding on the White Clouds of the Heavens, and clothed with
incomparable Beauty, before whom three Angels have been found flying through
the Heavens, proclaiming the everlasting Gospel of Peace and glad tidings, and
the destruction of Babylon, in her great CITIES, which were come up before the
remembrance of God, warning the Inhabitants of the Earth to come forth from
her, and flee out of her glory; lest partaking therewith, they came to partake
with her in those Plagues that were upon the Earth.

LXXXVIII.
These three are the Witnesses of God in Heaven, filling the Heaven of Heavens
with Glory, in one power that comprehends all Principles in Nature, which are
swallowed up in its immensness. Greater testimony of God has none; for since
God has a Witness on Earth, how much greater is that in and from the Heavens?
wherein an Angel has come forth out of the Temple, in which the first Witness
of God finished his Testimony; and beholding the Fruits of the Earth, that they
are ready for gathering, and that the Harvest is White, he has said unto the
Angel that sits on the WHITE CLOUD, Thrust in thy sharp Sicle, because of
the Harvest of the Earth which is ripe, and the Earth has been reaped, until
naught can be found, but that which has remained for a second Harvest and
Trial.

LXXXIX.
But he that has lain slain in the streets of that great City (in which the
Inhabitants of the Earth, have made merry over the crucified Life of the Lord
of all Glory in Heaven and Earth) is now come forth raised and exalted on that
White Cloud, from whence the Earth is reaped; And a second Angel of God is come
forth out of the Temple, with his sharp Sicle in his Hand, and an Angel of the
Altar (under which the Souls of the Righteous lie groaning) says unto that
second Witness or Angel that is come forth out of the Temple, Thrust in thy
sharp Sicle also, and reap the fruits of the Vine, the Clusters of the Vine
Grapes, and spare not the Olive Yards.

XC.
This is he that daily ministers before the Lord, and attends the Altar of
God with the Prayers of Saints, which are daily offered up, with sweet Incense,
put into his Golden Censer, and his power is over fire, by which all untimely
Fruits are scorched and consumed (in their third part) by the bright rays of
the breaking forth of the Summer, in the Sun of Righteousness, which is arisen,
with healing in its Wings; though in the passing away of the Winter, and in the
dispelling of Clouds of Darkness (which were over, and had covered the Face of
the Earth) the Summer is broke forth, wherein many remain unsaved from the
wrath thereof, to come upon the ungodly World.

XCI.
For in that which descended through the Clouds of the Air, the first beauty
and glory of the Temple, (in that which was built in the Heavens) is discovered
to be moveable, though therein God was worshipped, as in the Ark of his
Testimony, in the Covenant of Promise, which was carried about from place to
place, while the Temple remained under a Cloud, in which are the more lively
things themselves, then that in which the forms of Nature were gathered, as
patterns of what remained under a Cloud, until the time of the restitution of
all in the Heavens was come, wherein has wrought the Power and Spirit of
Preparation, in the Spirit of Creatures, to the perfecting the Work of God, and
bringing into the unity of the Spirits of just Men made perfect in God, until
all becomes complete in him that holds the HEAD, unto which the Body is
knit, in several Joints and Members.

XCII.
Yet in this time of ISREAL'S sojourning through the Wilderness, the Power of
God has been manifest, to those strangers in the Earth, in that strange
Country, through which they have their passage, and therein have pitched their
moveable TENTS; though Beauty and Glory has shined through such Vessels, in
the time of their preparation from transgression, that came under the Judgment
of the great Day of God, in the ground wherein God first chose a People to
himself, and to be called by his Name, until the Glory of the Earth is become
laid wast; the third and last WOE is come into the World, discovered in the
pouring forth of those seven Vials, to the utter consumption of the Spirit and
Power of Darkness, ruling and reigning in the God of the World, wherein Death
and Hell are conquered in their full strength, and the Enemy of all Souls
vanquished and overcome in that which is come to destroy the ground of
Destruction by utter dissolution.

XCIII.
And the sense of these things was manifest in the World; in that which came on
the Earth and great SEAS, and all Rivers and Fountains of WATER, and all that
lived therein or moved thereon, and on Sun and Moon, and Stars, and the seat of
the Beast, and great River EUPHRATES, and on the Air; wherein the Fruits of the
Earth withered and were destroyed, and the Waters became like unto the Blood of
the dead, and on Men fell a noysom Plague Sore and Headly Wound, because of the
infection of the Air, wherein was Hail ^ike unto Fire mingled with Blood, each
being of great weight, and at the appearance of God, there was wrought up
through the EARTH, a burning Mountain, under which fell the Powers of Nature in
Earthly Forms.

XCIV.
And all the WATERS were dried up in the great River Euphrates, wherein the way
of the Kings of the EAST was prepared, who gathered themselves together into a
place called GOLGOTHA in the Hebrew Tongue, which is a place of dry Bones and
dead Men's Sculs, on whom the Spirit of God had breathed, and they did live in
his sight, and stand on their Feet like Men; and it was the Valley of Megiddon
and of Hadadrimmon, even the Valley of Jehoshaphat, or the Valley of Slaughter,
where RACHEL sat weeping for her Children, because they we^^ not, and she would
not be comforted but herein is manifest (in the Valleys ACHOR, which is given
for a Doo^ of Hope.

XCV.
For God was descended into all the Powers of Nature, through his destroying
Angels, changing all Powers, and Laws, and Customs of the HEATHEN and
uncircumcised, in the ground wherein destruction wrought, and renewing the
Created FORMS in Nature, into their first lovely Being (as into these Kings of
the EAST, the Nature of the Beast had descended, which had his Power renewed in
an eighth Head and Mountain) and they had the Power of the Beast and false
Prophet, or Whore) wherein they were exalted to hasten the utter ruin and
downfall of the DRAGON, and Beast, and false Prophet, yet wrought Miracles in
the Earth, and encamped about the Beloved City, the New Jerusalem, which
descended from above out of Heaven, and they caused fire to come down from
Heaven.

XCVI.
But the Holy People waxed strong, and did exploits, although the Foundations
of all buildings, in the Earthly Principles of Nature, suffered great shakings,
and an utter overthrow, wherein darkness filled the Seat of the BEAST, and
every Mountain was removed out of its place, and great BABYLON fell, as the
nether Millstone that is cast into the Sea, and every Island fled away before
the Face and Presence of the Lord, and were cast into the deeps of Waters, that
were drying up into their Anihilation, and the smoke of the Torment of those
Men that had the Mark of the Beast ascended upward, as a place of Torment to
the Spirit of the WORLD, incorporated into the form of the Image.

CHAP. IX. Describing the Glory of the New Jerusalem, in the renewing Power of
God, which wrought up the efficacy of its change in the Forms of Nature.
XCVII.
AS all forms in Nature, were subjected under the Power of God; there was
manifest a Spirit of ZEAL, in the Qualities wherein the Creature became
imbodied, through which the change was wrought; for the ten Horns of the BEAST,
did hate the WHORE, whose flesh they consumed with fire; and the Minstrels were
all turned out of Doors, because the Damsel was raised; and the Bridegroom was
come at Midnight, wherein the Wise Virgins had prepared Oil in their Lamps,
which were lighted and trimed, burning in the flame of that which was gathered
and reaped in the Earth, by the Angel; but the Apples of Sodom, and Grapes of
Gomorrah (after which the Souls of many have longed) became unpleasant Fruit,
because of the sound of the Millstone, which could not be heard, neither was
there any Voice of the Turtle, or the singing of Birds.

XCVIII.
Nor did the Light of any Candle shine therein, but the sound of the Tabret,
and the Viol was departed out of the Land, and the Sun ceased any more to
shine, while there continued a cry for want of Oil among those that were
foolish, and at the Voice of the Grasshopper, the Aged rose up and were afraid
(as the Pillars of the House were shaken) and the Windows grew dim, the
Grinders failed, and the Pitcher that went often to the FOUNTAIN was broken, and
the limit of the circumference of the Waters, which were bound in that great
River, was loosed and enlarged, and the Streams of Corruption dried out of the
same wherein it had compassed about the frame of the WORLDS, like unto the Arms
and Legs of a Man; for every thing perished in its corruptible state and
course, until the form of the World became thus changed, and the Dragon and
Beast, and false Prophet (who had deceived the Nations of the Earth) were laid
hold on, and bound down by the Chain in the Hand of the strong Angel of God,
never to rise again.

XCIX.
And Death and Hell was cast into the Lake of fire, and a Seal was set on the
power thereof, that it never more should appear in the Worlds, to mar the
Workmanship of God, and form of his Image, and all forms of Nature shined out
of the Glassy Sea, (on which the redeemed of God stood Harping and Singing, and
Praising God) which was sprakling like fire; for the Heavens were rolled up
together like a Scrole, and the Elements were consumed with servent heat,
wherein was no more Sea, but that Sea of Glass, or first Waters, in which was a
new Heaven and new Earth, and therein did Righteousness dwell, for ever and
ever.

C.
For former things were remembered no more, but the former Heaven and Earth was
passed away, and there was a Voice from the New Heavens, Behold the Tabernacle
of God is among Men, and he is come to dwell in them, and to walk among them,
for ever and ever; who has wiped away all Tears from their Eyes, and sorrow
and sighing is gone into perpetual silence; and beautiful was the Countenance
of him that came from Mount TIRZAH, clear as the Sun, and bright as the Moon,
and terrible like an Army with Banners, whereby the power of the second Death
was Conquered, and came not into the new Heavens and new Earth.

CI.
And there was the CITY of God, which was placed between the SEAS, in which was
no need of the Sun by day, nor of the Moon by Night, nor was there any need of
the light of a Candle to shine therein, but the light of the Moon, was as the
light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun, as the light of seven days; and
all labor in the Earth ceased to be, neither did it Travel and bear its former
burdens, but the Lamb and the Lord were the Light thereof, for ever and ever;
and all things brought forth as in the beginning; wherein the WOMAN was
redeemed from sorrow and labor of Childbearing, and brought forth her SEED as
Angels of God, nourished in the Womb of Health, wherein saving blessings were
sprung up to heal the Nations; and from the place of Conception, from whence
sorrow was removed, did life break forth into being, and the birth thereof was
glorified in the sight of GOD; but time and place were no more.

CII.
Sing therefore, O ye Heavens! and let the Inhabitants of the EARTH rejoice,
because time is changed into Eternity, and the WOES are removed out of its
Quarters; Death and Hell are Conquered in its dominions, and the Sea and Grave
have given up their slain; the dead are come forth out of the secret Chambers
of LEVIATHAN, and the BEHEMOTH is overcome by him that sits on his WHITE
Throne, and rides on his White Horse; and the Walls of Brass and Iron are
broken down, and the Word by which every thing was created, says unto the hard
Rocks, Be ye soft, and unto the high Hills, Be ye bended down.

CIII.
The strength of the strong is bound in CHAINS, and the Power of Mighty binders
is loosed from Iron Fetters; and the King over NATIONS, has said unto the
Power of FIRE, Be thou kindled into a burning flame to consume, until
Consumation become reproved, and devouring flames are quenched; the forms of
Nature are comprehended, under the renewing Power of God in the HEAVENS, and
all things that have being are changed through dissolution.

CIV.
For the God of Life is come into his Holy Place, he is come forth from the
midst of burning flames, and has descended through the Clouds of the Heavens;
the Mountains of the World do tremble, and the form of the whole Earth does
shake in his Presence, before his Face they are lightly MOVED, that stand in
his way; for a devouring fire accompanies his progress, and it is very
tempestuous round about him; because he arises as a Giant refreshed with WINE,
who has took unto himself Vengeance for a clothing, and is clothed with
Zeal, as with a Cloak; under his Shoes are high Hills become like unto
dissolving Snow, and he that treads thereon, has his Feet like unto
sparkling Brass, come out of the Refiners Furnace.

CV.
His Eyes are like a flame of fire, and his Face shines as the Sun in its full
strength; he subdueth great Nations with the Breath of his Lips, and when he
speaks the Word, all things are done at his command; for in his Mouth is a
sharp two-edged Sword, and therewith are his Enemies slain, and brought down to
be his Footstool: Who would not but fear before him; for when his displeasure
is moved, his Foes are consumed with anger; and when he comes to be awakened,
before he please, who can stand in his Way? when his Wrath is but a little
kindled, Blessed are all they that trust in his Name, for those that flee from
the LION, are overtaken by a BEAR in the way, and a BASILISK does bite those
that would lean on a Wall. O Heavens! hear, and O Earth give Ear, for the Lion
is come forth out of the Thickets, and the Destroyer of the Gentiles is on his
way.

CVI.
And while I was thus beholding the Angels glory, I was again led into the
Wilderness, until the Mystery of all those things came to be fulfilled, in the
number of days; for the space whereof the Worlds abode under sore Trials, for
the manifesting of what has relation to the Kingdom of God, and Glory of his
Power. And I observed the result thereof, until eighty five days were past
over, for any longer I was not able to see and perceive for glory; but I rested
greatly astonished to behold the effect of that which came forth in those
days, until faintness of Spirit overtook me, and I was not able to stand
upright on my Feet any longer, because of the Temptations of the Devourer,
which became very prevalent, (through Darts that were shot against my Soul in
secret) wherein he labored to betray my Life under his Snares and Baits.

CVII.
And I stood before the ANGEL of God, as one clothed in vile RAIMENT, and as I
came to present my supplications unto the Lord, the Devil came also into his
presence, as one ready to resist me; for he having a desire to sift me (as one
would winnow Wheat) I was delivered into his Hands (as into the Hands of the
Tormenter) whose power was for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
might be saved alive in this day of the Lord Jesus: And I appeared as one
destitute of a Habitation in the EARTH, and cast out into the open Fields, as
in the day that I was born, striving in my Blood; yet was my right Leg bound
with fear, and on my Shoulders I bore the Yoke, from whence Blood ran down on
my Garments, defiled and torn, in meddling with the Worldly Spirit, before which
I was thus seen to bear my reproach.

CVIII.
Yet while thus in my Blood, and gasping after the Breath of Life, God said,
Thou shall live in my sight to feel the Infirmities wherewith the World is
touched. Then cried I out unto the Lord, Wonderful are all thy ways and works,
which my Soul knows right well; for in three times five years, thou have
brought me through very great Trials and Alterations in my condition, but what
I now see and behold is of great concern, through the Vision of Wonders that
has seized my Spirit; and the Glory of God rests weightily on me, though I
am often ready to conclude, it had been more happy for me that I had been
prevented by my Mothers Knees, and that her Paps had never suckled me, then to
see this day; for then had my Soul never grown up under the sense of such
sorrow as I have passed through, neither had I been pursued for my Life by
those that seek it for a prey.

CHAP. X. Describing the time for which the Dragon was loosed, until the
Mystery of that which is seen in the Vision came to be fulfilled.
CIX.
While I continued thus Praying and making Supplications unto the Lord, I was
touched in the night season, by the Angel URIEL, and my Bowels were moved
toward the Lord, and rouled within me, and I was carried by the Spirit of God,
on the WATERS where the WOMAN sat; and there came a Voice from the Heavens,
Behold now, thou art not born for thy self, but to be tried in the behalf of
thy People: and while the Angel was communing thus with me, TEMPESTS arose and
continued in the WORLD, and over the same did the WATERS swell and rage, until
I came safely to arrive at the Haven of Rest.

CX.
And being again beset with the Rage and Fury of the Woman, I came to pass
through great buildings, which were reared up sumptuous and fair to the Eye,
and I was led about its MANSIONS, though the rage and fury of the WOMAN
followed me for hurt, causing grief and mourning on my Spirit; And I said unto
the Angel, What evil have I done unto this envious WOMAN, who is seeking to
betray my Life? But he quieted my SPIRIT in a moment, saying, Fear not those
that seek thy Life, for I will smite thy Foes in my fury (as already thou have
seen them smitten in their enterprises) but continue thou still, and humble thy
self daily before the Lord, with fasting and prayer, and therein shall thy
abstinence be accepted.

CXI.
For when thy Heart is lifted up above the sense of what is thy preservation,
deliverance comes to stand afar off, and in the needful time and hour thou
may cry out for help, when strength is departed from thy HEAD, and none is
found near to put forth an assisting Hand and Arm to restore: And I again said
unto the Lord, Though I have not a Habitation and certain dwelling place on the
EARTH, I cannot be discontented at thy dealings O God! And why should I murmur
and repine at thy disposings? Though in the WORLD I am comfortless, since thou,
O Lord, art good in all thy ways, and thy Mercies are over all thy works.

CXII.
Then appeared there great preparation for WAR; and I beheld many go forth to
the BATTLE, while I continued exercised under the besetments of the WOMAN,
until she vanished, and I saw not any more her form to disquiet me; but through
the WILDERNESS, in which the WOMAN sat exalted, (on the Scarlet-colored
BEAST) I beheld the pleasant Field and fruitful Garden, working up the form of
what endured and continued patient under those fiery Trials, until they became
past over; though many therein did dwell on a barren Heath, who could not see
when good comes, whereby they perished in the Night of Obscurity and worldly
sorrow that overtook them (in their way) wherein the power of DEATH wrought and
became strong in the WORLDS.

CXIII.
And in the place of the fifth Head of the Beast (in the midst of four) which I
had beheld Wounded as it were unto death, were sprung up three other Heads; And
the Horns on that fifth Head (which had received that deadly Wound) were
increased, through the healing up of the Wound, wherein a little Horn that
sprung up between the Eyes of the Beast, received Voice, and began to speak
great swelling words, against the God of Heaven, and his SAINTS that dwell on
the Earth, and the little Horn waxed strong toward the four Winds of the
Heavens, wherein the BEAST appeared with seven Heads and ten Horns, (which had
Power in in the Beast to reign with him as Kings for their hour.)

CXIV.
And whereas (after I had seen the fall of five Horns, on that fifth Head of
the Beast) I beheld remaining four Heads, from whence sprung up four Horns, in
the dispersing abroad the Kingdom and Power of the BEAST, under the four Winds
of the Heavens; so in the reviving of his power, that which became exalted in
the reducing of four (to its first subjection) ruled over five (in which the
wound was received, and wherein the Beast came forth first manifest) and in the
discovery of both the rise and fall of the BEAST, though through the great Horn
of the Hee-Goat, who did not touch the ground, until he had accomplished his
design (after he had power given him, in the awakened fury of the West-Wind)
the two Horns of the RAM from the EAST, were broken and stamped in pieces, that
great Horn was also broken, when its fury was accomplished.

CXV.
Yet was the power of the four Horns on those four Heads of the BEAST, bound
down in the four Heads of the great River, until the time of the loosing of
their four Angels, that stood on the four Corners of the EARTH, to hold the
four Corners of the WINDS from blowing on the EARTH, while the little Horn was
magnified, whereby the third Head which sprung up in the midst of the seven,
recovered four Horns, from that which was dispersed under those four Winds of
the Heavens; and on the other six Heads, were manifest six Horns.

CXVI.
Thus was the BEAST more monstrous then all those other Beasts that passed
before him, with Iron Teeth, by which he did break and stamp in pieces; And his
Face was like unto a Leopard, with the form of a third part of the Stars in the
constellation of the HEAVENS on his Back; but he had the Feet of the great
Bear, and discovered his power through the four Heads of the great River
EUPHRATES, in the loosing of those destroying Angels, who came first out from
the WATERS, but the reviving of his strength (from those deceitful healings)
proceeded out of the Earth, through the power of the RAM in Nature.

CXVII.
And in the time of the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, this BEAST came forth,
through the loosing of those destroying ANGELS out of the great River; and
through those earthquakes and shakings that were come into the WORLD (wherein
fell that tenth part of the great City) God had returned unto himself his
Tenths, to be eaten as a Teyl-Tree, and as an Oak, whose substance was in it;
these were the remnant of the Holy Seed, who worshipped the Lord with a pure
Heart, even in Spirit and in Truth, and whose Garments were washed White in the
Blood of the Lamb.

CXVIII.
For they came to pass through great tribulations and Trials in their WAY,
because they could not Worship the BEAST, nor receive his Mark, but they were
preserved blameless before the Lord in that hour wherein Iniquity was not found
in their HEARTS, neither was there guile in their MOUTHS, to be uttered with
their Tongue: And I beheld until the sin of MANASSEH became ripened, and was
filled up, and the high Altars (in both Courts) whereon had been offered
Sacrifice to IDOLS, and Incense burnt to strange Gods (which neither we nor our
Fathers have heard of) were pulled down, because of the God of FORCES who was
worshipped, neither was the desire of Women regarded.

CXIX.
And after I came to see the WOMAN'S deliverance, from the rage and fury of the
great Red DRAGON (who had cast his floods of Water after her, in the time and
times wherein she had been helped by the EARTH, and sheltered by the Wings of
the EAGLE, with which she had fled into the Wilderness) as the Dragon came to
give up his Power to this monstrous Beast, the remnant of her Seed was
persecuted in the World, for the space of full forty days: And wherein the Sun
had gone back ten Degrees, for the prolonging of Life in the Just, after he
came to discover and reveal the glory in which was his safety, before Babylons
King, (who wrought by subtilty and much craft) whereby fifteen days were added
to his dying state.

CXX.
Those days were again doubled, in the renewed Zeal, wherein the Favor of God
was multiplied (to the purging his House and Sanctuary) according to the
fifty-five days, wherein Manasseh had caused the Israel of God to err in
following after Idols; And for ten days the Devil had power to cast many into
Prison, that they might be tried and sifted by his cunning devices, until their
Garments became thus made white in the Blood of the slain Lamb of God.

CHAP. XI. Describing the Form of the WHEELS, in the VISION, according to their
MOTION, wherein are numbered the days that the BEAST has yet to reign and
continue on the Earth.
CXXI.
AS to the form of the Wheels, as they wrought and moved one within the other
(as a Wheel within a Wheel) like unto the form of the Worlds, (which are moved
the one within the other) the WHEELS never rested, but went straight forward
toward Eternity, wherewith they were tinctured, and moved (in the power
thereof) as though they crossed, each other, and yet there was no crossness, in
the Will and Wisdom of Eternity from whence they were moved, in the power of
him that first wrought and labored in the motion thereof.

CXXII.
For all crossness that appeared in the motion thereof, wrought in the Earthly
ground, wherein the Worlds labored to Center in a Glory below the power of
Eternity, from whence every thing first proceeded, and was brought forth (to a
day of Trial) in the FRAME under which the Body of Nature was constituted to
exercises, from the Glory of the HEAVENS, wherein the Will of the Creature was
subjected to a change, through vanity that entered the WORLD (in a state of
corruptible Glory) which was suffered to work in a hidden ground, to manifest
the deceit of the TEMPTER.

CXXIII.
And Nature had not a Will of its own, to move about the Wheels in the Power of
the Heavens, that wrought on and over Creatures, that took being in time and
place (according to the form and frame of the Worlds in which all Glory
wrought) without the ENEMY, neither was the Enemies power any thing prevalent,
but through a subjection in the Will of the Creature, in that Power wherein he
was made able to resist him; but time and place became measurable from the
Heavens, wherein the comprehensible course of all forms in Nature had their end
come up in the World, in that which was manifest through distinction.

CXXIV.
But Number and Order remains manifest among the forms in Nature, in which
every thing comes forth into being, according to the Figure of its Birth,
constituted in the power of the Heavens, in respect to the dignification of the
Mind, in the thing wherein it delights, through which the Man comes to sow
the Seed from whence he expects to reap Fruit answerable thereunto; though in
the flesh of Creatures, there is that already sown and spread abroad, which
works in the Members, against that which dignifieth the mind, that remains
as a Thorn in the flesh, to make sensible of its pricking pangs, when the
Creature goes forth into self-exaltation, beyond or above the measure of power
and ability which he has received from God.

CXXV.
And this is to humble the Creature, and make him sensible of the need he has
of the preserving Power of God, in that which keeps open the Eye of the MAN, at
all times to see himself upon the Watch; for every Principle of Nature has a
contrariety attending that which is formed in its Birth, according to the
Diurnal and Annual motion in the Wheels; wherein that which causes a change in
the state of the Creature, multiplyeth days and hours in the course through
which it is manifest, according to the sufferance, or according to the delight
of SPIRIT, in which he is attended.

CXXVI.
This do I see in each Birth, and moreover I observe how Nature ripeneth that
which the Man reaches after, in the number of hours or days, according to
which the mind stands afflicted thereby, wherein nothing can exceed the
number thirty, (in the course of Nature) for that which is changeable returns
to the beginning of the WORK, by which it is Judged, to be manifest in its
Birth; And thirty years are the largest extent of motion (in the Rings of the
outward Wheel) as thirty days accomplish the race of the swiftest motion in
the Wheel's Rings, according to their Orbs in the Heavens.

CXXVII.
And in like manner, as in twelve hours, a day in Nature is complete, in that
which divides it from the night, so in twelve years, that which moves in the
most equal ORB (among the forms in Nature) returns to the Center from which
it was moved; though it be straight forward, that the Wheels are moved in the
Heavens; for all that has its Period in time, Centereth and ends its course
in the Will, and under the power of God, in that which is suffered to labor
and work up the form, over which Death and Dissolution has had power.

CXXVIII.
But the Inward Heavens being tinctured with the love and delight of God, all
BEAUTY and glory centereth therein, and shines therefrom, as from the FIRE of
Gods Jealousy, whereby his honor is mentained, in that which has kindled and
inflamed a desire burning after the highest good, which has its similitude in
the WATERS, wherein Nature is moved in its Principles, according to the several
ORBS and Spears, in which the Power of the Heavens does labor and work.

CXXIX.
Wherein the Heart of Eternity inflameth through the forms of Nature in a
yearly course, under which the Heavens have doubled the effect, of that which
rises up inkindled in the ORB, which breaks all essences in form, and
maintains War in the source in which the RAM has taken Head, distributing
power under the four Winds of the Heavens, in which the Elements of Nature
stand divided, and under the same came forth the faces of the four Beasts,
according to the third Ring in the Wheels, through which the fourth BEAST, is
become exalted in his dominion, over a fourth part of the WORLDS.

CXXX.
For the course of motion in this Ring of the WHEEL, is forty nine Weeks, to
regain that which is lost in form, through the Beauty and Glory of what was
finished in seven days, from whence the Heavens have multiplied all forms in
Nature, until the day and hour under which Death is dispossessed in its
dominion (for the separation of day and night in Nature) met in the Power of
the Heavens, through that which discovers the Period of all changeable
Courses, in which the Moon has strengthened her Revolutions, while Winter and
Summer, and Seed time and Harvest continue.

CXXXI.
And while I thus beheld the motion in the Wheels, there came forth out of the
Heart of FIRE in Nature, an ANGEL of the Sun, clothed with the Rainbow of the
Heavens, and he rode on all the Powers of Nature, proclaiming with a loud
Voice, a Feast that was prepared for the Fowls of the Air, which were gathered
together under the conduct of the EAGLE, and they were a great Multitude and
very numerous; and on my other Hand stood the ARK of God, which was taken in
BATTLE by his Enemies, wherein Glory was departed out of the Tents of those
that God had first chosen to be his own.

CXXXII.
For the Aged departed in Sorrow, and the Old Man died full of Grief, and
pained in Heart, until there came a Voice from the Heavens, Behold the result
of Isreal's deliverance, from their Enemies Hands, wherein the Servant in Gods
House (in his good Old Age) has his Eye open to see the Salvation of God, and
is enabled to depart in Peace; And henceforth shall thou no more count an
Infant of days, nor Old Man full of years, because of the sinner that dies
accursed, but a Child shall die a hundred years old, where the Hoary Head is
not reverenced, nor the tenderness of youth respected.

CHAP. XII. Wherein the substance of the VISION is concluded, in a PROPHECY of
that which is yet to come to pass, directed in an Epistle, (to all that are
separated into several Fellowships) concerning the third part of the Book.
CXXXIII.
AS I beheld the Ark of God's COVENANT, which was made with many People and
great Nations, brought up from the Waters, in the new Created HEAVENS, wherein
the forms of Nature stood MANIFEST in their Figure and order of Number; Among
three hundred URNS or earthen PITCHERS that were broken, (that Light might
spring forth from the Power of the Heavens, whereby the Enemies of God were
discomfited) there remained only two of those Vessels in the forms of Nature,
wherein every thing in being was doubled, and the Heavens were drawn both
ways, through a fiery Constellation therein inkindled.

CXXXIV.
And in one of those Urns were the Names of the twelve Tribes of ISRAEL, but in
the other was a party-colored Blank, on which was wrote PREROGATIVE, to which
the ANGEL said, This is Isreal's desire, and therefore has Benjamin had a
Prerogative to be higher then his Brethren by the HEAD, and his raving up has
been like an evening Wolf, while Israel has sought the Rule and Dominion of
other Nations of the Heathens; for from the seven Families of FATHERS, the Lot
rests on an eighth Head, who is discovered by his ANGEL, wandering after the
lost Asses, who have a month to be tamed, in the power over which he is set to
be their KEEPER.

CXXXV.
After whom came the lowing of the OXEN, and bleating of the SHEEP (in the
restraint of Fodder) of the KING of Gods Enemies; Then said I, What must be
done? Or has this fault been in one only, that Iniquity should rest on his
TRIBE? For lo, Israel stands before the ARK, enquiring into the MATTER: And
there was in the hands of the Angel, (over whom inquiry was made) a Signature;
in one Hand was a CROWN dipped in Blood, and in the other Hand a ROD, touched
with Honey, concerning which the Angel bid me choose, wherein I was covetous of
both.

CXXXVI.
And while my Tongue touched the Honey, it was in my Mouth sweet; but
immediately was the form of the ANGEL divided, and there remained other
Signatures in each Hand of the form of the living Creature, like unto a suite
of tried Armor, and Sheet, in which was tied the form of every living Creature
under the HEAVENS, according to the Corners of the Heavens from whence they
were let down bound. And as I was trying the ARMOR, finding it cumbersom, as
that in which I was not accustomed to wage War, therefore thought I hastily to
cast it off, that I might take hold of the Sheet, in which were those living
Creatures, there came a Voice from the Heavens, as from the Angel, whose form
was again united in a Body, Thou have chosen that which will make thee a Wonder
in the World.

CXXXVII.
And he yet cried aloud, The bitterness of the Miracle is in thy Belly, for
know thou assuredly, thou have Part and Lot in this Matter; And to my
astonishment, the Body again revived instantly before me, and it was made to
stand up before my Face; And there came a second Voice from the Angel, Is it a
time to be delighted, with sweetness in the midst of Battle? Or to feed on Honey
while Enemies are on the pursuit? And I was afraid I should die, and durst not
any more ask any Question in this matter: But after the Voice from the Heavens,
became intelligible, wherein an Angel of God said, Arise from thy slumber, thou
that art glutted, in that which thou have killed and eaten, for therefore is
thy Head filled with Wonders.

CXXXVIII.
I beheld until the forms of all those living Creatures were again awakened
before me and they came forth to make WAR in my way; and before me stood the
unsealed Book of Wonders, which the LAMB of God had taken out of the Hand of
the ANGEL, for the loosing of the Seals thereon, which was like unto that which
I had eaten, from what was tendered by the ANGEL: And while I beheld the Book
lifted up unto the Heavens, I was mourning in Spirit, and said in my Heart,
Wherefore has my life been prolonged for such exercise as this? For now I am
become the scorn of cruel Enemies.

CXXXIX.
And I returned to the Angel of him that I had seen divided, and who was again
united before my Face, and found him clothed in the Armor, as one riding
forth to a Battle, unto whom I said, Boast not thy self in putting on, and in
thy going forth to War, as may he that puts it off, and returns a Conqueror;
for twice have thou deceived me, let therefore my wrong rest on Thee (that
coverest a WOLF) according to the time I have become a stranger to my own
FAMILIARS, when driven forth as among the BEASTS of Prey.

CXL.
My Hair was like unto the Plumes of a FOWL, and my Nails like unto the
Tallents of a BIRD, and because of the Vow on my Head, I was as one forlorn;
for thou have counted the hours of my mourning, and know the days wherein
pleasant Bread came not into my Mouth, under which my Spirit was ready to
faint, but let the Issue be glory to the Highest; Turn again therefore my
reproach, I pray thee, that I may know and be assured that thou have taken
notice of the innocence of my SOUL in thy sight, and that thy love is yet
toward me.

CXLI.
And the Angel of God, again took me into the Habition of WONDERS, where I
heard an interpretation of the Mystery of the seven Thunders, and he said unto
me, These have made way for the preparing a ground, wherein is revealed what
was opened and loosed from the BOOK in the Hand of the Angel; and the time is
come that nothing hidden shall remain in its secret Chamber, but the Seal of
God shall be taken off from the Spirit of Wonders, and Truth shall have its
common recourse, in the fellowship that publishes abroad the sayings and
report of Wisdom: Therefore prepare thee to write, for thy Prayers are come up
before the Lord, and thou shall yet PROPHECY before the Nobles of the Earth,
and thy sayings shall terrify Kings and mighty Men, as in their appointed
season they become fulfilled.

CXLII.
And unto the Angels of all Fellowships of People write these things says the
searcher of all Hearts, before whom my desire has been granted, and he
answers daily my request, revealing the Mystery of all depths concerning the
glory of Gods Kingdom, and the sum and substance of all Prophecy in Words is
transferred to the sensible Reader in a Figure, until the substance thereof
become fulfilled, on a Generation of Men, through which it will be made to
speak, in an Universal Character of good to Nations, in the generous Spirit of
that love, in which many suffer despite.

CXLIII.
I know your Thoughts, from the greatest to the least, and you all are
expecting alterations and changes in the Government of Nations, and state of
public affairs; but believe it, truly, it will not come in that way you expect
it, who would gladly see your Enemies destroyed, and utterly confounded, that
you might not hope in vain; Alas! the Life of Creatures is precious in Gods
Eye, and God has determined no other Judgment to the Wicked, then that which
remains to be the utter Consumption and Destruction of the Spirit of ENMITY
(in the Man of SIN) by which NATIONS are oppressed under his Power, whose
destruction comes to be of themselves, in choosing that which leads and
guides under that which of necessity must fall on the World, in a wicked state.

CXLIV.
But God is not the Author of all the evil and mischief that is expected to
befall NATIONS, in such a Case, though his displeasure may be AWAKENED, against
a People or Nation, and in his sufferance are destroying ANGELS loosed out of
the great River of the WORLDS Sea, and often is he stirred up, to that which he
delights not in, even to appear like unto a LION roused up before he please,
and as a Giant disturbed from his sleep; yet will great Alterations and changes
come into the World, and they will happen unto the secure, like Events
determined from an overruling Power.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. Wherein is opened the Mystery of what came forth in the Worlds, in
the form and frame of the Heavens, from whence the Vision had power to work up
its discoveries.
I.
THE principles of ETERNITY in God, or God in his eternal existence, is the
fire of Life, burning in jealousy (over his own Honor and Glory, that gave
being to Love) in which remains ^he Original Center of all good from whence
his pre-eminence is main^ained (in and over his Creature) through that which he
first inkindled ^n the Ground and Center of Nature, in which is both a good and
an evil; But Waters are the first and all Principle in NATURE, through the
sinking frame of the WORLDS, into and under palpability, wherein EARTH took
form, as a third Principle in Nature, separated into being on the third day,
from whence all Creatures became imbodied in the substantial form of
Palpability.

II.
And all separated qualities remain in the ground of substantiality (while time
and place endures) wherein the Life of the Creature centereth, in that which
is come forth into its individual being, among the forms of Nature, according
to the source it possesses and inhabiteth for these beings are formed in and
from the Earthly Principles, which are separated from the Heavens (in what
remains sinking under a power of Corruption) wherein thre^ do bear record for
God, which are the glory of Terrestrial Bodies, Essentially forming Nature into
being, in that which continues breathing through the out-spread Firmament of
the Atry Heavens, under the Waters.

III.
As also from the fiery Heavens, (from whence a third part of the Waters was
dried up from the Earth in their Principle) on the third day, and by a third
days work of God therein manifest, the three Glories of the Father do shine
through all Celestial Bodies, to wit, one Glory of the SUN, which is a great
LIGHT, to rule the DAY; and another of the MOON, which is the lesser LIGHT, to
rule the NIGHT; and another of the STARS, according to their differing Glories,
in which the overruling Power of the Heavens, subjecteth the forms of Nature,
in their several Constellations, that gives life to the Creatures being in the
Earth.

IV.
In this respect, God is considered and become the cause of all causes in
ETERNITY, and ground of all being in NATURE (as Palpability is the ground of
Corruptibility) wherein he is called a consuming and everlasting FIRE; and yet
as substantiality is not without the Creature, he is absolutely the cause of
nothing, as well as of all things, where nothing (without God) is God without
Nature, which is a cause of both good and evil, wherein the Worlds do remain
unmanifest, but in Nature, and wherein the work of God is comprehended in the
forming qualities of that which is brought forth in the effect of labor in
seven Natural days.

V.
Therefore (said the ANGEL of God) these WATERS that thou saw, are those on
which the multitude of the WORLDS and great Nations are moved and carried to
and fro, according to the course of time and tide, the WOMAN remained exalted
on them who allured many into those Vessels, that begin to swim pleasantly over
the streams of Corruption (singing a Requium to their Souls) that they might
not remember the danger in their way, wherewith they are daily beset, and they
are called the PEOPLE, and Tongues, and Nations (of the Kindreds of the Earth)
that are divided under the four WINDS of the Heavens, tossed up and down,
through the boisterous Storms, and swelling Tempests, that are again gathered
together in HEAPS, over the main Sea and Ocean of Trouble, in which is the Lake
and Bottomless Pit, from whence all Monstrous shapes in Creatures are come
forth to cover the Earth.

VI.
And the Vessels that thou saw carried thereon, are those which were first
built and erected from the Heavens, into which the Patrons of all Earthly forms
were gathered in one, and were again distributed through many, according to the
Nature of the BEAST, wherein wrought the confusion of Languages, in the
prevailing of the MOON over Woman, in the changeable ways and course of the
WORLD, under which the Heavens stand thus divided.

VII.
In seven they took Head, and in ten was each Horn exalted, over nine, which is
an intricate number (among the Figures, in forms of Nature) wherein those seven
that thou saw come forth into the Creaturely being, first imbodied under the
power of Corruption, are the seven forms of Nature, subjected under a power, in
which the Heavens and Earth are multiplied, in and according to their
Generations, generating Nature and name to the being of each form Corporal.

CHAP. II. Describing the Nature of the degeneration of the WORLDS, in those
Principles wherein the Creature became imbodied in time and place.
VIII.
FOR answerable to the time and place wherein all Created Prinples (in the
forms of Nature) remained sinking under a Power of Corruption, working
properties in the Heavens, prevailed over the bodily frame to afflict it with
labor, according to the motion in the Wheels (in which those Principles
suffered and were acted) and that which suffered the glory of the frame of the
WORLDS to work up the gross form of Palpability, in the way and course the Body
of Nature became acted by a motion in the Heavens, was subject to Corruption,
that came into time and place, through the change of the frame in the Worlds.

IX.
And agreeable to the Name and Nature of those Men that were FATHERS in their
Generations (through whom palpability prevailed, in the Waters) whereby the
Worlds were first overwhelmed in the deluge and overflowing scourge; the glory
of the World, imbodied a form in Nature for the Seed of Life to work up the
first Beauty of CREATION, according to what was manifest in time and place,
wherein each day had its year, multiplied in Nature from the Heavens, as each
Month has its Hour, in what is divided to every particular state and condition
of the Creature, under which Death and Afflictions have increased their
dominion over the ends of the Worlds.

X.
And as from the Womb of Eternity, the BEAST in the forms of Nature, prevailed
in a backward course, under which the Heavens were subjected, for the
manifesting of each day in Nature, wherein the Principles of the World were
acted and wrought, in a frame that discovered its revolutions; so according to
the years, wherein the multiplicity of such forms increased, the WATERS
prevailed in the months thereof, until the seven Mountains could be seen (on
which the great CITY was erected) through the decreasing of the Waters, in what
remained falling backward for the space of seven Months.

XI.
And the CITY that thou saw, built and settled on those Mountains and high
Hills, which became the Foundations of all that fell into and under the
palpability of WATERS, is the City HENOCH, which the first born of Nations
erected under the power of Corruption, from the ground which he became the
Tiller and tearer up of, when driven Eastward from the Face of the Earth, and
Presence of God, into that Land where he took his Wife, that he might call the
name of his Buildings, after the name of his Son, for whom it was built.

XII.
For he possessed the seven forms of NATURE the number of years, according to
which the year increased its days, and has all the properties of the Heavens,
through a Translation wrought on the Body of Nature, in what came forth mamfest
in each line of the Fathers, resting in LAMECH (whence two Wives prevailed over
the Man) five years short of a sight into the destruction, which prevailed over
the Worlds, in the state it was first planted.

CHAP. III. Describing the property of Enochs Prophecies.
XIII.
THose seven forms of Nature, whose Characters are Figures in Hieroglyps, have
the property of Prophecy, among the Works of Wonder, which cannot be understood
in the Creaturely Capacity, but through the translations of ENOCH, for whom the
ground of conceiveability was torn up; and no less power is requisite herein,
than that which smites the World, in its third part, of both Earth and Waters,
and all that lives therein, or moves thereon; wherein the Beast has had his
Seat as a Temple, in which has shined the glory of Sun, and Moon, and Stars.

XIV.
And for the revealing the true ground, from whence all those glories may come
again to shine (in the Principles of Nature) as in the beginning, consumption
and darkness must come before his Face, who rides in the Chariot of Nature
(wherein those glories are smitten in the third part) until the sounding of the
sixth Angel on the great River EUPHRATES, which compasses about the fourth
part of the WORLDS, over which the EAGLE has prevailed.

XV.
And though as those Angels stand manifest in the Heavens, they are seven in
number, according to the seven forms of Nature, through which are sounded the
Mystery of God's Works of Wonders from the seven Golden TRUMPETS; yet is their
destroying power bound down in the four last forms only, in which the Elements
of Nature have spheared into Corruption, for the discovery of the Lake of Fire,
that is hidden in the great River EUPHRATES, from what is thence loosed.

XVI.
But the Witnesses hereof, are only two, manifested in each three Principles
(of both Heavenly and Earthly being) in which the AIR is commanded, until FIRE
and WATER is become united in its ANGEL, that has one Foot on the Earth, and
has his other on the great Seas; for the Angel of the Waters, says, It is
done, but an Angel of the Fire, who continues always ministering before the
ALTAR, has touched my Tongue with a live Coal he has brought from thence,
wherein I am made able to declare of what he has flung on the Earth.

XVII.
And beholding the seven Mountains of the Earth, on which is settled the
Foundations of that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Worlds, in
the in kindled Fire burning under its Foundations, I see terrible shakings that
are yet to pass through the Worlds, and over all buildings therein, after the
tenth part of the CITY is seen become fallen, in the assending up of the
Witnesses unto Heaven, in the sight of their Enemies, wherein the ten Horns of
the BEAST shall hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with FIRE.

XVIII.
Then shall be seen the seven Horns of the LAMB, full of Eyes, which are the
seven Spirits of God, which do walk among the seven Golden Candlesticks; and
the Books shall stand open, on which has been put those seven Seals, that he
may be known come into the Worlds, that holds in his right Hand a Crown of
seven Stars, as seven golden Lamps burning before the Throne of God and the
Lamb, and lighting the whole Earth with his Glory (in the form of the Pleiades)
for the seventh Trumpet shall sound forth the Mystery of what is thus unsealed
over the mighty deeps, which have filled the Worlds

XIX.
And in the finishing of this great Mystery, all Nations of the Earth shall be
gathered to their appointed place, that the Spirit and God of the World, may
bear the wrath of Indignation of what is poured forth (on the frame of all
created Principles into form) without mixture, which is the second Death,
executed in the seven last Plagues, wherewith the seven Golden Vials are
filled, wherein God will appear in ten thousand of his Saints.

CHAP. IV. Describing the ground in Nature, from whence the Wheels are moved
about the frame of the WORLDS.
XX.
THe seven spirits of God, are moved about the frame of the WORLDS, according
to what does operate and work up the way and course he is manifest through in
the Seven forms of Nature (which are become the Seven heads of the BEAST, and
the Seven Mountains of the WORLD, on which the City is built wherein the WHORE
does sit exalted;) and therefore is God manifest (in the Spirit of Judgment)
in those Forms of Nature, that every thing may come forth tried under the
motion of the WHEELS.

XXI.
But though the BEAST has taken Head in these forms of Nature Nature is again
returning to its first subjection, in the utter consumption and destruction of
the power of the Dragon, Beast and False Prophet (ou^ of those forms in Nature;
for now are the Wheels moving over the great River Euphrates, on which the
trumpet of God has sounded; and thence are loosed his destroying Angels which
cause thunders and lightning in the Heavens.

XXII.
And the Clouds of Heaven are already tinctured, with that which Ascends
upward, to prepare its motion in the Air, whence his appearance is expected,
who judges the Prince thereof, and casts down the Accuser of the Just (from
those Airy Heavens, wherein he has been exalted) though the Seven Forms of
Nature, which are moved about the heavens of the Worlds, attend the first
mover, wherein the Work of God is manifest in the Seven Spirits of Nature.

XXIII.
For this center of the Inward WORLD, which was thus unmovable, had a power in
and over all that was movable and changeable, which became a cause in the
motion of the WHEELS, that was overruled by the wisdom and power of the first
mover, wherein all Glories of the FATHER, shined in the Firmament of his POWER,
in which he remained unalterable, and unchangeable, the same, without any
shadow of turning or variation.

XXIV.
Yet is it only in Nature that God is become thus a cause of moveability,
because God is the unchangeable being of Love and Delight in REST, in the
Center of all that is good; and Nature is that into which good and evil has
entered, from whence its TREE has sprung up and does grow, which the Creature
(who is the cause of work and labor in God) has fed on, that has brought the
sense of pangs and misery into the World, where is the worldly sorrow that
works and brings under the power of Death, and all other afflictions they
meet with in their way.

CHAP. V. Describing the Form and Order of the WHEELS in their MOTION.
XXV.
FOR God is the cause of nothing without NATURE, though in the Wheels there
appeared two Motions, whereby the cause of moveability was kept from centering
in the ground of Corruption and Mortality, under the power of which the
Creature of God was thus fallen in a NATURAL Body, through that which was sown
in Weakness; therefore in what ever the Creature was betrayed under the power
of its guidance, it was a CROSS to all proneness and adiction of Motion, that
did arise from the ground of Corruption.

XXVI.
And about the CENTER, in which stood a Heart inflaming, was made a Diurnal
Motion in the Wheels, which moved at a distance in two Rings of the inward
Wheels, wherein the third and inward Principle, moved equally with the ground
of Motion, from the first CENTER; and the two outward Principles of the inward
World, acted according to what was formed in a third Principle, by which those
three Principles came to manifest their CENTER in Nature.

XXVII.
But in the WHEELS, there was also an Annual Motion, that moved round that
which stood fixed in the Center, and this caused a ground without the Center
(as it stood manifest through the inward Motion) to be corruptible, and to
Center under a power of Corruption, though in those inward Rings of the Wheels,
there were kept and preserved a tincture of the first Motion.

XXVIII.
Yet having let in another Tincture from the power of Corruption (under which
the Worlds were laboring to Center) what ever came forward under its motion,
must again be brought back, into the sense and feeling of that which it
reaches after, through DEATH, to the cause of all labor and pangs, wherein
the Body of Nature stands afflicted.

XXIX.
For there was neither East, West, North, nor South, from the Center, in the
inward Rings of the Wheels, though it appeared to me in the ground, whereon I
lay (for the beholding of the Vision) that as the outward Rings in the Wheels
were moved in a power of the four Winds of the Heavens, the inward motion was
from East to West, and the Wheels went side ways in all courses of the World.

XXX.
In which the three Rings of the outward Wheels did move and were moved,
according to the frame of the Worlds, wherein centered the Principles of the
whole; but the inward Wheels moved by reflection, the CENTER being unmovable,
wherein two Rings only were discerned at a distance (in that inward Wheel)
though in the Principles of each and both Worlds, there were moved about three
Rings in each Wheel.

XXXI.
And though in the outward Ring of the Inward Wheel (in its Diurnal Motion) the
Heavens did move, and were moved, in what stood fixed toward the CENTER, yet
the outward Ring of the outward Wheel, stands (...) in the (...) distance of
years, from the motion in the (...) as does the inward Ring of (...) inward
Wheel, from the revolution of the Moon, in the Annual Motion of the Wheels: And
in the second Ring of the outward Wheels, the Heavens were moved about, in
their Annual Motion; at the same distance from the Center, as they were in the
second Ring of the inward Wheel, in their Diurnal Motion.

CHAP. VI. Describing the MYSTERY of the sounding of the seven Golden TRUMPETS,
and the seven THUNDERS, that are for the preparing a ground in which the
Judgment of God is manifest.
XXXII.
ON the Ground and Principles of a third part of the Worlds, into which the
DRAGON drew a third part of the Stars of Heaven after him, did five of these
Golden Trumpets sound forth the Judgment of God, in what is loosed and unsealed
from the BOOK of WONDERS in the Heavens, wherein the four BEASTS were manifest
each in their day, calling to come and see what lay slain under the ALTAR of
God (in his Temple and House) wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven did
shine, through that which was smitten in its third part.

XXXIII.
And herein is discovered the seat of the BEAST in Nature, whose torment is
awakened out of the bottomless Pit, though as yet the number of Horsemen and
Riders do multiply on the Earth, through that which is awakened from the
sounding of the sixth Trumpet on the great River EUPHRATES, in which has been
bound the four Angels (that were prepared according to the time in which
stands the Execution of their destroying Power) in withholding the Winds
from blowing on the EARTH, as they are seen come up exalted on the four Corners
of the same, holding the four Corners of those Winds.

XXXIV.
Wherein each of those four Beasts, in the forms of Nature, recovereth six
Wings, according to the six Spirits of God, in which the seventh unchangeable
Spirit of Rest (in him) is begotten into the Creature and Creation, that are
become his Workmanship; and they cover the living Creatures, who day and night
are crying HOLY unto the Lord and by the lifting up and letting down of their
WINGS, is the whole Earth and Worlds darkened or enlightened with GLORY,

XXXV.
And the Mansions or twelve Houses of the Fathers GLORY in the Heavens, have
their form defended, with the WALL that is raised up on its ancient
Foundations, wherein are twelve Pearls on its twelve Gates, and under it are
the twelve Foundations, settled in the Refining Power, through which are to be
brought other three parts of a new World, in its Heaven and Earth, in the
destruction of a fourth part, over which the fourth BEAST has ruled with the
Face of an Eagle, who is come forth on his PALE HORSE, like unto Death, and
Death and Hell follows him.

XXXVI.
Whose Power is by Famine, Pestilence, and Sword, with WILD Beasts of Prey, in
all that lives in, or moves on the GROUND and PRINCIPLES, over which the seven
THUNDERS are awakened to Thunder, from those Places wherein Life does strive,
to break forth and come into the CENTER of the creaturely being, where every
Birth has its SIGNIFICATOR, and the twenty four Wings of the four Beasts, are
the Army of the HEAVENS, according to what came forth first MANIFEST in the
four Wings of the FOWL, that was stretched forth over the LION, in what strove
to come up, under the four Winds of the HEAVENS, wherein the Heavens contended.

CHAP. VII. Describing the MYSTERY of the four Beasts, in the seven Forms of
NATURE, and of the Beast himself, who is the Eighth.
XXXVII.
FRom the THUNDERS in the Heavens, I beheld a prepared Ground, unto which the
Gates of Eternity were opened; and from the Elemental being, in which four
Gates were opened into the Worlds, whence strove the four Winds of the Heavens,
I beheld the coming forth of the four Beasts in the seven forms of Nature,
wherein their Power was first manifest; after whom arose those other four
Beasts, in the dispersing abroad of the powers of Nature, through the plucking
of the Wings from the LION.

XXXVIII.
Wherein the Power of the RAM in Nature (who came forth first exalted, through
the plucking off the LIONS Wings, and dispersing abroad of the power of five
Kings that were fallen) had his HORNS first broken, in the separated power of
the Heavens, under the striving of their four Winds, and he is the last Power
in Nature, under which the Heads of the Beast have been healed.

XXXIX.
For through the appearance of the ANGEL of God, in the forms of Nature, I
beheld how the whole Earth was lighted with the Glory of that which is broken
forth into the Worlds; and there came unto me one of those seven Angels of God,
who had the Golden Vials, that were filled with the seven last Plagues, even
the wrath of the Lamb, ready to be poured forth on the wicked and ungodly
world, and he talked with me, as does a Man with his Friend, and said unto me,
This is the Mystery of that first Beast thou saw come forth with five Heads
and nine Horns.

XL.
These are nine Kings, five against four, who served and were subject to one
King twelve years, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled; and in the
fourteenth year his power was again revived, in what had received that deadly
wound, wherein was broken the first five Horns, from the fifth Head of the
BEAST, whose Seat was in MALE, called ELAM in the Hebrew Tongue, which you read
backward, and his Name is KEDORLEOMAR, in SHINAR of BABYLON, where is the VOICE
of an ANGEL, I-AM-RAPHEL, revealed in TIDAL (LAD it) KING of Nations.

XLI.
This therefore is the Mystery of all those Beasts, and of what thou have seen
come forth, according to the times in the Vision, for which it has wrought;
the LION is the Heart of that Nature, in which the first ADAM was Created, from
whence the RAM in Nature has Head and Face, which is the first House among the
Mansions in the Heavens, of the Father's Glory, and the CALF is the Neck and
Throat of Nature, which is the second House of the Fathers MANSIONS in the
Heavens, whence the escape GOAT took form, through the bended KNEES of what
descended from the Heavens, in the state of subjection, under which Nature was
framed.

XLII.
And in those two first Houses of the Heavens (wherein the Glory of the Sun and
Moon, of the Son of Man, in the FIRST ADAM was exalted) the fiery Heavens had
tinctured the forms of Nature, in the double Bodied being (through a separation
made between Day and Night) wherein the Man was oppressed, that bore the weight
and burden of the wrong in the Fall, on the shoulders of the created Body,
overruled through its two great Lights, whereby his ARMS were spread abroad,
as the appearance of his form, wrought in the Clouds of the Heavens, whence
those Beasts did both ascend and descend.

XLIII.
Which stood manifest on the EARTH, whence the HEE-GOAT ascended, through the
Man's sufferance, who had the face of the third Beast, among those forms in
Nature, for the Arms and Shoulders of Nature, is the third House of MANSIONS in
the Heavens (as the fourth BEAST in the forms of Nature, with the face of an
EAGLE) wherein the four Angels are exalted on the Earth, in the sounding of
those Golden Trumpets out of the TEMPLE, by their ANGELS in their forms of
Nature.

CHAP. VIII. Describing the Ground in Nature, wherein other BEASTS took Form,
then those FOUR in which the Creation of God was FIRST planted in its
Government over the BODY, wherein Man has a Being.
XLIV.
THe IMAGE of God, in which was the Man's Dominion, had power over all those
Earthly FORMS in Nature; though as ADAM was created an earthly Man, he was of
the Earth earthly; for that was first, which is earthly; and yet in the
similitude he bore of his Maker, there was a Government settled, to rule and
have authority over the Nature of the BEAST (which made subject to Vanity, and
a Power of Corruption) through a Generation and Generations that liked not to
retain the KNOWLEDGE of God in their MINDS.

XLV.
Therefore did they change the Image of God into Gold and Silver, and
four-footed BEASTS, and creeping things, with Wood and Stone, and things graven
out of the Invention of Man, which they have fallen down unto, and worshipped;
because after they knew God (or rather were known of Him) this MYSTERY of
Iniquity began to work HIDDENLY, wherein they were given up to a reprobate
sense, in the UNBELIEF of the Truth, that caused the Condemnation.

XLVI.
And their DAMNATION slumbereth not, who believe a Lie, to the marring of that
Form in which the MAN was an Image of his Maker: This therefore is prefigured
forth to thee, that thou may apprehend the Generation of MEN on whom God
has set a Mark according to the IMAGE they bare, to distinguish them in their
NATURE. And as the LION (whose Government is in the HEART of Nature) and CALF,
whose government (in Nature) is the Neck and Throat of the untamed Will (that
acts the BODY) are the FIFTH and SECOND Houses of those Mansions from whence
the SUN is moved, and wherein the MOON is EXALTED) so the RAM and HE-GOAT, who
are the FIRST and TENTH Houses among the FORMS (in Nature) are those BEASTS in
Nature, wherein a falsified Glory entered those FORMS in which the MAN lost
Dominion, though the Light of the SUN of his day was and is Exalted in that
FIRST House, as it fell in the TENTH.

XLVII.
And therefore in the sinking State under which those forms of Creation
continued, Light was Exalted in the Reins of Nature (which is the SEVENTH
House) whence came forth and appeared the Face of that THIRD BEAST like a MAN,
with the BALANCES in his Hands, whereby every thing was weighed and tried by
just Measure; though under him lurked the Form of a Leopard or great Bear, with
four wings of a Fowl on his Back, and through him sprung up FOUR notable HORNS
on the HEAD of the GOAT, in the dispersing abroad KINGDOMS of the EARTH, under
the FOUR Winds of the HEAVENS.

XLVIII.
But in the dividing of the Heavens, whence came to be exalted the Spirit of
Sound and Tone, uttering its Voice in the sound of seven golden Trumpets, as
the WOLF or little BEAR, that has for his Seat the Breast of Nature (which is
the fourth House among the MANSIONS in the Heavens) got before the LIONS Face,
who is the Heart of Nature, in that fifth House of Mansions, (wherein the SUN
has its seat) the Moon came to exalt her borrowed Light from that fourth House
(which is become her seat) in the second House, (which is her House of
Exaltation.)

CHAP. IX. Describing the Properties of the IMAGE in the FORMS of Nature, that
fell in the WATERS.
XLIX.
THe Head of the IMAGE, which was Gold, was the LIONS four first Golden Wings,
wherein the strength of ASSYRIA was broken, the first time, in what was plucked
from the LION, according to that which fell in the WATERS; and the Silver Breast
(which was the two Horns of the RAM in Nature) is the strength of the MEDES and
PERSIANS, that were broken by the Power of GREECE, whereby BABYLON spread
abroad her Kingdoms (in the rising up of the little BEAR on the LIONS side)
wherein was that second great LIGHT comprehended.

L.
But from the NORTH did he move about the Heavens through his TAIL, wherein
Centred the Meridian point thereof, holding in his Mouth those three Ribs that
were taken out of his Side, in his rising up to devour much Flesh, Furthermore,
said the Angel of God, The great BEAR or LEOPARD that thou saw, is that in
which a third part of the Stars of Heaven are comprehended, that have fallen
unto the Earth, which is the brazen Belly of the IMAGE in the FORMS of Nature,
even the Power of GREECE, in that which is dispersed under the Four Winds of
the Heavens.

LI.
This is a Power of the South Wind wherein the brass Belly of the Image
remained bound down with an Iron Bond of the NORTH Strength, from which it
could not be loosed (in the four destroying ANGELS of God) until that was
ripened to the Day of Destruction, wherein the Wound of the BEAST had been
healed up deceitfully, though three Horns were plucked up by the Roots, while
the stumps of the IMAGE continued fallen in ASIA, for the discovering of the
four Heads of the Beast, in which he bore the form of a Leopard or GREAT Bear;
but the LITTLE Horn waxed strong, and became GREAT toward the four Winds of
the Heavens.

LII.
For as I beheld the Throne of God placed in his Holy Habitation, the Ancient
of Days was sat thereon, wherein appeared his burning Wheels and the signs in
the WATERY HEAVENS discovered that which rested in their TRIPLICITY from the
Zodiac, whence those Houses of Mansions have their Constellations; And though
the RAM in Nature had the first Form in the Fiery Triplicity, and was the first
House of those twelve Mansions (as is the CALF the first Form in the Earthly
Triplicity, and second House in those Mansions) yet through the WHEELS the
HEAVENS and EARTH were moved toward a Change, throughout the seven forms of
Nature in EACH Triplicity.

LIII.
Wherein the Lion has the Face of the first Beast among the FORMS in Nature,
though in his fifth House that which shines (from his Seat) is exalted in the
Head and Face of the Ram. But both the Created and Uncreated Beings, having
their generated Forms in the Body of Nature, the first Form in the Airy
Triplicity, has the Face of an EAGLE (exalting that which is generated into
the Double-Bodied-Being) to be his House, that is sheltered under the Wing of
Favor (in that fourth Beast) through whom Death strengthens those Accidents
that are drawn from the FIRST Form in the WATERY Triplicity, from whence all
changeable Courses do work up Life in the Breast of Nature, wherein the SPIRIT
of the Creature does move, which is the Candle of GOD, through which Glory is
put forth in those borrowed QUALITIES of Light.

LIVE.
Though from Barenness in the worldly Nature, wherein the Glory of the Virgin
has been stained, cancered and crabbed Qualities have infected the Body,
whereby it has sprung up and grew, until from the second Form in the Earthly
Triplicity, the VIRGIN (who has sat in a dark place, even the Bowels of
Nature, which is the sixth House in the Heavens) came to put off her night
Robes for the Glory of the Birth exalted in the separation of all mixed
Qualities, which is HEIR of everlasting Renown.

LV.
Yet in the Watery Triplicity, where in the Bodies Courses have been defiled,
through that which has lain secretly lurking in the Members, whereby the FORMS
of Nature have power to generate an IMAGE of the Minds Delight, the Womb has
opened to the Power of Death, and letting in Sorrow into that which is
possessed in the Eighth House, whence the WORLDS are generated under a Power of
Corruptian; the Nature of the SCORPION stingeth in the Habitation of that
second Form (in the Watery Triplicity) through the Pleasure under which its
Subjects are allured, for the multiplying of what is generated to secret
content.

CHAP. X. Describing the MYSTERY of the Four Horses of four several Colors, on
which the four ANGELS that are loosed, etc. are come forth exalted.
LVI.
THrough the coming forth of the Son of MAN, in the CLOUDS of Heaven, who was
clothed with a Rainbow, in which are all the colors of the Heavens in their
pure Element, as the Powers of Nature became subject to the exalted of God, he
rod on those CLOUDS that were dispersed abroad under the Four Winds of the
Heavens, as on the Rainbow in the Firmament, whence every Angel of God is seen
in his Beauty and Glory, bending to the Son of his Love and Favor, through
whom he manifests the Life of Delight, according to the source they possess
and inhabit from the eleventh House of Mansions (in the third Form of the Airy
Triplicity) like unto HORSE- men that guide the Chariot of Nature.

LVII.
For the preparing of which DAY in its time, those Goats have been suffered to
come forth imbodyed (in that which is loosed out of the bottomless Pit) whereby
the Earth has been covered with Locusts, wherein pangs have rested on those
Men that have the Mark of the Beast. Therefore says the Angel of God, In that
third Being in the FIERY Triplicity, wherein the form of the Son of Man is come
forth exalted in the Clouds of Heaven, (through that which smites the EARTHLY
Triplicity in its third part among the Forms of Nature) the BOW- Man is riding
on his White Horse, and over the White Clouds of the Heavens; he has spread
his Glory from the North, because of those flying Goats in his Way, whose
ratlings are like the Chariot-Wheels of the FURIOUS Drivers.

LVIII.
And in the Watery Triplicity the burning Mountain continues in flaming from
that which is cast into the Sea, which does rage and swell because of the
disquiet that is come into its part of the Triplicity (in that Watery Form)
over whom the Glories of the Heavens do not shine in that third part, and
wherein both Earth and Waters, and all that live therein, or move thereon, are
smitten in the aforesaid third part, that rests its torment on the seat of
the BEAST, into which Glory has shined from the Heavens, in the operation of
those Signs of the Times.

LIX.
From whence I see great Alterations and Changes, attending the WORLDS in their
Generations; where wild BULLS of Bashan are reared up to push and devour each
other, and from DAN there is in mine Ear the snorting of Horses, and rattling
sound of the Chariot Wheels, like rumblings in the Air, hurling up and down,
for REST from noise: And what is herein written, is of things past, present,
and to come, which are all to be fulfilled in their place and order, (according
to the Days and Hours for which the VISION does work, and is made to speak) in
what is narrowed to the Creaturely Capaciiy, through him that has cut the Work
short in Righteousness, that is manifested throughout this la l^ and Age of the
WORLD.

LX.
For from the great River EUPHRATES which compasses about EUROPE (in its
fourth part and Quarter) is the destroying Power of God loosed, for the
Execution of Divine Justice on those Men that have the Mark of the Beast, on
whom the torment of those Months is accomplished; to the finishing the work in
which Death has Dominion over that Nature wherein the WORLDS are imbodied in
its Quarters; therefore is the time near at hand, wherein the Worlds will
suffer very great shakings, and Earthquakes will break forth in diverse parts
thereof, to the overturning of many Foundations, and changing of Laws and
Governments of Men, (whereby coldness of Spirit and deadness has over-taken
the Multitude in a dull and secure state) and afterward will follow a great
Power of HEAT, in kindling its FLAMES of DESTRUCTION throughout the BODY of the
ELEMENTS.

CHAP. XI. Describing the MYSTERY of Time for which the Vision is set, etc.
LXI.
Concerning the TIME for which the VISION is set, it is now near the expiration
of one hundred and twenty days, since the finishing of the fifteen years,
wherein I beheld the prevailing of the Waters over the Earth (in the fifth year
that I saw the fall of the Worlds, under a Power of Corruption) through which
the Waters became smitten in their third part, under which the WORLDS stand
divided (in their four Quarters) in the dispersing abroad of the FLOODS, on
which the People were moved and tossed up and down, as the Waters fell BACKWARD
into their four Heads by which every thing has been tried and carried into its
appointed Place, through the Tempests and swelling Waves of awakened Storms
that are come into the Worlds.

LXII.
For from those TWELVE Years wherein the Nations of the Earth were subject to
one KING, a Spirit of Rebellion against the Power of the Beast, entered four
Kings of the four Winds of the Heavens, who fell before five in the Vale of
Siddim (that is full of slime-pits) whereby the remainder of those that escaped
were reduced to the Mountains on their flight; yet the thirteenth year (which
was the year of their Rebellion) was it in which the Power of the BEAST stood
dispersed in the striving of the four WINDS of the Heavens on the great River
EUPHRATES, out of which their Power is again revived and loosed; though from
the Seat of the Beast (which is the BOTTOMLESS-PIT, from whence proceeded those
living Creatures called LOCUSTS, that I beheld in the Vision, in the form of
Goats, etc.) Life again entered that, on which rested the First Wound in Nature.

LXIII.
And as the LEOPARD or Great BEAR came forth manifest, with four Wings on his
Back, like the Wings of a FOWL, his Kingdom stood dispersed abroad the Earth
and Worlds, and in the place of the Great Horn of the RUFF GOAT of GREECE,
which was broken by the power under which the Worlds stood divided, those Four
notable Horns were seen, that became exalted toward the four Winds of the
Heavens, which are the Power of four KINGS, and four Heads of the Beast that
did spring out of the first Breach (whose Kingdoms are not so mighty as the
first) wherein the Little Horn came forth between the Eyes of the Goat, etc.

LXIV.
And that little Help through which the fifth Head in the midst of four (on
which sprung up five Horns that were broken, and fell in the first King)
received that deadly Wound, etc. is a Power in the North Wind of the Heavens,
under which the Wound is become again healed up, that is, the Feet of the
Image, which is partly to break, and partly to be broken, for it is both Iron
and Clay: And this is the King of the NORTH, who may be manifest in the Person
of a Man of fierce Speech, and dark Countenance (as he is indeed manifest
through many in whom a Power of the North Wind has been dignified, as Kings
in that REGION) wherein is a cold binding Climat of dark Air.

LXV.
For since the fourteenth year wherein the South Winds of the Heavens were
reproved and corrected for their Rebellion (in those four Kings whose Kingdoms
were enlarged in the dispersing abroad of the Power of four, that sprung out of
one, who retained not the ARM) that which grew up toward its trial by FIRE,
was separated into its Mystery, in what was effected through the fifteenth
year, from whence the Worlds have been warned one hundred and twenty days,
(according to the days of the Life of Man) of that destruction and desolution,
by the overflowing Scourge) wherein the Waters have exercised a Dominion that
is ome under the smiting of the four Winds of the Heavens.

LXVI.
And wherein both the HEADS and HORNS of the Beast are KINGS and POWERS in
Nature that have their Form in and on Men; yet the King himself of that North
Wind is not the Person of any ONE Man, but a Power in One as well as in Many,
that are wholly under the Dominion of the Beast, or that have his Mark, etc.
according to the Power of the Constellations, under which the period of all
Signs in the Heavens are moved, and do work over such that have their concern
therein, in a mystical and spiritual sense to all NAMES in Nature; but now is
it manifest that the MYSTERY of Time is complete in the Figure of the FORMS in
Nature, wherein every thing that is either past, present, or to come, remains
MEASURABLE and DISTINGUISHABLE, according to that Spirit under which all Powers
in Nature does WORK, and and whereby all that is wrought (in its BEING) is come
forth into FORM.

LXVII.
Yet Nature that is Creatable, suffers through all Changes and REVOLUTIONS
that are MANIFEST on and in the BODY of ELEMENTS, subject to Vanity, and a
Power of Corruption, both the Good and the Evil (of which the MAN has tasted
in the exercise of his Sense, according to the operation of Qualities that are
predominate in his BIRTH) though nothing is absolute (in time and place) to the
MAN, but in the Power under which his Life is concerned, operating in all the
faculties of Nature (in which is the holy and glorious Land) whence tidings
shall come out of the North, and from the East, which will trouble the NATIONS
and Inhabitants of the Earth (who are yet to be disquieted and unsettled from
their Lees) whereby Destroyers have been suffered (in the Way) that are come on
the Holy People, where they are scattered in the North Country situated between
the Seas.

CHAP. XII. Describing the MYSTERY of Time, according to the end for which the
FORMS of Nature came forth into Manifestation, on which Consumption and
Desolution has over-taken the Abominations, for which the WORLD is made
desolate in this last day and Age, etc.
LXVIII.
AS to the Time for which the VISION is made to speak, it is from and of the
Beginning, and to the End of Time and Place, whereby every thing stands
manifest (under a Figure) according to the Days and Years under which all FORMS
in Nature do labor and work, which have their Hours and Months in the measure
of Time, etc.) wherein the Frame and Form of the Work of God (in the power of
Creation) was laid in the Line of ADAM (in his Generations) answerable to the
Years of his Life, in which the Days of the VISION do manifest the whole WORK,
raised up from that in which it was sown.

LXIX.
For, as from the Creation of the Worlds (according to the most just and true
account of Men) is three thousand years to the finishing of the TEMPLE which
SOLOMON built, (in which the first Glory of the Work of God stood manifest) and
from the finishing of that Temple (which was built and erected in seven years)
to the Birth and Incarnation of the Son of Man (through the Power of the SECOND
ADAM, a quickening Spirit, etc.) was nine hundred and thirty years; so does all
things stand manifest (in NUMBER) under the same figure in the coming forth of
the WORLDS, which in seven days was brought into form, according to the sense
of the first Man ADAM, through whom the Works of GOD was comprehended in
Natural Body, wherein the seed of Life was known, by which his living Soul
became apprehensive, in the breathings of the SPIRIT, and Breath of GOD.

LXX.
Whereby NATURE multiplied in its Forms, according to the course they were
subjected under, in that Dominion, wherein the MAN was made LORD over all the
Works of GOD's Hands, answerable to the sensibility that was wrought up through
the seventh Form, descending; in which HENOCH continued imbodyed as many years
as are days in the year; and all the days of YEARS wherein Adam continued
imbodyed in that first Form, are reckoned nine hundred and thirty, which is two
years and seven months, according to the account of Time, wherein the Forms of
Nature do stand numbered (in a figure) under which they are multiplied (a year
for a Day.)

LXXI.
And concerning the Time for which the VISION is made to speak (in what is
formed for a conclusion of the matter) and wherein the Nature of that which
works stands figured forth to the bringing the WHOLE under its Day of
Trial; as it was one thousand six hundred fifty and six years from the Creation
of the Worlds (into time and place) to the overflowing Scourge that followed
them therein, and over-took the Forms whererein they were created with the
Deluge, and from thence until the days wherein Moses became manifest in flesh,
etc. was seven hundred seventy and seven years, who continued therein one
hundred and twenty years; so it was twenty eight Jubilies from the beginning of
those Services, which rested under the Government of JOSHUA that succeeded him,
in that sixth YEAR to the anointing of CHRIST to his Office, that put an end to
all those Offerings and Sacrifices, etc. thus typified out in JOSHUA, which
signifies JESUS, or SAVIOR.

LXXII.
From which time there is past the number of YEARS in thirty two Jubilies and
thirty two years, to this year of the Worlds account, 1665. And as from the
finishing of the Temple, in which those Services stood accepted under the Law,
etc. to the destroying thereof by Fire, was four hundred twenty and three
years; and after six years was the King of BABYLON established in his Kingdom
and Throne which made him say, Is not this great BABEL which I have built? so
unto that eleventh year wherein the HOLY ONE and the WATCHER came down to show
him the end of those Visions of the MONARCHIES of the Worlds, and the state
into which he should be driven (among Beasts of prey) was four hundred thirty
and four years, which is the number of sixty and two weeks of days.

A Conclusion To the whole WORK.
I.
BUt in the time beforementioned Life was prolonged in the Government over
ISRAEL, in its dying state, as it received in the sense of the Wound come on a
third part of its Glory that was smitten, and the shadow of the SUN went back
ten degrees on the Dyal in which the forms of Nature stand manifest (according
to the Significator of the Birth concerned therein, wherein the SUN has
recovered the first point of ARIES, from the tenth day of the first month, in
this sixteenth year; for from the period of fifteen years, the Pangs and
Sufferings that came into the WORLDS in their third part, has rested in the
Seat of the Beast, on those MEN that have received his Mark.

II.
And after the MOON has passed her Course through the Signs in the ZODIAC (of
an Inward World) wherein she will be descending toward the House of her
Exaltation, in the year One thousand six hundred sixty and six, and will renew
her Entrance through ARIES, on the concluding of the YEAR; the effect of that
which has rested on those Men who are come under the smiting of the Beasts
Power for those five Months wherein pangs have proceeded from his Seat, will be
seen in the WORLDS; for from the concluding of that year is thirty days,
wherein the SUN has his Passage through LEO, the Heart of a Lion, which is his
own House, who entered the first point of Cancer, (wherein the Summer Quarter
is manifest) nineteen days before the concluding of this year, 1665.

III.
And as the number of years for which Jerusalem was rebuilt the second time,
was sixty two Weeks, until the MESSIAH was anointed to his Office, after the
finishing of the second Temple, in seven weeks, which was for a Week, and in
the midst of that Week was the Prophet and SON of GOD cut off, (though not for
his own transgressions) so it was sixty two weeks more: or an hundred thirty
four days, from the birth of JESUS, that great PROPHET, through whom the
partition Wall was broken down between two Nations, to the thirtieth year of
the Reign and Exaltation of the Kingdom of Mystery BABYLON, over the Kings of
the Earth.

IV.
Whose King spoiled the Glory of JERUSALEM, and led away Captives from thence,
taking unto himself the VESSELS of Silver and Gold that were in the House of
the Lord, in the nineteenth year of his Reign over Assyria, and in the twenty
fifth year of his Establishment in Media and Persia, saw the four Kings in whom
the Image of Glory became manifest in the WOLDS, while the STUMPS thereof
remained bound down in the Earth with an Iron BAND, after seven times had
passed over his HEAD, which was wet with the Dew of the Night.

V.
Wherefore from the time wherein the daily Sacrifice was made to cease (after
the restoring of that breach on the Walls of Jerusalem) to the finishing of the
outward Court of the Holy City, (which was given into the hands of the Gentiles
to tread under foot those forty and two months, or an hundred and forty two
days) being the concluding of a time, times, and the dividing of times (which
is seventeen hundred and fifty days, wherein the Woman has been nourished in
the place that is there provided for her, for the space of one thousand two
hundred and threescore days, that the two Witnesses have appointed them to
finish and fulfill their PROPHECY in sackcloth, in which time the Earth does
help the WOMAN. It is now eighteen days since the Commandment of God came forth
for the rebuilding and restoring those outward Courts of the CITY.

TIME on a Prophetical account, which is the Language of the holy Scripture is
five hundred years, according to the life of Noah, before he began to build his
Family in the EARTH (which was saved in the Ark of God) and so long is
accounted the days of Shem, after the Flood of Waters, as the mystical Number
in which is contained ten Jubiles of years under the Law.

VI.
And after thirty one days it shall be finished, then shall be a WEEK to renew
the Zeal of God, and expiate sin, (to the sealing and binding down the power of
the WICKED for evermore) and in the midst of that Week those Witnesses shall
seal their Testimony concerning the Life of the Lord of all Glory in Heaven and
Earth, who has been crucified, and lain slain in the streets of that great
City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, but after three days and a half
(which is the concluding of the 1290 days) they shall be seen to ascend up into
Heaven in the sight of all their ENEMIES.

VII.
For it is now eighteen days since the WOMAN has regained a sense of her
deliverance from her great Captivity (in that WILDERNESS-State) in which the
forty two months of her travel are expired, and the Birth is brought forth in
the EARTH, which has been preserved and delivered from the fury and rage of
the great red Dragon (by the Floods of Water which he has cast out of his
BELLY after her) in the one thousand four hundred, and forty and four thousands
that are found standing on Mount Zion, with their Harps harping, but until the
end of two days the Judgment of God set up in ISRAEL shall quicken the sealed
number of Gods chosen and holy Ones, who have remained as dry Bones in the
Valley of Jehosaphat, where the spirit of God has breathed on the slain, that
from the third day will be found to live in his sight, to seal the testimony of
that birth, which has thirty days more to accomplish its growth, into the
power by which it is anointed to finish that great Work, in that Week wherein
the dead are made able to stand on their Feet, by the sound of the seventh and
last Trump.

VIII.
And he that has WISDOM, let him count the time, and number those days, from
whence the number of the BEAST, (which is the number of a MAN) is complete
DCLXVI, for from that day will the four destroying Angels of God stand loosed
out of the great River EUPHRATES, according to the hour, day, month, and year,
for which they were prepared, which after a month (wherein those five months
will be expired) will leave seven months for the Dead to bury their Dead, in
the concluding of the year, wherein Destruction is come forth against the
WICKED.

IX.
Therefore count thou from the year 1656, wherein the Devil did exercise his
power for ten days, by casting many into Prison, since the expiration of the
WOMAN'S Trials, and sore TRAVEL, that the forty days wherein the Seed of the
Woman was left to be persecuted and tried by the fury and rage of the Devourer
and his Angels (that great Red DRAGON, will make way for the power of God to be
glorified, after the third day, in ten thousand of his SAINTS; for from the
expiration of those months (wherein the striving continued between two Nations)
the King of BABYLON (who had looked into the Glory of the Temple which God has
built in Israel, wherein are many goodly Vessels of Gold and Silver) has been
let from spoiling and laying utterly waste the HOUSE, in which are appointed
those rich Treasuries about his Sanctuary.

X.
Yet the Daughter of the NORTH suffers Oppression under a strange KING, unto
whom the QUEEN of the SOUTH is joined, to corrupt their Seed; though unto them
the Mystery of that which pertains to the KINGDOM of GOD is opened (in those
that run to and fro to increase in knowledge,) and from the extirpation of the
fifteen years, from whence the WORLD has been warned one hundred and twenty
days, and wherein the EXECUTION of that which was detained from the Earth and
WORLDS (in their third part) to the prolonging of Life in the Government of
Nature, in which ISRAEL had their choice is to be MANIFEST, the substance of
what stands in the end of time and place, which is near to be revealed.

XI.
Therefore for the purging forth the Sin of MANASSEH, through whom the HIGH
ALTARS were erected in both Courts of the City (for those fifty five days
wherein the number seventy was accomplished in the concluding of fifteen years,
which discovered the Judgment that revived and was come on the Worlds, that on
whom the Image of JEALOUSY came forth manifest;) forty five days are yet
determined from the midst of the WEEK wherein the Testimony of GOD will receive
its everlasting Seal, and it shall be the Joy of many to understand the Mystery
of what is concluded in one thousand two hundred and ninety days; but blessed
are those that live and attain to the end of those eighty five days, which are
the concluding of one thousand three hundred thirty and five days, from those
ninety five days before the Sacrifice was offered up, (wherein the ROMANS
obtained their Conquest over JUDEA, and throughout ASIA, in which the Jews were
scattered) which was sixty two days before the BABE was brought forth, through
whom it became accepted.

XII.
For from the Conception and Birth of the MAN-CHILD, through whom the LIGHT of
GOD broke forth, with which the NATIONS of the EARTH, and REGIONS of the
WORLDS, that have sat under the SHADOW of Death, are ENLIGHTENED, on whom is
come the GLORY of GOD to the GENTILES. Their number is fulfilled and complete,
wherein TIME and TIMES are past, and HALF A TIME is divided (in those Figures
1750) and yet the EXPIRATION of those SIXTY TWO Weeks, wherein the GENTILES had
power to erect their GLORY in the OUTWARD COURTS of the CITY, in which the holy
BUILDINGS were defaced for the FORTY TWO MONTHS, is accomptable from the TIME
wherein was brought forth a TESTIMONY of that LIFE in which the DAILY SACRIFICE
(under the LAW) was made to cease.

THE MEASURE OF TIME: Ballancing all Actions in the Hand of the Angel.
I.
THus says the Angel of God, Seal up the Vision according to the appointed
time, for which it is set and is made to speak: For in the fifth month called
JULY, ( wherein JULIUS CAESAR was made the first Dictator in ROME, will be the
finishing of that Roman Monarchy, in the year 666; and a great PRINCE will fall
in Europe in the first month, according to the expiration of the Prophecy of
the two Witnesses, who then will put off their Robes of Sackcloth, and they
will stand clothed in WHITE Garments, wherein the sixty two Weeks, that the
Power of the Gentiles prevailed, will discover the Mystery of DAYS in the
number of Years that the Beast established his Throne, in what went before the
Face of the God and Lord of all Glory in Heaven and Earth.

II.
And in the sixth month, called August, (wherein Augustus Caesar was made
Consul) that Imperial Throne will be made subject to a Power of the Kings of
the East; but number thou a month of years, according to the days of the year,
whereby the VISION is made to speak forth the Mystery of those forty two years,
wherein the Seat of his Imperial Dignity was exalted, and then propose thy
sayings before the Wise, counting from the Creation of the Worlds, in the
Generation of ADAM, that which stands figured forth in the Mystery of the
Number 62. according to the WEEKS in which the Power of God wrought in the work
of Restoration.

III.
But from the FLOOD of WATERS which prevailed over the Earth, are fifty two
Generations of men, to the birth of him in whom that work of Restoration
stands manifest, which are the Number of Weeks in the Year, through whom the
Worlds have multiplied that which is come forth in time and place: And from the
days of Abraham, whose Seed he took on him, rather then the nature of Angels,
are forty two Generations, every Generation signifying the Change that is come
into the WORLDS, through the operation of the Moon over the Body of Nature,
wherein the Woman has stood afflicted, in her Seed, for the destroying of that
which corrupts the way and courses under which the Worlds are generated,
until all things become changed into ETERNITY, and the everlasting Body recover
its first beauty and glory, through all those Revolutions and Changes that are
come into the World.

IV.
And in the beholding of the glory of the ANGEL of God (while he thus talked
with me) I saw his Eyes sparkle like flames of FIRE, and he gave forth his
Testimony concerning the Covenant of God, that is confirmed with many and great
Nations, ratified in the BLOOD of that Life which has entered the WITNESSES of
GOD, who are made able to seal their Testimony herein; after which follows an
utter consumption on all the Enterprises of the ENEMY, wherein the end of Time
will finish the glory of God in the destruction of that Spirit, in which the
abomination of Desolation has wrought in a Mystery, and the consummation will
make the Worlds desolate in the forms of Nature, that will come into
dissolution, for the recovering Beauty in the Image of the first and last
Element, like unto the Glassy Sea of Transparent Glory, out of which the Power
of God will shine in subjected Nature.

V.
For the KING of BABYLON, who has seen into the glory of the House of God,
wherein are many goodly Vessels, shall not be able to remove thy Diadem (O thou
afflicted Daughter of a Land which God is laying waste!) out of the place
wherein GOD will settle his Delight in the midst of thee, until the
transgressions of those that have sought to bear rule over thee, by rigor and
constable aint is fully ripened, and come to its end wherein God will purge forth
all iniquity out of his own HOUSE and TEMPLE, on which Judgment is first
begun; and thou that have been tributary to KINGS of a strange Land, fear not
though thou art tossed up and down, for thou art not forsaken, and God will
comfort thee in his due time.

VI.
Who is come to lay all thy stones in fair colors (though the House of God
has suffered defacement in its first and primitive beauty) but the Glory of
the later House shall be greater then the Glory of the first; for thy Gates are
CARBUNCLES, and thy Windows are AGATES, and thy inward PARLOUR is paved with
LOVE; and when I look unto thy Galleries, I behold crowned KINGS rejoicing in
the upper ROOMS, and the best Wine is kept until now (because of the last Glory
of him that is bringing into the Wine-Cellar) in exchange of FLAGONS, with
which the sick of Love has been stayed.

VII.
And from the Feast in the Wilderness, wherein was a Table spread, and FAT
things prepared (MARROW and WINE from the lees well refined) he is bringing to
the WEDDING and LAST SUPPER of the Marriage of the LAMB, where are all the
Varieties in the Banqueting House, and his Banner over them is LOVE: Speak
that my Soul may be refreshed, and keep thou no longer silence, O my Beloved!
And as the VISION receives Voice, let it testify of thy Authority in the
Heart, by that which is ready to be fulfilled.

VIII.
For the DAY is come, and yet comes, that the Power of God will so appear and
break forth through his chosen VESSELS (in whom he takes delight to manifest
his good pleasure) that nothing shall be able to stand before it, and obstruct
the WAY thereof; but IRON BARS and BOLTS shall be broken and snapt asunder, as
a Thread of Flax, and PRISON DOORS shall fly open before them that dwell in the
power in which God is enlarging the Hearts of the Poor and Upright; yea, great
Seas shall be divided, and stand on heaps, when they move forward, and the
Waters therein shall be dried up, for the KINGS of the East to pass over.

IX.
And there shall be no need of outward Laws of Men to restrain Vice and
Wickedness, neither shall any covet high Places of Renown, and conditions of
that State unto whom Trust in Government is reposed; but rather shall say, In
my House is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a Healer, nor let not the
breach of Ruins rest under my Hands, for I came out of Prison, and have the
Garments of Captivity; how then can I govern Nations, but like unto a Child?
And woe be unto that People, because of a KING in Woman, that sets the Beggar
on horseback, while the PRINCE does walk on his Feet; yet he will raise up the
Poor from the Dunghill, and exalt him of low degree, when the Image of God does
so appear and break forth on the Heads of his Beloved and Chosen, that it shall
be able to raise a Witness in the worst of Men.

X.
But under the Anger and Fury thereof, they shall not be able to stand, though
it has not any other compulsive Power, but what is exercised in the
Conscience, because it will either cast out or conquer the Unclean Spirit that
acts evil, and detaineth Right from the Oppressed, or destroy the MAN that
remains joined thereto, though it delights not in the Destruction of
Creatures, or to be avenged on the WORKMANSHIP of GOD; but is constrained by
the necessity of a LAW in Nature, under which Divine Justice seeks to be
magnified, when the patience of God has discovered the end of the work of his
Spirit, which does all to praise him, even by his own Work out of the Mouth of
the Babe.

XI.
Which is the Sword in Gods Mouth, and Breath of his Nostrils, the Word that
proceeds from the holy Lips, whereby the Nations shall be consumed and
destroyed, that stand in his way, and remain in opposition to his Power,
because he is a great and mighty KING and GOD, above all LORDS, that are many
in the Earth, who will conquer and destroy the Power of DEATH, and remove the
GRAVE into the Land of forgetfulness, that his Will may be done in Earth as in
Heaven, and his Work effected on the BODY of Nature, in both outward and inward
WORLDS, through the power of Redemption and Restoration of all created
Principles in Nature, unto their first Beauty and Glory, where is no more SEA,
but the SEA of pure Water, transparent, in the reflection of its Element.

XII.
Before which time there shall be seen many signs and Wonders in the Clouds of
the Heavens, and the work of God will appear and break forth from thence; and
in that Power shall a People whom God is gathering to himself from the ends of
the Worlds, dwell for evermore, and the firmament of both outward and inward
World, shall be filled with Stars, that remain fixed in their glory and luster,
as Morning-Stars that sing together, and Sons of God that shout for joy; and
out of all the Glory, Pleasure, and Profit of the Worldly Spirits Interest,
their Hearts shall be redeemed, and from the Allurements of the same shall be
found daily dying, and then dead; whereby they will be the Terror of the
NATIONS, when in the power of God, (who has kept the Creature poor, and low,
and weak, that God alone might enrich the Soul in his due time) the Life
arises in glory, in that sense of Poverty of SPIRIT, from whence the Power
that is able to make many Rich, breaks forth.

BLESSED, BLESSED, and Everlastingly HAPPY therefore are all those that wait
for, and thoroughly believe in, the redeeming Power of the Work of God by this
Spirit that is broke forth, and come into the Worlds, to the destruction of
that Evil One, the Man of Sin. Lord, Let thy Will be done, yet hasten thy WORK,
to cut it short in RIGHTEOUSNESS, wherein thy Name may be exalted in Mercy,
that delights not in the destruction of Creatures, and Souls of Men. Come
quickly, says my Soul, that causest Joy in thy holy Way. Amen and Amen.

THE END.

