Mr. BEDFORD's SERMONS AT THE Two Assizes HELD AT Bury St. Edmund's, School.

TWO SERMONS Preached at St. Mary's in Bury St. Edmund's, AT THE ASSIZES.

The First, Upon the Seventh of April School, before the Honorable Sir Thomas
Rokeby Knight. one of the Justices of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench.

The Second, Upon the 16th of August School, before the Right Honorable Sir
Edward Ward Knight. Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

By William Bedford, Master of Arts, Rector of Whitton, and Vicar of
Stradbrooke and Wing field.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship at the Ship in Cornhill, School.

To the Right Worshipful John Cornwallis Esquire, High Sheriff, And one of the
Deputy Lieutenants OF THE County of SUFFOLK.
SIR,
WHEN the Grand-Juries of the County, consisting of so many Gentlemen of
Honorable and Eminent Qualities, Reputation and Estates, (with the Approbation
of my Lord Chief Baron) were both pleased unanimously to declare, That their
Opinions were, It would be useful to the Public that these Discourses should
be Printed; I thought my self obliged to comply with their Desires: And the
rather, seeing I am neither afraid nor ashamed, to give the most public
Testimony of my Fidelity to His Majesty, and Stedfastness to the true National
Interests; and hereby I obtain also this occasion of expressing my Gratitude
for your many Years Favors and Civilities, being,

SIR, Your most obliged and humble Servant William Bedford.

Genesis 18.25. That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
Righteous with the Wicked: And that the Righteous should be as the Wicked, that
be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?


SO just and laudable, as well as convenient and useful, is this Practice of
Justice traversing of our Counties and Provinces; and coming (as it were) home
to our Habitations, that one would be apt at the first view to conjecture, that
this Method had some Divine Original from God's own Example. There never was
the Invention of any thing publicly beneficial to Mankind, but the Ancients
ascribed it to some of their Deities; as Agriculture to Ceres, Physic to
Aesculapius, and Music to Apollo: Well then may we think the like of this
Perambulation of Justice, the wholesome Physic of the Body Politic; the tuning
of the whole Kingdom into the Musical Harmony of Peace and Concord.

I might say as St. Bernard says (in the like case) of the Hierarchy of the
Church, Nec nilem reputes hanc formam, quia in terra est, exemplum habet e
coelo. Neither can I think this Method of administering Justice throughout our
Provinces a mere Humane Devise, but I persuade my self that the Legislator that
first ordained it, had seen this Pattern of it in the Mount of God, and lo, if
you desire for to see it, I have found the Pattern it self in this Chapter.
Here is God the great Judge of the whole Earth, going his Circuit from Heaven
to the Plain of Mamre, and from Mamre to Sodom. This Judge comes to them to
their own home, and keep his Assizes and General Jail-delivery in their own
City, v. 21. Descendam and videbo, the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, I
will go down my self to them, and see how it stands with them.

This Judge condemns them not unheard, but admits Counsel to plead for, and
Intercessors to deprecate, as Abraham in the Text. So long as there lies a
Certierari from an higher Court, or an Appeal to an higher Court, the Case is
not desperate, though the Judge should not do right; for there is a future
Remedy to be hoped for. If the whole State were incensed against me, yet I can
find an escape to another Country: If all the World persecute me, yet if I be
an honest Man, I have a Supreme Court in my self; and I am at Peace in being
acquitted by my own Conscience.

But God is the unerring Judge of all the Earth, of this which I tread upon,
and this Earth which I carry about me; and when he judges me, my Conscience
turns upon his side, and confesses his Judgment to be right.

And therefore St. Paul's Argument Romans 3. ratifies and seconds Abraham's
Expostulation here; Is God unrighteous? God forbid: How then shall God judge
the World? A particular Council may err, but then a general Council may help to
rectify that particular: The King may err, but then God, in whose Hand the
King's Heart is, can rectify him: But if God that judges all the Earth, judge
thee, there is no Error to be assigned in his Judgment, no Appeal from God not
thoroughly informed, to God better informed, for he always knows all Evidence
before it is given, and therefore the larger the Jurisdiction, and higher the
Court is, the more careful ought the Judge to be against wrong Judgment; for
Abraham's Expostulation reaches in a measure to them; Shall not the Judge of
all (or of a great part of the Earth) do right?

This Judge, lastly, comes not solitary or alone, but associated; for in the
first and third Verses of this Chapter there are three of them, three Men stood
by Abraham; and in the nineteenth Chapter and the first Verse, at Sodom it self
where the Judgment was executed there are two of them (which is the number
usual at these times with us.)

There came two Angels to Sodom: A Divine Bench, an honorable Trial;
whomsoever we follow of all the Christian Interpreters, whether the Father
generally, (as St. Athanasius, St. Ambrose, and Epiphanius) which expound these
three to have been the three Persons of the adored Trinity, in three Humane
Shapes assumed: Or whither we follow some latter Expositors, (as Calvin and
others) who make them to be the second Person in Trinity, and two created
Angels attending him.

For as for Eben Ezra and the rest of the Jews, which make all three of them
Angels and mere Creatures, they are sufficiently confuted by that
incommunicable Appellation of the Name Jehovah, which Abraham so often in this
Chapter uses, when he speaks to them: Thus Abraham saw the day of Christ and
rejoiced, as our Lord himself testifies, John 8.56. for so to this very
Apparition some good Expositors have referred it: He saw his day indeed, he saw
this day of his, he received him into his House, he feasted him, he brought him
on his way, he found gracious Audience with him, as an Intercessor and Advocate
for others; and all this, even then when Christ was going in his Indignation to
judge Sodom. And in this Judgment, as in a Preludium, to show how he will judge
the whole World at the great Sessions of the last day, and visit it with the
Flames of an universal Combustion.

We see then the Tribunal, and the Judge, and the Form of the Proceeding in the
course of the whole Chapter: Let us come now precisely to observe the Text, and
hear the Advocate Abraham pleading here for the Righteous, that they may not be
destroyed with the Wicked; his Plea is intended principally for Lot, who was
his Nephew dear to him, and that lived amongst the Sodomites; it is intended
secondarily, for all righteous Persons, if any other such peradventure were
living there: And in the last place, in a commendable Compassion he would have
been glad also if it might have been extended to the whole City, and to so many
Thousands of Persons as now were about perishing in it; Far be that from thee:
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Which words naturally point out
their own division, consisting apparently of two parts.

The first is, a Detestation or Aversation, Far be that from thee.

The other is, a Reason, a Motive, an Aetiology, Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right?

In the Detestation again, which first offers it self unto us, there are two
things; the Subject of it, and the Degree of it; the Subject detested in the
word it or that, Far be that from thee.

The Degree of the Detestation is twofold, Gradus simplex, the plain Degree, be
it from thee; and Gradus auctus, or Gradus cum adjectione, the emphatical
Degree, be it far from thee. And first I will speak of these.

The Subject of the Detestation is expressed relatively, that or it, far be it
from thee; and so points us back to that which is passed already in the former
part of the Verse, namely, to slay the righteous with the wicked: far be that
from thee. So that here is a Supposition of Abraham's and a Position, the
Supposition is, That the Wicked no doubt are to be stain, and to be destroyed
by the Magistrate: And no marvel that this is put extra Controversiam, and
taken for granted; for what Herbalist does not root up noisome Weeds? Or what
Chyrurgeon does not cut away all corrupt and putrified Flesh? Betimes will I
root out all wicked doers from the City of the Lord (says the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. 101.8.) Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera
trahatur, says the Poet. What are the Wicked but Thorns, Cant. 2.2.
and what are Thorns but for the Fire? What are they but Chaff, Psalm. 1.4.
and what is the Chaff for, but to be severed from the Corn, and blown away of
the Wind: A Seditious Disturber of the public Peace, is a most noxious and
Savage wild Beast, says the Orator, and if it fall into a Pit, let it be
overwhelmed there, and come out no more, least it do more hurt. It was with
good Signification, that the Roman Magistrates caused to be borne before them
Fasces cum securibus, Rods and Axes both, whom the Rod corrects not, him the
Axe chops off.

I take this therefore for granted, as Abraham does, the Wicked are to be
destroyed: And I come from his Supposition to his Position, The Righteous
nevertheless must not be destroyed with them for company: If it falls out so
that the Wicked cannot be cut down, unless the Righteous also perish jointly
with them; even the Wicked rather are to be spared for the present, Far be it
from thee, to slay the righteous with the wicked. It Is well this Plea can be in
Sodom, here is some Comfort for us, worth our taking up by the way, the World
shall never be so bad, but there may be some hope of finding some Righteous,
even in those places which are worst; Joshua 6. Rev. 3.4. 1 Kings 18.3.
in Sodom there was a Lot, in Jericho a Rahab, in Sardis a few Names which had
not defiled their Garments. In Ahab's Court a good Obadiah; in infamous Nero's
Family, Christians and Saints, Phil. 4.22. The Devil has but sowed Tares
amongst the Wheat, Matt. 13.25.
he could not so root the Corn it self out, but that in every Field God will
have some Wheat. It Is a most true Axiom in the Schools, Malum non potest
existere nisi in bono, Evil cannot exist or be, but in something which is good;
and therefore cannot wholly eat out and destroy all Good.

And here is a Caution also for those who have the Sword of Judicature and
Authority in their Hands: Be wise ye that are Judges of the Earth, pre-judge
not a Man wholly by his Place, nor yet by his Company; though the Clamours of
the Sins of a Place in general, be as the Clamor and the Cry of Sodom; yet
descendite and videte, look into it nearer, and distinguish of particulars.

In Sodom there was a Lot; Genesis 27.22.
amongst Joseph's malicious Brethren there was a Reuben that dissuaded the
Murder of the Child; with the Robbers that were justly Crucified, there was a
guiltless Jesus. Even out of Nazareth, Luke 23.41.
in despite of the Jewish Proverb, John 1.46. there may come something which
is good: In one and the same Goal there may be as well as some Malefactors,
some that are as unjustly suspected. In one and the same Indictment, there may
be some Nocent and some Innocent.

But I touch upon these Matters only by the way, but will insist upon the
Proposition it self which Abraham lays down here, The Righteous must not be
destroyed with the Wicked; he which slays the Righteous with the wicked, says
Abraham, to him the righteous are as the wicked, but that must not be, far be
that from thee.

And sure it is an invincible Argument, for how foul Injustice is it, Tam in
equalibus equalia tribuere, to deal alike with Persons so unlike. How horrible
an Exorbitancy were it, that they should be all one in our Valuation, whom so
many and unspeakable Differences have distinguished in their own Conditions; I
mean the Righteous and the Wicked, their own Intentions which they shoot at
distinguish them, the one aims at direct Honesty and heavenly Piety; the other,
at base Profit and earthly Pleasure; their Principles which they go by
distinguish them, the one measures his Actions by the public Good, the other
by his private; their Fruits redounding to the Commonwealth do distinguish
them; the one are paces reipublice, and the other faces; their choice of
conversing does distinguish them, they come not at each other. The positive
Laws of Men distinguish them, they appoint Reward for the one, but Punishments
for the other.

Christ's Judgment does distinguish them, he will set the one at his right
Hand, the other at his Left; the place of their eternal Habitation does
distinguish them, for the one Heaven is prepared, for the other Hell: In one
word, from Eternity they were differenced, and to Eternity they shall be: They
strove in the Womb like Rebecca's Twins; and like the Smoke of Eteocles and
Polynices, when they are dead, they will have no Union; and shall then the
righteous be as the wicked? If that be not in equalibus equalia tribuere, what
is? Shall there be no difference of a Son and of a Slave? of a Friend and of an
Enemy? of a dutiful Subject and a plotting Traitor? All other Differences have
been reconciled, the Fair European and Foul Negro marry and live together; Fire
and Water meet in the Ingrediency of the mixed body, Light and Darkness concur
in one Crepusculum, one dawning of the day; but this diametrical Opposition of
Righteous and Wicked, has been and still is at Discord, it could never be
pacified; A wicked Man is an Abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in
his way, is an Abomination to the wicked.

When I consider therefore, that Abraham brings this as a Fundamental Axiom
indisputable, that the righteous must not be slain with the wicked; and that
they must not be unto us as the wicked; and when I weigh the Reason of it, I am
amazed to think of that shameful Lapse of the good Emperor Theodosius, who upon
the account of the private Actions of some mutinous Persons in Thessalonica,
sent his Army upon the City, and promiscuously slew the Innocent with the
Guilty.

It would make one tremble to think of such an erroneous Mandate; but it is
enough to overwhelm any considering Person with Horror and Amazement, to call
to mind the Domestic Example of that Infernal Direction of the Romish Traitor
Father Garnet, who being not a Military Prince, but an Ecclesiastic professing
Peace, not an illiterate rude Soldier, but a Clerk of elaborate Education, not
on a sudden Rage unpremeditated, but upon Deliberation more fully advised,
should warrant a more Barbarous Resolution, for being asked by the Popish
Conspirators of the Gunpowder Treason, Whither it was lawful for them to
destroy in our Parliament House many good Men for Company with more bad, (that
is, such as were their Favorers with such as were not) answered, Yea, it was,
Si in grande emolumentum Ecclesiae Romanae cessurum sit, so it might bring
evident Advancement and Benefit to the Roman Church.

If this Oracle did come (as there are good grounds to believe it did) from the
then Possessor of the Apostolical Chair at Rome, he was but a painted Wall, and
Vice-Demon upon Earth: Does he claim to be Judge of all the World, and does he
command the righteous to be slain with the wicked? I am sure that Judge of all
the World, with whom Abraham here conferreth, is of other Sentiments, unless he
will take a spice of Manicheism, and make two Judges of all the World, one good
one, which must needs be God, and another evil, which must be the Devil.

But I must not, like another Tarquinius, strike off the tops only of the
tallest Poppies, tax none but only the Emperor Theodosius, and the Romish
Pontifex Maximus; but the truth is, there are few Men living, of what Condition
or Quality soever, but one time or other, more or less, offend against this
Rule, and make the righteous as the wicked.

And to comprize it summarily, four ways it may be done: First, By indiscreet
Pity. Secondly, By preposterous Zeal. Thirdly, By Atheistical Neglect.
Fourthly, By diabolical Malice.


These I will very briefly treat of. First, It is done by indiscreet Pity,
when we are so childishly Compassionate, that we destroy not them that are
incorrigibly Wicked; 2 Kings 13.1^.
when like Joash the King of Israel, we smite but thrice at Aram, whereas we
ought for to smite five or six times till they were consumed; when like Ahab we
let go Benhadad, 1 Kings 20.42.
the Man appointed for to die, whom God has delivered into our Hands, when we
find Manslaughter for Willful Murder, and withold the Hand of Justice from
them, which withold not the Hand of Violence from their Brethren; this is to
make the righteous as the wicked, for it gives the Wicked the privilege of
Indemnity, which should be peculiar to the Righteous; yea, and more than so, by
sparing the Wicked, consequently it destroys the Righteous, it leaves that
Serpentine Brood, which will be in the end the Destruction of them.

Secondly, By Preposterous Zeal, we make the Righteous as the Wicked; when we
are too furiously hot upon the spur, when we hasten so to abolish the Wicked,
that necessarily we involve the Righteous in the same Ruin, when we are more
precipitant than John himself, 2 Kings 10.23.
that was so furious a Driver; for he would not let loose his armed Men upon
the Priests of Baal, till he had taken order effectually that there was no
Servant of the Lord Jehovah left amongst them. God himself, to show that he
would ever discriminate the Righteous from the Wicked, he would not bring the
Deluge ( Genesis 7.13.) upon the World of the Ungodly, till he saw that Noah was
entered into the Ark: Nor would he send the destroying Angel over Egypt, till
he knew that the Houses of the Children of Israel were sprinkled with the
Paschal Blood. Exodus 12.23.
Neither would he suffer the Tares in the Gospel ( Matt. 13.29.) to be plucked
up before the Harvest, lest the Wheat also should miscarry with them. Vice must
not be stabbed through the Loins of Virtue, as in a condemned Woman pleading
Pregnancy, our merciful Laws worthily expect the Delivery of her Innocent
Child. Let Rahab and her Family be brought safe out, and then let Jericho be
destroyed.

Thirdly, We make the Righteous like the Wicked, by Atheistical Neglect, when
we equally regard neither; when if Gain so invite us, we promiscuously oppress
both: Like that Popish Army which having taken a City mixedly inhabited by
Protestants and Papists, put them all indifferently to the Sword, because they
would finger the whole Spoil; and when those of their own Popish Superstition
fell at their Knees and cried, We are Catholics; they answered, The better for
your Souls; and that was all the Courtesy that they showed them.

Fourthly, It is done by Diabolical Malice, when Men are at a Defiance with
God, and take their Pay in the Camp of Lucifer, when the Righteous are the Men
of their Hatred, and they purposely set themselves to destroy them, but to
spare the Wicked. When they cry of Murtherous Barabbas, Let him have his
Pardon; but of the Holy Jesus, Crucify him, Crucify him. The Righteous are
then not only as the Wicked, but in a much worse case than the Wicked. Abraham
desired that they might be better than they, but here they may be glad if they
may be but as they. So as of old Aristides must have the Ostracism, and be
banished for his Justness, Nemo apud nos frugi sit, nemo excellat, aut si
excelluerit abeat. The Ephesians, when they banished a worthy Person, were not
ashamed to proclaim the Reason, because they would have no Man to excel above
the rest; if any Man would be better than others, let him pack away from their
Dominions. But I hope no such vain and unequal Dealings will be countenanced in
our times, this were to make the appearance of Goodness more prejudicial than
the Evidence and Conviction of Evil. Such Practices ought to be far from us.

What I have already spoken, shall suffice for a cursory Declaration of the
ways whereby we do make the Righteous as the Wicked; of all which four kinds we
must say as Abraham here says unto God, Far be they from us; all of them must
be the due subjects of our Abomination and detesting Aversation; in special
indeed Injustice, but in general all Sin and Vice; which our Gracious King, as
the true Vicegerent of God, is now endeavoring to root out, that God may
continue to protect this Nation, living in a Course of Righteousness, as he
has done already above our Deserts.

Thus having finished the Abhorrence or Abomination to slay the Righteous with
the Wicked, or to esteem the Righteous as the Wicked, be it from thee, yea, be
it far from thee. The former, the plain Degree, be it from thee, Injustice
especially; in general, all Iniquity; be it all from thee.

Here we may see the vile Condition of Sin and Impiety; no Commerce can it have
with God; no Union with his Nature; no Abode or Footing in his Presence; it may
say like Vagabond Cain, Genesis 4.14. Behold, thou have driven me out this day
from the face of the Earth; and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a
Fugitive and a Vagabond in the Earth: And it shall come to pass, that every one
that finds me, shall slay me. And we need no reason of this Sentence of
perpetual Exile, Be it from thee, these three words, It from thee, are a most
complete Reason; it, which is Misery; from thee, which art Blessedness; it,
which is Death; from thee, which art Life it self; it, which is Uncleanness;
from thee, which art Purity; it, which is Crookedness; from thee, which art
Rectitude; it, which is Darkness; from thee, which art Light it self: A
thousand Volumes compiled by never so Ciceronian a Pen, a thousand Tongues of
Men and Angels, could not more graphically paint out the Cursedness of Sin and
Injustice as these three words have done, It from thee, it is banished from
God, the Idea of Goodness, the Center and the Circumference of Perfection; and
when it is said to be banished from God, we must conceive it also (for our own
Instruction) banished from all which any way partake either of the Nature or
Name of God, from all Judges first, for so the Scripture says of them, Dixi
Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods, yea, universally from all Men; for Man is
in a true Sense pars Dei, a piece of God, and therefore Sin ought not to be
harbored in us. In God we live, move, and have our Beings. David says, That
God made Man a little lower than the Angels; the word will bear, A little
lower than God: And indeed our Souls and Bodies are the very Characters of the
Divine Image: Our Understanding, Will and Memory, are the Vestigia, the
Characters of the Divine Trinity; and our Humane Nature born of the Blessed
Virgin, has personal Union with the eternal Word. These things plainly evince,
that we have some Participation of the Divine Nature, and that the Regenerate
partake of the same Spirit with God; and therefore this, Be it from thee, must
take place with us also. Be it from God, and from all that partake of the
Nature and the Name of God.

I have done with the Gradus simplex, the plain Degree, but Abraham contents
not himself thus, he adds, Gradum auctum, Gradum cum adjectione, the emphatical
Degree, Be it far from thee; and he adds this when he speaks to God, not to
wish a thing that is not, but to express and acknowledge a thing that is.

The Truth is, there is none but God, of whom we can properly say, that Sin is
far from him: A Creature may be actually free from Sin, and so Sin may be
absent from it; but it is not far absent from it; as it is said to Cain, Sin
lies at the door. Genesis 4.7.
Every rational Creature has a Door, whereby it may let in Sin, a possibility
of being depraved and embracing it; but only the eternal God he has no door,
whereby he can let in Sin, his Nature has an infinite Repugnancy and
Incompassibility with it; an Angel may Sin, and yet remain an Angel; a Man may
Sin, and yet remain a Man; but God cannot have Sin in him and remain God; it
cannot consist with his Essence, and therefore far it is indeed from him, and
far be that Blasphemous Doctrine from us, to make God the Author of any Sin; he
cannot be the subject of Sin in himself, nor can he be the Efficient of Sin in
others.

Therefore let us enforce our selves to a Sacred Emulation of God's glorious
Prerogatives as far as may be; let not only Sin be from us, in gradu simplici,
but in gradu aucto, let it be far from us; there cannot be too great a distance
between us and it, ratione contagii, in regard of the Contagiousness of it,
there cannot be too great a distance, if we flee not from it, it will infect
us. It Is like a Basilisk, it kills as far as it can be seen; it is like a Siren,
it enchants as far as it can be heard. 'Twere good that there were a Pesthouse
for the Wicked, as there is for them that have the Plague, a Thracian Bosphorus
where they might live by themselves, and have no access to other Men to Poison
them; for it is not enough for us not to approach to them, but they will
approach to us.

Again, Ratione supplicii, in regard of the Punishment of it, there cannot be
too great a distance, though we practice it not our selves, if we be but in
company of them that practice it; if they be in our Houses, if they be in our
Towns, we fare the worse for them; for one Achan the whole Army of Israel flies
before their Enemies. Sin was committed on the Earth by Adam, and the very
Heavens felt the Smart of it; there were malignant Influences then added to
those Celestial Bodies, which had not at the first been created in them.

If Sin get a footing in our Servants, in our Followers, it is like an Enemy
that has got a Sconce, or a Citadel, too near us, from thence it will Gall us
too; and therefore when it offers to come and dwell with us, we must answer it
as Tully answers Catiline in the like case, Nullo modo iisdem in parietibus
tute esse possumus, qui magno in periculo sumus, quod iisdem in manibus
versemur. Far be it from us.

I have dwelt long enough upon the Aversation, Far be it from thee; I will nor
therefore long detain this Honorable Assembly, but recompense it with as much
brevity in this other which follows, the Reason or Aetiology, Shall not the
Judge of all the Earth do right? In which words take notice briefly of two
things.

First, The Perfection of Judges; and then the Judge of Perfection. Here you
may observe a Judge in abstracto, what it is; and in concreto, where or in whom
it is.

First, Take notice of the Perfection of a Judge, in abstracto, what it is: It
is to do Equity and Right. That is the End and Scope of all Judges, and of all
Judgments; that is the Pole Star of all Judicial Actions; Shall not he do Right
who is ordained to that end, to decide Controversies of Right and Wrong? Shall
not a Judge do Right?

You have heard the Perfection of a Judge in abstracto, what it is; there
remains the Perfection of a Judge in concreto, where or in whom it is; it is not
every where, nay, it is no where but in God. Absolute Perfection is the
incommunicable Property of the Deity, all created Natures, Tantum absunt a
Perfectione, quantum a Divinitate, but in God there is Absolute Perfection.
Negative Questions in this kind in Scripture, pre-suppose always Affirmative
Answers, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? Yes, he will do it, do
it others, or do they not; this Judge will do it.

So that God is here described a perfect Judge in two respects:

First, In the Extent of his Jurisdiction; and in the Exercise of it.

In the Extent of it, He is a Judge of all the Earth. In the Exercise of it, He
will do Right, he cannot but do Right; Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
Right?

The Extent of his Jurisdiction is the whole Earth; it is not a Country or two
that confine his Circuit; it is not a Province or two that bound his Empire; he
scorneth to borrow a Title as the Old Romans did, from one or two Conquered
Nations, Sarmaticus, Geticus, Numidicus, he has that which others long for,
and cannot have, Catholicus, Oecumenicus: He needs no plus ultra, as that
Charlemayn who confuted his rich Title with his craving Motto, for all the
whole Universe is his. There is none therefore so weak here, but if he be
Oppressed, sees an higher Tribunal that he may fly unto. There is none so
strong here, so armed with Authority and Favor, but if he be an Oppressor, he
sees a Tribunal that he may fear. No wonder that Felix trembled when he heard
St. Paul dispute of this Judgment, and of this Judge. From all other Courts
there lies an Appeal to him, but from him there lies no Appeal to any other:
There is a Commission, against which no Prohibition can be brought; we must not
come there with our Nemo bis judicabitur de eodem, bis judicabimur de iisdem;
all Causes that have been heard in this World, shall be heard again in that
Prerogative-Court of Heaven; and what was right adjudged here, shall be
ratified there; and what was wrong adjudged here, shall be repealed there. And
finally, What was never heard here at all, yet shall be decisively ordered
there.

I will shut up my Discourse in a few words, (which it becomes me to say) to
demonstrate, that the Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth will ever do Right,
(according to the Conclusion of the Text) does most undeniably appear, with
relation to the Church of England, (as it is by Law established) in whose Cause
he has been pleased of late to manifest his Power and Goodness most
remarkably; and not only in our Days, but he has done the like in former Ages;
for in respect of its Doctrine, Discipline and External Rites, he guided the
solid Foundation thereof, by that admirable young Prince King Edward the Sixth;
and supported it by the Steadiness of the Magnanimous Princess Queen Elizabeth,
who (during all her long and glorious Reign) would never admit of any
Alterations; no, not in the very Outworks, the External Rites thereof, (which
are Securities to the main Fortress of our Religion) though she was frequently
solicited thereunto by Men of great Fame and Judgment; and though in the 34th
Article of our Church it is owned, That the External part of its Worship may
admit of Alterations (by public Authority) upon Emergent Causes, and for
Reasons demonstrably and apparently tending to the Public Good; and when Times
and Men's Manners do require it.

And this Church has been since adorned by the Piety and Devout Practice of
the late Virtuous and Blessed Queen Mary, (who, by the Countenance and Consent
of King Charles the Second, was most happily Married to His Present Majesty,
notwithstanding all the Secret Opposing Intrigues of the Renegado Jesuits:)
which Famous Princess lived and dyed in all the Observances of this Church like
a Primitive Saint.

And it has been not only dignified by the high Respect borne toward it by
these two eminent Princesses, who set two such Examples as are hardly imitable
by the very best and bravest of Womenkind; but it was defended and cherished by
the Learning and peaceful Temper of King James the First, and by the Piety of
Queen Anne. And it has been exceedingly honored and embellished by the
Constancy, Patience and Charity of the Devout Martyr King Charles the First.

And thus stood it out against all Assaults, during the Reign of all our
Princes since the Reformation. (Queen Mary's short Reign, and part of the
twenty Years of our Unhappy Civil Wars, and foolish Anarchical Governments
excepted) after which it was re-established in course of Law upon the wonderful
and peaceable Restoration of King Charles the Second, who at his death left it
upon its own Establishment.

But as to two other Princes that have possessed the Throne (since the
Reformation) Queen Mary the First, and the late King James the Second, they
both were pleased to give it public, high and kind Characters at their first
Accessions to their Crowns; and whilst the Men of our Communion were busily
fixing them into their Royal Authorities; and the latter of them, did for some
considerable number of Years, outwardly comply with its Observances; (so long
as the Politicians of the Court of Rome would suffer him) but their deep
Engagements and Confederacies with the Romans Party, would not admit them for
to countenance it further, and that they openly declined Communion with it,
should be no Argument for any Protestant upon Earth to dislike its
Constitution, but the rather to embrace and support it.

How Queen Mary's Severities increased, Gentlemen, your Suffolk Ancestors soon
felt; and if it had not been for the seasonable Rescue of King William, we
might long before this time have Sorrowfully felt also, how King James would
have increased; had not King William delivered this Church out of all its
Imminent and Surprising Perils; and secured it by his Valor, Policy and
Indefatigable Vigilance (exerted both in the Fatigues of the Field, and the
Management of the Treaty) and with the Security thereof he has superadded the
ancient Luster to the Realm of England, of becoming once more the Balance to
all the Public Affairs of Europe.

And he has pleased to espouse it for his Grand and Professed Design, to
endeavor to Found us such a Settlement, as may secure both our Religious and
Civil Rights to our Posterities.

And toward all these he has made as vigorous Attempts, as the Policy,
Resolution and Integrity of the most Heroic of our Princes, or the Bravest of
Men can parallel.

Therefore we have the highest Obligation to follow that Example of the
Grateful Israelites toward King Solomon, recorded in 1 Kings 8.66. (with with
I shall conclude.)

To Praise God, and to Pray daily for the long Life and Grandeur of the King;
and to return to our Houses joyful and glad of Heart, for all the Goodness that
the most righteous God has showed unto his Anointed, and unto us his People.
The Second Sermon.
Zechariah 7.9, 10. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, Execute true
Judgment, and show Mercy and Compassion every Man to his Brother. And oppress
not the Widow, nor the Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor, and let none of
you imagine Evil against his Brother in your Heart.


MY Song shall be now, as David's was, of Mercy and Judgment. Judgment and
Mercy are the proper Subjects for this time, in which Righteousness and Peace
will the most gracefully kiss each other.

The liberty of the Gospel has no way abrogated the Morality of the Law, for
Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill it: So that this Precept of executing
true Judgment and Merty, is not at all excluded from the Doctrine of the Son of
God, but he ratifies the Commands of his Father, saying, John 7.24.
Judge not according to the Appearance, but judge righteous Judgment.

The Nature of this Judgment is either Political or Moral; Political, as being
proper to a Supreme Governor, and his Subordinate Magistrates; or Moral, as
implying an Equity between Private Men; whereby every Man is bound, both by the
Law of God and Nature, to show Mercy and Compassion toward his dejected
Brother. By the Law of God, because he so commands; by the Laws of Men, because
we are all the Sons of Adam: Therefore execute true Judgment, and show Mercy.

It will be a proper Introduction to the rest, that I speak generally (though
briefly) of Judgment in a Politic State: Jethro the Father-in-Law of Moses,
sets forth a President of a righteous Judge, according to the Qualities which
he ought for to be endued with, saying, Thou shall provide out of all the
People, Exodus 18.21.
able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness, and place such
to be Rulers over them. Able Men, or Men of Courage and Wisdom; they must be
Industrious, able to dispatch and expedite Causes, Valentes Ingenio, Men of
ready Wit and Dexterity.

Secondly, Constancy and Strength are requisite, lest they quit a good Cause
for fear of the Mighty; those that have not an adequate Power derived upon
them, are dangerously Ambitious of such a Dignity: Therefore said the Wise Man,
Seek not to be a Judge, being not able to take away Iniquity, lest at any time
thou fear the Person of the Mighty, and lay a Stumbling Block in the way of thy
Vprightness.

Thirdly, They must be Men of Estate as well as of Power, of eminent Birth and
Estimation; therefore Moses in the Fifteenth of Deuteronomy, took the chief of
the Tribes, Wise Men and known, and made them Heads over the People.

Our Modern Politicians therefore affirm, Futius divites quam pauperes in
Magistratum elegantur. And they must be Men fearing God, that being the
Foundation of all Virtue: Besides, if Men of Might fear not God, when in regard
of their great and public Power, they fear not Men, they are apt to fall into
many Outrages; but it behooves him that judges others, to have an exact
respect unto his Superor Judge, to whom he must give an account of all his
Acts; let them look unto God in whose stead they are.

They must be Men of Truth, both understanding the Truth, that they may
distinguish right from wrong: And also Followers of the Truth in their Will and
Practice; for there is a Speculative Truth, in Discerning and Judging; and a
Practicable Truth, in following a right Judgment.

They must seek out the Truth by Witnesses, Writings and Evidences, and having
found it out, give Judgment accordingly: And they must be Constant, and not
changeable in their Sentences and Decrees; and they must hate Covetousness, be
so far from that meanness of Spirit, as to have an Abhorrence of it.

God who commands others to do Justice, is pleased for to show the highest
Example thereof in himself; in him there is nothing Unjust or Evil, as Coldness
has no place in Fire, nor Blackness in Snow, nor Obscurity in the Sun, no more
has Sin any place in God, nor should it have any shelter or countenance from
Men.

This prescribed Traitor of our Prince, This Out-lawed Fugitive of our
Sovereign, should not be found harbored with them: God has put the Sword into
the Magistrates hand to punish, and he expects that he should not bear it in
vain, Execution is the Life of the Law; the Execution is as necessary as the
Promulgation. He that has Authority, and punishes not Disorders in others, is
consequentially guilty of them himself: But they must not punish more than the
Offense, that is too much, and to punish less, makes but Offenders Insolent and
Multitudinous.

Justice is Columna and corona reipublicae, it is the Cement which holds the
general parts of the Body Politic together, it is as the Nerves and Sinews
thereof, and by it the Throne is established.

Judges are Juris indices, they are Jus dicere and Jus dare, if they do not,
then is the Law weakened and perverted, and made to patronize Evil, and
Wickedness is committed under Authority, and the Law does turn its edge against
the Innocent; and that which should be a Defense, becomes a Maze of Briars and
Thorns, and the Rod of Justice is turned into a Serpent of Subtilty.

And so it is, if the Jurors give not a sound Verdict, but make the worst side
to seem the best; this were to be wise to do Evil, and not verum dicere, as
their Office signifies. In Justice we are not to respect Persons (though that
be commanded otherwhere, yet it is forbidden here) here the Causes are to be
heard, more than the Parties observed; the Equity of Causes is to be weighed,
not the Quality of Persons; if otherwise, it makes the Law but like Spiders
Webs, in which the small Flies are strangled, whilst the great ones escape and
break through. Hence haughty successful Robbers wear Chains of Gold, whilst
poor Pilferers are bound with Fetters of Iron.

The taking of Gifts is a secret Preventer of Justice, it makes Men to over-see
God's Laws and the King's; undermines and devours the Houses of the poor Widow
and the desolate Orphan; these blind the Eyes of the Wise, and stop the Mouths
of the Skillful: To some Persons the greatest Evidence is not half so
convincing as a secret Gift; though where Right is, there is the great Point.

It is no wonder that good Causes fall not out well, if many Hands be open to
receive Gifts.

It is no wonder if the Evidence of the Witnesses be strained and diverted; but
let such consider, what measure they meet, shall at the last be measured unto
them again; not only by God's Judgment hereafter; but upon the Observance of
his righteous Vicegerents, this Retribution will overtake them in this Life to
their Shame and Sorrow.

Let not those therefore that should be the Supporters of others be their
Supplanters; but let Justice and Equity be so exactly observed, that the Voice
of Fraud may be no more heard amongst us; when the Contentious Violence of Men
did overflow the Banks of Right, then would God have the Law take strength to
it self, to curb Men's fiery Passions and Attempts: To this end Judges and
Officers of the Law were appointed to see the Laws impartially executed,
without wresting or extorting: This is the end of the Law, the Office of the
Judge, and the Occasion of this time.

The Charge of the Judicial Office is great, therefore to him that gives the
Charge, a Charge is given of God, Thou shall not wrest Judgment; thou shall not
respect Persons, nor take a Gift, for the Judgment is not only before Men, but
before God also.

If they that sit in Judgment prospect him that judges all the Earth, in the
exactness of his Judgment, and follow it, their Integrity will grow Proverbial,
Like the Judgment of Bochoris, or the Sentence of Bias; he that thus sets
him before his Eyes, shall never fear what Cambyses the Persian made Othones to
do, Se samnem excoriavit, and filium ejus Othonem corio insidere coegit: For he
has here a great Terror and Restraint, he knows that God stands in the
Congregation of the Judges.

But a People so wisely Zealous of their Laws and Liberties (as the English)
will not be easily imposed upon; and such Sages of the Laws as we have, that
administer so exactly, need not any such tremendous Memorials.

As in the Palace of the Ottoman Emperor, four of the most Honorable Bassa's
sit in Judgment in the great Hall, and the Grand Seignior himself, through a
secret Window, unheard and unseen, hears the Complaints of his People, and the
Sentences of his Judges: So is our Great God conscious unto all that Men do
here, in their Deputations under him; they must therefore remember that no
Greatness can exempt them from his hi^ Censure, when they willingly corrupt
^^emselves.

The Egyptians of old would not suffer the Bodies of their Kings to have Royal
Interments, till their Lives were scanned, by a severe Examination of their
Management of the Regal Scepter whilst they had it; and as that was approved,
their Funeral Honors were augmented or diminished; showing that all Earthly
Greatness has an undoubted account, whereunto it is liable and stoopeth after
Death.

And Blessed is he who so judges here, as that his Judgment may be approved by
that Judge there, he which puts so all Injustice far from him, and truly
distinguishes between the Righteous and the Wicked, shall be absolved by that
Great Lord, whose Servants he himself absolveth, and whose Enemies he
condemns. Blessed is this Judge as to himself, and Blessed are the People
over whom he presideth.

It is the Judges Business and Profession to do Right; therefore the Egyptian
Hieroglyphick painted him without Hands, with his Eyes almost shut, and from
his Neck a Sapphire hanging down, with this word Veritas engraven upon it. He
must have no Hands for Bribes, no Eyes for Sinister Respects, or to respect
Persons.

To the same purpose the Image of Jupiter was made in Creta without Ears: He
must have no Ears to hear Importunity against Justice.

The Areopagites for the same cause never sat (...) Judgment in the Day, but
in the Nightime alwa^s, and by an obscure Light, that they might not be moved
by Apparel, Habits, Gestures or Countenances of the Persons summoned before
them: And surely Injustice, though it be a Blemish to any Man, yet it is not
half so much a Blemish to another Man as to a Judge; distastful it is in any,
but most of all in him.

And if Right be thus the Pole Star of all Judges in their Judicial Actions, we
must conceive it to be so too in all others, in their Actions Subordinate to
Judicial; yea, we must give it the due Extent of it.

If the Judge must Decree right, the Accuser also must Object right, the
Witness must Testify right, the Learned Counselor must Plead right, and the
Jury must Find right, Vltimus finis dat mediis ordinem and mensuram, all these
will be Planetical sometimes, and have the proper Motions of their own Sphere,
the Plaintiff is hot and fiery like Mars; the Defendant is Sullen and Froward
like Saturn, the Advocate is Crafty and Wily like Mercury, the Witness is
Variable and Changeable like Luna; but the Judge, like to the highest Orb of
the Heavens, must overruled all these inferior Spheres of the Planets, and
carry them all along in his own diurnal Motion with himself.

But especially the Advocate must be looked into, that he may not too lightly
dispense with himself, he thinks, though others are bound to the Right, yet he
may Sophisticate and plead wrong; but Equity and Right is the Scope that he
ought to aim at; if he will not give Right an helping hand, he should give it
none at all.

The general Calling of a good Christian, is presupposed in all particular
Callings, a Soldier must live by Fighting, but not in fighting a wicked
Quarrel; and he that Pleads should live honorably by it, but not in bolstering
Oppressions against the Orphan and the Widow.

St. Tertullian in his Book of Idolatry, condemns all those Christians most
deeply, who being Carvers, Painters, or Embroiderers, would do any Work
whatsoever which had the least and remotest Subordination to the decking of an
Heathen Idol.

It were a goodly matter if the Pilot should be bound to arrive at (or steer
to) the right Haven, and the Oar-men be permitted to row toward the wrong:
'Twere a pretty devise, if the Captain were tied to lead the Army to the place
of right Service, and the Sentinels have license to mis inform him: And what
were it then, if the Judge were enjoined to award the true Sentence, and the
Advocate be suffered to patronize the false.

The famous Civilian Papinianus, rather than he would defend the Emperor
Caracalla's barbarous Murder of his Brother, willingly admitted of death under
that bloody Tyrant.

And which you will more wonder at, the no less samous Ceselius in his Age, he
would never be brought by Favor or Fear, so much as to draw a Conveiance of
any of those Lands, which Anthony and his Fellow-Triumvirs had given away in
the Oppression of the Roman Liberties.

Famous may the Memory be of such Spirits, and long may the like flourish, and
deterr or ashame our Advocates from supporting corrupt Causes for large Fees:
For their Pleadings ought not to be considered as Sophisters Acts, tending to
the Ostentation and Exercise of Wit, but are serious and important Proceedings,
that ought to aim totally at Equity and Right.

But the Text seems to require me to speak something of the Moral Equity that
ought to be betwixt private Persons: And that this may be more exercised, I
will with the Prophet wish you by way of entreaty, to Execute true Judgment,
Lex talionis, the Law of like for like is of great Antiquity, common as well
with the Gentiles by the Law of Nature, as with the Jews by the Law of God,
whereby we are taught not to use others as we would not be used our selves; to
which accords that of our Blessed Savior, Whatsoever you would that Men should
do unto you, even so do unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

In these Admonitions we are taught Mercy and Compassion when we have our
Adversary in a straight, and to forgive the Delinquences of our Neighbors, as
we hope to receive a Remission of our Trespasses committed against the Supreme
Judge and Father of us all: For after the Execution of true Judgment, we are
admonished for to show Mercy.

Amongst the Heathens, the great Alexander is reported to have taken greater
delight in Pardoning than Punishing an Offender. When Bias came to the
Condemning of a Man he wept; and Cicero professed, Cum pareere vel ledere
poruissem, ignoscende quaereham causas, non puniendi occasiones; but to induce
us by a greater Authority, God Almighty is our President, and he is styled
Merciful and Long-suffering, and we by our Lord's Command should be the like,
Be you Merciful as your Heavenly Father is Merciful: And he adds thereunto a
Benediction, Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy.

Let us therefore make no Separation between Justice and Mercy, but execute
both truly: Let us be blind to insinuating Impostors, and deaf to palli^ting
Flatterers; it were better to want Sense, tha^ to judge an unrighteous
Judgment, either erring against Justice or Mercy.

God required of the Jews, as a Demonstration of their Repentance, Isa. 58.6, 7.
To loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the
Oppressed go free, and that they should break every Yoke, to deal their Bread
to the Hungry, and to bring the Poor that are cast out to their Houses, and
when they saw the Naked that they cover them, and that they should not hide
themselves from their own Flesh.

Afflict not the Poor, was the Precept of an anclent Philosopher, and suitably
the Prophet in the Text excites Mankind by way of Prohibition, not to oppress
any Subject to Oppression; the W^dow, nor the Fatherless; the Stringer, nor the
Poor; and let none of you imagine Evil against his Brother in your heart.

The Sin of Oppression in former times was expi^ted by Death or Banishment, as
may be seen by some Edicts of our ancient Kings: It was condemned of old by the
Prophet Amos, Woe to them that make the Ephah small, but the Shekel great; to
oppose the Oppression of the Widow, let there be the Love of an Husband; of an
Orphan, let there be the Affection of a Father; of a Stranger, let there be the
Hospitality of Abraham; of the Poor, let there be the Charity of Job, Job
29.12, etc.
He delivered the Poor that cried, the Fatherless, and him that had none to
help him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him. And he
caused the Widows heart to sing for joy. He put on Righteousness, and it
clothed him; and Judgment was to him as a Robe and a Diadem. He was Eyes to
the Blind, and Feet to the Lame. He was a Father to the Poor; and the cause
which he knew not, he searched out. Then he brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and
plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth. Then was his Glory fresh in him, and his
Bow was renewed in his hand. He relieved the Necessities of distressed
Widowhood, and was a Father to the disabled Orphans.

As we hear the Complaints and Cries of others that are overwhelmed with
Calamities, so God will hear us, and as we behold them; so will he behold us:
Therefore stop not your Ears at the Cry of the Poor, for whose does, he himself
also shall cry aloud, and not be heard.

The Prophet Isaiah pronounces Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees,
and write grievousness which they have prescribed: Isa. 10.1, 2, 3.
To tarn aside the Needy from Judgment, and to take away Right from the Poor of
the People, that Widows may be their Prey, and that they may rob the
Fatherless. What will they do in the day of Visitation, and in the Desolation
that shall come from far? To whom can they flee for help? and where will they
leave their Glory?

The Prophet Micah, Chap. 2. Ver. 1, 2, 3. denounces Woe against them that
practice Mischief as often as it is in the power of their hands; That covet
Fields, and take them by force; and Houses, and take them violently. Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, against the Family that does oppress a Man and his
House, do I devise an evil, from which they shall not remove their Necks. The
Redeemer of the Poor and Afflicted is Mighty, and he will plead their Cause
with their Oppressors. Cursed (says the great Law giver) be he that perverteth
the Judgment of the Stranger, Fatherless and Widow, and all the People shall
say, Amen. And this is repeated upon solemnest time (in the Commination) by the
constant Practice of our Church. Oppress not a Stranger, injure him not by Word
or Deed, neither secretly by Fraud, nor openly by Violence; but instead of
Injury show Kindness: We may learn a President from the Israelites who were
Strangers and Bond slaves in Egypt, they did feel by Experience, what it was
for to use Strangers cruelly, and learned by that Experience (and by God's
especial Command) to have Compassion upon others.

Besides, there are many Reasons why Strangers should be respected, Men of
every Nation, Language and Country, have originally one common Father, and have
the Stamp of the same Omnipotency upon them.

The next kind of Oppression is of the Widow and Fatherless; as we are to show
Pity and Compassion to Strangers that are in Misery, so we are also to show
Pity to them that are in Misery which are no Strangers, as Widows and Orphans.
As we must not turn aside the Stranger from his Right, neither must we the
Widow or the Fatherless; if Men regard not their Tears, their God will; and
whom they Contemn, he will Favor; though none at all are to be wronged and
afflicted, yet these especially must not be hurt, Quia defensorem non habent
(says good St. Chrysostom) the one wants a Father, and the other an Husband.

Oppress not the Poor (says the Text) in general; the Poor are commonly
oppressed by Extortion in Usury; this is not felt much in the beginning, but at
the last, Devorat totam hominis substantiam, these Extortioners live upon the
Poor, and eat them up by their Severities, like Savage Beasts, by biting of
others they feed themselves; the Men I speak of, are such as make an
unreasonable and illegal Gain of Money, catching at the present Necessity of
others.

These Men consider not, that they are not to oppress the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor.

Oppress not, out of these Prohibitions, we must look to do their contraries;
since the Lord of Hosts in the Text, has commanded us for to show Compassion
every Man to his Brother, and that none of us should imagine Evil against his
Brother in his heart.

In the Text (you have seen) there are four Precepts, two Imperative, and two
Prohibitive: The first two, of Judgment and Mercy; the second, of Oppression
and Malice.

The Imperative Precepts are, Execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and
Compassion every Man to his Brother.

The Prohibitive Precepts; Oppress not the Widow, not the Fatherless, the
Stranger, nor the Poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his Brother in
your heart.

The Author of them both is God, Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying.

I have finished all the Parts, except the very last, which prohibits Malice;
And let none of you imagine Evil against his Brother in your heart.

I shall for order sake (now in the Conclusion) speak of this branch of the
Text, and somewhat the more largely, because it is to be presumed, that
Insolence and crossness of Temper brings many Persons hither; and that their
Prosecutions are rather the Effects of Malice, than Desires of Right; such Men's
impertinent, but evil and mischievous Imaginations, give unnecessary Trouble to
the Court and Country, and deserve the Magistrates Reproofs, and to meet with
Derision and Disappointment from all men.

As the Heart is the beginning of Life, and the Elaboratory of the vital
Spirits, so it is the Magazine and Storehouse of Humane Cogitations whither
good or bad, and whereon, as upon an Anvil, are forged those Thoughts which the
Tongue its Instrument brings to light; for so our Blessed Lord informs us,
Matt. 12.34.
That out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. A good Man out of
the good Treasure of the Heart, brings forth good things; and an evil Man out
of the evil Treasure, brings forth evil things. Out of the Heart (says our
Lord) proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-witness, Blasphemies; therefore the Holy Prophet shut up his Exhortation
with a Prohibition from such Offenses, nominating the place wherein they have
residence, and let none of you imagine evil against his Brother in your heart.

Here observe first, The Offense and Imagination of Evil made apparent by
Blasphemy, Envy, Calumny, Revenge, False-witness, Murder.

Secondly, The Residence of that Evil, in the Heart, let none of you imagine
evil against his Brother in your heart.

It Is a Negative Precept, whereby we are here first, and by St. Paul
afterward, commanded to abstain from all appearances of Evil; here from evil
Thoughts, there from evil Actions; for seldom does a perverse Imagination set a
Brood, but it hatcheth some dismal Exploit.

Thus he that gives himself to imagine Evil, will at last proceed to give
False-witness; first privately, and then publicly in Judgment; and in Judicial
Acts this is diversely committed:

First, By the false and unjust Accuser; and therefore the Law admonishes,
Lev. 19. Thou shall not stand against the Blood of thy Neighbor, thou shall
not accuse him wrongfully, and bring his Life in danger.

Secondly, By the Magistrate who pronounces an indirect Sentence.

Thirdly, By corrupt Advocates that patronize false Titles, as Tertullus abused
his Eloquence in disgracing St. Paul, Acts 24. any way to be a False Witness,
is a grievous thing; he commits Sin in the Violation of Justice, and by Lying
and Perjury; in every false Testimony a Man Sins against God, oppresses the
Innocent, and condemns his own Soul. For False-witness, the Punishment by the
Law of God was Retaliation. If the witness be a False-witness, and shall
testify falsely against his Brother; then shall you do unto him, as he thought
to have done unto his Brother, Deuteronomy. 19.18, 19.

So Haman was justly hanged on the same Gibbet that he had set up for Mordecai;
and Daniel's Accusers were cast into the Lion's Den, whither he was before
condemned. False Witnesses were by the Edict of the ancient Romans, thrown down
as Malefactors from the Tarpeian-hill.

This Malady has its original in the Heart of Man, but the Searcher of Hearts
can find all out, there is no dissembling with him that knows the very Thoughts
thereof. Though Joshua could not, yet God can immediately see through the most
curious Umbrages and lying Testimonials which the most Politic Gibeonites can
invent, though Falsities were never so cunningly couched, he will find them
out, though a French Tongue conspired with a Spanish Arrogance to frame a
Greekish Lie.

Therefore God will avenge the Hurt that we do to an Innocent Neighbor, if we
Blaspheme him either in Name, or in Person, as Jezebel procured Naboth to be
thought a Blasphemer of God and the King, and thereupon had him-Murthered: Of
this sort of Calumny or Backbiting there are four kinds.

First, Men begin with Evil Suspicions, of which Eliab was guilty, when he said
to his Brother David, I know thy Pride, and the Naughtiness of thy Heart, 1 Samuel 17.28.
for thou art come down that thou might see the Battle.

Secondly, They proceed therein, having itching Ears ready and open to receive
Detractions; such were Readiness, who leaned to those Promoters that informed
against David, till David demonstrated them to be false Men, by his sparing of
Readiness Life in the Cave at Engaddi.

The third procedure in this Vice, is by Rashness in Judging; but this our Lord
forbids in these pregnant words, Judge not, and you shall not be judged. And
this Evil is finished by a continual but an unhappy Inclination or malicious
Desire of Backbiting, the Laws utterly forbids this, Lev. 19.16. Thou shall not
go up and down as a Tail bearer amongst thy People: These being the most
Pestilent sort of Vagabonds, should be whipped from every House.

He that Back-bites his Neighbor, has Satan in his Mouth; he that hears the
Calumny, has him in his Ear; and he that believes it, has him in his Heart,
having cast out Charity, which is the Bond of Peace.

The Punishment that the Witty Comedian a lots them is, That all Libellers
should hang the Hearers by the Ears, and the Detractors by the Tongues. To
credit False Reports and Seditious News, is a sign of malevolent Manners, or of
childish Conditions: And therefore the Philosopher being asked what Beast did
bite the soarest, answered, Of wild Beasts, a Detractor; and of tame, a
Flatterer.

Therefore has our Great God forbidden all evil Surmises; yet having an Eye to
our Frailty, he would stint us betimes, lest we should proceed to wicked
Practices; therefore he stops the next Issue of an evil Heart, saying, Thou
shall not bear False-witness against thy Neighbor; forewarning us against all
Untruths and false Evidences. We must not admit of evil Thoughts, for these are
the first Actors of our Brothers Tragedy, for out of the Heart proceed evil
Thoughts, False-witness, Murders, etc. Here the Scene of bloody Thoughts is
finished, for Murder is either Internal or External; the Internal likewise is
Twofold, either conceived, as in Anger, Hatred, Desire of Revenge, or else
permitted by consenting to another Man's Death, Who knowing the Judgment of
God, (that they who do such things are worthy of death) not only do the same,
but have pleasure in, or favor them that do them, Romans 1.32.

The External is actually committed by hand, as Wounding, and so consequently
Slaying; by the Mouth, as Reviling, and giving Pernicious Counsel; by Help, as
administering Aid, and so being accessory to the Murder: This External Murder
is either wished in Words, attempted in Gestures, or perpetrated in Deed.

There is an External Act of Murder likewise forbidden, that is committed by
hasty Rage, Malice, Envy, etc.

The Law of God is Spiritual, and therefore it binds not only the Hands and
Tongue, but the Heart and Affections also: As our blessed Savior, the best
Interpreter of the Law teaches; He that is angry with his Brother without a
cause, in respect of his own Will and Purpose, has committed Manslaughter;
and therefore the Apostle says, He that hates his Brother is a Manslayer, 1.
John 3.15.

A good Physician does not only take away the Evil that is apparent, but also
removes the very Root of the Disease; therefore our blessed Savior not only
forbids to take heed of Murder, but of Anger also; for Homicide and Murder
are engendered by Anger and Rage.

You have now heard the Effects which an Evil Heart does produce, the
Inconveniences that it ensnares the Soul of Man with, let none of us therefore
be so defrauded and seduced, but rather to Execute true Judgment, and show
Mercy and Compassion every Man to his Brother; and oppress not the Widow, nor
the Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor, and let none of you imagine evil
against his Brother in your Heart.

That none of these Evils may be countenanced, the Laws of God and of this
Realm have constituted Judges and Officers to observe, and to forbid and punish
them.

And it did please Almighty God, to set before us the very Model of executing
Justice, by sending his great Officers upon the place to make their Inquest;
(which Method our Wise Laws have therefore espoused,) and my Lords the King's
Judges pursue it now in their several Circuits. It Is in 1. Sam. 7.15, 16, 17.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his Life. And he went from year to
year in Circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all
those places. And his return was to Ramah, for there was his House, and there
he judged Israel, and there he built an Altar unto the Lord.

Samuel began at Bethel where was the House of God, and at the finishing of his
Circuit at Ramah he built an Altar and praised God; which is the Foundation of
this Honorable and Solemn Audience, before which I having made such suitable
Observations (upon the Text) as the time and the public Affairs will admit of.

I will close up all with a very few words of general Advice, and public
Exhortation, desiring every Person in this great Assembly, seriously to
consider, as it becomes them in their Allegiance, That as on the one side the
King's Majesty has ended the late War gloriously, and is raising a solid and
defensive Superstructure upon the Foundation of the Peace: So the late
unparalleled Parliament (that Phenix-like can only arise again out of its own
Ashes of Dissolution) has gratefully and honorably provided for the King's
Support, that he may enjoy the complete Luster and Repose of his Successes. And
indeed, they that were not Zealous to Support our King, might justly have been
suspected to be in Pension with a Foreign King.

Our Dangers disappear and vanish, and our Charges will begin to lessen, which
though for many Years they have been great, yet were they our very Security.

Since therefore our public Charges, as well as our public Hazards, will
decline together, (unless evil and foolish Men, by clamouring unseasonably
against them, entail them upon themselves and us too) Let us unite in Amity and
Friendship; and forget all Names of Distinction, and decline all peevish and
clandestine Projects one against another: Then assuredly will our Enemies be
weakened and infatuated by our Reconciliation, and our own Interests be
strengthened and established; So that every discreet Observer may say with Holy
David: Behold! How good and joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.
A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ: Showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenanting. With a
Preface chiefly designed for the Satisfaction of Dissenters; and to exhort all
Men to Peace and Unity. The Fourth Edition, in Octavo. Price bound 2 s.

An Explication of the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the Lord's Prayer; with
the Addition of some Forms of Prayer. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Dialogue between two Protestants (in Answer to a Popish Catechism, called, A
Short Catechism against the Sectaries.) Plainly showing, that the Members of
the Church of England are no Sectaries, but true Catholics; and that our
Church is a sound Part of Christ's Holy Catholic Church. In 8o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Poetic Miscellanies. In 8o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Christian Monitor. Containing an Exhortation to a Holy Life. Price 3 d.
Those that are Charitably disposed, may have them for 20 s. the Hundred.

All Five written by the Reverend Jo. Rawlet, B.D. Author of the Christian
Monitor.

A Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters. In large Octavo.

Theory and Regulation of Love; a Moral Essay, in two Parts: To which are added
Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and Dr. More. The Second
Edition. In Octavo.

Practical Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
To which are added Reflections upon a late Essay concerning Human
Understanding. Vol. I. The third Edition. In large 8o.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects, Vol. III. In Octavo.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. IV. Price bound 5 s.

Letters Philosophical, Moral and Divine, to the Reverend Mr. J. Norris, with
his Answers. In large 8o.

Treatises upon several Subjects, formerly Printed Single, now Collected into
one Volume, viz. I. Reason and Religion. II. Reflections upon the Conduct of
Humane Life. III. The Charge of Schism continued. IV. Two Treatises concerning
Divine Light. V. Spiritual Counsel, or the Father's Advice to his Children.

All written by the Reverend Mr. John Norris, Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, in Four Books. The third Edition
with large Additions. By John Lock Gent.

Malebranch's Search after Truth complete, in two Volumes Octavo.

Practical Discourses on the Parables of our Blessed Savior. By F. Brag
Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.

The Roman History, from the building of the City, to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar. By Laurence Echard A. M. of Christ's College in
Cambridge. Vol. I. The third Edition.

The Roman History, from the Settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar, to
Constantine the Great. Vol. II.

A New Voyage into Italy, with necessary Instructions for those who undertake
the same. By Maxilian Misson. In two Vol. Done out of French, and illustrated
with Sculptures.


