THE Present STATE OF THE UNIVERSE, Or an ACCOUNT of I. The Rise, Births,
Names, Matches, Children, and near Allies of all the present Chief Princes of
the World. II. Their Coats of Arms, Motto's, Devises, Liveries, Religions, and
Languages. III. The Names of their Chief Towns, with some Computation of the
Houses and Inhabitants. Their Chief Seats of Pleasure, and other Remarkable
things in their Dominions. IV. Their Revenues.
To which Are added some other Curious Remarks; as also an Account of
Commonwealths, relating to the foregoing Heads.

Parvula sic totum pervisit pupula Mundum. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold
by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1694.

Presented to R. Hook by his Worthy Friend the Author. July 4. 1694.

To the HONORABLE CHARLES COTTINGTON, Esquire.
SIR,
HIstory being much the Study of a Gentleman, I have presumed a Dedication of
these few Praeludia, relating to it, to your self. Not but your own Reading,
Conversation and Travels may have already furnished you with far more, and more
accurate Particulars in this kind, than my poor Essays may afford? but what I
have written is chiefly intended for your hopeful Offspring; to whom I
conceived a brief Idea of the World in this kind, relating to those chief
Potentates under whose Dominion, God, at present, has put it, might be of use
for initiating their Understandings, till being come to more mature years,
their own Studies and Observations in Travels, may inure them to well digested
Thoughts, concerning the various Governments of the World, whereby they may be
rendered serviceable to the Nation in which they live. It Is well known how
Eminent for Parts and Services to this Nation, the late Lord Cottington, your
Uncle, was: whose Family, a few years since, being reduced in the Male-Line,
only to your self; you see Providence by vouchsafing you three flourishing.
Branches of Male-Issue, has given you good Hopes, and a fair Prospect of a long
Continuance of it. And as the many Favors I have received from you, have
highly engaged me to wish Prosperity to it; so whenever any thing shall be
suggested to my Understanding whereby I may be a Mean to promote it, it shall
most readily be put in Execution by,

Sir, Your most Obliged Kinsman, and most Humble Servant, John Beaumont, Jun.

THE Present STATE OF THE UNIVERSE, etc.
The House of Austria.
THE Illustrious House of Austria, having the largest extent of Dominions among
the European Princes, I have thought fit to begin with that. This House owes
its Original to the Earls of Habsburg; whom a late Writer derives from the
Counts of Mount Aventine, of the ancient Perleonian Family; which was formerly
of the greatest Repute and Authority of any in Rome; and had its seat on Mount
Aventine. Albertus Dives Anicius Perleonius, a person Descended of the said
Family, was driven out of Rome, An. 1144. by the Arnaldistick Heretics,
together with his Brother Rudolph, in defense of the Roman See. Whereupon he
traveled into Switzerland, and there married the Daughter of Wernerus, last
Earl of Habsburg, of the Anician Perleonian Race.

This Albertus Dives Anicius was Great Grandfather to Rudolph the fourth Earl
of Habsburg, the first German Emperor of the Anician Perleonian Family.

This Rudolph the first, was the Common Father of the Austrian Family, born May
1. 1218. He was elected Emperor An. 1273. by the unanimous consent of the
Princes of the Empire, and crowned the same year at Aix la Chapelle, and at a
Diet held at Ausburg An. 1282. he had Austria settled on his eldest Son Albert
(who was first Duke of Austria) and Schwaben on Rudolph, his youngest Son.
Philip the first, descended from Albert, was born An. 1478. and An. 1496. he
married the Princess Johanna, eldest Daughter and Heiress to his Catholic
Majesty, Ferdinand of Spain; in whose right, he immediately became possessed of
the Kingdoms of Castile and Arragon.

He had for his Sons Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand the first; betwixt which
two Princes, there was a division made of the Provinces, when the House of
Austria became likewise divided into the Spanish and German Lines.

The Spanish Line.
I. THE Author of the Spanish Line was Charles the fifth, born at Ghent, in
Flanders, An. 1500. At fourteen years of Age he had the Government of the
Netherlands given him. At sixteen he was Crowned King of Spain. At nineteen
elected Emperor, and Crowned the year following at Aix la Chappelle. He
annexed the Duchy of Milain to his House for ever. He concluded a Peace with
the Protestants at Passaw, An. 1552, and three years after he Abdicated his
Government, leaving the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, and the Kingdom of
Spain, with the Low Countries, and its other dependencies to his Son Philip,
Great Grandfather to the present King of Spain, Charles the Second, who was
born Nov. 6. 1661, and on the 21. of December following was Christened
Carolus-Joachimus-Josephus-Antonius-Leonardus. He succeeded in the Kingdom at
the death of his Father Philip the Fourth; who died Sept. 17. 1665. and in the
year 1675, being entered on the fifteenth year of his Age, he took on him the
Government of his Estates; whereas during his minority, the supreme Government
was under the Regency of the Queen his Mother, named Mary-Anne, Daughter of the
Emperor Ferdinand the Fourth, and is now Dowager of Spain. She was born Oct,
12. 1631. and married to Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, Nov. 7. 1649.

This King, Aug. 31. An. 1679. espoused the Princess Mary-Louise of Orleans,
eldest Daughter to Philip, Duke of Orleans, by the Princess Henrietta-Maria,
youngest Daughter to our late King Charles the First. The Prince of Conde
espoused her in the Chapel of the House of Fontainebleau, in the name of the
King of Spain; and the Marriage was Consummated Nov. 19. of the said year 1679,
near Burgos, in Old Castile. She was born March 7. 1662. And this Queen dying
without Issue An. 1689. he the same year married Maria-Anna, Daughter of
Philip-William, Duke of Newburg, and Elector Palatine, the present Queen, born
Oct. 28. 1667.

II. For Arms, he bears Quarterly: the first Quarter Counter-Quartered: in the
first and fourth Gules, a Castle triple towered Or, each with three
Battlements, bordered Azure, Purfled Sable, for Castile. In the second and
third Argent, a Lion Gules, Crowned Langued and armed Or, for Leon. In the
second great Quarter, Or, four great Pallets Gules, for Aragon. Party Or, four
Pallets also Gules, betwixt two Flanches Argent, charged with as many Eagles
Sable, membred, becked and crowned Azure, for Arragon and Sicily. These two
great Quarters grafted in Base, Argent, a Pomegranate Verte, stalked and leaved
of the same, open and seeded Gules, for Granada. On the whole Argent, five
Escutcheons Azure, placed crosswise, each charged with five Besants Argent,
placed in Saltier, for Portugal. The Shield bordered Gules, with seven Towers
Or, three in Chief, two in Fesse, and two toward the Base, for Algarve. In the
third great Quarter, Gules, a Fesse Argent, for Austria, Coupe and supported by
Ancient Burgundy, which is, bendy of six pieces Or and Azure, bordered Gules.
In the fourth great Quarter, Azure, seem of Flower de Luces Or, with a border
Compone Argent and Gules, for Modern Burgundy. Coupe Or. supported Sable, a
Lion Or, for Brabant. These two great Quarters charged with an Escutcheon Or,
and a Lion Sable, armed and langued Gules, for Flanders. Party Or, an Eagle
Sable, for Anvers, the Capital City of the Holy Empire.

For Crest, a Crown trefoiled Or, raised with eight Diadems, or Semicircles
terminating in a Mond Or; which is the Crest of Spain. The Collar of the Order
of the Golden Fleece encompasses the Shield, and on the sides of it stand the
two Pillars of Hercules, viz. on each side one, with this Motto, Plus ultra.

The foresaid Order was refused by Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, as
having been founded by a Duke, who was Vassal to the Crown of France, viz.
Philip, surnamed, the Good, Duke of Burgundy, who Instituted it at Bruges, An.
1429. It may be worth notice that the Arms of Castile and Leon are the first,
which have been born Quartered.

The Ordinary Device of some Kings of Spain, has been this, Omnes Contra nos,
and nos Contra Omnes.

The Title of the Most Catholic King, was given by Pope Alexander the Sixth to
Ferdinand the Fifth, and his Successors, for having rooted out of Spain the
Moors and Sarracens.

You may also note that the eldest Sons of the Kings of Spain are called
Princes of the Asturias; as those of the German Emperors, Arch Dukes of
Austria. Those of the Kings of England, Princes of Wales. Those of the Kings of
Portugal, Princes of Algarves. Those of the Dukes of Savoy, Princes of Piemont,
etc.

The King of Spain's Livery is of a Yellow color. His Majesty Professes the
Roman Religion, and uses the Spanish Language.

III. Madrid, situate in New Castile, having been the place of Residence of the
Kings of Spain, since the time of Philip the Second, is become, from a Village,
to be the most populous Town of all Spain. The Houses are built of Brick, and
the greatest part four Stories high, all having Iron Balcones. All the upper
Rooms in the Town belong to the King, who is allowed for them. There are in it
several Public Edifices very beautiful; among others the famous Square for the
Bull Feast. This Town is about the bigness of Bristol, and is kept very
nastily, the filth and excrements lying in the Streets; tho on this account
excusable; because the Inhabitants who drink Well Water there, are fearful to
sink necessary Conveniences, left the Waters should be tainted thereby.

About seven Miles North from Madrid is seated the Escurial, or Monastery of S.
Lawrence, built by King Philip the Second. Its a Structure so splendid,
magnificent and sumptuous, that some think no Building in times past, or at
present comparable to it. The front toward the West is adorned with three
stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leads into a most magnificent Temple, and
a Monastery, in which are one hundred and fifty Monks of the Order of S.
Hierom, and a College. That on the right Hand opens into diverse Offices,
belonging to the Monastery. That on the left, into Schools and Outhouses
belonging to the College. At the four Corners there are four Turrets of
excellent Workmanship, and for hight Majestical. Toward the North is the Kings
Palace. On the South parts diverse beautiful and sumptuous Galleries, and on the
East part sundry Walks and Gardens, very pleasing and delightful. It contains
in all thirty seven Court and Cloisters, Eleven thousand Windows, Eight hundred
Pillars, and is indeed a most noble Structure. There are in it Seven
Communities, seven Priors, and a Grand Prior. The Revenue is above Thirty
thousand Crowns per annum; and there is a Library in it, containing above
Eighteen thousand Books, and among them a great many Arabic Manuscripts.

Toledo is the Capital City of New Castile, being situate near the midst of
Spain, on the River Tagus. Its about Four Miles in compass, and is well
fortified and beautified with a good number of stately Edifices; and by reason
of its situation in the midst of Spain, its well inhabited both by Nobility,
Merchants and Scholars, beside such Soldiers and their Officers who are
continually garrisoned in it. Its also honored with the Sea of an Archbishop,
who is the Metropolitan of Spain, and President for the most part, of the
Inquisition, having a Revenue of Three hundred thousand Crowns per annum, and
Seventeen other Towns under his Jurisdiction, both in Spirituals and Temporals.

Granada is the Capital City of the Kingdom called by that name, whose whole
Circuit is said to be Seven Miles; it having contained in the time of the Moors
Two hundred thousand Souls, and where the Houses of the best sort are, for the
most part, built of Free stone, with delicate and artificial Masonry, showing
their Magnificence.

Sevil, the Capital City of Andalusia, in the Kingdom of Corduba, is looked
upon by some to be the fairest City of all Spain. It is in compass six Miles,
divided into two parts by the River Baetis, on which its seated; but joined
together by a strong and beautiful Bridge; the whole environed with beautiful
Walls, and adorned with many magnificent and stately Buildings; as Palaces,
Churches and Monasteries. It has a flourishing University, adorned with a
goodly Library, furnished by Diego, the Son of Christopher Columbus the first
Founder of it, with Twelve thousand Volumes in several Languages, gathered
together with extraordinary Care and Charge, and endowed with a fair Revenue,
for the Maintenance and Enlargement of it. Its also a Town particularly famous
for Traffic, here being the public Emporeum of Spain for Wines, Oils, and
Commodities brought from the Indies, and other Foreign Parts. So much
concerning the Towns of greatest Note in Spain.

The King of Spain has likewise in Italy the City of Milain, being the fairest
and biggest City of all Lombardy, containing Seven Miles in compass, and Two
hundred thousand People. Its seated betwixt the Rivers Ticinus and Addua, which
run hard by it to the great Convenience of the Inhabitants, both for having
things brought to them at cheap Rates, and for vending and dispersing their
Manufactures, which are of great esteem in most parts of the World. It
flourishes in all Riches, and in the Beauty of its Edifices, both public and
private; but three especially commended for their Magnificence; the Castle, the
Hospital, and the Cathedral. Its fortified with Walls, Ramparts, and deep
Trenches, and the Castle in it is so strong, that its judged impregnable. The
Trade is so great, that private Shops there equal public Storehouses of other
Places, and the People are so rich, that the Wife of every Mechanic goes in
her Silks and Taffaties.

The King of Spain has also in Italy the City of Naples, which is the Capital
of that Kingdom, and contains Seven Miles in compass. It Is honored with the
Seat of a Viceroy, and the continual Resort, if not constant Residence of most
of the great Men of the Realm; which makes the private Buildings to be very
graceful, and the public stately; and it had increased much more in Buildings,
if the King had not forbidden it by his special Edict; and this partly at the
persuasion of his Noblemen, who feared, that if there were not such a
Restraint, their Vassals would forsake the Country to inhabit here, so to enjoy
the Privileges and Exemptions of the Royal City; but principally upon
Jealousy, and point of State, the better to prevent all Revolts and Mutinies,
which in most populous Cities are of greatest danger. In the Account of
Masaniello's Rebellion at Naples, Ann. 1647, published by the Lord Alexander
Giraffi, we find that in Naples, at that time were above Six hundred thousand
Souls: for he there says, that Masaniello, on the Fourth Day of his Rebellion,
had One hundred and fifty thousand Men bearing Arms under him, besides Boys and
Women. Now allowing as many Women in the City as Men, it makes Three hundred
thousand, and allowing all under Sixteen Years of Age in the City to equal in
number the Men and Women, it makes Six hundred thousand, not counting decrepid
persons, which make a Sixth Part of Mankind, nor all those persons who adhering
to the Viceroy, never followed Masaniello. Scarce any Country of Europe may be
preferred before the Kingdom of Naples for its Beauty, and excellency of its
Soil, and its great plenty of generous Wines, Fruits and Corn, or what else may
afford Delight and Pleasure.

I may add in the last place, that besides Brussels in the Low Countries, a
well peopled Town Four Miles in compass, and Ghent, the greatest City of all
the Netherlands, the Birth place of Charles the Fifth, who finding the
Inhabitants inclined to Sedition, built there the first Citadel, which was
built in Europe: the King of Spain has two considerable Towns in America. In
the Southern Division of it, Lima was of later years the chief Town (but since
ruined by an Earthquake) tho formerly Cusco was the chief Town, this being the
ancient Seat Royal of the Ingas, or Peruvian Emperors, (the word Inga
signifying an Emperor, as Capa Inga, by which name they sometimes called them,
the only Emperor) who, the more to beautify this City, commanded every one of
the Nobility to build here a Palace for their continual Abode. The Emperor's
Palace, now defaced, was seated on a lofty Mountain, and built of such huge and
massy Stones, that the Spaniards thought it rather to have been the Work of
Devils than of Men The spacious Marketplace there has been always esteemed as
the greatest and most regular found in any Town of America: its Figure is
square, and at its Angles, it gives an opening to four great Roads, tending in
a straight Line toward the four principal parts of the World, and to the most
considerable Provinces of the Empire of Peru, made by the Ingas of a vast
length and breadth with a most incredible Charge and Pains for the use of their
Subjects. To say a little of the Rise of the Peruvian Monarchs, Heylin tells
us, that the Peruvians were generally governed by the Chief of their Tribes, as
in all Countries else, where neither the Arms of Foreigners, nor the Ambition
of some few of the Natives had diminished any thing of those natural Rights;
nor subject to any one Supreme, till these later times, the Ingas of Peru
growing into their Greatness but a little before their Fall. Their Territory at
first was not above Five or Six Leagues in compass, situate in that part of the
Country where Cusco now stands. They were opposed at their first Encroachments
by their Neighbors, and had not prevailed to their Greatness, had they not
used the Policy (however they got it) which has been used by many in these
parts of the World, in Imitation of the Truth, conveyed down to us by Moses and
the Prophets, from Noah and the Patriarchs. For the Ingas gave out that their
Family had not only been the Seminary from which Mankind came, but the Authors
of that Religion also, which was then in use; particularly that the whole Earth
had been destroyed by a Deluge, except only seven persons, who had hid
themselves in a Cave, called Paticambo, where having lived in safety till the
Fury of the Waters had been assuaged, they came abroad at last, and repeopled
the Country. That Viracocha the Creator, and great God of Nature, had appeared
to one of them, and taught him how, and with what Rites he would be worshipped;
which Rites were afterward received over all Peru: and finally, that the same
Viracocha had appeared lately to the Chief of their Family, assuring him, that
he would aid him with invisible Forces against all their Enemies. This soon
gained Belief among those Barbarians, and drew many to take part with the
Ingas, whereby they became victorious. This is supposed to have happened Four
hundred years before the Spaniards put an end to this flourishing Kingdom, an.
1533, within which time they had brought all the Country, which we now call
Peru, and many of the adjacent Provinces under their Dominion. The Ingas were
much reverenced by their Subjects, and so faithfully served, that never any of
their Subjects were found guilty of Treason: nor wanted they good Arts whereby
to indear their Subjects, to keep them out of leisure to foment new Factions.
The way of Indearment was by the fair and satisfactory Distribution of the
Spoils gotten in the Wars, whether Lands or Goods; all which they divided into
three parts, allotting the first unto the Service of the Gods; the second for
the maintenance of the King, his Court, and Nobles; the third to the relief of
the common People. When there was no Cause of Wars, they kept the People busied
in Works of Magnificence, as building of Palaces in every one of the conquered
Provinces, which served not only as Forts to assure the Conquest, but were
employed as Store Houses to lay up Provisions to be distributed among the
People in times of Dearth. But that which was the Work of greatest Trouble, and
chiefest Use, was the Cross-ways that they made all over the Country, the one
upon the Mountains, the other on the Plains, extending Five hundred Leagues in
length; a Work to be preferred before any of Rome and Egypt: for they were
forced to raise the Ground in many places to the height of the Mountains, and
to lay the Mountains level with the flattest Plains, to cut through some Rocks,
and underprop others that were ruinous, to make even such Ways as were uneasy,
and support the Precipices, and in the Plains to vanquish so many Difficulties,
as the uncertain Foundation of a sandy Country must needs carry with it. And
for the Nobility, the Inga did not only command them to reside in Cusco, to be
assured of their persons, but caused them to have their Children brought up
there, that they might serve as Hostages for their Fathers Loyalty. They
ordered also that all such as repaired to Cusco, the Imperial City, should be
attired according to their own Country Fashion, so to prevent those Leagues and
Associations, which otherwise, without any Notice, or Observation, might be
made amongst them; and many such politic Institutions were by them devised.

As for the Names of the Ingas of Peru, Mango-Capac descended of the chief of
the first seven Families, was the first who laid the Foundation of this
puissant Monarchy. The Fourteenth Inga of this Race was Atabaliba, who was
vanquished and taken Prisoner by Francisco Pizarro, the Spanish Commander at
Caxamalca, in the Country of Lima; where, tho he gave him for a Ransom of his
Life and Liberty, an House piled up on all sides with Gold and Silver, valued
(as some say) at ten Millions of Crowns, yet they slew him at last; in whose
place Pizarro substituted his second Brother, called Mango-Capac the Second,
who was the Fifteenth Inga, and who, after many Vicissicudes of Fortune, was at
last slain in the City of Cusco, and so the Kingdom of the Ingas began and
ended in a Prince of the same Name, as it has happened to many Estates.

Armorial Ensigns, for the Distinction of Persons, being a thing of common
notion, among Mankind, have been found, in some sort, from all Antiquity in all
Nations, more or less; and the Gentilitial Arms of the Ingas of Peru, on their
first Discovery, were found to be, a Field Argent, charged with a Rainbow
proper, betwixt two Snakes extended, also proper.

As to the Forces and Revenues of these Ingas, doubtless they were exceeding
great; for tho (as Heylin says) we find no particular Musters, which they made
of their Men, nor what great Armies they drew with them into the Field, yet by
their great Successes, and many Victories, we may conclude them to have been
Masters of great Bands of Men, and skilful in the Arts of Conduct; nor can we
otherwise conjecture at the Greatness of their yearly Revenues, but by the
Greatness of their Treasure, so infinite and almost incredible, that all the
Vessels of the King's House, his Table and Kitchen were of Gold and Silver.
Statues of Giants in the Wardrobe, together with the Resemblance in proportion
and bigness of all the Beasts, Birds, Trees, Plants, and Fishes, which were
found in that Kingdom, of the purest Gold: Ropes, Budgets, Troughs, Chests, all
of Gold or Silver, Billets of Gold, piled up together, as if they had been
Billets of Wood, cut out for the Fire, three Houses full of Pieces of Silver:
all which besides infinite of other Treasures fell into the Hands of a few poor
Spaniards.

In the Northern Division of America, called Mexicana, the King of Spain has
Mexico, the chief City of all America. It was formerly situate in Lakes and
Islands, and built on Piles like Venice, every where interlaced with the
pleasant Currents of fresh and Salt Waters, and carrying a Face of more Civil
Government than any of America, tho nothing, if compared with Europe. But the
Town being destroyed by Cortez, its now built on firm Land, on the Edge of the
Salt Lake, and bordering on a large and spacious Plain. Its in compass six
Miles, and contains six thousand Houses of the Spaniards, and sixty thousand of
Indians. The Inhabitants are so very rich, that generally the Merchants,
Tradesmen, and Artificers go in greater State, and more splendid Equipage, than
any People elsewhere of the like condition. The Inhabitants of that Country were
governed by the Chief of their Tribes till the year 1322, that Acamapitzli was
elected the first King; who with his Successors encroach'd upon their
Neighbors, till the year 1502, when Montezuma, the Second came to be their
tenth King, who, who in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign was subdued by Cortez,
and the City was taken, sacked and burnt by the Spaniards, assisted by many
Confederates of that Country, August 13. 1521, it being in the time of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth.

The Kings of Mexico are said to have worn a Crown, resembling that which is
now used by the Dukes of Venice. And the Name of the first Mexican King being
Acamapitzli, which in the Mexican Tongue signifies an handful of Reeds (as
Acosta writes) they carried in their public Ensigns, in memory of that great
Prince, An Hand grasping many Arrows of Reeds: and the peculiar Arms of Mexico
are, a Field Argent, charged with an Eagle Proper, holding in his Right Foot a
Bird, the other standing on a Cochinele Tree, proper; growing out of a Stone.

The Revenues of the Kings of Mexico are thought to have been almost infinite,
raised out of all Commodities, and paid in kind, whether natural or artificial
only; the King participating of the Fruits of all Men's Labors, and sharing
with them in their Wealth, some paying in Cups full of Powder of Gold, of two
handfuls apiece, some Diamonds and Beads of Gold; Plates of Gold of three
quarters of a yard long, and four Fingers broad, Turquois Stones, Golden
Targets, rich Feathers, Pictures, etc. not to mention things of inferior Value;
all which in such a wealthy and large Estate, must needs afford him a Revenue
equal to the greatest Monarchs.

IV. The Revenues of the King of Spain, which ordinarily arise out of his
Estates, are computed to be nine millions of Crowns yearly, viz. four from his
Dominions in Italy, three from the West Indies, and two from his Kingdoms of
Spain. He receives besides yearly the Revenues of all the Masterships of the
great Orders of his Kingdom, which amount to an hundred and fifty thousand
pounds of yearly Rents, beside the opportunity of preferring Servants of the
greatest merit. Moreover the Free Gifts and Contributions of his Subjects, and
his Usualties, and extraordinary ways of raising Moneys, supply him with vast
Sums: and nevertheless this King is not counted to be rich in Treasure; his
Expenses being very great in keeping Forts and Garrisons in many parts of his
Estates, and in maintaining Frontier Places, and an Armada for conducting his
Plate-Fleet, etc. Its observable that the Kingdom of Spain, according to the
least Computation, is said to be five hundred miles in compass more than
France, and nevertheless France is esteemed to contain near double the number
of Inhabitants; which has been occasioned by the Extirpation of the Jews and
Moors, and by sending out yearly so many of their Subjects to Foreign
Plantations, etc. they acting herein contrary to the Romans, who finding
nothing more necessary for great and important Enterprises than multitudes of
Men, employed all their Studies to increase their Numbers, by Marriages,
Colonies, and such helps, making their conquered Enemies free Denisons of their
Commonwealth; by which means the number of the Roman Citizens became so great,
that Rome could not be ruined by any Forces but its own.

The German Line of the House of Austria.
I. AS Charles the Fifth, eldest Son to Philip the First, was Author of the
Spanish Line of the House of Austria, so his Brother Ferdinand was Author of
the German Line. He was born in Spain, 1503. Crowned King of Hungary and
Bohemia in the Right of his Empress Anne, Daughter to Uladislaus, King of
Hungary, 1527, Elected King of the Romans, anno. 1531, and Emperor, 1556; from
whom is descended

Leopold the Sixth, but first Emperor of the Name, and Fourteenth Emperor of
Germany, who was Born Jun. 9. anno 1640; he was Christened
Leopoldus-Ignatius-Franciscus-Balthazar-Josephus-Felicianus. He was nominated
King of Hungary at Presburg, Jun. 27. 1655; King of Bohemia at Prague, Aug. 2.
1656: Elected King of the Romans at Francfort, on the Main, Jun. 18. 1658, and
Crowned Emperor Jul. 22. of the same year, in the same Town; having been
Elected on the eleventh, where the three Ecclesiastical Electors rendered
themselves, the others sent their Ambassadors; as also the French King, the
King of Spain and others.

He had, for a first Wife, Margarida-Maria-Teresa of Austria, Daughter to
Philip the Fourth King of Spain, and Sister to the late Queen of France. He
espoused her by proxy at Madrid, April 12. 1663, and she died March 20. 1673.
He had by her two Sons and two Daughters, but three of these Children died very
young; there remaining only one Daughter living, named
Maria-Antonia-Josepha-Rosatia-Petronilla, who was born Jan. 18. 1669: and
married to Maximilian-Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, ann. 1685, or 86.

He has had, for a second Wife, Claudia Felicitas, Archduchess of Inspurc,
Daughter to the Archduke Ferdinand: whom the Emperor espoused, Oct. 15. in the
same year that his first Empress died, viz. ann. 1673. And this Empress died
April 8. ann. 1676. She had two Daughters by the Emperor, but both short-lived.

For a third choice, the Emperor married Jan. 6. An. 1677.
Maria-Magdalena-Teresa-Eleonora, Countess Palatine of Neuburg, she being the
eldest Daughter of Philip-William, Duke of Neuburg, and Elector Palatine. She
was born Jan. 6. 1655. Crowned Queen of Hungary, in the Town of Oldenburg,
December. 9. 1681. And the Emperor has the following Issue by her.

1. Josephus-Jacobus Ignatius-Joannes-Antonius-Eustachius, who was born July
16. Old Style, An. 1678. and is styled Archduke of Austria, at whose birth the
Duchess of Newburg carried the Empress, her Daughter, a Bed and a Cradle of
Silver. He was Crowned King of Hungary An. 1688. and chosen King of the Romans
An. 1689. 2. Maria-Elizabetha-Licia-Teresa-Josepha, born December 13. 1680. 3.
Maria-Anna Josepha-Antonina-Regina, born Sept. 17. 1683. 4. Maria-Teresa, born
Aug. 22. 1684. 5.
Carolus-Franciscus-Josephus-Wenceslaus-Balthasar-Joannes-Antonius Ignatius,
born Oct. 1. 1685. 6. Maria-Josepha-Collecta-Antonia, born March 6. Old Style
1687. 7. Anna-Josepha-Antonina-Magdalena-Gabriele, born March 28. 1689. Old
Style.
The Emperor has but one Sister living, named Eleanora-Maria-Josepha, born May
21. 1653, and An. 1670, she was married to Michael Wisnowitski, the late King
of Poland, elected upon King Casimirs Resignation of that Crown. Since his
decease, An. 1678. she was married to the famous Charles, Duke of Lorain, whom
its conceived she had married before, if he had been chosen King of Poland, as
he stood for it, with Wisnowitski, upon the Election.

II. For Armorial Ensigns the Emperor bears Quarterly. 1. Barwise, Argent and
Gules, of eight pieces, for Hungary. 2. Argent, a Lion Gules, the Tail noued,
and passed in Saltier, crowned, langed, and armed, Or, for Bohemia. 3. Gules, a
Fesse Argent, for Austria. Party, and bendwise, Argent and Azure, a border
Gules for Ancient Burgundy. 4. Quarterly, in the first and last, Gules a Castle
tripple towered Or-purfled Sable, for Castile. In the second and third Argent,
a Lion Purple, for Leon. The Shield crested with an Imperial Crown, closed, and
raised in the shape of a Miter, having betwixt the two points a Diadem
surmounted with a Globe and Cross, Or. The Diadem represents the Empire, and of
the two Points, one denotes Denmark, and the other Bohemia. This Shield, which
is environed with a Collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece, is placed on the
Breast of an Eagle, displayed Sable, in a Feld Or, Diadem'd, membred and becked
Gules; holding a naked Sword in the right Talon, and a Scepter in the left: the
two Heads signify (as some judge) the Eastern and Western Empires. The Motto
is, Uno avulso non deficit alter. This Emperors peculiar Devise is, Pax and
salus Europae. His Livery is of a Yellow color. He professes the Roman
Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language.

III. Vienna, seated on the River Danubius in Austria, and not much differing
from the Latitude of Paris, is the Capital City of the Hereditary Countries
belonging to the Emperor, which are Austria and Bohemia, Hungary being
Elective: and its the ordinary place of Residence of their Imperial Majesty's.
Its the strongest Town of the Empire, and one of the fairest. The Ditch of it
is large and very deep; into which also they can let the River; tho it be
commonly kept dry, lest they should incommode their deep Cellars. The whole
compass, taking in the Suburbs, makes a very large Circuit; but the City itself
which is walled in, may be about three Miles in Circumference; as populous for
the bigness of the place, as most great Cities. There are in it Turks, Tartars,
Italians, Grecians, Transylvanians, Sclavonians, Hungarians, Croatians,
Spaniards, French, Germans, Polanders, etc. all in their proper Habits, a
pretty diversified object to behold. There is a Bridge in it made by the
crossing of two Streets at equal Angles, the ground of one Street being as high
as the tops of the Houses of the other, so that to continue it, they were
forced to build a Bridge, or Arch in the lower Street, to let the upper to pass
over it. The City is fairly built of Stone, and well paved: many Houses are of
six Stories high, and are somewhat flat Rooft, after the Italian manner: each
private House has such store of Cellarage for all occasions, that, as much of
the City seems to be underground, as is above it: the Cellars being very deep,
sometimes four Cellars, one under another: they are archt, and have two pair of
Stairs to descend into them: some have an open place in the middle of each
Roof, to let the Air in and out from the Street, somewhat after the manner of
the Mines. At the entrance over the Gate of the Imperial Palace are set in
Capital Letters, the five Vowels A. E. I. O. U. which by some are interpreted
thus. Austriae Est Imperare Orbi Universo. The Front of one of the Jesuits
Colleges opens into a fair Piazza, in the middle whereof stands a large high
Composite Column, of Copper, upon a white Stone, with four Angels with
Escutcheons, and on the top the Blessed Virgin; Inscriptions also, in which the
Emperor Dedicates Austria unto her Patronage. Tho the Spire of Landshute in
Bavaria be accounted the highest in Germany, and that of Strasburg the neatest
and fairest, yet that of Vienna is the largest and strongest. Its accounted
above four hundred sixty five Foot high; being about half way up three hundred
thirty eight Steps, in a Chamber, or Room of it there is a Clock, whose Case
being made of Wood, was in part burnt down by Lightning, and therefore there is
Water always kept in this place to extinguish the Fire, if any should again
happen, and a Man continually Watches in the place where the Bells hang. No
place abounds more with Musicians than Vienna, because the Emperor delights in
it, Composing well himself. They are there of opinion that the number and
vallue of the Books in the Emperors Library yield to none, but rather excel
any other Library in Europe. There can scarce be a more admirable Collection
than the Manuscripts in part of the first Chamber, of Hebrew, Syriack, Arabic,
Turcick, Armenian, Aethiopick, and Chinese Books. The choicest Books in the
famous Library of Buda, belonging to King Matthias Corvinus, Son to Hunniades,
are now in it: and the Emperor has a right to have two Coppies of all Books
printed in Germany.

Prague, situate on the River Muldaw, is the Metropolis of Bohemia, and happily
the greatest Town of the Empire, it consisting of three Towns, named, the Old,
the New, and the Lesser, each having their several Customs, Laws and
Magistrates. This City is rather large than fair, the Streets being in Winter
very dirty, and of ill smell in Summer: the Buildings, for the most part of
Clay and Timber clapped together without Art, and as little beauty. Its thought
that there are more Jews in it than in any other Town of Europe, some counting
near Ten thousand.

Presburg, while the Turk had Buda, was the chief City of the Kingdom of
Hungary, and the Imperial Crown was there kept.

Buda is nobly seated, on the Banks of the greatest River of Europe, where it
runs in one entire Stream, the City rising up by degrees to the top of Hills,
affording from most Streets of the Town a prospect of twenty Miles, or more, on
the other side of the Danube, as far as a Man's Eye can reach, which, with the
view of Peste, and the long Bridge of Boats, and the beautiful fruitful Country
about it, makes it extremely delightful, and was the Royal Seat of the
Hungarian Kings and Queens, till Solomon the Magnificent entered it, Aug. 3.
1541. The natural Baths of Buda are esteemed the noblest of Europe, both for
their large and hot Springs, and for the magnificence of their Buildings. The
Turks bathe much, and tho little curious in most of their private Houses, yet
are they very sumptuous in their public Buildings, as their Chars, or
Caravansaras, Mosches, Bridges and Baths declare. In Buda there are eight
Baths; that called of the green Pillars, tho now they are red, is impregnated
with a petrifying Juice, which discerns itself on the sides of the Bath, upon
the Spouts and other places, and makes a gray Stone. The exhalation of the
Bath, reverberated by the Cupula, by the Irons extended from one Column to
another, and by the Capitals of the Pillars, forms long Stones like Icicles,
which hang to all those places. One Bath there has a white Water of a
sulphurous smell, and if money be rubbed betwixt the Fingers half a minute,
while the hot Water falls from a Spout, it gilds it. The hottest Bath there has
neither color, smell, nor taste differing from common Water, and deposes no
sediment; only the sides of the Bath are green, and have a fungous substance
all over.

Hamburg is the chief City of Holsatia; Munster of Westphalia; Erford of the
Landgraviate of Thuningia; Ausburg of Suabia; Francfort, on the Oder, of the
New Marca of Brandenburg; Visburg of Franconia; Brunswick of the Duchy of the
Lower Saxony; Inspure of those that belong to the Count of Tirolis; Bremen of
its Duchy.

IV. The Revenues of the Empire are esteemed by Bolerus Seven millions of
Crowns yearly; tho the Tribute paid by the Free, or Imperial Cities, being in
number about sixty, amount only to 1500 l. per ann. The Princes also, and Free
Cities are bound to aid the Emperor in the time of War against the Turk with
Three thousand five hundred eighty five Horse, and Sixteen thousand Foot; which
he may Challenge without troubling the Diets for it; but all this is but a
small addition to his own Estates.

The Duke of Lorain being nearly Allied to, and having his dependence on the
Emperor, I think it proper for me to speak of him here.

1. A late Writer says, Antiquity gives us not the least reason to doubt, but
the Family of Lorain had the same Original with those of Austria, Wirtenburg
and Baden: for Gerhard of the Ancient Landgraves of Alsatia (the Old Family of
Lorain, descended from Charlemayne being extinct) was Created Duke of Lorain,
by the Emperor Henry the Third An. 1048. from whom this Duke is descended.

The late famous Duke of Lorain, Carolus Leopoldus-Nicolaus-Sextus, was born in
April, An. 1643. and having been married to the Queen Dowager of Poland, as its
said before, he has left behind him the following Children, born at Inspure, in
the Principality of Tyrolis.

1. Leopoldus-Josephus-Carolus-Agapetus-Hyacynthus, the present Duke, born
Sept. 11. An. 1679. 2. Josephus-Joannes-Antonius-Ignatius-Felicissimus, born
Nov. 24. 1680. 3. Ferdinandus-Josephus-Philippus-Romanus-Laurentius, born Aug.
17. 1683. 4. Josephus-Innocentius-Emanuel-Felicianus-Constantinus, born Oct.
20. 1. 85. 5. Franciscus-Antonius-Josephus-Maria-Ambrosius-Nicolaus, born Dec.
8. 1689. New Style.
Charles the Fourth, Duke of Lorain, the present Dukes Great Uncle, was
deprived of his Estates for some years by the present French King, and was
reinvested in them, March 3. An. 1661, after that he had demolished the
Fortifications of Nancy, and (as a French Writer says) this Restoration was on
Condition that the Duke should quit all Leagues, Intelligences, Associations
and Practices with any Prince whatsoever; which having not performed, he was
disposest again: and since (as the same Writer tells us) Duke Charles quitted
to the Most Christian King, the Property and Sovereignty of his Duchies of
Lorain and Bar, which are united to the Crown of France for ever.

2. The Dukal and Sovereign House of Lorain contains many Escutcheons, over all
Or, a Bend Gules, charged with three Alerions Argent. These Princes bear also
in their Arms the Cross of Jerusalem: the last Duke possessed of this Duchy, to
show he was an Absolute Prince, and that he held his Estates by no other Tenure
but God, and the Sword, gave for his Devise an armed Hand, issuing, as it were
from Heaven, and grasping a Sword, with this Motto, Fecit Potentiam in brachio
suo. The Dukes Livery is of a yellow color. He professes the Roman Religion,
and uses the High Dutch Language.

3. The Capital City lately belonging to the Dukes of Lorain, was Nancy; not
great, but of a pleasant and commodious situation, well watered by the River
Meurte.

4. The Revenues of the last Duke possessed of his Estates, are said to have been
Seven hundred thousand Crowns yearly, whereof Two hundred thousand arose from
the Customs of Salt, made in the Country, and the other Five hundred thousand
from the Coronet Lands.

The Imperial, or Hans Towns.
I. THE Free or Hans Towns are to the number of about sixty. They are called
Imperial, because they owe homage to the Emperor. They are called Hans Towns,
happily because the Assembly, which is held among them, for deliberating
together, in the old German Language is called Hansa. Their Body has two Voices
at the Diets.

II. They have for Arms, an Eagle.

III. The Capital Hans Towns are Lubec, Collein, Brunswick, and Dantzick. The
Archives of all the Confederate Towns are at Lubec, which is the Capital of all
the Hans League, and has the right of assembling all the others, with the
advice of the five next neighboring Towns of the Association. There is not a
City in the northern parts of Germany, which can equalize this, for the beauty
and uniformity of the Houses, which are all built of Brick; the pleasant
Gardens, fair Streets, delightful Walks without the Walls, etc. The whole is in
Compass about six Miles.

The Empire contains above Three hundred Principalities, and Lordships. Its
divided into Ten Circles, Austria, Bavaria, Suabia, Alsatia, or the Upper
Rhine; the Electorate, or the Lower Rhine, Westphalia, Upper Saxony, Lower
Saxony, Franconia, and Burgundy. Alsatia and Burgundy are now in the French
Possession.

These Circles Compose the General Diets of the Empire, where all affairs are
determined.

The first body is that of the Electors.

The second is that of the other Princes, be they Seculars, or Ecclesiastical.

The third is that of the Free, Franc, or Imperial Towns.

Among the many Sovereign Princes of Germany, who are Feudatory to the Empire,
the principal are the eight Electors, who have power to choose by their
Suffrages the Emperors of Germany; and their younger Sons take place in
Germany of the other Princes. Three of these Electors are Churchmen, viz. The
Archbishops of Mentz, Triers, and Collin. Five are Layicks, viz. The King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Bavaria, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg,
the Count Palatine of the Rhine.

The Elector of Mentz.
I. ANselmus-Franciscus-Fredericus, of Ingelheim, Archbishop of Mentz, Prince
and Elector of the Empire, great Chancellor of Germany, and Legate of course
to the Sea of Rome, was elected Nov. 17. 1679. being then forty five years of
Age. Before his Election he was Archpriest of Mentz, and Governor of Erfort.
He is the seventy first Archbishop of Mentz, forty Bishops having preceded
them.

II. The Arms of his Electorship, are a Wheel Or, in a Field Gules, and over it
an Electoral Cap. The Wheel is born in Remembrance of the first Elector of this
Church, who being the Son of a Car-man, kept always (through humility) a Wheel
in his Chamber, to mind him of his Extraction. His Livery is of a (...) color.
He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language.

III. Mentz, seated on the River Maenus, or the Maine, and Aschaffenburg are
the ordinary places of his Residence; and he has thirteen Suffragans.

Gustavus Adolphus, after he took Mentz, had there with him, at one time, six
chief Princes of the Empire, twelve Ambassadors of Kings, States, Electors, and
Princes, besides Dukes and Lords, and the Martial men of his own Army. In this
City, Maud, Daughter of our King Henry the First, was married to the Emperor
Henry the Fourth, and Crowned Empress. Here also the Art of Printing was
invented, or perfected at least, and made fit for use.

An. 745. Boniface, an Arch Bishop of Mentz, believing that there were no
Antipodes, accused of Heresy before Pope Zacchary, whose Legate he was,
Vigilius Bishop of Saltsburgh, because he had publicly taught and writ the
contrary; and he caused Vigilius to be condemned, alleging that S. Austin, S.
John Chrysostom, and others of the Fathers of the Church never believed it.
Zacchary writ, on this occasion, two Letters to Boniface, which are inserted in
the General sum of the Councels

IV. This Archbishopric brings ordinarily to its Archbishop 6 or 700000
Crowns of annual Rent.

Treves or Triers.
I. John-Hugo de Dorsbec, Archbishop of Treves, and Bishop of Spire, Prince
and Elector of the Empire, Governor of Prumb, and Provost of Weifenberg was
chosen Archbishop and Elector An. (...) he Styles himself Great Chancellor of
the Gauls, and of the Kingdom of Arles, belonging to the Empire, and is the
101 Prelate of Treves.

II. He bears for Arms

His Livery is of a (...) color; he professes the Roman Religion, and uses the
High Dutch Language.

III. He resides at Wilich, tho Treves be his principal City, and is seated in
an Air so cloudy, and subject to Rains, that its called Cloaca Planetarum. This
City is said to be the most ancient of Europe, and built one hundred and fifty
years before Rome.

IV. Its said that the Revenue of this Archbishopric may amount yearly to 11
or 1200000 Livres.

Cologne.
I. PRince Clement of Bavaria, Arch Bishop and Elector of Cologne, Bishop of
Ratisbone and Freising, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Great Chancellor for
the Empire throughout Italy, and Legate by his place to the Sea of Rome, was
born Dec. 5. An. 1671. and Elected Archbishop and Elector July 14. 1688; being
the 81. Prelate of this See.

II. His Arms are those of the House of Bavaria, which I shall set down
beneath. The Arms of the Archbishopric are, a Cross Sable in a Field Argent.
His Livery is of a (...) color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the
High Dutch Language.

III. Bona, on the Rhine, is the ordinary place of his Residence. Cologne,
being about five Miles in Compass, is a considerable Town, and the Germans say,
Qui non vidit Coloniam, non vidit Germaniam. Its Arms are, three Crowns Or,
with this Motto, Colonia fidelis Romanae Ecclesiae filia. When the Archbishop
comes there, he cannot stay above three days together, without leave of the
Burgomasters (this being a Confederate Town) and the number of the persons
which he brings with him, is limited. This Town is one of the largest in
Germany, and the whole Town is so full of Convents, Churches, Churchmen, and
Relics, that its not undeservedly styled, the Rome of Germany. The
Archbishops Palace at Bona is said to be one of the fairest in all Germany.

IV. The Revenues of this Archbishopric are about 6 or 700000 Crowns per
annum.

Bavaria.
HEnricus Leo, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony being proscribed, and outed of his
Territories by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa: Otho Earl of Wittelsbach and
Schyre, was created Duke of Bavaria by the said Emperor An. 1180. and had both
the Bavarias, as well Upper, as Lower granted him for ever.

Otho the Second, Grandson to the former, married Agnes, sole Daughter and
Heiress to Henry the Younger, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and by reason
thereof, obtained of the Emperor Frederick the Second, the Investiture of that
Palatinate together with the Electoral Dignity* An. 1227.

I. From him is Descended
Maximilianus-Maria-Emanuel-Cajetanus-Ludovicus-Franciscus-Ignatius-Antonina-Faelix-Nicolaus-Pius, the present Count Palatine of the Upper Palatinate, Duke of Bavaria, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Steward to the Imperial House, and first of the Secular Electors, born Jun. 11. 1662. he succeeded his Father May 16. 1679. and An. 1685 he married Anna-Maria-Josepha, the only Daughter of Leopold, the present Emperor, by his first Empress, the Princess Margarida-Maria-Teresa of Austria, Daughter of Philip the Fourth, King of Spain. The Duchess was born Jan. 18. An. 1669. and had a Son by the Duke, May 1. An. 1689. but he died the same year. The Duke has a Brother named Josephus-Clementius-Cajetanus-Franciscus-Antoninus-Gasper-Melchior-Balthasar-Joannes-Baptista-Nicolaus, the present Elector of Cologne, beforementioned. He has also a Sister, named Violanta-Beatrix, born Jan. 23. An. 1673. and married to Gaston, eldest Son and Heir to the present Duke of Tuscany. An. 1688.

II. His Arms are three Escutcheons joined together, the first Sable, a Lion
Crowned Or, which belongs to the Palatinate. The second Fusile in Bend Argent
and Azure, in twenty one pieces, which belongs to Bavaria. The third Gules,
with an Imperial Globe, Or, which belongs to the Electorate. His Livery is of a
(...) color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language.

III. Saltsburg was formerly the Capital City of this Country; at present it is
Munchen, seated on the River Isar, where the Elector Resides. Its in a very
sweet and delightful Soil, among Ponds and Groves, daintily interlac'd with
pretty Rivulets, and embellisht with many excellent Gardens, that of the
Elector being extraordinary.

Norinberg is the fairest City in the Upper Palatinate, and perhaps of all
Germany: of figure it is Square, environed with a tripple Wall of eight Miles
in Circuit. The Houses are most of Freestone, and six or seven Stories high;
and diverse of them painted on the outside, and adorned with gilded Balls on the
top.

At Altorff, near this Town, in the Anatomy-School, is the Skeleton of a Bear
bigger than an Horse.

If the Bavarian Branch fails, the Palatinate Family are to reenter into the
ancient Electorship, and the other newly erected is to be abolished.

SAXONY.
ALbert the Third, Elector of Saxony, descended of the Family of Anhalt, coming
to an unexpected and accidental end, being without issue, ann. 1422, Frederick
the Warlike, Marquess of Misnia and Landgrave of Thuringia, Son to Frederick
the Sttong, was invested in the Electoral Dignity, by the Emperor Sigismond,
ann. 1425, from whom is descended

I. Joannes-Georgius the Third, the present Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of
Thuringia, Marquess of Misnia, Grand Marshal of the Empire, Prince and Elector,
who was born* June 20. 1647, and succeeded his Father, Aug. 22. 1680. and in
Sept. 1663, he espoused the Princess Anna Sophia, eldest Sister to the present
King of Denmark; but the Marriage was not consummated till October. 9. 1666, she
was born ann. 1647, and he has had by her two Sons.

1. Joannes-Georgius the Fourth, Heir apparent, born October. 17. ann. 1668. 2.
Frederick-Augustus, born May 12. 1670.
The Duke has no Brother nor Sister living, but there are forty two Princes of
the House of Saxony alive.

II. His Arms are quarterly. In the first, Upper Saxony. In the second,
Thuringia. In the third, Misnia. In the fourth, Lower Saxony. Over all the
Electorate bears Barwise of six pieces, Or and Sable, a Bend verte. His Livery
is of a (...) Color. He professes the Protestant Religion, according to the
Doctrine of Luther, and uses the High Dutch Language.

III. Dresden, seated on the fides of the River Albis, by which it is divided
into the Old Town and the New, joined into one by a Bridge eight hundred paces
in length, is the ordinary place of Residence of this Elector: the Country
round about it being very rich and pleasant. When the first Stone was laid to
build the Walls of this Town, there was placed in the Earth a Silver Cup
gilded, a Book of the Laws, and another of Coins, and three Glasses filled with
Wine.

Magdeburg is the greatest Town of the Country, but possessed by the Marquess
of Brandenburgh, by virtue of the Treaty at Munster. The first Turnament in
Germany opened at Magdeburg, 635, by the Emperor Henry, surnamed the Fowler.
These Pastimes were afterward deposed upon the emulation they caused between
the Princes and Nobility: or happily, on consideration that many brave Men lost
their Lives in these Encounters: for at Darmstadt, an. 1403, at the twenty
third Turnament which was held in Germany, the Gentlemen of Franconia, and
those of Hesse, drew so much Blood of each other, that there remained dead on
the place seventeen of the former, and nine of the latter.

Wittenberg, seated on the Elb, whose chief Beauty lies in one chief Street,
extending the whole length of the City; in former times was the Seat of the
Duke-Elector; till the Electoral Dignity was conferred on the House of Meissen;
who liking better their own Country, kept their Court at Dresden, but so that
Wittenberg is still acknowledged for the Head City of the Electorate.

IV. This Electors ordinary and extraordinary Revenues may amount to eight
millions of Livers yearly. It arises out of his Silver Mines, Imposts laid upon
Beer, the Tenths of all sorts of Increase, as of Corn, Wine, etc. Salt-Houses
and the like.

BRANDENBURG.
THAT the Family of Brandenburg is descended from the Counts of Zollern in
Schawben is not to be doubted; but from whence these Counts drew their
Extraction, does not so well appear. Their opinion seems to be best, which
gives them the same original with the Guelphi; yet so as not entirely to
exclude the Colonnas, a Family of an Italian Extraction also. In the Catalogue
of these Counts, we find Conrade the First, who flourished about the middle of
the twelfth Century, and married Anne of Vokburg, sole Heiress of the last
Burgrave of Nurenburg, whereupon he obtained of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, to be himself invested in that Burgraviate. From him was descended
Frederick the Sixth, the first Elector of Brandenburg, of the Family of
Zollern. This Frederick was born ann. 1372, and served the Emperor Sigismond in
his Wars, by whom, in regard of his great merit, he was constituted Vicar or
Warden of the Marc, ann. 1411. Afterward at a Diet held at Constance, ann.
1415. he obtained the Electoral Dignity of the said Emperor, with the general
consent of the other Electors, together with the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
paying down in consideration thereof four hundred thousand Hungarian Shillings.
The Investiture was afterward solemnly performed in Apr. ann. 1417, etc. From
him is descended.

I. Frederick III. the present Marquess of Brandenburg, great Chamberlain of
the Empire, and Elector, Duke of Prussia, etc. born at Nine of the Clock in the
Morning, July 1. anno 1657, he succeeded his Father, Apr. 29. 1688, Old Style:
and on the 23d. of August, ann. 1679, he married Elizabetha Henrica, Sister to
the present Landtgrave of Hesse: she died July 27. 1683, leaving one only
Daughter, named Louisa-Dorothea-Sophia, born Sept. 19. 1680. Since the Decease
of this Electress, in the following year, viz. 1684. Oct. 6. he married the
Princess Sophia-Charlotta, Daughter to Ernestus-Augustus, the present Bishop of
Osenburg, and Duke of Brunswick and Hanover. She was born Oct. 20. 1668, the
Duke has had by her two Sons, but only one living, viz. Frederick-William, born
at two of the clock in the Afternoon, Aug. 4. 1688.

This Elector has four Brothers, and two Sisters living, but his Father's Issue
by a second Ventre, viz.

1. Philip-William, born in May, 1669. 2. Maria Amalia, born Nov. 16. 1670: and
first married, ann. 1687, to Charles, eldest Son and Heir apparent to the
present Duke of Meckleburg-Gustrow; and after his Decease (which happened March
15. 1688,) to Maurice-William, Duke of Saxony and Administrator of Naumburg,
June 26. 1689. 3. Albert-Frederick, born Jan. 14. 1672. 4. Charles-Philip, born
Dec. 26. 1672. 5. Elizabeth-Sophia, born March 26. 1674. 6. Charles, or
Christian-Lewis, born at four of the clock in the Afternoon, May 14. or 17.
1677.
Note that there are fourteen Princes of the House of Brandenburg alive.

II. The Duke bears diverse Quarterings, containing several Alliances and
Principalities, over all Azure, a Scepter in Pale, Or, which belongs to the
Electorship: a triple Helm, and a triple Crest: he has moreover in his Arms, a
Lion, an Eagle crowned, and a Griffin, the Shield is compone, and contonue. His
Livery is of a blue Color. He professes the Protestant Religion according to
the Doctrine of Calvin, and uses the High Dutch Language.

III. Brandenburg, seated on the River Havel, is the Capital City of the
Marquisate, to which it gives the Name. His Electoral Highness resides
ordinarily at Berlin, Spandaw, Posdam.

Berlin is the greatest Town of the Marquisate, being seated on the River
Suevus; its as big as Montpellier or Beziers in France.

Magdeburg, belonging to this Elector, was formerly the Metropolitan City of
Germany; but scarce half built again since it was sacked by Tilly, and 36000
persons put to the Sword, and destroyed.

IV. His ordinary and extraordinary Revenues are computed to be eleven, or
twelve, and some say, fourteen millions of Livers. His Territories and Forces
are the greatest in Germany next the Emperors: and his Court is Royal, and the
second fairest. This Prince may go on his own Land from the Low Countries, so
far as into Poland and Curland.

The Elector Palatine.
THE Palatine and Bavarian Families are known to have had one Rise, viz. from
Otho Earl of Wittlesbach and Schyre, (as its said before in Bavaria) who was
created Duke of Bavaria by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, ann. 1180, and had
both the Bavarias, as well Upper as Lower, granted him for ever. His Grandson
Otho the Second (as it is said before) married Agnes sole Daughter and Heiress
to Henry the younger, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and by reason thereof
obtained of the Emperor Frederick the Second, the Investiture of that
Palatinate, together with the Electoral Dignity, ann. 1227. his eldest Son was
Lewis the Severe, born Apr. 13. 1229, who left two Sons, viz. Rudolph, an.
1274, who succeeded his Father Lewis in the Palatinate and Electoral Dignity,
and was Author of the Rudolphine Line of the Palatinate Family. 2. Lewis, who
was Author of the Bavarian Line of the said Family. From the forementioned
Rudolph is descended,

Joannes-Gulielmus-Josephus, the present Elector Palatine, and Duke of Newburg,
grand Treasurer of the Imperial House, who was born at Dusseldorp, Apr. 19.
1650: and married at Newstadt in Austria, October. 25, new style, 1678, the
Princess Maria-Anna-Josepha, Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand the Fourth, by
Eleanor Gonzaga, Daughter of Charles Duke of Mantua, his third Wife. This
Electress was born ann. 1658. She was brought to bed of a Son, but stillborn,
ann. 1683: and ann. 1686, she miscarried a second time, and continuing
indisposed, died three years after at Vienna, viz. Apr. 7. 1689. The Elector
succeeded his Father, ann. 1690: and his first Wife being dead, he married a
Daughter of Cosmo, the Third, great Duke of Tuscany, ann. 1691.

This Elector has six Brothers, and six Sisters living, born in this order.

1. Eleonora-Magdalena-Teresa, Empress of Germany, born Jan. 6. 1655. 2.
Ludovicus-Antonius, Greast Master of the Teutonick Order, born at Dusseldorp,
July 9. 1660. 3. Carolus-Philippus. born Nov. 4. 1661: and married at Berlin,
July 24. 168 to Louise Charlotta de Ratzeville; Lewis, Marquess of
Brandenburg's Widow. 4. Alexander-Sigismundus, Dean of Ausburg, and President
of the Chapter of Constance, born at Neuburg, Apr. 16. 1663. 5. Franciscus
Ludovicus, born at Neuburg, July 24. 1664: and elected Bishop of Breslaw, Jan.
30. 1683. 6. Fredericus Gulielmus, born at Dusseldorp, July 20. 1665. 7
Maria-Sophia-Elizabetha, born Aug. 16. 1666: and married ann. 1687, to Peter
King of Portugal. 8* Maria-Anna, born at Dusseldorp, Oct. 28. 1667, and
affianc'd to Charles the Second King of Spain, Aug. 28. 1689, whose Queen she
now is. 9. Philippus Gulielmus-Augustus, born Nov. 18. 1688. 10.
Dorothea-Sophia, born July 12. 1670. 11 Hedewig-Elizabetha Amalia, born July
18. 1673. 12 Leopoldina Eleanora-Sophia, born May 27. 1679.
II. The Arms of Charles Count Palatine of the Rhine, this Elector's
Predecessor in the Electorate, who deceased May 16. 1685, were Quartelry. In
the first and fourth Sable, a Lion Or, crowned, armed and langued Gules. In the
second and third, Lozengys Argent and Azure, of one and twenty pieces, with a
Mond Or, which belongs to the Electorate. The Elector's Livery is of a (...)
Color, and he professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High* Dutch Language.

III. Heidelberg is the Capital Town of the Electorate, seated on the River
Neccar. On the Town House is a Clock with diverse motions, and when the Clock
strikes, an old Man puts off his Hat, a Cock crows, and shakes his Wings,
Soldiers fight with each other, etc. In a great Building there, in the Elector
Palatines Palace joining to the Cellars, the great Vessel, holding two hundred
Tuns, is famous.

Ann. 1661 (as Dr. Brown has observed in the Account of his Travels) about an
hundred English came up the Rhine, and by the permission of the Elector,
settled themselves a few miles from Heidelberg, living all together, Men, Women
and Children in one House, and having a Community of many things; they are of a
peculiar Religion, calling themselves Christian-Jews, and one Mr. Poole,
formerly living in Norwich, was their Head. They cut not their Beards, and
observe many other Ceremonies and Duties, which they either think themselves
obliged to by some expressions in the Old Testament, or from some new
Exposition of their Teachers.

Manheim, seated on the Confluence of the Rhine and Neccar, is the Defense of
all the Country, there is in it a very fair Palace, where the Elector Charles
ordinarily resided.

IV. The Elector Charles, beside his own Estates, inherited five hundred
thousand Livres of yearly Rent after the Death of the Palatine of Simmeren,
Uncle to Charles-Lewis his Father, and formerly his Tutor.

Philip William, Father to the present Elector, after the Decease of Charles
Elector Palatine, which happened ann. 1685, became possessed of the Electorate,
by virtue of the Instrument of Peace at Osnabrug; but since was thrown out by
the French King, anno 1688, and tho he had recovered many places in it, ann.
1689, by the assistance of the Confederates, yet he continued at Neuburg.

Of the Family of Brunswick and Lunenburg, from which the new made Elector of
Hanover is descended.
THE Family of Brunswick and Lunenburg, for its great Antiquity, seems to bear
the Bell, in a manner, from all the rest. It owes its original to the ancient
Welffs; of whom see in Spencer's Sylloge Genealogica. Henry the Lion, descended
from these, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony, and Successor to his Father, ann. 1139,
may be properly looked upon as the common Father of all the Dukes of Brunswick
and Lunenburg; tho falling into disgrace with the Emperor Barbarossa, he was
proscribed, and so lost all his Dominions, except the Districts of Brunswick
and Lunenburg: he married Maud, Daughter of Henry the Second, King of England,
and had by her three Sons and two Daughters. Otho their youngest Son, born ann.
1204 the other Brothers dying without Issue-male, was created the first Duke of
Brunswick and Lunenburg, by the Emperor Frederick the Second. From him the
present Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg are descended: for Ernestus the
Seventh Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, who died anno 1546, left, among other
Children, two Sons, Augustus and William, of whom the first was Author of the
new Line of Brunswick Wolfembuttel, whose Sons Rudolphus Augustus, and Antonius
Ulricus now live together in joint Authority: and the other, viz. William,
being Author of the Line of Brunswick-Lunenburg-Hanover, whose Grandson
Ernestus-Augustus, Bishop of Osenburg, is now Duke of Brunswick
Lunenburg-Hanover, He was born November. 10. 1629: and ann. 1658 he married the
Lady Sophia, Daughter to Frederick the Fifth, Elector Palatine, and King of
Bohemia, born Oct. 13. 1630. This Duke is lately made a new Elector of the
Empire. There Children are,

I. Georgius-Ludovicus, Prince Hereditary, born May 28. 1660, and on Nov. 21.
1682 he married his Cousin German Sophia Dorothea, only Daughter of his late
Uncle, George-William, Duke of Zell: she was born Sept. 15. 1666. He has Issue
by her

1. Georgius-Augustus, born Oct. 30. 1683. 2. Gulielmus-Ernestus born 1685. 2.
Fredericus-Augustus, born October. 3. 1661: who died in Hungary, 1689. 3.
Maximilianus-Gulielmus, born Dec. 14. 1666. He died in the Morea. 4. Sophia
Charlotta, born October. 20. 1668, and married to Frederick the Third, the
present Elector of Brandenburg, Oct. 6. 1684, by whom she has one Prince alive,
named Fredericus Gulielmus, born Aug. 4. 1688. 5. Carolus-Philippus, born Oct.
13. or 23. 1669. he died in Hungary, ann. 1690. 6. Christianus, born Sept. 29.
1671. 7 Ernestus Augustus, born Sept. 17. 1674.
There are other Princes in Germany of the Houses of Hesse, Meckleburg,
Wirtenburg, Baden, Anhalt, Saxon-Lawenburg, etc* but I give an account only of
the Electoral Houses, omitting the rest.

FRANCE.
1. HUGH the Great, Duke of France, Burgundy and Aquitain, Marquess of Orleans,
and Earl of Paris, died in the year 956. His eldest Son Hugh Capet, upon the
Death of Lewis the Slothful, last King of France, of the Race of Charlemagne,
was by the unanimous consent of the Peers of France inaugurated King of that
Kingdom, ann. 987, from whom is descended Lewis the Fourteenth, the present
King of that Kingdom, born at St. Germains, Sept. 5. new style, 1638. Of the
several Branches of the Line of Hugh Capet, he is descended in a direct Line
from Robert, Count of Clermont, and Lord of Bourbon, youngest Son of Lewis the
Ninth, who died of the Plague, at the Siege of Tunis, ann. 1270. The Surname of
Bourbon is derived to the present French King from the said Robert: King Henry
the Fourth, his Grandfather, being the first King of France, of the said
Surname, who having first professed himself of the Roman Religion, whereas
before he had been a Protestant, was crowned King of France, ann. 1594. The
present King succeeded his Father, ann. 1642, or 3, and Sept. 7. 1651. he was
declared Major: for by a Sanction put forth by King Charles the Fifth, surnamed
the Wise, who came to the Crown of France, ann. 1364: the eldest Sons of
France, were for the future, to be declared of Age at fourteen years old, and
fit to be crowned, and govern: he was crowned at Rheims by the Archbishop of
that See, Jun. 7. 1654, and Jun. 9. 1660, he was married at St. John de Luz, to
Maria-Teresa, Daughter to Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, by his first Wife,
the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Fourth, King of France. She died
July 30. 1683, by whom the King has only one Son now living, namely,

Lewis the Fifteenth, surnamed the Hardy, the present Dolphin, born Nov. 1.
1661; and March 7. 1680, was married to the Electoral Princess of Bavaria,
Maria-Anna Victoria-Christina, Daughter to Ferdinandus-Maria, the late Elector
of Bavaria. The Contract was signed at Munic, Dec. 30. 1679. She since died
ann. 1690. The Dolphin has Issue by her three Sons, viz.

1. Lewis, Duke of Burgundy, born at Versailles Aug. 6. at twenty minutes past
ten of the Clock in the Evening, ann. 1682. 2. Philip, Duke of Anjou, born Nov.
9. 1683. 3. Gaston, Duke of Berry, born Aug. 31. 1686.
Concerning the Dolphin, note that he is so called, because Humbert the Second,
Earl of Dolphine, descended of the Blood Royal of France, seeing himself
destitute of Issue, made over the Province of Dolphine, an. 1358, to Philip de
Valois, the then King of France, for forty thousand Florins, and on condition,
that, for the future, the eldest Son of France should still be styled, The
Dolphin. And Charles the Fifth abovementioned, surnamed, The Wise, who came to
the Crown of France, ann. 1364, was the First, who in his Father's Lifetime
was styled, The Dolphin.

Now, besides the Dolphin, the present King of France has several natural
Children, viz.

1. Maria* Anna de Bourbon, born ann. 1666, and married anno 1680 to Lewis de
Bourbon, Prince de Conti. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke of Vermandois, born ann.
1667, supreme Intendant of the Marine. He died ann. 1683. These two were born
him by Aolisia-Frances de la Beaume, la Blanch de la Valiere, Duchess of
Vaujour, and Peeress of France, Daughter to Lawrence de la Valiere. She is now
a Carmelite Nun, by the name of Sister Aloisia de Misericordia.

3. Ludovicus-Augustus de Bourbon, Duke of Maine, born ann. 1670, and made
legitimate three years after, viz. 1673. 4. Ludovicus-Caesar de Bourbon, Count
of Vexin, born ann. 1672. He died 1683. 5. Aloisia-Frances de Bourbon,
Mademoiselle de Nantes, born An. 1673. and married An. 1685. to Lewis, Duke of
Bourbon. 6. Aloisia-Maria-Anna, deceased An. 1681. 7. Ludovicus*Alexander de
Bourbon, Count of Toulouse, born An. 1678. Legitimated An. 1681: Intendant of
the Marine. 8. Frances-Maria de Bourbon, Mademoiselle de Blois, born An. 1681.
These six were born him by Frances Athanasia de Roche*Chovart, Gabriel Prince
de Mortemars Daughter, and Wife to Henry-Lewis Paidallan, Marquess of.
Montespan.

The French King has only one Brother, viz. Philip, Duke of Orleans, born Sept.
1. An. 1640. He espoused for his first Wife, the Princess Henrietta-Maria,
youngest Daughter to our late King Charles the First. She was born at Exeter,
Jun. 16. 1644, and died An. 1670. He had by her four Children, viz.

1. Maria-Aloisia, born March 27. 1662. and married Nov. 17. 1679. to Charles
the Second, King of Spain. She died without Issue by him An. 1689. 2. Philip,
who died an Infant. 3. Another Daughter, not named. 4. Anna-Maria, born Aug.
27. 1669. and Apr. 9. 1684. married to Victor Amadeus the Second, the present
Duke of Savoy.
The next year after the forementioned Duchess of Orleans died An. 1671. The
Duke married Elizabeth Charlotta, Daughter to Charles-Lewis, Elector Palatine,
who was born in May 1652. The Espousals were celebrated at Metz, Nov. 26. of
the said year, he has Issue by her,

1. Philip, Duke of Chartres, born Aug. 2. 1671. 2. Elizabetha-Charlotta,
Mademoiselle de Chartres, born Sept. 13. 1676.
The Princes of the Blood.
BEing to name the Princes of the Blood, I shall show withal, how they are
descended and allied to the King of France. Robert the Fifth, Count of
Clermont, and Lord of Bourbon, youngest Son to King Lewis the Ninth (as
mentioned before) was the person, in whom the Line of Hugh Capet is continued
in the Crown of France. Charles Duke of Vendome, lineally descended from him,
was born An. 1489. And left among other Children, two Sons, viz. Anthony, the
eldest who was Duke of Vendome, and King of Navarr, Great Grandfather to the
present King of France. 2. Lewis, Prince of Conde, Great Grandfather to the
present Prince of Conde, Henry-Julius de Bourbon, born Jul. 29. 1643. formerly
styled Duke D'Enghien, and now, since his Fathers death, Prince of Conde. He
was married Dec. 11. 1667. to the Princess Anne, Daughter to Edward Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, who was born July 23. 1647. and is since deceased, but
he has by her the following Issue.

1. Maria-Teresa, Mademoiselle de Bourbon, born 1666. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke
D'Enghien born 1668. and married 1685. to Aloisia-Frances, Natural Daughter to
the King of France by Madam de Montespan, who was born 1673. 3. Maria-Anna,
Mademoiselle de Monmorency, born 1675. 4. Anna-Maria Victoria, Mademoiselle
D'Enghien, born 1676. 5. Aloisia-Benedicta, Mademoiselle de Conde, born 1678.
The Prince of Conde had also a Brother, viz. Armand, Prince de Conti, born
1629. married to Anna-Maria de Monmorency, Cardinal Mazarines Neice, by the
Sister 1659. Deceased 1666, leaving behind him two Sons, viz.

1. Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, born 1661. and in 1680 he married
Anna-Maria de Bourbon, the Kings Natural Daughter, by Madam de la Valiere, who
was made Legitimate. He died without Issue An. 1685. 2. Francis-Lewis de
Bourbon, the now Prince of Conti, born, 1664, or 8.
Besides these Princes of the Blood, the King has also three Cousin Germans
living; Daughters to his Uncle Gaston-John-Baptist, late Duke of Orleans.

1. Anna-Maria, Duchess of Montpensier, born An. 1627. unmarried. 2.
Margarita-Aloisia, born An. 1645. and married An. 1661. to Cosmus the Third,
Great Duke of Tuscany. 3. Isabella, born, An. 1649, and married An. 1667. to
Joseph-Lewis, Duke of Guise, She is now a Widow.
Note, That tho this King of France be but the twenty sixth King inclusively of
the Line of Hugh Capet, yet he is the sixty first*King of France: for there
preeceded twenty one Kings of the Race of Merovius, and thirteen Kings of the
Race of Charlemagne, before the Line of Hugh Capet came in.

II. For Arms, he bears Azure, three Flower de Luces Or, two in Chief, and one
in Base; the Escutcheon is environed with the Collars of the Orders of S.
Michael, and the Holy Ghost: It has for Crest, an Helmet Or, entirely open,
thereon a Crown Closed after the manner of an Imperial Crown, with eight
Inarched Rays, topt with a double Flower de Luce. The Supporters are two
Angels habited as Levites; the whole under a Pavilion Royal, seem of France,
lined Ermines, with these words. Ex omnibus floribus elegi mihi Lilium. Lilia
neque laborant, neque nent.

These words, The Lilies do not Spin (as a late French Writer tells us) import,
that the Flower de Luces, which represent the Crown of France never fall to the
Distaff, and that the Female Sex cannot inherit, according to the Salique Law.
The same Custom having prevailed among the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Persians,
Chinese, Turks, Tartars, and Parthians: tho the Daughters have sometimes
succeeded in England, Spain, Sicily, Sueden, etc.

The King of France pretending likewise a right to Navarre, bears also for that
Kingdom, Gules, a Carbuncle noued Or; which having a resemblance to Chains of
Gold, is Blazoned by some, Chains of Gold Interlac'd, parted into Orbs, Pales,
Fesses, Counterbands or Saltiers.

The King of France's Device is, Consiliis Armisque Potens, or also this, Nec
pluribus Impar.

Note, That the Arms of France in the days of Pharamond, and his three
Successors, were Gules three Crowns Or. Clovis the Great altered them to Azure,
seem of Flower de Luces Or, and Charles the Sixth, who came to the Crown, An.
1380, reduced the Lilies, in his Coat of Arms, to three. The Kings Livery is of
a blew color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the French Language.

III. Paris is the Capital City of France, which has the pleasant River Seine
running through the midst of it. I shall speak concerning the extent, and number
of the Houses and Inhabitants of this, and other Cities when I come to speak of
London; wherefore I shall pass by these things at present.

As for his chief Seats of pleasure, the chief is that noble Seat at
Versailles, four Leagues South of Paris, of which there being a full and clear
description extant in English, as also of the Seat of Monsieur at S. Clou, and
of the Treasury of S. Denis, I shall say nothing here of them. He has also the
noble Seats of Fontainbleau, and S. Germains, beside the Louvre at Paris,
celebrated by that famous Distich

Non Orbis Gentem, non Urbem Gens habet ullam,
Urbsve domum, Dominum nec habet ulla parem,
4. The Revenues of the King of France are said to amount to eleven millions of
Pounds Sterling; being above the fifth part of the Revenues of that Kingdom;
and the French averr France to contain fifty thousand Parishes.

The House of England.
I. WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, surnamed the Conqueror, under the pretense that
King Edward the Confessor, his Cousin, who died without Issue An. 1065. Son of
King Ethelred, by his Queen Emma, had by his last Will and Testament,
transferred the Kingdom to him, made a Descent into England, An. 1067. and
having slain King Harold in Battle, the then usurping King there, after King
Edwards death; was by the unanimous consent of the Peerage of England Crowned
King.

Now, when King William the Conqueror's youngest Son, Henry, upon the death of
his elder Brother, William the Second, who had succeeded his Father in the
Kingdom, came to the Crown, which was An* 1087. He married Matilda, or Maud,
Daughter of Malcolm the Third, King of Scotland, by Margaret, the Sister of
Edgar Atheling, right Heir of Edward the Confessor, as being descended from
King Edmund Ironside, half Brother to King Edward the Confessor, by their
common Father, King Ethelred, and Grandfather to the abovenamed Edgar Atheling
and Margaret.

And the said King Henry the First had by his Wife Matilda, or Maud, a Son, who
was cast away at Sea; and a Daughter, named Maud also, the only Legitimate
Issue that survived him, born An. 1104. She was married first to the Emperor
Henry the Fourth, who had no Issue by her; and after his death, to Geoffry
Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, by whom she had a Son, named Henry the Second.

Now, King Henry the First, his Son being dead, seeing this Daughter his only
Legitimate Issue, called a Parliament An. 1133. in which all the Lords of the
Land, took an Oath to be true to his Daughter Maud the Empress, and her Heirs,
and acknowledge them as right Inheritors of the Crown.

And tho Stephen, Earl of Bologne and Montagne, Son of Stephen, Earl of Blois,
by Adela, third Daughter of the Conqueror, was set up to the Crown, by the
working of Henry his Brother, Bishop of Winchester, after the death of King
Henry the First, against the undoubted right of the said Empress; yet at
length, seeing his Children dead before him, he secured the Succession to her
Son Henry the Second, who was Crowned An. 1155. And from this Henry the Second,
in whom the Saxon Line was restored, is Descended,

James the Second, of the Royal House of the Stuarts, late King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc. who was born Oct. 14. 1633. His Majesty
Espoused, for his first Wife the Lady Ann, Daughter to the late Edward, Earl of
Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, etc. She died before he came to the
Crown, and brought him Issue, four Sons and four Daughters, but all dying
young, except two surviving Daughters.

The eldest is the Lady Mary, born Apr. 30. 1662. and was married to William
Henry, Prince of Orange, in London, at S. James's Nov. 14. 1677. The said
Prince being born on the 14. of the same month, New Style, 1650, and restored
to his Hereditary Dignity in the United Provinces An. 1672. concerning whom I
shall say more beneath.

The second is the Lady Ann, born Feb. 6* 1664. And July 28. 1683. was Espoused
to George Prince of Denmark, only Brother to the present King of that Kingdom,
he was born An. 1653. or, 1. he has had Issue by his Princess,

1. William, Duke of Gloucester, born in July. 1689. and three Children more,
viz. the Lady Mary, the Lady Ann, and another Princess, who died in their
Infancy.

His Majesty Nov. 21. 1673. took for his second Wife, the Lady
Mary-Eleanor-Beatrix D'Este, late Queen of England, still living, who was born
Sept. 25. 1658. being youngest Sister to Francisco D'Este the present Duke of
Modena and Regio, etc. She was Crowned with his Majesty April 23. 1685. And his
Majesty has had by her two Daughters and a Son, who all died young, before the
year 1688. And, as some say, he has had a Son and a Daughter by her since,
still living. Their Majesty's reside at present, at S. Germains, in France, and
profess the Roman Religion.

His Majesty has Natural Issue by Madam Churchil, two Sons and two Daughters,
all living in France. The Sons go by the name of Fitz-James. The eldest is Duke
of Berwick, the youngest is styled Grand Prior of Ireland. The eldest Daughter
was married to the late Lord Waldegrave, by whom he has Issue two Sons. The
other Daughter is unmarried.

Now, as for William Henry of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and now styled William
the Third, King of Great Britain, etc. who married the Lady Mary, eldest
Daughter to King James as above. They were Proclaimed King and Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, the Executive Power in him, Feb. 14. 1689.
Proclaimed King and Queen of Scotland, April 11. of the same year.

His Majesty has, as yet, no Issue by his Queen.

Now, as to the Rise of the House of Nassaw and Orange, as it concerns King
William, I shall not seek to retrieve its Original; but its certain it
flourisht in the ninth Century, and I shall only take notice, that from Walram
and Otto, Sons of Henry, surnamed the Rich, Earl of Nassau, sprang two Capital
Lines, viz. that of Idstein, afterward called Sarepont from Walram; and that
of Dillenburg, which now enjoys the Principality, from Otto, and therefore we
shall confine ourselves singly to this.

Now, John the Third, who was the eighth of his Family Lineally descended from
the said Otto inclusively, had two Sons, viz. Henry, and William the Elder.
Henry was born An. 148^. and from him the Principality of Orange Descended to
King William. As for William the Elder, Brother to Henry, he had a Son called
John, who dwelt in the Castle of Dillenburg, and had twenty five Children, of
whom I shall note only four, viz. John, George, Ernestus-Casimire, and
John-Lewis; for from them sprang the several Lines of Siegen, Dillenburg,
Diezen, and Hademar; on each of which the Emperor Ferdinand the Third, in the
Diet of Ratisbone, March 3. 1654. conferred the honor of having a Voice, and
Seat among the Princes of the Empire. As for a farther Genealogical account of
these Families, it may be had elsewhere.

To the Royal Family of England I must add Donna Catharina, Infanta of
Portugal, Queen Dowager of England, born at Villa Vicosa in Portugal, Nov. 14.
Old Style, An. 1638. and Espoused at Portsmouth by his late Majesty King
Charles the Second, in the month of May, An. 1662. She being only Sister to Don
Pedro of the House of Braganza, the present King of that Kingdom. She resides
at present at Lisbon, in Portugal. Her original Jointure some settled by King
Charles was 40000 l. per annum, to which considerable additions have been since
made.

Their Majesty's have two Uncles living in England, viz. the Earls of Clarendon
and Rochester.

The Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal of England, that are not
excluded from the Succession of the Crown, by the late Act of Parliament.
I. PRincess Ann of Denmark, before* mentioned.

II. The Duke of Gloucester, of whom also see before.

III. Sophia, Duchess of Hanover, Daughter to Frederick the Fifth, Elector, and
King of Bohemia. Married to the Duke, An. 1658. Her Children.
1. George-Lewis, born May 28. 1660. Who Nov. 1. 1682. Married Sophia-Dorothea,
only Daughter to the Duke of Zel, by whom he has, (1.) George-Augustus, born
Oct. 30. 1683. (2.) William-Ernestus, born, An. 1685.
2. Christian, born Sept. 29. 1671. 3. Ernestus-Augustus, born Sept. 17. 1674.
4. Sophia-Charlotta, born October. 20. 1668. and married to Frederick the Third,
the present Elector of Brandenburg, October. 16. 1684. by whom he has had two
Princes, but only one living, viz. Frederick-William, born Aug. 4. 1688.



The other Princes and Princesses that are Roman Catholics.
I. ANna* Maria, the present Duchess of Savoy, Daughter to the Duke of Orleans
by Henrietta-Maria, youngest Daughter of Charles I. born Aug. 27. 1669. Her
Children.
1. Maria-Adelheid, or Adetherd, born Dec. 6. 1685. 2. Another Princess, born
Aug. 30. 1688.


II. ELizabeth-Charlotta, the present Duchess of Orleans, Daughter to
Charles-Lewis, Elector Palatine. Her Children.
1. Philip, Duke of Chartres, born Aug. 2. 1631. 2. Elizabeth* Charlotte,
Mademoiselle de Chartres, born Sept. 13. 1676.


III. ANN, the present Princess of Conde, Daughter to Edward, Prince Palatine
of the Rhine, and Grandchild to the King of Bohemia, born July 23. 1647. Her
Children.
1. Maria-Teresa de Bourbon, born 1666. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke D'Enghien,
born, 1668. 3. Maria Anna de Monmorency, born 1675. 4. Anna Maria-Victoria,
D'Enghien, born 1676. 5. Aloisia Benedicta de Conde, born 1678.


IV. TWO Daughters of Benedicta-Henrietta-Philippina, Duchess of Hanover,
Daughter to Edward Count Palatine, and Grandchild to the King of Bohemia. 1.
Charlotta-Felicitas, born March 8. 1671. 2. Welhelmina-Amalia, born Apr. 26.
1673*


The Princes of the House of Nassau are to be found in the Genealogies of the
Princes of the Empire.

II. The Sovereign Ensigns Armorial of the King of England are as follows. In
the first place he bears Azure, three Flower de Luces Or, for the Regal Arms of
France, quartered with the Imperial Ensigns of England; which are Gules, three
Lions Passant Guardant, in Pale, Or. In the second place, within a double
Tressure, Counter-flowred-de-Lys, Or; a* Lion Rampant Gules, for the Regal Arms
of Scotland. In the third place, Azure, an Irish Harp Or* stringed Argent, for
the Royal Ensigns of Ireland. In the fourth place, as in the first; all within
the Garter, the chief Ensign of that most honorable Order, on which is written
this Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. Above the same an Helmet, answering to
his Majesty's Sovereign Jurisdiction: upon the same a rich Mantle of Cloth of
Gold, doubled Ermine, adorned with an Imperial Crown, and Surmounted for a
Crest by a Lion Passant Guardant, Crowned with the Like; supported by a Lion
Guardant Or, Crowned as the former, and an Unicorn Argent, Gorged with a Crown*
thereto a Chain affixt, passing betwixt his forelegs, and reflexed over his
Back Or: both standing on a Compartment, placed underneath, and in the Table of
the Compartment, is his Majesty's Royal Motto, Dieu and mon Droit.

King William, as Earl of Nassau, bears Quarterly, 1. Azure a Lion Or, armed
Gules. 2. Or, a Lion Leopard, Gules armed and crowned Azure. 3. Gules, a Fesse
Argent. 4. Gules, two Leopards Or, armed and membred as the first. As Prince of
Orange, he bears Quarterly. 1. Gules, a Bend Or. 2. An Hunters Horn Azure,
stringed Gules. The third as, etc. over all an Escutcheon of Pretense Checquy
Or, and Azure. More briefly thus, quarterly, Chalons and Aurange, under an
Escutcheon of Geneva. His Motto is Je maintiendray. His Majesty's Livery is a
Red Color, before his coming to the Crown it was blew. He Professes the
Protestant Religion according to the Church of England, and uses now the
English Language.

Note that as Charles the Fifth, who came to the Crown of France, An. 1364. was
the first, who in his Fathers life time, was styled the Dolphin. So Edward the
Second, Son of Edward the First, King of England, was the first Prince of
Wales, so created An. 1300, to gratify the Welchmen: his Father Edward the
First having slain in Battle Leoline, the last of the Welsh Princes, and united
Wales to the Crown of England. And perhaps it was in imitation of this that the
Donor of Dolphine, would have the eldest Son of France styled the Dolphin. The
Title of Prince of Wales in the eldest Son of England having preceeded the
other for many years. The particular Cognizance of a Prince of Wales is a Plumb
of Feathers, with this Motto, Ich-Dien, that is, I serve.

III. London, seated on the famous navigable River Thames, is the Capital City
of England, and the undoubted most famous Emporium, and (for ought appears,)
the greatest and most considerable City of the Universe. For as to Pequin, in
China, the only City to be brought in competition, which by some is imagined to
be greater, we have no account of it fit to reason upon.

The late ingenious Sir William Petty, having critically examined the
capaciousness and populosity of London, and its other advantages, and compared
them with the other chief Cities of Europe, according to what accounts could be
gotten of them, has accurately made out the following particulars, viz. that
there are contained in

London 696000 Inhabitants, and 105315 Houses. Paris 488000 and 23223 Houses.
Amsterdam 187000 Venice 134000 Rome 125000 Dublin 69000 and 6400 Houses.
Bristol 48000 and 5307 Houses. Rouen 66000 and about a third bigger than
Bristol. Lions 100000 Toulouse 90000

From the foregoing particulars, he makes the following Observations.

1. That the people of Paris, Rome and Rouen, make but 679000, or 19000 less
than the 696000 of London alone. 2. That the people of the two English
Emporiums, viz. London and Bristol, make 744000, or more than Paris, Amsterdam,
and Rouen, these being in all but 741000. 3. That the same two English Cities
seem equivalent to Paris, Rouen, Lions, Thoulose, these making in all but
744000. 4. That the King of Englands three Cities, viz. London, Dublin and
Bristol, containing 813000 people, exceed Paris, Amsterdam and Venice, containg
809000 people. 5. That of the four great Emporiums, London, Amsterdam, Venice,
and Rouen, London alone is near double to the other three, viz. above 7, to 4.
for the other three make but 387000, London 696000.
Sir William Petty farther makes out that the people of London are as many as
those of Holland in their twenty eight walled Cities, and Towns, and in their
Dorps and Villages, or at least above two thirds of the same.

He compares London with Paris in several particulars; in all which he shows
London to exceed the other, viz.

1. In the goodness of the Hospitals. 2. In the cleanly, and more convenient
way of living. 3. In the richness of the People, the number of the Servants and
greatness of Equipage. 4. In the preference of the River Thames, to the River
Seine, both in pleasantness and navigableness, the wholesomness of its water;
and the Bridge of London being the most considerable of all Europe. 5. In the
shipping and Foreign Trade, London therein incomparably exceeding both Paris
and Rouen: the City of Bristol appearing by good estimate of its Trade and
Customs, as considerable, as Rouen. 6. In the richness of the Lawyers Chambers,
those of Londen being worth 140000 l. Sterling. 7. In the wholesomness of the
Air. 8. In the cheapness, and less stowage of Fuel. 9. In the cheapness of all
the most necessary sorts of Food, and the greater variety and plenty of all
sorts of Drinks. 10. In the Churches, nothing at Paris being so great as S.
Paul's has been, and is like to be; nor so beautiful as King Henry the Seventh's
Chapel.
As to the ground upon which Paris stands in respect of London, he says Paris
is said to be an Oval of three English Miles long, and 2 broad, the Area
whereof contains but 5 square Miles. Now tho* London, measured from Lime* house
to the end of Tuttlestreet, from East to West, is above seven Miles and an
half; and from the farthest end of Blackmanstreet in Southwark, to the end of
S. Leonard Shoreditch is 2500 Geometrical paces, or two Miles and an half, yet
he says, upon a Medium, London is seven Miles long, and 1 broad, which makes an
Area of near nine square Miles; which proportion of 5 to nine differs little
from that of 13 to 23.

Its worthy of Observation, that before the Restoration of Monarchy in
England, An. 1660. the people of Paris were more than those of London and
Dublin, put together: whereas now the people of London are more than those of
Paris, Rome and Rouen.

The forementioned Author also makes out by a rational computation, that Rome
in Nero's time, seems not to have been above half as big again as London now
is; and that now London is near six times as great as the present Rome, wherein
are 119000 souls besides Jews, which he computes at 6000.

I know not whether Edinburg, the Metropolis of Scotland may deserve noting.
Its extended from East to West, on a rising ground, a Mile in length, or
somewhat more; and its about three Miles in compass. The Houses are generally
six or seven Stories high, and its greatly peopled according to its bigness,
several Families living in each House.

His Majesty's chief Seats of pleasure in England, are Windsor Castle, and
Hampton Court.

IV. The Revenues settled on the late King Charles the Second, by Parliament,
on his Restoration were 120000 l. per annum, which since has been considerably
augmented, so that his present Majesty has near two millions per annum. And we
know that in case of a War, or the like (as at present) the Kings of England,
with a concurrence of their Parliaments, are able to raise sums great enough to
deal with any Prince or Potentate whatsoever.

HOLLAND.
KIng William being Great Stat Holder for Amsterdam, I have thought fit to
subjoin an account of Holland here.

I. The Seven Provinces, which united themselves at Utrech, An. 1579. are
generally known by the name of Holland: tho Zealand was the first Province
which set it self at Liberty. The motives which obliged these Provinces to
depart from the Dominion of Spain, were,

1. Because Spanish Garrisons were kept in the Low Countries to the discontent
of all the Orders. 2. The Imposition of the tenth penny on all Merchandises. 3.
The fear of the Spanish Inquisition, which enraged them, it being more Politic
than Christian, for keeping in awe the Nobles, and great Persons of the
Country. 4. The Infraction of their Privileges. 5. The cruelty of
Ferdinando-Alvarez of Toledo, Duke of Alba, joined with his haughtiness, and
contempt of Persons. 6. The endeavors for an alteration of Religion.
Now, the Princes of Orange, of the House of Nassau, have been the Council,
Support, and Glory of these Provinces. As to the present Prince, see England.

II. The States Arms are, Or, a Lion Gules, holding with one Paw a Cutleas, and
with the other a bundle of seven Arrows, closely bound together, by allusion to
the seven Confederate Provinces, with this Motto. Concordia res parvae crescunt.

The States Livery is of a red color. They profess the Protestant Religion,
according to the Doctrine of Calvin, and use the Low Dutch Tongue.

III. Amsterdam is the most considerable City of all Holland, the Houses are
generally built of Brick, and its built on Piles like Venice. As to what
proportion in bigness this City bears to London, I have no exact account; but
upon comparing the Bills of Mortality in both, the Burials of the latter,
vastly exceed those of the former. For An. 1685. the Burials of London were
23222. and those of Amsterdam 6245. From whence, and the difference of Air, its
probable that the people of London are quadruple to those of Amsterdam. Dr.
Brown having taken a view of this City in his Travels, before London was
rebuilt, gives this handsome account of it. Amsterdam for Riches, Trade,
Shipping, fair Streets, and pleasant Habitations, scarce yields to any other
City of the World, its seated on the River Ye. An. 1470 it was walled about
with a Brick Wall, to defend it against the Citizens of Utrecht. The Arms of it
are three Crosses on a Pale, with an Imperial Crown over all; the last given
them by Maximilian the Emperor. Of late years this City is mightily increaced;
and encompast with a new Wall, and fortified after the modern way. And the
whole Town being in a low marshy ground, the water is let in through all the
considerable Streets, and its all built upon Piles, or high Firr-Trees, driven
down perpendicularly so close together, that nothing can be forced in betwixt
them This supports the greatest buildings, where no bottom is. For the
Foundation of one Tower, or Steeple alone, there were ramm'd into the ground
6334 great Trees. The Town House is the noblest building in all these
Countries: a Pile of free Stone one hundred and ten paces in Front, larger than
the magnificent Church of S. Peter's at Rome; and eighty one paces deep, or on
the sides. On the top of it stands Atlas, or Columbus, holding a Globe on his
Shoulders made of Copper, of about ten Foot diameter; which is as large,
perhaps, as any Globe, or Ball whatsoever, employed in this Ornamental use. The
Draw-Bridges at Amsterdam part in the middle, and a Vessel, tho under Sail, may
pass them without the help of any one on shore; for the Mast Head, or break
water of the Ship bearing against the Bridge, in the middle, opens it. So far
Dr. Brown.

Harlem also, in Holland is a Town of a large extent and the Hague is one of
the fairest Villages in Europe; it containing above four thousand Houses.

Its remarkable that the whole compass of the Province of Holland is but one
hundred and eighty Miles, no part thereof being distant from the Sea above
three hours journey, and yet it contains twenty three walled Towns, and four
hundred Villages.

From the Steeple of the Town of Gorcham, in this Province, a man may behold
twenty two walled Towns, beside a great number of Villages. And the Town of
Utrech, situate within the Province of that name, is so miraculously seated
among walled Towns, that a man may go from thence in one day to any of fifty
walled Towns, or Cities, thence equally distant, or to any one of twenty six
Towns to Dinner, and come home to Bed.

King Williams Palace, at Houstlardike, built by Frederick-Henry of Nassau, is
esteemed the most beautiful and stately of the seventeen Provinces.

IV. The Public Revenues of the Netherlands, coming all out of the Subjects
Purses, are computed to be seven millions of pounds Sterling. In a Book
Composed by a Dutchman, Entitled, The Depths of Spain, the City of Amsterdam,
is said to have daily above fifty thousand Livers of Rent in Customs, Assizes
and Imposts.

The House of Denmark.
1. THE Danes have had their peculiar Kings for many Ages past, whom Historians
generally distinguish by eight Periods. The seventh of these Periods was that
of the Suenonidae, or English Danes, so called from Sueno, or Swain Ethrick.
This Family ended An. 1448, upon the death of the last of them without Issue.
And the Danes elected Adolph, Earl of Holstein for their King; but he modestly
declined it, and earnestly recommended to their Choice, Christian, Count
Oldenburg, his Sisters Son; who was thereupon elected, and Crowned King by the
unanimous consent of all the Nobility. As for the Original of the Family of
Oldenburg, its too far buried in Antiquity, for Historians to clear it; however
they say that toward the end of the tenth Century, one Otho was Earl of
Oldenburg, who had a certain wonderful Horn given him by a Spirit, or
Apparition, which is to be seen to this day in the Castle of Oldenburg. Of this
Family the present King of Denmark is descended, tho the Monarchy continued
Elective, till the time of his Father Frederick the Third, who was elected King
of Denmark and Norway, An. 1648. in whose Reign the Constitution of the
Government was altered, and the Monarchy was made Hereditary.

Christian the Fifth, of the House of Oldenburg, present King of Denmark,
Norway, the Vandals, Goths, etc. was born Apr. 18. 1646. Owned Heir of the
Crown of Denmark, Jun. 12. 1650. ascended the Throne after the death of his
Father, which happened Feb. 19. 1670. Crowned at Fredericksburg, June 17. 1671.
He espoused, May 18. 1667. Charlotta-Amalia, Daughter to William the Sixth,
Landtgrave of Hesse: she having been born, Apr. 27. 1650. He has Issue by her
living;

1. Frederick, born Oct. 21. 1671. 2. Christian, born Oct. 18. or March 25.
1675. 3. Sophia-Hedewig, born Aug. 28. 1677. 4. Christiana-Charlotta, born Jan.
18. or 28. 1674. 5. Charles, born Oct. 25. 1680. or 82. 6. William, born 1684.
The King of Denmark has but one Brother, viz. Prince George, of whom see in
England.

His Sisters are as follows.

1. Anna-Sophia, married to the Elector of Saxony, of whom see in Saxony. 2.
Frederica Amalia, born 1648. and married An. 1667. to Christian-Albert Duke of
Sleswick, or Gottorp, who was born Feb. 3. 1641. 3. Wilhelmina-Ernestina, born
1650. the now Relict of Charles, late Elector Palatine. 4. Ulrica-Eleanora,
born 1656, and married to Charles the Eleventh, the present King of Sueden, May
16. 1680.
Note, That King Frederick the Third, beside these Children, left a Natural
Son, Ubrick-Frederick, Count of Guldenlow, the now Governor of Norway, who by
a certain Noble Lady, is Father of Woldemar, Baron of Lowenthal, a Colonel in
the Danish Forces. Afterward he took to Wife Antonia-Augusta, Daughter to
Anthony, Count Oldenburg, An. 1677. by whom he has many Children, and among the
rest Fredericus-Christianus.

The present King of Denmark has also several Natural Children by the Countess
of Samsee.

To give an account of the chief Princes of the several Branches of the Royal
House of Denmark; you must note that they are divided into two Capital Lines,
viz. The Dukal Line of Holstein, and the Dukal Line of Sleswick, or Gottorp.

As for the Ducal Line of Holstein,, John, Brother to Frederick the Second,
King of Denmark, and Son to King Christian the Third who came to the Crown,
ann. 1537, was the first Progenitor of it: who being twice married, became the
Father of a numerous Issue, which spread it self into the four Branches of
Sunderburg, Norburg, Glucksburg and Ploen.

The present Duke of Holstein in Sunderburg, is Christian Adolph, born ann.
1641, and now lives at Frantzhagen, in Sax-Lawenburg (which was his Wive's
Portion) together with his Son, Prince Leopold Christian, born 1678. There are
of this Branch besides, seventeen Princes alive.

The present Duke of Norburg is Christian-Augustus, born 1639.

The present Duke of Glucksburg, is Christianus, born 1627, who lives in the
Castle of Glucksburg, with his three Sons, Philip-Ernestus, born 1673.
Joachim-Adolph, born 1679, and Christian-Augustus, born 1681.

The present Duke of Ploen is Joannes Adolphus, born 1634, and married ann.
1674 to Dorothea Sophia, eldest Daughter to Rudolphus-Augustus, Duke of
Wolfembuttel, who was born Jan. 28. 1653. He has Issue by her two Sons living,
viz. Adolphus-Augustus, born 1680, and Joannes-Ulricus, born 1684. His youngest
Brother Joachimus Ernestus, born 1637, is General of the Spanish Horse in the
Netherlands.

As for the Ducal Line of Sleswick, or Gottorp, the Author of it was Adolphus,
youngest Son to King Frederick the First, born ann. 1526. The present Duke is
Christian-Albert, born Feb. 3. 1641; and married 1667 to Frederica Amalia,
second Sister to the present King of Denmark, who was born 1648 He has Issue by
her.

1. Sophia-Amalia, born 1670. 2. Frederick born 1671. 3. Christianus-Augustus,
born 1673. 4. Maria-Elizabetha, born 1678.
II. The Shield of the Kings of Denmark, is charged with many Marks of
Possessions, Pretensions, and Alliances. He bears party of three, and Coupe of
two, which make twelve Quarters. In the first Or, Seem of Hearts Gules, with
three Lions passantguardant, placed one over the other, Azure, crowned,
langued, and armed of the first, which belongs to Denmark. 2. Gules, a Lion
Rampant, crowned and armed Or, holding a Battle-Ax Argent, hilted of the
second, for the Kingdom of Norway. 3. Gules, a Lion passant-guardant, Or, on
nine Hearts of the same, in Fesse, for Gothland. 4. Gules, a Dragon crowned Or,
for Schonen. 5. Azure, three Crowns Or, for Sweden. 6. Gules, a Paschal Lamb,
Argent, supporting a little Flag of the same, marked with a Cross, Gules, for
Gutland. 7. Or, two Lions passantguardant, Azure, for Sleswick. 8. Gules, a
Fish crowned Argent for Iceland. On these eight Quarters is a great Cross
Argent, which is the ancient Devise of the Kingdom, since the Conversion of
these People to the Faith of Christ. On the Center of this Cross are placed the
Arms of Dithmarsh, which are Gules, a Cavalier armed Argent. In the ninth great
Quarter, Gules, a Nettle Leaf spread at breadth, and charged in the midst with
a little Escutcheon, the whole Argent, for Holstein. 10. Gules, a Swan Argent
gorged with a Crown Or, for Stormaria. 11. Gules, two Fesses Or, for
Delmenhorst. 12. Gules, a Cross Pattee and Argent, and Fitchee at the Foot, for
Oldenburg.

This Shield is environed with a Collar of the Order of the Elephant, and bears
for Crest a Crown flowered, raised with eight Diadems, which terminate in a
Mond Or. The Motto to his Devise, on the Reverse of his Medals, is, Pietas and
Justitia coronant. His Livery is of a Red Color. He professes the Protestant
Religion according to the Doctrine of Luther, and uses the Danish Language,
which is a Dialect of the High Dutch.

III. Haffen, or Hafnia, by the Dutch called Copenhagen, or the Haven of
Merchants, seated near the Sea, in Seland, the greatest Island of the Baltic,
lying near the main Land of Scaudia, is the chief City of Denmark, and one of
the best Ports, and most frequented of the Northern Seas. Its of an orbicular
form, the Houses, for the most part, built of Clay and Timber, tho there are
many beautiful Edifices among them: its commended for a spacious Marketplace,
and has in it a Palace-Royal, built of Freestone, in form of a Quadrangle, but
of no great Beauty or Magnificence. Some say it to be near as large as
Amsterdam, but not so full of Inhabitants.

Near Elsenore, a Village much frequented by Seamen, as their Ships pass by the
Sound, is seated the strong and magnificent Castle of Cronenburg, built with
incredible Charge and Pains by King Frederick the Second: the Foundation of it
being laid on huge Stones sunk into the Sea, and so fastened together, that no
Storm or Tempest, how violent soever, is able to shake it; well fortified, as
well as founded, and mixed of a Palace and a Fort, being since the first
building of it, the most constant Residence of the Kings of Denmark; who from
hence may easily discern each Ship which sails through the Sound. By the
Commodity of this and the opposite Castle, the King secures his Customs, and
greatly strengthens his Estate; the Castles being so near, and the Straight so
narrow, that by the addition of some few Ships, he may keep the greatest Navy
that is from passing by him.

A little South of the Castle of Cronenburg, is an Island called Ween, a Dutch
mile in length, but not quite so broad: it was given by King Frederick the
Second to the famous Astronomer Tycho-Brahe, that living retired from all but
his own Family, he might, with more convenience attend his Books There is in
this Island the Castle Uranopolis, or Urenburg, where the greatest part of his
Mathematical Instruments are preserved in safety.

The said King Frederick the Second, built also for a place of Pleasure,
Fredericksburg, among Woods of Beech trees, where the King has a fine House and
a little Park.

In this Kingdom are the Knights of St. Mary, or of the Order of the Elephant,
instituted by King Frederick the Second. As in England, the Knights of the
Garter: in France, the Knights of the Holy Ghost: in Spain, the Knights of the
Golden Fleece: in Portugal, the Knights of the Sancta Crusada: in Tuscany,
those of St. Stephen: in Poland, the Knights of the White Eagle, etc.

This King has a Throne made all of Sea-Unicorns Horns.

Dronthein, seated on the River Nider, is the chief Town of the Kingdom of
Norway. The Cathedral Church there is the largest of any in those Northern
Countries. The Viceroy of Norway ordinarily resides at Bergen.

The Revenues of the King consists in Imposts laid on Ships, which pass through
the Sound; of which he is said to take one per Cent. on the Merchandises.
Sometimes there pass three hundred Vessels in a day, from several Ports through
this Straight, which makes the Tribute considerable. He has also a Revenue of
Crown Lands, and a great yearly Toll, made of the Cattle which pass into
Germany; as also of the Fish, transported into other Countries; yet its
conceived, that the Treasures of this King are not very great; partly because
there is no other important Commodity but Fish, to draw Merchants thither, and
partly, that there is not any one Town of any great Traffic in all his Realms
for the entertaining of Commerce.

The House of Sweden.
ABout the beginning of the last Century, the Nobility of Sweden growing weary
of the Tyranny of Christian the Second, King of Denmark, elected Gustavus, Son
of Eric of Wasa a Grypsholm, first Governor, then Duke, and last of all ann.
1523, King of Sweden, Gothland, the Vandals, Nordland, Finland, etc. and from
him is descended,

Charles the Eleventh, of the House Palatine of the Deux ponts, the present
King, born Dec. 24. 1655, whose Father dying while he was but five years of
Age, the Government of his Person and Kingdom were committed to ihe Queen his
Mother, and five great Senators of Sweden, viz. to Count de Brahe, who was
Grand Bailieffe, Couut Wrangel, who was Constable, Count de Stembock, who was
Admiral, Count de la Gardie, a French Man by Birth, who was Chancellor, and the
Baron de Bond, who was Treasurer. He was declared Major, Dec. 24. 1673. The
Contract of Marriage of this King, and of the Princess Ulrica-Eleanora-Sabina,
youngest Sister to the present King of Denmark, was signed at Copenhagen, May
7. 1680: and on the sixteenth of the same Month, it was consummated at
Schutturup. On the fourth of December following the Queen made her public and
solemn Entrance at Stockholm, where she was crowned Queen the next day. She was
born anno 1656, and has Issue living by the King.

1. Hedewig-Sophia, born Jun. 26. 1681. 2. Charles, the Hereditary Prince, born
Jun. 17. 1682. 3. Ulrica-Eleanora, born Jan. 21. 1688.
The present King of Sweden has one natural Brother, Count Gustavus Carlson.

II. He bears quarterly. In the first and fourth Azure, three Crowns Or, two in
Chief, and one in Base, for Sweden. In the second and third, Barry, Argent, and
Azure, a Lion Or, crowned Gules, for Finland. On the whole, quarterly, in the
first and fourth Sable, a Lion Or, crowned, armed, and langued Gules, for the
Palatinate of the Rhine. In the second and third, Fuzele in Bend, Argent and
Azure of twenty one pieces, for Bavaria. The Crest is a Royal Crown, garnished
with eight small Flowers, and closed by as many demi Circles, terminating in a
Mond Or, which is the Crest of Sweden. The Supporters are two Lions Or, crowned
with the same. His Livery is of a blue Color. He professes the Protestant
Religion according to the Doctrine of Luther, and has many Calvinists in his
Dominions. He uses the Swedish Language, which is a Dialect of the High Dutch.

III. Stockholm is the Capital City of Sweden, and the usual place of the
King's Residence: its a noted and well traded Port, and very strong; being
situate in Marshes, and built on Piles like Venice; most of the Houses are
covered with Copper. The Castle of this City is conceived to be one of the
strongest Holds in the World; fortified with four hundred Brass Pieces; many of
which are double Cannon. The Artillery of Sweden is so great, that its said,
they have above eight thousand Brass Pieces of Cannon.

Heylin counts in all the Kingdom of Sweden but one thousand four hundred and
seventeen Parishes, but many of them have a thousand or eight hundred Families,
the People being dispersed in Forests, and other places, where they have store
of Timber to build them Houses, and store of Pasturage for their Cattle, which
is the reason they have not so many great Towns, nor so well inhabited, as
usual in far lesser Countries.

IV. The Revenues are very great, they arising first from Church Lands taken to
the Crown. Secondly, from Mines. Thirdly, from the Tenths of all Increase, as
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Fish, Oxen, and the like Commodities. Fourthly, from
Customs imposed on Merchandises, paid in all Haven-Towns for all Commodities
imported and exported. He has also Contributions, and Power of imposing Tax in
time of War, as occasion may require.

The House of Portugal.
I. TOward the latter end of the eleventh Century, Alphonso the Sixth, King of
Castile, had very frequent and bloody Wars with the Moors, in which a certain
Prince, named Henry, descended (as some say) from the House of Burgundy (as
others) from that of Lorain, was chiefly signalized for his Valor, and good
Services to the Crown. King Alphonso in reward of this Merit, gave him
Portugal, then lately recovered from the Moors, under the Title of an Earldom,
together with his Daughter Teresa to Wife; yet with this condition, that he
should continue a Vassal to Castile. This Prince's Son was Alphonso the First,
who throwing off the Spanish Yoke, and having subdued several petty Kings of
the Moors, caused himself to be proclaimed King of Portugal in the year 1139.
His great Grandson Alphonso the Third, King of Portugal, had Algarve given him
in Dowry with his Queen, the Princess Beatrix, Daughter of Alphonso the Tenth,
King of Castile, whence the eldest Son of Portugal is always called Prince of
Algarve. Of this Family the present King of Portugal is descended. Indeed
Philip the Second, King of Spain, on some pretenses, made himself Master of the
Kingdom of Portugal by Force of Arms, ann. 1580, but 'twas again lost by his
Grandson ann. 1640; for the Portuguese, actually rejecting the Spanish Yoke,
elected John, Duke of Braganza, descended, as above, to be their King; in whose
Line the Kingdom continues. What particularly contributed to the Renunciation
the Portuguese made to the King of Spain, ann. 1640, was the permission that
King gave to others beside themselves to trade to the East Indies; and the Tax
he imposed of the fifth penny on all their Merchandises, and other Revenues. Its
remarkable, that the Deliberation of shaking off the Spanish Yoke, was kept
private above a year betwixt two hundred persons.

Don Pedro, of the House of Braganza, King of Portugal and Algarve, was born
1648. His elder Brother, Don Alphonso the Sixth, King of Portugal, etc. ann.
1667, married the Lady Mary-Frances Elizabeth, or Isabella, Daughter to Charles
Amadeus of Savoy, Duke of Nemours. She was born June the Twenty first, 1648.
and after sixteen months living with Don Alphonso, she obtained a Declaration
of Nullity of her Marriage with him, retired to a Cloister. And ann. 1669, Don
Alphonso was deposed, as judged incapable either of a second Marriage, or of
the Government, and sent the year following to the Tercera Island, where he
died in the year 1683. Now the present King upon his Brother Alphonso's being
deposed, was presently declared Prince Regent, and after his death King of
Portugal; and by a Dipensation, from the Pope, married his Sister-in-Law
abovementioned. The Cardinal Deacon, Louis de Vendome, in quality of universal
Legate, a Latere, gave them the Dispensation under Pope Clement the Ninth. Abbot
Bon-Filz, the Secretary to the Legation, has set forth the particulars, and the
Conferences he had with his Holiness, at the end of the Transaction.

The King had by this Queen a Daughter, named Mary Elizabeth, who was born ann.
1669, and died ann. 1690. And the Queen her self dying Dec. 27. 1683. the King.
ann. 1687 took to Wife the Lady Mary-Sophia-Elizabeth, Daughter of
Philip-William, Elector Palatine, who was born Aug. 6. 1666, and Aug. 30. 1688,
was brought to Bed of a young Prince, who died Sept. 3. in the same year. And
in October. 1689, she was brought to Bed of another Prince, named John, Prince of
Bresil.

The King of Portugal has but one Sister living, viz. Donna-Catharina, the
Queen Dowager of England, concerning whom, see in the Head of England.

II. He bears Argent, five Escutcheons Azure, placed Crosswise, each charged
with as many Besants of the first, placed in Saltier, and pointed Sable for
Portugal. The Shield bordered Gules, charged with seven Towers Or, three in
Chief, and two in each Flanch. The Crest is a Crown Or, which is the Crest of
Portugal. Under the two Flanches and the Base of the Shield appear the Ends of
two Crosses, the first Flower de luc'd Verte, which is for the Order of Avis.
The second Pattee Gules, which is for the Order of Christ. The five Escutcheons
were born in memory of five Kings, whom Alphonso the first King, slew at the
Battle of Obrique, ann. 1139. The Border with the Towers or Castles were added
by Alphonso the Third, on his Investiture into the Kingdom of Algarve, by
Alphonso the Tenth of Castile ann. 1257, whose Daughter Beatrix he then
married, and so conceived himself to have some Relation to the Arms of that
Kingdom. This King's Livery is of a Green Color. He professes the Roman
Religion, and uses the Portuguese Language, which is a Dialect of the Spanish.

III. Lisbon, seated on the River Tagus, is the Capital City of the Kingdom,
and the place where his Majesty keeps his Court. Its seven miles in compass,
and contains above thirty Parishes, and above thirty thousand Houses. The
Portuguese have this Proverb, He that has not seen Lisbon, has not seen a fine
thing. The Buildings are neat and elegant, and there are seventy six Turrets or
Towers on the City Wall, and twenty two Gates toward the Sea shore, etc. Its
the Staple for the Commodities for all the Kingdom, and thought to be worth
more than the whole Realm besides: and doubtless the Revenues which accrue to
the King from hence, and from his Foreign Plantations are very considerable.

ITALY.
The Papacy.
I. INnocent the Twelfth, the present Pope was born at Naples in March ann.
1615: elected Pope, July 12. ann. 1671, he is Son to Prince Minerbino, of the
Family of Pignato: the chief whereof is the Duke of Terra Nova, a Grandee of
Spain.

II. Having not the particular Arms of the present Popes Family by me, I can
here only say, that the Popes for a Crest to their Gentilitial Arms are wont to
put the Arms of the Popedom, which are as follow.

The Papal Escutcheon is Gules, and consists of a long Cap, or Headpiece Or,
surmounted with a Cross pearled and garnished with three Royal Crowns: with the
two Keys of S. Peter, placed in Saltier. Boniface the Eighth was the first that
wore the Tiara, with a double Crown, and Urban the Fifth made it in the Form of
a Cap, adorned with a triple Circle of Gold, for some Mystery contained in it.
Its called the Regnum because it denotes the Dignity and Power of Priest and
Emperor. The late Pope's Devise was, Innocens manibus and mundo cord. The
Popes Livery is of a Red Color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the
Italian Language.

III. His ordinary place of Residence is the famous City of Rome, seated on the
River Tiber, it being about eleven miles in compass; tho much of the Ground is
there taken up in Gardenage, and the like. As to the Computation of the People
of Rome, I have already given an account of them, in the Head of England, where
I speak of London; but for a farther satisfaction, take the following exact
account of them, as it lately stood for ten years together, given to a very
ingenious English Gentleman, at Rome, by the Abbot Nazzari, then Author of the
Giornali de Litteroati, and as I hear, now Keeper of the Vatican.

In the year 1672 they numbered -- 121064 In 73 -- 120945 In 74 -- 121726 In 75
-- 131912 In 76 -- 128507 In 77 -- 125701 In 78 -- 116287 In 79 -- 126128 In 80
-- 121031 In 81 -- 115722

Flavius Blondus, in his Ninth Book of his Roma Triumphans, has this great
Expression of the ancient Roman Grandeur, viz. There were at Rome in ancient
times, not only twenty thousand, but many more of Citizens, far surpassing all
the Citizens of our present Towns in the Splendour, Curiosity and Luxury of
their Houses, Furniture, and all manner of Accommodations for their Families.

The Cupula of S. Peter's Church at Rome is the greatest of the World; it being
one hundred and fifty Foot Diameter. That on the Cathedral of Florence is next
to it in Greatness.

The Vatican Library also at Rome is counted the greatest, and best furnished
with Manuscripts of any in the World.

Before S. Peter's Church at Rome, there is an Obelisk, erected on a Basis and
Pedestal, twenty six Foot in height: the Obelisk it self being eighty Foot
high. The Urn which held the Ashes of Julius Caesar was formerly raised on the
point of it; now it is a Cross. The Obelisk consists of one entire Stone, which
by good Computation is said to weigh four hundred Tuns, which, perhaps, is the
greatest Weight, in one Bulk, raised by the Art of Man.

The ordinary Revenues of the Papacy, arising out of Land-Rents, Imposts on
Commodities, and Sale of Offices, Boterus makes to be better than two millions
of Crowns yearly: but the extraordinary and spiritual to be far beyond.

SAVOY.
I. THO the Dukes of Savoy may not be improperly referred to Germany, and
contained in the Upper Circle of the Rhine: yet because they are possessed of
all Piemont in Italy, as also of many places in France, I think it more
convenient to treat of them here.

Now, this Family is justly to be numbered amongst those of greatest Antiquity,
since little that is certain can be spoke of its original by reason thereof.
This nevertheless is without dispute, that Beraldus, Marquess of Italy, Earl of
Savoy and Maurienne, flourished in the beginning of the eleventh Century, from
whom is descended Victor-Amadeus-Francis, the present Duke of Savoy, born May
17. 1666: he succeeded his Father Jun. 12. 1675: and the Duchess Regent, his
Mother, deposed the Regency into his Hands, ann. 1680. And Apr. 9. 1684, he
married Mademoiselle de Valois, named Anna-Maria, the second and youngest
Daughter to Philip, Duke of Orleans, by the Princess Henrietta-Maria, youngest
Daughter to Charles the First, King of England. By whom he has Issue.

1. Maria-Adelheid, or Adelherd, born Dec. 6. 1685. 2. Another Princess, born
Aug. 30. new Style, 1688.
The Princes of the Blood of Savoy.
I. CHarles Emanuel, the fiest Duke of Savoy, and King of Cyprus, great
Grandfather to the present Duke of Savoy, was born Jan. 12. 1562, who marrying
Catharine Michaelis, of the House of Austria, Daughter to Philip the Second,
King of Spain, left Issue by her several Children, but only two survived to
propagate the Family, viz. Victor-Amadeus the First, Grandfather to the present
Duke; and his younger Brother Thomas-Francis Prince of Carignan, who, Jan. 22.
1624, married Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to Charles, Count of Soissons, by whom
he had Issue,

1. Charlotta-Christina, who died young. 2. Aloisia-Christina, born August 1.
1627, and married to Ferdinand Maximilian, Marquess of Baden, ann. 1653. She is
now a Widow without Issue living. 3. Emanuel-Philibert-Amadeus of Savoy, Prince
of Carignan, born Aug. 6. 1628, he was both deaf and dumb, and so wholly unfit
for Business of State: yet ann. 1648 he was married to Catharine d'Este, Prince
Borsus's Daughter, by whom he has no Issue living.
Thomas-Francis had four Sons more, but all dead, without Issue, except
Eugenius-Maurice of Savoy, Count of Soissons, who was born May the third, 1635,
and died Jan. 7. 1673. On Feb. 20. 1657, he married Olympia, Daughter of
Michael-Laurence of by Cardinal Mazarine's Sister, whom he left a Widow, and by
her the following Issue living;

1. Lewis-Thomas, Count of Soissons, born Dec. 15. 1657, his Princess's name is
Urania de la Cropte, Daughter to the Noble Baron de Beauvois, whom he married
December 17. 1682. 2. Philip, born 1659. 3. Francis-Eugenius, born 1665. 4.
Maria-Joanna-Baptista, born. Jan. 1666. 5. Aloisia-Philiberta, born Nov. 22.
1667.
The Duke of Savoy's Mother, the Duchess Dowager of Savoy, is still living. Her
name is Maria-Joanna-Baptista, Daughter to Charles-Amadeus, Duke of Nemours.

II. This Duke bears Gules, a Cross Argent; this Coat being given to Amadeus
the Great, by the Knights of Rhodes, ann. 1315, with these Letters, in lieu of
a Motto. F. E. R. T. that is, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit. The occasion was,
that Amadeus the Fifth, Surnamed the Great, forced Mahomet the Second, Emperor
of the Turks, to raise his Siege at that time, from before the City of Rhodes.
The said Cross, is the Cross of S. John of Jerusalem, whose Knights, at that
time, were Owners of Rhodes; whereas before the Arms of the House of Savoy
were, Or, an Eagle displayed with two Heads, Sable, armed Gules, supporting in
Fesse an Escutcheon of Saxony; that is, Barwise of six pieces, Sable and Or, a
Bend flowered, Verte; a Coat belonging to the Emperous of the House of Saxony,
from whom the first Earls of Savoy derived it. They bear also the Arms of the
Kingdom of Cyprus, which Crown gives the Title of Royal Highness. His Livery is
of a Red Color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language.

III. Turin, seated on the River Po, in the Plain of Piemont, is the chief City
of his Principality, he there usually keeping his Court; his new Palace there
being one of the faiest of Italy. Adjoining to it, is a Park of the Dukes,
watered with the Duria, Sture, and Po, six Miles in Circuit, full of Woods,
Lakes, and pleasant Fountains, which make it one of the sweetest situations in
Europe.

Chambery, seated on the Banks of the River L' Arch, is the principal City of
the Dukedom of Savoy, where the Duke keeps his Court, when he is on this side
the Alps. The number of the people of the Principality of Piemont and Savoy
computed together, is thought to be 800000.

IV. The Ordinary Revenues of this Dukedom (taking in Piemont) are said to be
above a Million of Crowns per annum: but his Extraordinary so Great, that Duke
Charles-Emanuel, during the Wars with Henry the Fourth, in a very few years,
drew out of Piemont only, eleven Millions of Crowns, beside the charge they
were put to in Quartering the Soldiers.

TUSCANY.
I. COsmo de Medices, a Citizen, and whose Ancestors were Merchants, was
elected Prince by the Populace of Florence, An. 1434. But Piero, or Peter de
Medices, his Grandson, having, without the Senators knowledge, entered into a
League with the French King, Charles the Eighth, was ejected by the
Florentines; who enjoyed their ancient Liberty till 1512. That Ferdinand, the
Catholic King restored the Medicean Family: which nevertheless, in the year
1529. was again expelled by the Florentines: and although the Emperor, Charles
the Fifth, seized on the City, and made Alexander de Medices, who had married
his Natural Daughter Margaret, their Governor, yet he being slain, the
Populace made choice of his Kinsman, Cosmo de Medices. This Cosmo, commonly
called the First, was declared King of Tuscany by Pope Paul the Fifth, An.
1569. But upon the Emperor Maximilian the Second's much opposing it, he laid by
the Title of King, and took that of Great Duke of Tuscany. And this man was
Great Great Grandfather to the present.

Cosmo the Third, Great Duke of Tuscany, born 1642. succeeded his Father 1670.
and married by Proxy April 19. 1661, the Princess Louise-Margaret of Orleans,
Daughter to the late Gaston of France, Duke of Orleans, and of the deceased
Margaret of Lorain, by whom he has Issue,

1. Prince Gaston, born An. (...) and married An. 1688. to the Princess
Violanta-Beatrix, only Sister to the present Elector of Bavaria. 2. The
Princess (...) born (...) and married to the present Elector Palatine, An.
1691.
II. His Arms are, Or, five Roundles, Gules, two, two, and one, and one in
chief Azure, charged with three Flower de Luces, Or. His Livery is of a (...)
color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Tuscan Language.

III. Florence is the Capital City of the whole State, and the place of abode
of the Great Duke; who resides there in a Palace, on the Model of which
Luxemburg, at Paris, was built. This City is counted six Miles in compass, and
is said to have in it 90000 souls. The City Piza, belonging also to this Duke,
is five Miles in compass, but has not a third part of the Inhabitants of the
other.

His Revenues, as a French Author says, are conceived to be a Million and an
half of Ducats yearly: of which 600000 Crowns are raised yearly out of the
Dominion of the City of Florence, 150000 more, out of that of Sienna. The
Customs arising out of the Port of Legorn amount yearly to 130000 Ducats. The
Toll of the Millstones only 160000. That of Salt, Mines, and Iron falls not
short of the latter. In all, a Million and 20000 Ducats. He has also his Stock
going amongst the Bankers; and Trades as much as any in the way of
Merchandising: he uses also to buy up almost all the Corn, which is brought
into the Country, out of other parts, and to sell it again at his own price;
forbidding any to be sold, till all his be vended. The rest is made up by
Excise upon all Commodities, even unto Herbs and Sallets.

A late German Author says thus of him. His power may be guest at by his yearly
Revenues, which are estimated at 1800000 shillings.

MANTUA.
I. THE Family of the Dukes of Mantua is derived from one Hugo, who married one
of the Gonzagas, a Family of a Noble Extraction in Lombardy, which was the
reason that his Son Gerhard, who was invested in Mantua, by his Cousin
Adelbert, An. 1009, as an immediate Feudatory of the Empire, took on him the
name of Gonzaga. Aloisius, or Lewis Gonzaga was the eleventh in descent from
Gerhard, and created Captain of Mantua by the Emperor Charles the Fourth, An.
1329. which Title continued in the Family till John-Francis, his Great Great
Grandson, was created the first Marquess of Mantua, by the Emperor Sigismond,
An. 1433. whose Great Grandson Frederick the Second, was created the first Duke
of Mantua, by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, An. 1530. whose Great Great
Grandson is

Charles the Third, present Duke of Mantua, of the House of Gonzaga, born (...)
succeeded his Father An. 1637. and has married Isabella Clara, Daughter to
Leopold the Fifth, Archduke of Austria, but has no Issue by her.

II. His Arms are Argent, a Cross Pattee Gules betwixt four Eagles Sable,
membred of the second, under an Escutcheon in Fesse, charged Quarterly with
Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, and three Bars Sable. His Livery is of a (...)
color. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language.

III. His chief City and place of Residence is Mantua, seated on the River
Sarca, being very large, strong and pleasant. Its said to have been built by
Oenus, the Son of Manto, the Prophetess, Daughter to Tyresias; and is esteemed
more ancient than Rome by 670 years.

The Dukes, to take their pleasure on the Lakes and Rivers near this City, have
a Barge, called the Bucentaure, five Stories high, and capable of receiving two
hundred persons (whence it took the name) furnished very richly, both for State
and Pleasure.

The Dukes Palace in the City of Mantua is very fair and stately; but far
short, for the pleasures and delights thereof, of his Palace at Mirmirollo,
five Miles from the City: which, tho it be of a low Roof, after the manner of
ancient buildings, yet its very richly furnished, and adorned with very
beautiful Gardens, fit to lodge and gratify any Prince whatsoever.

IV. His Revenues amount to about 500000 Ducats yearly.

The House of Modena.
I. A Late French Author says that the ancient House of Brunswick in Germany,
and of Modena are of the same Stock, and justify their descent for almost 800
years. A late German Genealogist derives the Pedigree of Modena thus. The Dukes
of Modena are descended from the Ancient Marquesses d' Este, whose common
Father was Hugo, Lord of Padua, and Marquess of Este. Among the Descendants of
this Lord, we find one Borsus, who was created Duke of Modena by the Emperor
Frederick the Third, and of Ferrara by Pope Paul the Second. He was succeeded
by his Brother, Hercules the First, who died An. 1505. From him is descended,

Franscisco d' Este, the present Duke of Modena and Regio, Prince of Carpi and
Corregio, Marquess d' Este and Rovigni, etc. born An. 1656. and married a
Princess out of the Family of the Barbarini.

He has a Brother living, viz. Almericus, Prince of Modena, Cardinal d' Este,
born (...)

He has also a Sister living, viz. Maria-Eleanora-Beatrix, born Sept. 25. 1658.
and married to our late King James, An. 1673. She now lives in France.

II. His Arms are Palewise, of three pieces. First, Party per Fesse in a Chief
Or, an Eagle displayed Sable, membred, becked and crowned Gules, and in Base
Azure, three Flower de Luces Or; within a Border indented Or and Gules.
Secondly, Gules, two Keys in Saltier, one Or, the other Argent, charged in
Fesse with an Escutcheon of Pretense, Azure; supporting an Eagle of the Third,
membred and crowned of the Second. Over all, in Chief, a Papal Crown Or,
garnisht with sundry Gems, Azure and Purple. The third as the first Counter
placed. His Livery is of a (...) color. He professes the Roman Religion, and
uses the Italian Language.

III. Modena is the Capital City of the Duchy of that name, and the ordinary
place of Residence of its Duke.

IV. If this State be but small, it is good: but the particular Revenue is not
known to me.

Parma and Placentia.
I. THE Dukes of Parma and Placentia owe their Original to the Ancient Line of
the Farneses in Italy, from whence Pope Paul the Third (otherwise Alexander de
Farnese) was descended; who An. 1545. Created his Natural Son, Peter-Aloisius
de Farnese, Duke of Parma and Placentia, from whom is descended,

Rainutius, the Second, present Duke of Parma and Placentia, born (...) and
April 29. 1660, he married, Margaretha Joland, Daughter to Victor Amadeus, Duke
of Savoy, who died An. 1663. After which he took to Wife, Isabella d' Este
Sister to the present Duke of Modena, who likewise is since dead.

He has but one Son, viz. Odoardus the Third.

II. He bears Or, six Flower de Luces, Azure. His Livery is of a (...) color.
He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language.

III. Parma, seated on a River of the same name, is the Capital City of the
Duchy, and the ordinary place of Residence of its Duke. The Fields about this
City are excellent Pasturage, and yield great plenty of famous Cheese, called
Parmesan.

IV. His Revenue (...)

VENICE.
I. LOuis-Contareni, Knight and Procurator, after having been employed in four
Embassies, was chosen Duke of Venice, Aug. 29. 1676. and crowned with the usual
Solemnities.

The Dukes of Venice have a Custom of espousing the Ocean yearly, the occasion
of it being thus. While Sebastiano Ziani was Duke there, Pope Alexander the
Third, driven from the Pontifical Dignity, by Frederick Barbarossa, came to the
Venetians for relief; who sent Ambassadors to Frederick in his behalf.
Frederick receiving the Overtures of the Ambassadors concerning Pope Alexander,
with anger and threats, unless he were delivered to him; afterward sent his Son
Otho with 75 Galleys against the Venetians; which being met by Ziani's Fleet,
were routed; forty eight being taken; and among others the Royal Galley, and
two others sunk: and Otho was brought Prisoner to Venice, and diverse other
great Persons. As soon as Ziani came on shore, the Pope, after he had
Congratulated his Victory, presented him a Gold Ring, and said, Take Ziani this
Ring, and give it the Sea, obliging it thereby unto thee; which both yourself
and Successors shall for ever henceforth do yearly on this day, that Posterity
may know, you have in times past, by right of War, purchac'd the entire
Dominion over it, making it subject unto you, as a Woman is to her Husband. And
ever since after any new Duke is Chosen, he is carried to the entrance of the
Gulf in the Bucentaure (a Vessel of State) with the Senate, and chief of the
Town, where, after some Ceremonies performed by the Bishop, he Espouses the
Sea, and casts a Gold Ring into it, as a Pledge of Marriage. The same Ceremony
being also annually performed.

The Office of Duke holds during life. This State is Aristocratical, and is the
sole Sovereign and Independent Republic of Italy, the others owning the Pope,
or the Emperor.

II. The Arms of Venice are, Azure, a Lion winged, Sejant Or, holding under one
of his Paws a Book covered, Argent. The Dukes Livery is of a (...) color. And
the Republic professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Tongue. It has
a Patriarch residing at Venice; the Signior Sagredo being chosen to it Nov. 29.
1678. This Patriarch has under him the four Bishops of the Duchy of Venice, and
all the Archbishops and Bishops of Dalmatia, over whom he has the Authority but
of Primate. When the Pope writes to this Republic, he uses this
Superscription, or Address. Alla nostra Charissima Sorella, la Serenissima
Republica di Venetia.

III. The City of Venice stands at the end of the Adriatic Gulf on seventy two
Islets, joined together by above one hundred and fifty Bridges, all built of
one Arch, beside the Communication they have by an infinite number of
Gondolo's, or little Boats, very neatly built, and covered over with Cloth, so
that the Passengers may go unseen and without the molestation of Sun, Wind, or
Rain. The Compass of the whole aggregate body of Islets is said to be eight
Miles, it containing within it seventy two Parishes, the Houses being built on
Piles; and the City stands invested to so great a distance with Lakes and
Marshes, that its said to be impossible to be taken, but by an Army that can
stretch in compass one hundred and fifty Miles. Venice has been Independent
above 1200 years; it having lasted longer under one form of Government than any
Republic in the World. The number of its Inhabitants has been computed by some
to be above 200000 but a special account of them being taken by Authority about
sixteen years since, when the City abounded with such as returned from Candia,
then surrendered to the Turks, the number of souls was found to be but 134000.

There are two vast Columns erected in the Market Place at Venice, betwixt
which are their public Executions, the occasion of their Erection I conceive
to be this.

When the Venetians had beaten Barbarossa's Fleet, and taken his Son Otho, with
others Prisoners; Barbarossa was fain to come to Venice, and cast himself at
the Pope' s Feet, and beg his Pardon; and its said by some (tho, perhaps,
overstraining the matter) that the Pope then set his Foot on his Neck, and
caused a Deacon of his to sing, super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, etc.

Now its observable that it was in the same Sebastiano Ziani's time, who beat
Barbarossa's Fleet, that those Pillars were erected: for in his time there were
brought out of Greece (some say from Constantinople) in Ships of burden,
called Carracks, three vast Columns: one of which, at unshipping, brake the
Cables and other Engines, and fell into the Sea, where it remains: the other
two are those erected, having a space left betwixt them, and on the top of one
of them is set a gilded Lion, with open Wings, which is the badge of St. Mark,
their Patron: and on the other the Figure of S. Theodore, the Martyr, holding
his Lance and Shield, with a Dragon under his Feet. Whence its probable that
the Venetians, by setting up the monumental Pillar, having S. Theodore on its
top, with a Dragon under his Feet, would denote Barbarossa's submission to the
Pope, caused by them: and that by the Column with the winged Lion on it, they
would represent their own Naval Force.

IV. Tho it be conceived that the standing Revenues of the State of Venice are
but four Millions of Ducats yearly, yet they have many other ways to advance
their Treasury, by laying new Imposts on Commodities, as they see occasion;
which must arise to vast sums, in so extraordinary a place of Trade. Beside
there is nothing which the people Eat or Drink, for which they pay not
something to the Publick-Treasury: and moreover the poorest Labourer pays his
Pole money. Whence its credibly affirmed that the Christians live better under
the Turk, than under the Venetians.

GENOA.
I. THE Sieur Antonio Passano was chosen Dogue of Genoa, with the ordinary
Ceremonies, Jul. 16. 1677. He has for his ordinary Guard five hundred Germans.
His Office is Triennial. He Governs the State assisted with eight Senators; but
in Matters of great Weight, they are subordinate to the General Council,
consisting of four hundred Senators. His Palace stands in the midst of the
Town, adorned with an high Tower, whose front appears very Antique. They are
under the Protection of the King of Spain. Genoa was under the Government of
several Princes, till the year 1528, that Andrew Doria established there the
Form of Government observed to this day, which is Aristocratical. There is seen
in the Town the Statue of Andrew Doria, mounted on an Horse of Cast Copper,
with this Inscription on the Pedestal, Liberator Populi.

II. The Arms are, Argent, a Cross Gules, with a Crown closed, by reason of the
Island of Corsica belonging to it, which has the Title of Kingdom; the
Supporters are two Griffins, Or. The Livery is of a (...) color. They profess
the Roman Religion, and use the Italian Language. Innocent the Third made it an
Archbishopric. The present Archbishop is Father Giulio-Vincenzo Gentile, a
Dominican, who was nominated to it, at the beginning of the year 1681.

III. The Capital City bears the name of the Republic, and is seated on the
Sea Coast, being incompast with double Walls. The Italians call it the Jewel of
Italy, and style it the Proud, by reason of the stateliness of the Buildings,
both of the Churches, and Nobles Houses. Its in Compass about six Miles, and of
an Orbicular form. We find in the London Gazette of the twelf of June 1684,
that Genoa within its outmost Walls, contains 25000 Houses.

IV. The Revenue of this Republic (beside the Treasury of S. George, which is
very Rich, and managed as a distinct Body from the Public by its own Officers)
amounts to 430000 Crowns per annum.

RAGUSA.
I. THE Dogue of this Republic has the Government but for a month.

II. It has for Arms, the Image of the Virgin Mary. The Li very is of a (...)
color. It professes the Roman Religion, and has the Title of an
Archbishopric: and uses the Italian Language.

III. The chief City is Ragusa, seated in Dalmatia, on the Gulf of Venice, and
is enclosed within the State of the Venetians.

IV. Its Trade into diverse Countries makes it rich: it being a Magazine of
Merchandises, which come from Turkey, and the Turks make use of those of Ragusa
to procure from Europe, what Wares and Merchandises they have need of.

LUCA.
I. THE Republic of Luca lies in Tuscany, under the Protection of the House of
Austria. A Magistrate called the Gonfalonere, assisted by a certain number of
Citizens, Governs the State: the former being changed every month, and the
latter every six months.

II. The Arms are Azure, a Bend Or, on which is written, Libertas, betwixt two
Cottices, Or. The Livery is of a(...) color. It professes the Roman Religion,
and its Bishop owns none but the Pope: he has right to the Pallium, and causes
the Cross to be carried before him. Cardinal Spinosa was nominated to this
Bishopric some years since.

III. The City of Luca, situate on the River Serchius, is about three Miles in
Compass, and contains about 24000 Inhabitants. Its called the Industrious, by
reason of the Politeness and Skill of its people in making diverse Stuffs: and
because it has yielded great Men in Painting, Architecture, Sculpture, and in
all kinds of Arts.

IV. The Revenue of this Republic is 80000 Crowns per annum, arising from
their Silks, Wines, Stuffs of Cloth of Gold, precious Marble Quarries, and
famous Olive Groves.

SWITZERLAND.
I. THE Switzers conceiving themselves oppressed by the House of Austria, had
long thoughts of shaking off the Yoke, and in the year 1307. Verner Stauffacher
of Switz, Walter Furst of Uren, and Arnold Melchtal of Underwal, formed a
design for effecting it. An. 1308. these three Cantons entered into a League
Offensive and Defensive on this account, and by surprise made themselves
Masters of all the Forts which kept them in awe; by taking an occasion to carry
New years Gifts to the Governors, on New-years-day, according to Custom. Switz
gave its name to the whole Nation, because it was the first of the three, which
proposed the Confederacy. Lucern joined with them, An. 1332. Zurich, 1351.
Glaris and Zug, 1352. Bern 1353. Friburg and Soloturn 1481. Basil and
Schaffaussen, 1501. Apenzel, 1513.

To range these Cantons according to their Rank and Place, and not considering
the time of their Confederacy, they stand thus. Zurick, Bern, Lucern, Uren,
Switz, Underwal, Zug, Glaris, Basil, Friburg, Soloturn, Schaffhaussen, Apenzel.
These Cantons have all their peculiar Coats of Arms, which may be seen
elsewhere: and of them Zurich, Bern, Basil and Schaffhaussen, profess
Calvinism. Glaris and Apenzal profess both the Roman Religion and Calvinism.
The others profess the Roman Religion.

When Berthol the Fifth, Duke of Zeringham, caused the Town of Bern to be built
An. 1140. He slew a Bear which came to devour him; whence the Duke called this
place Bern, which in the German Language signifies a Bear. And since the first
Foundation of it, the Inhabitants have always kept Bears there, in a great Pit,
by the Gate of the Town, for a Remembrance. The Canton of Bern is almost of as
great extent as all the other Twelve, and of greater strength. The Town is
considerable, and neatly built with Freestone.

The City of Lucern is one of the largest, and most pleasant of Switzerland.
The Pope keeps his Nuncio there for all the Catholic Cantons, and the King of
Spain his Ambassador for the six Cantons of his Alliance; which are Lucern,
Uren, Switz, Underwal, Zug, and Friburg.

The Town of Basil has the greatest Trade, and is the most peopled and the
pleasantest of all Switzerland.

The Town of Soloturn is very beautiful: the French King keeps there his
Ambassador, and many other Foreign Princes ordinarily Reside there.

The Switzers hold every year at Basil, the General Assemblies of all the
Country. When they assemble separately, the Catholics take for the place of
their Congress Lucern, and the Protestants Arau, on the River Aur.

All the Cantons are as many Republics, which are Governed by their
Burgomasters, or Avoiers, their Government being Democratical. The Cantons
which have no Towns, call their Magistrates Landanes, instead of Burgomasters.

The Switzers have several Towns and States confederate with them, viz. The
Abbot and Town of S. Gal. Four Bishops, viz. of Sion, Basil, Constance, and
Croired. The Towns of Neuchatel, Valengen, Nuenberg, Biel, Geneva, Mulhausen in
Alsatia, Rotwel in Suabia, beyond the Danube. They have also many Prefectures,
that is, such little Parcels and Additaments, as have accrued to their State,
and are subject to their Authority, either by Gift, Purchase, or Chance of War.

The Principal Prefecture is the Town of Baden, taking its name from the Baths
there; and is the place of meeting for the Council of State of all the
Confederates. The Grizons also are Confederate with the Switzers; and of those
there are three Divisions. I. The Gray League, so called because the
Inhabitants wear a Gray Scarf. 2. The League of the House of God, so called
because it was the proper Patrimony of the Bishop and Church of Chur. 3. The
League of the Ten Commonalties. All these Confederates are able, on occasion,
readily to set forth an Army of sixty thousand Men.

The Republic of Geneva.
I. THIS Republic professes Calvinism. An. 1679. Mass was said in the City of
Geneva, with leave; at the House of Sieur Chauvigny, the French Kings Resident
there; which had not been done, since the year 1535. That Calvinism was there
Established by a Decree of the Senate.

II. Geneva gives for Arms, Party Or, and Gules, the first has a demi Eagle
displayed Sable, the second a Key Argent, with this devise. Post Tenebras Lux.
The Romanists say the words are misplaced, and that it ought to be, Post Lucem
tenebra.

III. The City of Geneva is situate on the Lake Lemanus, the River Rhone
passing through the lower part of it. The buildings are fair and of Freestone; the
Compass of the whole City being about two Miles, in which there are supposed to
be about 16 or 17000 souls. Munster calls it Mirae voluptatis Urbem. Its allied
with the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland; and in two or three hours it
advertises all the Canton of Bern to come to its succor with 50, or 60000 Men;
who may come on the Lake a day after the Signal; which consists in lighted
Torches, set from Tower to Tower. Its Governed by twenty five Senators, who
follow the written Law. Beside this Council of twenty five, they have one of
sixty, and another of two hundred.

POLAND.
I. POland, from the year 694, that Lochus of Croatia was the first Duke, has
been Governed by Dukes Palatines, Kings and Dukes again, till the year 1295,
that Primislaus, surnamed Posthumus, Duke of Posna, again assumed the name of
King, which continued ever since to his Successors of the same Family, till the
year 1574. Henry, Duke of Anjou, Son to Henry the Second, King of France, was
chosen on the death of Sigismund-Augustus, who was the first Stranger to the
Blood.

John the Third, of the Illustrious Family of Sobieski is the present King of
Poland, etc. Elected King March 20. 1674. being before Senator, Grand Marshal
and Generalissimo of the Armies of the Crown: he made his solemn entrance at
Cracow, Jan. 3. 1676. and was crowned there on the second of February
following, by the Bishop of that place, called Olzaski. He married, before his
coming to the Crown, a French Lady, named Maria Casimire de la Grange, Daughter
to Henry de la Grange, Knight, Marquess of Arquien, Lord of Beaumont, Master of
the Camp of a Regiment of Cavalry, and Captain Colonel of the hundred Switzers
of the Guard of the late Monsieur, Duke of Orleans. This Princess was crowned
on the same day with her Husband, and has brought him many Children.

1. Prince James, born An. (...) and An. 1691. he married
Hedewig-Elizabetha-Amalia, youngest Daughter save one to Philip-William, Duke
of Neuburg, and Elector Palatine. 2. Prince Alexander, born about the year 70.
3. John, born An. (...) 4. Casimire, born An. (...) 5. Leopold, born An. (...)
6. The Princess Louise* Adelaia, born Oct. 3. 1677. held at the Font of Baptism
by the Palatine of Russia, for his late Majesty Charles the Second, King of
Great Britain, etc. This Princess was Baptized with the Water of the River
Jordan, whereof the King her Father* just before her birth, had been presented
with a Pot full, as also with many other rarities from Asia.
II. As King of Poland, he bears Quarterly* In the First and Fourth, Gules, an
Eagle Argent, crowned, membred and becked Or, for Poland. In the Second and
Third, Gules, a Cavalier armed Argent, holding a Sword with the Right Hand, of
the same; and a Shied Azure, in the Left; charged with a Cross, Or, with double
Cross-Barrs, his Horse barded Azure, and nailed Or, for Lithuania. On the whole
Azure a Buckler Or, for Sobieski. For a Crest, a Crown raised with eight small
Flowers, and closed with eight Semicircles, terminating in a Mond Or; which is
the Crest of Poland. The Shield environed with the Orders of France. The
general Motto of the Kings of Poland, is, Habent sua sydera Reges. His Livery
is of a Blew Color. He professes the Roman Religion, but Greeks, Protestants
and other Sects are there tolerated. He uses the Poland Longuage, which is a
Dialect of the Sclavonian.

III. Warsaw, seated on the River Vistula, is most frequented, best traded, and
the Capital City of the Kingdom; honored, for the most part, with the Kings
Court, the holding of all Public business of Peace and War. Cracow, seated on
the same River, is little inferior to the former, the Buildings here being
fairer than elsewhere in Poland, of Freestone, and four Stories high; but, for
the most part, covered with Shingles, or Tiles of Wood.

IV. The Revenues of this King are computed to be 600000 Crowns per annum,
drawn chiefly out of Salt-works, near Cracow; and from Mines of Copper, Lead,
Tin, and Silver: from the fishing Trade in Prussia, and the Tribute of the
Jews. His Daughters are provided for at the Public Charge; and for the most
part, the expense of his Household defrayed. In time of War he is enabled by the
Diets to lay Impositions and Taxes on the people.

In Poland its an affront to call a Man Cossack; as in Italy, Calabrian; in
Germany, Switzer; in Spain, Galician; in Sueden, Finlander; in France, Norman;
in England, Welchman, etc.

Russia, or Moscovy.
I. THE first Great Duke of Moscovy, who shook off the Tartarian bondage, was
named John, who Reigned about the year 1500. Since him the Government has gone
partly by Election, and partly by Succession. The last Elected was Michael
Fredrowitz, Son of Theodore, the Patriarch of Mosco, and Grandfather to the
present Czars. He was Elected An. 1615, and settled this vast Empire, and
managed it in a more constant way of Peace, with the Turk, Tartar, Polonian,
and Swethlander, than any of his Predecessors had done before him.

At present there are two Brothers that Reign jointly, as Czars, Great Dukes,
or Emperors of Moscovy. The eldest is named Iwan-Alexeewich, born about the
year 1667. and has married the Daughter of one Soltikows, a Polander. The other
is named Peter Alexeewich, born about the year 1670. Upon the death of the late
Czar, the elder of these came to the Crown, but by reason of his Natural
Defects, being judged by a great party of the Empire, unfit to Govern, they
would have Deposed him, and set up the younger Brother: but the former being
upheld by a good Interest, after much stir, they came to this accommodation,
that they should Reign jointly.

II. The Great Seal of Moscovy is, an Eagle displaied Sable, in a Field Or,
bearing on its Breast a Shield, the Field being Gules, charged with a S. George
Argent, holding a Lance, with which he kills a Dragon. Betwixt the Heads of
the Eagle are three Crowns placed one over the other, which are said to
signify Moscovy, and the two Kingdoms of Cassan and Astracan. They say it was
the Tyrant Iwann Basileewich, who first made use of these Arms, to raise a
belief that he was descended from the Ancient Roman Emperors, the word Czar,
signifying Caesar. Heylin makes the Arms of Moscovy, Sable, a Portal Open of
two Leaves, and as many degrees Or. His Livery is of a Yellow Color. He is of
the Greek Church, and the Moscovites have a Bible translated from the Greek,
and printed in their own Tongue, which is the Sclavonian, in the Moscovite
Characters.

III. Moscow, seated on the River of the same name, is the Capital City, and
Imperial Seat. Few Cities in the World have suffered so much by Fire. An. 1571.
the Tartars burnt it, and in it 80000 persons, it being then 12 Miles in
Compass, and containing 41500 Families and Houses; and above 1500 Convents,
Churches and Chapels. It keeps its Compass still, but the number of Houses is
not restored, they not extending above five Miles. An. 1611. the Polanders
burnt it: and An. 1676. the Fire happening by accident, held on for three weeks,
and burnt, as its said, 5000 Houses. This Town is apt to Fires, because the
Houses of the Common People are generally built of Wood, with Mortar, mixed with
Straw, and done over with Lime, brought from Smolensko, and are covered with
Boards and Barks of Trees, having sometimes Turffs laid on them: and Fires
would happen oftener there, but that Soldiers and Guards are appointed to take
care of it. The Churches and Houses of the Persons of Quality are built with
Stone or Brick, and some of the chief Churches are covered with gilt Copper, or
Tin, and have many Globes of the same Metal on them, so that the Prospect of
Moscow is very beautiful. There is a Bell raised on a Tower of Moscow, which
weighs above one hundred seventy six Tuns. Two hundred Tuns of Metal were
allowed for making it. Its twenty four Foot in hight, the Clapper is twenty one
Foot in length, and weighs above seven Tuns.

IV. Its said that this Duke has more Lands than all the Dukes of Europe
beside: and his Government being Tyrannical, so that he has the free and
absolute disposal of his Subjects Lives and Fortunes, he makes his Revenues
what he pleases. But beside the extraordinary ways of oppressing his Subjects,
which he often makes use of, he has many ordinary ways for amassing Treasures,
viz. By Forestalling Homebred Commodities, and Engrossing the Foreign, selling
them at what price he lists, and hindering others from* Trade till all his are
sold. By provision of Rent, Corn, and Victuals, raised, in some years to 20000
Marks Sterling. Customs on Merchandise to 800000. Poll-mony to 400000. Rent,
Wood, and Hey to 30000, etc.

Tartaria Precopensis, or the Lesser Tartary.
I. ITS probable that upon the breaking of the great Empire of the Tartars into
pieces, upon the death of Tamerlane, which happened An. 1402. The Precopenses or
European Tartars submitted to a Prince of their own Nation, under the Power and
Government of whose Successors they still continue.

The name of the present Cham of the Lesser Tartary, or of the Crim Tartar, is
Nuradin Kiery. He has a Wife, called the Chamine and four Children, to all whom
the Emperor of Germany sent Presents some years since. He is called the Crim
Tartar from the Town of Crim; the Ancient Seat of the Chams, and at that time
the fairest and greatest of the Country, situate in the midst thereof, and
fortified with a strong Castle; and for the hight of the Walls, and depth of
the Ditch esteemed Impregnable.

The Country is also called Tartaria Precopensis from Precopia, a chief Town
thereof.

II. He bears Or, three Grissins Sable, armed Gules. His Livery is of a (...)
color. The Religion there most Embraced and Countenanced is that of Mahomet,
mingled with some few of their old Principles of Christianity: for they confess
that Christ shall be Judge both of the Quick and Dead, in the day of Judgment;
and punish ^^ose that speak irreverently of him: which makes great store of
Grecian and Armenian Christians dwell among them. The Language which they speak
is their own Tartarian; but intermixed, with much of the Arabic, and Turkish
Tongues, and when they write they use either Chaldean, or Arabic Characters.

III. A late French Writer tells us, he resides at Baccasarium, which stands in
the midst of his Countries; perhaps the same with Crim, before mentioned. But
the Court of the Great Cham in the Summer time makes a moveable City, built
upon Wheel-Houses, and Transported from one place to another, as occasion
serves; which Houses at every station, are orderly disposed of into Streets and
Lanes, and by the Tartars are called Agara, or a Town of Carts. They remove
also their droves of Cattle up and down with them. Within these Territories
there is a Town called Capha; but it belongs wholly to the Turk, he keeping
there a Governor. It was taken from the Genoeses, An. 1475. Its six or seven
Miles about, being, in a manner, wholly inhabited by Christians. The Greeks
have twelve Churches there. The Armenians thirty two, and the Romanists one,
Dedicated to S. Peter. The Town is of great Trade.

IV. The Revenues of this Prince are uncertain, his Subjects having but little
money, and living most upon Bartering of their Cattle: beside what he has in
Lands and Customs, and five thousand five hundred Ducats yearly, which he
receives from the Great Turk, he has the tenth of all Spoils which are gotten
in the Wars.

The Male-Line of the Ottoman House failing, these Chams are to succeed, upon
an Agreement made betwixt the two Emperors.

TURKEY.
I. THE Turks, who anciently inhabited about the Fens of Maeotis, lived a poor
and contemptible Nation, till Mahomet, the Sultan of Persian, Rebelling against
his Lord and Master, the Caliph of Babylon, called these Turks to his aid, and
by their help obtained a signal Victory: after which they desired their Wages,
and a fair dismission, which he refusing, they thereupon, under the Conduct of
Tangrolipix, their chief Leader, assaulted the Persians; and in their second
Fight, overthrew and slew the Sultan himself; and Tangrolipix was by both
Armies proclaimed Sultan, or King of Persia, about the year 1030.

There were at that time among the Turks, two noted Tribes, the Selzuccian, and
the Oguzian, of the former Tribe the forementioned Tangrolipix was the Head;
but this Line being at length all worn out, one Ottoman, chief of the Oguzian
Tribe, from small beginnings, warring against the Christians possessed himself at
length of the City of Nice, not long before, the Imperial Seat of the Greek
Emperors. And An. 1300. took on him the Title of Sultan; and from this Ottoman
inclusively, seven Sultans of the same Race Reigned; still increasing their
Dominions, to the year 1450. when Mahomet the Second, surnamed the Great, and
first Emperor of the Turks, Conquered the two Empires, of Constantinople, and
Trapezund, twelve Kingdoms, and two hundred Cities: from whom the present
Emperor of the Turks, being the fifteenth inclusively of the same Race, is
descended. His Name is Achmet, proclaimed Emperor June 22. 1691. upon the
death of his Brother Solomon.

II. He bears, Verte, a Crescent Argent, crested with a Turbant, charged with
three black Plumes of Herons Quils, with this Motto, Donec totum Impleat Orbem.
His Standards have the name of God, and sometimes that of Mahomet, written on
them, in Arabic Characters: beside these there is a Great Standard of the
Empire, and the Took, or the Horse-Tail.

The Great Standard of the Empire is like a sort of Ensign, or Colors of a
Company: its carefully kept in the Seraglio, because they say, the Legislator
Mahomet has made the Impression of his Hand on it.

The Took, or Horse-Tail is carried on an half Pike, in memory of a Bacha, who,
when those under his Command had lost their Great Standard, cut off an
Horse-Tail with his Semiter, and fastn'd it to an half Pike, held it up, and
Rallied his Men, and defeated the Enemy.

I know not whether this Horse-Tail may not relate to the Horse-Tail of the
famous Captain Sertorius; who to teach his Men that the stress of War lay in
unity, showed them an Horse-Tail, from which it was easy for any Man to draw
out the Hairs one by one, but that no Man could draw them out when joined
together.

The Grand Signior carries in his Turbant three Plumes made of Herons Feathers;
but if he sends the Grand Vizier to the Army, he takes out one, and puts it in
the Visiers Turbant, for a mark of the Authority he gives him.

The Mahometans go by a Lunar Calculation in their Calendars, and this is the
reason why those Worshippers cause the Crescent, or Figure of the New Moon to
be set on the spires of their Moschs, or Megids, as we the Cock or Vane, etc.
on ours. They set it also upon their Ships instead of the Heathens Castor and
Pollux. Indeed its the general Cognizance of the Grand Signiory, and its common
to the Persian with the Turk.

The ancient Arms of the Eastern Empire were, Mars, a Cross Sol betwixt four
Greek Beta's, of the second. The four Beta's signifying, (...), that is to say,
Rex Regum, Regnans Regibus.

The Grand Seignior's Livery is of a Green Color. He professes the Mohammedan
Religion; and the better sort of Turks use the Sclavonian Language, which being
originally the Tartarian, borrowed from the Persians, their Words of State;
from the Arabic, their Words of Religion; from the Grecians, their Words or
Terms of War; from the Italians, their Terms of Navigation.

III. Constantinople, by the Turks called Stamboul, is the Capital City of the
Ottoman Empire, and indisputably the finest Port of Europe. Its about nine (
Heylin says eighteen miles) in compass, taking in the Seraglio, and has twenty
two Gates, and contains, as Boterus says, seven hundred thousand Souls. The
Ground it stands on consists of seven little Hills, like that of ancient Rome;
thus all the Houses being of different Elevations, are advantageously seen from
the Fields, and Sea, and appear very beautiful: but the inside of it does not
answer the Beauty of this Prospect: for the streets are narrow, and run
winding; the Houses are ordinarily built of Wood, whence there often happen
Fires, and they are but of two stories high.

Its remarkable, that this City was taken by Mahomet, the Second of the Name,
and eleventh Emperor of the Turks, ann. 1453, on Tuesday, being the twenty
seventh day of May, and the third day of Whitsontide, a day which is kept
Festival in Honor of the Holy Ghost, whom the Greeks, from the time of their
Patriarch Photius, who lived about the year 860, had denied to proceed from the
Son of God, drawing all the Oriental Church to this Error, in which they have
still continued. The Temple of S. Sophia, in Constantinople, now converted to a
Mosque, for Beauty and the Elegancy of the Building, is thought to exceed all
the Fabrics in the World; concerning which a Greek Historian thus pathetically
delivers himself. The most splendid and august Temple of S. Sophia, is the
Church of my God, a terrestrial Paradise; which I believe the Seraphims
themselves with admiration admire; and if God vouchsafes to refide in Works,
rendered as polite as possible, by the Hands of Men, certainly he resides here,
or no where. This Church being divinely built, the Ornament of the whole Earth,
most gloriously shines like another Sun, and celestial Giant, etc. When the
Emperor Justinian, who had bestowed seventeen years in finishing it, entered it
first with the Patriarch Euthymius, he gave God thanks, that by his assistance
he had completed so admirable a Work, and said: Vici te Solomo. And on a
Pedestal in the midst of the Imperial Fountain, before the Church, he caused to
be placed the Statue of Solomon as gazing on it, and holding his Finger on his
Mouth, as owning himself far exceeded by this Structure of the new Jerusalem.
But however this Temple is adorned, its but a Trifle, if compared in bigness
with the ancient Temple at Jerusalem.

There is a pleasant story in Glycas relating to this Edifice. When Justinian
undertook to build it, he bought several Houses near the place where he
intended the Building, which, People, willing to promote the Work, sold him at
a reasonable value. But there was one Man, who by no means would part with his
House, notwithstanding any Offers made him by the Emperor; whereat the Emperor
was much troubled. A Magistrate of the Town understanding this, and well
knowing the Genius of the Man, and that he was greatly delighted in seeing
Feats of Chivalry, at a time when a Turnament was to be held, clapped this Man
into custody; whereupon he cried out that the Emperor should have what he
pleased, so he might have freedom to see the sight; and parted with his House
accordingly.

The Palace of the Seraglio contains three Courts, one within another, the
Buildings yielding unto those of France and Italy, for the neat contrivances,
but far surpassing them for cost and curiousness.

The Grand Seignior has many other considerable Cities; the chief is Grand
Cairo in Egypt, which is eight miles in compass, and being viewed from a high
place, it presents a most delightful prospect; the Mosques being built of
various Colors, and very beauteous, and the other Houses, tho but two stories
high, having generally their Roofs raised with Turrets for Coverings, and being
all surrounded with Palm Trees and Gardens.

Alexandria also in Egypt, has been a considerable Town, belonging to the Grand
Seignior: its at present full of Ruins, and but poorly inhabited; the cause is
imputed to the illness of the Air, during the Months of July, August, September
and October; which is thought to proceed from this, that the greatest part of
the Houses are built on solid Vaults, which serve as Cisterns to keep the
Waters of Nilus, whence the Air becomes corrupted and inclines to Diseases.

He has also the City of Babylon, in Chaldea, not the ancient Babylon, but
another City, going by that name, situate forty miles more North; maintained
chiefly at present by the Trade of Aleppo, and being seven miles in compass.

IV. The Turkish Empire being of so vast an extent in three parts of the World,
viz. Africa, Asia, and the better part of Europe, must of necessity yield an
immense Treasure: a certain Author says he has under him seventy Kingdoms, and
three Empires. The Revenues consist chiefly in Tributes raised on the People,
and in Customs, and these are paid for the most part in Silver. As for the Gold
which is raised, it proceeds from four Sources, whereof two are foreign, and
two of the Country. One of the first is the Trade of the English, French,
Dutch, Italians, Moscovites, and Polanders, who bring Ducats from their
Countries. The other is their annual Tribute of the Cham of the Lesser Tartary,
the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, Valachia, the Republic of Ragusa, and a
part of Mingrelia and of Russia ought to pay the Grand Seignior in Gold, which
amounts to considerable Sums. One of the two Sources of the Country is the
Spoils of the Bacha's, all their Moneys, which for the most part is Gold,
coming to the Grand Seignior at their Deaths: the other the Revenue of Egypt,
which amounts yearly to twelve millions of Livres. Beside this yearly Income,
the Turk has a secret Treasure, consisting of such stores of Gold, as have been
laid up by the Ottoman Princes; and in this private Treasury when Ibrahim, this
Emperor's (...) came to the Crown, there were four thousand Bags of Gold, each
containing 15000 Ducats, of Gold, or thirty thousand Crowns, which Sum makes
three hundred and sixty millions of Livres.

Some have affirmed the Grand Seignior to be Proprietor of all the Lands under
his Dominions, and that Fathers do not leave the Succession to their Children,
which is a great mistake; for the right of inheriting according to the degrees
of Blood is not only granted the Turks, but likewise to the Greeks, they paying
the Grand Seignior only about three per Cent. at each change of Heir.

PERSIA.
I. HIstorians make eight Dynastyes of Persian Kings. The fifth of these
Dynastyes was begun in the person of Tangrolipix, the first Persian King of the
Turkish Race, ann. 1020, who is mentioned by me in my foregoing Account of
Turkey. This Race failing, the sixth Dynasty began in Haalon, made King of
Persia by Occata, the Great Cham of Tartary, ann. 1260. This Tartarian Dynasty
ended also in Persia with the Race of Tamerlane; and the seventh Dynasty of the
Turcoman, or Armenian Race began in Ussan Cassanes, ann. 1472, he being the Son
of one of those poor Armenian Princes, dispossessed by Bajazet the First,
Emperor of the Turks, and restored by Tamerlane, who grew at length to that
power, that he overthrew in a pitched Field Zeuzes, the last of the Tartarian
Race, and slew him.

This Dynasty of the Turcoman or Armenian Race continued till 1496, that
Alanat, the last King of it was overthrown and slain by Hysmael, one of the
Sophian Race and Faction. The Quarrel and Occasion was thus.

Mahomet the Impostor, and first Emperor of the Saracens, by his last Will and
Testament bequeathed the Succession of that Estate to Haly, his near Kinsman,
and Husband to Fatima his eldest Daughter: but Abudezar, Haumar, and Osman,
three powerful Men, and the chief Commanders of the Army in the time of
Mahomet, successively followed one another in the supreme Dignity. After their
Deaths Hali enjoyed that Honor for a little while, supplanted first, and
afterward vanquished by Muhavias, a great Man of War, who succeeded in it, and
to secure himself, slew Hasen, or Ossan, the Son of Hali, and eleven of his
Sons, a twelfth escaping, called Musa Ceredine, from whom Hysmael Sophi
abovementioned, was lineally descended, who, after his Victory, and being
crowned King, or Shaw of Persia, altered the Form of Religion, making Hali and
himself the sole Successors of Mahomet, and condemning Abudezar, Haumar, and
Osman with the Turks, as Rebels, and Schismatics. Hence proceeded the Bloody
Wars betwixt them and the Turks; the Persians burning whatsoever Book they
found concerning those three; and the Turks holding it more meritorious to kill
one Persian, than seventy Christians.

This Hysmael Sophi was the Founder of this eighth Dynasty of the Persian
Kings, ann. 1505, from whom is descended,

Cha Soliman, the present King of Persia, at his coming to the Crown called Cha
Sophi; he came to be King, ann. 1665, his Father great Cha Abas then dying,
himself at that time being thirty five years of Age. Its a remarkable Passage
concerning the change of this King's Name, and his being twice crowned, which
was on this occasion.

It happened some time after his being crowned, that he grew indisposed in his
Health, and his Physician had tried several methods on him without success;
whereupon the King's Mother growing impatient, fell severely on the Physician,
and charged him for being either Fool or Traitor, that he did not cure the
King. The Doctor finding himself so hardly put to it, had no way to shift
himself but by charging the Fault on the Stars and the Astrologers; and told
her, if the King languished, and could not recover a perfect health, it
proceeded not from any Failure in him, or his Medicines, but for that the
Astrologers had not taken the Aspect of a fortunate Constellation at the time
of his Coronation. The Physician was backed by all his Friends at Court, and
particularly by one of the King's Astrologers, who had a secret hatred against
the Prince of the Astrologers, who had been appointed to observe the favorable
hour for the King's Coronation; and the former made out the mistake
astrologically to the Grandees of the Court; so that the King and Queen Mother
were possessed of the truth of what the Physician had averred. The chief
Astrologer seeing how things went, was forced, for fear of drawing on him
somewhat worse, not only to forbear contradiction, but withal to applaud what
was said; and upon this second Inauguration, the King changed his name, as is
said before, which was judged unfortunate to the State; and he began (as he
thought) to find himself better afterward.

Note that the word Cha, in the Persian Tongue, signifies King, and that tho
many call all the Kings of Persia, Sohpies, some modern Accounts say it is an
Error so to do, and that Sophi is a proper name, or rather a name of the
Religion of Hali; it signifying wise and knowing in the Law.

II. Concerning this King's Arms, there are various opinions. According to his
Picture, to be seen in many places, there is a Sun Or, in a Field Azure.
According to some ancient Books of Heraldry, the Kings of Persia have a white
Banner, charged with an Eagle displayed and crowned Or. Another Author assures
us they give the Cressent, as the Turkish Emperors, with this difference, that
there is an Hand added to it. Others maintain that beside their bearing the
Cressent, they cause it to be carried before them, when they walk in Ceremony,
and that all Mohammedan Kings have the Cressent in their Arms, and that Blazon
and Coats of Arms are not much used in those Countries, but that in lieu, they
make use of some Marks. Another says they bear Or with a Dragon Gules, and
another says Or, with a Buffalo's Head Sable. Others say they give the Sun and
Moon; and others a rising Sun on the back of a Lion with a Cressent: and in
truth this is their Emblem and Hieroglyphick, and the Armenians, Subjects to
the Persian, that are at Paris, say, that these are the Arms of this Crown, and
our Merchants at London, who have lived in Persia many years, affirm this to be
the great Seal of the King of Persia. His Livery is of a (...) Color. He
professes the Mohammedan Religion according to the Doctrine of Hali, the Turks
following that of Osman, and he uses the Persian Language, which is not limited
within the Provinces of the Persian Empire, but used also in the Court and Camp
of the Great Mogul, and some parts of Zagathay: and where its not vulgarly
spoken, its studied and understood by persons of the more eminent sort, as the
Latin, by the Gentry of these Western parts; so that he that has this Language,
may travel over all the East without an Interpreter.

III. Hispaan, seated on the River Senderut, is the Capital City of Persia, and
the ordinary place of Residence of the Kings. The Town and Suburbs are almost
of as great extent as Paris; but the number of the Inhabitants is much lesser.
The greatest part of the Houses there are but of one story, or two, at most;
they are built of Bricks, only dried in the Sun, and generally they have flat
Roofs (as generally in the East) and have Terasses on the tops. The Fronts
facing the Streets are very mean, and the Men's Apartments are very neat: as for
those of the Women, Strangers are no ways permitted to see them. Each
considerable House has a Garden belonging to it, where they do not now suffer
the great number of Plane Trees to grow, which formerly made the Town, at a
distance, seem like a Forest. The streets are narrow, oblique, and very dark;
because for the greatest part, they have Arches made on each side of them, for
walking dry. They are not paved, wherefore the Dirt is very troublesome in the
Winter, and the Dust in the Summer. The Town-Walls are only of Earth.

He has a Seat of Pleasure at Tawgebawt; its of no great Receipt; but for the
Cost and Ornaments of it, and for the Delightfulness of the Gardens, adjoining
to it, not yielding to any in this large Empire; and for Grotto's, Echoes,
Labyrinths, and other Excellencies of Arts, perhaps not fellowed in the World;
especially considering that it stands in the midst of a Sandy Desert.

IV. Pontier, a late French Writer, tells us that the King of Persia has
fifteen millions of Crowns, annual Rent. His Revenues arise from the Fishery of
Pearls, found on his Coasts,, from the Mines of the old and new Rocks of Turkey
Stones, from the Customs and the Sale of all sorts of Merchandises, which pay
proportionably to the price they are sold at. And each public Hall built for
the Entertainment of Travelers pays the King a Tribute.

The Government of the King of Persia, tho it be despotical and severe, has a
great deal less of the Tyrant in it, than any other of the Mohammedan Kings, or
Princes; these cherishing their Brethren, maintaining Nobility amongst them,
and encouraging Industry; which makes them to be better served than the Turk or
Tartar, to both whom they are far inferior both in Power and Treasure. Their
Officers of State, and Men of principal Employment, for the most part, are
Eunuchs (as generally in all Empires of the East) such persons being thought
most trusty, because abstracted from the Obligation of Wife and Children, they
study more the Prince's Service, than their own Advantages.

Grand Tartary and China
I. THE Chronicles of China tell us of three hundred and forty Kings, which for
the space of 4000 years there Reigned, and that the Country being without Rule
or settled Government before, was first reduced into Order by one Vitey, by
whom the people were instructed in Physic, Astrology, Divination, the Arts of
Tillage, Shipping, etc. Of this Kings Race there are said to have been two
hundred and seventeen Kings, who held the State 2257 years. The last of them
was Tzaintzon, who being ill Neighbored by the Scythians (not yet called
Tartars) is said to have built that vast Wall, extended four hundred Leagues in
length, parting Tartary from China, having at the end of every League a strong
Rampart, or Bulwark, continually Garrizon'd, and well furnished with all
warlike Necessaries. This Wall in reality is only a continuation made good of a
Chain of Mountains, dividing the two Countries; there being a Work of the like
Nature, tho not for the same use, in the Kingdom of Peru in America; of which I
have given an account before. Now this King Tzaintzon being slain by some of
his Subjects, who found themselves burdened and wasted with this Work, the
Race of these Kings ended; and then several Princes of Chinese Families held
the Government one after another, and afterward several Tartar Princes; China
being Conquered by the Tartars, and made a Province by them, till about the
year 1269; when a Chinese, named Hugh, a mean Person, but of great Courage,
raised to himself a strong Party, and drove the Tartars out of all, and was
Crowned Emperor of China; taking to himself the name of Hungus (by some
Writers commonly called Hombu) that is a famous Warrior, and gave to his
Children and their Posterity the name of the Taingian Family, from whom the
last King of China, called Zunchius was descended, and under whom China was
again Conquered by the Tartars, and continues under their subjection.

To give an account of the rise of the Tartars, it was as follows. East Tartary
contains many Regions, Governed formerly by distinct Governors; and among
those Regions, there were six of chiefest Note; whereof one was named Tartar,
giving name to the Tartars, which was divided among five Tribes, each Governed
by its Chief, as its commonly among barbarous Nations, tho all of them were
subordinate to an higher Power, being oppressed by a King of Tenduc, another of
the six chief Regions, so called. But at length one Cingi, a Chief of one of
the said five Tribes, first with the force of his own Tribe, subdued the other
four Tribes, and afterward the King of Tenduc himself: and then took on him the
Title of Cham, or Emperor, about the year 1162. And this was the first step by
which this base and beggarly Nation, began their Empire and Sovereignty;
whereas before they lived like Beasts, having neither Letters, Faith, nor
dwelling but in Tents, nor any thing befitting Men. Some write that Cingis
before he joined Battle with the King of Tenduc consulted with his Diviners and
Astrologers of the Success, who taking a green Reed, cleft it asunder, and on
one piece writ the name of Cingis, and on the other the name of the King of
Tenduc, and placed them not far asunder, and then fell to reading their Charms
and Conjurations; whereupon the Reeds fell a fighting, in the sight of the
whole Army, the Reed of Cingis overcoming the other, whereby they foretold the
joyful News of Victory to the Tartars; which accordinly happened. But whether
this seems not a Story contrived in imitation of the Rod of Moses, and those of
Pharao's Magicians, I leave it to Consideration. From the foresaid Cingis, the
present Cham, or Emperor of Grand Tartary and China is descended. The most
famous of all the Chams of Tartary was the Great Tamerlane, who Reigned about
the year 1370. he being thought to have subdued more Provinces in his life time
than the Romans had done in eight hundred years. Dying he divided his Empire
among his Children, viz. Persia to Mizra Charock, his fourth Son, Zagathy to
another, etc.

The account of the present Emperor of the Asiatick Tartars and of China
stands thus. An. 1644. a Chinese called Lycungus revolted against the Emperor
of China called Zunchius, defeated many of his Generals and surpised the Town
of Peking. The Emperor for fear of falling into the Hands of the Rebels, ran
into the Garden of his Palace, and seeing himself pursued, hung himself to a
Tree. Some time before, he had sent a considerable Army against the Tartars,
who had made some Incursions into China: Usungus, who commanded it, hearing all
what had past, sent to desire the Tartars to join with him, and to march
together against the Rebels. Zungteus the King of the Tartars accepted the
proposition, and came to him with eighty thousand Horse, which were followed by
above two hundred thousand Foot. As soon as the Tartars saw themselves the
stronger, they made Usangus and his Troops to shave themselves like the
Tartars, and went straight to Peking, which Lycungus had forsaken, after having
pillaged it of all the Treasures of the Emperors of China. Zungteus the King
of the Tartars died on the way, and left but one Son, six years of Age. The
Tartars owned him for their Emperor, and after having Crowned him second
Emperor of China by the name of Zunchius, they pursued their Enterprise under
the Conduct of Amavangus, his Uncle and Tutor; and in seven years they
perfected the Conquest of almost the whole Empire, and defeated many Princes of
the Royal House; who had been Crowned in different Provinces. This Emperor
Zunchius died Feb. 6. 1661. and had for Successor his Son, only eight years of
Age. He ordered dying that his Mother and Grandmother should have the care of
his Education till he were Major; and that the State should be Governed by four
Mandarins, or great Lords of the Tartars. He was called then Haei, but since he
has ascended the Throne, he has caused himself to be called Yunchi. He Reigned
peaceably till the beginning of the year 1674, that the forementioned Usangus,
seeing the Desolation of his Country, and being in some power, as being Viceroy
of Quansi, now let his Hair grow like the Chinese, and endeavored to shake
off the Tartar Yoke, making himself Master in a little time of four great
Provinces, on the western part of China, and drawing to his side the Viceroys
of Foquien and Canton, who commanded on the East and South. But these three
could not long agree, so that the two last submitted themselves again to the
Tartars; and Usangus now stands only on a defensive War, being Master of the
Provinces of Quansi and Huquan, where the Chinese keep still some remainder of
their first Grandeur.

II Pontier says that this Emperor bears, Or, an Owl Sable, for Tartary; and
that, as King of China he bears, Argent, three Blackamoors Heads, placed in
front, their bust vested Gules. Another says the Kings of China have for
Blazon, two Dragons, and that the Ancient Kings of China had a kind of Crown.
That now the Tartar Kings that command there, have for their Royal mark, a sort
of Cap, compast about with a Circle of Ivory, and terminating in a point, with
a kind of Tower, Or; on the top of which there are many Pearls, and among them
one as big as a Pigeons Egg: these Pearls being the sole mark of the Royalty,
none of the Kings of China, how absolute soever they may be, daring to wear
them on their Caps. The Ancient Motto of the Emperors of Tartary, engraved in
their Seals was this. Deus in Caelo and Chiukuth Cham in Terra, Dei fortitudo,
and omnium hominum Imperator. This Emperous Livery is of a (...) color. He
professes the Mohammedan Religion, and uses the Chinese and Tartarian Languages.

III. Manesson Mallet, in his late description of the Universe, says that the
little knowledge Men have had of the Eastern part of Tartary, which is on the
North of China, has occasioned the Error of many persons, who have taken
Chambalu and Peking for two different Towns: the greatest part of Geographers
having made Chambalu the Capital City of Cathai, which they believed to be one
of the chief Countries of Tartary; but since we have seen the relation of the
Voyage of the Dutch to China, and that of Father Kircher, it has no longer been
doubted, but that Cathai was the northern part of China, and that the Town of
Peking was that which the Saracens, and Moscovites call Chambalu, that is, the
Court or City of the King, the name of Peking signifying the same in the
Chinese Language. This City is said to be of a vast extent, but we have not any
account thereof to rely on, but its generally agreed that the Houses, for the
most part, are but of one Story; and the Sreets being not paved, so troublesome
a dust is raised by the Wind in the Summer, that it forces those who have not
Portative Chairs, to cover their Faces with a Linen Cloth, reaching to their
Girdles, through which they may see without being seen; and the Dirt makes the
Streets altogether as offensive in the Winter. In this City, as they say, the
King has a Palace of great Magnificence and Curiosity.

Nanking is the next chief City of China, and not inferior to the former, only
in the number of Inhabitants, which, by reason of the Kings Residence at
Peking, is there greater. The Houses of the chief Merchants are very well
built, and of many Stories. They compute in it a Million of Inhabitants,
without comprising a Garrison of forty thousand Men, kept there by the Tartars,
under the Command of the Lieutenant General, of the Southern Provinces, who
resides there. There are several accounts of the vast numbers of Cities, Towns,
Villages, Houses and Inhabitants of China, as also of their incredible numbers
of Shipping, concerning all which we want more perfect accounts to rely on.

IV. Its said that the Kings of China have ordinarily had an yearly Revenue of
above one hundred and fifty Millions of Crowns. His Revenues, as Cham of
Tartary may be what he lists himself, he being the absolute Lord of all the
Subject has, without any thing he can call his own. But that which ordinarily
accrues to him is the Tenth of the Wool, Silk, Hemp, Corn and Cattle: and he
draws into his own Hands all the Gold and Silver which is brought into the
Country; and which he causes to be melted, and preserved in his Treasury;
imposing on his people instead of money, in some places, Cockleshells, others a
black Coin, made of the Bark of Trees, with his stamp on it: and he keeps to
himself the whole Trade of Pearl fishing, which no Man, upon pain of death,
dares fish for, but by leave from him.

INDIA.
I. THE Emperor of India, called the Great Mogul, or King of Indostan, is
named Aureng-Zebe, which in the Indian Language signifies The Ornament of the
Throne. He is called the Mogul, by reason of his descent from the Mongul
Tartars, one of the five great Tribes, or Nations mentioned in the foregoing
Head, into which that people was divided, derived Originally from the Great
Tamerlane. The present Emperor began to Reign An. 1660, after the cruel Deaths
which he made his own Father and Brothers to suffer, he being the third, of
four Sons of that Prince. He has many Children, and his eldest Son is called
Sultan Mahmond.

II. The Armorial Shield of India is, Argent, seem with Besants, Or, his Livery
is of a (...) color. He professes the Mohammedan Religion, which has been long
Embraced by the Tartars, from whom they were originally descended: and he uses
the Scythian or Tartarian Language, from which the Turks (a Scythian people)
differ but in Dialect, and a sprinkling of the Persian intermixed with it.

III. The City where he keeps his Court is called Agra. He formerly resided at
Lahor. Agra is esteemed twice as great as Hispaan. The Houses of the Persons of
Quality are Magnificent tho they are but of one Story, or two at most, and are
environed with very high Walls, to keep their Wives from being seen.

IV. This King has an infinite Treasure in Gold and precious Stones. His yearly
Revenue is said to be fifty Millions of Crowns; and he is Heir to every Man's
Estate, that is worth an having; the Persons and Purses of his Subjects being
at his sole disposal, so that he may amass what Treasures, and raise what
Forces for War he pleases.

Decan and Cambaia.
I. THE name of the King of Decan and Cambaia is Idalcansi, or Idalschaa.

II. He bears Verte, encompast with a Collar of large precious Stones. His
Livery is of a (...) color. He professes the Mohammedan Religion, and uses the
(...) Language.

III. His chief Cities are Decan and Visapore, tho he resides ordinarily at
Danoger. There is much talk of a great Canon, he has in his Artillery. He has
in his Country an Hill, encompast with an high Wall, and kept by a strong
Garrison, because of the great store of Diamonds, and other Precious Stones,
which are dug out of it. An. 150^, the Portugueses took from a Prince of Decan
the Island and Town of Goa, which they have since made the Capital of their
East India Conquests.

Golchonda and Orixa.
I. THE King of Golchonda and Orixa is called Cha John.

II. He professes the Mohammedan Religion.

III. His Capital City is Golchonda, which is very fair and strong. All the
Merchants Lodge in the Suburbs, and the Kings Officers, and persons of Quality,
in the Town.

IV. This Prince has in his Estates, a very rich Mine of Diamonds.

CALICUT.
I. THE name of the King of Calicut, is, Zamorin.

II. He professes the Mohammedan Religion.

III. His Capital City, and the ordinary place of his Residence is Calicut: It
is in length extended upon the Sea shore three Miles, and a Mile in breadth,
containing about six thousand Houses, but mean and low built, few of them
exceeding the height of a Man on Horseback, the Soil being so hollow and full
of water, that it is not capable of a Foundation for an heavier building, and
for that cause unwall'd; so that Merchants Houses are here valued but at twenty
Crowns, those of the Common sort, no more than ten: yet it is of great Trading.
The Portuguese forced a Foundation on the shore there for a strong Castle, but
were so put to it by the King of Calicut, that they were fain to demolish it,
and to quit their Posts. The Priests or Bramans there were yellow clothing,
because they think this color Consecrated to God, by reason of its resemblance
to the Sun and to Gold.

PEGU.
THE Kingdom of Pegu, and the Town of its name, are now almost ruined. Siriangh
is at present the most considerable Town of the Kingdom, and the ordinary place
of the Kings Residence. Pegu was once the chief City, and was very famous,
having round about it a Moat, in which Crocodiles were kept, to keep people
from surprising the Town. The people of Pegu have white Elephants in great
Veneration, and think they draw on them a Benediction, and that their false
Prophet Xaca was Metamorphoz'd into that Animal. This King is a Pagan.

SIAM.
I. THE present King of Siam is about forty years of Age.

II. He is a Pagan, tho the people of Siam are generally Adiaphorists; that is
to say, all Religions are indifferent to to them, because they believe them all
good; wherefore they tolerate them all, so they may consist with the Laws of
their State.

III. The Capital City is Siam; its said to be one of the finest a Man can look
on. The buildings are of an admirable Structure; and the Temples, Monasteries,
and gilded Towers appear so rich and beautiful that they surpass all may be
imagined of most stately.

JAPAN.
I. POntier tells us the Emperor of Japan's name is Xogun, or Taico. Mallet
says its Quane.

II. According to the Relation of the Ambassadors of the Dutch East India
Company, sent to this Emperor, his Arms are, Or, with six Stars Argent, in an
Oval Shield, and bordered with little Points of Gold. Mallet says he bears
Sable, with three Trefoils Argent. He is a Pagan.

III. Meaco was formerly the Capital City of Japan, while the Emperors there
resided; but since he has left it, it is not so considerable, tho it contains
still above one hundred thousand Houses, the most part built of Carpenters
Work, as being less subject to be shaken with Earthquakes, which are there very
frequent. In this City is a most magnificent Palace, in which the Dairy, or
Chief Priest resides. Yedo is now the Capital City, the Emperor there
residing. The Houses are generally built of Clay, and covered with Wood, that
the moisture might not prove offensive. The great Men's Palaces are numerous,
and of a magnificent Structure. There is one Street in the Town near four
Leagues in length. The Emperors Palace there is one of the most beautiful of
Japan. The Temple of Amida in Yedo is very stately.

IV. This Country is very Fertile in Corn, Beasts, Wild-Fowl, Pearls, Mines of
Gold, and Silver, and others. Rice alone, as its said, brings this Emperor
yearly two Millions of Crowns.

TONQUIN.
I. THE present King of Tonquin is about fifty five years of Age.

II. He is a Pagan; and when a King is there newly elected, the number of
Beasts, sent to be Sacrifis'd in the Temples of their false Gods is said to be
one hundred thousand.

III. The Capital City is Checo. Tonquin is judged almost in equal extent with
France. The Tonquineses say that the whole Kingdom contains above twenty
thousand Cities and Towns; and many more there would be, but that many of the
people choose rather to live on the Water, than on the Land, so that the
greatest part of their Rivers is covered with Boats, which serve them instead
of Houses.

IV. The chief Riches of Tonquin, which yield a great Revenue to the King,
consists in the great quantities of Silks, which are there worn by Rich and
Poor; and in their Musk and Lignum Aloes, of which there is some worth one
thousand Crowns the pound, according to its goodness and oiliness, tho there is
some not worth above 3 l. it being dry.

The Names and Ages of some other East India Princes.
THE old Sultan of Bantam, named Abdul Fete, if now living, is about sixty
years of Age. His Son, Sultan, Annum-Cassar, Abdull-Massar is aged thirty seven
years.

Sasnum, Emperor of Java, vulgarly called the Mandarin, is aged about forty
years.

Sultan, Annum-Abdull-Negara, King of Jambee is aged about forty five years.

Sultan, Rutterro, King of Cherriboam, aged about thirty nine years.

Sultan, Adisbull-Abdull-Isphew, King of Macasser, aged about forty four years.

Raja Pallacca, King of the Buggesses, the High Land of Macasser, aged about
fifty seven years.

The King of Ceilon, now about eighty six years of Age.

MOROCCO and FEZ.
I. NOT to go farther for the Rise of the Emperors of Fez and Morocco, a Family
of them, called the Marine Family, begun in Jacob Ben-Joseph, ann. 1270, who
held their Residence at Fez, as the first Seat of their Empire; Morocco being
then governed by an Under-King; and the rest of the Provinces of the Kingdom
cantoned into several States. Now it happened about the year 1508, that Mahomet
Ben Amet, a Native of Dora, in the farther Numidia, pretending a Descent from
their Prophet Mahomet, caused himself to be called Xeriffe, a Name by which the
Kindred and Successors of that Impostor used to call themselves: and being a
poor Hermit only (which sort of pretended Saints have often imposed on this
People) plotted to make his Sons the chief Princes of Mauritania. To this end
he sent them to Meccha, whence they returned with such an opinion of Sanctity,
that Mahomet, the then King of Fez, made Amet, the elder of them, Governor of
the famous College of Amadorach, and the youngest, called Mahomet, Tutor to his
Children. In those days the Portuguese greatly infested the Provinces of the
Realm of Morocco; to repress whose Insolences, Mahomet and Amet obtained
Commissions, tho much opposed therein by Muley, the King's Brother, who told
him, that under color of Religion, they might quickly raise themselves to a
power, and how unsafe it was to trust an armed Hypocrisy. But this Counsel was
rejected, and they being furnished with an Army, defeated Lopez Barriga,
Commander of the Portugal Forces, under King Emanuel, and compelled that King
to abandon all his Footing there: and they subdued Duccata, Sus, and Hea, three
Provinces of the Realm of Morocco, entered that City, poisoned the Tributary
King, and salute Amet King thereof, by the name of Xeriffe of Morocco,
investing Mahomet, the other Brother in the Kingdom of Sus. During these
Successes the King of Fez died, and his Successor, named Amet, an improvident
young Prince, confirms his quondam Tutors in their new Estates, conditionally
they should hold of him in Chief, and pay him the accustomed Tributes. Amet
denied both Tribute and Superiority to the King of Fez, whom he overthrew in a
set Field, and was himself afterward vanquished and dispossessed of his
Kingdom (upon some quarrel breaking out) by his Brother Mahomet, King of Sus,
who having got the Kingdom of Morocco, united Fez unto it also, by the
vanquishment of Amet, the King thereof, who at last was slain by the Turks of
his Guard. From this Mahomet is descended,

Ismael Muley, or Muler her, Brother to the late King of Taffilette, by the
Mother-side, present Emperor of Barbary and Morocco, King of Fez, Susa, and
Taffilette, being about forty years of Age.

II. He bears for Arms, three Wheels Argent. He professes the Mohammedan
Religion, and styles himself Xeriffe, of the Race of Mahomet: Xeriffe
signifying an illustrious and sacred person. The Language spoken at present in
most of the Maritime Towns of Barbary, except those of Fez and Morocco, is the
Arabic. In those two Kingdoms, and most part of the Country Villages, the
Punick, or Old African, the ancient Languages of the Country is spoken. The
Punick in all places where anciently the Carthaginians were of any power: the
African (whatsoever it was) in the parts of Mauritania, not subject to them.

III. The two Capital Cities are Fez and Morocco, the latter was reckoned once
amongst the greatest Cities of the World, at what time it was said to contain
one hundred thousand Families; but by the Depredations of the Barbarians, and
the removal of the Seat Royal to Fez, its hardly a third part so big as
formerly. The Castle there is very large and strong; on a Tower whereof stand
three Globes made of pure Gold, prized at six hundred thousand Livres. There is
no City in all Barbary which equals Fez in Greatness, Beauty, and Number of
Inhabitants. Some count in it twenty eight thousand Households, and seven
hundred Mosques, the chief of which is Carnven, being a mile and an half in
compass; the Roof is large and high raised; its one hundred and fifty yards in
length, and eighty in breadth: there is a College called Amadorach, a most
curious and delicate Building; it has three Cloisters of admirable Beauty,
supported with eight square Pillars of diverse Colors; the Roof is curiously
carved, and the Arches of Mosaic Work of Gold and Azure. The Gates are of
Brass finely wrought, and the Doors of the private Chambers are of inlaid Work.
This College cost the Founder three hundred and eighty thousand Crowns. There
are about one hundred hot Baths, well built, with four Halls to each, and
certain Galleries without, where they put off their Clothes when they go to
bath themselves.

IV. As for his Revenues, he is absolute Lord of the whole Estate, and of his
Subjects Goods and Bodies. He has the Tenth, and First Fruits of all Fruits,
Corn and Cattle, tho many times contented in the Name of the First Fruits, with
one in twenty. He receives the fifth part of a Ducat, for every Acre of Land
throughout his Dominions, the other four parts for every Fire, and as much for
every Head, above fifteen years of Age. Of Merchandise he receives of every
Native two in the hundred; of every Alien, ten; and has a large Impost upon
every Mill. When any of his greater Officers or Judges die; he is sole Heir of
all their Goods, and yet advances great Sums, by the Sale of those Offices. And
upon extraordinary Occasions he levies what Taxes he pleases, but commonly he
is pretty moderate in them.

HABESSINIA.
I. THE Emperors of the Habissins, and Kings of Upper Aethiopia, pretend to be
descended from Solomon and Magueda, (or Nizaule, as Josephus names her) the
Queen of the South, or of Sheba. The name of the present Emperor is Malec
Saghedus. The genuine style of an Epistle written by him to the Pope, was thus,
Libellus Epistolae a Malec Saghedo, Rege Regum Aethiopiae, perveniat ad Sanctum
Patriarcham Romanum.

II. The Arms of this King are usually said to be the same with those of the
Tribe of Judah, viz. a Lion Rampant, in a Field Or, with this Motto, Vicit Leo
de Tribu Judah* But others say his Arms to be, Luna, a cross Portate Mars,
charged with a Crucifix, Sol, betwixt two Scourges of the Second. He professes
the Christian Religion, but is a Schismatic, and owns the Patriarch of
Alexandria. He uses the Aethiopick Language, which is a Dialect of the Hebrew,
but the Dialect there used by the Persons of Quality, and the Learned, is the
Amarick.

III. He has scarce any considerable Town, People living there most in Tents.

IV. His Revenues are not in Ready Money, but consist of the natural Products of
his Country, by an even way of Tribute: some pay Gold; others Horses, Cows,
Oxen, Sheep, Bread, Corn, Ox-hides, and Garments, etc.

MONOMOTOPA.
I. THE King of this Country was baptized with his his whole Court, by one
Gonsalvo, a Jesuit, by the name of Sebastian, that being the name of the then
King of Portugal, ann. 1560: but he caused the said Gonsalvo to be put to death
afterward, at the solicitation of four Mahometans, whom in the end he also
caused to be slain.

II. His Arms are Azure, two bearded Arrows in Pale, Or. Some give him a Dart
and a Pickax.

III. His Capital City is Monomotopa; the Houses are made of Wood and Earth,
bound together with a sort of Bitumen: they are but two stories, and are
covered with Straw, or Branches of Trees; the tops are raised like a Tent; they
are contrived to lie open after such a manner, as to be refreshed by the Winds,
which reign according to the diversity of the Seasons: all their Fronts
resemble each other, and are painted with diverse Colors, and embelished with
many Figures: they mix certain Gums with those Colors, which make them resist
the Injuries of the Weather. The Emperor's Palace is not without its Beauty.

CONGO.
I. IN the Reign of John the Second, King of Portugal, ann. 1490, the Discovery
and Conversion of the Kingdom of Congo happened; the then King there being
Christened John, from whom the present King is descended; and continues of the
Roman Religion, according to a Relation given by the Capucins, ann. 1665.

II. His Arms are Gules, a Cross Argent, cantoned with four Escutcheons of the
same, each charged with five Roundles Sable, placed in Saltier. These Arms
having been formerly given one of the Kings of Congo by Don Alphonso, King of
Portugal. Others say these Arms, in their beginning were Gules, a Cross
flowered Argent, charged in the midst with an Escutcheon Azure, charged with
five Besants Argent, placed in Saltier, within a Border Azure, charged in each
Angle with two Cockle-Shells, Or. Others say his Arms are Mars, five Swords
meeting in Base, Sol; which Coat was taken by Alphonso, the Second Christian
King of Congo, because in the Battle which he fought against Panse Aquitine, he
and his Soldiers saw, (or fancied they saw) such a Number of shining Swords,
hanging in the Air, with their Points turned directly upon the Enemy.

III. His chief Town is S. Salvador, which is of large extent, and well
peopled: the Houses are built with Wood and Branches of Trees, bound together
with a little Earth, mixed with Lime.

IV. The only Money of this Kingdom is Cockle-Shells, tho the King has great
Treasures from Mines of Silver and other Metals, from the Sale of Slaves, from
Elephants Teeth, etc.

FINIS.
Advertisement to the READER.
AS to the Account here given concerning the Chief Princes of the World, and
the several Heads relating to them, I well know that the last year, a small
Book was printed in 120* relating to the first Head of mine, viz. The Births
and Names of the Chief European Princes. I know also that, a few years since, a
Book was set forth, in Latin, by a German Writer, giving a Genealogical Account
of the Chief Princes of Europe, which Book was translated into English, and
published also the last year. But it cannot be said that I transcribe from
these: for its well known to many Gentlemen in London, that the year before Mr.
Gadbury set forth the Births of some European Princes, in his Almanac, I had a
Collection of them ready for the Press. Indeed, as for what Princes have been
born since that time, I have now and then made use of those Books, tho their
Births are also to be found in our Gazettes. And as to the Rise of the European
Princes, I have generally followed the said German Author, tho I only briefly
intimate the Rise and Descent of each Prince in his direct Line, and do not
deduce an entire Genealogical Series of them, according to the several Branches
of their Families, as he has done. As to the Blazon of the Princes Coats of
Arms, and some other particulas in the Work, I have chiefly followed two French
Writers in them, viz. Manesson Mallet, in his Geographie Universelle, and
Gedeon Pontier, in his Cabinet des Gran^^* As to the greatness and Populosity
of Cities, I have chiefly used Sir William Petty's Account of them, and some
things I have taken from Dr. Brown's Account of his Travels, relating to them.
And as for other Matters, I have used several Authors, according as things have
occurred to me in my Reading, and inserted what I have otherwise received by
information. Upon the whole, I conceive a brief view of the World, according to
the Heads set down by me, may be grateful^^ and usefully instructive to
Gentlemen; tho I cannot (...) them with that accurateness, or rendered them
(...), as a second Edition set forth by me, or some other industrous Hand
hereafter may afford.

FINIS.

