THE Behavior, last Speeches, Confessions, AND EXECUTION Of the Prisoners that
Suffered at TYBURN On Friday the 7th of March, 1678/9.

VIZ. Thomas Coxe, and Charles Smith, Who were drawn thither on a Hurdle, for
TREASON. Mary Augur, For Murder. AND Anne Atkins, For a Burglary, her Husband
being hanged for the like Offense but the very last Sessions before.


With a true Account of their Carriage, and Discourses to Mr. Ordinary and
others, both in Prison and at the place of Execution.

At the Request of the Publisher, I have perused this Sheet, and do Attest the
Truth of the Contents therein.

Samuel Smith, Ordinary. LICENSED, 1678/9.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678/9.

The Behavior, last Speeches, Confessions, and Execution of the Prisoners that
Suffered at Tyburn on Friday the 7th of March, 1678/9.
AT the last Sessions there were in all Nine persons received sentence of
Death; Three men and Six women. (Not Six men and Three women, as a false and
surreptitious Pamphlet, printed with the Letters D. M. did lately mention;
which also said, there was Fourteen to be Transported: and several other
notorious Untruths almost in every Line.) Of these unhappy Criminals one was
respited for the present from Execution, being found by a Jury of Matrons to be
quick with Child: three other women and one man, the nature of whose Offenses
and Conversation had rendered them fitter Objects of Royal Mercy, obtained the
favor of his Majesty's gracious Reprieve after Judgment.

The other Four came now to suffer; their Names and Crimes being as follows.

Thomas Coxe and Charles Smith, each of them found guilty of Treason on several
Indictments, both for Coining and Counterfeiting, and also for Clipping of
Money.

Mary Augur, for Murdering her Bastard Child; and Anne Atkins, for a Burglary,
whose Husband, for the like Offense, was Executed but the very last Sessions,
and she then turned out of Newgate on the account of her Poverty, having
several Children; but was no sooner at liberty, but she fell to her old
wickedness; and it is believed seduced a person, now Condemned with her, but
Reprieved, into this Burglary, for which she suffered. So difficult it is for
people, when they are once come to make a Trade of sin, to forsake it, though
they have the saddest and most near related Warnings in the world to reclaim
them.

Coxe, in the hearing of the Ordinary, prayed very pathetically for himself;
and being asked concerning what hopes he had of a future happy Estate, he
declared, That the fear of Death was much abated, and as he trusted on a sound
and firm foundation, because his sorrow for sin was more for offending God, and
grieving his Holy Spirit, than for the dread either of that momentary
Punishment he was justly to suffer here, or even for the fear of Hell and wrath
to come. Adding, that if he were to live, he resolved and hoped in God's
strength that he should never run into such Extravagances as he had formerly
been guilty of. For he did not only freely acknowledge the Crime for which he
was Condemned, but said, there was scarce any Immorality or Sin (except
Murder) which in the debauched Course of his Life he had not stained and
polluted his Soul with.

The Ordinary urged, that his Coining counterfeit Money, was not only a great
Crime against the Kings Majesty, but an abuse to the whole Nation, especially
the poor, whose wants could not be supplied if they offered such bad Money in
buying; so that the ill influence and consequences of his sin in this kind,
would survive when he was dead, and the fraud he had knowingly put upon others,
must needs in the loss or deceit, circulate to the prejudice of many innocent
people. He replied, that for that very consideration, his penitent grief was so
much the greater; and being told, that he could not repent sincerely, if he
made not restitution to his power, to such whom he had defrauded, He professed
he would do all he could possibly on that account, by making distribution as
far as able to the poor, because he knew not whom he had wronged in particular,
nor how to send to any such. He expressed much grief, that he had omitted to
observe the Lords day, and that he went not to the public Worship; as also,
that he neglected to pray Morning and Evening, for which remisness, he
conceived the Lord justly left him to the temptations of bad Company, and in
particular to be acquainted with a person, who drew him to the crime of
Coining, which he closed with, on a lewd principle, not being content with an
honest Trade, viz. a Gun-smith, which he well subsisted by, being a single Man,
but made have to snatch at unlawful gain, that he might be at higher expenses
to gratify his Lusts, which he the rather acknowledged, that it might be a
warning to all others.

Smith, the other Goyner of false Money, was well educated, and it grieved him
that he had not answered those good Instructions which his Parents gave him. He
was put forth in Apprentiship to a Chandler, after he came to his own disposal,
he lost the government of himself, for he profaned the Lords day, which he said
was occasioned by neglecting to repair to Gods public Service, because he
thought out of the pride of his heart, that his clothes were not fine enough,
so natural it is for one sin to beget another.

He bewailed himself as a great sinner, and in particular very much lamented
the Crime for which he was Condemned, which he said he engaged in, out of a
covetous disposition, but made not so much gain by it as some others; and that
he had a resolution to desist from that wicked practice, not because it
answered not his expectation of profit, but rather for the regret and trouble
which he had in his Conscience concerning proceeding in it. He said that bad
acquaintance first enticed him into it, and that he was justly by God left to
the temptation, since he had neglected daily to guard himself by Prayer. He
wished he had took the meanest lawful employments, rather than so hainously
transgresed against the Kings Majesty, and the Law of the Nation. But the Lord
he said was righteous, in discovering his Crime, because he had lived securely
in committing other sins; for had he not been apprehended as he was, there was
provided for him an honest and creditable employment. But (said he) the Lord is
just in cutting me off in the prime of my years, that I might not proceed in a
course of Iniquity; and if his Divine Majesty shall be graciously pleased to
sanctify this stroke of death on my body, to bring me thereby to Repentance, I
shall not dread to drink of that bitter cup, as believing the Lord will order
it to my eternal happiness. -- -- He praid for himself very well in the
Ordinaries hearing, and being questioned what hopes he had of Salvation, and on
what foundation the same were grounded, he made such judicious answers, in a
distinct difference of true Faith and Repentance from the false, as the
Ordinary was well satisfied with the same, and does verily believe, that his
endeavors with him were blessed, to bring him as a Convert to God.

As for Mary Augur, she was very weak in body, not able to come on the Lords
day in the afternoon into the Chapel; but the Ordinary several times attended
her in her Chamber, and gave her many serious Exhortations: but her condition,
etc. very much obstructed the good effects he hoped for from such his pains, so
that we can give little farther account of her.

The other Woman wept bitterly, and very often, and seemed to be penitent for
her sins, not denying the Crime for which he suffered, but seemed to have been
bred up in a loose course of life, and very ignorant of the Mysteries of
Religion, but the Ordinary took considerable pains to instruct her therein, and
it is charitably hoped God might bless his endeavors toward her.

FINIS.

