New and Rational Experiments in Physic.

CORAL and STEEL: A most Compendious METHOD Of Preserving and Restoring HEALTH.

OR, A Rational Discourse, grounded upon Experience; Practically showing how
most Diseases may be both Prevented and Cured, either Solely or Chiefly by two
Common Medicaments, Viz. Red CORAL and STEEL.

By R. B. M. D.

Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. London, Printed for the
Author, and are to be sold by Simon Miller, at the Star and Bible at the West
end of St. Paul's Church.

To all such as are Lovers of, and Curious Searchers into Rational and
Experimental Physic.
TO You, to whom the whole World is Obliged for those Rare and Admirable
searches, you daily make into the bowels of Mysterious Nature; to whom the
awakened Age listens for what your happy Labors shall produce, I am bold to
Dedicate this small Tract. I have by your singular Modesty, learnt not
overmuch to commend what I approve, only to acknowledge I have here
endeavored a Rational Essay, which I hope will Influence your more Noble and
Higher Attempts to Improve. I have here given you a faithful Account, of what
for many Years Practice, has occurred to my Observation, that you may perceive
what Admirable Effects have fell from these Preparations. The General Advantage
that may Accrue to the World hereby, not any Vanity of my own, has overcome my
natural Aversion, and importuned me now to appear i^ Public. Thus submitting
my self to you favorable Censure; conclude,

Yours, in all Humility R. B.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THat a nice and strict observation of any of those six things not
Natural, except Exercise, is no legitimate means for the preservation of
Health, on prevention of Diseases. Page 1 CHAP. II. How Air can be appropriated
to particular constitutions for preservation of Health. 7 CHAP. III. Whether a
strict observation of Diet, may conduce to the prevention of Diseases. 11 CHAP.
IIII. Whether Excretion by siege or stool, besides that by sweat and Urine, be
necessary to preserve Health. 16 CHAP. V. Whether it be necessary for the
preservation of Health, to observe Rules concerning sleep. 20 CHAP. VI. Whether
the Regulation of the Passions of the Mind, be a Legitimate means to pervent
Diseases. 23 CHAP. VII. That the chief preserver^ of health is Exercise,
because it does ferment the the mass of blood; and tha^ whatsoever else does
caus^ Fermentation, may be used as a fit Succedaneum for Exercise. 26 CHAP.
VIII. What is meant by Fermentation. 3^^ CHAP. IX. What things perform the act
of Fermentation. 36 CHAP. X. How Childrens diseases may be prevented by the use
of Red Coral, which fermenteth the mass of Blood. 41 CHAP. XI. How the Diseases
of those persons which are above seven years old, may be prevented by the use
of Steel. 46 CHAP. XII. That the things not Natural, are necessarily to be
observed together with the use of Coral and Steel, for the cure of diseases. 49
CHAP. XIII. Of the cure of the Green Sickness, by the use of Steel. 55 CHAP.
XIV. How Steel conduces to the cure of the Spleen. 57 CHAP. XV. How Steel may
be used for the cure of the Scurvy. 62 CHAP. XVI. Of the use of Steel, in the
cure of the Jaundise. 64 CHAP. XVII. How Steel conduces t^ the Cure of the
Mother. 68 CHAP. XVIII. Of the cure of the Gou^ by Steel. 71 CHAP. XIX. Of the
use of Steel in the cure of a Consumption. 74 CHAP. XX. How all manner of Agues
may be effectually cured by the use of Steel. 90 CHAP. XXI. How Steel may
conduce to the cure of the Stone. 99 CHAP. XXII. Of the stopping of all manner
of Fluxes, by the use of Steel. 102 CHAP. XXIII. How a Dropsy may be cured by
Steel. 105 CHAP. XXIV. Of the use of Steel in the cure of the Strangury, or
Pissing by Drops. 108 CHAP. XXV. That Steel does carry away the Relics of
those Diseases which it does not cure. 110 CHAP. XXVI. How Coral may be used
for the curing of Diseases in young Infants. 114
CORAL and STEEL.
CHAP. I. That a nice and strict observation of any of those six things nor
natural, except Exercise, is no legitimate means for the preservation of
health, or prevention of diseases.
MEdicina, that Art, which in our English tongue is commonly styled by the term
of Physic, that has for its object dis^ases, either to be prevented or
re^oved, and for its end or scope the health of humane bodies, does cosist of
two general parts, viz. Pr^phylactical and Therapeutical. T^^ Prophylactical
part of Physic she^ how diseases may be prevented* The Therapeutical part
discove^ how they may be removed (...) cured, after they are once co^tracted.

I shall first treat of the Prophy^ctical part, and show, how by t^^ common
Medicaments, diseases m^ as well or better be prevented, the by that various
and multiform (...) byrinth, wherein most Physicians this time do wander. Not
tha^ pretend how by these Medicamen^ all manner of diseases in all pers^
whatsoever, shall or may be so c^^tainly prevented, as that no ^stemper can
possibly happen u^ any of those persons that use the^ for if this could be
effected, m^ would then be immortal. But speak comparatively, that as mu^ or
more may be effected towar^ the prevention of diseases by this Compendious,
than by that Ela^orate and more tedious proceeding.

The way and means which has been, and is at this time in use amongst
Physicians to prevent diseases, is to give prescriptions unto several persons,
according to their various temperaments, complexions, or constitutions,
concerning Air, Diet, Excretion, Sleep, the Passions of the mind, and
Exercise: Things, as they are termed by Physicians, not natural, (for all
things that the Physician has to do with, are ranked into three orders, viz.
Res naturales, non naturales, and praeter naturam) which things not natural, if
they shall be exquisitely proportioned, and made correpondent with each
particular constitution, and so continued in their proportion, may without all
peradventure in a great measure prevent diseases. But to make and continue such
an exquisite proportion, is altogether impossible.

To make a stone or powder (...) that quality, that it shall convert a^ metalls
into gold that shall be touched by it, is certainly a direct way (...) increase
riches. Yet if such a ston^ or powder cannot by humane A^ be produced, it is an
absurd thing t^ historize the dignity and worth o^ that imaginary stone, and
propound it for the intent and purpose aforesaid.

The case is the same in the proportioning Air, Diet, Sleep, etc things not
natural, unto particula^ constitutions. I deny not but th^^ those things not
natural, may an^ ought to be appropriated to disease^ for the cure of the same;
yet tha^ they cannot be proportioned to particular constitutions, for
prevention of diseases, I shall show by discoursing upon them particularly.

And suppose they could be so proportioned, yet would it be a very difficult
thing to be performed, in respect of that necessity which providence has cast
almost upon all men, enforcing them to the contrary. As for example: Suppose
that such particular Air, or Diet, should be absolutely necessary for the
preservation of health, for all persons of a sanguine or phlegmatic complexion
in this City, how many would there be who would have no convenience for the use
of either? If a certain particular air, should be absolutely necessary for the
preservation of the health of some particular persons, even Kings themselves
might be pitied in this respect, who by keeping the same air, must either lose
their health, or by changing it, endanger the loss of their Kingdom.

When a certain King demanded of a Philosopher, in what part of his Kingdom it
would be most convenient for him to live; The Philosopher called for a Bulls
Hide, and throwing it down, desired the Ki^^ to tread upon it; who treading
upon the sides, found by experience the the contrary sides, by reason of the
stiffness of the Leather would fly (...) in his face; but when he trod in the
midst, the whole Hide was coucha^^ and still.

Now if Kings themselves at^ oftentimes necessitated to retain t^^ same air,
much more may we co^ceive Subjects and inferior person to be: Insomuch that if
it were s^ that a certain particular Air, an^^ Diet, etc. were absolutely
necessar^ for all persons, according to the several constitutions, for the
prese^vation of their health, Providenc^ might in some measure be complained
of, for enforcing the greate^ part of mankind unto so hard choice, as the loss
either of the^ health or estate. But as in reason, is not probable that Divine
Providence has dealt so hardly with u^ so experience will evince the contrary.
For, it is well known by ex^^rience, that but one of those six ^^ngs not
natural, which is Exercise, (...) much concerned in the preservation of health,
or prevention of diseases; of which afterward in its proper place.

CHAP. II. How air can be appropriated to particular constitutions for
preservation of health.
IT is a very hard thing in the general to distinguish of air under the same
climate, whether it be better or worse for the preservation of the health of
humane bodies. For we know that here in England, in those places which are
reputed to have the worst air, as in Fenny and Marshy places, the inhabitants
are as strong in constitution, and generally do live as long as others, who
breath that air which is accoun^ most pure and healthful. And (...) those
persons that are so healthfu^ and live so long, in that suppose unwholsom air,
are of different complexions, some sanguine, some choleric, some phlegmatic,
an^ others melancholic, or else mi^^ of these, yet different from eac^ other,
according to that infinite v^riety of proportion of the foresai^ humors, which
is easilier conceiv^^ than expressed.

Insomuch that in the same ai^ which is supposed to be the wor^^ persons of all
kinds of temperaments or complexions enjoy their health, whilst, in the mean
time others altogether as different in their complexions, in the very purest
ai^ are either soon cut off with death, o^ else most part of their lifetime d^
groan under the heavy burden o^ sickness and diseases.

Now although it may be here objected, that many who have a general Cachexy
upon them, who cannot perfectly and thoroughly enjoy their health, do find in
themselves an alteration to the better, by the change of air; yet we are not to
ascribe this to the quality of the air, but to the difference, to the
alternation, vicissitude, or change, which procures a fermentation of the mass
of blood, the next and immediate cause of health. For certain it is, that
change of air does ferment the mass of blood, of what quality soever the
changed air be; and it is known by common experience, that the change of air,
although from the better to the worse, does oftentimes remove Cachectical
distempers.

Who would not think, but that a clear and dry air, should be far better for
persons that are inclined unto Aguish distempers, than to live in a Ship at
Sea, especially in these Northern Climates, where the air is more cold and
watery? Yet is it known by experience, that even Quartain Agues have been cured
b^ going to Sea, by changing a bette^ for a reputed worse air: The one reason
without all peradventure, this, viz. A just fermentation the mass of blood
caused by the change of air.

But here it may also be objecte^ that some bodies that are healthfu^ do find
an alteration to the worse, b^ the change of air.

To this, I answer; That those a^ bodies of a more delicate and fi^ habit, who
being in perfect healt^ cannot but be somewhat altered, b^ the change of their
accustomed A^ For if the change of air can man an alteration to the better in
bodi^ that are distempered, it may as we^ make an alteration to the worse (...)
other bodies, that are in perfe^ health; especially in such bodies (...) are of
a more tender constitution seeing also that health does depen^ upon a just, not
an under nor over fermentation of the mass of blood.

By this it may appear, how vain a thing it is for prevention of Diseases, to
prescribe a particular air, to some particular constitutions; whereas that
alteration which happens unto some bodies, is caused not by the quality, but
by change of the air.

CHAP. III. Whether a strict observation of Diet, may conduce to the prevention
of Diseases.
IN the next place let us inquire into the nature of Diet, how that can be
appropriated unto particular complexions, for prevention of Diseases.

And this I find impossible to be done. The way and means to effect this,
should be, first to inquire into the Nature and Constitution of the Person to
be Dieted, then to prescribe such a Diet as may rectify what is conceived to
be amiss in him. (...) for example: to prescribe such diet as may lenifie sharp
Humour^ such a diet as may incrassate ser^ and thin humors, and attem^ those
that are viscous and thi^ etc.

But how is it possible for the wis^ Physician, to know the particul^^
Constitution of any person living It Is confessed, it is a matter of (...) great
difficulty, to make a very pr^bable Conjecture of the Te^perament, whether it
be Phlematick or Choleric, etc. but touching the diet, this is not suffi^ent.
There is that in Nature whi^^ the Greeks call (...), a prop^ and particular
temperament, un^ each Individuum, which by a sec^^ instinct, inclines many
persons (...) desire, and enables them to dige^ such diet as many Physicians
would think (upon the account of the Temperament which appears unt^ them) as
hurtful as poison unto them. And on the contrary, many there are who would be
sick even unto death, if they should make use of some such diet, as Physicians
would prescribe them. How many are there of Phlegmatic Constitutions, who do
nauseate and loath Honey, the great Attenuatour of Phlegm and viscous humors,
and that which by almost all Physicians is commonly prescribed, for the same
purpose? And again, there are many whose bodies seem to abound with viscous and
gross humors; yet by a secret instinct of Nature, resulting from that (...) or
proper temperament, they do not only desire, but do also very easily digest
Cheese, and Fish, and other such things which most Physicians would strictly
forbid them.

You shall have two persons of the same Temperament, as near as any Physician
is able to judge; the one shall desire Cheese, and very easily digest it; the
other shall be sick even at the very sight of it. The o^^ shall abhor Wine, and
strong Drin^ who perhaps never drank any thin^ beside water, in all his
lifetime; an^ the other shall be unsatisfied, and si^^ at his stomach, if he
drink not eith^^ wine, or strong drink, at all his meal^ The one shall abhor
Flesh-meat, an^ preserve his health by refusing it and the other, though of the
sam^ Temperament, as far as any Physician can judge, shall much desire it and
be very healthful all his lifetime by reason of the use of it.

So that to prescribe a diet, is no^ so much the way and means to prevent, as
to produce diseases; seeing that Nature, the wisest of Physicians, has
provided for every particular person, a different and distinct palate, which
(if not vitiated and corrupted by some accident) does truly distinguish of
meats, relishing or disgusting them according as they are wholesome or
unwholesome for the body.

It Is well known in Martial Disci^^ine, that he who stands Sentinel, ^ath and
ought to have full power to examine all particular persons, before he admit
them entrance into the Garrison. Now suppose that some Deputy Governor in the
Governor's absence, should so far question the discretion of him that stands
Sentinel, as to take away all his power of Examining; and in stead thereof,
give him in charge to admit, without Examination, all persons that have black
hair, and to exclude others: This might be a means to exclude some Friends, and
to admit of some Enemies, and so to destroy the Garrison.

Every Physician is Natures Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor; the Palate is that
Sentinel which stands to examine every thing that is ingested into the body.
Now if the Physician, Natures Lieutenant, should take away the Palates power of
examination, and in stead thereof, give only some general precepts, wh^^ and
what not, is to be ingested; (...) this means he shall, by excludi^^ friends,
and admitting enemies, r^ther destroy, than preserve (...) bodies health and
welfare.

CHAP. IIII. Whether Excretion by siege or sto^ besides that by sweat and
urine, necessary to preserve health.
ANother way and means in u^ amongst Physicians, to preser^ health, and to
prevent diseases, to provide and take care that the be due excretion, that the
body (...) kept Laxative or Soluble, whereb^ all that excrementitious matte^
that shall by any accident be co^lected in the mass of blood, man conveniently,
by siege or stool, b^ separated, excerned and purged that so the mass of blood
may (...) reserved sincere and pure, in all re^^^ts fit for the use of nature.

This, I confess, seems to be some^^at pregnant with reason; yet
not^^thstanding experience does clearly ^onfute it.

It Is known by experience, that ^any, who are most careful, by Art, ^o preserve
their bodies Soluble and ^axative, are seldom thoroughly and ^^rfectly
healthful; yet many others, ^^o are continually Costive, who go ^ot to stool
every day, and perhaps, ^^metimes not above once in three ^r four days, do
enjoy their perfect ^ealth for many years together. ^lthough it cannot be
denied, but ^^at most persons, who are naturally ^axative, are also very
healthful: ^et is it much to be suspected, ^hether that Solubility of body,
which some have beyond others, do ^ot proceed, rather from a deficien^y, than
perfection of Nature: see^ng also that most men are Costive, ^^d they that are
Laxative, are of the weakest constitutions.

Through the viscosity of h^mours, obstructing the urinato^ passages, through
the coldness of t^ body, thickness of the skin, (...) closeness of the pores,
where^ transpiration is hindered, industrio^ nature being put to her shifts, is
^cessitated to vent a great part of the serous humidity, by siege or stoo^
which she had rather throw out sweat and urine. So that this S^lubility of
body, may at the best, styled nothing else, than a good eff^ of a bad cause.
Although it be w^ to be liked, that Nature has length, found out a new chanel,
^vent her superfluous humidity; y^ had it been much better, if she h^ never
been so far put to her shifts to seek it.

Yet is it the common and gene^ received opinion, that Solubility body does
proceed from the pe^fection of Nature; and that in (...) bodies she does
primarily intend (...) how can this be any other than a ^gar error? Whereas
those that (...) commonly Costive, are such as (...) eat, drink, sleep, digest,
ex^ise, and perform all other offices (...) Nature, perfectly and exactly:
(...) on the other side, those that ^on every small occasion are sub^^t unto
Solubility, or looseness, (...) either aged persons, sickly and ^akly young
Children, Women in ^ilde-bed, consumptive persons; (...) else others, that are
known by ex^rience to be of the weakest con^tutions. And besides, that it is ^e
intent and scope of Nature, to ^parate any excrementitious mat^^r, that may be
collected in the ^ass of blood, by throwing it off to^^ther with the serous
part, and con^ying it through the Ureters and ^res by urine and sweat, it may
clearly appear by that large quantity of Hypostasis or Sediment that i^ in the
urine of those persons that are ^ecovering from sickness, and by their great
inclination, at that t^ unto sweating.

So that whereas solubility of b^ was never primarily intended (...) Nature,
but only made use of (...) accident, to purge the blood; (...) make such
provision that the bo^ be kept soluble, must needs be far from preserving
health, and p^venting diseases, that it may ve^ well be thought to be a means,
(...) disturbing Nature, to destroy heal^ and to cause distempers.

CHAP. V. Whether it be Necessary for the Pres^vation of Health, to observe Ru^
concerning sleep.
ANother means to preser^ health, in use amongst Phy^tians, is to prescribe
rules concer^ing sleep, that it be not excessi^ nor deficient, but moderate
agre^able to the Constitution. Now w^ must know that sleep is nothing else, us
a cessation of the exercise of the ^mal Faculties, caused by a de^ency of
spirits, which spirits (...) the only promoters or setters (...) work, of the
exercise of those ^mal Faculties.

The spirits are nothing else but a ^re Halitus, or thin matter breathed ^n the
Mass of blood, which as ^y are in a continual production ^ayes arising from the
Mass of ^od; so are they also in perpetual ^ence, drawn out by External ^jects,
and continually losing them^ves in the air.

Now by the exercise of the animal ^^lties, as motion of the body, ^ing, etc.
or by the senses, Hear^ Seeing, etc. entertained by ^ternal objects; the
expense is greater than the procreation or ^duction of the spirits. But by
^cessation of the exercise of those ^mal Faculties, the spirits are again
^uited and restored: for by that means the production becomes greater than the
expense.

Here is also to be noted, that how much the exercise of the ani^ faculties
shall be more intense remiss; so much the more or (...) sleep will be required
for the resti^tion of the lost spirits.

From hence it may appear (...) sleep is by no means to be appro^ated unto the
constitution, bu^ necessarily required by Nature p^portionably to the expense
of spi^ caused by the exercise of the ani^ Faculties.

Now although there be s^ Lethargical and sleepy diseases, we are not in the
least to conc^^ that sleep is the cause, but the ^duct and effect, or at least
the adj^ or concomitant of such diseases.

The restitution of decayed spi^ cannot possibly be the cause of disease
whatsoever, but rath^ preservative against diseases: wh^fore to prescribe rules
for the ^ation of sleep, is in some sort to ^ulate the strength of Nature, and
^estrain the body from being too ^ate and lively.

^f sleep, be it never so much, can any cause of disease; How comes ^o pass,
that young Children who and the greatest part of the first ^rter, in continual
sleep, become ^re lively and thriving, than others ^o sleep less? Or how
happens it ^t some aged persons spin out the ^ed of their lives to a great ex^t
by much sleeping?

CHAP. VI. ^ether the Regulation of the Passions of the Mind, be a Legitimate
means to prevent Diseases.
ANother means in use amongst Physicians, for the preserva^n of health, is the
Regulation of ^e affections or passions of the mind. Now although it cannot be
deni^ but that the Irregular passions of (...) mind may do much hurt to the
^dy, and that there is somewhat (...) to be attributed to the discre^^ of every
person, as to the regulat^ of his passions: Yet must we h^ presuppose that
health of body is ^cessarily required for the regulat^ of all humane
affections. Insom^ that the regulation of our affecti^^ is rather to be
conceived an eff^^ product, and result, than any ca^ of health. As to the
affections (...) passions, as anger, joy, fear, gr^^ etc. there can scarce be
men's sa^ except it be in corpore sano. For know by experience, that sick, ag^
and consumptive persons, are (...) more peevish and fretful than other
Although, when the body is dissed, the mind, or soul it self, (...) be in
perfect health; yet the affe^ons, which are the souls attenda^^ must needs be
disturbed and disq^eted, whenever the body shall ^^emper'd, because their
very es^ce, or being, does depend upon (...) crasis, or temperament of the ^dy.
And so on the contrary, they ^st needs be altogether as much in (...) souls
reach, to be regulated and ^mmanded by her when the body healthful. It is in
some sense a ^^st certain and infallible Axiom, Mores sequuntur humores) viz.
that (...) manners, i. e. the affections of (...) mind, have dependence upon
(...) humors of the body.

From hence it cannot but be ^ought more rational, that provi^on be made first
for the body, that be preserved in health, that so the actions of the mind may
be re^ated, than to prescribe the regu^ion of the affections as a cause and
(...) server of health.

CHAP. VII. That the chief preserver of health Exercise, because it does ferm^
the mass of blood; and that wh^soever else does cause fermentati^^ may be used
as a fit Succedane^^ for Exercise.
NOw am I arrived unto the si^ and last, which is a true a legitimate means,
prescribed by Physicians, for the preservation (...) health, and prevention of
diseas^ and this is bodily Exercise. (...) thing so well known by experie^^ to
preserve health, that they (...) do moderately use it, stand in ne^ of no other
preventing Physi^^ This is that which makes the labo^^ing man's sleep pleasant
and sw^^ unto him: This is that which she^ the Justice and equality of Divi^^
Providence, distributing the hap^ness of this world, in some good ^asure alike
unto the Sons of men. ^or they who are necessitated, and ^^nstrain'd to work
hard for a live^^od, are recompensed with the ^^ition of health, than which
no^^ng is more comfortable and de^^^ble in this world. And certainly, ^^e the
virtue and efficacy of Ex^^cise, for the prevention of diseases, ^tter known,
or more seriously ^^sidered, many Millions in this ^^rld, might be happy in the
injoy^nt of their health, who are now ^iserable by reason of the want of it.
(...) many there are, who by reason ^^ameness, or debilitation, through ^he
accident, are rendered inca^^^le of exercising: and many more, ^o are prevented
by their professi^^ whose employment is Writing, ^^ving, Studying, or some such
like, which enforces them unto a still (...) sedenary life; and as many, who
though they do sometimes Exer^^^e, yet not so often, nor unto that degree and
measure which Natu^^ requires. Besides that innumer^^^ multitude of others, who
have contracted a depraved habit of E^minacy and softness of living, (...)
think it a thing burthensom, (...) troublesome to Nature, although the
preservation of their health Exercise; and cannot by any a^^ments be persuaded
unto it, but (...) apt to think such remedy as b^ or worse than any disease it
(...) prevent.

So that although Exercise man of it self sufficient to prevent (...) eases,
yet seeing that there are many Accidents which may poss^^ hinder Exercise, it
cannot but^^ conceived a thing profitable u^ many persons, for prevention of
(...) eases, to propound some other (...) and means which may serve in st^^^
thereof.

Not that I am willing, by (...) means, to entice any unto a sed^tary life, but
am rather desirous gratify all those with a fit and meet Succedaneum, who
cannot, either by ^^son of their employment, or some ^^her accident, use
Exercise.

Here we are first to suppose, that ^odily Exercise is an adequate cause ^o
produce the effect of continuance ^f health: And this I should first love by
reason, were it not suffi^ently known unto all men by ex^erience, which is the
very basis and ^^undation of reason. It being then ^anted, that moderate
Exercise is ^^ay and means to preserve health, (...) us enquire into the manner
how (...) produces that effect. And this (...) ^inde to be done by fermenting
of ^e mass of blood. Now this fer^entation of the mass of blood, is ^^anted by
all Physicians, to be the ^^xt and immediate cause of health. (...) that
whatsoever has a power in (...) self, to put a just fermentation ^^on the mass
of blood, may be a (...) Succedaneum to be used in the ^tad of Exercise, and by
consequence must needs be a proper a fit Medicament to be given for t^
prevention of Diseases, or preser^tion of Health.

But before I propound those pa^ticular Medicaments, whose natu^ and property
is to ferment; I sh^^ discourse in general of Fermen^tion.

CHAP. VIII. What is meant by Fermentation.
FErmentation, is a certain moti^ of the Particles of some He^rogeneous matter,
whereby the Particles become so perfectly mi^ and incorporated into each other
that the matter does from the^ result Homogeneous, or Simil^ i. e. consisting
of no other parts the what are of like nature one to another, and like unto the
whole.

As for Example: When Leave^ that is, extreme sour Paste, is mixed with other
sweet or insipid Paste, by ^rmentation the sour Particles ^e so incorporated
with the sweet, (...) insipid, that they do receive an ^solute and perfect
allay from each ^her; the insipid parts put off their ^savouriness, and the
other their sowreness, insomuch that the Mass or Lump does result of a middle
^^ture compounded of them both. Yet so perfectly compounded, that the Lump may
then be denominated Homogeneous or similar, which before Fermentation was
Heterogeious; because that after Fermenta^^on, it cannot be divided into insi^d
and sour parts, nor into any ^her parts or particles different from ^ch other,
or different from the ^hole.

Thus are we to understand of the ^ermentation of the Mass of blood; ^he Mass
of blood is in it self a vari^usly-compounded and mixed body, consisting of such
diversity of parts, all apt to act upon the body afte^ different manner
according to (...) nature of each part, that were the not all united by
Fermentation, the would quickly destroy the body Obstructing, Corroding,
Exul^rating, Putrefying, etc. but bei^ by Fermentation united, the visco^ and
thick parts are Attenuated, t^ thin are incrassated, and the Ac^mony thereof
much contemper^ and allayed; and all other partic^ so firmly embodied into
those the are of a contrary nature unto themselves, that the mass is thereby
re^dred of a just crasis or temperame^ fit for the Nutriment of the body.

To this end, there is given, b^ the providence of Nature, even un^ the very
Embryon in the Womb, large Coagulum of blood, I me^ the Liver, together with
the form^tion of its parts, that whatsoever ^^ ingested into the body, may by
virtue of this Coagulum be fermented and so united unto the mass, that (...)
the tender parts may, by the mass (...) blood receive no detriment, but (...)
nourished and augmented by it. ^ow that Nature has designed the ^wer in young
Children for Fer^ntation, it is evident; in that then the Liver cease to do
its ^ffice, that is, to ferment the blood, often times grows unto the side of
^hilde; even as the Umbilical Vein ^sing to convey nutriment into the ^dy
degnerates from its former na^re, and unites it self with the ^uscles of the
Abdomen.

And as Nature does at first pro^de this Coagulum for young Infants, ^ does she
afterward by degrees ^ovide for others that are adult by ^ongesting in the
other side of the ^ody another Ferment or Leaven of more terrestrial substance;
I mean, the Milt or Spleen, altogether as fit (...) perform the office of
Fermenta^on in others, as the Liver in young ^hildren.

Here it will not be unworth our observation to take notice, (...) whatsoever
is received into the Ve^ and Arteries, and circulated to^ther with the mass of
blood, exce^ it be united to the blood by Ferm^tation, cannot but become hurt
to the body. It may either by (...) Density and Viscosity obstruct (...) narrow
passages, or by its Acrim^corrode the tenderest parts, or (...) by its
putrefaction corrupt (...) blood. Now here we must n^ that by Concorporation
with (...) mass of blood, it is hurtful quali^^ can receive no allay, except t^
Concorporation be done by ^^mentation. As for example: (...) Honey there is a
certain sharp or ^^rosive part, which although it (...) Concorporated with that
o^ sweet and healing part, yet is (...) the Acrimony thereof allayed, (...) by
being Fermented with the swee^ part it is thereby abated; the tr^ whereof may
appear by this Expe^ment. Take a pound of Honey, a^ ^oyle it a little while in
three Pints (...) any water that will bear Yeast; ^^sh any sore with this
liquor un^orked, and you may observe it to (...) very detersive and cleansing:
^at afterward work the same with (...) little Yeast, and then you shall ^^de
it of another nature, not in the ^ast detersive. By Fermenting or ^orking, the
sweet and sharp parts (...) the Honey, are so firmly united to ^^ch other, that
they lose their for^er nature, and produce a third, which is different from
either. ^ence it is also, that not only the ^arper, but the sweeter parts also
of ^at liquor, by Fermentation, are ^^ayed, as may appear by its taste unto
every Palate.

CHAP. IX. What things perform the act of Fe^mentation.
HAving in the general touched (...) little upon fermentation, (...) shall now
recite a Catalogue of suc^ things, as are endued with a facul^ of fermenting,
especially those the are most signal. And these ar^ Coral, Pearl, Mother of
Pea^^ Steel, Crabs Eyes, Egg shells, t^^ Liver and Milt of all kind (...)
Animals boiled and dried; t^^ Shells of Crabs and Lobsters, Cora^lina; with
many others. All whi^^ agree in this, that they lenifie sha^ humors; open
obstructions; pr^voke the Menses; stay the bleedi^^ at Nose, or elsewhere;
stop, wi^^ much safety, all manner of Flu^es: assuage pain; provoke Urine; p^^
a good confitence upon the mass (...) ^loud; strengthen the Spirits; allay
^apours; exhilarate the mind; ^rocure an Appetite; help Digesti^^^; open the
Pores, and produce an ^^sensible transpiration; clear the ^kin, and make the
Countenance ^egete and lively.

Now although all these things, do work all these effects in some de^ee and
measure, yet seeing that ^xperience has found some to be more infallible and
certain than o^^er some, or at least more general: shall propound that which
experience has taught to be the most general of all, and that is, Steel. And
^^eing that in this also experience has found some uncertainty, by ^eason of
its various preparations, and several ways of exhibition; I shall above all
commend one prepa^ation, called, Sacharum Martis, or Sugar of Steel, and that
to be given ^o otherwise than in Wine or Wa^er. And this Sugar of Steel, so
exhibited, may be truly called, Panacea, or that universal Medicame^^ which may
in it self be sufficient, (...) touching the Prophylactical part (...) Physic,
that is, to prevent disea^^ and preserve health, as you m^ read afterward. Yet
is it not to (...) denied but that Steel has be^^ often tried, and found
ineffectual (...) the distempers of young Infant Whether it be for want of due
Pr^paration, or that it is too strong Ferment: However, I shall not (...)
present propound this, although t^^ best Preparation of Steel for tende^
Infants, but offer another Med^cament, yet of the same tribe which is well
known by experience not only of my self, but diverse others; and this is Red
Coral, (...) which also you shall read afterward^

It is not impertinent in this plac^ to show, how that grand Quae^ may be
resolved, viz. How is it possible, that the same individual Medicament, should
be efficacious to prevent or cure several diseases o^^ ^^fferent, and perhaps
of contrary ^^ndes? Which thing is evident and ^ear by what is here supposed.
It ^here supposed, that Fermentation ^f the mass of blood does lenifie ^^arp
humors, and yet attenuate those that are viscous and gross; that (...) does
both provoke, and yet stop ^he overflowing of the Menses, and ^roduce many
other such like effects of a contrary nature. So that if any ^ne Medicament
will but Ferment ^he blood, it may by the same reason produce different, yea
contrary ^ffects upon the body.

This is also to be exploded for a ^alse opinion, viz. That Steel performs
^ontrary effects, opens obstructions, yet stops Fluxes, by a diversity of parts
which it has in it self. Whereas ^t performs these different effects only by
that one individual act of Fermenting the blood, seeing also that all other
things, as Coral, Pearl, Corallina, etc. which have a faculty of Fermenting, do
produce the same different effects. I shall now she the use of these two
Medicamen^ first of the Coral for Children, all the are under seven years of
age; a^ afterward of the Steel for all other Men, Women, and Children, abo^^
seven. But this is first to be adve^tised, that it is not here pretend^^ how
the Coral and Steel do of themselves perform the whole Act (...) Fermentation,
but only by Fe^menting a little, do put the Liv^ and Spleen upon their Office
of Fementation, even as exercise dot^ whereof these are propounded as
Succedaneum; yet so, as that so^^ exercise, if possible, is also to be use with
them.

CHAP. X. ^^w Childrens diseases may be prevented by the use of Red Coral,
which Fermenteth the Mass of Blood.
^Or prevention of Diseases in Children under seven years of ^^e, give them
either the Magistery (...) the Syrup of Coral, or else Red ^^ral prepared,
twice every day for ^ree days together, once in a for^ight or thereabouts.
Give a child (...) about four or five years old, five ^raines of Red Coral
prepared, ^^x'd with a little conserve of Bar^^ries, from a knifes point in a
morn^^g fasting, and let the child drink (...) draught of spring water, either
^^eetned with sugar, or alone, im^ediately after it, if it be in the
^^mmer-time; but if in the Winter, ^hen a draught of White Wind. Let him fast
at least an hour, and, if can, let him exercise after it; him do the like at
four in the aft^noon, and so the next day for the days together.

Or in stead hereof he may t^ seven grains of Magistery of Co^ from a knifes
point, mixed with (...) pap of an Apple after the afores^ manner, drinking
wine, or wat^ or both mixed together, accord^ to the season of the year,
exerci^ and fasting after it as aforesaid.

Or else he may drink half an ou^ of syrup of Coral at a time, in w^ or water,
according to the seas^ twice every day for three days ^^gether, as aforesaid.

Now although this be the w^ and means to prevent such Dise^ only as are apt
to breed within (...) body, yet is it also a great means strengthen Nature, to
resist those ^ther Pestilential diseases, as t^ Measels and small Pox which co^
from without; as also to enable t^ body the better to encounter with ^^se
diseases in case they should ^pen. For doubtless the only ^son why, when the
seeds of those ^stilential diseases are sown in seve^ bodies, some die, others
languish ^ong time, and others speedily re^er, is this, viz. because some ^lies
are of a better Crasis or Tem^ament than others. And this also ^n undeniable
truth, that the Eu^sie and Dyscrasie of all bodies, do ^cessarily depend upon
the more ^fect or imperfect Fermentation the mass of Blood.

And here, that not only a rational ^t also an experimental satisfaction ^y be
given unto all persons what^ver, concerning the efficacy of ^ral, for
prevention of Childrens ^eases; I shall propound this fol^wing Experiment.

Give of Red Coral twice every ^y six or seven days together, according to any
of those ways be^^oe mentioned, unto ten several children which have contract^
some general distemper; not s^ as may bear the denomination of a particular
disease, but so as it m^ clearly appear that they are indis^sed, and not
perfectly well, as m^ perhaps appear by their loss of ^^petite, by the more
then ordina^ Paleness and Wanness of their Co^tenance, or by other some such-^
infallible signs and tokens; t^^ have upon them no particular (...) ease, but
only that which Phy^ans call a general Cachexy, that an immediate inclination
or disp^tion unto all manner of diseases (...) say, give unto ten such Child^
twice every day, for six or se^ days together, of this Red Cor^ according to
any of those ways before mentioned, and you shall ^^serve (except somewhat
extraor^^nary prevent it) that scarce one these ten shall continue, to the spa^
of those six or seven days, unrest^red unto its perfect health.

After that, make choice of ten ^ore Cachectically distempered ^hildren, but
give the Coral only (...) five; and then after a few days (...) shall observe
the difference, and ^t no small difference, between those unto whom you gave
the Co^l, and the other. I appeal with ^uch confidence unto any man's ex^ience,
because I know it already my own experience.

I know by experience that Red ^oral cures the Cachectical distem^rs of
children, as infallibly as Steel ^res the Green Sickness; and I cannot persuade
my self but that ^he effect is performed upon this ^^count. Those Cachectical
distem^rs proceed from an imperfect Fer^entation: Coral Ferments; where^e by
taking away the cause, it re^oveth the effect also, according to ^at old, worn,
yet true Axiom, ^blat a causa, tollitur effectus.

CHAP. XI. How the Diseases of those pers^ which are above seven years (...)
may be prevented by the use of St^^
AS Coral for young Infants, Steel for all others above ^ven years old is, if
rightly made of, a great preventer of Diseases, (...) preserver of health. And
amo^^ those preparations that are as (...) extant, there is none compara^ unto
that which goes under the (...) nomination of Sacharum Martis, Sugar of Steel.
The use whereof to the Prophylactical or Preservat^ part of Physic, is as
follows.

Let any healthful person drink grains of Sugar of Steel in a dra^^^ of
spring water in the mor^^ fasting, exercising and fasting at (...) least an
hour after it. Let him her do the like also at four in the ^ternoon, and so the
next day, and (...) next after that, for five or six ^^yes together. And after
a months ^ermission, the same course is to be ^ated.

Note, this water is to be used in ^^e Summertime, but in the Win^^r the Sugar
of Steel is to be dissol^ in white wind in stead of water; ^pring time and in
Autumn, water (...) wine may be mingled together.

^or a Boy of eight, ten, or twelve ^^s old, six, seven or eight grains (...)
be sufficient.

Now for a certain trial or proof (...) of this Sacharum Martis, or ^ar of
Steel; I offer the same ^^ner of experiment which I did ^ncerning the Coral for
young ^ildren, that it may clearly ap^^ unto all persons whatsoever, (...)
only upon a rational, but also ^n an experimental account, that ^ar of Steel
is a True and Legi^ate means to be used by any of love seven years old, for
prevention of diseases, or preservation health.

Give unto several persons wh^ are Cachectically distempered, t^ every day, for
the space of te^ twelve days, of Sugar of Steel, ^cording to the manner above
m^tioned; and if within that space time, all or most of them shall be stored
unto their perfect health cannot be denied, but that the foresaid means must
needs be effe^al for the intent and purpose afo^^said.

Yet I think we need not go sc^ as this for a trial; For let any pe^
whatsoever, of the most abso^ and perfect health that may be, (...) of this
Sugar of Steel for ten twelve days together, after (...) manner aforesaid; and
ten to (...) within that short space of ti^ there will appear at the least so
outward signs of health (...) strength more than formerly. I ten to one, but
that his countena^^ be somewhat more vegete (...) lively, and that he will have
^mewhat a quicker and sharper ap^ite to his meat.

(...) have now done with the Pro^lactical, or Preservative part of ^^sick,
wherein I have, I hope, ^en satisfaction to all those whom ^son will satisfy,
concerning the ^^acy of Coral and Steel for pre^tion of diseases. It remains in
the ^t place, that I treat of the The^eutical or Curative part.

CHAP. XII. ^at the things not natural, are ne^essarily to be observed together
with the use of Coral and Steel, for ^he cure of diseases.
WHereas it is not only a thing more dfficult to cure diseases ^e contracted,
than beforehand prevent them; but also a matter of greater consequence, because
diseases unprevented, terminate one in sickness, uncured in death: (...)
behooveth every Physician to (...) so careful of his Patients recove^ from any
disease, that he neglect (...) rational and probable means t^ may serve for
that intent (...) purpose.

Hence is it, that although (...) chief aim is to divulge the efficacy these
two medicaments for (...) curing of diseases, which indeed (...) chiefly to be
considered; yet shall not be silent as touching any oth^ additaments, or helps
which may subservient unto them.

Wherefore although for g^ reasons I have rejected all the things which
Physicians call not ^^tural, for prevention of diseases, ^^cept Exercise; yet
for the cure diseases, it will be necessary to ^^brace them so far forth as
reason (...) admit. As first, for matter of D^ it is requisite that it be, for
quant^ ^ry little or spare; and for quality, ^h as may be easily digested, in
^ose diseases where Nature is chiefly ^ncerned in the conquering and ^posing of
some Morbifick matter, (...) she be called away a Pepasmo ad ^psin, from her
encounter with the ^sease, unto the digestion of meat. ^or is the Palate in
sickness to be ^garded, because she is then vi^ted and corrupted, disliking
that ^ich is wholesome and profitable, ^d relishing other things which are
^ngerous and destructive to the ^dy. The Diet is also to be ap^opriated unto
the disease, accord^g to the common experience of all ^ysicians. As for
example: flesh-^at is to be denied, or at least, not freely granted in Fevers,
because ^perience teaches that the Chyle Juice extracted by the Chemistry
Nature from thence, and trans^ted into the Veins and Arteries, most obnoxious
unto putrefacti^. Anchoves, Mustard, Frenchwine, and such like things of much
acrimony, are by no means to b^ given to those that have inward Ulcers in their
Bladder, Kidneys, o^ elsewhere, because they are apt ^ excoriate and fret, and
so to increa^ and inrage the distemper. The Diet which is Analeptical or
Reston^tive, is to be given to Consumpti^ persons: and so for other diseases
there is scarce any distemper wha^soever which may not in some me^sure be
abated, by a due observatio^ of Diet.

And as Diet, so Air also in t^ cure of diseases is somewhat to (...) regarded:
as in those disea^ where transpiration or sweating (...) required, care is to
be taken, that t^ ambient Air be as warm as may b^ that so the Pores may be
kept op^ and not closed too suddenly, where^ the Morbifick matter, once
atten^ated and enraged, may not be lock up in the body to the exasperatio^ and
increase of the disease, b^ ^radually breathed out and spent, to ^e recovery of
health.

So for sleep: Care is to be taken ^at in Fevers and suchlike Di^empers which
spend the spirits, ^at it be moderately procured to ^fresh the body, and
strengthen nature to encounter with the disease. Neither are the affections
vio^ntly to be moved, and the mind ^scomposed in sick and weak per^ns, by
relating any thing that is ^npleasant, or less desirable to be ^eard. For
experience teaches, ^at a very small commotion of the ^inde, has great
influence upon a ^ck and weak body; whereas great ^oubles and discontents do
very ^tle or no hurt unto the bodies of ^ose persons that are in perfect ^ealth.

Having premised this in the gene^l, I shall now descend to particu^rs, and
discourse first of the Effi^cy of Steel in the cure of Diseases, then
afterward Analogically to^^ upon the Coral also.

Some Diseases there are whi^ Steel does both prevent and cure, ^ the Green
Sickness, the Spleen, Scu^vey, Jaundies, Mother, Go^^ Consumption, Ague, Stone,
Flu^^ Dropsy, Strangury.

Although it does prevent, y^^ does it scarcely cure continual Fe^vers, and the
Epilepsie, or falli^ Sickness. And although it do^ prevent, yet does it not
cure (...) Apoplexy. As to the French d^ease, it does neither prevent nor cu^^
it; yet is it useful for this, and (...) others, as shall appear in the sequel^
my discourse. I shall treat of the Distempers in the same order as have
propounded them; as first (...) the Green Sickness, then of the Spleen,
Scurvey, Jaundies, etc. a^ they are here above described.

CHAP. XIII. ^f the Cure of the Green Sickness, by the use of Steel.
THe Green Sickness is a distemper peculiar unto young Maids, which renders
them listless and loath (...) stir; which makes them in their ^^e or
countenance squalid, and less ^andsome, of a pale and greenish ^olour, from
whence it has the ^enomination of Green Sickness.

It proceeds from the defect of ^ermentation of the Mass of blood, ^^e Liver
and Spleen not performing their office according to the intent ^f Nature.

It is cured only by the use of ^ugar of Steel. Give the Patient ^wenty grains
of Sugar of Steel in a ^raught of spring water in the morn^ng fasting, and as
much at four^ in ^he afternoon, for the space of ten or twelve days together,
and (...) her every time exercise very w^^ after it. And in case her distemp^^
be such that she have not her Mens^^ let her continue taking the san^ quantity
at the least twice so long^ and let a vein be opened in the le^ foot, to the
evacuation of eight o^ nine ounces.

It is here worth our observatio^ to take notice how this Sugar o^ Steel drank
in a draught of spring water twice every day, with exercis^ after it for a
fornights space, does beautify and enliven the countenance, not only of those
who have the Green Sickness, but of other^ also, insomuch that there are scarce
any who look so well, but by taking of it will appear in their countenance much
better, livelier and clearer then before. A thing which may in it self signify
the wholesomness of the Medicament.

Certainly were many of our Gallants in this City advertised of this, ^^ey
would lay by all their Un^ents, Paints, and Washes, which ^n at the best afford
them but an ^rtificial hue, and would betake ^emselves wholly unto this Sugar
(...) Steel, whereby, besides the be^efit and advantage of health, they ^ight
gain a clear, lively, beco^ing, amiable, natural complexi^n.

CHAP. XIV. ^ow Steel conduces to the cure of the Spleen.
THere are several Distempers arising from the Spleen. Know therefore for
distinctions sake, That ^y the disease called the Spleen, I ^nderstand both the
swelling of the ^pleen, which is accompanied with ^iolent pain, by reason of
the va^ours distending those Nervous Fi^res which are in the body of the Milt
or Spleen, as also those Hyp^condriack Vapors which are from thence dispersed,
which fuming (...) into the Head disturb and disco^pose the Brain, which
suffocate a^ almost stop the breath* beside e^tream pain, and some other
troublesome and pernicious symptoms.

A Case.
A Gentleman of about twe^^ eight years of Age, having been (...) fits for the
space of four or five yea^ much troubled with violent pain (...) his Spleen,
was thus cured.

He took ten grains of Sugar Steel in a draught of spring-wa^^ twice every day
for the space of (...) days, walking very easily after (for he durst not move
violently (...) any time for fear of his pain) a^ after ten days intermission,
he to^ it other ten days after the sa^ manner; and so he did by cour^ every
other ten days, for the spa^ (...) half a year. In the mean time ^hen he was
by fits taken violently ^^th his pain, he had present ease by ^^inking a
draught of raw White-^ine bloud-warm, together with an ^ince of Syrup of Red
Poppies. ^ut his pain, by taking of Steel grew ^ss and less every fit, insomuch
that (...) two months time it was almost ^holly abated: so that he needed not
^he White wine and Syrup of Pop^y at the furthest above ten weeks, and that at
the latter end not above ^nce in a fortnight, although at first ^e was
constrained to take it once in ^our or five days.

Another Case.
A Gentlewoman, a Widow of ^hirty seven years of age, being very much
oppressed with Hypocondri^ck vapors, was thus cured in the ^pace of ten days.
She drank twice ^very day twenty grains of Sugar of Steel in Spring Water; and
in that ten days she bled twice in the foot^ to the quantity of about nine or
te^ ounces. She took also for the first three nights, a Bolus consisting of
half a dram of Venice-Treacle, hal^ a dram of Conserve of Red Roses, and a
grain of Opium.

A Boy of about fifteen or sixteen years old, was cured of the swelling and
pain of his Spleen, by only Sugar of Steel; drinking ten grains at a time, in
a draught of Spring Water twice every day for three weeks together.

A Maidservant of twenty three years of age, about the fall of the Leaf or
Autumn, was much troubled with Hypocondriack vapors every afternoon for three
weeks or (...) month together: she was also taken after the same manner the
Spring after. And having tried many things to no purpose, was at length cured
by Sugar of Steel drank i^ Spring Water, twelve grains at (...) time twice
every day for a fortnight ^fterwards, fearing the return of ^er distemper, and
thinking with her ^elf that her cure might be wrought ^s well by means of the
water as the Steel: applied her self wholly unto ^he drinking of nothing else
but water, both at her meals and all other times. This she continued for a year
and half, in which time ^he had not the least touch of her distemper. But
afterward returning unto her drinking of Beer as formerly, she perceived a
recidivation of her disease; so after that by drinking only water again was
^cured.

This I relate to gratify all those that are inclined unto Hypocondriack
vapors; which distemper may as well as any that I know, be called, Opprobrium
Medicorum, the shame of Physicians; because so many laboring of this disease
have come out of the hands of very able Physicians uncured. Yet do I verily
persuade my self that it might be cured in any person whatsoever, by the only
use of Sugar of Steel and Water, by drinking Water continually upon all
occasions, and Sugar of Steel in it at some times.

CHAP. XV. How Steel may be used for the cure of the Scurvy.
THe Scurvey is a disease proceeding from the putrefaction of the blood, which
putrefaction has its original from the defect of Fermentation. For those
particles in the mass of blood, which are not by Fermentation embodied with the
rest, must needs act their particular parts upon the body; they must needs
either excoriate, obstruct, or putrify, etc. according to their different
qualities. From whence it is an easy thing to conceive, how a diversity of
diseases may be produced in humane bodies, from one and ^he same original, viz.
from an imperfect Fermentation of the mass of blood.

The symptoms of that disease which is called the Scurvey, are pains in
several parts of the body, especially in the Calfes of the Legs and Thighs;
and sometimes Spots also in several parts, especially in the Legs and Thighs.
A weariness and loathness to stir. An itching in the Gums, and looseness of the
Teeth.

Let the Patient drink twenty Grains of Sugar of Steel in the morning fasting
in a draught of White Wind, exercising very well after it; and as much at Four
in the Afternoon after the same manner, for the space of Six or Seven Days.
After that, let him sweat after this manner following.

In a Morning fasting, after he has made himself as hot as he can with good
store of Clothes, and by putting his Head into the Bed, give him the Liquor of
Forty small Oysters wherein Twenty Oysters have bee^ boiled, as hot as he shall
be able to drink it. And so let him Sweat very well after it, drinking a
draught o^ clear White Wind Posset Drink very hot, now and then, during the
time of his sweating. After this, if occasion be, he may repeat his taking of
Sugar of Steel, after the manner above mentioned, and so after that sweat again
as formerly.

CHAP. XVI. Of the use of Steel, in the Cure of the Jaundise.
THe Jaundise is a Disease well known by the Yellowness of the Skin, which is
commonly first discovered in the Eyes, which oftentimes produces Pain and
Dizziness in the Head, want of Appetite and Digestion, with some other
symptoms. (...) is caused by a thick and viscous hu^our, which obstructeth
that passage, which is called, Meatus choledo^us, the Chanel or Passage through
which the Yellow Choler, contain^d in the Vesicula fellea, or Bladder ^f the
Gall, according to the course ^f Nature is transmitted from ^ence into the
Intestines. For when ^at passage is obstructed, the Yel^w Choler is thrown out
into the ^ass of blood, by the same way that (...) was first conveyed into the
Blad^er of the Gall; even as when the ^ylorus, or lower Orifice of the ^tomack
is stopped, that which was in^ested, is oftentimes thrown up by ^omiting the
contrary way. Now ^hen the Yellow Choler is thrown ^p out of the Bladder of the
Gall ^to the mass of blood, and Nature ^tending always, when she is able, ^o
purge and cleanse the blood of its ^xrements by Urine and Sweat; ^ence it is,
that both the Urine ^^d Skin do receive the yellowness and tincture of the
Chole^

To say nothing, how this visco^^ humor proceeds from the want o^
Fermentation, the cure is chief performed by Steel, although pe^haps sometimes
there may be occ^sion to make use of somewhat else, (...) subservient unto it.

There is that which is called the Black, as well as the Yellow Jaun^clise,
which proceeds from some matter thrown out from the Splee^ into the mass of
blood, even as the Yellow does from some of the matter contained in the Gall.

The Black Jaundise is cured b^ the only use of Steel in manner fo^lowing.
Give the Patient Twenty Grains of Suga^ of Steel, in a draugh^ of White Wine in
the Morning Fasting, and as much after the sam^ manner at Four in the Afternoon
for ten days together.

Let the like be done also for the Yellow Jaundise, except that the White Wind,
wherein the Steel is t^ (...) dissolved, is first to be colored ^th Saffron.

Or else, let the Patient take the ^antity of a Nutmeg of this Electu^y
following from a Knifes point ^ery Morning Fasting, drinking Ten ^rains of
Sugar of Steel in a draught (...) White Wine after it, and as much Four in the
Afternoon, after the ^me manner for Ten or Twelve ^^yes together.

The Electuary.
Take of Cardamom-seed Long^epper and Turmerick, all finely ^owdered, of each a
Dram. Saffron ^owdered, half a Dram. Conserve of ^osemary-Flowers, two Ounces;
^ith as much Syrup of the Five ^pening R^^^^s as is sufficient: Make ^hereof an
Electuary to be taken as ^bove mentioned.

CHAP. XVII. How Steel conduces to the Cure (...) the Mother.
THe Mother is a distemper peculiar unto Women, whos^ symptoms are hinderance
o^ the exercise of the Animal Faculties by Fits or Paroxysmes; as also (...)
hinderance of Respiration: which symptoms are caused by Vapors ascending from
the Mother, o^ Womb. The Vapors ascendin^ to the Brain, do hinder the
exercis^ of the Animal Faculties, and withal^ elevating and raising the Matrix
o^ Womb, so that there is a compression made upon the Diaphragma; they do also
hinder Respiration.

It is a distemper easilier prevented than cured; and easilier cured at the
first, than afterward, when the ^apours have for some time been ^bituated to
ascend. For then upon every small commotion or distur^nce of the mind, they are
apt to ^^end and cause the Paroxysme; ^is is too well known by experience,
which verifies that Maxim, Habi^s est qualitas difficulter mobilis.

Therefore by how much the longer ^e distemper has continued, so ^uch the
longer time must the Steel ^e used. Give the Patient 15 grains ^f Sugar of
Steel in a draught of ^pring-water every morning fasting, and as much at four
in the afternoon ^^ter the same manner, for twenty ^ayes together: she may take
it a ^nger time proportionably to the ^ontinuance of the disease; or else
^termit twenty days, and then ^^ke it other twenty.

Here we may note that this Medi^ament is the most apposite and fit ^r this
disease, of any that can be ^iven, both in respect of the Water, and of the
Steel. Water has a natural propriety to allay vapou^ and Steel has a faculty
of procuri^ that which is called Deorsum t^dentia, a motion downwards; bo^
which are required in the cure (...) this disease. Hence it is that (...) only
water, but every thing e^ that is apt to allay vapors, is kno^^ by experience
to be good for the distemper; and on the contrar^ things apt to raise vapors
to b^ hurtful. So are all other things besides Steel which are apt to make
motion downward, known by e^perience to be good; as the taki^^ Tobacco, the
burning of Feather^ the smoke of Assa-Foetida, and (...) other stinking smells;
the fume (...) Benjamin, Storax, and Franki^cense, received up into the body,
a^ suck-like.

How the Steel performs this effe^ of making a motion downward whether it be by
its Elementa^^ form, or some other Specific qu^lity, and by what means the
wat^ ^oth produce its effect of allaying ^pours, it is not in this place to
^ntrovert.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cure of the Gout by Steel.
THe Gout is an extreme pain in the joints, caused by an hu^our settling there
and sometimes ^ntrefying, whereby the Tendons, which are exquisitely sensible,
are ^stended.

The matter settling and residing in ^e joints, is the Seminifick or Sper^atick
part of the blood: hence it is ^at Eunuchs, Women, and those that ^re under
Age, are seldom or never ^oubled with this disease.

A Case.
A Gentleman, an Ancient Batche^our of about forty years of age, was very much
and often tormente^ with the Gout; who after the try^ of many things to no
purpose, w^ at length thus cured. He drank t^ grains of Sugar of Steel in a
draugh^ of Spring Water every morning fa^ing, and as much at four in the
a^ternoon for a month together; an^ applied to the part affected the pu^ of a
roasted Turnep as hot as he wa^ able to bear it. After the mon^^ was expired,
he left taking the Stee^ but continued the Water, drinkin^ it constantly at his
meals and all other times; this he did for the space (...) two years, during
which time (...) had little or no pain in his joints only now and then some
sma^ touches, which he could cure himself immediately, by applying the pu^ of a
roasted Turnep mixed with (...) little Saffron to the part affected* After the
two years, he married (...) young Gentlewoman in whom b^ much delighted, and
then notwithstanding his return unto drinking (...) ^^er and sometimes Wine, as
former^ he continued well.

Another Gentleman, a Bachelor (...) about thirty years of Age, was ^red only
by drinking Water. ^here note, that Water has of it ^f a Specific faculty of
curing the ^out; and on the contrary, Wine is (...) to Exasperate that disease.
So ^at the Reader is here to be adversed, that although for prevention (...)
Diseases, I have propounded ^gar of Steel to be drank, in the ^mmer-time in
Water, and in the ^inter in White Wind, in the Spring ^d Autumn in Water mixed
with ^ine; yet for prevention of the ^out, those persons who suspect or ^r it,
must drink it any time of the ^ar in water. I counsel them also (...) drink
Wine very seldom or ne^r, and to use as much exercise as ^ay be.

CHAP. XIX. Of the use of Steel in the Cure of Consumption.
A Consumption is truly and pr^perly an Ulcer in the Lung^ which by putrefying
and spreadi^ does waste and consume the Lungs although generally it is taken
for a^ kind of Languishing and Consumi^^ of the Body. It is of all disease
considering the time that the Phy^tian has to turn himself in, the m^
difficult to be cured; therefore the greater care is to be taken in the cure of
this disease, that nothing (...) omitted which may in any sort co^tribute to
the benefit of the P^tient.

It is bred of a putrid, and also o^ sharp humor in the Mass of blou^ (which
humors continue such (...) want of Fermentation) therefo^^ ^l things that do
add either to Acri^ony or Putrefaction must needs be ^urtful, Et vice versa.

For the cure of this disease, there (...) first a regard to be had unto those
things which are called not natural, (...) Air, Diet, Sleep, the Passions of
^he Mind, Exercise. As for Air; ^lthough, considered in it self in re^ect of
the Climate, it is not easily ^o be distinguished whether it be ^etter or worse
for the preservation ^f health, seeing that many of all ^onstitutions are very
healthful in any manner of Air; yet certain it is that the Air may be bettered
by Art, and corrupted by accident; witness that sad accident which many years
^nce, happened unto one Mr. Smith and his Family. Mr. Smith, the ^own-clerk of
Grantham, together ^ith his Wife, Maidservant and ^wo Children, were all in
one night ^ereaved of life, by reason of the ^r vitiated through vapors
arising ^om Charcoal; removing unto a new house to dwell, having its wal^ new
limed and not thoroughly dried to correct the dampness of the ai^ they placed a
Pan of Charcoal (...) the Room, and having close shut the Doors, they went all
to bed, and i^ the morning were found all dead.

Now seeing that the Air may b^ accident be so corrupted, as in (...) short a
time to make so great a^ alteration, as from health to death much more may it
be so vitiated a^ in continuance of time, in Chronical and Languishing
diseases, in some measure to increase the disease. Tha^ which either in the Air
or ought else is most apt to increase that diseas^ which is truly and properly
called Consumption, is either Acrimony or else Putrefaction. Acrimo^^ cannot
subsist in the Air, being (...) thing much different from its El^mentary form.
For we are to understand by Acrimony, matter consisting of Angular Atoms; but
(...) Air, matter consisting of Spheric^ Atoms.

It remains then that whatsoever (...) the Air may be hurtful unto this
^sease, must needs be Putrefaction: and indeed the Air is as much Ob^oxious
unto Putrefaction, as any ^ther thing whatsoever. Now ^hereas Air may be either
more or ^ess putrid, it must be either better ^r worse for this disease.

We are therefore to enquire into ^he quality of the Air, in this re^pect, and
consider what Air is more ^r less putrid. And this experience ^ath taught, that
in populous places, ^n great Cities which are continually ^equented with a
great multitude ^f people, the Air is most of all ^utrid; it is probable it
becomes so ^y reason of the breaths of many people putrefying, or else from
that ^utrid matter which is continually ^hrown out of their bodies by
Transpiration, either sensible or insensible.

That the Air is most putrid in populous places, it can be Demonstrated by no
better an experiment, than by the corruption of any kind of flesh. The
Butchers all know by experience, that any kind of flesh-meat, is sooner
putrified and corrupted in the City, than in the^ Country; which must needs be
through the putrefaction of the Air. It is therefore expedient for all
Consumptive persons, who dwell in the City, or any close place amongst many
people, to remove into a more open Air, that the cure of their disease be not
hindered by reason of the Air.

The next thing to be regarded is Diet, which is subject not only to
putrefaction, but also unto Acrimony or sharpness, whereby such a Juice may be
conveyed into the mass of blood, as may by fretting, and corroding, exulcerate
the Lungs. Wherefore Salt, although it resist putrefaction, yet because it is
apt to corrode, is hurtful; and so are all things sharp or sour. So is
Stale-Beer, and Ale, if it lie long in the ^omack, because by that means it is
^ftentimes made sour. But if Ale, which has as yet contracted no ^wreness, be
drank very Warm, so ^at it may immediately be convey^d into the Veins and
Arteries, by ^eason of its lenifying quality, it must ^eeds be profitable. The
much use ^f Bread is also very wholesome, by ^eason, not only of its lenifying
qua^ty, but also in that it is apt to re^st putrefaction. Flesh-meat is
^urtful, especially in the City, because there it does soonest putrefie. ^dence
it is, that the City-Air is to be ^voided, not only in respect of it ^elf, but
also in regard of the Diet which it is too apt to corrupt.

As for Sleep; it is also in this disease moderately to be procured: Not only
because it does recruit the spirits, but also in that it does ^etund the
sharpness of humors, and stop the motion of the Catarrhe, ^or descent of
Rheum upon the Lungs. Hence it is, that experience also teaches that those
things which procure sleep, if discreetly used, an^ in this disease beneficial;
as Diacodium, and Opium in Pil. e Styrac^ and in Pil. de Cynoglosso.

And so for the Passions of the mind, the Patient is in this diseas^ to be
pleased as much as may be; because by inward discontent, the putrid matter is
locked up in the breast, which Nature always intends to expel, as much as she
is able, by transpiration.

For this end is Exercise also, if possibly it may, moderately to be^ used.
Exercise is in it self, the best Diaphoretick, or incentive to transpiration:
and certain it is, that Nature always intends by transpiration to clear the
mass of blood of its putrefaction. Hence it is that the matter breathed out
from many bodies by sensible sweat, is so Fetid or stinking.

Having premised thus much, I ^m now to show the efficacy of Steel ^or the cure
of this Disease. Herein ^ shall consider those two cause of ^his Disease, viz.
Acrimony and pu^refaction of the mass of blood, part or severally; and first of
Acrimony.

That sharpness of humors, fret^ing and corroding the Lungs, is ^ome cause of
this distemper, it may sufficiently appear by those things which do cure, or at
least, palliate the disease; things which are Naturally apt to retund, lenifie,
or assuage Acrimony. Such are mild Ale, New-Milk sweetened with Sugar; the
Liquor of Snailes made into a Syrup, with White-Sugar-Candy, and Snailes boiled
in Milk.

Now that Steel is also endued with a faculty of lenifying sharp humors, it
may appear by this following experiment. Put an Ounce or two of the filings of
Steel into a Glass-Bottle, unto which put a Pint of very sharp Vinegar, or
Juice of Lemmons: let them be together two days, and now and then shak'd up;
and in that time, the Vinegar o^ Juice of Lemmons shall have put of all its
sowreness, and shall become in a manner insipid.

That some putrid matter in the mass of blood, is a cause of this distemper,
may also appear by other things resisting putrefaction, which palliate the
disease; as the Powder of Red-Rose Leaves, and the Juice of Turnips baked, etc.
And that Steel does resist putrefaction, may appear by this, in that the Water
wherein Sugar of Steel is put will not putrefie.

To say nothing of the Sanative or healing faculty of Steel, as also of its
Fermenting power, by reason of both; which reason will also admit, that Steel
may be a legitimate Medicament for this disease, I appeal unto the experience
of those persons, that shall rightly use it.

A Case.
A Minister in the City of about ^hirty five years of age, was thus ^ured. He
had first an Issue made in ^is lest Arm, then went into the Country, and for
the first ten days drank ten grains of Sugar of Steel, ^n a draught of
Spring Water every morning fasting, and as much at ^our in the afternoon,
exercising very well after it; his exercise was only walking, yet by that he
heated himself very well, being very well clothed, and put himself into a
breathing sweat; the place where ^he walked, was upon plowed ground newly
broken up. After the first ^en days leaving his Steel, he applied himself to
the drinking of new Milk and Sugar morning and even^ng, which he continued for
the space of a fortnight; then he repeated his taking of Steel as before, and
after that Milk, very warm from the Cow as formerly. In the mean^ time he
combed his head very well every morning with a small toothed comb, and once in
two or three days had the ends of his hair cut, and provoked himself to neeze
every other day with a little white Hellebore grated, and snuffed up into his
nostrils.

As for his Diet, he would eat good store of Bread with whatsoever else he did
eat, and oftentimes Bread alone; and besides his taking now and then some of
the Juice of baked Turnips with Sugar, he would oftentimes make a meal of
buttered Turnips. His drink was small Ale, which he always drank very warm,
both at his meals and other times: after all his meals he sat still about half
an hour, then walked at the least an hour upon plowed ground newly broken up:
the Chamber where he lay had its Casements open all the day, and in the evening
before he went into it, (...) was well warmed with a good fire, and perfumed
with Benjamin, Storax and Frankincense: every night so ^oon as he was in his
bed, he took ^om a kises point the quantity of a Nutmeg of Conserve of Red
Roses. By this means he was not only cu^ed of his Consumption, but afterward
became more Corpulent and Fat than ever he was before.

In this case is represented only the Practical part; I shall now by
Commenting upon the several particulars show the Rationality of this Practice.
And first, to say something of the person, the Patient was a Minister. We must
know, that of all men in the City, Ministers are most Obnoxious unto
Consumptions, in that their Lungs are most of all strained, and their bodies
least exercised, besides the weakening of their Brain by continual study; Of
which afterward. Orange and Oyster-women, and suchlike, which cry about the
streets, although they strain their Lungs, yet they have this advantage, that
they are necessitated to exercise, whereby they receive the greater benefit of
Transpiration. Doubtless the reason why Consumptive persons, if they pass the
midst of May, do commonly escape for that year; is only because they have then
the greater benefit of Transpiration. For this reason the Patient used
exercise, and kept himself very warm with clothes.

The reason why after ten days he left his Steel and drank Milk, is this, viz.
Because, although Steel does both Lenifie sharp humors, resist Putrefaction,
Ferment, and Heal, yet is it not Nutritive; and the reason why after a
fortnights use of Milk, he left that also to return unto his Steel, is this,
viz. Because, although Milk does both Lenifie sharp humors and also nourish,
yet does it in continuance of time, Obstruct, and so by accident produce
Acrimony or sharpness of humors; For ^hensoever the Pylorus or lower Orifice
of the Stomach is obstructed, ^o that the liquid matter contained ^o the
Stomach cannot in some con^enient time pass away; it must ^eeds by the heat of
the Ambient ^arts contract an Acidity or sowre^ess; even as if the mildest Ale
be ^lose stopped in any Vessel, and be set ^n some warm place, it will in a
^hort time be converted into Ale^gar.

The reason why he smoked his Room with Benjamin, Storax, and Frankincense, is
upon the same account that he changed the City for the Country-air. Some
skilful Surgeons there are, who by suming ^int with Benjamin, Storax,
O^iba^um, Frankincense, Mastick, etc. can dry up old Ulcers of long
continuance; It is therefore very rational to impregnate the Air with the sum
of such things as are healing, and drying, for an Ulcer in the Lungs, seeing
also that Air has so great an Affinity with the Lungs that Experience has
taught how much it does conduce to the recovery of Consumptive persons to
change the Air.

Nor is it without reason th^^ when he walked, he made choice o^ ground newly
broken up, because one cause of his disease was Putrefaction. Now Experience
teaches that the Earth does very much resist Putrefaction, or rather prey upon
putrid matter, especially those foil^ that are hungry and barren.

The reason why he had so much regard to the combing of his Head, Neezing, and
cuting off his Hair was for the strengthening of hi^ Brain. For this we must
know, tha^ the humors of the Body which are inclined to Putrefaction, passing
through the Brain (which they are forced to do by the Circulation o^ the blood)
do there soonest putrify when the Brain through weaknes^ has already
contracted some Putrefaction. It is the nature of all purid matter, by
corrupting and purefying, to convert all it touches unto its own nature. And
the Brain ^f all the parts in the body, is the ^ost subject unto putrefaction.
^dence it is, that Nature has prepa^ed for it a fit Emunctory, viz. the Nose,
for the purging of its Excre^ents; which if stopped, so that the ^xcrements of
the Brain cannot ^ass, Imposthumes are bred in one ^art or other, within the
Capacity of ^he head.

It is well worth our observation ^o take notice, that all those, who ^y any
accident do weaken their Brain, are the most of all subject to Consumptions.
Whether the Brain ^e weakened by Fumes and Vapors ^om Strong Beer and Wine, or
by Cuts or Blows upon the Head, ^r else by much Study, it is all the ^me.

CHAP. XX. How all manner of Agues may be effectually cured by the use of Steel.
Fevers are usually distinguished into putrid and Pestilential, and putrid
Fevers into continual and intermitting. An intermitting putrid Fever, is that
which we call in English, an Ague. To say nothing of the several kinds of
Agues, passing under several denominations; as Quotidian, Tertian, Quartain,
Double Tertian, etc. it will be sufficient to show the Quiddity, or nature of
an Ague in general, from its cause and symptoms, by which means also the
particularities and differences may be easily discerned.

Besides, sometimes illness at the Stomach, and Vomiting, Thirstiness, pain in
the Head, and in the Back and other parts; the common symtomes of an Ague, are
first Cold, ^en afterward Burning, which are ^used by some Particles of the
mass (...) blood, at that time actually pu^efying.

What Fermentation is, I have already described in the Eighth Chap^er. Now we
must know, that Pu^^efaction, I mean the Act of Putre^ing, is to be conceived,
in some sort, ^ontrary unto the Act of Fermen^ng. It is Fermentation reversed,
^^z. a resolution of some Homoge^eous, matter into particles of a ^ifferent
nature: Even as when a ^ell-governed Commonwealth does ^issolve and break into
an Anarchy. Whereas Fermentation and Putre^ction do agree in one common ^enus,
viz. Motion; they produce ^^e common effect, viz. Heat, which is a natural
product of all and very kind of Motion. But as the ^otion of either is very
much ^fferent and distinct from each other, so is the Heat also resulting from
either diverse. The result o^ Fermentation is a Natural, but o^ Putrefaction a
Preternatural Hea^ Now whereas the Act of Putrefying is a contrary Motion unto
that o^ Fermenting, it cannot be that the^ both can subsist together in the
mas^ of blood, after an intense manne^ at the same time: According to that
common Maxim, Duo contraria non possunt simul esse in eodem subjectio. Hence
it is, that before there can be an intense Act of Putrefying, there must needs
be a cessatio^ of the Act of Fermenting. So tha^ as the motion of Putrefying,
does beget a Preternatural Heat in the body, which is called the Burning or Hot
Fit; even so, the cessatio^ of the Motion of Fermenting, must needs before
that, produce another Fit as Gold as that is Hot.

The cause of this distemper i^ commonly both inward and outward: the inward
cause is either some putrid matter gradually collected, or else a disposition
of some particles in the mass of blood to purefie. The outward cause is
commonly cold, preventing Transpira^ion, and so by consequence hinder^ng, or at
least retarding Fermenta^ion. For by one individual act of ^ermentation, we are
to suppose that all the Offices of Nature are performed, amongst the which,
this ^s not the least, viz. That there is ^roduc'd continually either a
sensible ^r insensible Transpiration. Now ^s in the motion of a Clock or En^^in
where several Wheels move from ^ne and the same Original cause, the
^rresistible stopping of one Wheel does hinder the first cause from acting; So
is it with the Clock-work ^f Nature in all humane bodies: The cessation of any
one Office of Nature, which although it have its ^ependance upon Fermentation,
yet ^ay it be a means to hinder or at ^east retard it.

According as either the put^^ matter collected is more or less, (...) the
disposition of some Particles (...) the mass of blood to putrefie (...) greater
or less, a stronger or weak^ outward cause, may give an occa^on to this
distemper. An inwar^ cause without some outward, do^ seldom produce this
disease; b^ oftentimes a strong outward caus^ when there is no inward cause at
al^ does produce it; As many person who have no putrid matter, nor an^
disposition in the humors of the^ bodies to putrefaction, only tha^ which
they call, Potentia Naturali^ a Natural power which all men have by some strong
outward cause, a cold baths or suchlike, do get Ague^ And such Agues so
contracted, (...) they continue long, are altogether (...) dangerous as others.

For such is the nature of an Agu^ that it does of it self produce Mo^bisick
matter for other diseases, (...) though perhaps when it is first beg^^ (...)
may have no Morbifick matter of ^s own. An Ague is an habit, and ^ach fit
thereof an act of putrefy^g; so that putrefaction or putrid ^atter in the mass
of blood, is the ^roduct of all Agues, which, if after every fit it be not
vented by ^weat and Urine, must continue in ^he body as Morbifick matter for
^ome other distempers, whether that ^gue was at the first chiefly produced ^y
an Internal or External cause.

The way and means to cure this ^isease, is to strengthen the habit of
^ermenting, and to weaken the ha^it of putrefying in the body of the ^atient;
both which may be effe^tually performed by the use of ^teel.

Give the Patient twenty grains of ^ugar of Steel in a draught of Spring Water
every morning fasting, and as much at four in the afternoon, ^xercising very
well after it, for ten ^r twelve days together; and if in that time his Ague
be not gone, endeavor to prevent in him the cessation of Fermentation, by
gi^ving him two drams of Sugar o^ Steel at once, in a draught of posset^ drink
two or three hours before h^^ cold fit: this perhaps may make hi^ vomit once or
twice, however i^ does usually continue the habit (...) Fermentation, and by
consequenc^ prevent the cold fit, which is cause^ by the cessation of
Fermentation and so cure his Ague: for experience teaches, that whenever the
cold fit is prevented, the Ague i^ cured; Because, as I said before there
cannot be a sudden and violen^ or intense act of putrefying, excep^ there be
first a cessation of the act o^ Fermenting: so that to continue (...) habit of
Fermentation, is the way and means to cure an Ague.

And this is the reason why Strong water and Peper, and other ho^ things of
several kinds, both Actual and Potential, being given som^time before the cold
fit, do often times cure an Ague. And the reason why those things which do
some^imes cure, do also sometimes fail, (...) this, viz. Because the habits of
^ermenting and Putrefying are in ^ome bodies more Intense or Remiss, ^han in
othersome. Now that there ^ay be no uncertainty in the cure of ^his disease,
which is called Oppro^rium Medicorum, the Physicians ^ame; It is best by the
use of Steel ^radually to strengthen the habit of ^ermenting, and to weaken the
ha^it of Putrefying first, before any ^ndeavour be done to cure this dis^^se by
preventing the cold fit, ^used by the cessation of Fermen^tion.

And because that in Quartan A^es, the habit of Putrefying is not (...) soon
weakened as in others, be^^use it is there seated in a tougher ^umour; it will
not be amiss to give ^e Patient his Sugar of Steel in Sack ^ther than in water,
or at the least (...) advise him to drink Sack very often. For it is known by
experience, that the much drinking of Sack, does in a great measure help those
that labor of Quartan Agues; probably because the Sack embodying it self with
the humor, does abate its toughness.

Now suppose there may be some Quartan Ague, especially in the Wintertime,
which notwithstanding these means, may yet remain uncured: Yet must the Patient
needs receive great benefit by the use of Steel, in that it opens the pores,
and provokes Urine, whereby the Morbifick matter, generated by the Quartan,
for other diseases may by Urine and Sweat be carried out of the body.

CHAP. XXI. How Steel may conduce to the Cure of the Stone.
THe Stone is a disease Obnoxious unto all manner of persons whatsoever, both
Men, Women, and Children. I my self have taken out of the Bladder of a Boy of
about eight or nine years of age, a ^tone of the bigness of a Hens Egg.

Stones are bred either in the Blad^er or the Kidneys, of Gravel and ^ough
Phlegm, and gradually aug^ented oftentimes unto a very great signess,
especially in the Bladder, which are either smooth, or else ^gged and sharp,
according as one ^f those two Materials, whereof ^hey are generated, viz.
Gravel or ^legme, is predominant. The smooth ^tones in the Bladder are
generated ^hiefly of Phlegm, which oftentimes lying upon the Neck of the
Bladder, and couching close unto it, do injury to the body by stopping the
passage of the Urine.

The ragged and sharp Stones in the Bladder, are bred of a greater quantity of
Gravel than Phlegm; which oftentimes by their roughness and sharpness, do
excoriate and fret the Neck of the Bladder, which is most exquisitely sensible,
whereby the Patient is tortured with extreme pain.

That a Stone of the greatest bigness may possibly be dissolved, it is without
all controversy; for experience has taught, that many who have been much
tormented with the Stone, after they have had several^ pieces of Stone com'd
away with their Urine, have been perfectly well. Besides, reason will very well
admit, that whatsoever by accident is generated in the body, may (...) well be
corrupted and dissolved; according to that Maxim, Qu^^oritur moritur.

This, even as all other distempers, may be effectually cured, if the cause can
be removed. All effects must necessarily cease, when their cause is once taken
away. If that sharp Urine, apt to produce gravel, impregnated with a viscous
matter, can have its acrimony and viscosity abated, it will then sooner
dissolve, than before it did produce a Stone. Now it is well known by
experience, that Steel has a faculty, both to attenuate Phlegm, and to lenifie
sharp humors; wherefore it cannot be otherwise, but that Steel must needs be a
fit Remedy for this Distemper.

Give the Patient Ten Grains of Sugar of Steel in a Morning Fasting, and as
much at Four in the Afternoon, in a draught of Spring Water, for a Month
together, and let him Exercise after it if he be able.

As for his Diet, let him by all means abstrain from New Bread and ^tale Beer.
Let him abstain also from Cheese, and all manner of Fish, except Shellfish, of
which let him eat as often as he will. To drink New Whay often, may be very
profitable for him.

CHAP. XXII. Of the stopping of all manner of Fluxes, by the use of Steel.
THe word Flux, is a general and comprehensive term, whereby is signified, any
violent and sudden evacuation of humors of what kind soever, as well the
overflowing of the Months in Women, and the immoderate bleeding at the Nose, as
those Fluxes of the Belly, viz. Lienteria, Dysenteria and Tenesmus; for all
which, there is not a more Sovereign Remedy than Steel, and that upon a
rational account. For whether any Flux may proceed from Putrefaction, or from
sharpness of humors, or from both, it is ^ot not material, as to any impediment
in the Steel to perform the Cure; seeing that Steel, as you may ^ead above in
the Nineteenth Chap^er, does both resist Putrefaction, and lenifie sharp
humors. And besides, that it does also very much strengthen the Bowels, the
weakness whereof is sometimes the cause of some Fluxes of the Belly, it may
appear by that quick and sharp appe^ite which it causes in all that ^ake it.

A Case.
A Boy of thirteen years old, had been troubled with a great looseness by Fits,
a year and half, who was thus cured. He drank for a Fortnight together, Ten
Grains of Sugar of Steel in Spring Water, twice every day. And after that
another Fortnight he drank Morning and Evening a draught of New Milk from the
Cow: and so did he do alternately; one Fortnight he drank Milk and another
Fortnight Sugar o^ Steel in Water, for a Quarter o^ a Year.

A Child of six Years old was cured of a Looseness by a Gad o^ Steel quenched
in all his Beer he drank.

A Young Man of Twenty three Years of Age, was much subject to bleeding at the
Nose, who for seven Years together, in the Summertime, bled constantly, almost
every day, more or less; and after the trial of several things in vain, he was
at length cured by the only use of Steel. In the hot Weather when his Bleeding
came upon him, he drank twice every day. Ten Grains of Sugar of Steel, in a
large draught of Spring Water, for Thirty days. This he did so long in the
Summertime, two or three Years together.

A Woman of Thirty two Years of age, troubled with an immoderate Flux of her
Months, was cured by taking Ten Grains of Sugar of Steel twice every day, in
Spring Water, for a Fortnight.

Another Woman not recovered out of Childbed, much troubled with floudding, was
cured by taking Eight Grains of Sugar of Steel in a draught of Sack, twice
every day for six days.

CHAP. XXIII. How a Dropsy may be Cured by Steel.
A Dropsy is a collection of the more serous and watery part of the Mass of
blood, from the Veins and Arteries, into several parts of the body, caused
through the want of excretion of that watrish humor by Urine and sweat,
through the Pores and Ureters. When this watrish moisture is extravassated from
the Veins and Arteries, and diffused throughout the whole body, i^ is called,
Anasarea; when it is collected in the Abdomen, it is called Asci^es; when in
the Abdomen, and mixed with Flatulency, Tympanites But however it is
distinguished by several denominations, the general cause of all is want of
Fermentation. For this we are to suppose, that i^ there were a just
Fermentation o^ the Mass of blood, there would no^ be those obstructions in the
Pore^ and Ureters, for that serous humou^ to be locked up in the body, which
ought to be excluded.

A Case.
A young man of about four or five and twenty years of age, was ver^ much
swelled in all the parts of hi^ body with an Hydropick humor who was thus
cured.

He first took a Vomit of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum; after that for six
days he drank twice every day, twenty grains of Sugar of Steel in a draught of
White Wind and water mixed: then he sweat twice, overnight and the next
morning, in a Hot-house. After his sweating, his swelling being somewhat abated,
he was able to walk a little. Then returning to his Sugar of Steel, he drank
for six days more, twice every day, half that quantity, viz. ten grains at a
time in Water and Wine mixed, exercising as much as he was able after it; and
then sweating twice more as formerly. In the mean time he kept himself as warm
as he could possibly, and all his drink was middle Beer, wherein was infused
Sage, Broom, and Wormwood.

Another was cured by the only use of Steel, taking ten grains of Sugar of
Steel twice every day in Wine and Water, for the space of three weeks,
exercising very well after it; and in the mean time keeping himself as warm as
he he could possibly.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the use of Steel in the Cure of the Strangury, or Pissing by
Drops.
THe word Strangury, signifies in its Original, nothing else but a Pissing by
Drops. It is a disease in the Bladder, incident to Aged people and Phlegmatic
persons, when the Neck of the Bladder through phlegm is so obstructed, that the
Urine cannot pass. It is effectually cured by Steel, that great Attenuatour of
Phlegm and Viscous humors.

A Case.
An ancient Gentleman of eight and fifty years of age, was often troubled with
an Impediment in the making of his water, who was thus cured. At night when he
went to bed, he took half a dram of Mercurius Dulcis, mixed with a little
Conserve of Red Roses from a knifes point. The next day he began to take Sugar
of Steel, whereof he took ten grains at a time, in a draught of White Wind and
Water mixed, twice every day for fifteen days together: after that, for other
fifteen days, he drank every night so soon as he was in bed, a good draught of
White Wind Posset Drink warm. In the mean time he kept himself to warm Diet,
which Diet was chiefly Flesh-meat, and the Broth of Flesh-meat: he abstained
from Cheese, New-bread, Stale-beer, and all manner of Fish except Shellfish.

He kept himself always very warm, and would oftentimes eat Raisons and Figgs
between his meals.

CHAP. XXV. That Steel does carry away the Relics of those Diseases which it
does not Cure.
ALthough there are some Diseases which Steel does rather Prevent than Cure,
yet is it useful also in the perfecting and finishing of the Cure even of such
Diseases. A Disease cannot truly and properly be said to be perfectly cured,
until the Relics of that Disease be quite removed out of the body. And for
removing of the Relics of Diseases, I know no better way than to provoke
Urine, and to procure a moderate Transpiration; both which are done by the use
of Steel. I deny not but that purging Physic may and ought to be given, to
such persons who in the time of their health were naturally soluble, for the
removing of the Relics of Diseases. But, as I showed before in the fourth
Chapter concerning Excretion, Nature does not primarily intend to separate
Excrementitious matter from the Mass of blood, by siege or stool, but by Sweat
and Urine; so that solubility of body is but a shift of Nature, when the
Ureters and Pores are obstructed, as you may see more at large in the 4 Chap.
As therefore the way to preserve health, is to take care rather that the Pores
and Urinatory passages be kept open, than that the belly be loose; Even so is
the same care to be taken for the Restitution of Health, and Restoration of
Strength when the violence of a Fever is once over. Now as in the time of the
violence of a Fever (I speak of a putrid Fever) the Physician is constrained
to imitate Nature in her shifts, in using Clysters for the Evacuation of that
matter, which cannot at that time be carried out of the Body by Urine and
Sweat; so afterward when that violent act of Putrefying, which is Fermentation
reversed, is past, he is much more to Imitate Nature in that which she does
primarily intend, by taking away the Relics of the Disease after the order
and course of Nature, by the Pores and Ureters, which victorious Nature after
the conquest of the Disease, has in some measure opened for that intent and
purpose.

And as for the taking away of the Relics of Feavours, Steel which is good to
prevent them, is necessary; So is it also altogether as useful and necessary
for the taking away the Relics of that Disease wherein it is not at all
concerned, either to prevent or cure; I mean the French disease. For certain
trial and proof hereof, I appeal to the Experience of those that have been
imperfectly cured of that Disease, whether upon some Intemperance, or cold
taking, they are not sensible of some returns of their disease. Now seeing that
those things which breed other diseases, are a means to recruit this disease
when it is imperfectly cured; it follows by a necessary consequence, that
whatsoever does generally prevent and cure other distempers, must carry away
the relics of this. Besides, there is no disease whatsoever, but Nature does
in some measure strive against it; and although Nature may not of her self be
able to cure it, yet when it is almost cured, she may be able to perform what
remains. Now it is well known that Steel does very much strengthen Nature in all
her Offices, in opening the Pores and U^eters, and all other obstructed
passages, in lenifyng sharp humors, in at^enuating others that are viscous and
thick, in putting a good consistence upon the Mass of blood, etc. all which it
does effectually perform, by that one individual Act of Fermentation.

CHAP. XXVI. How Coral may be used for the curing of diseases in young Infants.
HAving discoursed of the efficacy of Steel, for the Cure of diseases in all
persons above seven years old, I am now to Treat of Red Coral for the
distempers of Infants. But because the distempers of Infants are not so
distinct from each other, as that they can receive so many several
denominations, as the diseases of those that are Adult; I cannot be so distinct
in my Discourse: I shall therefore by one Case only represent the virtue of
Red Coral for the cure of Childrens diseases. Certainly Nature is much more
industrious in attempting of her self, the cure of distempers in young Children
than in others; because, in young Children she seldom suffers the disease to
come to that height, whereby it can receive any certain denomination (except in
the Smallpox, Measells, Rickets and Convulsions) before she is endeavoring to
cure it, by throwing out the Morbifick-matter by the In^estines, when she
cannot prevent the disease by throwing the same matter out, as it first
gathers, by the Pores and Ureters. Now whereas Coral does as much conduce to
the cure of Childrens diseases, as Steel does to the cure of others, although
the disease fall under no particular denomination, but has one^y one general
appearance from several causes; yet may it be sufficient ^o show the use of
Coral in this one Case for all.

A Case.
A Child of three years old, had upon it every day an Aguish distemper,
consisting of a cold and hot fit; it was also much fallen away in all the
parts, except in the belly, which was very much swelled: it was also very
Thirsty, and had a great Looseness, which was thus cured. It drank every morning
half an ounce of the Syrup of Red Coral, in five or six spoonfuls of
Spring Water, and as much after the same manner at four in the afternoon, for
the space of ten days. In the Night, when it called for Beer, it had given it
small-beer, wherein was infused Rubarb, Cream of Tartar, and Cinnamon. A dram of
Rubarb sliced, half a dram of Cinnamon bruised, and as much Cream of Tartar
finely powdered, were tied up together in a little Rag, and put into a pint of
small beer.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
BE pleased to take Notice, that the True Prepared Coral, and Sugar of Steel,
is to be sold by Mr. Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil; And by Mr. Simon
Miller, a Stationer, at the Star and Bible at the West End of St. Paul's Church;
And nowhere else in London.


