Imprimatur,

Febr. 13. 1678/9.

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

A SERMON PREACHED IN S. Lawrence-Jewry CHURCH ON THE Fifth of November, Anno
Dom. 1678.

BY JOSEPH BEDLE, Vicar of Great Bursted in Essex, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains, etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

A SERMON PREACHED On the Fifth of November, 1678.
Psalm VII. V. 15. He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch
which he made.


IT is the interest of Mankind to be just, and good: Righteousness has a
Reward, it delivers from death: a good man shall be satisfied from himself,
though the World does not much regard him, or reward him: though he has hatred
for his good will, and is persecuted because he will be just and good; yet his
inward peace and soul-contentment shall plentifully recompense him. Whereas the
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. Every
wicked man, though his ways be never so secret, and his contrivances never so
subtle, and his design carried on with never so much power and policy; yet his
success shall not only be fruitless, but so cross and contrary to his purposes
and plots, that he shall have little cause to boast of his bargain. This the
Psalmist asserts in this Psalm; he tells you, that though he travelleth with
iniquity, and conceives mischief, yet he brings forth a lie: He makes a pit,
and digs it, but he falls into the ditch that he made. In the one we are told
that he brings their wicked designs to naught; in the other, that he turns them
to their own ruin and destruction.

In the words, with their coherence, you may find these parts,

1. The labor of a wicked man; he makes a pit, and digs it.

2. The end of his labor, to ensnare the righteous, and to lead captive men of
the soundest principles and greatest integrity; this you may gather from the
body of the Psalm. David being sensible of the enmity of the wicked, provides
for his own safety, he flies unto God for refuge; Verses first and second.

3. There is the event of his labor, he falls into the ditch which he made.

From the two first of these I represent this to your consideration, That
wicked men are very industrious, they make it their business to destroy the
Church and People of God; they are said here to dig a pit to entrap them, and
that is a laborious work. Hence we meet with the unjust Steward venting himself
thus, to beg I am ashamed, and to dig I cannot. It Is that I was never used to,
I was never brought up to it, my body will not bear it. This was part of Adam's
Curse upon his transgression, he was to get his living by the sweat of his
brows, and he was sent to till the ground. And though it be tedious and
painful, yet men are willing to undergo it, yea choose it, that they may thereby
accomplish their wicked Designs. Hence David prays, deliver me from the workers
of iniquity, and save me from bloody men. The wicked plotteth against the just,
and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. It Is not done in a passion that arises
and vanishes in a moment, but it is their deliberate act, their work, their
employ, their business: He watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him. The
wicked oppress him. Psalm. 17.9, 12. Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey,
and as it were a young Lion lurking in secret places. Where the Prophet alludes
to a hungry Lion. Now we know what an influence hunger has upon our selves;
our Proverb tells us, It will break through Stone-Walls. Though man should be
subject to, and restrained by the Laws of Nations, and of Nature too; yet if
these lie in hunger's way, they become but Spiders webs. The Rules of Nature
are deserted to preserve Nature: In the Famine of Samaria we meet with a Woman
saying, Give me thy Son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my Son on
the morrow: How many have forfeited their lives, by endeavoring to satisfy
their bowels, when they cried for bread. Now if hunger in man makes him break
all Laws, how ravenous must the beasts be, that have no such ties upon them?
how ravenous must the Lion be when greedy of his prey? Even such are the
Enemies of the Lord and his Church. And though man may at first wonder, that
man should be so cruel to man, whom it becomes to practice Courtesy, and
exercise Civility; yet upon second thoughts we may be satisfied that it is true;
and the occasion may be this.

First, The Corruption of his Nature: For though he is excellent as to his
Original, yet being corrupted he proves worse than any. Those Parts and Gifts
which should be employed to the Glory of his Maker, and the working his own
salvation, are turned to his Dishonor, and his own Eternal Ruin. It happens
many times, that Scholars and men of great Learning have broached the greatest
Errors. Thus man, though he has more advantage than any other Creature, and
might support his Nature better, yet many times bends all his strength to its
subversion, and shows his Wit and Knowledge in this only, that he can be more
cruel than any other Creature.

But the occasion of wicked men's hating the Church and People of God, may
proceed,

Secondly, From the enmity that is between them: There is an irreconcilable
hatred between the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent; because the
one must break the others head, therefore the other will bruise his heel, Genesis
3.15. The enmity is natural, it is hereditary.

Or if this be not the occasion, the opposition may proceed,

Thirdly, From the vast difference that is between them in their Customs and
Habits, in their Manners and Mode of living. Wherefore did Cain hate his
Brother, but because his own Works were evil, and his Brothers righteous? What
should we do, say they, with these men that are so much for Law and Gospel?
they are but Enemies to Nature, and their business is to rob us of those
Privileges that we are born to. Man is a free agent, why should he be stinted?
says the Libertine, let him gratify his genius to the full, wherefore were the
Creatures made, if not to be used? Why for us, if we may not use them as we
please? Am not I, says another, Master of my own body? Am not I Lord of my
self? what can I else call mine? Let Us, says a third, have Gods of our own
making, that we may worship them: they being in our eyes may be familiar to us,
these extort less fear, and require less obedience; when therefore any person
shall tell these men, fitter termed beasts, that man was not made for himself,
but for the promotion of the Glory and Honor of God his Maker, they are but
derided for their pains. If they are directed to a right use of the Creatures,
and are advised to live a holy, righteous, and godly life, they are but hated
for their labor. These men, say they, are not for our turn, they are men of
another world, they have a fashion by themselves, they hate our ways, and
therefore we must hate them.

Fourthly, A righteous man and a wicked man differ in their End, and in the
Means about their End; their interest is vastly different, and this contracts
the odium: Or else the enmity may proceed from this, that the wicked sees the
righteous more happy than himself; this begets envy. He looks upon him to be
his Enemy, and he is greatly disturbed to see him prosper. Therefore David
prays, Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men, in whose
hands is mischief. This was the ground of the Devil's quarrel with the Woman,
When the Dragon saw he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the Woman that
brought forth the man-child, Rev. 12.13. Thus you see what is the ground of
wicked men's persecuting the Church of God, and I hope you believe that they are
industrious to work out her ruin.

USE.
Let us then be as industrious for the preservation of it: self-preservation is
a Law of Nature; and to preserve Religion in its purity and regularity we are
commanded by the Law of God. And therefore we are bound to appear in open field
against the common Profaners and Corrupters of it. What Reason can there be
given, why we should not be as zealous for the propagating that Religion we
profess and believe to be true, as the Romanists are for theirs? there is none
that I can think of: but yet it is not so. Though the Romanists differ amongst
themselves, yet they all are as one man against the Protestants; when it is our
business to supplant and destroy one another; one's for Paul, another for
Apollo, a third for Cephas, as if Christ could be divided. This I fear, without
a speedy Reformation, will be our ruin: we are taught by an Infallible Spirit,
that a Church divided against it self cannot stand long: And yet how
industrious are many to make breaches and create differences, by making Worship
to affront Worship, and one Church to jostle out or beat down another.

I refer it to any Man's judgment, whether or not by these our Differences have
not been much augmented, the Protestant Religion lost much Ground, and the
Enemy prevailed much against us. I confess I can hear sometimes the Pope called
Antichrist and the Whore of Babylon, but what does all this signify? strong
Arguments, wrapped up in better Words, must impair his Cause; Peace, Unity, and
Uniformity amongst our selves must work out his Interest, it cannot reasonably
be expected without it. But where lies the fault? that must not be mentioned. I
have been sometimes thinking this was a Cause, every Man so vigorously
prosecutes his private Interest, that they care not what becomes of the whole,
or at least the Public concern is much neglected. Or if this must not be
allowed the Cause, may not I say, as the King to the Woman of Tekoah, Is not
the hand of Joab in all this? Is not the Jesuits Hand in our Divisions and
Separation? It was notable Counsel that was given to Benhadad when he was
routed by the King of Israel, viz. Change your place, take the Kings away every
Man out of his place, and put Captains in their rooms, then shall we be
stronger than they, 1 Kings 20.24, 25. Thus the Jesuits know, that many of
their Doctrines are so odious, that they will not pass from them as they are;
but let new Men broach the same Errors with a fair gloss upon them, then shall
they pass currantly.

As for instance, Their Doctrine of Infallibillity, most of the reformation
start at it; but let this be turned into a state of perfection in this life,
and be managed by the demure Creature, called a Quaker, then it shall slide
down glibly amongst the common sort of people. If the Jesuits preach the
lawfulness of deposing Kings and Princes at the Pope's pleasure, it is cried
down as Heretical and Damnable, and very good reason for it. However, let a man
of another Face, a new Name, and a more pleasing Aspect, preach and practice
Rebellion too, then the crowd immediately cries out, Curse ye Meros, Curse him
bitterly, because they do not come out to help the Lord against the mighty.
Though I always thought we were to embrace Truth for its own sake, and hate
Error because it is such, let either of them be managed by what person soever:
else we may be justly charged with what St. Jude speaks, of having men's
persons in admiration because of advantage, and so consequently inherit the
portion St. James lays before us, viz. to commit Sin, and to be convinced of
the Law as Transgressors, James 2.9. And thus have we discoursed of the former
part of the Text, clouded, and full of troubles: We come now to the brighter
and better side, long may it be so. And is fallen into the Ditch which he made.

These words bring us to the event of a wicked Man's labor, He fell into the
Ditch that he made.

Note. God not only disappoints the wicked Designs of the Enemies of his
Church, but he turns them to their own hurt and detriment. Their own Plots are
their own Plagues; he wrests their Swords out of their Hands, and turns them
into their own Bowels; he serves all his Enemies as David did Goliath; he cuts
off their Heads with their own Sword. Nothing has amongst the Heathens been
accounted more just, than that a man fall by the same means which he designed
should be the ruin of his Neighbor. It has of old been proved true, That
evil Counsel is worst to him that gives it. The Wicked is snared in the works
of his own Hands; the Wicked in his Pride does persecute the Poor, let them be
taken in the Devices they have imagined, Psalm 10.2. His own Iniquities shall
take the Wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the Cords of his Sins.
Satan makes use of a Woman to subvert and destroy the very race of Mankind; the
woman tempts Adam to eat the forbidden Fruit, thus man falls: however, man is
restored by the Seed of the Woman to a safer and surer Estate than he was in
before. Joseph's Brethren have a design to hinder his Prophesies, and to make
his Dreams but idle things; upon this they sell him as a Captive or Slave into
Egypt; then they thought he would not expect to be worshipped by them when he
was in that condition himself. However, this design effected what they
endeavored to have prevented; there happening a Famine, they are forced to go
into Egypt, and there bow and cringe to Joseph for Bread. The Jews take counsel
to kill Christ, thinking, that if they let him alone all men would believe on
him, and the Romans would come and take away both their Place and Nation. And
this very thing proved the means of effecting what they feared; for the days
came upon her that her Enemies cast a Trench about her, and compassed her
round, and kept her in on every side, and laid her even with the Ground; and
they left not in her one Stone upon another, because she knew not the time of
her Visitation, St. Luke 19.43, 44.

Thus Roderick, King of Spain, to secure himself against the lawful Prince,
whom he had deposed, dismounted all the strongholds, unburthen'd the Castles,
disarmed the people, which turned to his own ruin: this indeed strengthened him
against Domestic Commotions, but not Foreign Invasions; for the Moors, soon
after, overthrew him, and in few Months conquered Spain. My Text tells you,
They fell into the Ditch which they made. Thus Haman is hanged on the same
Gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai. And this Text is literally
fulfilled in our Ears this day. For thus it happened to these wicked
Conspirators; that which they designed to have been the ruin of the King, the
Royal Issue, the Nobles, the Clergy, and Gentry of the Land, was the
destruction of themselves; for two of them being drying of a pound of Powder in
the Chimney-Corner, on a sudden a Spark of Fire flew into it, and they were
miserably battered by their own Engine; you might at that time have read their
Sin in the Glass of their punishment; they hate a lingering death, they are for
a speedy ruin, so sudden a mischief happens to themselves.

USE I.
All which demonstrates the Lord to be most wise and merciful, powerful and
just.

1. Most wise, The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes, the wicked
is snared in the work of his own hands. God will not lose the Glory of any of
his Attributes, therefore God takes them thus, that he may be known to be wiser
than the wisest, as the Apostle has expressed it: Oh the depth of the riches
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his Ways past sinding out! He is said to take the wise in their own
craftiness, when they are in the highest and most sublime Counsels: He does not
stay till they begin to dote, and to do weakly, and then takes them; but he
befools them in the height of Wit, and in the depth of Carnal Policy; when,
like Achitophel, they give Counsel like the Oracles of God.

2. This demonstrates the Lord to be most merciful, that will deliver his
people at such a time: The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation
of the poor shall not perish for ever. He saves the poor from their Sword,
from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty; so the poor has hope, and
iniquity stops her mouth, Job 5.15, 16.

3. This also vindicates his Power. Helets them alone till their Plot comes to
maturity, and they were upon executing of it, and then he brings all to light
and naught: This does he at this time and not before, for the greater
manifestation of his Power. As Christ deferred to come to Lazarus till he had
been dead four days: Now our Savior did not defer to come because he loved him
not, for he wept bitterly; insomuch that the Jews could say, See how he loves
him. If our Savior had relieved him presently, the Jews would have said he was
not dead, and that our Savior had only awakened him out of Sleep; but having
been dead four days, and beginning to stink, then for Christ to raise him! this
was for the Glory of the Son of God. To restrain the Sinner in his height, to
cross the Counsels of Wicked men, and to ruin them by their own Devices,
bespeaks God to be very great. If one man prevails against another it is through
error; they take them by some advantage, because they err in their Counsels:
most successes of men are made out of the defects of their Adversaries; but the
Lord is able to confound his Enemies after the most deliberate and great
Debates, the choicest and best-grounded Resolves, as the Apostle says, The
foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than
men, 1 Cor. 1.25.

Lastly, This speaks God to be very just, that he will thus pay the Sinner home
in his own kind, in that he causes their mischiefs to light upon their own
head, and their violent dealing upon their own pates, in tumbling them into the
Pit they have made for others. Thus justly was Adonibezeck requited, thus he
tells you himself, As I have done, so God has requited me, Judges 1.7.

USE II.
2. This speaks the case of all the Enemies of Gods Church to be very
miserable: they are wise only to do evil; they dig pits, and lay snares, and
say who see them? Let such know that God will not only disappoint them, but
take them in their own craftiness. Now it is a great trouble to wicked men, that
they are prevented, and cannot do that mischief they intend to others; but it
is a greater vexation, when their counsels recoil upon them, and wound
themselves; when their own plots and projects promote their own ruin; when
their own actions effect that which they had rather dye than live to see done;
when that mischief falls on their own heads, which they intended for others,
how does this aggravate their sorrows? How will they be able to bear it, to see
themselves accessory to their own ruin: This must needs wound their souls, to
think, they have blasted their own Estates, blemished their own Names, ruined
their Posterity, set fire to their own Houses with their own hands: this
aggravates the misery, when a man falls by his own hand; self-murder is the
most bloody of all murders: surely this then must needs be a great terror to
these wicked Conspirators, to think they had plotted and worked so long to
destroy themselves, for thus you see it happened. They made a Pit, and dug
it, and fell into the Ditch which they made.

USE III.
Since God preserves his Church, and turns the Conspiracies of wicked men to
their own detriment, ruin, and destruction, as he did this day, Let us return
Praise and Glory to God; this is the business of the day; it is its proper work:
If they had had their Ends they would have been singing long before this, Jam
seges est ubi Troja fuit. And shall not we rejoice at our own preservation?
Bless then and praise the name of the Lord; I Will tell you for what and how.

First, That God did discover this Plot, and brought their Deeds of Darkness to
light; that after they had traveled with mischief many years, and brought
their Design within few hours of its Execution, that then it should be brought
to naught! Faux, at the dead time of the Night with his Dark Lanthorn, ready to
blow up his Mine, was discovered, taken, and that strangely; all was
miraculously discovered by a few obscure Lines, which being brought to the
King, he truly interpreted them; the Lord made him the happy Instrument of this
great deliverance, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. Bless then that God that
blasted this Plot, and brought this Design to naught. They designed to have
blown up the King, to have taken away the life of the Lords anointed, which
accursed Principle and most horrid attempt, is contrary to the Law of God, the
Law of the Nation, and to common Reason.

1. The Law of God says thus, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; Curse
not the rich in thy Bedchamber, for a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice,
and that which has Wings shall tell the matter, Eccles. 10.20. The Apostle
teaches us thus. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is
no power but of God; whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.1, 2. Let
every Soul of what rank or quality soever, every Soul of what faith and
persuasion soever. And it follows, whoever resists shall receive to himself
damnation. In which Words it is very plain, That it is upon no account whatever
lawful, either upon corruption in principle or practice, to rebel against,
much less to depose, the Supreme Magistrate. And to confirm men in this
Principle, I have these two things to offer to their consideration. First, it is
very remarkable, That those for whom the Gospel presses subjection and
obedience, were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, implacable Adversaries to his
Person, Doctrine, and Government. Could this Doctrine of subjection to wicked
and Atheistical Princes and Emperors have been laid aside, our Savior and his
Apostles had easily avoided those Persecutions and fiery Trials which they met
with upon the account of their Doctrine, and the holiness of their lives. If
Heresy or Corruption in Manners had been sufficient Cause for the deposing of
Princes, as the Romanists assert, you would not have had so long a Roll of
Martyrs to run over as now you have. Our Savior was able to have defended his
own Cause by his own Power, but how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled.

But farther, I desire you to reflect upon a remarkable passage in the Gospel,
relating to this purpose. It Is in the case of Herod the King. When he heard
that Jesus was born King of the Jews, he was troubled, and then no question of
it but agreed upon his destruction, though 'twas cunningly blinded with a
zealous pretense of worshipping him. Thus he pretends to the wisemen; Go, and
search diligently for the young Child, and when ye have found him, come and
tell me, that I may worship him also: But the wisemen, being warned of God
that they should not return, they departed into their own Country another way.
Now when Herod saw he was mocked of the wisemen, he was exceeding wroth, and
sent forth and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the
Coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he
had diligently enquired of the wisemen. Now what a miserable case was this?
you can conceive of little less than Lamentations, weeping, and great mourning.
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not; for what is more dear to a Father? the Father loves his Child, because it is
his Image; and if he has never so many, he knows not which to part with; for
some reason or other he loves them all. Therefore to be deprived of them all,
and that at once, is a sore affliction; it is too hard a saying, who can bear
it? to be bereaved of our Children by the common Infirmities and Diseases that
attend Mankind, is a great affliction to a good man; for by this he is
dismembered, as a Tree whose Branches are lopt off; and by such losses, whilst
he lives, he sees part of himself turn to corruption: But to have them all
butchered so barbarously, and inhumanly murdered. Poor innocent Babes! what
had they done, that they must fall by so fatal and cruel a stroke? The thoughts
of this certainly was terrible, and if any thing would have exasperated the
people, and enraged the Multitude, this would have done it; and the people,
swelling with envy, would have burst into public hostility and open Rebellion:
But yet this Divine story acquaints us with no such thing: the Arrows of Divine
Justice and Vengeance, though they fly not so swift as we would have them, yet
they will certainly wound the heart of the bloody and deceitful man, though
they be not sharpened and winged by the rage of a mad-headed Multitude: it is
evidently the design of the Gospel, to press obedience to Magistrates, tho they
were Heathens and Tyrants, much more are we obliged to obey Christian Monarchs,
those that are merciful and good, such as by the mercy of God we now live
under; long may we do so, notwithstanding all the Plots and Conspiracies of the
Jesuits to destroy the Lords Anointed; which is contrary, I am sure, to the
Rules of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of our Savior.

2. It Is contrary to the Law of the Nation, as you are Subjects you are obliged
to honor and obey your King; this is a Law of your own making, made by your
Representatives in Parliament, and so ye are bound to stand to your own Act and
Deed; every honest man will be, I Am sure, as good as his word, and stand to his
promise.

3. It Is contrary to common Reason: This is the first Commandment with promise,
Honor your Father and your Mother; we in our sphere expect duty from our
Children, and obedience from our Servants; I hope then, the Father of the
Country may come in for a share. Those Principles that own the murdering of
Kings, and deposing of Princes, cannot be of God, neither can those men be
Christ's Disciples, that would reduce these Principles into practice, seeing he
came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them: Behold then the Villainy of
this days Conspiracy; they would have destroyed the Lords Anointed, blown up
the two Houses of Parliament, the Representatives of the whole Nation, the
Church and State too, and that at one blow: They would not allow the Honorable
Peers of the Realm, the worthy and brave Gentry, the Pious, Learned, and Loyal
Clergy, the least time to prepare for another World: They had no respect to the
Souls of men. But blessed be God they were prevented. Let the Patrons of their
Principles turn it off as well as they can, and say 'twas only the Plot of some
unfortunate Gentlemen, we'll give them the hearing of it: However, 'twas well
for us they were unfortunate; had they succeeded, they would have had greater
Titles conferred upon them; success would have made so great Villainy have
passed for Virtue: Witness the honor and esteem that Father Garnet is in to
this day in the Church of Rome, for the generous attempt made on this day. If I
should instance in the horrid Murder committed upon the Body of Henry the Third
of France, you will find the Pope admiring and commending the Person and the
Fact too, and dares before Witnesses enough, compare it with the miracle of our
Savior's Incarnation: and had the design of this day taken effect, no question
but it would have been as great and as generous in their thoughts and
determinations: But blessed be God, the snare was broken and we were delivered,
they were taken in their own craftiness. Faux could not escape, who was so
wickedly insolent as to say, had he been within the house, as he was without,
he would not have failed to have blown them up, house and all. But blessed be
God he was apprehended, and the rest either slain or taken Prisoners. And now,
having told you what you are to bless God for, let me tell you in a word how,
and so conclude.

First, Bless God for the Deliverance from this horrible Conspiracy; and that
so, as you grow more and more in love with the true, ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic Faith, represented often to you under the Name of the Protestant
Religion; it is not enough to bless God with our lips, unless we praise him with
our lives; he that orders his Conversation aright, praises God best; and you
cannot do it better, than by a zealous contending for the Faith once delivered
to the Saints.

Secondly, So bless God, that every day you grow into detestation and hatred of
those Principles that allow such bloody Practices: If I should say the Romish
Religion is a Religion whose Faith is Faction, and whose Zeal is Rebellion,
it is no more than may be proved. It Is a Religion that deposes Kings, blows up
Parliaments, changes Governments: It Is an argument of an ill Cause, that must
be managed by blood and treachery: It Is a Religion that holds the Pope has
Power over Foreign Princes; a Religion that sets Kingdom against Kingdom, the
Father against the Son, and the Son against the Father.

Thirdly, So bless God, as that we pray to God to deliver us still from all
such bloody Attemps and horrible Conspiracies: They are never weary of plotting
mischief, we have fresh and new arguments which tell us what they would have
had, and yet desire: And this late Plot against his Majesty's most sacred
Person and Government, in many Circumstances far exceeding that of this day,
should oblige us to be more constant and fervent in our united Prayers for our
Preservation: We must either not understand, or else not love the Religion we
own and profess to be true, if we are not as diligent to preserve it, as the
Enemy is to undermine, subvert, and destroy it. I am sure the Psalmist
determines to practice, what I recommend to you: I will call upon the Name of
the Lord, who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from my Enemies,
Psalm. 18.3. Let us imitate this great and good man, a King and Prophet too, yea
let us pray, that as the Enemies of the Lord and his Church make a pit, and dig
it, so they may again fall into the ditch that they have made: And to this let
all the People say, Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

