Licensed,

October. 24. 1677. To. L'Estrange

THE LIVES Of Sundry Notorious Villains. Memorable for their Base and
abominable Actions.

Together with A NOVEL, As it really happened at Roan in France.

(...). Diog. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and sold by Sam. Crouch at the
Princes Arms at the corner of Popes-head-ally in Cornhill. 1678.

TO THE READER.
YOu have here in these persons the Character of a Grand Debauchee, or daring
Villain, abolishing and enervating, as much as in them lay, all Laws and Rules,
without which it is impossible to suppose a Society: who having obliterated the
natural impressions of Justice and Piety, have devised and accomplished all
manner of Baseness and Villainy, having performed such horrid actions as would
have amazed themselves as well as others, had they not by a long Series of
wickedness been hardened in their detestable undertakings.

Here you may be satisfied by evident Demonstration, instanced in the Lives and
Deaths of these men, of the difference of Virtue and Vice; that they are not
empty Names, or significant Nothings, seeing Heaven has interposed as a party,
not suffering any of them to go out of this World without the signal marks of
its ^resentment.

And if the lives of good and virtuous men have been exceeding advantageous to
the purposes of Religion and Virtue, why may not likewise the Examples of those
who are Vicious and Abominable be in their kind as useful? seeing by the one
we learn what we should do, by the other, what we should not.

In short, I know the Book needs not long Apologies, nor Commendatory-prefaces,
having been so often reprinted and approved of in France, and elsewhere;
wherefore, that I may no longer detain you with te^dious Exordiums, I shall
refer you to the Book it self, which will never need to beg Commendations.

BOOKS Printed for, and to be sold by, Sam. Crouch, at the Princes Arms at the
corner of Popes head-ally next Cornhill.
REsolves Divine, Moral, Political, with new Additions. By Owen Feltham Esquire.
Clark's Martyrologie, containing a Collection of all the greatest Persecutions
from the Creation to our present times. -- His Lives of the Fathers, Schoolmen,
first Reformers, and modern Divines. Whereunto is added the Lives of Christian
Emperors, Kings, and Soverain Princes. The History of the valorous and witty
Knight Errant, Don Quixot of the Mancha. Cassandra, a Romance, the whole Work,
in five parts. Mackbeth, a Tragedy. Coals English Dictionary, being the best
extant. Winchester-Phrases. Dr. Tomson's method of curing Chy^mically. To which
is added the A^ of Midwifry chymically asserted. -- His Epilogismi Chymici,
Observationes necnon Remedia Hermetica^ Mystagogus Poeticus: or the Muse^
Interpreter; by Alexander Ross. The Art of Painting; wherein is included the
whole art of Vulgar Painting according to the best and most approved rules for
preparing and laying on of Oil colors. By John Smith, Philomath. The Clarks
Tutor. Studii Legalis Ratio: or, directions for the study of the Law. Funeral
of the Mass: or, the Mass dead and buried without hope of Resurrection.
Translated out of French. The Purchasers Pattern, much enlarged. Showing the
true value of Land or Houses by Lease or otherwise. Also the measuring of Land,
Board, Timber, Glass, etc. Whereunto is added Tables of the Excise of Beer and
Ale, with the whole art of Gauging. By Henry Phillips. ^lunt 's Characters.
^enkithman 's Accounts. He also sells
Spirit of Salt. Buckworth's Lozenges. Spirit of Scurvy Grass. Lockier's Pills.
Turner's Dentifrices for cleansing of the Teeth.

CHAP. I. The Life of Capt. Lycaon, General of the Thieves.
WHen Rage and Despair seizes on the spirit of a man, when he suffers
himself to be carried ^way by his blind inclinations, there cannot be any
thing seen in the world more furious and insolent. He huffs ^he Heavens, and
defies the Destinies, and thinks that the Stars are obliged to ^im for their
influence. The Earth ^eems not worthy to bear him, nor the Ocean large enough
to retain him; and ^lows Fear on all that come near him. His Words are claps of
Thunder, and his Looks flashes of Lightning; and his Deliberations irrevocable
Statutes. He imagines that the Mountains should crumble at his Presence, and
is ambiti^ ous enough to persuade himself tha^ the Rivers should stop and make
way for his passage. Such were the Rhodo^ montadoes of Capt. Lycaon, whom w^
may call by a fit title, The General o^ Thieves.

He was a Britain, born in the Isle o^ Narmontier, of noble Parents; but h^
degenerated from his Ancestors, wh^ ever kept the ways of Virtue. When scarce
had he attained to the Fourteent^ or Fifteenth year of his age, but h^ made
appear the fierce marks of hi^ Courage in the Army. Nothing dur^ oppose it self
to his fury, and seemed t^ ^evour already with his eyes, thos^ who looked on
him; which made peo^ ple say, that he was not a man, but (...) Monster spewed
out upon the eart^ from the depths of Hell, to commi^ those Outrages. His
Parents, as people of reputation, were astonished (...) his daily
Exorbitancies: for when (...) Child, he was continually a beating his
Companions: but above all, they durst not leave him alone, by reason of his
natural inclinations to steal. In the mean time the War breaking out in France,
and Lycaon being now at years of maturity, and naturally licentious, could not
endure the threatening taunts of his Parents, wherefore he resolves to leave
them and follow the Wars, that he might have his boundless humor.

As he was ready to depart, he was a long time deliberating under what Party he
should serve. In the end he betook himself to the Duke de Mercoeur; where, a
certain desire of making himself considerable inflaming him, he would be always
in the most difficult Enterprise, despising all dangers, and casting himself in
the midst of Fire and Swords, and massacring all before him: So that in a
little time he became famous for his Valor, which made him be taken notice of
by the Commanders; who seeing his port, his mein, etc. a^ an excellent
Soldier, gave him the command of a Company: which charg^ he acquitted with no
small glory, pro^ mising himself a perpetual series of Wa^ and Dissentions.

But the Heavens are not always ar^ med with Thunders against mortal^ which the
unthought-of event plainl^ showed, scattering in an instant the Tempest (by an
happy Accommodation) which threatened the subversion of the whole Kingdom of
France. So tha^ Lycaon thereupon being out of employ^ his hopes vanished with
the cessation o^ the Wars; which made him (as (...) man despairing) betake
himself to the Woods, from whence he might rifle the innocent Passenger.

And being a man highly pris'd for his daring Courage, he failed not of
company, being followed by his two Brothers, who were resolved to stand by him
with their lives and fortunes. And having gathered together the Scum of
Poictou, Britain, and other places, he ^ound himself accompanied with near Four
hundred men, who breathed nothing but blood and cruelty. He began, before he
enterprized any thing, to build a Fortress within the Forest of Machecoust, it
being a solitary place, and far remote from any road or path.

It is impossible to relate the diligence they used in making and fortifying
this their Castle: for his Banditi being as desirous to preserve their Prey as
to get it, worked day and night till they had finished it. Which done, they
divide into bands, and begin to range and ransack not only the Countries
thereabouts, but the whole Kingdom of France.

The people were not a little astonished at the Robberies and Murders
committed every day about them, and yet could not imagine whence this Deluge
proceeded.

It were impossible to relate all the outrages which these Villains committe^
in Poictou, Saintoigne, Aulnis, Normandy and Britain. The overflowings of R^
verse, the breaking down of Sluices, no^ the most tempestuous weather, did eve^
half so much mischief to the standing Corn, as these rogues did to those whos^
unhappy fortune caused their rencoun^ ter. For they wanted not for Arms either
offensive or defensive, neither skill coming so lately from the Army, to use
them. They would be sometimes i^ the habit of Merchants, and sometimes like
Gentlemen; other times like the Sheriffs Officers in Liveries, vaulting and
ranging for a hundred miles about, sparing not the lives of any whom they
thought had money.

As for Lycaon, he seldom went but well accompanied, and exceedingly well
mounted, for fear of surprizal.

But it happened that one day he parted from his Fortress alone, (his people
being gone out in the Country for Forage) and took the great road which leads
to Nantes, where he hid himself in ^he thickest part of a Wood along the
way-side, and there lay two hours, till ^t last there passed by an honest
Countryman, one who seemed by his looks not to travel without money: Wherefore
Lycaon arises and accosts him; and having understood by him that he went to
Nantes about a Lawsuit -- Thou have certainly money then, replied Lycaon; for
they to whom thou addressest thy self will do nothing without it. The good man
perceiving that he was overtaken, would willingly have recalled his words
again, pretending that he had but Six pence or a shilling about him to pay for
his Dinner. And truly for my part, replied the other, I am far from being
overladen; yet howsoever I trust so much in our good God, that if we heartily
pray to him, he will not fail to send us some.

Notwithstanding which discourse, the Countryman failed not to put on his way
as fast as he could, and to gain ground; but Lycaon had something more to say
to him before he parted wit^ him: wherefore he asks him whethe^ he had no more
money than that smal^ sum he last mentioned. To which the other replied, That
he used not to se^ out with money, it being not only i^ danger of being lost
upon the road, bu^ our lives too with it. But Lycaon for all that, commanded
him to fall to prayers, and see what the event would be; and at the same time
draws out of his pocket a little Manual, and falls on his knees, constraining
the Countryman to do the like: but he knew not what to infer from these
mysteries, and would willingly have been in another place to make his Orisons;
for his devotion was much abated by his fear: yet notwithstanding he was forced
to kneel down and wait the issue of this pious adventure.

When Lycaon had mumbled three or four words betwixt his teeth, feigning an
extraordinary devotion, he enquires of the Countryman how it fared with him,
telling him withal, that Heaven was not ungrateful to the pious addresses of
devout Petitioners; wherefore he bid him feel in his pockets, that they might
see what God had sent him; which the Countryman did, but could find nothing:
upon which Lycaon feeling in his own pockets, pulls out Five pence, telling him
withal, that for certain he prayed not heartily, that 'twas expedient for him
that he prayed again; showing him, that if he looked directly toward Heaven,
he needed not fear, nay it could not be otherwise but he must get something as
well as he: whereupon he pulls again out of his pocket Ten pence, and still the
other could not find any thing in his; and was rather for praying that there
might not be any thing found there, than that there should. To make short,
Lycaon fell to prayers again the third time, and produced a
Five-shilling-piece; and seeing that the Countryman was still upon the
negative, he told him, That one of these two things must needs b^ that either
he did not pray with Ze^ and Devotion, or else he would no^ let him know how
liberal Heaven ha^ been in his behalf: For; says he, how else can it come to
pass that my Prayer^ should be rather heard than yours? for if you pray
(continued he) with as much spiritual heat as you outwardly make show of, it
must needs be that by this time you have gained considerably: Wherefore, says
he, I am resolved to see the experience of this: And so saying, he puts his
hands in the man's pockets (for it was to no purpose for him to resist) and
found there Ten pieces of Gold; at which they were both amazed, the one
seemingly for the liberality of Heaven, and the other for the loss of his
money. Yet notwithstanding Lycaon dealt with him better than he expected,
returning him the one half of his money with these words back again: What!
says he, you would have cheated me, and would not let me share with you
(though your Companion.) Is this the compact? this the agreement we made before
we set to prayers? Good Lord, how few are the just upon the earth! And yet
notwithstanding this thy churlish humor, I will not be as ungrateful as thou
art, for look you, here is half of what Heaven has sent me; wherefore you have
no reason to complain: now indeed you might, if I shared with you in your
acquisition, and not you with me. And so the poor Countryman was pleasantly
wheedled out of his money: for Lycaon robbed a man of two or three hundred
crowns as if it were really a sport or pastime, so small a sum was that with
him.

As soon as ever there was any Fair, though never so far off, he was sure to be
at it in disguise, that he might with less suspicion observe the business of
each person there concerned, to the end that at their return homewards he might
set upon them.

But as he skulked up and down with his Companions, he had notice that the
Provost of Roan with his men were i^ quest of him, and that they had intentions
of besetting the Forest of Morsemont, where he then was; which made him stand
on his guard, but could not make him lose his undaunted courage: Wherefore he
rallies his Troop, and withdraws into the thickest of the Forest, to a place
judged by him the most advantageous; and having left Orders, he sends out
Scouts: but thinking it not safe to trust to Spies in a case of such
concernment, he puts on a Canvass doublet and breeches, Wooden shoos on his
feet, and a Steeple-crown'd hat on his head, and so draws near them; where
observing them not to be equal with him in strength, he returns back to his
Companions, makes them stand to their Arms, and so encourages them by his words
and example, that in setting upon them, as they did immediately, they were
presently routed; whom they so nearly pursued, that Seven of them were taken
Prisoners; from whom having taken their Livery-coats, they hanged them on
several Trees in the most solitary places of the Forest, their Habits serving
afterward to execute sundry Villainies.

For going one night to a Castle not far off the Forest, he commanded the gates
in the Kings name to be set open to him, saying, for a pretense, That Lycaon
and his Companions had hid themselves there; which Order was obeyed without the
least suspicion of what happened afterward. Lycaon made as if he would search
every where for Thieves, bustling in all corners of the house with the greatest
eagerness imaginable; but at last he would needs have it that the Thieves were
hid in the Trunks: wherefore he caused the keys without any more ado to be
brought him, and having loaded himself and Companions with every thing of
considerable value, he returns with his Booty to the Forest.

In the mean time the Lord of the Castle finds himself not a little moved with
just indignation, that he should be thus robbed, thinking that the Provosts
men, under pretense of looking for Thieves, had thus pillaged his Castle:
Whereupon he makes his Address to the Parliament of Roan, giving them an
account by whom he thought himself thus robbed; who presently gave order for
the examination of the Provosts Officers, and being put on the Rack, the
torments thereof made them confess that whereof they were never guilty: so that
there was one of them hanged, to see what effects that would work on the rest.

The Provost of Roan being justly incensed against Lycaon, as well for this as
other his villainies, resolved to be revenged at any rate: which Lycaon having
got notice of, caused his men to retreat into the Forest of Machecou, the usual
place of their Rendezvous. He in the mean time staid alone there, where he was
informed they would attack him, having notice likewise of the very hour when
they would give their intended Onset; which fell out punctually according to
his expectation: Wherefore seeing them, he makes up toward them in the habit
of a Peasant, mounted upon a most piteous beast, and who to look on was not
worth two pence, without either bridle or saddle, having only a Sack under
him, and a great greazie Hat on. And thus accoutred he meets the Provost, who
demanded of him whence he came, and what he had seen. He made answer, That for
his, part he met nobody; but told him, there was great talk of robbing, and
especially of one called Lycaon, a very naughty fellow, and one who did much
mischief to the Country. They asked him moreover where he went, and what was
his business; and being told he was going to buy Corn a^ Roan, they dismissed him.

Going on he met with other Officers, who made a second Band, who dema^ ded of
him whether he had spoken wit^ the Provost; and having received answer Yes,
they bad him rudely pass on but he stopping a little, pulls out from under his
skirts two Pistols, and discharges them backwards under his arms amongst the
Officers, and shot two of them off their horses; imitating in this the
Parthians, who are said to have routed whole Armies flying; bidding them withal
remember that they had met Lycaon: which having said, his Hackney began to cut
the air with such swiftness, that it seemed to them he was rather carried by
the Devil than a Horse. He was howsoever pursued by them, though but to little
purpose, notwithstanding the worst of them seemed to be better mounted than he
was: But he on the other side made a pastime of their pursuit of him; for he
sometimes appeared near them, and sometimes a great way off; sometimes on one
side of them, and sometimes in the middle of them: and this continued till
night constrained them to retire, leaving them nothing after all their coursing
but a phantasm ^r shadow.

Being one day in his Fortress, the Provost of Nantes assembled all the
Officers of the neighboring Cities, tel^ing them that for certain Lycaon this
^out could not escape their hands; and ^ndeed the design was carried on so
well (it being at a time when he was least accompanied) that they did surprise
him.

He saw the danger he was in, but could not see the means to escape it. But
howsoever, being instigated by rage and despair rather than discretion, he
brought those about him into resolutions of fighting; who came with such fury
on the Officers, although their number was not at all answerable to the others,
that they forced them, in spite of their teeths, to give ground: but this
first shock being past over, they were so beset on every side, that Lycaon,
being left engaged in the midst of them, w^ taken. But whilst the others were
i^ pursuit of his scattered Crew, he perceiving that he was guarded but by two
presently purposes an Escape, which h^ effects after this manner: Having o^
purpose dropped his Handkerchief, he entreats him that held his right arm t^
suffer him to stoop to take it up; whereupon he pulls a Poingard out of his
pocket, and strikes it into the belly of the Provost, who stood just by him.
The Officers seeing that blow given, would needs bear up their Master, being so
mortally wounded that he could not stand; leaving Lycaon for that purpose, who
presently made use of his time, leaping on one of their Horses, and finding a
Pistol by the Saddle-side, pulls it out, and shoots one of them dead on the
place, and makes his escape. His brother, who fled with the rest, hearing that
he was taken, resolves to die in the midst of them, rather than so leave him:
wherefore he rallied his scattered Companions, and throws himself in the midst
of his Enemies, thinking his brother had been amongst them; cursing and
ban^ing, that if they kept him any longer, he would make them rue it. But so
far was he transported by these Rhodomon^adoes, that he was not aware of his
being surrounded by them; who so far overpowered him, that he was taken and
carried to Nantes; where two or three days after he was with three or four of
his Companions broken on the Wheel.

This business did not a little scare the other Thieves, although that they had
Lycaon still left for their Captain, this being but their Lieutenant; yet
howsoever, he was a man of great prudence in Counsels, ready at dispatch,
bloody and cruel; which are all qualities requisite in a notable Villain.

Lycaon looses not, for all this, his courage (if a man may term that courage
which is in such persons) but getting together his dispersed Companions, he
withdraws into the Forest and co^ tinues his former courses, without (...)
membring his brother's miserable en^ who was executed in the sight of all the
Gentry of his Country.

One day one of the gang, being known at March Pontoise by two Me^ chants, was
laid hold on, brought t^ trial, and condemned to be broken o^ the Wheel; which
was accordingly executed.

As the Hangman of Pontoise went t^ do execution upon some Malefactors i^ an
adjoining City, he met Lycaon clothed in all points like a Merchant, who
demanded of him what news at Pontoise, and whether it were safe traveling: To
which the Executioner made answer, that indeed there had been, and that not
without cause, great talk o^ Thieves, and especially a great Rogue named
Lycaon; but that now, thank^ God, the number of his accomplices was diminished,
he coming just now from putting one of them on the Wheel.

O then, cried Lycaon, you are the ^angman of Pontoise! I am very glad (...)
have met with you; for you can with^t doubt tell me something which is ^alked
of concerning this wicked crea^ure.

They had not long traveled together before they entered a Wood, where Lycaon
having whistled half a dozen ^imes, saw himself attended with ten or ^welve of
his Companions: the Hangman notwithstanding kept his counte^ance, and would
never have been per^waded that he was in the midst of a company of Thieves, and
so near him whom he so much blamed.

Lycaon having made him relate again the Execution which he came from doing
upon one of their Companions, and this Bravo vapouring and swearing that ^he
would upon that account, with all ^his heart, travel through the whole Kingdom
of France, he was immediately laid hold on by two of the sturdiest Rogues of
that Crew; who told him, That seeing by mishap that there was no conveniencie
to break him on the Wheel, he must be content with hanging. Whereupon, without
any other form of process, they take the poo^ Hangman, and tie him up with
their garters to the boughs of a Tree, and dispatch him.

Another time he would have entered by force the Castle of St. Hermine and
Marveil; but the Lord of it having gotten notice by some means or other of his
intentions, got together all the Gentlemen thereabouts to assist him, laying an
Ambuscade of near two hundred men in the way by which he should pass: but as he
was coming on, one of those who lay in wait for him, let fall his lighted Match
in his pan, and so discharged his Musket; at which being startled, sent out
some before to know what was the matter; and having understood that there was
an Ambush laid for him, he returns back, and was pursuid: wherefore having
stopped at the side of a Wood, he makes head against them, casting himself
amongst the thickest, followed only by Thirty Curias^es, and beats down all
that withstood ^im: Yet notwithstanding, the Coun^ry people came in so fast
upon them on; every side, that they were forced to Fly, and leave six or seven
of their company killed and taken Prisoners behind them; who two or three days
after were broken on the Wheel at Bessay.

A while after this Encounter they took a Gentleman, who lived not far from
thence, and having hood-winked him, they led him into their Fortress; where
they showed him all their Provision and Ammunition, their Mill with which they
grind their Corn, as also their Ovens, their great number of Muskets, of
Pikes, Blunderbusses and Grenades, their Fieldpieces with their bullets,
their Fortifications and Ditches, but above all, their Mines, Draw-bridges,
Gates, and Portcullices, and every thing else remarkable in this their Castle;
at which he was not a little asto^ nisht, thinking that he was all this while
in a dream.

At last they conducted him into their common Hall, which was richly hun^
all-over with Spanish Leather which they had taken out of a Vessel on the Sea
near the sands of Anlonne, (for their Robberies extended as well upon the Sea
as at Land) where, after being treated with a most magnificent Collation^
served up all in Plate, they again hoodwink him, and carry him back again to
the place whence they took him up, without any hurt.

The people of Britain and the low Poicton, daring not to travel, made their
complaints to the Magistrates; but all the business was, to know where to find
him: for one day he was seen about Nantes and Rennes, and two hours after about
Dieppe and Roan; so that the common people looked upon him as an Enchanter.

There was order howsoever given to Monsieur Parabelle, Governor of ^iort, and
to all the Officers of the ^eighbouring Cities, that they should ^eet together,
and march directly, being ^onducted by the Gentleman afore^poken of, to the
Forest of Machecoust, with the greatest haste and secrecy that might be. There
was besides the Provosts, who were about Sixteen or Eighteen of them, with
their Officers, several others, who voluntarily joined themselves with them, to
the number of 4000 men, who were guided all of them by the person who had been
before in the Fortress.

Lycaon was not a little astonished in seeing such a multitude round about him,
who had begirt the place, and planted several Fieldpieces against it:
wherefore he encourages his men, who were to the number of 300, to make a sally
out upon them; for to keep within there, was certainly to perish. But alas,
this their first Onset was too furious to last long; for being overpowered by
such multitudes, they began to fall down on every side.

Lycaon thinking to break through all, was at length, with several of hi^ Crew
who stood by him to the last, beaten down and taken, and was carried to
Saint; where, after the Rack, he was broken on the Wheel dying with such an
admirable Constancy, that all the Spectators, though before they never so much
hated him, were more concerned for him than he seemed to be for himself.

CHAP. II. The Life and Death of Arpalin, a notorious Villain.
I Am very sensible how difficult a thing it would be here to take notice of
all the Tricks and Subtleties of this Rascal, whose Life I intend now to write;
wherefore I shall content my self with an Account of some of the most
remarkable Actions of it.

This person made himself be called Arpalin; and was born, as far as we could
learn by our enquiries, in a little Village betwixt Savoy and Dauphine. He was
from a Child so given to the base vice of Stealing, that whatsoever he touched
stuck to his fingers; and was wont, the better to carry on his Villainies, to
change himself into as many shapes as Prote^ being a man that so well
understoo^ the world, I mean the Tricks and Fa^ lacies of it, that he could
humor a^ thing, there being no part that ca^ amiss to him. And for as much as
(...) could speak several Languages, he a^ commodated their use to his partic^
lar occasions: Sometimes minglin^ himself with a Crew of vagabon^ Rogues, whom
we call Gypsies, h^ with great applause practiced all their tricks of
Legerdemain, and pass pass being an excellent Rope-dancer, an^ one who
tumbled, and told Fortunes^ to the admiration of all that saw an^ heard him. In
short, we may we^ believe this, seeing they of his ow^ trade took him for an
accomplish^ Artist.

And with these Tatterdemallion^ Ingeniosoes, he ran up and dow^ throughout all
Fairs and Concourse^ of people in France and elsewhere; changing continually
his Post and Fashion, and seldom making use twice (...) the same invention. To
day he ^as a Merchant, to morrow a Soldier, ^e next day a Gentleman, the next
^ay after a Beggar. In a word, he ^as every day what he pleased himself.

Moreover, in what part of the ^orld soever he was in, he said he ^as of all
Trades and of all Coun^ries: So that in the company of Han^licrafts-men, of
Fencers, and Seamen, he was all three together; and in the company of Germans,
Italians, and Spaniards, he was, he told them, of each of their particular
Countries.

He was wont, when he had done any signal Roguery, to cover his body all-over
with stinking Sear-cloaths and Ointments, and his face with Plasters; so that
it was impossible for his own Mother to know him. Sometimes he was a blind
Harper, other times, forsooth, you might see him swinging himself on Crutches:
Some times he fastened artificial Arms to (...) body, whilst that in the Church
(...) made use of natural ones to cut Purs^

After he had acted over all the^ parts in a Town or City, he the^ shifts to
another, or else he made hi^ self be admired as a man of another world, coming
from the Antipodes giving people to understand, that h^ was chief Physician to
the Great Mo^ gul, and King of Persia: and as such (...) one he mounted the
Stage, being in al^ points indeed a most accomplish'^ Mountebank, no Disease
coming a^ miss to him, curing the incurable^ Galen, Hippocrates, Paracelsus,
and Ponteus, and all the learned Rabble^ were men that might have put
themselves to him as Apprentices: In short, another Aesculapius. Upon the Stage
he so charmed the people into astonishment with his babble, that he made them
buy off amain his Drugs; and gave his Comrades opportunity to draw out the
Quintessence of their ^ockets.

He in the meant time, forsooth, continuing, for the Public good, to trumpet
forth the mavelous secrets of his Medicines; but above all, promising them
strange things, if they would take the pains to come to confer with him at his
Chamber, as in effect he did to those who came there, showing them, to their
cost, that his fellow was as yet unborn. For Occult Philosophy, for a full
knowledge of the utmost Effects of Art and Nature, and for his sharp insight in
the Mysteries of the Superior bodies; but above all, for an entire command of
the Infernal Spirits, no mortal could ever yet attain to such boundless
ability: For then discovering himself to them with a thousand Injunctions of
secrecy, he offered to sell them familiar Spirits, to show them Spectrums and
Demons in glasses. To the Covetous he would promise, for such a sum of money
paid down t^ him beforehand, to teach them to discover Golden Mines; and to
kindehearted Maidens, their as kind Sweethearts; and to Fops and ingenious
Triflers, the Philosophers Stone.

In the mean time he never so much forgot himself amongst all these pastimes,
but he ever remembered his business, which was to get money.

It happened that being one day strayed from his Gang, for it was he from whom
the story takes its rise, he on purpose put himself into the hands of a Thief;
who not knowing him, as soon as ever he saw him, comes up to him and claps a
Pistol to his breast, telling him, he must deliver his money: which Order
Arpalin was forced to obey; but desired him withal, that seeing he gave it him
without resistance, and lest his Master should think, whose money it was, that
he parted from it without blows, he would do him the favor to discharge his
Pistol at his Hat and shoot through ^t: which having done, and Arpalin
^bserving that they were in all points ^rmed alike, claps his hand to his
^word, and so distresses the undergraduate, that besides his own Purse which he
had again, he makes the other entrust him with the office of being his
Purse-bearer too.

Now as his Gang were made up of several sorts of Artists, so he made several
uses of them according as he perceived which way every man's particular talent
lay. Some of them being excellent at making false Keys and Betties, he would
never suffer them to want employment. Others were ingenious at wrenching off of
Locks, at making Deaf Files, which wasted the iron without noise, making the
strongest fastened door give way for their passage.

Arpalin having for a long time lived after this manner, and ranged with great
success throughout the best Cities of Europe, arrived at last again with his
Attendants at Paris, when they went, according to their usu^ manner, each man
to his particula^ Lodging: but forasmuch as Arpali^ as their chief had ever the
principa^ part to act, he lodged himself on purpose at a noted house of
entertainment for strangers, where he soon insinuated himself amongst them,
making them believe that he was likewise a stranger, and came to Paris for no
other reason but only to see the Town, and frequent honest Conversations. And
as he had a notable way with him to conceal his intentions, so he trapt these
strangers with such specious pretenses, that it was impossible for them to take
him for any other than the best-natured man living. Sometimes he would carry
them out along with him to Supper, not suffering them to pay a farthing; but
only at their return homewards, were certainly robbed by fellows planted
expressly by him, who took from him his Cloak first, to take away all
suspicion; and in the morning he was sure to have it again, and with it the
greatest share in the Booty.

Sometimes he would carry six or seven of those strangers to the Playhouse,
where he would pay for them; but then he failed not to place them among his
Accomplices, whom he had on purpose sent there beforehand, who never let them
go till they had picked their pockets. A certain Dutchman happening into
Arpalin's company, and having found his pockets picked of all the money he had
about him save one Guiney, he told them near him, that he was resolved that
they that got the others should not get that too; whereupon he claps it in his
mouth: Which being observed by him that had before dealt with him, You shall
lie, said he softly to himself, in spite of your teeth, for all your security:
And at the same time he follows his man, being accompanied with other Rogues
whom he had acquainted with his intention Wherefore he making as if he would
have pulled out his Handkerchief, let fall on purpose on the ground a
considerable quantity both of Gold and Silver, which he prayed the bystanders
to gather up for him; when observing the Dutchman as well as others stoop to
help him, one of his confederates, to whom he had tipped the wink, began to cry
out Thief; saying, that the Dutchman instead of returning the money which he
had taken up, had, that he might the better conceal it, hid a piece in his
mouth: which so moved the assistants, that they all immediately fell upon him,
so beating and kicking of him, that they made him return it again to him whom
they thought the right owner.

These were some of the many inventions he made use of: for should we relate
them all, they would be sufficient to make a book of themselves. Wherefore we
shall only take notice of one act more of his perfidiousness, and so hasten to
give you an account of his end.

Having heard one day that there was some persons to be executed at La Greve,
the apprehension which he had lest there should be some of his Companions
amongst them, made him hasten thither; where amongst the erowd he singles out a
young man, well clad, and of a good mein, named Florizard, and enquiring of him
what one of the Prisoners had done, whom he pointed out, He has killed,
answered Florizard, my Lord D'Alize, a man of great esteem at Court, as well
for his birth as excellent qualities; and the common report is, that he went
even to his bed and there strangled him. At which words Arpalin smiling cried
out, that he was a silly Rascal to suffer himself to be taken. For my part,
continued he, should I ever have occasion to do the like, I defy the taking of
me. Florizard a^ these words looked steadfastly on Arpalin, and observing in him
the countenance of a man that dared any thing* You seem to me, says he, to be
a person that would not baulk an adventure because dangerous: but the business
which I shall propose to your consideration, may be effected with small hazard,
provided you be secret, and follow my directions. These words at first startled
our bold undertaker, as having never before had any commerce with the proposer:
Yet notwithstanding he fails not of giving him attention; telling him withal
(that he might the better sound him) That if he had any thing of concernment to
acquaint him with, they should withdraw, and discourse together without
witnesses. In saying which, they both walk out of the Crowd, and Florizard
carries his new Acquaintance to a Tavern where he was used to frequent; and
there having conveniently seated themselves and drank a round or two, offers
him, on the part of his Master, a Person of Quality, Five hundred Guineys, if
he would undertake to murder an ancient man, whom he named to him. Arpalin
likes his proposals, and promises him his man dead at midnight: Upon which
promise Florizard gives him One hundred pieces in earnest, with a promise of
the rest when he had done his work. They part thereupon, and Arpalin goes
immediately to one of his Comrades, named le Balafre, a man full of wicked
resolutions, and ready at all times to execute the most horrid villainies; to
whom he communicates his design and Fifty pieces, half of that which he had
received, and agree together concerning the manner of the Murder. Wherefore at
Eleven a clock in the night they go to the ancient man's house, and finding the
gates shut, they with their Betties and other Instruments got them open and
entered, and having with them a Dark-lanthorn, they go softly up stairs, and
finding the old man a bed, they most inhumanely murder him: Which having done,
they put him in a Sack and carry him, each of them by turns, directly to the
place where Florizard had appointed them. And having received the rest of the
money, they together dig a hole and throw the Corpse in it: Which they had no
sooner done, but these two wretches, fearing least Florizard should at some
time or other discover them, fell upon him likewise and killed him, throwing
him in the same hole with the other. And at the same time Arpalin, whether
beginning to mistrust Balafre, or being de^ous to have all the money to
himself, yet so it was, that he sets upon him unawares, and treats him as the
two others, covering him with earth in the same place, and so departs.

After this and many other Tragical Actions, he retreats (being weary with
running up and down the world) unto one of the best Cities of Dauphine, where
giving himself more than ever ^o wickedness and debaucherie, the Divine
Justice, which slept not, over^ook him: For it happening that some fellows being
taken for a Robbery by them committed, accused him also of sundry Villainies,
which they, as his Companions, knew he had been guilty of: wherefore being once
laid hold on, there came in so many witnesses against him, that for all his
tricks and inventions he was sentenced to be hanged, and bear them company;
which Sentence was accordingly executed, he marching to the place of Execution
with the same undaunted and resolute countenance as he was observed to have in
his lifetime.

CHAP. III. The Life and Death of la Ch^nay, a famous Villain
LAChenay was born of honest Parents, who took all possible can that this their
Son might be brough^ up as beseemed a man sprung from (...) good a Family; but
he would never hearken to their wholesome counsels but was resolved to break
through a^ virtuous sentiments, and wholly t^ betake himself to all manner of
wickedness. Wherefore having watched an opportunity, he takes what moneys he
could light of in his Father'^ house, and departs, glad that he might now range
the world with liberty resolving with himself (being naturally cruel, and one
who could with as little horror dip his hands in blood as in water) to commit
every thing that his Lust should suggest to him; and in a short time made
himself so remarkable for his Villainies, that there came several Rogues to
enroll themselves under his Standart, as to a man that wanted neither
resolution to undertake, nor skill to perform the most hazardous Enterprises.
And the Discipline and Trial which he put them upon who thus came to him, is
not the least considerable: for he was wont to lock them up for two days
together in a Chamber, without either eating or drinking; and to make them lie
out three or four nights bareheaded in the open air, that he might the better
know who were fit for his purpose.

One Winter-night, when the weather was so unpleasant, by reason of Fogs, Hail,
and Snow, that no body cared to stir out of their Lodgings, he divided his Crew
into three Bands, and planted them on the Pont-neuf in Paris, for it was there
as in his proper sphere, where he moved himself.

When it happening that a Country Attorney, well mounted and accoutred, was
about passing over the Bridge on that side where lies Dauphine-street, but
scarcely had he set foot upon it, but he saw himself immediately beset with six
Thieves; who with horrid Oaths and Imprecations, charged him to alight off his
horse, and make no words on it, for if he did, they would throw him over into
the River: which, what with their Oaths and Curses, together with the coldness
of the weather, so chilled the poor Lawyer, that he could not, if he would,
have spoken a word for trembling. When la Chenay comes up to him, as being
their Captain, and sets a Pistol to his breast, commanding him without delay to
deliver his money; which the other, thinking so to be rid of them, immediately
did, putting his foot in the stirrup, and hoping now that he might pass on
freely: when presently comes up a Rascal to him, pretending himself so lame by
a fall ^e lately had gotten, that he could not go home a foot, wherefore he
must needs borrow his horse of him; which the other was forced to alight off
and lend him; and so with much ado gets from them, rejoicing howsoever that he
had now past, as he thought, all danger: When lo, suddenly as he came up to le
Cheval de Bronze, he was again surrounded with a parcel of Rogues, who viewing
him nearly, demanded whence he came, and where he was going: to whom he related
his piteous adventure, and into what cruel hands he had fallen. How, cruel!
answered one of the gang, how durst you use these terms? and who made you so
bold as to pass the Cheval de Bronze, without pulling off your hat? Pray, Sir,
be pleased henceforwards to learn more manners. Which saying, (...) snatcheth
his Beaver off his head, an^ a Diamond-ring off his finger value^ at near Two
hundred crowns. Wha^ could our poor Gentleman do? to return back again, was, To
leap out of the Drying Pan (as we say) into the fire^ wherefore he faintly puts
on. When scarce had he got to the Samaritane but the third Band, who lay as
Sentine^ in this place, make up to him, bringing along with them a man who had
not (...) rag of clothes on his back but his shirt (a dreadful thing,
considering the tim^ of the year, it being in the depth o^ Winter:) Sir, said
one of them, wh^ seemed to be the eldest of the company, you will do a
charitable deed t^ let this poor wretch have your Cloak^ who you see has
nothing to cover him being almost dead with cold. The Lawyer would willingly
have pleade^ that Charity begins at home, and tha^ every man is bound by the
Laws o^ Nature to conserve his own being rather than another: but alas, his
Cli^ts were other kind of men than to ^e moved by the Laws of the Land or ^f
Nature either; wherefore they ^ke from him his Cloak, telling him, ^at it was a
favor that they took ^ot from him his life also, seeing he ^ade so bad use of
it.

Not long after this, la Chenay so ^rought on a Lacquey by fair words, and some
small gratuity, that he discovered to him all the concerns of ^is Master's
house: upon which in^ormation he commands one of his ^ogues, who attended him,
to go ^o this Gentleman and offer him his ^ervice; which the other so plausibly
^erformed, that with la Chenay's re^ommendation, (who pretended himself a
person of quality) he was without any further enquiry received into ^e house:
Where he had not been ^ong, but he gets the Keys and im^rints them in Past,
giving the print ^f them to la Chenay, who presently orders a Lock-smith to
counterfe^ them: which being done, they expe^ the Gentleman's going into the
Country; which he soon after did, to house of his pleasantly seated ne^
Pontoise: of which having receive^ notice, immediately the next nig^ they beset
the house, and with the^ false Keys and other Instruments, for^ their passage.
When no sooner ha^ they gotten in, but they presentl^ make up to the Closet
where the^ had information the Money lay, b^ by chance there was none there: b^
in revenge they entered into the nex^ Chamber, where having broke open^ great
Trunk, they took out of it (...) much Plate as was worth Five hundred pounds,
and were just ready t^ go out, when the Master of the house with two Lacqueys,
enters, returnin^ sick from the Country; at which our Rascals were not a
little suprize^ knowing not what course to take for, to make out with their
Booty, w^ t^ attempt that which was almost ^possible. Wherefore they hid
them^lves as well as they could; but the ^ischief on it was, that they happen^
into the Chamber where the Lac^eys lay, and there hid themselves, ^me under the
Beds, others behind ^upboards, and in corners of the ^ooms whithersoever they
could as ^ey thought with conveniencie be^ow themselves.

The Master of the house not know^g any thing at all of what had hap^ened, goes
to bed: There was heard ^ndeed some kind of noise, but they ^ould not mistrust
Thieves, seeing that they found the doors locked as ^hey left them.

After the Lacqueys had gotten in^o their Chamber and were asleep, ^hey under
the bed first creep out in^o another Chamber next the street; where they cut
the bed-cloaths into ^lips, fastening them to the window, and so slid down. La
Chenay and one more remained alone, that they might let down the Booty; when
it came presently into la Chenay's mind that he had left his Pistol on the
Table in the Chamber where the Lacquey^ lay, and being not willing to loose i^
he, like Aesop's Dog, instead of getting two pieces of flesh, lost that which
he had already in his jaws. For going in to fetch it, he had no sooner laid
his hand on it, but it presently (having a very easy Spring discharges, and
awakened them (...) the house, who immediately put themselves into a posture of
defense. (...) Chenay flies presently to the window and first offers to slide
down, when scarcely had he got halfway, but the knots wherewith the Clothes
were tied slipped, and he falls on the ground He received not so much hurt, but
that he made a shift to scramble to his Companions, and give them notice of the
danger. The other who was left behind in the Chamber, was as man amazed,
seeing himself alone ^ree stories high, without any possi^lity of following his
Companions; ^t he was quickly put out of doubt ^w to dispose of himself: the
folks (...) the house, with Halberts and other ^rms, coming soon into the
Chamber ^here he was, with their Master, who ^d also taken the Alarm, believing
^e whole house to be full of Thieves; ^t having after much search found ^one
but this man, after severe cudgel^g of him, they shut him up in at^ndance of
the morning. When he ^eing the extremity he was in, resol^ed rather to break
his neck out of ^e window, than remain a remediless ^ictim to their just
passion: where^re having tied two or three Napkins together with his Garters,
and fasten^d them to the window, he gets out, ^inking to slide down by them as
far ^s they would reach; but alas, they ^resently brake, and he with the fall,
^eing on the Free-stones, split his head in pieces. The Watch hearin^ they
cried Thieves, made such clo^ pursuit after them, that they took tw^ who were a
while after executed.

La Chenay seeing how ill his tw^ Companions were treated, chang^ his Post, and
skulks with the rest (...) his Associates about the Suburbs (...) St. Marcel,
quartering themselves (...) nights in the University; being n^ often seen
abroad, having been d^ scribed to the Judges. Whilst he l^ thus about the
University, he had n^ tice of a young man of the Count^ of Champagne, who came
on purpo^ to Paris for his Studies, and h^ brought a considerable quantity
(...) money for his maintenance: when upon they accost him, and findi^ him of
an easy and pliable tempe^ they grew in a short time so well a^ quainted, that
they must needs go (...) dinner together, pretending the^ selves likewise
Scholars: But befo^ they went, one of the Gang orde^ mighty courteously) the
Porter, co^ing from the Carriers with his ^runk, to set it in his Closet, and
^ckt it, giving him the Key; which ^aving done, they set out together. When
having dined, they conduct ^im to the College of Navarre, and walk him up and
down till they ^hought their Companions, to whom ^hey had given another Key of
the ^ame Closet, had conveyed, as indeed ^hey did, all the young man's money
and clothes away.

A while after this, he takes along with him three or four of his Gang ^o the
house of a rich Citizen in St. stephens Parish; and having watched the
opportunity of his being alone in the house, they knock at the door, desiring
to speak with him. The Maidservant thinking that they were Gentlemen, made no
scruple to let them in: Whereupon they presently go up stairs into the Chamber
where the Master of the house was; whom they compliment, pretending the came to
him to confer about extraodinary business: Whereupon la C^ nay drawing him
aside, tells him (...) his ear, that he must needs lend the^ Two hundred
Crowns. Which hea^ ing, he would fain have gotten from them; but setting a
Pistol to his brea^ they soon hindered him, swearing wi^ horrid Imprecations,
that if he mu^ tered a word, and did not quietly an^ speedily satisfy their
demands, he wa^ a dead man: which made him, i^ spite of's teeth, comply with
their requests. No sooner had they gotten out of the house, but he makes afte^
them, and got two of them appre^ hended, the rest escaping, who were
afterward, for this and many other Rogueries, executed at la Greve.

La Chenay had committed so many Villainies, and was so well known i^ Paris,
that he perceived he could no^ with security stay there any longer (...)
whereupon he resolves to beat the Road, and in effect gets to Mont au^an during
the time of the Siege, and ^ere stays a while in the Army; but ^nding that he
had not there that li^ertie to do mischief as he desired, he gathers together a
pack of sturdie Villains, the chief of whom were la Fontaine, la Point, and la
Faverie, and left it.

The first Encounter they made, was of two Gentlemen in Guyenne; who returning
from the Army, were by them, at the corner of a Wood, most inhumanely
murdered.

La Chenay was wont to give this ^n charge to his Companions: that whenever
they saw any Merchant, or person of considerable Quality, that they should,
before he came near them, set themselves to their Music and Dancing, and
constrain him into the middle of the Dance; who oftentimes, God knows, had
rather have danced a Courant than a Galliard: but they were not so busied in
their dancing, but that they looked to put hi^ in when he was out, and made hi^
profess 'twas the dearest Music he (...) ver bought in his life; constraini^
him to part with what he had to pa^ the honest Fiddler, who had recre^ ted him
with such choice Music.

And this Stratagem was put i^ practice in all places wheresoever the^ came,
and especially toward thr^ Merchants, whom they set upon after this manner in
the Forest of O^leans; constraining them to rejoy^ at their Losses, and to cut
capers for the Rape committed on them. Bu^ as men's designs do not always
happen according to expectation, so i^ chanced that a stout Blade, a bre^
Soldier, called L'Espine, fortuned to ride the Road where they were; and
coming up to them in a Valley nee^ Gergeau upon the River Loire, as soon as
ever he came near, la Chenay judge^ by his Garb and Countenance, that he had
likely good store of money; wherefore he lights from his horse, ^aking signs
to his Companions to ^o the like, and takes his Cittern, ^eeting of him,
singing forsooth, and ^ancing: But the Gentleman know^ng not to what end these
Gambals ^ended, fell back a little, and would have put himself in a posture of
defense before he passed forwards; but they pretending that 'twas nothing but a
mere Frolic, took away the apprehension of their designs: So that being in
the midst of them, they set to their accustomed dancing. Yet notwithstanding,
upon second thoughts, he concludes that their intentions must needs terminate
in Villainy: wherefore pretending to tie his Garters, he dexterously
dis-engageth himself from them, running to la Chenay's horse, who was tied to
the bough of a Tree, and nimbly mounts him, cutting with a Sword his Bridle;
and makes his way maugre all their efforts through the midst of the dance,
laying two of them, with their pa^ broken, on the ground; and ride^ directly to
the Provost of Orlean^ telling him what had happened, an^ where he thought he
might meet wit^ them. But they came too late; for la Chenay, finding himself
cheated o^ his hopes, leaves the Country, an^ with his Companions marches ove^
into Picardy, exercising there the^ tricks, till they had after this sort a^
bused so many people, that they were forced to shift again the Country.

After this, la Chenay, being accompanied with only two of his Companions, set
upon a Merchant of Beauvai^ coming to Paris, taking away not only his Goods and
Horse, but his Life too. Whilst la Chenay went to the Horse-market to sell the
Horse, the other two expose the Merchandise to sale; which turned to their
ruin: for when 'twas known that they offered their Goods at so low a rate, it
was imagined immediately that they came not honestly by them; and in effect,
being laid hold on upon suspicion, they confessed the whole matter.

La Chenay, whose destiny reserved him for another place, came to find his
Merchants in the Hall; but seeing ^a great confusion of people in the place
where he had left them, it came into his mind that they were taken; whereupon
he places the rest of his hopes in his heels, leaving his two Companions
behind him, who were broken a while after on the Wheel. A man would think,
that having escaped so many times the hand of Justice, when he was in as great
danger as his other Companions were, it should have reclaimed him; but he
rather making use of this as an argument to continue his Villainies than to
leave them, resolved still to persist in his former wicked courses: Where he
rallies his scattered Troop, and takes again the field; and having met with
three Citizens, he affronts them with a mavelous audaciousness, and with a
tone which argued nothing but blood and cruelty, he told the best accoutred of
the three, that the Horse which he ri^ on was his, and had been lately stole^
from him: that it must be return'^ him, or else he wore a Sword tha^ should do
him right. La Faverie, l^ Point, and la Fontaine set upon the others with the
like impudence, an^ would needs make them believe the Horses that they rid on
were theirs* The Citizens seeing it in vain to dispute Proprieties, were forced
to aligh^ off their Horses and leave them, with their Money likewise, behind
them, glad that they had fared no worse for la Chenay was a bloody-minded
wretch, and valued no man's life; so little sense had he of Justice and common
Goodness.

It happened, that being one day alone near the City of Man's, walking in the
Fields thereabouts whilst hi^ Companions were gone to visit the neighboring
Fairs, he entered at night into an Inn, where no body, considering his Garb and
Mein, would have taken him for what he was, being excellently well mounted, and
in all things like a Gentleman. Now it chanced that the Provost of Man's and his
men having heard that he vaulted thereabouts, were set out on purpose to try if
they could take him; but forasmuch as none of them had ever seen his face, it
was impossible for them to know him. Being in the Inn, he enquires of the
Inne-keeper what Guests he had; who returns answer, that there was only one
Company: Whereupon he bids the Host ask them whether they would not think it
troublesome for him to sup with them: to whom the Provost returned answer, That
he should take it as a great favor if the Gentleman would be pleased to honor
him with his company. Whereupon la Chenay enters, being received with all the
respect imaginable. To make short of it, they seat themselves, and he tells
how he returned from the Army, and that his Lacqueys, being not able to keep
pace with him, were left behind at a Village, which he named, not far from
thence. They entertain one another with several Discourses, as well what had
passed at Languedoc, as at Vivarets, Rochell, and other places: but as they
fell from one thing to another, especially concerning what had happened
thereabouts, la Chenay perceived that he was in the midst of them who were set
out on purpose to take him; whereupon he then (understanding his part) acts
accordingly, detesting all Thieves, and telling them how that coming out from
Toulouse he was robbed by a crew of Rogues of all he had brought from the Army.

The Provost, who understood not whereto tended this discourse, very gravely
listens to him, thinking that truth it self spoke by his mouth. To make short,
having all supped, they betake themselves to their Chambers: and the best of it
all was, that la Chenay lay in the same Room with the Provost; and being
willing to give himself pastime, he orders the Hostler to get ready his horse
at Four of the clock in the morning, intending to be before noon at Man's.
Whereupon he gets up as soon as ever it was light, reckons with his Host, and
pays not only his own share, but the Provost's too: And as he was ready to
mount on his horse, he draws the Inne-keeper apart, and charge him to tell
the Provost, that he with whom last night he had supped, was la Chenay, whom he
had so much sought after; and that he had paid his scot for him.

Two hours after this, the Provost he rises, demanding whether the Gentleman
was set out yet; and answer being returned, Near three hours ago, and that he
had remitted the account to them behind; he at this falls into a passion, and
admires that so brave a Gentleman as he should put such a trick upon him. The
Inne-keeper perceiving him to stomach it so much, told him at last, that he
that supped with them was called la Chenay, and that he had indeed paid the
whole reckoning for them: At which the Provost was ten times madder than
before, cursing and swearing at the Inne-keeper, that he did not tell him of it
sooner; the other excuses himself, as not knowing any thing of their concerns,
having never before seen la Chenay, wherefore he could not be reasonably
blamed, for giving him a simple account of what passed betwixt them.

The Provost all in haste raises the Country to pursue him; but all in vain,
for he had by that time gotten at least 10 Leagues off, escaping after this
manner from them.

But it is in vain for him to think ^'escape divine Justice; the blood of so
many poor wretches, whom he had most cruelly murdered, cried ^o Heaven for
vengeance, and would not suffer him a^y longer upon the earth: for as he ranged
about Fontainbleau and the Forest of Orleans, la Fontaine comes and gives him
notice, that if he were minded to make a good booty, there was a great Fair
kept in the Country of Perch, and that it was needful there should be to the
number of five or six, who should go straight to Vernueil, as being a place
near the Fair, and, if occasion required, very necessary for their retreat.

This counsel was as soon executed as proposed, la Chenay taking along with him
la Faverie, la Point, and four or five more, and make straightwaies thither;
giving out, that they went upon design of helping a Gentleman, a friend of
theirs, who w^ to fight a Duel.

In the mean time, la Fontaine, wh^ was the guide in this enterprise, go^
directly to Perch, walking about the Fair, and making as if he came pu^ posely
to buy Goods; but indee^ 'twas to consider who had most Money, they being the
men he did intend to force a Trade withal: an^ having understood that one of
the^ that kept the Fair, had sold Commodities to the value of seven hundre^
Pounds; after information of the place of his abode and time of departure, he
came and communicated his discoveries to la Chenay, saying, which was the word
amongst them, that The Gentleman had taken the field. Upon which la Chenay sets
out with his companions, and being come to the place appointed, there hid
themselves behind a Hedge, about half a League off of Vernueil, to the intent
they might be ready when the Merchant passed by there: ^ut it happened (howsoever
it came to ^ass) that the Magistrates of Vernueil got notice of this their
Cabal; upon which the City was all in a tumult: there was inquiry made
presently after them in the Inn, where they had lodged the last night; but
there they could learn nothing of them, but only that they were Gentlemen, who
came to assist their friend who was to fight. This pretense was specious
enough, and many were in the mind not to concern themselves any further about
them: yet nevertheless, as there are some men who see further a great deal than
others, so these concluded on the other side, that there must needs be
something in it which looked ill, and that this Duel must be fantastic and
imaginary, and invented by them as a cloak to cover some notable Villainy: to
which it was added, that they were seen to pry about the Fair, and that,
without doubt, their intent wa^ not good; upon these conjectures it was thought
fitting to make afte^ them: whereupon the chief of the City, being followed by
twenty o^ thirty men well-arm'd, as well Hors^ as Foot, made up to the place
where they had notice they lay. But la Ch^ nay and his companions perceiving^
that this troop approaching concerned them, took the alarm, and rid away as
fast as their Horses could carry them, for about ten miles together, and hid
themselves in an Inn* hoping that they were now out o^ danger: Where they had
no soone^ refreshed themselves, but the House was immediately beset on every
side, with as well those that came in their pursuit from Vernueil, as of the
Villages thereabouts, who came in flock^ after them.

But as they saw the people crowd more and more about the house where they
were, so there were two of them so nimble, as to make their escape; there
remaining but four behind, who thinking to get on ^orseback, were so closely
followed by the Countrey-people, that they were constrained to leave their
Horses and stand upon their guard. La Faverie and la Fontaine were in the yard
ready to mount their Horses; but the Peasants so laid on them with their Forks,
Rakes and Staves, that they could not, for all their dexterity, avoid being
taken. La Chenay seeing his Companions taken, thought within himself, that this
was not a time to dally in, but that 'twas his best way to barricadoe the door
with Benches, Stools, Tables, and other Lumber which he could find in the
Room, that he might stop the fury of the rude multitude.

The Host in the mean time knows not the cause of this tempest, which came
thundering in such a manner on his house, being charged with such earnestness
to deliver up them wh^ came there. He knew not what answe^ to make them, nor
indeed could have come at them if he would, neither could tell what to say, but
that they were Gentlemen that were unknown to him, as having never seen them i^
his life before. But to conclude, l^ Chenay and la Point having so fastened
the door that 'twas almost impossible to enter, they get up to the Windows,
crying out, That they wondered at this usage; that they were Gentlemen and
persons of reputation, and therefore they had best to have a care how they thus
treated them; yet notwithstanding all this, the people ceased not to endeavor
to get at them, with such eagerness, that there was nothing, as is usually in
such cases, but confusion and disorder.

A Gentleman, living not far off, named Monsieur la Brusse, hearing this noise,
took horse, and with three or four of his Attendants came, where ^e noise
directed him; where be^g come, he sees the Magistrates and Officers of
Vernueil, and enquires ^f them the occasion of this tumult; and being given to
understand the ^easons of it, he so orders the business, ^at he comes to the
speech of la ^henay, who understanding his qua^ty, and perceiving him a
Gentleman, ^ells him how little reason there was ^hey should be thus used, and
what ^ity it was that they must be offered ^p as Victims to the fury of the
Po^ulacy; desiring him withal, that he ^y his authority and interposition ^ould
appease this vulgar commoti^n, and get them out of the hands of ^hese Rusticks.

The Sieur de la Brusse, seeing them (...) good equipage, could never have ^in
persuaded, had not the event ^hewed the contrary, but that they ^ere really
such as they pretended themselves; whereupon he desires the Judge of Vernueil,
that he would permit him to conduct them to hi^ house, and that there they
should b^ examined concerning what they ha^ to say to them.

To which the Judge agrees, provi^ ded that he may draw up a verb^ Process of
the whole matter; which being done, and la Brusse's reque^ granted, they return
to Vernueil.

The four Thieves being now a^ la Brusse's house, are continually (...)
plotting and contriving their escape^ but there being strict charge give^ by
the Magistrates concerning them it being the condition upon which they were
delivered, they wanted no^ for looking after. La Chenay, wh^ displayed all his
inventions to escap^ pretended he belonged to a Noble man, who lived a
considerable wa^ from thence; to whom when a Lette^ was sent to know the truth,
the^ was answer returned, that he was (...) far from belonging to him, that h^
had never heard that there was such a ^erson in the world: so that two or ^ree
days after, he sent into the City (...) the Magistrates to be discharged of
^em.

It was thought expedient to come ^ell armed, it being likely that there ^as
more of their Crew abroad, and ^ho, if they should have notice, would ^ome to
their Rescue: wherefore ^hey brought two Companies of Soul^iers, that they
might with greater ^curity conduct them to the Castle.

La Chenay desisted not still to ^reaten them who had made this tu^ult, as he
called it, protesting he would make them pay dearly for their ^solence to a
person who was their ^uperiour; that they were mistaken (...) their man; that
it was not to him that they should put these abuses. ^ut alas, all these
bravadoes were to ^ttle purpose; for they were soon after, being in custody,
known by se^eral persons, who deposed against them: So that being clearly
prove^ guilty of several Murders, These and Robberies, they were senten^ (as
it is usual in France) to do P^ nance in their shirts, with light^ Torches in
their hands, before t^ great Church of Vernueil, and afte^ wards to be broken
alive on t^ Wheel; which was accordingly ex^ cuted: la Point, la Faverie, and
Fontaine, confess ingenuously the several Crimes, reproaching la Chen^ upon the
Wheel, as having debauch^ them from the Army, and broug^ them upon these horrid
practices, a^ consequently to this shameful E^ But he on the contrary took his
Dea^ with such a strange kind of undau^ tedness, that it is impossible to co^
ceive, without being an Eye-witne^ saying never a word, but looking (...) the
people with a countenance the argued a scorn to live though life we^ granted
him; showing the same re^ lution and fierceness at his Death which was observed
to have run ^ough the current of his whole ^fe.

CHAP. IV. The Life of la Fleur.
^T would be but little benefit and (...) satisfaction to the Reader, to have
(...) account of this persons Extracti^n, Village, Town, or City where he ^as
born, seeing that these things, if ^e knew them, would not be mate^al to our
Relation: for we will not ^uppose him, with Mercury, to be a Thief as soon as
ever he peept out of ^e shell; and therefore I hope I may ^e spared the pains
of further enqui^ies, being willing to relate nothing ^f him but what we find
upon un^oubted Records to be true; and being desirous to come to that part his
age in which, by a thousand Vlanies, he made himself in Paris a^ elsewhere
remarkable.

For having one day notice of t^ return of a certain Merchant of Sen^ to Paris
from the Low Countries, dressing himself in women's Appar^ with three or four of
his Compa^ ons, marches thither; where the were at least three days in expecta^
on of his appearance, but at last the descried him a great way off desce^ ding
the Hills: which made la Fl^ prepare himself for his Entertai^ meant, lying down
in the Road wi^ piteous Cries and Lamentations, a^ cusing Heaven and Earth as
Consp^ rators of his Misfortunes. The Me^ chant being a man of a brisk and ai^
temper, and one who well understod the delights of Feminine Conver^ tions, was
not a little moved with jo^ at this happy surprizal, as imagini^ himself in an
easy possession of ^gular Beauty: For indeed la Fleur, ^ough a man, had a
Countenance, in which there appeared so much deli^cie and sweetness, that
there is few ^omen but would have been glad (...) have been possessors of the
like ^eatures; pity it is that he should ^ve made such use of them; but he ^as
one of those handsome men the ^allows laid claim to. But to our ^ory: the
Merchant alights from his ^orse, and enquires of la Fleur the ^use of his
Complaints: Who, coun^erfeiting rarely well the Woman, told ^im a long story of
her piteous adventures, (without howsoever pul^ing off her Mask:) That she had
been ^eeing some of her Kindred, and was ^eft there by her Brother upon some
^mall distaste received; so that she ^ould do no otherwise than lament her
misfortune, and curse the time she set out with him, her Honor being through
his occasion so much in danger.

The Merchant hearing this di^ course, imagines, poor man, that the^ must be
truth in it; and setting him self down near this goodly Creature begins to
enter into Appetite. (...) Fleur making small resistance, onel^ crying out,
Whore-like, that now she was going to be undone, ruined, lo^ for ever! Alas,
Sir, said she, what d^ you mean? what will you do to me^ Pray forbear, I cannot
indeed; away I pray: I am as yet a Maid; I be^ seech you let me alone; you will
hur^ me: Pish, fie, I took you for another man; what, loose my Honor, more
dear than my life! Away, it is i^ vain.

Whilst they were in these discourse^ there happens to ride along the Road a
notable old jovial Fellow of Compeigne, a good Companion, and one who in his
time had been a great Vaulter; who perceiving the Merchant a courting the Lady,
resolves to put in too for a share: Whereupon he alights off his horse and
makes up to ^^em. Which la Fleur perceiving, cries ^ut, she was the most
miserable of women; that Heaven had ceased to take care of her; and that she
should be happy, should the ground open and swallow her up. These two comforted
her with many fair promises, taking her each of them by the hand, and led her
into the entrance of the Wood.

La Fleur seeing it now time to draw his Game to a close, told them, that
seeing her misfortune so ordered it that she should fall into their hands, that
they would do her so much favor as to advance farther in the Wood, that she
might not be openly prostituted; yet still sob'd and cried, calling a thousand
times on Death to succor her, as if she had been infinitely troubled at this
Encounter. The old Fellow, being the hottest of the two, went on foremost,
having quitted her hand, the Merchant following; but he had I know not what
kind of fea^ which damped his Spirits, and mad^ him hang back: but as one Wav^
drives another, and as the greate^ part of the World lives by Example so he
thought he might as well advance as the other: Whereupon h^ goes on till they
came to the mo^ solitary places of the Wood, where being just ready to execute
their filthy designs, la Fleur draws out (...) Pistol from under his coat and
kill^ the Merchant; which blow was n^ sooner given, but the other was se^ upon
by four sturdy Rogues, who^ with their Poignards struck him dea^ immediately:
after which they set to their Booty, rifling their pockets, and found about 'em
near Three hundred pounds besides their horses. When being upon sharing this
their unjust Acquisition, there arises a great-Quarrel betwixt 'em: la Fleur
would have a^ Horse and a hundred pound for his share, as having acted the
chiefest part in the Tragedy; to which the others would by no means consent:
wherefore they joined Two against Three and fought near the Cross of St. Pen,
which is a little Village about two ^eagues distant from Compeigne; la ^leur
(having good skill) runs his man through the body, and having desperately
wounded the other, gets on horseback and rides to Paris.

Where he is no sooner arrived, but he accosts the gang of Rogues, Lifters,
Pick-pockets, and Filers; refines, corrects, augments, and establishes their
Laws; and having read to them some few Comments on the Piccaro, he for a while
leaves 'em, but in a short time returns, and begins a pleasant adventure: For
being informed that a company of Lawyers were to dine at la Pomme de Pin, he
parts from the Palace (his usual place of plying) and hastens directly to the
Tavern, the place of assignation; where entering puffing and blowing as a man
in extraordinary haste, h^ gives order, as deputed by the company, to make
ready a breakfast for Ten or Twelve persons: Which h^ had no sooner done, but
the compan^ comes to the house, and la Fleur bussles about as Valet, and was
indeed believed to be so by the Lawyers, s^ notably did he bestir himself in
the business; when being about the middle of their Breakfasts, he packs up the
best of their Cloaks, and so pikes off. Scarcely had they made an end, but they
began to miss their Cloaks, demanding where they were; but they might look long
enough before they find 'em, he having got already to the Brokers with 'em who
was wont to buy stolen goods: Where following him (this Broker being a noted
Raseal for his dealings that way) they took him just as he was receiving his
money for his Merchandise. When as they were carrying him before a Justice,
three of his Companions chancing to pass by that way, and seeing which way
their Pi^ot was steering, fall immediately upon the raising a Quarrel, drawing
their Swords, and fall together by the ears, making such a Scuffle, that all
the people were busied in looking on them: which our grand Rogue perceiving,
nimbly skips out of their hands who held him, and gets into the Crowd; where
they might search for him till he would be found.

After this, with some of his Comrades, he marches out of Paris to St. Clou,
and puts in at the first Inn he comes at: Where asking for a Chamber, the
Mistress of the house supposing them honest Guests, shows them up stairs; and
perceiving her alone, they intend to force her, and in effect were ready to put
their intentions into practice, when the Master of the house just enters; upon
which they were forced to await for a more seasonable opportunity. About
midnight then there was one o^ them feigns himself sick, and raise the Master
and Mistress of the house but it happening as he stepped out of hi^ bed he espies a
Neighbor of his i^ the Chamber; upon which the Hos^ being transported with
jealousy, run^ after his man, whilst in the mean time these Rascals seize on
his Wife, who had gotten up stairs in the dark into la Fleur's Chamber, where
they began to truss her up like a woman of her profession: upon which the
Husband comes to his Chamber, and missing his Wife, goes up to them; with whom
finding her, he would have killed her; but by a strange kind of perfidiousness
she causes him to be murdered by one of these Rogues, thinking to come off
well enough her self. But la Fleur would not be so contented: for having
understood of a long time that there was money in the house, comes up to her,
clapping a Pistol to her breast, and tells her, that if she showed him ^ot
where the money lay, there was ^n end of her life: but she making ^esistance
when it was matter of mo^ey, was quickly dispatched by them.

CHAP. V. The Life of Cleomas, hanged in St John's Coemitery at Paris.
ALthough that a person of base extraction is ordinarily void of Courage, yet
notwithstanding I find many great Personages remarkable for Valor amongst the
dregs of the Populace, where it seems to us that there cannot be any at all
recommendable. Nevertheless, in this case we must attribute more to Fortune and
Despair, than to true Courage, seeing that is seldom found but amongst the
Great, and those who are truly Noble: for Virtue appears with greater
advantage, and works more wonderful effects in a body well disposed, than in a
rustic mass, and stupid lump of flesh, as your Country-Peasants.

Cleomas, a Rustical fellow, and made by Nature more to cultivate the Earth
than to handle Arms, will furnish me with a sufficient Example for the proof of
what I said; from the instant of his birth his name prognosticated nothing to
him but what was to his disadvantage. But as we are oftentimes blind in the
things which do most concern us, so from his tender youth he forgot the
knowledge of himself, that he might the better forget the respect and devoir
which he owed to his God. He dwelt about Paris, where he was sometime Servant
in an Inn. The first act of impiety which he committed (whether naturally he
was cruel, or that ^ury had transported him out of his ^enses) was as he went
alone to Pa^is, whither his Masters affairs, or ^is own particular concerns
called ^im: As he was on the Road, mu^ing and pensive, he saw a Waggoner
driving his Wagon laden with Corn to Paris. The Wagon was drawn with four
Horses; the ^ight of which inflamed him with a desire of murdering the
Waggoner. What does not a man when he has let loose the bridle of his
Passions? what cruelty does he not imagine? how is he transported? persuading
himself that a Tigers heart is not fierce enough to animate and accompany him
in his actions. Cleomas, without any consideration of the event, sets on the
Waggoner, and with two stabs poignards him, and boldly took so much time as to
bury him. You Would think this a story, if he himself at his death had not confessed
it. This first Enterprise was but only the foundation of greater mischiefs he^
then designed: The inward fury o^ his Soul hurried him on to greater attempts;
and having buried the Waggoner, not out of any piety to the deceased (for he
never had any) he mounts the Wagon and drove on to Paris. Surely he must needs
be Master of a great stock of impudence, seeing he came to the Marketplace as
if he had been the Waggoners Servant, and there sells the Wagon and Horses
without St. Honores gate; and with the money he returned to his former
Employment. There was made in Paris all imaginable enquiry for the Waggoner.

Two years pass on; during which Cleomas committed no other villainy: for
whether that they came not to public notice, or whether he would never confess
it; in the end, his cruelty increasing with his years, for at the most he had
not attained to the Twenty fourth year, he resolved to ^eave his Master, that
he might with ^ore freedom carry on his designs. His inclinations carried him
on to ^one but high Enterprises, which he for the most part effected alone. So
from thence he betook himself to the Woods, and accosted the most despe^ate
Thieves he could meet withal: ^o that every day new Bands of Rogues came to
list themselves in his service.

He committed many notorious Robberies along the River of Marne, and about St.
Maur, Charenton, Fon^enay, and other neighboring parts. All the Country
thereabouts knew his name; and although he was so well known, yet none had the
courage to take him: for ordinarily he was attended with Fifty horse, and
pillaged and plundered all he met with. But if his Life was strange, his End
was not less admirable: for having done things beyond imagination, the fame, or
rather infamy of Cleomos i^ creasing every day, the Country r^ solved no longer
to endure his ins^ lencies. He was threatened from a^ parts; and that
notwithstanding d^ but inflame his Courage. At Chare^ ton a man called
Floriander had caus^ five or six Marshals men to come t^ his house, in order to
take him; for he sometimes used to walk alon^ Cleomas heard of it, and came b^
night, with his Crew, to Floriander gate, firing the house with a hundre^
Curses; which presently alarmed the Town as well as the Marshals men who
pursued him with all their forces His Company perceiving they were pursued,
dispersed themselves; but h^ retreated to a Villiage, and went t^ Inn there.
This pursuit made him keep in: They inquired where h^ was hid, and at last he
was found ou^ by the Marshals men in the said Inne^ The people gathered
together about the Inn; and as two were ready o^ the threshold to sieze him,
he rose from the Table where he sat with his Pistol in his hand, and killed one
dead ^n the place; then with his Sword made an end of his Companion, and had
the assurance to bridle his horse, and to get out of the Inn. The Peasants
seeing this, rushed all on him, so the number of a hundred and fifty, armed
with Clubs, Forks, Rakes, and what they could next lay their hands on; so they
forced him from his horse: which did not so terrify him, but that he made his
way with his sword, and the Peasants could not then take him; but the number
increasing, closely pursued him. He seeing himself at the last period of his
life, ran with all the force he could, and got among the Vines, outstripping
them, a thing almost incredible, at least half a league; but as he would have
^eposed himself, he was astonished, that in less than a quarter of an hour he
was environed with no less than Three hundred people. Being in thi^ extremity,
he again forced his wa^ through them, and came to the Vallie^ of St. Maur;
where being arrived, h^ saw there was but one way left for t^ escape, which was
to cast himself into the River, where he took the leisur^ (though closely
pursued) to undres^ himself, and left his Clothes on the bauk; then taking his
naked Swor^ in his teeth, he sets to swimming i^ the River of Marne. The banks
were covered with the multitudes of people, who prepared Boats that they might
take him: But that which wa^ admirable in his courage was, that h^ never parted
with his Sword from betwixt his teeth. Swimming to a little Island on which he
got and rested him, many there were who put themselves in Boats to take him;
but five or six of them were wounded in the attempt. At last he came, by
swimming, from St. Maur to Charenton, where the people made at him with their
Oars, seeing they could not take ^im without blows, striking him ^hree or four
times with them on the ^ead, which stunned him, and thereupon was with ease
taken and carried ^o a Surgeon in order to his cure, being very much wounded.
His wounds ^eing dressed, he was condemned, and ^y an Appeal sent to Paris, where
he was hanged.

CHAP. VI. The Lives of two Blood^ Thieves, Francis Dornande^ and John Langlois.
THe irreligion of Francis Dor^ nandez and John Langlois instigated them to
commit the most detestable actions, having abandoned a^ sense of Piety from
their youth, their ordinary exercise being nothing but Theft and Murder; nor
could it wel^ be otherwise expected, for their Ancestors had exercised no other
trade, as it appears by the Sentence of their Condemnation pronounced at
Orleans: For their Father was broken on the Wheel at Rouen. They were born near
Gergean, a City of Soloigne, and past their youth in the Wars of Savoy. We will
not take ^otice of an infinite of wicked acti^ns which they committed, as well
(...) the Wars as in other places; I Will ^ake notice now of nothing but what
(...) most remarkable, especially of one ^ct that they did near Paris; 'twas
^ot far from the Mount Valerien, ^here these Villains made their Sal^ies, this
place was their rendevouz, and scarcely a day past but they pil^ag'd somebody;
they held all the Country in subjection, neither durst any offer to take them,
lest they should afterward fall into their ^ands: The Woods served them for
(...) retreat, and the Caverns for a hiding place, from whence night and day
they exercised a thousand sorts of Villainies. The fame of their cruelty
spreading it self far and near, caused all the Country to keep off from them;
the good Religieux of Meudon, who lived hard by, were the only persons who
could pass with safety, as having indeed nothing t^ lose: Their goods
consisting not i^ the riches of this World, but in the treasures of eternal
Life. Hunge^ often forces the Wolf out of the wood; Dornandez would have never
come out of his private retreat, if h^ could have found enough there t^
satisfy his vicious inclinations: bu^ his companion, who loved to nouris^
himself with blood, persuaded hi^ to take the field; it seemed to him a^ age
past since he had taken any booty. Dornandez, solicited by the desires of his
companion, leaves hi^ den, and so they came forraging a^ along the river Seine,
where, as i^ happened, about half a League off S^ Clou, they met two poor
Religieu^ Recollets, who wandering out o^ their way by reason of the nights
approach, could not reach Paris, asking of them the way to Meudon, ther^ being
a famous Monstery of Capu^ chin-Friars. Langlois, who breath'^ nothing but
blood, tells his compa^ion that he must needs kill these ^wo Religious.
Dornandez with^eld him, showing him the horror ^f the fact, and the little
gain that ^ould redound thereby; yet never^eless his remonstrances could not
^erswade him; wherefore he turning ^owards them, told them he would ^ew them
the right way, and that ^e was going the same Road. At ^he hearing of which,
these good Fa^hers humbly thanked them for their ^ains. Langlois, who had shut
his ^yes to all manner of goodness, that ^e might open his heart to all manner
^f villainy, conducted them into his Cavern, intending to kill them; but
Dornandez, who could not agree to ^he death of these persons, with much ^do
made him alter his resolutions: but howsoever, he tells them that ^hey must
leave behind them their habits; and so saying, took them from them.

Dornandez not knowing his intention, desired him often to let them g^ as they
came; but he had other de^ signs in his head, promising no sma^ advantage by
these habits. Wherefore having stripped these two Fathers he conducted them out
of the wood and showed them the way to St. Clo^ where, by reason of the night,
they went to lodge.

Langlois and Dornandez havin^ got into the place of their Retreat and
discoursing together of wha^ they had done, Langlois told hi^ the reason why he
took their Clothes You know, continued he, that it is no^ far from hence to
Argentville: (...) would turn toward Meudon, but the Religieux there perhaps
would kno^ us by our demeanor; howsoever I ad^ vise to assume these habits,
pretendin^ to be what they are who wore 'em, l^ me alone to do the rest; we will
go t^ Argentville, where I saw the la^ time I was there, a golden Chalice;
(...) don't question but by this disguise to (...) master of it. Dornandez
an^wered him, that 'twas a bold and ^angerous enterprise; howsoever if ^e can
do this, said he, it will be an ^ncouragement to do others.

Whereupon they resolve at last to ^ut their invention in practice, going ^o
Argentville to the Curates house, who believing them to be Religieux ^oming
that way, received them very kindly; which free access gave ^ope to their
design. At night as ^hey lay together, they were a while consulting of the
manner how they should carry on their business, which ^hey at last resolved
upon. The Morning being come, our two Religieux gat up betimes, and came to the
Curate's Chamber, telling him they desired to say Mass: the good Curate not
mistrusting any thing, ^arises and opens the door; which ^he had no sooner
done, but they with their Poinards stab him to the heart, laying him dead at
their feet although he inteated their mercy which having done, they break open
his Trunks, taking away all his Money; and not therewith contented they take
the Keys of the Church and carry away not only the Chalice but all the other
Ornaments besides and so march off.

And after this sort they deceive^ not a few, using these Habits as (...) sure
covert to exercise sundry Villa^ nies, till they were at last detecte^ and
seized on at Orleans, where they there on the Gibbet made an end o^ their
miserable Lives.

CHAP. VII. The Life of Postell, a Scholar of the University of Paris.
POstell came of a good Family, and was sent to Paris for conveni^ncies of
Study, where he was en^ered in the University, being al^ow'd a sufficient
Pension from his Friends for his maintenance: but a^as, that was by him
immediately, in ^he space of two or three days consumed at farthest; wherefore
he was forced to betake himself afterward ^o shirking and stealing for his
subsistence, running up and down a^ights about the streets, and in the morning
he betook himself to his Chamber, as a Fox that had been hunting the Geese. The
first that was trapt by this Gamester, was Booksellers-man of the Palace, wh^
coming from carrying some Books t^ a Scrivener, and having not foun^ him at
home, returned in St. Iames^ street about eight at night, in the midst of
winter. Postell having me^ him, asked him what Books he ca^ ried: the other
shows him; where upon they chaffer, and he carries hi^ to his Chamber, which he
had hir'^ near the College of St. Barbe where being arrived, he gives him
(...) glass Pistol to change; in the mea^ time shuts his Chamber Door, and a^
the Booksellers man brought him the Pistol again, he would not stir to open it:
but on the morrow happened the mischief; for thinking to sell the Books he had
bought to a Bookseller, he addresses himself to the Owner, who stopped them; and
had he not found his legs ready at his service, he had even turned Bookseller
in the Gatehouse. This one should imagine was warning enough for him, had he
not been so addicted to wickedness; in a word, 'twas so far from reclaiming
him, that on the contrary, having heard a little after that a young Vintner had
been lately married, and set up in St. Iames-street, he with his Gang
frequented his house, and were received with welcome and credit. Postell
observing that he left his Wife often alone, took that as an occasion to make
love to her, imagining by his fair words to compass his designs. It happened one
day, that the Master of the house going to Supper to some of his Relations,
Postell with one of his Camrades at night knocks at the door, which was
presently opened; he began to carouse, looking for the good hour in which he
might execute his intention; for the Mistress of the house being indisposed
staid at home, knowing besides that 'twould be late before she should return,
had she gone. As they were going about their enterprise, the Master of the
house knocks at door, a little merry, for they had made him drink where he was,
as a man of his profession; he enters, and doubts not in the least his guests,
but drinks with them, and thinks they would, as they were wont, go to their
Lodgings at last: But one of them pretending to be drunk, sleeps at the end of
the Table: Postell desired for his Friend a Chamber that Night, which the
Vintner at first scrupled, but upon the consideration of being his guest,
granted his request. About Midnight, when every body was in deep sleep, they
rise and come from their Chamber, armed with Pistols, thinking to find the
Vintner's Chamber open, but it was locked; they consulted a long time what to
do, and how they might get into the Chamber; at length Postill told his
Companion, he would have him return to his Bed, and pretend himself sick; which he
did, and presently he began to knock on the floor, under which the Vintner lay,
and to call for Wine to fetch him again to life, pretending that he had swoon'd
away. The man of the house awakens in a maze, and brings some Vinegar for this
Counterfeit; but Postell told him, he thought it most proper to give him some
of his best Wine, and that he knew his Companions constitution; whereupon they
went both into the Cellar. Postell takes a Pistol with him loaded with three
Bullets, charged with white Powder, and as the Vintner stoops to draw Wine, he
discharges it and shoots through his Head, killing him dead on the place: the
Candle was put out, and he was above a quarter of an hour, before he could
find the way out of the Cellar. In short, he got out, lights the Candle, and
goes up stairs, telling his Companion what he had done. The Woman of the House
seeing a man, took him for her Husband, not mistrusting he was murdered.
Postill goes to bed to he^ and she receives him for her Husband, and bids him
put out the Candle; but as he turned to draw the Curtain, she perceived he had
no Beard, and presently cries out: whereupon Postill's Comrade throws himself
into the Chamber, and stops her mouth with the Bed-cloaths, and so accomplished
their brutish Appetites, and afterward killed her with six stabs of a Dagger.
It chanced that the Maidservant was not at home, having got leave of her
Mistress to be at one of her Brother's Wedding; so that these Murderers knowing
they were alone in the house, ransackt and pillaged the best they could lay
their hands on, breaking open Trunks and Boxes, till they met with four hundred
Pounds, which the Vintner had borrowed of his Wives Father, to buy Wines in
Burgundy. Furnished with this Booty, they gently opened the door, at three of
the Clock in the Morning, having carefully shut all after them, as if there had
been nothing done. In the morning every one was astonished to see the doors
fast, it being a well-custom'd house, the Master of it having the reputation to
be no Water-dasher, there being few of them in Paris: For of a Pint, they will
make a Quart, and of a Pottle a Gallon. The Neighbors did not at all mistrust
mischief, thinking that this their keeping the door shut, was out of some
particular humor; but at last they were doubtful of the worst, and therefore
sent word to his Relations, who broke open the door, and found the Mistress
bleeding in her Bed; whereupon all the Neighborhood were in an uproar: the
Commissary comes there, drawing up a particular account of what they had seen.
All people accused the Vintner as guilty of murdering his Wife, saying that he
came home drunk the night before; and seeing he could not be found, what could
be more probable? This was told his particular Relations, who could not tell
what to think on it, as knowing not how to acquit or condemn him: But this they
affirmed, that to their knowledge he never had (a thing very rare) any quarrel
with his Wife, being not of a choleric temper. Whilst these debates were
managed, the Commissary, whose business it is to take care of those matters,
orders the dead body to be carried to the Chatelet. But before he does so, the
Parents of each of them desired him to search the house; which they had no
sooner done, but they found the Vintner dead on the ground. The shriekings and
lamentations are doubled on every side, and none could imagine the author of
these Villainies.

So these two Rascals went clearly. off with these spoils, and lay continually
in Bawdy-houses, till they had consumed it all, and then were fore'd to put
themselves on new shifts. Postill had a rich Uncle, a Citizen of Paris, who
knew not of the ill courses of this his Nephew, giving him always a favorable
reception in his house. He finding all his Money gone, so contrived his
business, that he at last got the Key of the Trunk in which his Aunt used to
store up her Money: she not imagining that any of the house had it, much less
her Nephew, caused a new one to be fitted to the Lock. He being willing to make
use of an occasion when offered, watches one Sunday till they were gone out of
doors to Church, leaving no body at home, but a little Girl their Kinswoman and
the Servant-maid: Postill seeing his Uncle and Aunt safe at Church, returns,
where he sindes the Maid washing the dishes. He who knew the customs of the
house hastens her to the Sermon, telling her that 'twas already begun: she no
doubting his designs, believes him and so they go out together, leaving the
little Girl at home: Postill follows her to Church, where being entered, he
presently whips out and returns, knocking at the door, which was presently
opened, telling her, that he had left his Beads behind him; whereupon he
marches up stairs, and pretends to look 'em, and opens the Trunk with his Key,
and takes out a little bag, wherein was Two hundred Crowns, and so goes out of
the Chamber, putting every thing in its place, as if he had never been there.

Six or seven weeks after, his Aunt having occasion to look into the Trunk, and
missing this bag, was much amazed, telling her Husband; who did not know whom
to impeach, except a certain necessitous person that frequented the house: who
knowing himself innocent, and yet not withstanding accused as guilty, did not
know what to do, but takes notice of all comers and goers; and at last was
given to understand by some of Postell's Comrades, that he spent his money like
a Prince, and that his Incomes would not answer those Expenses: whereupon he
informs his Uncle; who inquired narrowly into his Nephews life, and found what
was told him was too true: But not being willing to shame him, as being his
Kinsman, gave him wholesome and severe Admonitions, and withal, notice to his
Father and Mother. The Father being much afflicted at this his Sons deportment,
came to Paris, and would have had his Uncle severely punish him. His Uncle
being angry at the loss, would not expose him; and thinking that he might one
day be reduced, he promising an amendment to his Father, was received again
into favor: but being not able to live without his accustomed pleasures,
turned to his Debauch again, addicting himself more than ever to his old
Cronies; among whom it was at length resolved to get a fresh Stock, for their
Purses had been a long time empty: They thereupon take a house, under pretense
of making it a house for Entertainment, where they showed themselves very
courteous and noble; so that a great many young Students, newly come to town,
visited them. They had on their parts returned all the civility imaginable,
until they had found out who had the most money; and their usual course was to
draw them along with them to their house; where being entered, after the usual
Compliment, set themselves to play: The money being laid down on the table, one
of the Comrades, seeming to come in as a stranger, would snatch all and run
away.

One of the Gang, a great Debauche, being not able to continue his courses
without supplies, resolves with himself on a Murder: Wherefore he goes one
morning to one Mr. Gantier, dwelling in Paris; a man of unblamable
Conversation, and who had been Tutor to this Scholar, and resolves to kill him
and plunder his house. Coming therefore to the door of this Gantier, the
Chambermaid, who knew him, let him in; where entering, he finds Gantier abed.
This good old man asked him how he did, and what progress he made in his
Studies; and for answer he stabbed him with his Dagger. This Servant which let
him in was a wellbred maid, and Kin to Gantier, and kept his house, and who was
promised in marriage to a good honest Tradesman; she coming into the Chamber
and hearing the noise, had her throat cut by this Villain: which done, he opens
the Trunks, and finds there Plate, and some small matter (...) Money, and so
departs. But think in to conceal his horrid fact, sets fire o^ the house,
hoping that the house be^ing in a flame, these two Corp^ would be consumed: but
the fire b^ the Neighbors diligence was p^ out, and these two poor creatur^
were found most cruelly murthere^ The Villain finds his mind so harrass'^ and
tormented by the thoughts (...) what he had done, that he could no^ by any
means get into his Lodging being laid hold on by some Neighbors who knew that
he frequente^ Mr. Gantier's house, not knowin^ though that he was the Author o^
these Villainies; but being taken there was the things before-nam'^ found about
him; and being had be^ fore a Justice, he was committed, an^ within a short
time hanged and burn^ at la Greve.

As soon as ever Postell and his Companions had notice of his being taken they
get as fast as they could out of the City; but this our Rascal could not leave
the Town without some Rogues trick. He was wont to be often at a Tavern near
his Lodging, and was usually respected as one of the best Guests; which he
being sensible of, makes bold to request of the Vintner to lend him his horse
for two or three days, pretending to go see his Father: which was lent him
without difficulty. Postell being thus gone from Paris, goes to Beauvais, where
he sells the horse to an honest Merchant; who thinking he had gotten an honest
bargain, trucks him away for another more to his mind. He with whom he had
exchanged came some while after to Paris, where thinking to sell the horse, he
was known by the Inne-keeper who had lent him to Postell: whereupon he seizes
the horse, and proves that he was his. The other returns to Beauvais, where the
Merchant who had bought him of Postell was forced to return the money. Postell
had shifted his abode, and wa^ marched to Abbeville; and comin^ near to a Wood,
it being late, and h^ having neither Sword nor Stick to defend himself, met
with two Thieves who being exceeding earnest afte^ their Prey, thought they had
foun^ what they had looked for, seeing Postell. He being confident enough i^
himself, would not retreat, but keeping on his way, comes up to him, who
demanded of him his money, swearing Damn 'um and Sink 'um, that if he did not
presently deliver, he was a^ dead man. He being not accustomed to give but to
take, could not relish this Summons; but without being a whit afraid, made
answer he had none; and at the same time laying suddenly his hand on one of the
Thieves Swords, who stood not well on his guard, he wrench'd it out of his
hand, giving him with it such a blow on the arm, that the pain took away all
sense: which having done, ^e sets upon the other, who less va^ant than his
Companion, betakes himself to his heels; but Postell pur^'d him so nearly that
he made him ^ield himself to his mercy, who gave ^im his life, after severe
checks for ^etting upon his Master. He returns ^o the other whom he had first
struck, ^hreatning to kill him if he delivered ^ot his money. He would have
excused himself, as having none; pro^nising him, that if he would go along with
him to the first house after they had come out of the Wood, he would help him
to some. Postell not thinking that the other was laying an Ambush for him,
follows him; so that having went through the Wood, he enters with this Thief
into an Inn, the Master whereof was a mere Rogue, and of correspondence with
these Rescals.

Being very well used by this Inne-keeper, who said he was kin to this Thief
who had conducted him thithe^ he receives Ten Crowns; and professing plainly
what he was, he wa^ the more kindly entertained, it being agreed he should stay
and dwell there and have every thing necessary, and go partners in all booty.

A while after this, a Gentleman o^ Picardy, a very discreet and valian^ person
as any in his time, returned from England, after having staid some time at
Calais; and having taken the Road of Amiens, he rides through^ Abbeville; where
he would not stay being willing to reach farther: so that he went through this
Wood, and wa^ forced, by the nights approach, to pu^ in at this Inn.

Being in his Chamber, after having had every thing fitting, he perceive the
Servant to weep as she was making his bed, and was secretly informed by her of
the danger he was in. Amongst other things, she told him. 'Twas the
Inne-keepers oustome to ring a Bell, at the sound of which ^veral Rogues came
running; when ^esently one of them feigning to be ^ervant to the Inn, comes to
the Chamber where the Guests are, and ^aking as if he would snuff the Can^le,
would put it out: upon which ^he other Villains would enter and ^ll upon them,
and so most cruelly ^urther them, there being none that ^ould escape them.

This Gentleman considering with himself what to do, causes the Maid ^o bring
him a Lanthorn, and puts a Candle lighted in it, and hiding his ^anthorn under
a stool, lays ready his Arms, and stands upon his guard.

When scarcely had he sat himself down, but a great boorish fellow en^ers, who
very officiously, as Servant of the house, so snuffs the Candle that he snuffs
it out; but the Gentleman causes presently his man to bring out the Lanthorn,
repels the Villains, who came pesle mesle upon him, killing some of them, and
puts the others to flight; seizes on the Inne-keeper, and delivers him into the
hands of Justice.

Postell saves himself, and returns again to Paris, and lodges with a
Gentleman, a stranger, in the Suburbs o^ St. German. This person had a
considerable sum of Money, together with a great Chain of gold, and several
Rings, which he ever carried about him. Our Rascal, willing to ge^ them from
him, so prevailed with him, that he got him to walk with him toward the Wood
of Vincennes* where, being amongst the Vines, he sets upon him, and having
seized on him unawares, he cuts two of his fingers off his hand, and gives him
two stabs with a Dagger into his back, thinking that he had killed him. Thi^
done, he takes the Money and Rings and returns to the City. The Gentleman (who
pretended himself worse than he was) makes a shift to rise and crawl to the
House of a Peasant near ^y, who took what care he could of ^im.

From thence he was carried as soon as ^ver he could bear it, to Paris, where ^e
sends for the Provost of the Island, and relates what passed, describing ^o
him, as near as he could, the person; he made search for him about ^ll the
University, and was at last ^et withal as he would have leaped ^own from the
College of de Lysieux ^to the Ditches.

He was carried to the Chatelet, ^here being put on the Rack, he con^esseth
these and several other Villa^ies, for which he was Sentenced ^o be broken on
the Wheel; but, ^owsoever it came to pass, he died ^x hours (whether he
poisoned himself or no, or by some other means) before the Officers came to
fetch him ^o Execution.

CHAP. VIII. The Life and Death of Vero^ born at Compeigne in France
NOt far from the place where the Rivers of Oire and of Ene joy^ together that
they may come in the same course to lose their Names i^ the Seine, there stands
a pleasant an^ stately City called Compeigne, famous for its Antiquity, having
bee^ built by Charles le Chauve or the Bauld, taking from him its name (...)
Carlopolis. This City has all the advantages desirable; for it enjoys most
excellent Air, and admirab^ Prospect, being every way most ple^ santly seated;
on the one side she (...) watered with the River Oire, which separateth her by
a great and spacio^ Meadow, bordered with fruitful ^ines and all sorts of
Grain: On the ^ther side half a League distant it ^ath a large and level Forest.

The Kings of France were wont (...) divert themselves in this City, by ^ason
of its convenient situation ^r Hunting, especially in the said ^orest, which
may be justly said to ^e one of the best in all France.

'Twas in this Forest and thereabout ^here Veron played his Devilish ^ranks;
and as an other Antheus ^nged and ransacked all the neigh^ouring parts; there
being scarcely ^y one who durst be so bold as to ^eet him, so cruel and
barbarous was ^e. It will not be here amiss to ^eak something of his Parentage
and ^xtraction, before we relate any of ^is horrid and abominable actions.

He came then of one of the best ^amilies of Compeigne; but gave himself over
from his Youth to Cruel^y and Rapines, and all manner of Licentiousness; yet
nevertheless, bei^ born of honest Parents, he light (...) a good Match in the
said City; b^ alas! when we leave God he leav^ us, and suffers all our Affairs
to d^ cline.

Veron had no sooner entered in^ possession of his Estate, but began immediately
to abuse his Wife, a^ to pawn and make away all the^ had, that he might keep
lewd co^ pany, and be continually at Taver^ and Alehouses; this course of Li^
lasted not long, drunkenness being Labyrinth, in which those who a^ plunged,
cannot get out when the^ please.

Having spent some years after the sort, he found himself at length stri^ of
all things necessary, so that his Wiv^ friends would have 'em-parted, as we^
for the present want he had reduce^ her to, as for the injuries he con^ nually
did her, pawning not one^ his own Clothes, but hers likewi^ that he might have
wherewithal to ^rnish his drunken appetite: which ^roceeding was not a little
hard of ^igestion to her, who being as yet ^oung, was not a little troubled to
^e her self used after this manner.

All the admonitions his Parents ^sed were to no purpose, being so ^abituated
in Vice and naughtiness. from that very time he despised all ^ood Counsel, and
began to range the Woods, being sometimes eight days before he returned home;
so that ^e was often held for dead, by reason ^f his so long absence.

There was scarcely any thing else ^alk'd of but Thieves in that Forest; and
scarcely durst any one pass by ^here, being sure if they did, to be ^obb'd:
sometimes he was on that ^ide which lies toward Pierrefonds, and other times
toward Verberie. There was not a Hole or Cavern in ^he Forest he knew not:
Sometimes ^e would take the Field, and vaulted on the other side the Water, a^
bout the Borders of Vernelle Rem^ and other circumjacent places: An^ that which
gave the most admiration was, that having committed an^ Murder or Robbery in a
place, h^ would be seen two or three hours a^ ter at least eight or nine
Leagues o^ thence.

This person was of a great siz^ being a huge massy Fellow, and, lik^ another
Hercules, would by hi^ strength do things beyond concep^ tion. One day being
pursued in the City by the Justices Officers, wh^ were resolved to have him
examine^ concerning his way of living, he ca^ himself from the Bridge into the
Ri^ ver near where the Boats are hale^ up the Water; the Tide running i^ that
place with such a rapid swift^ ness, that when a man could not swim^ it would
carry him half a Leagu^ without stirring himself. Veron cas^ himself in there,
and (which wa^ never before seen) he was so strong, that maugre the force of
the River, he made up and ascended the Key. This action was admired by every
one, as indeed it might well.

The Woods were the ordinary places of his retreat; he lurked there all the
daytime, and was often seen on a Tree with his Harquebuss watching the
Passengers. It is reported for certain he killed in one day six Merchants, who
were all of them returning from a Fair not far distant thence. In short, all
the parts thereabouts trembled with fear at his cruelties: he on the other side
when he was flusht, returned to Compeigne, and no one durst be so bold as to
affront him, carrying on always his business so slyly, that 'twas impossible to
find certain proofs against him.

It happened about the year 1609, when France was calmed by a long and happy
Peace, that people from all parts, as it is the custom, came to the general
Match of Shooting, every one striving who should bear away the Prize.

Veron being a man who loved to show himself, would not let slip this occasion,
resolving with himself to make one amongst them; but that for which he was most
concerned was, that he had no Money, and not one of his Relations would lend
him any, being by them well enough known to be a bad Husband; notwithstanding
which, he was resolved to furnish himself some how or other, imagining people
would reflect on him not appearing on so eminent an occasion; and seeing on the
other side he could borrow none, he resolved in his mind to get some by force.

It is to be remarked, that about a quarter of a League beyond Compeigne, upon
the side of the Wood, near the great Road which leads to Soissons, there is a
little Hermitage, called the Cross of the holy Sign, where there lives
continually Hermits who come begging to the City: There is likewise a very
decent Chapel, where many people, whose occasions lie that way, turn in to
make their Prayers.

In this Hermitage dwelt then two good old Fathers; one of them was called
Frater Claudus, the other's name I do not remember. Now Veron was wont very
often, after he had been weary with ranging the Wood, to retire there. They
ever gave him entrance when he knocked at their Gate, and also imparted to him
what they had gotten in the City. He had frequented this Hermitage for at least
two years before this business of the Shooting-match was talked of; so that
notwithstanding all the bad reports which were continually noised of him, these
Fathers were not afraid of him, and ceased not to receive him whenever he
listed to put in with them. But the easy access which they gave him, lost 'em:
For frequenting there so often, he came at length to know they both had Money;
he would not howsoever have harmed them, could he otherways have effected his
business; but finding himself urged by want of Money, and knowing he must
contribute his part to the Prize, which was to a very rich one, and that very
speedily; he resolves thereupon to rob these Hermits, and take from them their
Money, but he knew not what means to use that people might not mistrust him:
but behold what he did! one night about eight of the clock, 'twas about
Whitson^ide, when the days were at longest, as he was about to go out of the
City, he asks of two several persons what a clock 'twas; he was told it was
eight; upon which he strikes into a little Street that leads out of the Gate,
and was so quick, that scarcely was he half an hour in his way to the
Hermitage, where he enters, no body without seeing him go in, where he
addresses himself to the Eldest of the two Hermits, (for the other was gone to
draw Water out of a Well hard by there) and demands his Purse. The good old
Senior thought he was in jest, not making any reckoning of what he said; but
was immediately astonished finding himself on the Ground by a blow given him by
this Parricide, seconding it by another with his Poignard about his
left-breast: the Hermit feeling himself thus struck, showed him the place where
his Money lay; the other redoubles notwithstanding his blows* piercing him to
the Heart, and so was dispatched without any farther noise; for Veron held his
Foot on his Throat; which having done, he takes his Money, amounting to about
three hundred Livers.

Frater Claudus in the mean time returns from the Well with his Bucket of
Water, not in the least suspecting what had happened, and sees Veron standing
before the Wicket of the Hermitage: being entered, he sees likewise his
Companion on the Ground, and began to cry out; but Veron made up to him with a
Countenance witnessing fury, and with his Dagger struck him in the Brea^,
laying him likewise half dead wallowing in his own Blood on the ground, who
never spoke any other words than these; Ah, Veron, thou kill'st me; is it
possible my Age cannot stop the Fury which boils in thy Soul? These words
howsoever could not hinder this Tyrant (for so I call him, seeing he betook
himself to two such religious persons) but that he pierced his Heart at the
second stroke.

This Murder, or rather Sacrilege, being committed, he gave himself the
leisure to light two Torches which were in the Chapel, and laid them both
strecht out one upon another, setting the two Torches at their Feet: then
charging himself with the Money, shuts the Gate, and throws the Keys into the
Field, and returns to Compeigne: And that which was most to be admired was,
that he did all this in one quarter of an hour; so that he came into the City
at half an hour after eight, without any bodies having perceived him, except a
Baker's Boy, who coming through the Woods, and passing by this Hermitage, heard
one of these Fathers cry out, Ah Veron thou kill'st me. And that he might not
be thought to have done this, he came immediately to the same persons of whom
he had demanded half an hour before what a clock it was, asking them the same
question, who answered him 'twas half an hour past eight. Veron did this, that
he might have Witness, if there should be occasion that he had been in Town
when the act was done.

This Tragedy being acted afte^ this manner, he returns to his Lodging, not
letting his Wife know wha^ an abominable villainy he came from committing. Two
days are pas^ without any bodies taking notice o^ the Hermits not coming to the
City: Veron however failed not to wall^ about the Town, as assuredly as ever.
At length some devout Women going to visit the Hermits, found the Doors of the
Hermitage, as also of the Chapel shut, contrary to custom; upon which they
began to suspect something; which suspicion nevertheless was suspended, being
told by some there by, they were probably gone out in the Country nevertheless
there was one among the rest who advised the Door to be broke open, that they
were perhaps sick, or some other sad disaster had befallen them. This Counsel
was put in execution, ^ausing two Smiths to come from the Town to-break open
the Doors; which being done, they found the two Hermits stretched out dead upon
the Ground; at the sight of which they were struck with horror and amazement:
they searched the Corpse, and found the Wounds near the Heart, the Bodies
beginning already to putrify.

Which being known in the City, they were all astonished at so dreadful a
relation, flocking to see this woeful spectacle: Veron came amongst the rest,
and made show of no small sorrow for the loss of these two good Fathers,
cursing with a hundred imprecations those who had done this wicked fact: They,
says he, must certainly have a great stock of Cruelty and Hardheartedness, who
have executed so execrable a perfidiousness to have killed two so Religious and
Devout Personages, even at the very Evening of their days: they must certainly,
says he, be possessed with diabolical fury; speaking which words, he could not
so much palliate his fact, but the motions of his Soul were apparent in his
Face; the nearer he approached to the Hermitage, the more he found himself
agitated by, I know not what kind of chilliness and fear, which caused those
who accompanied him not a little to suspect him. This suspicion took deeper
root in the minds of the Assistants, when he came before the Corpse of the two
poor Hermits; for at the same time the Corpse, which were dry and withered,
having bled all the Blood in their Veins, began then to bleed again a fresh;
whereupon all the people began unanimously to cry out that there must be one in
the company concerned, seeing the dead Corpse so plainly called for vengeance;
at which, every one cast their Eyes on Veron: nevertheless by his Meine he
endeavored to put by ^he suspicion conceived of him; but his Conscience
feeling it self tormented within him, suffered him not ^o rest, but as a
Vulture was incessantly a gnawing his Heart, making outwardly appear the inward
resentments of his Soul.

The Officers came to take away the Bodies; during which all the Citizens cast
their Eyes on Veron; his frequenting the Hermitage not a little strengthening
their suspicion; yet durst they not immediately accuse him, there being not any
who could come in as a Witness against him.

Their suspicion of him daily increasing, there was scarcely any thing else
talked of, or concluded on, but that he was the Author. There was all enquiries
imaginable made to find out something to strengthen them in this their
conjecture; and at last the Baker's Boy, of whom we have before spoken,
attested that he heard about eight a clock at night the Hermit, who cried out,
Veron, tho^ kill'st me; upon which simple deposition, and upon the joint
conjectures of the people, it was resolved on to apprehend him; but the
difficulty was how to seize on hi^ without blows, for should he have the least
notice, he would not have stai^ long at Compeigne; (although h^ said since
that, he could never have imagined they would dare to la^ hold on him upon so
frivolous conjectures) nevertheless they appointed out the day and manner of
taking him, making a match with him t^ play at Tennis (a Game very ordinary in
Picardy) just before the Prison-gate.

The day appointed being come two or three Citizens came to him asking him
whether he would g^ out to take some recreation; he being a man who was
mightily for Company, agreed; whereupon they walked together till they came
over against the great Gate of the Prison, where they set to their Game: they
who should seze on him, failed not in great numbers to appear there, lest any
resistance should happen, for he was exceeding strong and robust, and would
have given them their hands full, had he had but notice of their design. As he
was in the midst of his Game, there was a Sergeant who trundled slily a Ball
into the Entry of the Prison, praying Veron to step for it; whereupon he goes,
but was astonished seeing himself set upon by twelve or fourteen Officers, who
charged him in the Kings Name to yield himself: Veron was not a little amazed,
seeing himself taken after that manner, being ready to burst with rage and
fury, running about the Prison like a madman, seeking something to do mischief
withal; and to say the truth, they who laid hands on him had enough to do with
him; yet notwithstanding all his efforts, he was forced to contain himself
within the Prisonwalls, being loaded with Irons.

In the mean time they draw'd up his Process, there coming from all parts those
which deposed against him, being accused of diverse Thefts and Robberies
committed both in the Woods and elsewhere; but not one of them could say any
thing against him touching the Murder he was cast into Prison for, excepting
the Baker's Boy, who affirmed that upon such a day he had heard, as he passed
by the Hermitage, the forementioned Words. He for his defense brought in two
Citizens of good repute, who affirmed they had seen him in the Town at eight a
clock, and at half an hour after eight; withal adding, 'twas impossible he
could perform such an Enterprise in so little a time: this made them all at a
stand, putting them in doubt what to think of it. Several of the Court seeing
no sufficient proof, went from their Seats, and would be no farther concerned,
fearing lest they should give a wrong judgment through want of certain
knowledge, knowing not what to think of it. Likelihood indeed there was, but no
sufficient proof; yet howsoever, finding they could get nothing from him but a
bare negation, and that the tortures of the Rack could not make him confess
this crime, they proceeded notwithstanding upon probabilities, and the other
undeniable crimes which he was proved guilty of, for which he was sentenced to
be broken on the Wheel, which did not a little daunt him; for there was no
appeal; he must on force undergo it, though it went to the Heart of him, being
in the flower of his age. There was sent to him a Confessor to prepare him for
death; but he would by no means hear on it: for although condemned, he flattered
himself with the hope he should not die this bout; but seeing there was no
respit given him, they endeavored by degrees to dispose him for his passage.

This man had an undaunted Spirit, and could not be brought to the belief he
should die in the flower of his age: He threatened and calumniated his Judges,
bidding defiance to Heaven and Earth, foaming with rage and despair, fury
having so much possessed him that scarcely the Priest his Confessor durst
approach him.

He at length confessed to the Priest; but when he came to speak to him
concerning his murdering of the Hermits, he cast it back with a thousand Oaths
and imprecations: saying that in truth he had committed several Robberies; but
touching the Hermits, so horrid a thing never so much as once entered into his
mind.

It will not be perhaps impertinent to speak a word or two concerning ^is
Death, being as tragical as his Life was, and strange and horrible.

He was led then at five of the clock (...) the Evening to the place of
Exe^ution, there being such a multitude (...) people who came from all parts ^o
see him, that the whole City was ^lled with them. Veron being come on the
Scaffold, which was set up before St. Cornille's Church, showed outwardly in
his countenance the disdainful haughtiness which boiled inwardly in his mind.

'Twas observed during the time ^e was in Prison, notwithstanding the ^rons on
his Legs, he would turn and ^hrow himself more nimbly than another man could
who had none on: but here 'twas otherwise; for as soon as ever he was on the
Scaffold, he walked about it with his Arms across, taking ^en or a dozen turns
thereon, look^ng more like a man despairingly ^ad, than one who had made his
Peace with God, or who had a becom^ ing apprehension of death; Choler ha^
painted on his Front a kind of da^ ring boldness. When his Sentenc^ was
reading, he listened to it with matchless gravity, stroaking his Mu^ staches, as
a person who cared little for Death, and who believed h^ should not die that
day: and indee^ had he found the Bar with which he was to be broken, the
Execution ner and others too would have bee^ in danger to have lost their Lives
for it angered him so much to leave^ so young and robust as he was, thi^ World,
that he would have hew'^ his way through Rocks and Mountains to have escaped.

But in the reading of the Sentence, when he heard he was condemned for having
assassinated an^ barbarously murdered two poor Hermits, he cried aloud three
times, tha^ the Judge lied, and that he was s^ far from doing any such thing,
tha^ i^ never so much as came once into (...) thoughts.

There were two men sent for on ^rpose for to finish his Execution, ^om he
warned not to come near (...), and that he would never suffer him^f to be laid on
the Wheel by ^e: and to make appear that he ^d great strength, he was seen nine
^es one after another down on the ^ffold, and the Executioners upon (...);
notwithstanding which, he got ^p from them, and every time he got ^p he began
his walks, cursing the day (...) which he was born, wishing a ^ousand plagues
to fall upon them ^ho had condemned him, and espe^ally cursing and damning the
Judge ^ho pronounced his Sentence; be^g mad chiefly, amongst the rest, that ^e
should be the first this Judge, ^eing newly made, ever had begun ^ithal. At
length, seeing he could ^ot escape, and that he must die, he ^ields, but with
much ado; for his vigorous youth could not suffer (...) self to be blossomed so
soon.

He was laid on the Cross then, o^ which he was broken alive: h^ Heart of
steel, which could not b^ moved before, after having endure^ exceeding great
torments, began t^ bethink it self; wherefore he cal^ his Confessor, to whom it
is thoug^ he declared the whole matter. An^ so, after a long struggling with
Death he was at length overcome by him.

A True and Pleasant NOVEL, As it really happened At Roan in France.
POverty brings oftentimes great alterations and changes in our Humors;
Necessity pouring in a great deal of constraint in our Passions, even so far,
that a man lets himself be carried away to the commission of those things which
otherways would be looked upon by him as infamous, if Necessity constrained not
to embrace them. There has been ever seen them, who being constrained by their
Poverty, although that inwardly they have acknowledged their faults, yet
however have suffered themselves to be carried away to do what they could and
of this the History which write will give credit, wherein wi^ be seen how many
and great evi^ are begotten and brought up b^ Poverty; and that it is not witho^
reason that every one with such ca^ and fear avoids it, drawing with (...) such
dangers and misfortunes.

In the City of Roan, chief Sea^ port, and one of the most famou^ Havens of
France, lived a person whom I shall call Meris, whose you^ promised no small
fortune, as havin^ great correspondencies in Englan^ and Spain, by means of
several Navi^ gations and Voyages which he ha^ made sundry times there; but For
tune changed quickly the good coun^ tenance which she had at first shewe^ him
two years after he was married about which time he fell into such mean and poor
condition, that scarce^ ly could he get enough to subsi^ on.

Variable are the effects of For^ne; such a one thinks himself to ^ay in
surety, being shaded with all ^e Happiness and Prosperity that an^ be hoped for
in this world, and (...) a trice he finds himself thrown ^own more low than
ever before ^e was high; such is the inconstan^y of all things here below,
which ^ake growth and nourishment in Chance and Change: for amongst all those
who walk under the cope of Heaven, there is not any one can ^uely say he is
exempted from the Tribute which we owe to this fickle Goddess, she engraving
her Laws upon Empires and on Republics the most flourishing and Triumphant.

Meris found her favorable in the beginning, but in the end he was constrained
to assert, that the Rose ^s not found but amongst Thorns and Briers. All his
loss came from a Ship, wherein was the greatest part of his Estate, which by
means o^ mighty Tempests was cast away upon the Coast of England.

This Tempest was the first stroke that Fortune gave to his happiness, which
since was seconded by many others; so that poor Meris saw himself in a short
time reduced to the lowest fate that could be: nevertheless Fortune could not
shake his courage, nor the generous resolution of his Wife, who was called
Helene. These two Hearts were insensible to the strokes of Fortune, although
reduced to such meanness: The constancy of this married couple was not a thing
the least remarkable; for they lived 10 years together after this sort the best
that they could; but to say truly, all this space they could not really be
said to live, but to lead a lingering death.

Now although that Chance had spoiled both the one and the other of all
temporal Commodities, yet Nature howsoever was pleased to bestow with
prodigality every thing that ^as beautiful and comely on He^ne.

She was an Abridgement and E^itome of all the perfections desira^le in a
Woman. She had the Mein, ^he Order, and the Port altogether ^oble. In short,
nothing was wan^ing her that goes to the making up of a complete Creature: but
that which was most admirable in this Woman was, that she loved her Husband so
greatly, that notwithstanding all the Addresses which many of Roan made to her,
and even of the richest, who promised her Money enough, yet she would never be
false to her Husband; but as one deaf to all their amorous complaints and
desires, she universally despised them, and made a flout at their Prayers; in
which Meris saw himself happy in his Misfortune, and could not choose but prize
her as she deserved.

Amongst all those who showed he^ most affection, and who gave greates^ proofs
of it, there was a certai^ Lawyer, whom I shall call Carildus^ that I may not
trouble the repose o^ his Ashes, and bring afresh again the^ day of his death
in the memory o^ his Friends. This Lawyer was a person come of a good stock,
and had as well by his Birth as Practice got a very considerable Estate.

He was one of the chief who with most affection solicited Helene; but never
could obtain his desire, his attempts being all of them vain and unprofitable:
For her admirable Chastity was the Buckler and Target on which were broken all
the blows of the amorous Lawyer; all his treats served him to no purpose in
this business; which having at last known, he would employ the Rhetoric of a
Neighbor of his, one who likewise solicited to as little purpose as himself.

Helene had all this while dissem^ed and concealed their importuni^es, without
making her Husband ^cquainted; but perceiving that their impudence increased
every day ^ore and more, she resolved no lon^er to forbear, but to let her
Hus^and know of it; whereupon one ^ight she discourses him after this manner.

My dear Meris, says she, you know ^ow entire my affection has been to (...)
since the day we first met: you cannot but know it; and the great love I have
continually bore you may serve as a sufficient proof. I am im^ortuned by three
or four persons who attempt mine Honor; amongst others by Carildus, whom you
know; he endeavors to shake my Constancy; but his attempts have been hitherto
unprofitable, and ever shall be. Far be it from me that I should ever do this
thing, and so falsify my conjugal Vow^; Hell it self shall open and swallow me
up, rather than I will be disloyal: And it is for this I desire your Counsel how
we shall be rid of all these importunities.

Meris, who attentively lent his ear to these words, knowing that his Wife bore
him a great and singular affection, and that on the other side she would never
deceive him, made answer, My dear, I know not which way 'twill be possible for
me to recompense the greatness of the affection and fidelity which you on your
part have ever showed me. Yet nevertheless you see to what Fortune has reduced
us, and how greatly we are tormented with Poverty; wherefore I am of advice
that you pretend to Carildus that you will content his desires, provided there
be some considerable sum of Money: as for the rest, let me alone, I Will find
means to disentangle my self and be rid of him.

Helene, who heard her Husband speak after this manner, began to ca^ss Carildus
with her Eyes more than ^er. He perceiving this unusual and ^xtraordinary good
will, as he interpre^ed it, joyful above measure, persuades himself that 'twas
best beating the Iron whilst it was hot, and that he could ^ot hope for a bad
issue in what he ^romised himself; for he saw that ^igour wherewith his desires
were wont to be opposed, altogether laid aside, and his love reciprocally
received of his Mistress; wherefore he advertises his Confident, who
participated already with him in his joy.

Carildus familiarizeth himself every day more and more with Helene, and he
thinks himself at the top of Felicity. In the end, she who feigned in the
beginning to be drawn by his promises, began to lay aside more and more her
averseness; saying, that not only her Poverty constrained his reception, but
that he had likewise acquired such an ad vantage in her favor, that she could
not live without seeing of him.

These dissimulations so wrough^ upon Carildus, that he parted not from her
till he had gotten her consent, and knew the day and hour in which he should
come to her, having promised her 500 Crowns. The day come, Carildus failed not
to tarry at a Church-door, where the night before was given the assignation,
where he found his Mistress in expectation of him.

When scarcely had they seen one another, but Carildus asks of Helene if her
Husband was at home, and when she expected his return; to which she answered,
that he would not be at home this eight days; For he has, says she, some
business which has called him to Paris, where^ore you may come to me with
security.

Carildus, who on the other side burned and consumed in his own flame, gives
her a Purse full of Gold, and immediately comes to her Lodging, where Meris had
hid himself in order to the finishing of his Enterprise; for he would together
with the Money have the Clothes too of Carildus.

As they were entered, there was a good Fire made, and the Lawyer began already
to undress himself, when Meris came with a Club and discharges it on his Head,
felling him with the blow to the Ground; and redoubling his blows, he never
left striking of him till he had killed him.

Helene, not thinking that he would ever have killed him, was very much
astonished in seeing him lie dead at her Feet: her Husband howsoever assured
her, telling her, that she should not trouble her self, fore would so order it,
that it should never come to be known that he killed him: Wherefore, bidding
her go to bed, he takes the dead Lawyer on his Back, and enters directly by a
Backdoor (being well acquainted with the House) into the Lawyer's Lodging,
where, the Night and Sleep favoring of him, he immediately discharges the
Corpse in the place where people used to ease themselves; and so placed him on
the Seat, that whosoever should come in there, would judge that he had died in
this place and posture.

Now the day before, Carildus told his Companion all the affair, and how Helene
had promised him access into her Lodging: It happened therefore that this
Confident of his, rising at Midnight by reason of the Gripes wherewith he had
been for these four or five days troubled, as he came to the said place to ease
himself, he perceived that 'twas occupi'd by Carildus; wherefore he was some
time (being not willing to disturb him) a staying for him; but seeing that he
came not out, he goes to him, pulling him by the Sleeve, which made the Corpse
fall down at his Feet.

This man being much astonished, takes his flight, and knows not what could be
said in this matter; but being at length assured, he comes back again, and
seeing Carildus dead, he doubts presently that he had been betrayed in Helene's
house to Meris her Husband, whom he had known of a long time to be a man of his
hands. Wherefore for fear lest he should be accused that he had murdered him,
(for he was seen to rise) he takes him up on his Back, with intention to carry
him before Meris's Door. Hitherto we have seen the mischief which Poverty does
bring with it, instigating men to the doing of those things which otherwise
would be abhorred by them. Let us see now what happened to Carildus after his
death: for there is Plaisantrie and Adventures perhaps never before heard or
thought of.

Carildus's Companion having taken up the Corpse on his Back, went and placed
it at the same House it came out of, setting it upright against Meris's Door;
then returns to his Lodging without any bodies taking notice of him. Helene, by
chance too, through default of Nature, would go out of doors, it being about
half an hour after Midnight, but was very much astonished that she had no
sooner opened it, but the dead Body fell into the House. She cries out being
affrighted, and tells her Husband that the Lawyer was come back again to their
Lodging; upon which Meris rising up in haste out of his sleep, assures her,
telling her she should not be troubled at the dead, protesting that he would
carry him so far that he should never find his way back again. Wherefore he
takes him up again the second time; and as he goes along the Street to carry
him to the River, he hears a great noise, coming, as he thought, from the end
of the Street; whereupon, fear, which before had no effect on him, seizes on
his Courage, making him dread the just punishment he deserved; which made him
stand up close in a Street which went across, that he might see them whom he
heard coming, and shun their meeting: but his fear quickly changed into joy;
for them from whom he heard that noise were night-Adventurers, who just came
from stealing two Flitches of Bacon from out of the House of a Baker named
Philip duBois. As these Fellows passed along by this Lane where was Meris, who
had got under a Bulk, he heard them talking that there was a man drew good Wine
in that Street, and that they would leave their Bacon somewhere, and see
whether they could make 'um rise. The proposal was agreed to, and they put
their Sack into the descent of a Cellar, covering it with some Straw which they
by chance there met with; and there left it. Meris, who had observed all this
from his Bulk, imagines that he needs not go any further to unload himself;
wherefore he makes up to the place where the Thieves had laid the Sack, and
having opened it and felt Bacon in it, he takes it out, and puts in lieu of it
the dead Lawyer, and returns to his Lodging, where he finds his Wife up, and
who was so concerned at what had unexpectedly befallen her, that she could not
(so much was she affrighted at what had passed) go to bed.

But when she perceived that he came back again, she thought she should have
died immediately with fear; for the imagined that her Husband could not be rid
of the dead Corpse: but he quickly appeased when he showed the Bacon, and gave
^er an account of his adventure; upon which they go to bed again, ^eing not a
little pleased at the dou^le booty they had got, which was ^ot discovered till
a little while after.

Come we now to our Thieves, who by and by will find work e^ough. Whilst that
Meris was re^urning to his Lodging, they had got to the house, drinking stoutly
upon the account of their Merchandise, which they did intend to chaffer away to
the Vintner. When they had drank sufficiently, they reckon, and for payment
tell the Vintner that they had a good quantity of Bacon to sell him, and he
might pay himself out of it. The Vintner re^lied, that he was not used to buy a
^ig in a Poke; wherefore he bid them let him see it, and then he ^new what he
had to say to them.

The Thieves then go to the place where they had left their Sack; and having
there found it, not at all dreaming of the exchange, they take it up, fancying
it though to be somewhat heavier than it seemed to be before; but of that they
took no farther notice, and brought it straight to the House where they were
drinking; which they had no sooner opened, but the Vintner sees poor Carildus's
Head peeping out of the Sack: whereupon he begins presently to cry out upon
them (for he knew the person) Oh! villains, what have you done? cries he, You
have killed the Sieur Carildus, and are so impudent to bring him here to me to
sell him for Bacon. The Thieves, more astonished than he, stood as men amazed
staring one upon another, and knew not what Countenance to keep: the other
cried out still against them, threatening to have them soon laid by the heels,
and to send for the friends of the defunct. They on the other side desired him
to have patience, and not to speak of it; for they knew where they had this
booty: and to accuse them of intended theft they might, but not of murder; but
howsoever they would carry the Corpse back again where they had it; which they
did, wondering and tempesting at this their rencounter, asking one another what
they thought of it, whether this was not a strange Metamorphosis, and how 'twas
possible for them to be so much mistaken as to take a Lawyer for Bacon; which
saying, they come to the Bakers House, where getting up to the place from
whence they had taken the Bacon, they there place the Lawyer, and withdraw.
During this time, the Baker, who had a great deal of work that day to do,
called a Servant of his, named Martin, to have him go to the Mill; whereupon he
rises at four a clock in the Morning; the Baker commands him to make ready to
go to the Mill; Marti^ swears Zoons that he would not stir a foo^ before he
breakfasted; and that h^ would have a rasher of Bacon. Wel^ having received
permission so to do^ he takes a Ladder, and as he was go^ up to the top of it,
both Lawye^ Servant, and Ladder fall on the ground, and tumble one upon
another. The Baker runs with his Wif^ to their man's assistance, thinking that
he had been dead on the ground howsoever he told them that h^ had received no
hurt, and that h^ had escaped any mischief by reason that he fell on the Bacon:
at which the Baker was well enough satisfied but when he came to look dow^ and
saw the Head of the Lawyer which just peeped out of the Sack it being unti'd,
he had like with a stonishment to fall backwards in a Swoon; neither could his
Wife scarcely make him come to himself again. In the end, astonished as they
were at this business, they consulted how to get him from thence. The Baker had
a young Colt never yet backed, whom he causes his Man to bring-him; and having
clapped on him a Saddle, he fastens the Lawyer on him, so that he could not fall
off, putting likewise Spurs to his shoes; and thus equipag'd they lead him out
into the Street, it being not past six in the Morning in the shortest days of
Winter; the Baker believing that losing the sight of him he should lose him
altogether, as indeed he did; for as this young Colt went on the way, it happened
that one of the Spurs struck by mishap into his Side, which made him so fall a
running, that he cast off his Rider into a Well, where he was never more heard
of.

FINIS.

