A Certain and True RELATION OF THE Heavenly Enjoyments AND Living Testimonies
Of God's Love unto her Soul, Participated of from the Bountiful Hand of the
LORD, and communicated to her in the time of her Weakness of Body.

Declared upon the Dying-Bed of SARAH the Wife of JOHN BECK of Dockrae in the
County of Westmoreland, who departed this Life the 13th Day of the 6th Month,
1679.

The Souls of the Righteous are precious in the Eyes of the Lord, and they
shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the Spirit; for they
rest from there Labors, and their Works follow them

Rev. 14. 13. Printed in the Year 1680.

A Testimony that Sarah Beck, the Wife of John Beck, did bear and signify of
the Love of God, which she was sensible of when she was very Weak of Body, and
on her DYING-BED.
SHE continued seven Weeks and one Day after the Birth of her Daughter Sarah;
and all the time of her Weakness she was very patient, and freely given up and
resigned to the Will of God, often signifying, She was Content, whether to Live
or Dye; saying, She had sweet Peace with God.

And on the First day at Night, being the 3d of the 6th Month, she was worse
than before; and in the Morning she grew very ill and weak, so that it was
thought, that she had been gone; and when she recovered, she said, She was
Well; I was very well if I had gone: But after that she was raised by the
mighty Power of God many times to praise and magnify the Name of the Lord,
saying; Oh, thou pure God! Oh, thou pure God! O thou blessed God! O my Savior!
Honored be thy Name, Praised be thy Name, Renowned be thy Name. And when she
had rested a little, being very weak, she desired of the Lord, that she might
praise his Name again, before she departed out of this Tabernacle; and the Lord
by his Living Power did raise her up in a wonderful manner, contrary to the
Expectation of them that were with her; and his Living Presence did surround
her, insomuch that she could not contain, but brake forth into a sweet Harmony,
and fung Praises unto the Lord, even to the rendering and breaking of the Hearts
of several, and true refreshing of the Souls of the sensible Ones, that were
with her, who had true Unity with her; yea, she was so overcome with the Love
of God, and the Joy of that Endless Life, (into which she is now entered) that
she cried forth aloud, Magnify the Lord! O Magnify the Lord! O Magnified be
thy Name! O thou God of my Life! Glory to thy Name, thou Helper of Israel; and
said, O Friends! Praise the Lord; O Praise him, every one of you! for surely
Heaven is open; I see God in his Glory, O! he shines: Friends, do you not see
how God shines. O God! thou shinest in thy Beauty of Holiness! O what a Light
is here! sure Heaven is open: I see God on his Glorious Throne, and his holy
Angels: And she sweetly praised the Lord, and said, O Lord! thou have satisfied
my Soul: I desired, that I might Praise thee, and thou have satisfied me;
Honor, Glory and Halelujahs unto thee: O thou God of my Life! Oh! I feel sweet
Peace and great Joy, Oh! the Joy that is laid up for the Righteous; Oh! who
would not but fear the Lord! who would not but be faithful! And she was taken
ill again, and was very Sick, so that it was thought several times, that she
had been gone, but the Lord again did raise her up; and she would have said
aloud, O Lord! O God! let me Praise thy holy Name once more before I depart out
of this Tabernacle: And the Lord did answer her earnest Desire, and by his
Eternal Power gave her Ability to Praise, Magnify and Glorify his Holy Name,
as before, to the refreshing and comforting of Friends that were with her, and
some that were no Friends in the Truth, said, Surely God was with her: And she
did often signify what great Joy and Peace she felt, saying, Surely never
greater Joy can be desired, than what I now feel.

And at another time she said, My Physician is come; O God! thou art my
Physician, and thou have Cured me: I matter not for all the Physicians in the
World; for I believed in thee, and thou have Healed me: And she said, My Soul
is near ready to be offered up unto the Lord as a Living Sacrifice: And took
her leave of her Husband, and the rest of her Friends, taking them by the hand,
and kissed them, and bid them Farewell one by one; saying with a cheerful
Countenance, I am near going; she said, This sweet End will come; it makes my
heart glad when I remember my end; It will be the Happiest Hour that ever came
to me: She remembered her Love to Friends, and said, I desire that Friends may
be faithful. And when it was thought that she was in great Pain and very Sick,
so that some said, It was very hard: she answered, Nay, it is very easy; for
the Lord sweetens it; Oh! thou Glorious God, thou have satisfied my Soul; I am
filled with thy pure Presence: O thou Keeper of Israel! Praised and Magnified
be thy holy Name forever, for thou art Worthy, and thy Mercies and Goodness are
Endless: O Righteous God! O who would not but Praise thee! O that I may Praise
thee while I have Breath and Being! as indeed she did; for even at the hour of
her Departure she praised the Lord very sweetly; and said, Call in the Family;
they being called in, Now, said she, Rejoice Friends; and reached forth her
hand to her Husband, and holding him by the hand, made sweet Melody in her
Heart, to the Praise and Honor of the Lord, and to the great Comfort of
Friends that were with her; and said, Dear God (several times together, (being
very Weak) what shall I render unto thee for this Evening Sacrifice? And so
went on in Prayer and Praising the Lord, till her natural Strength failed; and
then turned her face to the Pillow, and lay still like an innocent Lamb, as
indeed she was, and said no more, even as if she had fallen a sleep, being the
13th of the 6th Month, 1679. in the Evening.

Many other sweet and comfortable Words she spoke, which cannot be remembered to
the full; but as she lived an innocent Life, so was her Latter end comfortable,
and she has laid down her Head in Perfect Peace with the Lord her Maker and
Redeemer

Well, the Lord shall have the Praise, the Honor and the Glory, over all, and
not any Creature, for he is worthy, as she has often said both in her Health,
and also in her Sickness; for she would always lay the Creature Low, and God
to have the Glory of his own Work, who is worthy, blessed over all forever.

And in the time of her Weakness several came to see her that were not Friends,
before whom she was moved to bear a faithful Testimony against their Hireling
Priests; and in the Name of the Lord, and in his Living Power, did she
testify, That they were out of the Right Way, and not sent of God, and
therefore did not profit the People at all: And she cleared her self; that it
was not in the least in Emnity or Ill Will that she had toward the Priests,
but that the Lord had made her a living Witness against their Ways and
Covetous Practices; to which some of them answered, That they did believe her,
for they believed that she wished all well.

Witnesses hereof, as being often present with her in the time of her Weakness,
and hearing these words, with more to the same Effect:

John Beck, her Husband, Isabel Gardner, Elizabeth Ware, Thomas Gardner, Agnes
Gardner, John Dickinson, Elianor Dickinson, Elianor Corney: With several others
that might be mentioned.
Concerning Sarah Beck, my dear wife, this Testimony I have to bear.
THat she was a Woman truly fearing God, and had a true and real Desire after
Truth and Righteousness, and after the Welfare and Prosperity of it both in her
self, and all that professed it; and that those that knew it not might come to
the Knowledge and Obedience of it: And after I came into acquaintance with her,
and did move her to Marriage, Oh! how Solid and Weighty she was! insomuch, that
she would often say, Marriage is a weighty Thing; and did often desire and
breathe to the Lord, That we might proceed in it in the true Fear of the Lord,
and then our Love and Unity would abound one toward the other, and so it did:
And after we were married, her whole desire and breathing was, that we might
both be kept in the true Fear of the Lord in all our Undertakings, and in a
living Sense of the Truth, and of the Goodness of the Lord toward us; and this
Desire being True and Real it was increased, so that she grew in the Gift or
Measure that God had committed to her; and being faithful and obedient, so that
she came to have her Mouth opened to pray to God in our Family, whereby I was
often refreshed and broken into Tenderness, through the living operation of the
Power and Gift of God in her, which did freshly and livingly spring in her many
a time; so that a living Testimony and a good Remembrance remains upon my Heart
continually concerning her: And often she said, O! that we may be kept faithful
to the End, that we may never Offend the Lord; so that her Desires, Breathings
and Groanings were after the Lord Night and Day, that she might not lose her
Peace with him, and this was also granted unto her; for in the time of her
Sickness and outward Exercise, she was patient and contented, though her
Exercise was many times very sharp, yet she did patiently bear it; and said
many times, It will be over; and that she had true Peace with God; and her
Heart was full many times with Praises unto God, that he had kept her in
Perfect Peace with him; and being kept in this Condition, she was a Refreshment
to Friends when they came to visit her. And when she drew near her time of the
giving up of her Natuarl Life, she bid, Call in the Family; and she took me by
the hand, and then took her leave of us one by one, bidding us Farewell; and
then she prayed while one could understand what she said, then she laid down
her Head upon her Pillow, as though she would have fallen asleep, and so she
gave up her Natural Life without either Sigh or Groan, like an Innocent Lamb:
and she is gone to her Rest with her Maker and Husband, who had betrothed her
unto himself in Faithfulness.

JOHN BECK.

I have this to say concerning my dear Child Sarah Beck;
THat as she lived an Innocent Life, so was her Latter-end Comfortable; and
although it has been a near Exercise to me, to part with such a dear Child,
yet truly can I say, that the Consideration of her Everlasting Well-being does
stay my Mind; and the Remembrance of the Love of God to her, does often break
my Heart; for in the time that she lay on her Dying-Bed, I have several times
found her very Tender, and much Broken; and when I had ask't her, How she was?
she said, It is even the Love of God that breaks my Heart, and the
Consideration of his tender Dealings with me: And she said, to me, Dear Mother
let nothing trouble thee, for there is nothing at all that troubles me: So I
can testify to these Lines above-written; (for I was much with her in the time
of her Weakness;) and we were often well refreshed together with the Incomes of
God's Love, then she said, Oh this was a good Meeting! we have met with the
Lord.

Isabel Gardner.

A Testimony lives in my Heart concerning my dear Sister Sarah Beck, the Wife
of John Beck, whose former Name was Sarah Gardner.
THis I can truly testify, That she was an inoncent Woman, and one that did
truly fear the Lord in her day, and wished the welfare of all People; yea,
even from a Child was her Heart set to seek the Lord, and the prosperity of his
blessed Truth, which the Lord had made her with many more partakers of, blessed
be his Holy Name for evermore: and I certainly know that it was her chiefest
care, faithfully to serve the Lord and obey him in whatever he required of her.
And it was sometimes required of her by the Lord to exhort others to
Faithfulness, and to improve the Gift or Talent which the Lord had committed to
them; and the Lord did always give her Power and Ability to perform faithfully
whatsoever he required of her; for which she did, as was her Duty, return the
Praise and Honor unto him over all: Surely her Love was Universal. I have
often heard her say, Oh that all would come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
live therein! Methinks I wish that all People would truly fear the Lord. So far
was she from bearing any Ill Will toward any, that she wished the Everlasting
Welfare of All, and it was her earnest desire unto the Lord, that he would
preserve her faithful unto himself, and that she might live to his Praise while
she lived; and as the Lord had put it into her Heart to seek true Peace with
him, so (blessed be his Name) he preserved her in the same to the end of her
days.

For on her dying Bed she did often signify, that she was content whether to
live or dye, saying, That she had sweet Peace with God; and she said, It makes
my Heart glad when I remember my End, it will be the Happiest Hour that ever
came to me. Yea, she did often signify what great Joy and Peace she felt,
singing Praises unto the Lord, and making sweet Melody in her Heart, saying, Oh
thou Ocean, Ocean! Oh Fullness, Fullness! Oh! who would not but fear the Lord,
and serve him all their days! Oh the Joy, that is laid up for the Righteous!

And in all the time of her weakness of Body, she was very patient and freely
given up to submit to the Will of God, saying, O Lord, I will wait upon thee
with patience, till my Change come; for surely thou art worthy to be waited
upon! Oh thou God of my Life! Oh that I may Praise thee while I have Breath and
Being! Yea, that was her earnest desire, both for her self and others, both in
her Health and Sickness) as indeed I (with several more) was a Witness that she
had her desire granted; for even at the Hour of her departure she Praised the
Lord very sweetly; and the last Words that she uttered, were in Prayer unto the
Lord, and in praising of his Holy Name; and so passed away quietly as if she
had fallen asleep.

And now although I with many more, unto whom the Lord made her Serviceable, am
sensible of a great want of her; yet of this I do conclude, that though it be
our Present Loss, it is her Everlasting Gain. So unto the Lord do I desire to
commit my Cause, who is able to supply all our Wants, and to make hard Things
easy, as we truly eye him, and have our whole Dependence upon him, who is God
over all, blessed forever.

Now what I have here written concerning my dear Sister, the Lord knows my
Heart, it is notin the least to set her up above her place, as if she had been
able to do any thing of her self, but as the Lord did enable her, as she often
confessed unto the Lord, That of her self she was not able to do anything, but
all her Help and Ability was in the Lord alone. So unto him be the Praise over
all, and not unto any Creature, for there is none that can perform any
acceptable Service unto the Lord, but as he enables them; therefore unto him be
the Honor and Praise of his own Work forever.

Agnes Gardner.

This is my Testimony concerning Sarah Beck;
THat I traveled with her in her Exercise, both in her Health and in her
Sickness; and her Desire was, That all might be Faithful to what was made
manifest unto them; and in the time of her Weakness of Body, I can truly say,
That I was sensible of her Exercise, and did bear a share with her, and said
several times to her, That I did believe that the Lord would turn it to her
Joy, whether it was to live or dye; and when the Time came, that the Lord
comforted her, I can truly say, I was comforted with her; and so I can truly
say, that I had such Unity with her, that that which was her Joy was my Joy,
and that which was her Sorrow was my Sorrow: So I can bear witness what is
above-written, for I was much conversant with her in the time of her Weakness.

ELIANOR DICKINSON.

PEACE is sown for the Righteous, and Joy and Gladness for the Upright in
Heart; they are certainly Blessed and truly Happy who answer the holy Call of
God by pure Obedience, as this our beloved Sister has done; for she chose the
Truth to be her Path, and her Delight was in it even from a Child; and as she
grew in Years, so she grew in the Truth, and by Faith therein was a true
Witness of God's heavenly Word of Power manifested in her Bosom, by the Virtue
of which her Soul was made alive by Christ, who is the Light, the Life, and the
Power, by which she came to be reconciled to God again, and so became a true
Witness of his Name and Saving Health, and therein did extol his Praise and
magnify his Power, as she has often sweetly done, not only in her Health but
also in her Sickness, to the Refreshment of many; and as she lived an Innocent
Harmeless Life, she being of a mild Lamb-like Disposition, so she ended her
Days in Innocence; and being Redeemed from the Earth, laid down her Head in
Peace; and though her outward Body be gone to the Dust, from whence it came,
yet her Spirit is ascended to God that gave it; and her living Testimony and
good Savor that she has left, remain as Comfortable Memorials upon our Minds,
desiring, That we may so live, and so finish our Course, as she has done,
knowing that all who endure to the End shall be saved. So being satisfied and
persuaded, that many Friends are of the same Faith and Belief concerning her, I
rest with this Testimony in my Heart, which is here expressed.

Robert Barrawe.

My Testimony concerning my dear Sister Sarah Beck, is;
THat she was an Innocent Woman, and from her Childhood, till her Dying-day,
she always minded good things; for when she was a Child, she had an Eye to
God, that she did not offend him, and loved good Friends well; and as she grew
up in Years, so she grew in the Truth of God, always desiring the Prosperity
thereof; so that her Diligence exceeded many of her Equals in Years, and the
Lord was with her, and she grew in the Truth, and he put his Word in her Mouth,
and she faithfully declared it, as the Lord required her, whether as in a
Public Testimony amongst Friends, or otherwise to warn People to Repent and
Turn unto the Lord, to whom he did send her, and she was faithful in all things
as the Lord gave her Utterance; for she was but a weak Instrument, but as the
Lord was her Strength, unto whom she would always return Praise; for he alone
was Worthy; for it was the Glory of God that was most in her Mind, and she was
wholly given up to serve him in all his Requirings, and his pure Fear was truly
placed in her Heart, so that when the Lord did visit her Body with Weakness,
and as she grew Weaker outwardly, so was her Strength renewed (...), and she
grew stronger and stronger in God, so that (...) cried aloud (when she was very
weak of Body, so that she was ready to faint away, as to outward appearance)
and Praised and Magnified the Name of the Lord (as is testified in the
foregoing Testimonies) and often exhorted Friends to Faithfulness: I was often
with her in the time of her Sickness, and I was well refreshed with her; for
when her Sickness did but a little abate then she would be Praying and Praising
the Name of the Lord, often signifying to us, what Joy and Peace she did feel,
to the Satisfaction of her Immortal Soul, and to the great Comfort of us her
Friends, who had sweet Unity with her; and although it was a great Exercise to
us, her near Relations, to part with her, being a living Instrument in the hand
of God, by which we were well refreshed many a time; yet we can certainly say
to the Joy of our Hearts, That it is her Everlasting Gain, and she has laid
down her Head in Perfect Peace; for I can truly say, That I am often well
refreshed and comforted in the Remembrance of her, my dear Sister. Well, the
Lord gives Life and Breath, and takes it away when he pleases, for he is
Worthy, forever blessed be the Everlasting Name of our God, for he is Rich in
Mercy and Endless in Loving Kindness; O! that we may always dwell low before
God, and return him Living Praises over all, for he alone is Worthy, says my
Soul.

Thomas Gardner.

THE END.

