To the HONORABLE the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament.
PROPOSALS Humbly Offered to lay down a Method which will totally prevent all
Robberies upon the Highway, Raise Five Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum to the
Government, and Increase Dealings of all kinds.

1. By Erecting Chambers of Accounts in the Kingdom, to return money from place
to place, as Trade shall require. 2. By a Computation made of the number of
people in England, Wales, etc with the consumption of Goods transferred from
place to place throughout the Kingdom. 3. The Ways of transmitting moneys, from
place to place, on sight of Bills, and ballancing of Accounts. 4. By ways and
means to furnish those Chambers of Accounts with Cash, sufficient to answer, in
ready moneys, all the Goods that shall be bought and sold throughout the
Kingdom. 5. By presuming that the Profits, arising from the said Chambers, will
amount to the sum of 500000 l. per Annum; Persons paying no more for such
returns than has been Customary, time out of mind, on the like occasions.
1. WERE there Four Grand Chambers of Accounts erected in London, (being the
Metropolitan City of the Kingdom) to answer all Countys in England, Wales, etc.
and those nominated The Principal or Grand Chambers of each County, or
Division; and let them have power to fix a Petty Chamber in most Principal
Towns of Trade, throughout the Kingdom, etc. Providing for every Principal or
Grand Chamber, a different Stamp; with Numbers to be kept in every Petty
Chamber, so fixed, (as aforesaid) placing Clerks, in each Chamber of London,
distinctly for each County. And were all Inland Bills strictly forbid, and all
Gentlemen, and Chapmen, Carriers, and Hagglers, Prohibited from Traveling with
any Sum or Sums of money (more than to Defray their Traveling Charges:) But so
often as occasion offers, let each, and every Person, pay such greater Sums of
money into any of the Chambers, from whence it may be Remitted to any place, as
desired, with as great Expedition as the General Post can reach it: The Party
having his money so Remitted, paying for the same Three Pence per Pound; or
something more or less, according to the distance of Place from whence it shall
be so Remitted.

2. IT is supposed (by common Computation) that there are Six Millions of
people in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, etc. (which if so) they
cannot subsist, one with another, for less Charge, in Meat, Drink, and Apparel,
than Seven Pounds per Annum each person, which amounts to Forty Two Millions
Yearly expended in the way of Trade and Commerce; which at Three Pence per
Pound, Annually paid for such Returns, or Transmittances of money, as
aforesaid, amounts to the Sum of Five Hundred Twenty Five Thousand Pounds per
Annum, besides the large Sums that are expended in a Year for Household Goods,
Plate, Jewels, etc. Note, What is Consumed in the Year must be the Gain of
Trade; the Returns are infinitely more.

3. SUPPOSE a Merchant, or any other Trader, or Dealer, sells his Goods,
Cattle, or Wares, in any part of the Kingdom, etc. receiving his moneys for the
same, being the Sum of a Thousand pounds, more or less; he or they paying such
sum or sums into the Chamber next adjoining, may have it remitted to any part,
without running any Hazard; the person receiving the same, discounting Three
Pence per pound, more or less, according to the distance of place: And upon
payment of his moneys into the said Chamber, he shall Receive a Bill of Return
indented; the Office or Chamber Filing another of the same Date; and a third so
agreeing with the two former, shall be sent to the place, where he intends to
receive the same, with advice to pay it to the said Party, or his Order, upon
the sight of the Party's Bill so mentioned, making such payment in good Current
Coin of England; and upon payment thereof, to give his Receipt, indorsed upon
the said Bill, for so much Moneys, as the said Bill expresses to be due: By
which means every Petty Chamber may be able to adjust his Accomps with the
Grand Chambers of London, as often as they shall be required to do the same.

4. AS to the Furnishing the said Chambers with Cash sufficient to answer such
Ends, I presume the moneys Collected for the KING's Taxes; The Excise, and
other moneys already Charged, and to be Charged, by Act of Parliament, with
Moneys payable for all manner of Goods or Commodities through the Kingdom in
parts remote; being paid into the said Chambers, in each Town or County, as
aforesaid, in order to be Remitted to other parts of the Kingdom; may (as I
humbly conceive) answer the ENDS Proposed, with all Objections that shall be
made against it; only allowing Petty Chapmen, who shall Travel the Country for
some Miles, to lay out moneys in order to buy up Goods; as Wool, etc. buying
two or three Tod in one place, and three or four in another, where they can
meet with them: For it is not to be imagined, such Chapmen as these: shall have
their moneys remitted, by reason of the great uncertainty in what place they
shall buy their Goods: But my meaning is, That such Persons, who bring their
Goods to a certain Town or Market, selling them for considerable sums; and such
Persons, who shall carry in their moneys to a Market or Fair to Buy with. (As
for Example.) A Person living at Exeter, or any other place, hearing of a
parcel of Wool to be sold at Northampton, or any other place Cross the
Country, though far remote; The said Party, paying the moneys he intends to lay
out, into the Chamber of the Town aforesaid, the Clerk of that Chamber, sending
up the Advice-Indenture, to the proper Clerk of the said County, he shall Remit
the moneys to the Chamber of the said Town, with as much expedition, as the
Post can make: And in like manner, may all Gentlemen's Rents, or moneys for
Portions, and Purchases be transmitted throughout the Kingdom. For if any
person shall adventure to Travel with Sums of money, after having such
conveniences provided for their so safe and easy ways of Remittances, I Judge
the Country ought not to be Liable to make good what shall be so lost by
Robberies after such Bold and Daring Adventures. And they may keep an exact
Balance on all occasions, in all places, and at all times throughout the
Kingdom; by which means each Town may have a Bank of money by them, which, (as
I conceive) will be no small Increase of Riches throughout the Kingdom, causing
all manufacturies to flourish much more than hither to they have done, the
failure of which is thought to before want of Moneys among them, which has
occasioned many Country people to try their Fortunes in London, where money is
more plenty, which has much depopulated the Country, thereby damnifying very
much both Gentlemen's Estates, and done great injury to all Manufacturies.

FURTHER, There are several principal Towns and places of Trade; as Exeter,
Norwich, Colchester, Hull, Leeds, etc. wherein the Goods are bought by the
Inhabitants of the said places, and there vended; which moneys, with the Kings
Revenues, being paid into the Bank of the said places, must inevitably be
equivolent to the manufactures made in the said Towns, and vended elsewhere:
For suppose each of those do vend and make great quantities of Woollen
manufacturies, being the Stable Commodities of the Kingdom, the more they make
the better, being the greater number of People must be employed therein; And we
find by experience, That (by the Wisdom and Providence of GOD) Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Shopkeepers, Merchants, etc* are so promiscuously intermixed in
Towns and Villages among Handicrafts, being subservient one to another, as
different members of one and the same body; and supposing there are Twenty or
Thirty Thousand Souls in each Town or place; These must all be Fed and
Clothed, with all things according to their several Ranks and Qualities; and,
by consequence, must Trade in Linen, Woollen, Silk, etc, and in all Grocery
Wares, Wine, Oil, Tobacco, Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, Glass, etc. and in all
sorts of Grain, Cattle, Fruits, Dies, and Druggs, without which, no place can
well subsist. Now let the Traders of the said Towns, and Villages nigh
adjacent, pay into the Banks of the said places, all the moneys which shall
become due in Parts remote, for the Goods vended by them: The prime cost of all
such Goods consumed, together with the Money Collected for Excise, the Land
Tax, and Customs, being paid into the next Chamber, or Bank, in or nigh the
place, must make a sufficient Fund of Money in all the Banks of each County,
Town, or City, to answer all Goods and Manufactories that shall come out of the
Countries, being the prime Cost of materials are allowed for: But if any
Merchant or Dealer suppose the Manufactures made in the Countries, and sent
abroad, are of greater value than the prime Cost of Goods, that are bought and
consumed in the Countries; I beg to know how it happens, That such Town or
County has not gained the greatest part of the Kingdoms Wealth; which, if any
person satisfies me in, I shall look upon all my pains, and serious thoughts,
about this Project, to be vain imaginations, and shall desist further to urge
it.

AND so soon as the KING's Money shall be paid into any of the said Chambers in
the Country, it may be drawn off here from the Chief Chambers in London, at the
pleasure of the Lords of the Treasury: Which will occasion the Paying in of the
Kings Revenues into the Exchequer with more Expedition by the Sub-Collectors,
being the first Charge laid upon the Moneys given His Majesty, which will save
the Government 100000 l. per Annum. so much and more being now paid for
Collecting; going through so many Hands.

5. I Humbly Conceive it may be highly improved, in like manner as the
Post Office has been since the first Establishment thereof, which will conduce
much to the Good of Trade, both in City and Country: For if A. B. or C. suffer
for not having Returns of Money, according to expectation or desire, certainly
the greater part of the Alphabet must sensibly Feel it one way or other. But
this Method being taken, it must, by consequence, lessen the Interest of money,
highly advance Lands, increase the Income of the General Post Office; I presume
by modest Computation, it will add a Third part, more to the Incomes of the
same.

This I humbly conceive (if approved on by His Majesty, and the Honorable
Houses of Parliament) may be worth Five hundred thousand pounds, per Annum. or
more, without hurting the Subject; paying no more for their Returns of Money,
than they commonly now do upon occasion of such Returns by Carriers, or
otherwise. Therefore the Terms in my Propositions being so easy (and the
Service of so great value) I hope no Man can rationally Grudge at it, obtaining
so great a Benefit by it; For I clearly conceive, both City and Country will
Improve and Encourage such an Establishment, as shall make Moneys Circulate
upon all Occasions to their great advantage.

AND this being Proposed for the Public Good, I hope it will not be Postpon'd,
but rather meet with that Encouragement from the Government, as may render it
Useful for the Matter intended; which will not only be a Great Benefit, but
also a Great Honor to the Kingdom. And I hope the Objections that may be
raised against my Proposals, are so Rationally Answered, as with Ease to be
understood; relating to the Advance of Trade; the Improvement of Estates; the
safe and quick Transmittances of Rents; the Benefit accrewing to the
Post Office: And in Removing of the Cause, it will most Effectually be the
preventing of Robberies by Highway Men.

By D. B.
By C. L.
Note, IT is allowed, by most men of Deallings, that the Consumption of this
City, within the Weekly Bills of Mortallity, is vastly Great. The Number of
Black Cattle Consumed per Week, Computed about Three Thousand; Calves, Sheep,
Lambs, and Hoggs, about Thirty Thousand; the value of all sorts of Grain not to
be Known, besides the vast Quantities of Woollens that are bought from the
Countries: From all which, it is plain, there may be One Hundred Thousand Pounds
saved to the Government, by drawing off the Kings Revenues and Taxes; (as
aforesaid) which will more than defray the Charge of such an Advantageous
Settlement, and the Kingdom will become as one entire Trading Body.



FINIS.

