Magnalia Naturae: OR, THE PHILOSOPHERS-STONE Lately exposed to public Sight
and Sale. BEING A true and exact Account of the Manner HOW WENCESLAUS SEILERUS
The late Famous Projection-maker, at the Emperors Court, at Vienna, came by,
and made away with a very great Quantity of Powder of Projection, by projecting
with it before the Emperor, and a great many VVitnesses, selling it, etc. for
some years past.

Published at the Request, and for the Satisfaction of several Curious,
especially of Mr. Boil, etc.

BY John Joachim Becher, One of the Council of the Emperor, and a Commissioner
for the EXAMEN of this Affair.

Minut. Felix. Quid igitur ingrati sumus? Cur invidemus: si veritas divinitatis
(quae per ea quae fiunt sat intelligi potest, Romans 1. 20.) nostri temporis
aetate maturuit.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Dawks, His Majesty's British Printer, living in
Blackfriars. Sold also by La. Curtiss, in Goat Court on Ludgate hill. 1680.

Advertisement.
BOoks and single sheets Printed and sold by Tho. Dawks, in Black friars, and
by La. Curtiss in Goat Court on Ludgate Hill, where may always be had, 1.
Godfreys Murder made visible, and the Papists Cruelty therein. 2. A Chronology
of Popery, showing When, and Who brought in their idle, foolish Foperys. 3. The
only Historical Plot Cards, with a Book, illustrating the PLOT, by greatly
satisfying the Protestant Reader. 4. The Beggars Petition to H. S. showing
Reasons enough why he threw Popery off, and we not now befoold into it. 5. The
3 Prime Discoverers, their Pictures, with Verses showing their Reasons why they
discovered this Hellish Popish Plot. 6. Romes Hunting-Match for 3 Kingdoms. 7.
England 's Calamity foreshewn, from the growth of Popery, in Gemanys Misery. 8.
A Seasonable Caution to Apostatizing Protestants; or Gods eminent Judgment upon
Protestants that turned Papists to save their Lives, but perished. 8. The
Resurrection proved in a Relation of what happened to Mris Ann Atherton, who lay
7 days in a Trance, declared in an astonishing Speech when she came to life.

9. A great Truth, The Jesuit a downright Complete Atheist, proved such, and
condemned for such, by the Famous Faculty of Sorbonne, well known to be the
best Divines of all the Catholic Party, and by the French Bishops, and Pope
Alexander 7. Showing how they make a Mock at Sin, deny God, and overthrow all
Religion. Their Design being to Debauch Mankind, wherein they, as a Judgment
from God upon us, have succeeded pretty well, but speedy Judgment attends its
Promoters.

10 Famous Master Rich's Absence supplied by a KEY to his Shorthand TABLE,
entitled The PENS Dexterity, Allowed and Approved by both Universities. Fully
discovering the whole Art to the Meanest Capacity, in that Method he Taught his
Scholars, with the reserved Rules in their proper Places, by T. Dawks, a
quandam Scholar of his; the like never publicly discovered before; all Books
and sheets relating to this Hand has been Abuses to the Public, and the Buyers
of them much deceived, for the Table alone was never designed by Mr. Rich to
teach the whole A R T, but to bring Scholars to him: And for the Truth of what
I say, as well in relation to this Key, as to other spurious Books, I refer my
self to Mr. Rich's Scholars, as fittest Judges, knowing not where else to
appeal. Also, I have added since it came to my hand, beside the Key to
distinguish this from all false Tables, Directions concerning the place of
Vowels, which he gave me in writing among the private Rules; wherefore, all old
Tables without the Key are false ones, beware of them. These true ones are sold
by. T. Basset, at the George by S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet: by Fr. Smith
at the Elephant by the Exchange in Cornhil,

11. Also Dr. Salmons New London Dispensatory, end his Soul of Astrology, are
always to be had at the places abovesaid. As for his Synopsis or Praxis
Medicinae, the vast labor it has taken up, is the Cause of its not coming
forth; expect it spedily, the Compleatness of the Work make it exceed in
thickness his Dispensatory, besides the 21 Plates.

There is in the Press A packet of Popish Delusions, False Miracles and Lying
Wonders: Together with many grand Divisions among Papists, notwithstanding
their seeming Unity.

The TRANSLATOR To the READER.
THere is no ingenious man that is not unacquainted with the Curiosities to be
met with in the World, who has not either seen some Transmutation of Metals, or
at least heard so many witness that they have seen it; as to be persuaded that
there is such Thing as the Philosophers-Stone, or Powder of Projection. Only
there he some great men (as his Highness Prince Rupert, who has seen the
Projection at Frankfort, in Germany) who seem to question whether such Powder
or Tincture is prepared with Profit. But this Doubt is hereby now fully cleared
and resolved, from the great quantity of this Tincture left buried by the Abbot
Founder of the Church it was found in: (as this Relation informs you) for it is
not credible that the Abbot was Master, before he had done the Work, of such an
immense Treasure, as he must needs have had to draw so much Tincture from:
which could not be extracted (if the Preparation thereof is without profit,)
from a lesser quantity of Gold than it gives or yield again in the Projection:
so that the same quantity of Gold as it yields again must have bin spoiled to
make it; which it is not credible an Abbot of Germany was Master of, as is
said. And, for the Truth of this Relation, besides that, it is attested by many
men of great Quality, good parts, Probity, and Modesty, by the Emperor himself;
by Count Wallestein who was Resident here a year ago; and by Dr. Becher at
present in this City. It is so publicly known through all parts of Germany,
chiefly about Vienna where this was transacted, that to doubt, or deny it, were
as absurd, as if one denied that the West Indies have bin found out of late
years, or that there be ships at Sea, because he has seen neither.

But among the many remarkable Passages in this Relation, one thing is most
worthy of Observation, viz. the Honesty of F. Fra. Preyhausen, who deserves to
be chronicled for his Faithfulness and Truth to F. Wenceslaus the Finder of
this Powder: for he wanted neither frequent Opportunities nor specious
Pretenses to effect what some Princes could not forbear to attempt (i. to rob
Wenceslaus of his Powder) tho without a certainty of Success, and tho he was
himself sure of Success, for he was thrice, for a good while each time,
entrusted with the Box, and might find Excuses enough for it; yet he not only
did not succomb to the Temptation of getting All, as they did; but did not so
much as deny, purloin, or withhold the least part of the Powder from F.
Wenceslaus, even when (seeing how he squandred it away) he had a good pretense
to keep back some for his use: and might justly have claimed and reserved some
for his own use also, not only for his Services, but for the great Dangers he
had exposed himself to for his sake; thus keeping True to the End, even against
his own Right and so great a Temptation. A faithful man who can find? Pro. 20.
6. But here such one is found, and that among the Friars! Whence I am glad to
Observe, That all the Friars are not quite so black as some make them; and to
see that among them, as well as among other Sects some good men are to be found
who make Conscience of an Oath, and keep it tho to their loss. Thanks be to F.
Francis 's Honesty for so much as we know of this whole Concern. I am sure that
if he had what his Honesty deserv's, what the Emperor has done for Wenceslaus
had bin bestowed upon him; and that Wenceslaus himself, whilst in the Dungeon,
would have said with all his heart, that if he would do for him what he has
done, he would deserve what he has not had, I mean the whole Powder: But
Honesty meets seldom with what it deserves.

Errata. Page 1. l. 16. for After, r. As for p. 29. l. 22. r. Imprudent.

Magnalia Naturae: OR, THE TRUTH OF The Philosophers-STONE ASSERTED: Being
exposed to Public Sight and Sale in our Days.
THE Place where Wenceslaus Seilerus (who is the main Subject of this following
Discourse) was born, I am not certain whether it was at Vienna, yea or no; But
sure I am He was of the Austrian Country: and his brother did wait upon the
Count of Weissenwolf, the younger. After, Seilerus himself, when he was about
the 20th year of his Age, he was cast into a Monastery of the Augustine Friars
at Bruna in Moravia: where, after his year of Probation, he took the Habit upon
him, and was admitted into the Number of Friars, though it were against his
Will, as he afterward confessed, and as the Event did make appear: For having
once made Profession of the Order, he did continually strive and study how he
might free himself from the Monastery, and seeing that could not be done
without Money, and Money, in his Circumstances, could not lawfully be obtained:
He began to study an indirect way for the obtaining thereof, for his fellow
Friars having often muttered to him of some great Treasure hid in their
Monastery, he had a great desire to find it out.

And in order thereunto, he did not scruple to learn the Magic Art, if any one
had been ready to inform him therein: wherein Fortune seemed to favor his
desires, for there was an old Woman, a Cow-keepers wife, living before the Gate
of the Town, and Fortress, who was skilful therein, and he came to be
acquainted with her upon this Occasion.

The younger Monks and Students, as they were called, are allowed some set
days, every week, to walk out of the Gates of the City, to enjoy the open Air
and to refresh their minds, supposed to be wearied with study; In these
Relaxations one Company dispersed it self here, another there, as they think
fit for their Divertisment. But Friar Wenceslaus (for so I shall hereafter call
him) made use of this Occasion, always to visit the said old woman, and upon
the pretense of drinking New milk, to interogate her concerning her Art. And in
a short time he got so much into her Favor as to obtain from her a small
Waxball marked with certain Figures or Characters, which was of that Virtue,
That, if it was laid upon the Ground, it would presently run to the place where
any Treasure was hid: (This Ball I afterward saw often in his Custody, and
handled it with my hands.)

It happened afterward, That, as the Custom is for the old Fathers when they
grow weak, to have some young Friars to assist them; so, Friar Wenceslaus was
assigned to attend an ancient Father, who was a Cabalist, and a lover of
Magic, in which studies, at any Vacancies, he spent his time. He often told
Friar Wenceslaus, That there was a Vast Treasure hid in the Church of their
Monastery; to whom Wenceslaus replied. That he had got a Ball which, he was
assured, had the Virtue to discover hidden Treasures: And, thereupon he showed
him the Ball, and the Characters impressed thereon, which the old Father did
seriously consider, and much valued them.

A while after, as they two were walking alone in the Church, before day, after
Mattens, they Tried the Ball, by laying it down in several Places, but found no
effect; At last, placing it near a certain Pillar old and ruinous, it began to
show its Efficacy and Virtue by its often running thereto: This they
Interpreted for a certain Indication, That the Treasure was there hid; but how
to come at it was the Question. They had neither Leave, Means nor Opportunity
to break down this stony structure, neither did they certainly know at what
height or deph thereof the Treasure was laid in it. So that upon these
Discouragements they were forced to let it alone.

But it happened afterward, That, a great Tempest arising, The whole Church,
and especially this decayed Pillar, was so shaken and spoiled, that to prevent
its falling down the Abbot was necessitated to order it to be demolished. And
in regard the old Father, whom Friar Wenceslaus attended, had skill in
Architecture, and by reason of his Infirmities could not be otherwise
serviceable to the Monastery, he was therefore appointeed to oversee the
Masons; which Office he and his Assistant Friar Wenceslaus did willingly
undertake, and were very sedulous in theit Attendance, and discharge thereof.
When the Pillar was almost all pulled own, They found therein a Copperbox, of a
reasonable bigness, which the old Father presently snatched up and carried it
into his Cloister, and immediately opened it: Where, at the Top, he found a
piece of Parchment, on which there was some Inscription and Writing: I once had
a Copy of it, but I lost it amongst my other Letters; But this I remember, It
contained the number of the years wherein the Church was built, and the Name of
the Abbot the Founder thereof, who had been an Envoye at Ratisbone; I do also
remember, That amongst other Writings, there was this Motto, AMICE, TIBI SOLI,
which I English thus, Friend, to thy self alone. Under this Parchment there
were other Letters laid, marked with Characters, which contained Directions how
to multiply the Powder, as the Inscription showed: and under them there were
four Boxes full of a red Powder.

When the Boxes were opened, Friar Wenceslaus was quite out of Heart, having
lost his preconceived hope of some great Treasure therein: for he verily
believed that, if there were not old ^ieces of Gold yet some Diamonds, or other
precious stones must have been lodged there. And finding no such thing, but
four Boxes of darkish colored Powder, he was so impatient at the
Disappointment, that, if he had been the sole Manager of the Business, he had
thrown away Boxes, Powder and all: For at that time he was so little acquainted
with Chemistry, that so much as the Name was not known to him, and he had
scarce heard of the word Tincture.

But the old Father was not so Transported, but told him, That perhaps some
Medicinal Virtue was contained in the Powder, and that the Characters in the
annexed Papers might possibly discover its Use, and therefore he was resolved
to study some Books, to find out what those Characters meant: In the mean time
he would carefully keep the Box.

Not long after, The old Father sent Friar Wenceslaus into the Kitchen of the
Monastery, to see if he could find an old Peuter dish or Plate, which was no
longer fit for use, and if he could, to bring it to him; which he accordingly
did, who thereupon caused a Coal-fire to be made, and put a Crucible into Friar
Wenceslaus hand, to place therein; This was the first Chemical Operation that
ever Friar Wenceslaus performed in all his Life, and for which he was so unfit,
that he placed the Crucible upside down, so that the old Father himself was
forced to set it in its right Posture. They put the Pewter Plate broken and
folded together into the Crucible, which being presently melted, the Father
took out some of the Powder (so much as would lay upon the point of a Knife)
which was in one of the four Boxes, and wrapping it in a little wax, he cast it
into the Crucible upon the Pewter, and commanded his Assistant Friar Wenceslaus
to blow up the Fire, adding these Words, Now I shall see whether I have well
decyph^red the Characters, and whether I have found out the use of this Powder.

As soon as ever the Powder was cast in, the Pewter stood still, came to a
sudden Congelation. Then the Fire was suffered to go out, and the Crucible to
wax cold, which being broken, there was found a ponderous mass of Metals, very
yellow and variegated with red lines: Upon which the Father made Friar
Wenceslaus to go out into the Town, upon pretense of getting a Book to be
bound, and wished him to go to some Goldsmiths, and show him this Mass of
Metal, alleging to him, That he had some ancient Roman Coins of Gold, which
he had melted down, but for want of a sufficient Fire and other Defects, he had
not done it exactly; and therefore he desired the Goldsmiths to melt it over
again, and cast it in an Ingot; The Goldsmiths gratified him therein, and Friar
Wenceslaus, at the Command of the Father took off a small piece, which he
Preserved, and then asked the Goldsmiths, What the rest was worth? Who, after
he had weighed and tried on the Touchstone, did value it at Twenty Ducats
(which are worth two Crowns a piece) at which Rate Friar Wenceslaus sold it to
him, and receiving the Money, returned joyfully home. The old Father did only
desire the remaining Portion of the Gold, which he had reserved, but suffered
Friar Wenceslaus to enjoy the Ducats, yet with this Advice, That he should
discover it to none in the Monastery.

But Friar Werceslaus, though he had not been Master of so much Money a long
time, was not satisfied therewith, but entertained various thoughts in his
mind, whether he should by Flight free himself from that Bondage and Slavery he
was in, whilst he had the Advantage of so much Cash? Or else, whether he
should stay so long there, till either by Flattery or Craft, he had got the
Copper Boxes from the old Father. To the first of these Cogitations he was
edged on, by the eagerness of that Desire he had to leave the Monastery: But
then, the great Heap of Gold which he might make with the Powder, as he well
conjectured, if he could get it into his hands, did somewhat abate his Fervor,
and persuade him to stay. For, though he was yet altogether ignorant of
Chemistry, yet the precedent Trials had given him so much Light, That he was
fully persuaded, The Box contained and was worth a vast Treasure; and, though
at that time, the Rareness of the Powder, and the multiplication of it had very
small Influence upon his Thoughts: yet, because he had a share in finding of it
out, by means of his Ball, he therefore thought that half of it at least did
belong to him.

But there was another thing which more perplexed his mind, and that was the
Fear, That the old Father, either out of a Principle of Devotion, or of
Vainglory, should discover the whole story of the Business to the Abbot, and
by that means should make away all the Powder: and he was rather inclined to
these Cogitations, because he had observed, That the Father, who before had
been more remiss in hiding the Box, now of late was so solicitous to preserve
it, that he kept it continually in his Desk, and scarce ever stirred from it,
except when he was to go to Church with Friar Wenceslaus.

Being moved with these Considerations, he was induced to demand boldly some
Quantity of this Powder of the old man? The Answer he received, was, That he
was yet too young to know how to dispose of, and to keep well this Powder:
besides, he wanted no Money whilst he was in the Monastery; and, if he should
procure a sum by means of this Powder, in his present Condition, it would be
very prejudicial both to his Soul and body, and he might become thereby of all
men most miserable: Moreover (proceeds the Father) This Powder may have many
other Virtues and Operations which are yet unknown both to you and me, and
therefore I will farther study the Writings annexed to it, and hereafter I will
be mindful of you, but at present I will not part with any of the Powder, only
you shall have every week two Crowns allowed for your Divertisements: thus the
Father; But this fair story sounded not well in the Friars ears, who had a
private Design (unknown to the oldFather) to leave the Monastery

In the Interim it happened, That as they two were returning from Mattens,
early in the Morning, the old Father complained of a Cold he had got, and a
great Rheum in his head, and desired Friar Wenceslaus to go to the Cellar and
fetch him a Cup of Sack, he did so, and upon his Return he found the Father
taken with a Fit of an Apoplexy, and Speechless: whereupon, the first thing he
did was to find out the Key of his Desk, and taking from thence the Copper Box,
he carried it to his own Cell, and hid it there. This being done, he rang the
Bell in the Fathers Cell to call up the Monks, who came flying with all
Diligence to bring him some Remedies, but they were all too late the Father
being quite dead: Hereupon his Desk was presently sealed up, and solemn
Ceremonies according to the occasion were performed over his dead Body. But who
more inwardly joyful than Friar Wenceslans, from whom Death had removed his
Rival, and made him to be Master of all the whole Treasure.

Hereupon he began to deliberate with himself how he might make his Escape out
of the Monastery with most Safety and least Suspicion. But herein many
Difficuties did accrue: He was grown a little deboist and prodigal by the
Opportunity of the 20 Ducats abovementioned, which he had to spend; and by that
means he had incurred the Emulation of his Fellow Friars, who did urge the
Pryor and Superior, That, the old Father being now dead, and so Friar
Wenceslaus discharged from his Attendance on him, he should for the Future be
bound to a stricter Discipline, both in reference to his Studies, as also to
his frequenting the Church. Moreover his Ducats were all spent, and no
opportunity offered to make another Trial, or if he had, he could not have sold
the Product of it.

In this Anxiety he resolved to open his mind to another Monk, a Comrade of
his, one Friar Francis Preyhausen, That so they might mutually consult together
what was best to be done: for you must know this Friar was intimate with Friar
Wenceslaus, as having entered into the College at the same time; and, being
also a young man, was weary of a Monastical life, as well as he.

Whilst these things were in Consult, there happened a Solemn Disputation in
the School of the Monastery; Where among other Theses, Friar Francis, under a
Moderator, was obliged to maintain, That Metals can not be transmuted: And it
chanced to be the turn of Friar Wenceslaus to be the then Opponent: But, as he
had made no great Proficiency in his Studies, so Friar Francis easily bafled
him, and exposed him to the laughter of the Auditory; so that in a great
Passion he broke out into these Words, Why do you laugh? I can practically
demonstrate the thing to be true? To whom the Moderator with great Indignation,
answered; Hold thy peace, thou Ass, will thou also be an Alchymist? I shall
sooner be able to turn thee into an Ox, than thou to transmute the Metals.
Herewith Friar Wenceslaus's mouth was stopped.

When the Disputation was over, Friar Wenceslaus took occasion to confer with
Friar Francis; when they two were alone together in the Garden belonging to the
Monastery, Fr. Francis thus accosted him, You have this day publicly affirmed
in the Disputation, That you were able to transmute Metals; 'Twas unadvisedly
spoken of you, whether it be true or false; if it be true, and it come to the
Abbot's ear, you will not enjoy your Liberty very long: Besides, there is a
great muttering in the Monastery, That the old Father and your self, found a
Treasure in the Church, and, That the Masons saw a Copper box, and that a Monk
of the Augustine Order sold some Gold to a Goldsmith, and that you did take
from the Kitchen a Pewter plate; Moreover, the sudden Death of the old Father
is not without some Suspicion; and although you may alledg, That the money was
sent you by your Friends, and it were true, that they did send you some, yet it
being probable that some came another way, for which and other reflections, you
would never escape Scot-free out of the Monastery, 'twas well the Moderator took
you for a Buffle-head. But, if what you have affirmed be false, you do ill
again that way, by asserting that which you are not able to demonstrate. I do
therefore earnestly desire you to declare unto me, as to your intimate Friend,
the whole truth of this Matter.

Whereupon Fr. Wenceslaus fell down at his Feet, humbly beseeching him to swear
not to discover what he should reveal to him, but to afford him his help and
assistance, and then he would disclose that to him, which, upon their stealing
away from the Monastery, would procure great wealth to them both, and advance
them to high Dignities; and that they would equally share the Happiness between
them, and run alike hazard in all things. In a word, the Bargain was soon made,
and they without loss of time, went into F. Francis's Cell, where they took
their mutual Oaths one to another. And then F. Wenceslaus declared the whole
Intregue and the procedure thereof to F. Frarcis, withal desiring him upon the
first occasion to go into the City to buy there a pound of Lead, which being
brought to him, he changed it into Gold, observing the Method the old Father
had observed before: The transmuted Gold was carried back by F. Francis into
the City, and there sold to a Jew, for an 100 Ducats, though it were worth
more, his pretense was as the former, that it was melted down out of ancient
Coin and Meddals. Having received this Money, and thus made a strict League and
Friendship with F. Francis, and the Art being now found true for the second
time, they were more intent upon their Design of Escaping out of the Monastery.

But that which retarded their Resolution, was the Season of the year, it being
then Winter; and a very hard one too, for they well understood, that they could
not then safely take so long a Journey as they were to undergo, if they would
by their Flight elude the search, (which would be made without doubt with all
diligence possible after them) and avoid the punishment usually inflicted upon
such an occasion. Hereupon they thought it more convenient to deferr their
intended flight till the Spring following, and they were the rather induced
thereunto because they had found means to pass that time merrily, by getting
now and then a Cup of Wine, and a couple of roased Pullets, which F. Francis
(who was well verst in that Trade) knew well how to get, and to convey into
their Chamber. But because F. Wencelaus had as great a mind to taste of Women's
Flesh as of that of Poultry: and had lighted on a certain Austrian Drab fit for
his purpose, he caused therefore some man's Apparel, with a Periwig, and suitable
Accoutrements to be made ready for her.

Having thus disguised her Sex, they gave her the Name of Seignior Anastasio,
and she came often to the Monastery, on pretense, That she came from Vienna, to
visit her Cousin F. Wenceslaus, pretending he was her Kinsman; this lasted a
while, but the Visits of this Seignior Anastasio was so frequent, that at last,
he was observed to come into the Monastery sometimes, and not to go out again,
by reason of his staying all night in the Cell of F. Wenceslaus, who did thus
live for some weeks in dishonest Love with him: and, when he went either to the
School or to the Church, he always carefully carried his Key with him.

But a matter of that Nature could be kept close no longer; some Rumor of it
came to the Ear of the Abbot or Prior, so that one Morning as F. Wenceslaus was
at Mattens before day, The Abbot demanded of him the Key of his Cell, which he
was forced to deliver, (but how willingly, any one may guess.) The Abbot
immediately, with the Pryor, and some other Monks went to his Cell and there
found Seignior Anastasio naked in the Bed.

At this sight there was a general Consternation on all sides, none knew what
course to take, F. Wenceslaus his mind was more in his Chamber than in the
Chapel canring out his Mattens; as for Seignior Anastasio, she was doubtless
as much at a loss; for, to run without her Clothes out of the bed before such
venerable Company, was no ways thought convenient, and, as for the good
Prelates, they were also uncertain how to steer; some advised to declare the
matter to the Magistrate, that so Anastasio might be thrust out of the house by
the Secular Power; others feared, That if they took that course, they should
derogate from their Rights and Privileges; and, if Seignior Anastasio should
chance to be whipped, and to be put into the Stocks for dissembling her sex, the
noise of such a thing would affix an indelable Character of Infamy upon their
Monastery.

After some Deliberation, they concluded, That presently Anastasio should put
on her Clothes, and, after a severe Reprehension, should be ejected out of the
house, in the Morning before day. And, as for Friar Wenceslaus he was called
from Mattens, and shut up in his Cell, the doors being well bolted and barred
on the outside, until four Walls were prepared to enclose him, which were
already built, only something was defective in the Door, which was supplied the
next day.

Whilst this was a doing, Fr. Wenceslaus found Opportunity to secure his Copper
Box, and to gather together the Powder, and by means of a Rope to let them both
down at a window to Fr. Francis, who staid there on purpose to receive them;
and withal he conveyed down a Letter to him, the Contents whereof was, To
desire the said Friar Francis not to forsake him in his Distress, but to use
his utmost Endeavor to contrive a way for his Deliverance, withal minding him
not to violate his Oath about the POWDER, but to keep it safe, for as yet, to
his great Comfort, it was entire.

The next day, Fr. Wenceslaus was kept Fasting, and in the evening his Back was
scourged with many cruel lashes, and afterward he was shut up close within
four walls, and for a Month fed with nothing but bread and water; during which
time, the Severity of the Stripes he underwent, the Disaster of Seignior
Anastasio, and the hazard of the loss of his Powder did so afflict him, that he
was even ready to despair; but this did somewhat relieve him, that he carried a
string with him into the Dungeon, and casting it out at the hole, received
sometimes both Letters and Victuals from his Comrade F. Francis: and indeed the
desperate Condition of Fr. Wencenslaus did so affect his heart, that he bent
all his Endeavor to excogitate ways how to free him; at last an happy
opportunity offered it self upon this occasion.

Prince Charles of Lichtenstein was a great Favourer of Chemistry, and he had a
Steward of his house at Bruna, to whose Friendship F. Francis had insinuated
himself, and by him sent a Letter and some of the foresaid Powder to the
Prince, in which he related the lamentable Condition of Fr. Wenceslaus, and
implored his Aid for his Deliverance.

The Steward having sent the Letter, and going to Felisbourg the Princes seat,
was scarce arrived but that the Prince bestovved upon him a more profitable
office than that which he had before, and this Message concerning Fr.
VVenceslaus was so favorably received, That he strictly enjoined him to return
speedily to Bruna, and to assist Fr. Francis to the utmost in order to the
Deliverance of Friar Wenceslaus. And to that purpose he Committed his own Seal
to his Custody, to be made use of for that End, if there were occasion.

Thus the Steward returning home, did presently Consult with F. Francis to
deliver F. Wenceslaus; and being delivered from his Prison and Cloister, to
hide and shelter him a while in the house of his Master the said Prince of
Lichtenstein: until some convenient opportunity could be found for his passage
out of the Town, and for his conveyance to the Prince of Felisburge. In order
whereto Fr. Francis took Care to provide a false Key, fit to open the Dungeon,
which he more easily did, because the Padlock was on the outside of the Door:
and on a certain day, when Mattens were ended, he brought his Project to its
desired Effect, for he opened the Door, and took out Fr. VVenceslaus, locking
the Door again; and disguising him with a Cloak, Coat, and Periwig which he had
prepared for that Purpose, he conveyed him through a bygate in the Garden of
the Monastery, to Lichtestein's House, where he shut him up in a Chamber,
locked the door, and Sealed it up in two places with the Princes own Seal and a
Labell appendant.

The next day when the Monasterys Porter, according to his Custom, was carrying
his Bread and Water, about noon, to F. VVenceslaus, Lo, he was not to be found!
whereupon a great Tumult was raised in the Monastery, and from thence the News
flew to the Count de Collebrat, Governor of that Precinct, who presently
commanded the Gates to be shut, and search to be made in all houses, not
excepting Litchtenstein's house it self. When they had diligently searched
every Corner of this latter house, at last they came to the Chamber that was
sealed up: Here the Steward of the House interposed, and told them, That that
Room was the Closet of the Prince, which he had sealed up himself with his own
Seal, and therefore, it could not be opened without great danger and hazard of
incurring his high Displeasure.

Whereupon they desisted; and F. VVenceslaus remained hid there for some weeks,
until at length he found means, in a disguise to escape out of the Town in the
morning early, at the very first opening of the Gates, and so was conveyed,
with other officers, in the Princes own Coach, to Felisburgh. Being arrived
there, he was courteously received and well treated by the Prince, before whom
he made a notable demonstration of his Art.

But the Prince soon found, that a man in his Circumstances and of his
Abilities, could not be long concealed in his Court, because the Abbot of Bruna
having sent Spies after him, would certainly find him out, and would also
obtain a Mandate from the supreme Consistory at Vienna concerning him.
Whereupon (though, as some think, the Princes Intent was to gain the whole
Tincture from him) he advised him to go to Rome, and there obtain a full
Discharge from his Monastical life, and to secure himself from the Abbot, which
favor he proffered to obtain for him by means of his Agent there: And to
accommodate him for his Journey, he gave him a Bill of Exchange for 1000
Ducats, and withal provided an Italian, his Chamberlain, to bear him Company on
his way.

But you must know Fr. VVenceslaus had sent away his Comrade Fr. Francis (who
privately had made an Escape) to Vienna with the Tincture enjoining him to get
him a private Loding there, to abscond himself for a while, till he could
commodiously contrive his Journey to Rome.

Soon after the Italian Chamberlain and he began their Journey, and when they
were about half a Days Journey from Vienna, the Chamberlain on a sudden
picked a Quarrel with him, and holding a Pistol to his Breast, threatened to
kill him, unless he would deliver him the Tincture.

F. VVenceslaus being thus unexpectedly assaulted, was much abashed, and
calling God to Witness, protested, That the Tincture was not, for the present,
in his hands, but that he had sent it before by his Companion F. Francis to
Vienna whom the said Chamberlain had himself seen to undertake that Journey a
few days before.

The Chamberlain was the rather induced to believe his asseveration, because
upon Search both of him and his Portmantle, he found nothing at all of the
Tincture therein. Hereupon, They came to Terms between them, F. VVenceslaus was
to give the Chamberlain 100 Ducats, and an Amnesty to be for their sudden
falling out, and so they agreed and bid one another, Farewell.

The Chamberlain, being a Covetous Italian, was glad of the Money, and F.
VVenceslaus was glad to be rid of him, having escaped such an hazard, and being
now likely to attain Vienna, where he arrived in the Evening of the same day,
and told his Companion F. Francis what had happened to him in every Circumstance,
upon the way. He being a subtle man, did easily perceive by his Relation, what
was the Mystery of his designed Journey to Rome, and that his Bill of Exchange
was but a mere Collusion, whereupon they both resolved to take another course
for their safety, in order whereto, by means of a Saxon whose name was Gorits,
a crafty fellow, and a Clerk in the Chancery of Bohemia, they came acquainted
with one Count Schlick, a person of great sagacity, then living at Vienna, a
great Favourer of Chemistry, but had lately received some affronts from the
Court, he was very glad of their acquantance, and presently took F. VVenceslaus
into his Protection, and brought him to his House, where he made some Trials,
and withal gave him some of the Tincture, that he himself might make one.

But as for F. Francis, he always lodged abroad. After some Weeks, Count
Schlick told F. VVenceslaus, that he could no longer secure him after that rate
at Vienna, for both the Clergy and also the Prince of Lichtenstein, had an ill
Eye upon him, for his sake; and being already disfavoured at Court, he should
run a further hazard, by concealing of him nevertheless he would show him what
courtesy he could, and if he pleased, he would send him to one of his own
Country-Houses and Castles in Bohemia, where he might remain in greater
security, and accordingly he prepared all things for the Journey. F.
VVenceslaus did easily perceive the intention of the Count, for before he had
observed, that the Counts Footmen did observe him as narrowly as the Monks had
done in the Monastery, and therefore perceiving what was to be done with him,
he made his Escape through an Arch in the Wine Cellar, built after the Italian
fashion, the day before he was to go to Bohemia (a place designed for his
perpetual Imprisonment) and retired to the lodging of his friend F. Francis, to
whom having related what had hapn'd to him again, upon deliberation they both
agreed to extricate themselves out of all these hazards, and to acquaint the
Emperor with the whole matter.

And to introduce them into his presence, they knew none more fit than a
Spanish Count called de Paar (whose Brother named Peter, was Hereditary Post
master, in the Emperors Hereditary Country) he was a great Alchymist, a
Factious and Seditious man, and one much troubled with the Gout, yet he had
found means to creep into the Emperors favor: therefore this gain unlookt for
was no less acceptable to him, than to the others before, for he had heard a
great while before of F. VVenceslaus, and had an extreme passion to be
acquainted with him, and fancied that he should see strange things in him, as
King Herod did of Christ, whose first, he acted the part cunningly enough, as
you shall presently hear. They agreed together, that F. VVenceslaus should
abide Incognito at his House, where he was as much observed as at the House of
Count Schtick.

Here he made another small Trial, whereupon Count Paar went to the Emperor,
and discovered to him the whole Business. But his Imperial Majesty who (by
reason of the great and weighty concerns of the Empire, does not only not much
regard or value Learning, as his Father did, except what contributes to his
Recreation, as Plays, Music and the like, but also had a particular aversness
from Alchymy, holding that for a mere Imposter, which did cost his Royal Father
and his Uncle the Archduke Leopold, so much expense, both of Money and Time)
gave no great heed to the Proposition made by Count Paar, especially it having
been related to him, that this F. VVenceslaus was a fugitive Monk, and had led
a dissolute life; and moreover by Report was accused of Magic.

The Spanish Count Paar having heard this Repartee of the Emperor, being a
subtle man, and easily foreseeing those Objections would be made, had armed
himself against them: upon which he thus replied to his Imperial Majesty; That
he did confess, that there was a great weight in all the Objections made by his
Majesty, yet without presuming, being so means a person, to Impose upon his
Imperial Majesty, it seemed to him, that though the Case were extraordinary,
yet nevertheless the Dictates of common Reason were to be obeyed, which does
advise sometimes to consider of things, abstracted from the persons they
concern, it being evident, that some men though ill in themselves yet have been
the Authors of Useful Inventions, of which Truth, Instances might be given near
at hand, in regard his Imperial Majesty had many notable Inventions in his
Archieves, which owed their Originals to bad men, yea, some of them accused of
the same miscarriages as F. Wenceslaus, and since it is true, that some good
things are done by some bad men; it being no less true, that all men are
Sinners, must we therefore reject all their laudable Inventions and all the
good Works they do. A notable Example whereof (proceeded he) lies as yet fresh
before your Majesty, Joseph Burrhi was accused of Heresy, and being taken at
Vienna, was sent to Rome, but after Penance, he was pardoned upon the score of
his knowledge, rather than of his person, and the Germans his Accusers were by
this means deceived; of which I my self (says he) at that time being Burrhus
his Commissary at Vienna, did forewarn them, but in vain. Your Majesty (said he
farther) is a person, with whom God seems to deal after a peculiar manner,
having wonderfully delivered you from many imminent dangers, and now in these
necessitous and indigent times, cruel Wars being also in prospect, your
Hereditary Countries being also exhausted, the Divine Bounty seems to offer you
a mean and way how you may most pity and spare your Subjects: It is the Devils
Policy to cast suspicion upon all extraordinary Assistances, that so he may
make them useless; but (says he) it is as great a Sin not to accept of things
when offered, as to abuse them when they are accepted. As for my self (says
he) I have no great reason to be a Friend to Chemistry, having suffered so much
less by it, as your Imperial Majesty well knows, neither did I ever find any
Truth in the Art, save only in this Powder of F. Wenceslaus, and the
transmutation made thereby. But as in referrence to that Trial, he dared pawn
his Credit it would succeed; and if his Majesty would not believe his word, yet
he might depute some persons to see a Trial made; for his part, he thought he
was bound in Conscience to discover the whole business to his Majesty,
referring it wholly to him, whether he would graciously accept the Proposal and
protect the person that made it, or else discard them both; still hoping
nevertheless, that his Majesty would not take his good Intention in ill part,
nor exclude him from his Favor; wishing for a Conclusion, That he would cause
one Trial to be made under the Inspection of some persons; unprejudiced, that
so his Impertal Majesty might be satisfied, at least in this one thing, that he
had not made the Proposition to him without sufficient reason: Thus he
concluded his Harangue. The Emperor, as he is gracious to all Suitors, so he
gave favorable attention to the Counts discourse, and commended him for it;
Only (says he to the Count) Alchymy is a subtle Imposture, and though you your
self may mean honestly, yet perhaps you also may be deceived thereby, otherwise
I do not (adds he) at all despise the wonderful Works of God, but do highly
value them, and accept of his Gift with all hearty thankfulness, and I do well
know how long my Father took very great pains in that Art; and how highly he
prized that little which was showed him by the Baron Chaos, and rewarded him
for it; besides, I know full well how to make a distinction between the Art,
and the life of its Professors. Only least he should expose himself, and show
himself too easy, he gave the Count order to make another Trial, and to procure
the Presence of other skilful Persons both of the Clergy and Laity: That so he
might make him a more exact Relation of the Matter with all the Circumstan e,
and receive further order of his Majesty concerning it.

Count Paar being returned home from his Audience: The very same day he sent to
Father Spies and Dr. Becher to invite them to Dine with him the next day,
adding these Words in his Message, That he had a Business to communicate to
them from the Emperor. The next day, they all accordingly met. F. VVenceslaus
being present, where after Dinner Count Paar made known his Commission, and
forthwith caused an ounce of Schlachenwald Tin, and a new Crucible to be
bought, which Materials being prepared and tried, and for fear of Enchantment,
ex abundanti cantesa: sprinkled with Holy water: The Trial began and was
finished within a quarter of an hour, one part Tinged, ten Thousand parts into
Gold, which was so graduated by the Tincture, that it was almost Friable, and
was striated and distinguished with red Veins interspersed, of which, as
likewise of the Tin before it was tinged, both the Count de Paar, and also
Father Spies, and Dr. Becher, each of them took a little piece for a perpetual
Memorial of the thing. The rest was sealed up with their three Seals, and the
same quantity of the Powder as this Projection was made with was enclosed with
it, and the thing was by all three suscribed to.

The next day, Count Paar went to his Imperial Majesty, and delivered it to
him, making also a full Relation of all the particular Circumstances in the
Trial.

Hereupon the Emperor enjoined him to treat Fr. Wenceslaus kindly, and to
assure him of his Favor, moreover advising him to refrain his ill and
scandalous life, and to satisfy the Clergy, that he would reassume the
Monastical Habit, and for the rest he would take Care; and till he had enquired
further into the the thing, he would for his Security send him into some
private place

The Count returned home very joyful with this Commission and the very same
Evening he caused F. VVenceslaus to be re-vested with his Monks Habit by two
English Fathers of the Augustine Order, Father Dun^ll and Father Vostaller: A
Letter was also writ to his Abbot at Bruna, informing him, that he might set
his mind at rest concerning him, because he had laid aside his Monks habit, and
clothed himself with other Apparel, for no other Reason, but because he would
free himself from the hardship of a Prison, and make a Journey to Vienna, to
discover a great Secret, which he had, to his Imperial Majesty, which being now
done, he had again resumed his Monks habit.

All this was done to persuade him, that they meant him nothing but good, to
make him call again for all the Tincture from his Comrade, and to keep him from
conversing any longer with those which before were his most intimate
Aquaintance, as counting himself sufficiently secured against all Violence, by
the Emperors Protection, and his Monks Habit: So that Count Paar was as a
Father to him, and he, on the other side, as his adopted Son. These two new
Friends, undertook a Voyage together, to a Country House of the Count's
(adjoining to a certain Lake) which he had in Hungary, distant about a days
Journey from Vienna.

Being come thither, the very same night they two being alone in a Chamber, The
Count plucked out a Decree of the Emperor's (as he pretended) which was sealed
up, adding these words, My Son, Into what Gulf of Misery art thou cast? Here I
have a Command in writing from the Emperor, to demand the Tincture of Thee, and
if thou refusest to deliver it, then to my great Grief, I must execute upon
Thee the Sentence contained in this sealed Decree.

Friar Wenceslaus desired to read the Decree; but, the Count replied, If it be
opened, it must be immediately executed! and, withal plucking a Pistol out of
his Pocket, he directed it to his Breast, Sighing, and breaking forth in these
Words, Into what miserys are we both Cast! Yet notwitstanding if thou will
harken to my Counsel, (from whence thou may gather my Love and Fatherly Care,
and free both of us from this great Misfortune, and make our Condition very
happy) I will give it to thee.

Nothing was more grateful to Fr. VVenceslaus than to hear this Condition, and
having given him his hand that he would follow it:

The Count began thus, It Is certain (said he) That you and I do both stand in
need of the Emperors Protection, and it is as certain, That we shall be forced
to deliver the Tincture to him. My Advice then is, (which I refer to you for
your approbation and consent.) I will pretend, that being enjoined to make a
stricter Examination of this Tinging Powder, that I have employed it all, in
order to its multiplication, to try whether it might be augmented for the
greater Benefit and Advantage of his Majesty. However, we may both be sheltred
under the Continuance of the Emperors Protection, and yet we may keep the
Tincture; And after the time designed for its augmentation is elapsed, we will
easily devise some colorable Excuse, to evade it; as, That the Glass was
broken, or some Error committed in the Operation. For, the Truth is, (said he)
The Emperors Court is not worthy so great a Treasure; it will be Prostituted
there and made common. But to engage they self to me in a greater degree of
Faithfulness, Thou must not refuse to give me half the Tincture, and we will
take a mutual Oath to be faithful one to the other, as long as we live, and for
what now has passed between us, it shall be buried in perpetual oblivion. The
Emperor shall never know any thing of it, neither shall he ever have any of the
Tincture.

Fr. Wenceslaus was fain to make an Agreement on those Terms which were drawn
up in writing, subscribed with both their hands, and confirmed by their mutual
Oaths; and so the Tincture was divided betwixt them. The Count made a Trial
by himself alone the next day, with some of his proportion thereof, to try
whether he had not been deceived therein: but he found it Right and good.

Having staid a while at this Country House, he was about to return to
Vienna; but he was taken so grievously sick of a fit of the Gout, that out of
the intolerable Torment which he felt, he drank some Aurum Potabile, which
Burrhy had given him heretofore; but with this Caution, That it was not yet
perfect. Having tasted a fevv drops thereof, he presently felt a most grievous
and vehement pain in his Joints, so that he could hardly perform his Journey
with Fr. Wenceslaus to Vienna. But the first night after his coming, he was
so afflicted with heat, that all his Entralls seemed to be on a Flame; as he
complained himself. The Day follovving his Physician, the Son of Dr. Sorbat,
whose Name was Kreisset, who was also Physician to the Emperors Army was
sent for, who considering his present Condition, applied the properest
remedies he could, which availed him nothing, but bad Symptoms did so grow upon
him, that the third day his Case was judged desperate.

The Count himself also being sensible of his Death approaching, caused his
Brother the Master of the Post Office to the Emperor, Count Peter de Paar, his
only heir, (for the sick Brother was a Batchelour) to be sent for about night:
to whom he spoke in these Words;

It was foretold to me heretofore in Italy, That I should obtain the Tincture,
and, That soon after I should dye! The first part of the Prophecy is fulfilled,
and the latter is near at hand to be accomplished; I know, That you have
bestowed as much time and Expense in this Art as my self; I have nothing more
valuable to leave you, and which, nothing can be more acceptable to you, than a
Notable Portion of Tincture, which I have sealed up in this Desk, and shall
entrust it in the hand of my Confessor, who upon my decease, shall deliver it
to you.

After which words, he delivered the Desk to his Confessor, who was present and
heard him speak them. Count Peter not imagining his Brother was so near his
End, took his leave of him for that Night, and rode home, because it was very
late. And his Brother soon after departing this Life, his Confessor also took
Coach, and went home to the Monastery of St. Francis, not far distant from the
Emperial Post Office at Vienna. The Death of the Deceased Count being signified
to his Brother, by his Footmen who had accompanied the Confessor home.

The Count immediately rose out of his Bed, being but newly entered thereinto,
and clothing himself, gallopped at two of the clock in the morning, to the
Monastery of the Franciscans, and, after he had knocked fiercely at the Gate
for admittance, the drowsy Porter arose and let him in; the Count desired to be
admitted to the Speech of the Confessor of his newly deceased Brother, but it
was replied, It was an unseasonable time for such a Visit, in regard the old
man was weak, and weary, and being newly returned home, was laid down to rest.
The Count was not satisfied with this Answer, but was very earnest with the
Porter to accompany him and some of his Attendants to the old Fathers Cell: he
making Excuses, the Count rushed in presently himself, and awaked him,
demanding the Desk which his Brother had deposited in his hands, as now
rightfully belonging unto him.

The Father was much surprised at his fuddain irruption and demand: which he
did the more suspect, because it was made at such an unseasonable time of the
night: whereupon he desired the Count to hold himself contented till the
Morning, and then he should have the Desk delivered unto him without fail, only
he desired to deliver it in before the Father Guardian, and that he would then
give him his acquittance for the Recept thereof. The Count, not content with
this Answer, by the help of his Attendants and Servants, endeavored to get it
from him by force:

Whereupon a Tumult arose; The Watch was sent for, the Monks were also gathered
together, and a Spanish Bp. of the same Order, the Confessor of the Empress
Margaret, then lodging in the Monastery, was also roused out of his sleep, who
hearing such a tumultuous Noise in the Monastery, a privileged place, was so
much concernd thereat, that he enquired into the occasion, whilst the Count was
yet present, and understanding that it arose upon the score of a sealed Desk:
he demanded it of the Father who had it in keeping: which having received from
him, the next morning he carried it with him to the Emperor, and complained
grievously against the Count, as being the occasion of that nights Uproar: In
the mean time, as soon as it was day, the noise hereof was spread all over the
City: and among the rest it reached the Ears of F. Wenceslaus, who presently
hastened to Court, and by means of the Empress's Confessor obtaining Audience,
he related to the Emperor the whole Story how the Count had used him in
Hungary, how he had extorted from him half the Tincture, how he was
necessitated, by a forced Agreement, not to discover any thing hereof whilst he
was living, but was now free from the Obligation of his Oath by the Counts
Death, that he was very glad that the Tincture was at length come into the
Hands of the right Owner his Imperial Majesty, for whom he had long before
designed it; he did therefore now implore nothing more of his Imperial Majesty,
but that he would afford him his Protection, against the Violence of Count
Peter Paar, his Postmaster, and his Adherents.

The Emperor perceiving the wonderful Series of this Affair, presently
entertained F. Wenceslaus at his Court, and committed him to the Care and
Inspection of Count Wallestein, the Imperial Governor of Hatschirr.

About this time, the Postmaster abovementioned dyed also. F. Wenceslaus
being thus received into the Emperors Protection, had his Lodgings assigned
him by the Imperial Bowling-Green, where he made some Trials before the
Emperor and Count Austin of Wallestein his Guardian, and in the Palace of the
Johannites in the Carinthian-street, he made one of 15 Marks, as they say, out
of which Transmutations the Count Wallestein made him a Gold Chain, to keep in
perpetual Memory of the thing. Moreover he did deposite some of his Tincture in
the Court, for augmentation, and, as far as I can judge, by the Process
dlivered to me, he had a great desire to get the Mercury of Silver, how far he
proceeded in it, I do not certainly know, but some affirm, that he made some
progress therein.

In the mean time he both desired to be acquainted with some noted Chemists and
eminent Artists, and several Imposters and Sophisters intruded themselves into
his acquaintance, so that from thence resulted very frequent junketings,
drinkings and merry meetings, and many foolish trifling Processes wrought by
him; from whence F. Wenceslaus learned rather several cunning and subtle
Impostures, than any real augmentation of his Powder: But the noise and
multitude of so many Importunate Visitants, being cumbersom at Court, where F.
Wenceslaus had his Diet, under the severe inspection of Count Wallestein, he
thereupon pretended, that he had occasion to make some sorts of Aqua Forts and
other Menstruums, which would be dangerous to the whole Court, and cause such
noysom Fumes and odious Smells, that they could not safely be prepared in that
place; therefore a Laboratory was built for him, in the Carinthian Fort, where
the Emperors chief Engineer did dwell, his name was Fischer, a great lover of
Alchymy, and who showed himself very officious to him, assisting him to build
strange and most nonsensical Furnaces which can ever be seen; and besides being
not a little pleased with his good fortune of the neighborhood and
acquaintance of the Owner of so rich a Tincture; but this intimacy lasted not
long, as the event soon made appear: for when F. Wenceslaus had scarcely well
fixed his habitation, and settled his things in order, the Engineer was forced
to leave the splendid dwelling there assigned him by the Emperor, and to go to
Javarin in Hungary, to dwell there, his Wife also, as some give out, being
vitiated into the bargain; F. Wenceslaus also fell very sick, and he that
waited upon him in his Chamber dyed suddenly, not without some suspicion of
Poison, and he himself also lay without any hopes of recovery, in this case J.
A. C. P. C. L. de S. who before had bought some of the Tincture of him, and had
paid him for it a thousand Ducats, designing to take this opportunity of his
illness, and decease so apparent, and so to get and enjoy his Tincture without
money, sent to him one Biliot, a French Physician, to steal from him, under
pretense of a Visit, both the said thousand Ducats, and the rest of the
Tincture: Fortune did favor him as to the first part of his Design, but in the
latter she did fail and dissappoint him, for F. VVenceslaus had hid his
Tincture more carefully than his thousand Ducats: at last, the Sick man,
contrary to all men's exspectation began to Recover, and F. Francis who was sent
to Rome to obtain a Dispensation for him, to absolve him from his Vow, having
obtained the same returned home; whereupon presently F. VVenceslaus laying
aside his Monks Habit, took a Wife and was married publicly to one named
Angerlee, who had ministered to him in his sickness, and had otherwise been very
assistant to him when he wanted her; she was a very subtle and crafty woman,
yet accounted at Vienna but little better than a common Harlot, and she was the
worse thought on, because her Sister had been naught with B. D. L. and by his
advice and assistance had caused her Husband to be made away, for which Fact,
he the said B. D. L. was Sentenced to Death: but, though afterward pardoned by
the Emperor, yet was deprived of all his Dignities, degraded of his Nobility,
and cast into perpetual Prison in the Citadel of Gratz, where he dyed
Miserably; and his Whore, F. VVenceslaus's Wives Sister, was the same day to be
Beheaded in open Court, before the Judgment Hall, the Scaffold and all the
rest being already prepared, but by the intercession of the Wife of Castle
Rodrigo, the Spanish Ambassador she was set free, yet afterward, upon the
account of her lewd life, and dishonest Practices, she was killed with a
Pistol-shot.

Fr. VVenceslaus being linked by Marriage into such a Family, did then fancy
for a time, That all the Elements did conspire together to make him happy: for
why? he was visited by Persons of the highest Rank, and withal was mightily
respected by the most eminent Ladies, Countesses and Princesses: As for me, as
Spectator of this Scene, I considered him in this Fools Paradise: Whilst it put
me in mind of Cornelius Agrippa, who, in his Book of the Vanity of Sciences,
under the Title of Alchymy, says, That if ever he should be Master of the
Tincture, he would spend it all in nothing but in Whoring; for women being
naturally covetous, he could thereby easily make them to prostitute themselves,
and to yield unto his Lust.

And it seems that not only F. VVenceslaus was so mighty a Proficient and so
stout a Soldier in the School of VENUS, That he was brought very low by the
French Disease, but also that his Wife Angerlee dyed of it. After whose decease
Fr. VVenceslaus exceeded all Bounds of honest Modesty, and daily let loose the
Reins to all sinful and voluptuous excesses: for from that time he had obtained
the Tincture, he spent in two or three years time more than Ten Myriads of
Crowns, in all manner of Luxury: and he foresaw well enough, that it could not
last and subsist long at that rate: for the Tincture would not maintain him.
And to turn it into Gold, or sell it for a small price would turn to no
Account, as he had always hoped it would by Augmentation, and thereby to gain
an inexhaustible Treasure.

But on the one hand, his Want and Necessity was such, and on the other hand,
the Solicitings of those who would buy of his Powder, were so importunate that
he could not resist so great Temptations: And therefore between both, he
resolved upon a dishonest Shift, which was to sell for great Rates, Poudred
Cinnabar, red Lead, and the Caput Mortuum of Aqua fortis boiled, and such other
Ingredients in stead of the true Powder, mixing also therewith some few Filings
of Copper, that Foolish ignorant People might mistake the same for a
Gold-making Powder: to some he sold it without any such Cozening Addition as
Coppar: And if they were not able to tinge with it, he would lay the Blame on
their Impatience and Unskilfulness in making the Projection. To others, he
pawned some of his Counterfeit Tincture for a great sum of Money, which he
pretended, he had a present use for: but he was loath to spend his Tincture in
projecting, because he hoped to augment it with a Thousand-fold advantage: And
that they might see the Tincture was genuine and true, he took some of it and
wrapped it up in a little Wax, with which he mingled a little of his right
Tincture, which he called his Crocus, or Powder of Reduction, and so tinged
therewith.

By this means he got very many 1000's of Crowns, and over and above he got P.
C. de L. and C. L. to be his Assistants and Partners in these Mysteries. But
the Impudent sort, among which A. C. P. and his Cosen C. B. are to be reckoned,
he gave them whole Ingots which he had cast, consisting of equal parts of Gold
and Silver; then filing some of them, and dissolving it into common Aqua forts,
which he brought with him, he affirmed that now his Tincture was exalted into a
Menstruum, which would presently change Silver into Gold: and that as soon as
ever the price or value which was to be paid for its purchase should be put
thereto, it would be converted into Gold:

It has been also further related to me, That he grew to that Degree of
Impudence, as to tinge some sort of Coins after this manner into Gold, before
the Empress Dowager and the Emperor himself. Yea, this fellow was so arrogant,
as to cause his own Effigies to be drawn on some of those false Coins which he
did attempt deceitfully to put off.

Yet this matter could not be kept so secret, but the more prudent began to
smell the Cheat, and to mutter something about it; which was very ill taken in
the Emperors Court. For he was in such Credit there, that it was not safe to
impeach him, as being received into the Emperors Protection, both against the
Clergy and the Secular Power, and even against the skilful in the same Art. For
great men are loath to acknowledge their Error; but think themselves, tho under
a Mistake, to be as infallible as the Pope himself.

Those who were not much concerned in the Matter, suffered it so to pass, as
taking little Notice of it; but some true Philosophers were very much
aggrieved, That so in famous an Impostor, after so many Vows and Protestations
made by him to the contrary, and after such evident Proofs of his former
debauched Life, after so many villainous Crimes committed, and his base
Prostitution openly of so noble an Art of Chemistry, should yet notwithstanding
that he ranted it up and down in his Coach in Masquarades, before the Emperors
Court, be maintained and protected by him. But others, who had been cozened by
him of great Sums of Money, even to many thousand Ducats, with his adulterate
Tincture, could not so rest satisfied, but brought in their Action against him
at common Law: where, after some time and much Expense, they obtained Judgment
against him, but it never was put in Execution, though all other means were
tried.

Now the Emperor, unless he would have left his Favorite VVenceslaus to the
Jurisdiction and power of his Judges, and Rigor of the Law, must needs
interpose: for the Complaints made against him for his insolent and abusive
practices were so many, and the Fame of them was spread so far abroad in the
world, That his Imp^^ial Majesty thought it more convenient to have the Noise
of it altogether suppressed.

To be short, The Emperor paid all his Debts, and that he might prevent his
farther opportunity of Cosenage, he got from him the rest of his Tincture, and
then advanced him to the most Ancient Order of Barrony in Bohemia, by the Title
of Baron Seyler of Seylerburgh, and afterward made him Hereditary Master of
the Mint of Bohemia: and having thus preferred him, he sent him away from his
Court to Prague, where he now lives very gallantly; and has made Friar Francis
the Steward of his House: having married a Second Wise, called VValdes
Kircheriana, a handsome woman, and of a Noble Family.

In the mean time, a Rumor was spread all over Germany, That the Devil had
carried him away Soul and Body. Which Report, though it might have some good
grounds, yet, for this time it was not true: but he has very great reason
to-fear that it may prove true, at last, if he does not amend his Life: and the
Event thereof we must expect.

I have described the Series of this Story both to vindicate the Truth, and
also to satisfy so many Curious, who have despicable thoughts of Chemistry. If
I have mistaken in any Passage, Fr. VVenceslaus is yet alive, and I earnestly
desire him to amend and rectify my mistakes, and to vindicate himself, by
giving the World a more exact Account thereof, that he may no longer lie under
any unjust Reflection.

For a Conclusion, I heartily wish, That if God should bless any lover of this
noble Art, with some such like Treasure, he would use it better than
VVenceslaus has done: for the Glory of God, the Benefit and advantage of his
Neighbor and the furtherance of his own everlasting Salvation.

FINIS.

