A WORD IN SEASON: OR, A LETTER FROM A Reverend Divine TO A Justice of the
Peace IN LONDON.

Licensed,

May the 4th. 1679.


LONDON, Printed for R. G. in the Year, 1679.

A WORD in Season, etc.
SIR,
IN Answer to Yours, of the 4th. Instant; I cannot but acquaint you, that ever
since I heard any thing of this late Hellish Plot, Contrived by the Roman
Catholics, against his Majesty's most sacred Person, our Religion, and
Government; and have observed what Gracious Proclamations, and Suitable ORDERS
of King and Council, have been frequently exhibited for the Extirpation of
those Common Enemies of our Land, and perpetual Disturbers of Mankind, Priests,
Jesuits, and other Romish Recusants; and yet, to our sad Experience, have seen
how both the City and Country still swarm with these Destructive Vermin, who
yet hide their Permeradus Heads in every Hole, and Corner of the Nation; and
are both ready, and willing too, upon the least Occasion offered them, to Sally
out, and make Desparate Excursions; either to the Proselyting, or stirring up
Dissension among his Majesty's good Subjects, Firing of Towns or Cities,
Committing of Clandestine Murders; or any other Hellish Impiety, be it never so
Black, or deep Died, so it may but conduce to the Romish Interest, and
Protestant Ruin: I say, Sir, having observed, that these Evils still remain
among us; I have been thus bold, partly through that intimate Friendship,
wherewith you have been always pleased to Honor me; and partly through an
earnest Desire, to satisfy my own Conscience, in the Discharge of that
Function, wherein Providence has been pleased to place me; to give you my own
Sentiments, (which, I think, I may term Supplicationes Populi, The Wishes of
the People) of which, yet I am in no wise fond; but should be glad to have them
Returned, when Corrected by your better Judgment.

The great Thing which I would offer to your Care and Consideration, is, That
since our Great City, the Metropolis of our whole Nation, is by the Hellish
Conspiracy of our Implacable Enemies, at this Day more particularly threatened
with those two most Terrible Judgments of Sword, and Fire; the latter of which,
if not seasonably prevented, is in all likelihood, like to be the greatest
Incourager of the former: How Commendable would it be, if the aforementioned
Orders and Proclamations of his Majesty's, (wherein he has divulged all the
Marks of a Gracious Sovereign, and a good Christian) were by those his
Officers, to whom they are Recommended, put into as strict Execution, as they
were at first designed? What, Is it not enough, that we have a God, but we must
have a King too, who takes greater Care of us, than We of our Selves? Shall he
Condescend so far, as to grant us a Power, and shall not we use the Means for
our Security? but like drowsy Snayls, lie slumbering in our several Houses,
till they be either Demolish't, or burnt about our Ears? O that I could awake
every Dividual Officer out of this Fatal Stupidity, and stir him up to Purge
the City of those Skulking Recusants; who, like Crude Humors, infest every Part
of Her; and have often set her into such Burning Feavors, as have threatened to
bring both her, and all her Inhabitants, to speedy Ruin! It would be a good
Work therefore, to see where the Fault lies: If Inferior Officers are either
Remiss, or Timorous; for fear, forsooth, of offending their Friends, Neighbors,
or Relations; and will not take notice of every Papist they know of, because
(perhaps) he is one of their Servants, or seems himself to be a harmless,
innocent Fellow. I say, for fear of these important Abuses, it would be well,
if such Officers were inspected, and punished by their Superiors. This is no
time for Ceremony, or Complement. The Nation is immediately concerned therein;
and no less than our Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes, lie at Stake. Besides, no
Roman Catholic is now to be trusted, tho of never so silly, and unpromising an
Aspect: We know, that the subtlest Jesuits have obscured themselves under the
meanest Trades, or Callings: And therefore, whilst we Connive at a Tailor,
Weaver, or Shoo-maker, etc. of that Persuasion, we do not know, but we harbor a
Coleman, Staly, or Pickering, amongst us; who, whilst he holds us in suspense
with a seeming Friendship, is secretly Contriving how to introduce our Enemies
to Cut our Throats. Nay further; I know, that the main Current of their
Extravagant Principles, do so encourage and prompt them to Treachery and Blood
shed, that were my own Brother a Roman Catholic, and knew me to be otherwise,
I would refuse to Bed with him, for fear he should stab me in my Sleep. There
is no Faith, no Trust to be found in them: No Obligation can engage them to
Peace: No Oaths can tie them to Loyalty, or a civil Conversation, among others
of a Different Opinion; which a Reverend Divine took particular Notice of, and
upon an urgent Occasion, expressed himself thus before a Great and Learned
Auditory, in his Sermon. Conformity (says he) to the Oath of Allegiance, and
other outward formal Satisfaction of the State, concurring with a Resolution to
continue in Popery, is far more Pernicious to the State, than open and professed
Recusancy. For, first, either by Power of Popish Dispensation, which great Men
especially, may for their Money easily procure: They may thus become more
notoriously Serviceable to the Church of Rome, than before.

2dly. He declines and diverts the watchful Eye of State-Jealousy, from its
ordinary Vigilance over Popish Villainies and Machinations: Whereby he more
securely contrives his Plots and Designs; and thinking himself unsuspected,
most dangerously concurs with that Man of Sin; to the wasting of our Church,
the distrengthening of the State, and the total Subversion of Religion and
Government.

3dly. He lies more dangerously shrouded under Respect, and the undeserved
Reputation of a Good Subject; and so may with greater Bravery, wound and weaken
the better Side, vex Goodness and Good Men; promote Popery; hinder the
Proceedings against Papists, under colorable Ostentations of safer Policy, and
flourishing Pretenses of deeper Reaches into the Mysteries of State.

4thly. He that Conforms, in outward Obedience to the STATE, by virtue of a
Popish Indulgence, Dispensation, or Pardon, is more than ordinarily obliged to
Recompense the Popes Liberality therein; with some more Remarkable and
Notorious Service to the Sea of Rome than ordinary.

5thly. He that with willful Enlargement of Conscience, and secret sturdy
Resolution, takes the Oath, is in all probability, most likely to grow
Revengful and Inveterate against those that imposed it.

Upon these Grounds, I cannot but think it dangerous, to put too much
Confidence, even in Church-Papists: whose State, while they yet are
premeditatedly resolved to continue in Popery, is, if we will Credit their own
Doctors, very dangerous; Vide Bernards Legal Repentance, p. 59.

I speak not, to drive or detain any Papist from the Church: No; If he leaves
that obstinate Temper behind him, and enters our Congregation, (as he ought to
do) with Humility, Reverence, and Godly Fear; submitting his Understanding to
the Illumination of that Powerful Spirit of God, which opened the Heart of
Lydia, the Eyes of Saul, and Converted Hundreds to the Primitive Church in a
few Hours; I should then rejoice at his Coming, and should for his farther
Encouragement, alot him the best seat in the Church. But if, on the Contrary,
if he comes merely out of Formality, with no expectation to be benefitted by
what he Hears, I look on him no better than a professed Recusant; and verily
believe, It had been better he had kept away.

But it may be some will reply, What can possibly be more required, and exacted
from these Men, than Conformity to outward Obedience to the State? what better
Security, or surer Bond can be thought on, than an Oath; the Sacred, and
Sovereign Instrument of all Justice and Obedience amongst Men? What farther
Invention of State shall be able to stay the fearful Mischiefs, that hang over
our heads from this Malicious and Murtherous Generation?

I Answer; None in the World, whilst they stay among us; not the most
excellent, and Quintesscential Policy of all the wisest States, that ly under
the Sun, can afford help in this Case. Idolatry is ever attended with this
inseparable Curse, that it will Plague that Kingdom, that Nourishes it; and pay
it Home with a Witness, unless some Right Hand, and resolute Course be taken,
for the more speedy rooting of it out. For indeed, the Depths of the Mystery of
Iniquity are laid so infathomable, that they cannot be Sounded by Honest and
Christian Policy: Nor are we ever likely to arrive at the Bottom of this
Hellish Plot, without the Immediate Assistance of Allmighty God.

It Is true, it were a very Just and Pious Act, to Administer to them the Oath,
and bring them to the true Church. But their Violations of Oaths,
Dispensations, Absolutions, and Pardons, etc. their Equivocations, Mental
Reservations, Evasions, Corruptions of Conscience, and Execrable Violations of
all Laws, both of God and Man, of Nations and Nature, are so Infinite, and
Endless; and they so mingle their Conclusions of State, with the very
Confusions of Hell, that in proportion, it is as easy to Chain up those Damned
Spirits from Tempting men on Earth; as to Bridle these Blood-Thursty Monsters,
from under-mining and over-turning those States, which profess the Truth of
Christ, if power and means were answerable to their Malice, and Revenge. Nor
can we ever expect to be free from the implacable Malice of Anti Christ Abroad,
unless we endeavor to suppress the rising Insolence of those her Followers at
Home. Then, and not till then, the Royal Person of our most Gracious King,
would be in safety; the Concurrent Fury of our greatest Enemies, durst not
entertain a Thought of Invasion: This would cut the Throat of All Plots against
the King and Government; and Crush the Pope's Heart, for ever harboring any
Probability of Exacting, or Re-establishing his Tyranny or Idolatry, in this
happy Island.

And this wished for Condition, would be mightily farthered by these 2 Means.

First, If Laws, worthily provided in such cases, might have their Course and
Current, without Opposition, Diversion, Partiality, Diversion by false Friends,
or any Cunning Frauds and Delusions, of the Religious Intentions thereof.

Secondly, If on our side, there were but half the care taken for the
Maintenance of Christ's Truth, and Extirpation of the Infectious Heresies of
the Man of Sin, as there is Curiousness, and Cruelty in Popish Kingdoms, for
the Continuance of Anti-Christianism; and their Banishing, and Barring out even
of all possibility of Re-formation, Plantation of Primitive Truth, and
Profession of Grace.

To Conclude; It is the General joint Consent, and Current Conclusion, of all
the Christian Orthodox Reformed Churches, upon the Face of Europe; and it is
worthyly and unanswerably demonstrated by King James, of happy Memory, That the
Pope is ANTICHRIST; and Rome, the Mystical Babylon. Though I know, some few
Authors, either Addicted to Partiality, or Popery have not assented hereunto;
which is little available, in a Truth so universally resolved on by Divines of
best Learning and Judgment. So that, if we may take their words, before a few
partial persons, that write against them, I would ask any man the meaning of
these Scriptures -- Reward Her even as She has rewarded you; And give Her
double, according to Her Works. And again, In the Cup She has Filled you, Fill
Her the Double. Rev. 18.6. And in the 7. v. In as much, as She Glorified
Herself, and lived in Pleasure; so much give you to Her Torment and Sorrow.

Sir; Delays are dangerous! and an Impunity to Idolatry, may shake the
strongest Pillars in a well settled-State: And though I am far against Cruelty,
yet I am mightly for Care; So that, if your Circumspection in that Clasis of a
Justice of the Peace, where in his Majesty has bin pleased to Honor you, can
any wise speedily promote the security of his Royal Person, the Extirpation of
Romish Recusants out of the City, that the Citizens may sleep without
Watch-lights at their Beds-heads, of fear of being roused by the dismal Outcry
of Fire! Fire! In fine, If in your Station, you can Effect any thing, that may
Conduce to the safety either of King, Country, or the Protestant Religion,
There Is no man of private Degree, shall Express himself more thankful,

Than him whom you have honored with your Friendship: and Subscribes. R. B.


