THE LOYALTY OF THE LAST Long Parliament: OR, A LETTER TO AN English Gentleman
AT FLORENCE.

SHOWING, That the late Parliaments (Addressed against) did not so much
Entrench on the PREROGATIVE, as that of XVIII YEARS Continuance, of whom His
Majesty said, NEVER any KING was so happy in a House of Commons, as I in this.
-- King's ANSWER, 20 Febr. 1663.

LONDON Printed for Francis Smith, Senior. 1681.

THE LOYALTY OF THE LAST Long Parliament, And their APPROVERS; In a LETTER to
an English Gentleman at Florence.
SIR,
I Received yours of Sept. 1. Stilo Novo, wherein you are pleased to discover
to me your Sentiments concerning the state of the Parties among us, and the
division of Minds about public Affairs; whence I readily perceive how
obnoxious you that live in Popish Countries, are to Mis-informations and
False-conceptions of the state of your own Country: For whilst you take your
Measures either from public Prints, or private Letters, written either by the
Popish or Yorkian Party, (and such are all that are brought over and
entertained by the Men of Intelligence where you are;) You are altogether as
unable to give a right Judgment, as he that determines a Cause having heard
only one Party.

Hence it is, you imagine that we here are now again divided in our Minds and
Actings relating to Government, just as we were forty years ago, and that they
are the same Men, or those that succeed in the same Principles, that are now
prosecuting the same Ends, even the alteration of Government both in Church and
State, and instead of Episcopacy and Monarchy, to introduce Presbytery and
Democracy. Indeed it cannot be wondered that you who have lived so many years
out of your own Country amongst strangers, should harbor such conceits, when
even here (where men have such plentiful means of true Information) the Popish
and Mercenary Agents working upon Prejudice in some, Malice, Envy and Revenge
in others; Jealousy in one sort, and affectation of Prudence in another:
Prevail with many to forget Coleman's Letters, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder,
and the Trial of my Lord Stafford, much more the dreadful Burning of London;
the the two Armies, one of 73, the other of 78. The Declaration of Indulgence,
the Popish Designs of Clifford, the Impeachment of Danby, and the Popish Lords
by diverse Parliaments; the many Sham-plots, especially that discovered by
Dangerfield, or the Meal-tub Plot; the Subornation of Witnesses to take away
the Life of the Duke of Buckingham, and Dr. Oats by odious Accusations; the
Assassination of Justice Arnold, and Attempts to corrupt Bedlow, and others:
not to speak of the Trial and Judgment given and executed upon Coleman, and
upon Godfrey's Murderers, and upon the Jesuits; and many other things, which
demonstratively prove the Plot of introducing Popery and Slavery into these
Nations, or in Coleman's own phrase, Of utter subduing a pestilent Heresy,
etc. And according to my Lord D. of Governing without a Parliament. It cannot
be wondered at, I say, that such as you should falsely conceive of the State of
these Kingdoms: But if you will have the patience to look a little back upon
some few things that are past, and compare them with things present, you will
easily perceive that it is not some factious men of Commonwealth Principles,
nor the Clamours of Non-conformists against Popery and Arbitrariness, that
forms the discontented and agrieved People among us, but it is in truth the old
and loyal Friends of the KING, RELIGION and GOVERNMENT of England; such as
assisted His Majesty and his Royal Father in their Wars and Councels, and the
Successors and Adherents of such who constitute the Bulk of the substantial Men
and Protestants in the Nation, with whom the Dissenters join and fall in. These
are the men who for these nine or ten years last past, have seen and set
themselves against the Popish and Arbitrary Designs carried on by Cabal
Councels and Parasites. Indeed the Discovery of the horrid Popish Plot and
Treasons did open the eyes of many, who would not see these mischievous Designs
till they had a Meridian Light.

That this is the Naked Truth, will appear plainly to you, if you consider,
with what earnest desire, joy and applause, His Majestry was restored to his
Crown; was ever any people so transported with Joy and Triumph as the people of
England? Insomuch, that even those who where obnoxious to, and suffered Capital
Punishments afterward, were lulled into a hope of Impunity by the universal
Congratulation. Then as soon as might be, was the King's Long Parliament
called, whilst the people was in this passion, and they chose (to be sure)
those especially whom they apprehended most grateful to the King and his
Prerogative, and most averse to the Principles and Practices of foregoing
times. This appeared in all the Votes, Addresses, and Bills of that Parliament
for many years; wherein they set themselves with all their skill to assert the
King's Power and Authority against Parliamentary Pretensions, and had almost
raised his Revenue to such a prodigious height, that he should never need
Supplies from his People. They were so fully addicted to please the King, that
he Answ. 20 Fe^ 1663.
says, Never any King was so happy in a House of Commons, as He in this. And
surely he judged aright concerning them, if the King's happiness consist in the
Parliaments Concurrence with Cabinet Dictates.

Notwithstanding the Gentlemen of this House began, after the dreadful Burning
of London, (which to a Committee of their House was proved by many shrewd
Evidences, to be done by contrivance of the Papists) to make Addresses against
the Papists to repress their Insolences. But in the Year 1672, after the
Plotters had procured the Exchequer to be shut up, and the Properties of many
Thousands of the People in it, and that the Tripple League (which cost the
people so great Sums of Money in favor of it) was dissolved, and a War against
Holland in Conjunction with France was commenced; and the penal Laws against
Papists and Dissenters dispensed with by Declaration: the Commons in Parliament
saw clearly which way they were driving, and therefore as soon as they were
permitted to sit, Addressed the King against that Declaration of Indulgence,
informing Him, That penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, cannot be
suspended but by Act of Parliament. And though ^^br. 4. ^672.
His Majesty tell them in answer, That they question His Power in
Ecclesiastics, which he finds not done in the Reign of any of his Ancestors:
Yet they reply, That his Majesty has been very much misinformed, since no such
Power was ever claimed or exercised by any of his Predecessors. In fine, His
Majesty was induced to cancel that Declaration, and declare it should be no
President for the future.

Hereupon I would gladly ask our Boasters of Loyalty, and Exclaimers against
the late Parliaments, (excepting open and secret Papists, for whose Interest
this Indulgence was procured) whether they approved of what the King did, or of
what the Parliament did in this Affair. If of the Declaration, then they had
the Presbyterians and Dissenters in General on their sides, owning the
Prerogative by taking Licenses for exerciseing Worship and Religion contrary to
Law: if they did not approve of the Declaration, but of the Address, then let
them acknowledge that at this turn, the Dissenters were more Loyal (as they
call it) and greater Adorers of Prerogative then themselves, and that it is not
the King's Prerogative which these love, but their own Malignity, and the
Prerogative for the sake of that; so that if the King should use his
Prerogative contrary to their minds, they would be as much against it as now
they are for it: Judge they as they will concerning it, it is a plain Case, that
the Parliament, which sprang out of the most Ardent Affection that ever was in
a People toward their Prince, and out of the greatest Detestation of
Republican Principles, yet resolved that the King was deceived by his Cabal
Councillors in a matter, which in the direct consequence of it tended to the
interrupting the free course of the Laws, and altering the Legislative Power.
And since the discovery of Coleman's Letters, I think there is none doubts but
that Indulgence was the effect of Popish Councils; and the Papists were the
Persons who designed the greatest advantage to their cause by it, If any Favor
was intended for Dissenters by it, it is strange that His Majesty should not
pass a Bill for Nulling of the Rigorous Act of the thirty five of Queen
Elizabeth, when it had already past both Houses of Parliament.

In the same Session of Parliament it was, that the Parliament passed a Bill
for imposing a Test against Popery upon all that should bear any Office Civil
or Military in the Kingdom, which the Duke of York submitting to, had his
Commission of High Admiral vacated, but his Advice and Influence still
vigorous. By this means also my Lord Clifford was discovered to be Popish, and
quitted his High Office of Lord Treasurer and great Minister of State. Was it
not high time for those in Parliament that had any love to their Religion and
Government, to look about 'em? Or was it sawcily done for the Parliament to
concern themselves with the King's Counselors, and find fault with their
managment? Nay, they proceeded so far in the next Session, as to Address
against the consummation of the Marriage between his Royal Highness and the
Duchess of Modena (which was already done by Proxy) because she was a Papist.
And after they had received one Answer from his Majesty in this matter, The
Commons in Parliament proceed to give their reasons against it, praying him to
relieve his Subjects from those fears and apprehensions which at present they
lie under, from the Progress made in that Treaty -- That for another Age at the
least, this Kingdom will be under continual Apprehensions of the GROWTH of
POPERY. And the danger of the Octo. 31. 1673.
Protestant Religion. Here we see that the language of fears and apprehensions
of the Growth of Popery, and danger of Protestantism, is as well the language
of the King's happiest Parliament, that ever was, as of the unhappiest
Parliament of Forty One.

Three days after this, they Address to his Majesty for a General Fast, and
that upon these Grounds, (viz.) Being passionately sensible of the Calamitous
condition of this Kingdom, not only by reason of the War (which was then
managed against the Dutch) wherein it is at present involved, but many other
intestine differences and divisions amongst us, which are chiefly occasioned by
the undermining contrivances of Popish Recusants, whose numbers and insolences
are greatly of late increased, and whose restless practices threaten a
Subversion both of Church and State. What is the difference now between this
Seventy Three Parliament, and that of Forty One.

Feb. 7. Following, they show there resentment of the Black Heath Army, and
resolve, That the continuing of any standing forces in this Nation, other than
the Militia, is a great grievance and vexation to the People. What? This Loyal
Parliament talk of grievances and vexation to the People in the King's
management of his Prerogative.

This House of Commons (as well as some that have been since) take upon them to
pray the King to remove some of his Great Counselors from his Presence and
their Public Employments. But their Address against Duke Lauderdale, Feb. 23.
75. is very remarkable, both for the matter and language of it; for thus they
say -- Though we have great cause to rest assured of the continuance of your
Majesty's Gracious Disposition toward us, yet we find upon a serious
examination of the State of this Kingdom, that there is a great jealousy
arisen from some State-proceedings in the Hearts of your Subjects; That some
Persons in great employment under your Majesty have fomented designs, contrary
to the Interest of your Majesty and People, intending to deprive us of our
ancient Rights and Liberties, that thereby they might the more easily introduce
the Popish Religion, and an ARBITRARY Form of GOVERNMENT, to the Ruin and
Destruction of the whole Kingdom. Here Is a Charge with a Witness: all the worst
of Forty one Forms of Declaiming against the Government. This is the General
Charge; let us hear the Particular -- The said Duke of Lauderdale did Publicly
affirm in the Presence of your Majesty sitting in Council; And before diverse of
your Majesty's Subjects then attending, that your Majesty's Edicts ought to be
obeyed, for your Majesty's Edicts are equal with Laws, and ought to be observed
in the first place. Thereby justifying the said Declaration [of 15 March, 71.]
and the proceedings thereupon, and declaring his Inclinations to Arbitrary
Councels, in terror of your Majesty's good Subjects. They conclude thus; We do
therefore in all humility implore your Sacred Majesty -- That for the ease of
the hearts of your people, who are possessed with extreme grief and sorrow to see
your Majesty thus ABVSED, and the Kingdom endangered; That your Majesty would
graciously be pleased to remove the said Duke of Lauderdale from all his
Employments, etc. Is not this Writing after the 41 Copy? Is not this striking
at His Majesty and the Government through his Ministers sides? What! that House
of Commons tell His Majesty he is abused, and the Kingdom endangered, which was
chosen, and nourished, and indulged for 18 years together, to be an ensample to
all succeeding Parliaments.

But to proceed in His Majesty's Answer to their Address of the 20, or 26th of
May, 77. advising him to enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with the
States against France: He tells them, How highly he was offended at that great
invasion of his Prerogative. And in His Majesty's Answer to their Address of
Jan. 31, he reminds them of it: But (says He) you take no notice of it, but on
the contrary, add to your former ill Conduct, new Invasions equally offensive
to His Majesty's Authority, as contrary to His (and He thinks) most other men's
judgments. Unhappy House of Commons now, how ever happy heretofore, thus to
interfere with His Majesty's Authority and Judgment too.

This sharp Answer and Reproof bears date 4th of Febr. 77. but in March
following the Parliament having prepared a Poll-Bill for furnishing His Majesty
with money, for entering into an actual War against the French King, His Majesty
past that Bill, March 20. Thus with great vigor and animosity, to the
universal joy of the whole Nation, Drums were beat up, and all preparations
made for the War, and a bitter Book, entitled, Christianissimus
christianandus, published by Allowance, against the French; but the
Conspiritors at Court intended no such thing, for the then Lord Treasurer's
Letter to Mr. Montague then Ambassador in the French Court, bares date 5 days
after, viz. Mar. 25. wherein he gives him directions for proposing Conditions
of Peace between the King and ours with the Confederates, and such as for which
(says he) the King expects to have six Millions of Livers yearly for three
years -- because (he adds) it will be two or three years before he can hope to
find his Parliament in humor to give him supplies, after the having made any
Peace with France. This I take notice of, to let you see, Sir, how different
Sentiments and Designs that Prerogative Parliament and the great Ministers had
in the transacting of State-matters. But before this Letter was discovered, the
Commons in their Address of May, 10, 78. did deeply resent the Councils the
King took in these Affairs. 'For they tell his Majesty, that the refusing of
their advice [given the 26 of May before, and reiterated the 31 of January
ensuing] and dismissing the Parliament in May last, was the accasion of these
ill Consequences, which have since succeeded both at home and abroad. All which
have arisen from those misrepresentations (say they) of our proceedingss which
have been suggested to your Majesty by some particular persons in a Clandestine
way, without the Participation and Advice, as we conceive, of your
Council Board, as though we had invaded upon your Majesty's Prerogative of
making Peace and War: Whereas we did only, etc. upon which Grounds your Majesty
was induced to give us such Answers, to those two Addresses rejecting our
advice, as thereby your Majesty's good Subjects have been infinitely
discouraged, and the State of your Majesty's Affairs reduced to a most
deplorable condition. We do therefore most humbly desire, that for the good and
safety of this Kingdom and the satisfaction of your Subjects, your Majesty
would Graciously be pleased to remove those Counselors, etc,

These things were done and said by this Parliament, even before the discovery
of the horrid Popish Plot, and Treasons. For how vigorously they acted after
that discovery in the Prosecution of Coleman, the Jesuits and Godfrey's
Murderers, in the Impeachment of the Popish Lords and Danby, for High Treason,
in throwing out the Popish Lords from sitting in the Lords House, and other
matters, (for which they were subjected to an Honorable Death or Dissolution)
I shall not need to mention, because they are fresh in every ones memory: One
thing of an elder date I will call to mind, wherein the temper of that House
against Popish and Arbitrary designs, does notably appear it was their
rejecting of two Bills past in the House of Lords, and sent down to the
Commons, The one was tituled, An Act for the more effectual Conviction and
Prosecution of Popish Recusants; which they rejected with great contempt, for
being ready to put the question for throwing it out, it was moved they should
stop a while to see if any Member of their House had the face to speak for it.
It appearing so evidently to them that this Bill tended directly contrary to
its Title. The other Bill was to be An Act for further securing of the
Protestant Religion, by Educating the Children of the Royal Family therein, and
for the providing for the continuance of a Protestant Clergy. In this Bill
there was a Test to be presented to every future King and Queen of this Realm
against Popery. A fine Project, which clearly implied, that any King or Queen
in future may be a Papist, and then the security of the Protestant Religion,
etc. was to lie in this Paper-Statute, Maugre all the Wit, Policy, Craft,
Power, secret and open violence of all Jesuits, and Papists with the Crown of
England on their sides. But the Commons rejecting this, did not only show
disaffection to Popish Cabal Councils, but also their judgment in seeing into
the malice of those contrivancies, that had already over reached the House of
Peers with the Bishops in it, and that in the great concern of Religion their
proper Province.

But because the Impeachment of the Earl of Danby, is a full discovery of the
sense of that House touching Court Councils and Actions, give me leave to mind
you of it more particularly.

The first Article says, That he has Traitorously encroacht to himself Royal
Power, by treating in matters of Peace and War with Foreign Ministers, etc.
against the Express Declaration of His Majesty and His Parliament, etc. For
when the King at the instance of the Parliament, had made provision for War,
had raised an Army, and money for that end. Then did he treat of peace with the
French Ministers, and with the French King by the English Ambassador, as
aforesaid.

The second Article, That he has Traitorously endeavored to subvert the
ancient and well established Form of Government in this Kingdom, and instead
thereof to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical way of Government, and the
better to effect this His purpose he did design the raising of an Army, upon
pretense of a War against the French King; and to continue the same as a
standing Army within this Kingdom: And mis-imployed the money given for the
disbanding of that Army to the continuance of it.

3. Article, That he Traitorously intending to hinder the Meetings of
Parliaments, and to deprive His Majesty of their Council, and thereby to alter
the constitution of the Government, did negotiate a Peace for the French King
-- for the doing whereof he endeavored to procure a great sum of money of
him; for the carrying on his Traiterous designs.

4. Article, That he is Popishly affected, and has Traitorously concealed the
late horrid Popish Plot -- and has suppressed the Evidence, and reproachfully
discountenanced the Kings Witnesses, etc.

5. Article, That he has wasted the Kings Treasure, by issuing out of His
Majesty's Exchequer -- for unnecessary Pensions and secret services, to the
value of 231602. l. within two years, etc.

6. Article, That he has by indirect means procured from His Majesty to
himself, diverse considerable Gifts and Grants of Inheritance of the ancient
Revenue of the Crown, even contrary to Acts of Parliament.

Here we have a great Favorite, and mighty Minister of State accused for High
Treason, in respect of great Transactions of Government for a long time
together: And the accused person thought not fit to stand upon his
justification, and put himself upon his Trial, but pleads his Majesty's pardon,
thereby implicitly confessing his guilt. And that is of the highest nature
that can be, no less then subverting the ancient and well established Form of
Government in this Kingdom, and introducing an Arbitrary and Tyranical way of
Government.

But that which is more to my purpose is, the consideration of the persons that
exhibit this charge, I have told you already who they were, such a House of
Commons, so Loyal, so obliged in Interest and Affections to Prerogative, so
abominating all Principles and pretenses against it, or that may seek to
entrench upon it, as never can a better on that account be expected in England;
now if this House find such horrid Crimes in Court-councellors. And if the
three Parliaments we have had since, have but proceeded in the same Methods
which this Parliament took, and led them into, then the inference from these
Premises are very Obvious; as,

1. That the Court is in the Opinion of the Kings best Subjects and Friends
liable to be abused by not only ill and hurtful, but by treasonous, and
destructive Councels.

2. That (which is the thing I under took to show you) not only the best, the
wisest, the loyalest, but the Body of the Nation is of this mind, and will ever
be so, as there is great reason to conclude.

3, That they who would persuade His Majesty and the People, that the actions
of the late Parliament which are but the same, or of the very same Nature with
those of this Long Parliament are irrugelar, factious, seditious, injurious to
the Kings Prerogative and the Government, do in plain consequence find fault
with the constitution of the Government and legislative Power of England, by
King, Lords and Commons, and desire and endeavor the subverting of it.

That the Body of the People, the loyalest, and most substantial part of the
Nation is thus minded and will in reason always be so, appears from the Nature
of the Long Parliament and the continuance of it, and the Successors of it. For
that Parliament continued about 18 years, and we have had three since in these
3 years, and all agreeing in the same Councels, in opposition to Court Councels
and actings. Now if the People can never be expected in any circumstances, to
be better inclined to choose a Prerogative Parliament than they were at the
choice of that, and that the Parliaments since have been of the same temper and
judgment, and this for 21 years, 3 lives of single persons, how can it be
imagined we should ever have a more Prerogative Parliament. And then my third
Inference follows, that they who Inveigh against these Parliaments, do in true
construction inveigh against the constitution of Parliaments in England, and
desires the Subversion of the Government. For if all the Individuals be naught
the Species must needs be naught, which subsists in these Individuals. If all
Parliaments that have been these threescore years have been in these men's
Opinion seditious and injurious to the Kings Rights, and are ever like to be
so, surely there ought to be a Reformation, for injury ought not to be done to
the Kings Rights, and there remains no way to remedy this but the alteration of
the ancient English constitution, and either to throw off Parliaments wholly,
or to reduce them to the present State of the French Parliaments, that they may
not dare to oppose, or not to affirm and ratify every of the Kings Edicts, or
according to the Scoth Oracle, Duke Lauderdale, That the Kings Edicts are not
only equal to Laws, but ought to be obeyed in the first place.

Now I hope Sir, you cannot imagine that the Body of the People can be weary of
their Old English Government, or that any but such as I spoke of at first,
persons obxnoious to the Justice of Parliaments, their Friends and Favorers,
Deputies, the envious and revengeful Papists, or indifferent to any Religion,
or those that hate all that are not of their minds, or whose Interest it is to
desire a French Government, together with some dull Spirits that think it the
only way to peace and quietness, yield up all to Court-councels of what kind so
ever; such as these are the Party, the Faction, the Clamorers against the late
Parliaments, and in them against all English Parliaments whatsoever.

Here, Sir, I that to have concluded, having in my Opinion said enough to show
that the present Lovers of Parliament Councels, are both the greatest part or
body of the Kingdom (which appears from their choice of Representatives, for
the Commons in Parliament do best speak the Voice of the people) and also the
most loyal and true Lovers of His Majesty and the English Government, but I
crave your leave to add some more things that occur to my mind in reference to
this matter.

And you may remember (if at least you were then in England) that in the Year
75. there was a great Contest between the Lords House and the House of Commons,
about Privileges, insomuch that the Lords entered into a Debate, and put the
Question, Whether they should Petition His Majesty to dissolve that Parliament
and call a new one, which had been carried in the Affirmative, if they had
decided it by the greater number of Lords, then present at the Debate; but they
but they called in the Aid of Voices by Proxy, and so concluded it Negatively:
thereupon the affirming Lords make Protestation against it, and give their
Reasons; which Reasons and many other Objections against the continuance of
that Parliament, were answered in a Pamphlet, entitled, A Packet of Advices to
the Men of Shaftsbury: which though it was written by a mercenary Pen, yet
there is no doubt (that I ever heard) of it is being written at the Instigation
of the then Lord Treasurer, and contains as high praises of that Parliament as
can be given; I Will instance but in one or two passages, pa. 15.

A Parliament (says that Author) which has had the honor to re-settle the
Crown and Kingdom, after it had, by a wonderful hand of God, been but newly
rescued out of the ruins of a late Rebellion; a Parliament that has done
perhaps more for the preservation of this well-tempered Monarchy, than many
other of the best Parliaments put together ever did before: and I may boldly
say, because it can be proved by Instances of Fact, that they have done more
toward the containing of Monarchy Power, in its just bounds, than any
Parliament ever did, that may be counted to have been the most popular and
public hearted. And p. 56. the generality of this House of Commons are known
to be men of the best Quality and of Estates, and of the best Understanding;
they understand what the true Interest of the Crown is, and -- as they have
ever been, so they still are right and firm to it and the Government. This was
the Earl of D. judgment of this House in those days; but when they came to
Impeach him of High Treason, then the dangers of Dissolving them are quite
blown away; and now it is advisable, that His Majesty should meet his People in
frequent Parliaments. I would ask the Clamores against the late Parliaments,
Whether they did not heartily approve of the Character given to that Parliament
in the Book cited, and of the Treasurer and other Counselors Advice to
continue it? If they did, how can they think that good Counsel which induced
his Majesty to Dissolve it; and that at a time when the people were never more
full of Fears of the Designs of Papists against the King's Life, the Religion
and Government of the Kingdom? Or was this House of Parliament all of a sudden
fallen from their Loyalty, their Understanding and firmness to the Crown and
Government? There was a long Bill of Pensioners said to be found amongst them,
such as the Treasurer had gratified with the Sum of 231602 l. in two years
time; I presume these were not the cause of their Dissolution: It was not the
Treasurers Interest to cast of these Servants, whom he bought at of dear a
rate. It was the generality of that House which he had by his Agent so much
extolled, whom he now falls out with, and by whose Influence, judge you, they
were dissolved! What clearer Demonstration would any man have, that the Cabal
Counselors, and the most substantial and loyal people of the Kingdom were now
at odds: For to be sure those Members of this Parliament which had behaved
themselves well, and according to the minds of those most loyal Freeholders,
Citizens and Burgessers that chose them at first, would be in high estates with
them still; and this they manifested by choosing them into the Parliaments that
succeeded. Accordingly we find near 200 besides Court-dependants of the same
individual men in the next Parliament. Those that were left out, were either
Pensioners or Dependants on Cabal Counselors: Those that were chosen were the
ablest men of Parts and estates; whence it came to pass, that these were the
leading-men still in the House of Commons, and thereforet read in the very same
steps, and prosecuted the Treasurer and his Adherents, the Papists and their
Abbetters, just as they had done before; with only this advantage, that they
were freed from a heavy clog of Court-pensioners, where by they were more
unanimous and more uniform in their Votes and Addresses, than they could be
whilst those were among them.

But we have a greater Testimony than this, that Cabal Councils and Parliament
Councils were at a great distance; for His Majesty himself in his Declaration
of April 20. 79. whilst this new Parliament was sitting, for the dissolution of
his Old Privy Council, and the choosing a new one, tells us, That He had been
induced to use the Advices of some few -- for many years past: He is sorry for
the ill success he has found in this course, and sensible of the ill posture of
Affairs from that, and some unhappy Accidents, which have raised great
Jealousies and Dissatisfactions among his good Subjects, and thereby left the
Crown and Government in a Condition too weak for those Dangers we have reason
to fear both at home and abroad. Hereupon he resolves for the future to take
the Advice of this Privy Council and the Parliaments.

I think this is an unexceptionable Evidence of the illness of Cabal
Counselors, and the great difference between them and Parliaments: And I hope
men shall not incur the reproach of Disloyal, Fanatic, Whigs, Enemies to the
King and Government, etc. for adhearing to, and commending the Counsels and
Actions of Four Parliaments successively, whereof the 18 years Parliament has
such Testimonies to their Ability and Loyalty, as they surpass in their opinion
for any that has gone before them, or that in moral possibility can come after
them; excepting those that have already succeeded them, wherein their very
selves made the most considerable and leading number: insomuch that all these
Four Parliaments may in reason be reckoned One Long Parliament, with this
difference, that in the Three last they were reformed and purged from many
diseased and corrupt Members, which had been poisoned by Court Empericks: Shall
men, I say, be made Enemies for adhering to this House of Parliament, which
represents both the Persons, Judgments and Affections of all the substantial
and unbiased Commons of England? And that against either the same Counselors,
or those that succeed them in the same Spirit; especially at the time, when the
only security of the Papists and guilty Caballers, and the only hope they have
of carrying on their Plots and Designs, lies in fomenting these Differences and
Animosities among His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and hindering the effectual
sitting of Parliaments: How many Sham-plots have they set on foot, to throw
guilt upon these Protestants that are most eager in their Prosecution. How many
persons have they labored to Suborn to charge Treason, to take away at once
the Lives and Innocence of those whose only security lies under Divine
Providence, in the safety of the King and the Government, can you think Sir,
that any other persons can possibly be in these endeavors, and in that party
but such as I have already discribed unto you? You hear perhaps of many
Addresses, which disaprove of the late Parliament-councels and actions, and
they are said to come from numerous Bodies of men: But I conceive you will
easily grant, that the temper of their Representatives in Parliament does
better show the temper of the People than those Addresses, which many times are
gained by sinister Arts, and from a few that take upon them the Name of the
Many.

Besides there is so much clear reason and wisdom in the House of Commons
assembled in Councels, that even those persons that are chosen by the Caballers
Interest, if at least they have any sparks of Ingenuity left in them, do
sometimes become quite other men, and have other Sentiments than they had
before.

Have we not known some, who by this change have reaped the Curses and Dam'ems
of their Electors; so that the mind of the people cannot be known till they
meet together in Parliament. And I persuade my self that many of those that are
now of a contrary mind, could they but be admitted to hear the Debates in
Parliament, would give their Suffrage to the same things they condemn. But I
seem now to have said enough in this matter, though very little to what might be
said, and almost all I have said is plain matter of Fact: As for my reasoning a
little upon it, I refer it to your judgment whether it is not genuine and
clear. But if you chance to show my Letter to any of your Popish Conversants,
they will turn it off with a scoff, and think you must take that for an Answer;
but they are much mistaken in you, or else I am, who still retain that hearty
affection for you, which I professed at your departure hence: and I am sure I
shall never cease to love you, and hope I shall never have any cause not to
Honor you for your Affection to all true Protestants and Lovers of English
Government.

Sir, Yours, etc. T. B.


