THE Potable Balsome OF LIFE.

Being a Collection of the choicest Preservatives that are Extant within the
three Natural Families of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, reduced into such
Essences and Tinctures by the Scientifick Art of Chymie, which constitute a
Radical and Cordial Balsamic Liquor, agreeable and pleasant to the Senses, and
to be taken in small proportions.

By which the Bodies which are in Health may be preserved, the growth of
Distempers intercepted, and Diseases already confirmed, totally Erradicated.

Especially such as are most Predominant in Sea-bordering Nations, more
particularly in ours, of which diseases you may have an account in the
following pages.

Published by P. Bellon, Physiomathetes.

For the Public Good, especially for those who are unhappily deprived from the
great convenience, and advantageous assistance of Learned Physicians, and that
live remote from Medicaments, it being of such a Nature as meliorates it self
with keeping, though it be kept a hundred Years.

All persons are desired to peruse the Book thoroughly, for in each Page they
may meet with something which will satisfy their Curiosity. With Allowance.

Natura Vniversalis cum paucis principiis operatur
Mirabilia, and Chimico Ingenioso pauca sunt necessaria.
London, Printed for the Author, 1675.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
WHere as the Body of this Balsum is capable of receiving all such additions,
as all Judicious and experimented Physicians may judge proper for the Cure or
prevention of such particular distempers, as any of the Subscribers may be most
liable unto. And it being also convenient that I should have some account of
the quantity of this Balsum, that will be vended so soon as it is finished.
(that I may take my measure accordingly) All persons that are desirous to have
of this Balsum, are invited to inform me either by word of mouth, or Letters
directed to me at my Laboratory over against the Cross-Keys in Bedford-street
Covent Garden. What Medicaments they desire should be added, whereby to render
that proportion which they shall please to subscribe unto, more proper for
prevention of such distempers; and it shall be faithfully and carefully
performed, according to their desires, in their, or any other Persons presence
whom they shall appoint. Yet at no greater rate than that said best sort of
Balsum (without additions) shall be sold to such as have not subscribed,
whereby the said Subscribers will have a great advantage, both by those
additions, and the certainty of having of it rightly prepared, according to the
Receipt, it being to be done in public, to which advantage none other can
pretend after the Mixture is once made.

And whereas all Persons are not willing or in a condition to go to the rate of
40 shillings a pound, for that Balsum which is prepared with the true Tinctures
of Gold, Antimony, Coral, Vipers, Vitriol, and Pearls (as is specified in this
Book) I have thought it convenient (for the general good) to prepare some of
the Balsum, without the forementioned Tinctures, which though not so great a
Cordial, Preserver, Restorer, and Renewer of Nature as the other, yet will
prove as effectual for the Preservation, and Cure of those Diseases mentioned
in this Book, as likewise for all outward Applications. To be had at sixteen
shillings the pound. To which may be made additions, also paying the overplus
for them, at very reasonable rates. And to avoid all manner of fraud and
deceit, both the Balsums shall be delivered ready put up in bottles and sealed
with my own Seal, the same as here prefixed, of which there shall be one
delivered to each Subscriber for Surety.

Dignissimo Viro D. D. GEORGIO ENT, Equiti Aurato, Collegii Londinensis
Praesidi, nec non Censoribus and Sociis ejusdem nobilissimi Collegii. Viri
Excellentissimi, and Literarum splendore conspicui.
POst varias peregrinationes per diversos Orbis Christiani tractus, and post
multos in Theoria and Praxi Chymica exantlatos labores; tandem in hoc
florentissimae Urbis beato sinu senescere, and sedem ponere constitui. Sub D^o.
Laz. Riverio and Theod. Mayerno Immortalitate dignissimis Viris, Tyrocinium
Chymicum exercui, quorum Autographa apud me extant; and si quemlibet Collegij
curiositas videndi, and perlegendi tangat, deprompturus. Offero vobis (Viri
amplissimi and doctissimi) selecta quaedam Medicamenta, gustu jucunda, visu
amabilia, and in desperatis morbis profligandis efficacia. Vos estis mihi
Judices, coram vestro Tribunali me sisto; and vestra praesentia in meo Chymico
pistrino erit mihi honori and praesidio; forte vobismetipsis non minori
voluptati, si mihi quilibet Collegij Londinensis Socius adesse voluerit. In hoc
consultius and prudentius me fecisse existim^o, quod me vestrae candidae
censurae objicerem, quam ut Agyrtas imitarer, qui Schedulis postibus affixis,
inanem Vulgi gloriam, tantum densitate humerorum notabil^s, ridicule
aucupantur. Subscribo me

Dabam ex Aedibus meis in Platea Bedfordienfi, oppositis Tabernae Vinariae, cui
signum Clavium transversatum pensile. Vestrae gravissimae Societatis Cultorem
obsequentissimum Petrum Bellonium Land. Natum.

THE PREFACE.
HAving found by a no less succesful then long experience, that this Specific
which I treat of, is not only proper, but effectually powerful for the Cure of
diverse Diseases, especially of those which usually afflict Maritime Countries,
among the rest, more particularly those of this Kingdom, wherein the Scurvy,
Dropsy, Apoplectick Palsy, Asthma, Tabes, and the Venereal Diseases do so much
reign of late years, daily getting ground by their impetuous Ragings,
especially among the Vulgar; who not regarding Rules and Methods, though never
so much grounded upon Reason and Experience, are still for the shortest,
easiest and cheapest ways of Cure.

I thought my self obliged (through a due sense of this spreading Calamity) to
render this pleasant and powerful Remedy more generally known, and in a shor^er
time, by this kind of Publication, than my small acquaintance would do in many
years.

The Ingredients that enter into this excellent Composition are selected from
among those, that the three Families of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals have
in them; which are most proper, not only for the cure of the foermentioned
Diseases, but also for Preservation, Prolongation, and Renovation.

And lest this excellent Remedy should lie under the scandal of being some
upstart Thing, invented merely for Lucre; and my self a Person that would
impose upon the Vulgar (as too many do) not regarding how little effectual
their Medicines prove, so they do but thereby fill their Pockets with the
Gains: I have not only (as to the practical part) declared what the Ingredients
are that constitute this excellent Compound, and published their exquisite
Preparations; but also given valid reasons for their choice, in a Theorical
Discourse of their Qualities, Properties and Virtues, which extend to
Preservation and Renovation. And all this done without the least design of
entrenching upon the Prerogative of the most Learned and Eminent College of
Physicians; whom (with all submission to their Censure) I humbly entreat, as
well as all other Ingenious Artists, and Lovers of this Scientifick Art, to
favor me with their Opinion and Approbation of this Remedy, and honor me with
their company at my Laboratory during the time of the Operations. To which
purpose I shall give a timely and public notice of the opening of the said
Laboratory. Not doubting but through this fair way of dealing, I may remove
from this Medicine, all such prejudices, and jealousies, as things in this
manner of Publication do commonly create; preserve it from all foul aspersions,
raise it above those little Spurious Brats of Physic, with which this famous
Nation is but so much pestered; and place it beyond the reach of Malice and
Envy.

I shall leave it is own Virtues, and those Gentlemen that shall be Eyewitnesses
of it is exquisite Preparations and Operations, to speak it is Encomium; and
shall only say, that though it sets not forth so large a Catalogue of
Ingredients as the Theriaca Andromachi, Sr. Walter Rawleigh's great Cordial or
such like long but most excellent Compositions: Yet in that Few is sufficiently
comprehended, what is requisite to effect those several operations, which I
mention in this small Treatise, not omitting Preservation and Renovation.

It is this excellent Specific, which I humbly present to the public, for
the general good of this Kingdom, thinking all my studies and I abours well
rewarded if I prove in this effectually serviceable to my Country, and so
esteemed by the Learned Virtuosi; to whom I wish all health and increase of
Knowledge.

Of the Preparations of each particular Ingredient and first of the Dissolvant
BY reason that these Preparations are to be made through the medium of
Dissolvants, which are the material Instruments of such Chemical Preparations,
I thought it necessary in the first place, to give an account of that
Menstruum, which I have made choice of for this work.

It is obscurely set down by Ramundus Lullius in his Works, but because it is
not to be comprehended so as he has writ it by every vulgar capacity, I have
thought it convenient to explain it here, that those Persons who have the least
insight in Chymie, might understand it is most exquisite and elaborated
Preparations.

The Receipt is thus.
Take of the strongest and best Claret Wine one Hogs-head, out of which you
wust extract the spirit after the common manner, rectifying it to a perfect
purity, let the rest of the liquor be distilled by it self, so draw of the
Phlegm by the vaporous or ashee heat, until it remains of the color of Pitch,
and in consistence of a thick syrup, at the bottom of the Vessel. This black
substance distribute into several Glass Bodies, and pour over it he Phlegm,
till it overtops the Black substance, the hight of four or five fingers
breadth. Set them upon warm ashes and in few days the Phlegm will, be tinged
with a red color, by attracting to it self the combustible Sulphur from the
impure faeces of the wine. Let the tinged Phlegm be separated by inclination,
and fresh Poured upon the matter, repeating this labor till the feces yield no
more Tincture, and that what remains in the bottom be white and Chrystalline.
Set this Chrystalline substance in several Matrasses with long necks, and pour
over it the rectifyed spirit of Wine till it overswims it by three fingers
breadth; apply to these Matrasses fit heads and Receivers, well joined with a
proper Lute for the purpose, and set them on warm Ashes, that the matter may
distill, Cohobating diverse times that which is distilled. All being cold, let
it be poured out by Inclination, without raising the sediment, then pour upon
the Feces more of the spirit, and thus reiterate so often, that the Feces which
through their proper nature Calcine themselves, begin to grow black, and smoke
when laid upon a red-hot plate of Iron; which is a sure sign that the first
Philosophical Calcination is accomplished, and the Spirit already fully
animated with that acid Balsum and Ferment of Nature, that was contained in
these Faeces which were reduced into Chrystals. Join all these animated
Spirits together, and preserve them in some close stopped Vessel, for fear of
Evaporation.

Set the remaining Faeces in small Matrasses with long necks, which seal up
Hermetically, and set in sand, in an Athanor Furnace, so that flame may be
given round the Vessel, continue the fire five or six days, till the Earth be
thoroughly calcined, fixed, and changed as white as snow. The which to render
more volatile again, divide and distribute into several Cucurbit^^, pouring
upon them the fourth part of the aforementioned Spirit of Wine, apply their
heads and Receivers well joined and Luted, and set all in a wet Bath, lukewarm
during one days space, from whence transport them afterward on ashes, and with
a competent heat draw off the Liquor, which from very fiery and sharp that it
was, will come off as insipid as springwater; by reason that the abovementioned
Spirit has then deposited it is Balsamic Salt in that of the Lime, which Salt
did ascend in the former operations with the Spirit. Nam Natura Naturam amat,
eamque sequitur in sua Natura.

Pour upon the Calx or Lime the same proportion of other animated Spirits as
before, observing the same order in the Distillation, till you find by your
taste that in the distillation, that Spirit comes over as strong, as it was
poured on, which will be a sign that the fixed Salt has retained as much as
needs, or as it can contain of the Volatile Salt. Observe that if you have
weighed your Matters at first; you will find them trebly augmented in weight,
which ought to be diligently noted, in order to the Sublimation and last
operation, that the Volatile may exceed and overcome the fix.

Set all your Matter in diverse little bodies of the shape of Sublimatories,
adding their Heads and Receivers to receive the sulphurious spirituous
humidity, distill this in Ashes with a gentle fire, during a whole day, then
augment the fire by degrees, till at last (toward the end) the fire be in a
degree of Sublimation, which continue so, during 18 or 20 hours, and till that
the Vessels appear no longer filled with Whitish Fumes; then will you find the
Matter sublimed sticking on the sides of the Glasses Pure, Clear, and
Transparent, like unto Pearls or Talk.

Take this Sublimed Matter, and make it into Powder in a Glass or marble
Mortar, put it into a Mattress, and pour over it of the Sulphurious Spirit,
moistning it little by little, and concocting them 3 or 4 days in an Athanor
Furnace, with a pretty strong fire, and thus you will have the Menstruum.

Concerning the Radical dissolution of Gold.
When I shall have told you that the Preparation of the Dissolvant for Gold,
was given me by an Adeptus under the seal of secrecy, and confirmed with an
Evangelical Oath, I hope there is none that bears the name of a Christian, but
will dispense with me for making public, what I ought to keep for ever locked
up in the Cabinet of my breast; yet presuming upon that limited Liberty which
was then allowed me, and that others make use of when they treat of such
Secrets. I will here set down in an Allegorical sense (though intelligible
enough to those that are Masters) the whole process as follows.

Rep. Glaciei solubilis Gemmarum q. s. imponatur Crucibulo super ignem per 6
vel 7 horat, dein remoto igne, Crucibulo fracto, recipe tuam materiam
calcinatam et vitro retorto inde, superfundendo spermatis Fermenti Vniversalis
dimidiam partem, and cum Recipiente capaci, in qua sit circiter quarta pars
aquae communis, firmiter lutetur, deinde augendo ignem per gradus distilletur
ad materiae siccitatem. Tunc frange retortam and calcinatum tuum inde retorto
Terreae recipiente adapta, deturque ignis vehementissimus apertus, donec ad
perfectam distilletur siccitatem, quod septies rectificatum servatur ad usus;
Postea R. Speculi Philosophici, cum sudore Achillis, sanguine Veneris, et Adami
pituita Philosophice per Vulcanum impregnati parts duas. Ignis terrae partem
unam, Purifica in Barathro ad perfectissimum splendorem; deinde sumito de ista
purificata materia et de aqua non madefaciente manus ad parts aequales.
Ingrediantur apertum Ignis Balneum per aliquot horas, quando satis sudaverint,
^bducantur cum tegmine, ne a frigore intercipiantur, quiestant isto madore per
horas quatuor, mox quando lent refrixerint, excipiantur, ex Balneo sicco, and
cum praedicto liquore, subtepido, in Balneo liquido foveantur, and maneant in
humectatione ista per semidiem, deinde parato lecto, clause tecto, Cogas ex
Balneo, in gremium Quietis.

Thus have I (though obscurely) yet faithfully set down this great Menstruum,
which if any Son of Art understands, let him enjoy it with thanks, and in a
Perpetual silence.

Take of this Dissolvant (which the Philosophers call their Mercurius
Philosophorum) 9 parts, add to them of Laminated Gold, cemented with Antimony
one part. Leave them together in a Mattress without heat, and in 24 hours, the
Gold will be dissolved. Close the glass Hermetically, (or adding a blind head
to it) set it to digest and Circulate in a gentle lamp heat during a
Philosophical month. Then having Poured off the Tincture into a small glass
retort, draw off the Menstruum, till the saffron of the Gold remain almost dry.
Pour upon it of the Vegetable Menstruum to the hight of three fingers breadth,
having stopped the Glass and luted it very well, set them in digestion during
10 or 12 days, and it will be totally Impregnated and the Crocus of Gold wholly
dissolved in it, which is to be kept in a Glass well stopped for Use.

The Preparation of Vitriol and Pearls.
Take of the Vitriols of Mars of Venus, of each a sufficient quantity, and by
reiterated dissolutions and coagulations, purify them from all their
Terrestrial parts; then put them in a Glass retort with a quart of Pearls, and
distill them, still pouring what is distilled upon its faeces, till they have
imbued and drank up all the humidity, and you will find in the retort an
excellent Red Colcother joined with the calcined Pearl, reduce all in powder,
and pour upon it of the accuated Vegetable Menstruum, to the height of three
fingers breadth, this mixture put into a Glass retort, distill it in a Naked
Fire during three or four days, save all the Liquor by it self, and extract
with common water the dissoluble Magister of the Pearls out of the red Faeces,
which keep apart, then take the distilled liquor, and from it distill off the
accuated Menstruum, and there will remain in the bottom of the Lembick a
Balsamic Liquor as red as blood, to which add the Magister of the Pearls and
the accuated Vegetable Menstruum, and circulate altogether during 40. days, and
you will find your Liquor as red as blood, sweet, and without Faeces in the
bottom.

Of the Preparation of Antimony.
Basilicus Valentinus in his Currus Triumphalis Antimonii does teach how to
make an excellent Tincture of Antimony, of which he says; none but those that
have tried it can believe it is wonderful Virtues. Yet in my opinion that which
is set down by Zwelfer in his Apendix ad Animadversionem page 72, is to be
preferred to this in respect of it is most excellent Dissolvant, which for that
very reason I have made choice of, and this it is.

Take of the best pulverized, Vertdegris q.s. which put into a Glass Limbeck,
over which pour distilled Vinegar the hight of three fingers breadth, then
after a competent time for digestion, when the Vinegar is well saturated with
the Tincture, pour it off by Inclination, and pour upon the Vertdegris some
other distilled Vinegar, digest it as before, and then pour of the Tinged
Vinegar as before, repeating this work till the last Vinegar poured upon the
Vertdegris will attract no more Tincture, and that the substance of the
Vertdegris be almost totally dissolved. Let all these filtrated dissolutions be
put together in a Limbeck or Copper pan and evaporated with a gentle fire, till
there appears a film on the superficies of the liquor, then set it in a cold
place to Chrystalize, part the Chrystals from the liquor, and dry them with a
gentle heat, exhalate again the remaining liquor a little, and gather the
Chrystals as before, and thus continue to operate, till it be almost all
converted into Chrystals.

These Chrystals being afterward Put into a Limbeck, pour upon them of good
rectifyed spirit of Wine, a sufficient quantity to overflow the matter the
hight of three fingers breadth, distill it off again, and this repeat twice or
thrice for their better Impregnation and volatilization. These Chrystals being
pulverized, put into a Glass retort, luted, to which fit a Receiver, and distill
it by degrees, in an open but gentle fire, until all the spirit be drawn off,
which is to be very well rectifyed, by an Alimbeck in a sand Furnace.

This Menstruum being Perfected thus, take of Glass of Antimony prepared by it
self, so much as you please, make it into a very fine Powder, and pour upon it,
to the height of three fingers breadth of this Menstruum, set it in digestion
in a gentle heat without any agitation, until the Spirit be Tinged with a
yellow or reddish color, pour this off by Inclination, and pour on some new,
this repeat so often, as you find the Spirit Tinged after some time of
digestion, (which will be after the second or third time) These tinged Spirits
must be put in a Limbeck and drawn off not to a perfect dryness, but that there
be some small proportion of liquor remaining behind; upon which pour of the
actuated Vegetable Merstruum q.s. which will be instantly imbued with a deep
red color, which must be separated by filtration from the gross and
Terrestrious yellowness. Then draw off again part of the Spirit, or Tinged
Menstruum, and the rest will remain of a most excellent and bright red color,
which Keep for Use.

The Preparation of Vip^rs.
Take Vipers No. xx. of the Actuated Vegetable Menstruum llvss. Put those
Vipers living and whole in the Menstruum in a Mattress with a long neck, to
which you must fit a head and receiver, and there let them remain till they be
suffocated, and after a due digestion draw off half the quantity of the
Menstruum in B. M. the other half pour off by decantation, then pour over them
the remainder of the distilled Menstruum, and after digestion, distill again
half of it, and the remaining part Pour off as before, which must be very hard
Pressed from the Vipers, and joined with the first Tinctured Menstruum, then
filtrate them through Paper, and keep them close stopped.

Take those Vipers very well dried, so that they may be easily crumbled into a
gross powder with the hands, set them in a glass retort, to which fit and lute
a large Receiver, distill them in an open fire observing the degrees of heat,
till all that is in the retort be driven over through the violence of a Flame
fire. The distillation ended, the Volatile Salt will be ^ound partly dissolved
in the Water contained in the receiver, and Partly adherent round the sides of
the receiver, in various forms which is to be washed off with the said water,
then separate it from it is fatid Oil through a filter of paper. This Volatile
Salt is to be separated afterward from it is stinking and better water by a
gentle Sublimation in a long-neck'd Glass, with it is Head and Receiver, so that
the humidity mount not with the Salt.

Join this Volatile Salt to the forementioned Essence of Vipers, which set to
digest in a glass well stopped, during two or three days, and so you will have the
Preparation of Vipers.

The Preparation of Coral.
Take of red Coral so much as you Please, make it into very fine Powder upon a
Porphiry, and having put it in a Mattress with a long neck, pour over it to the
height of three fingers breadth of the spirit of Venus described in the
Preparation of Antimony, set it to digest till it is very well impregnated,
with the Tincture of the Coral. Then pour it off gently, and pour on some fresh
Spirit, this repeat till the Coral will afford no more Tincture, then take all
the Tinged Spirit, and distill it off almost to dryness, then pour over the
remaining Tincture, as much of the actuated Menstruum, as will be requisite to
take up the Tincture, which keep for Use close stopped.

The Preparation of the Sarsa, China, Saffron, Rosemary and Lavender Flowers.
This Preparation is so common and easy that few words will serve to
demonstrate it.

Take the Sarsa and China, and after the usual manner slit them and slice them
in to very thin pieces, but leave the flowers whole, put all into a Mattress
with a long neck, pour over them the height of three fingers breadth of the
Vegetable Accuated Menstruum. Stop well the Glass, set it to digest in a gentle
heat, and when the Menstruum is thoroughly Tinged, pour it off by Decantation,
pour new Menstruum upon the Materials, digest it as before, and when well
Tinged, Decant as before, and so you will have the true Preparation of the
Roots and Flowers.

The Preparation of the Gumm Guajacum.
Though this Gumm seems so pure and clear from all dross that it requires none
other purification, yet in the Preparation of it, there are found such
Terrestrial parts, as require a separation from the Tincture after this manner.

Take of that Gumm q. s. powder it very fine, and put it into a Mattress with a
long neck, pour upon it to the hight of three fingers breadth of the Accuated
Vegetable Menstruum, Close the Vessel, set it to digest in a gentle heat a day
or two, then gently pour off the Tinged Menstruum; in which all the Refinous
and Balsamic part of the Gumm is dissolved, which keep for Use close stopped.

The Preparaion of Myrrh.
Is after the same manner, as of the Gumm Guajacum, therefore I refer you to
that.

The Composition of the Balsum.
The Ingredients being all duly and rightly prepared as has been said, every
one according to what their Nature and Quality did require. It is time to come
to the Comp^sition, consisting in the true proportioning of their respective
Doses, and the Mixture of the several Preparations, which take as follows.

Take of the Tincture of Gumm Guajacum llij, of the Tincture of Myrrh llss; of
the Tincture of the Roots and Flowers, the same as of Myrrh, of the Essence of
Vipers vi, of the Tincture of Coral iiij, of the Tincture of Antimony iij, of
the sweet Red Oil of Vitriol impregnated with the dissoluble Magistery of
Pearls, as much as of the Tincture of Antimony, and of the Tincture of Gold ij.

Pour these into a capacious Mattress with a long neck, add to it a blind head,
and set it in digestion in a gentle heat, during two or three days.

Here is the Composition of the Excellent Balsum of Life proper for a general
use, which will keep hundreds of years, fit to receive any Medicinal addition,
provided it be first prepared, according as it is Nature and Quality shall
require and dissolved in our Menstruum, For none other being so purely
spiritualized as this, those waterish particles which others would introduce
into these other pure Tinctures, would cause them immediately to precipitate to
the bottom in a milkie white substance, to the great detriment of the
Accidental, and some Prejudice to the Essential form of this Specific
Balsamic Liquor.

Reasons for the Election of the Ingredients which constitute this Balsum; of
their Natures, Properties, and Virtues. First concerning the Menstruum.
Amongst the Chemists the word Menstruum is given to any Liquor, either Natural
or Artificial, Simple or Compound, which is used for the dissolution of any
Mixed; and in that respect common Water may be so termed, But this word is
restrained to such Liquors, as are of power to disunite, open, and dissolve,
the Mucilaginous, Resinous Saline, and Balsamic parts of whatsoever lies hid
in Natural Productions, as also to extract and retain their respective
Tinctures.

There are variety of these Menstruums, according to the diverse qualities of
matters to be dissolved, and the Inventions of Ingenious and laborious Artists.
There being but few Masters in this Scientifick Art, but have some peculiarly
due to their own fortunate Stars, and Industry.

Of these Menstruums some are made of the Juices of fruits, as of Lemons,
Pomgranats, Barberies, and the like; but the chiefest amongst them are such as
are prepared of the Juice of the Grape, namely Spirit of Wine and Vinegar.
Others are extracted of some parts and excrements of Animals, as out of Blood,
Urine, the faecal Matter, and the like. Others are prepared from Minerals and
Metals, as out of Vitriol, Common Salt, Nitre, Antimony, Mercury, Venus,
Saturn, and the like. To these Menstruums I may add by themselves such as are
extracted out of Honey, May-Dew, they being kind of Meteors not to be properly
ranged under any of the forementioned Classes.

By a sympathetick influence those which are extracted from Vegetables, are
most proper for the extraction of Vegetables, and so it is with those extracted
from Animals, Minerals, and Metals: Yet this rule is not so absolute, but that
some of these Menstruums are used promiscuously one for another, but that which
is most general is the Spirit of Wine.

This Spirit is called the Incorruptible Essence, the Water of Life, the Key of
the Philosophers, the Universal Liquor or Balsum, the Philosophers Sulphur and
Mercury of the Vegetables, the Pearly Matter, and the Author of this Menstruum
has given it the name of Accuated Menstruum, or Heaven of the Vegetables, with
which he was used to extract the true Tincture of Gold. And by the Philosophers
it was termed that Fire of Nature, as much concealed as Celebrated amongst
them, who unanimously say, Ignis and Azot tibi sufficient. These and diverse
other such Denominations too tedious to relate, are sufficient to declare, that
this Spirit is the fittest Liquor of all those which are either Natural or
Artificial that is capable of extracting the Virtues of whatsoever is infused
and digested in it, without the loss of its seminal Faculties, and leaving
behind any relics of their Middle Lives Virtue. Whosoever is acquainted with
this Spirit will acknowledge it to have a most piercing Virtue, yet not of so
hot a Nature as is imagined by the Vulgar, since it resolves the hottest and
hardest Tumors, allays the pains of burning, and takes away any inflammations.
It Is Incorruptible Nature renders it in great esteem, both because it preserves
it self, and all other Beings Animated or Inanimated.

This Spirit of Wine is Simple or Compound, I call that Simple, which is
extracted by bare Distillation, without any further addition. And by the
Compound, I mean that which is Essencified and impregnated with its Essential
Salt, and amongst all of that kind is that which I have chosen for the
preparation of those Matters, which compound this Balsum of Life. Namely the
Accuated Vegetable Heaven of Raymundus Lullius heretofore described.

The reasons why I have preferred this Menstruum before all others, to be the
Vehicle for communicating the Virtues of this Balsum into humane bodies, are,
because it will extract the Tincture from all things by devesting them of their
Accidental Forms, and yet preserving their substantial ones, which speaks it
the most proper Liquor of all such as are capable of extracting the Virtues of
those Mixts which constitute this Compound. Besides this its intrinsecal
qualities and Virtues have invited me to this Election; for it is not only of
power to convey and communicate the Virtues of all Mixts annexed to it, but
through its own penetrating Balsamic Essence, does open and dissolve all
obstructions, drives forth all Heterogeneal particles, cleanses, heals, and
strenghtneth the inflamed, and debilitated internal and external parts, and
corroborates the whole body; and thus Natura corroborata est omnium morborum
Medicatrix.

Thus much concerning the Virtues, qualities, and choice of this Menstruum,
before all others, though easier to be made, and now a few words concerning

Gold and it is Dissolvant.
Gold is the most perfect Child of the Earth, the Ne plus ultra of the Mineral
Power. It is a yellow, most solid and compact Metal, compounded of such
principals as are fix, permanent, and digested in a most Sovereign degree, as
it is incorruptibility does manifest. It Is called by some the Sun, not only by
reason of it is great Correspondency and harmonious Relation with the Celestial
Sun of the great World, but for it is Sympathy and Affinity also, with the Sun
of the little World the Heart of Man. Its fixidity, purity, and most excellent
Cordial Virtues, makes it wholly dedicated to the Heart, who is the Operator of
all the Noble Functions of life. It is not only a most Sovereign Cordial, by
reestablishing and augmenting the Radical Moisture and Natural Heat, but it is
also an excellent Purifier of the Blood, dispersing and driving forth by
sensible and insensible Transpirations, that which is Heterogeneous and
corrupted in the whole Body, which are the results of the diverse alterations
of the blood, tending to Corruption and Putrefaction, and Consequently to the
destruction of that subject, who it ought to Vivify and Nourish.

Notwithstanding those exquisit intrinsecal qualities and virtues, it is the
opinion of some, that Gold cannot preserve nor renovate by reason of his
compactedness which is such as not to be so dissolved, but that it may be
reduced to a Metalline substance again, and that by consequence never better
Employed or more of use than when it is desolved in the devouring Menstruum of
an over gorged Kitchen, an overflowing Celler, and of exorbitant and Gorgeous
Apparel (all which be daily found to be most radical dissolvants.)

To which I shall only say that there are none never so meanly versed in
Chymie, but know that Gold can be so opened, through the operations in that
Art, as to be capable of producing some good effects upon our Bodies, although
reducible again to its Matallick Body. This is easy to be demonstrated, by the
example of other metallic bodies, which are resolved into Salts or Vitriolls,
as Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron, all which may be reduced again into
Metalls, which hinders not the daily and successful use of them, by learned and
eminent Physicians, who are invited thereunto by the daily discoveries of those
admirable effects, which such open Metals produce in Cronical diseases, even
upon the most obstinate and deepest rooted, and complycated amongst them, all
these metallic vitriols having different tastes, various colors, as also some
peculiar specific virtue, as appears by their various effects. If Gold being
opened and prepared by the means of a powerful Menstruum so as to be reduced
into a Vitriolick Salt, having its peculiar Color, Taste, and specific
virtues, is administered into our Bodies, why may I not conclude it to be of
force and virtue to renovate and operate diverse other wonderful effects, and
consequently not to be debared from Physical use, for no other reason then
merely its reducibility into metal again, not but that I know, that if this
Metal was once so opened and radically dissolved as never to be reduced into
Metal again by any Art, it would then be more efficacious, for Gold thus
volatilized, and spiritualized, does acquire a more ample sphere of activity
and virtue, but this ought not to debar us from the use of its meaner
preparations, especially such as have been known by a long experience to be
effectual in their operations, for the prevention and cure of diseases in
humane Bodies.

But by reason that the more radically Gold is opened, the greater effects it
must consequently operate, I have made choice of such a Menstruum, which
through its simpathy, and great affinity with Gold, does so radically dissolve
it, that though it may be reduced in part, into a metallic substance, yet not
without a sensible decay of its weight after, every dissolution, which in
success of time by reiterated dissolutions and circulations, might so radically
dissolve the whole as never to be reduced again into Gold or any other
metallic substance.

One property that this dissolvant has, which in my opinion cannot be paraleld,
is that, though it be so powerful upon Gold, dissolving it without external
heat, inward corrosion, freting, ebullition, or raising of any fumes, scum, and
bubbles, (but just as wax would do in warm water) yet it will not so much as
touch any other Metal, Mineral, Linen, Woollen, or any other thing, being so
far from corroding, that those parts of my Cloths or skin that have been
accidentally wetted and imbued, with this dissolvant, have proved as sound in
the wareing as any other parts of my Apparel, and my hands not in the least
offended, which proves its operation upon Gold to proceed from an Analogical
consent of parts and by sympathy, but after the dissolution of the Gold in it,
it tinges all things of a most glorious purpurine color, which Evidently shows
that the said Menstruum is sufficiently saturated with the central sulphur of
the Gold, which yields that color.

So soon as I shall have prepared this dissolvant, which will take up six Weeks
Labor, in which time I hope to have all the other operations required in this
composition, I shall present to public view this as delightful, as exquisite
dissolution of Gold, to all such as will favor me with their visits at the
Laboratory, to which they shall at all times be very welcome, especially such as
are desirous to communicate with me about some particular additions to the
Balsum, according to their Physicians orders, whom I advise all Persons to
consult very well before they repair to me.

Gold thus prepared yields its Tincture in any Liquor, which Tincture of a most
acerb and austere taste, does operate as variously as pleasantly, for sometimes
it has been known to Purge by Stools, sometimes (though very rare) by Vomits,
frequently by Urines and Sweats, but most commonly by no visible outward
effects, but then its Virtues are sensibly felt, in augmenting the strength of
the Sick, reviving the Spirits, chearing the Heart, and by Corroborating of the
Viscera, and the whole Body. To speak in few words, its innumerable Virtues, I
shall conclude with Quercetans own words, Ad innumerabiles morbos fere
incredibilis videtur virtutis. Thus I conclude with the most noble of Metals,
to speak something of the best of Minerals.

Of Vitriol.
That there is an Universal Spirit, or Spirit of the World which God has
Established for the continuance of the species, which Spirit gives Life to all
beings, is a truth that is past disputing, but what this spirit is, in what
substance incorporated, and how communicated, is that which but few understand.

Yet most of the Eminents Philosophers say, that the external green and Azurine
colors of Vitriol, and its inward acide declare it to be that subtle juice of
the Earth, which is the sole cause of that Universal fermentation which
preceeds all natural Productions, even as leaven to Flower and Water. The
sulphur contained in the said Vitriol being the Spirit and Ferment which opens
and unites, gathers and coagulates the diverse vapors which are in the Earth,
and according to their respective matrices, forms them into Vegetables,
Minerals or Metallic Substances.

In Vitriol, Venus is most apparent, and therefore most Ingeniously Feigned by
those Poets that were Philosophers to be the Mother or Principle of all Natural
Generations, and in my opinion, the Internal redness of the said Vitriol does
clearly manifest that generative blood of Nature with which she does ferment
her seeds, and of those fermented seeds, produce such Varietys of beings, which
makes such a sympathy between those three Natural Families.

This Vitriol that has an acide Spirit, a burning or corrosive oil, has also a
sweet red tincture in it, that is so friendly to Nature as to communicate to
her all that she wants both as to her preservation and renovation, sweetening
all preternatural acides, purging its balsamic parts, from all outward
adherences, and Vivifying of the suppressed Spirits, besides it is generally
known to be the greatest opener and resolver of obstructions that is used in
Physic.

This was the reason that I have made choice of this inward balsamic sweetness
of Vitriol, Impregnated with the dissoluble Magisters of Pearls to enter into
this composition.

Of the Pearls.
Pearls are the concretion of the purest part of that Mucilaginous Liquour,
that a certain shell Fish called Oyster, draws from the Sea Water, which
contains an Embrionated Salt, full of a Natural Balsome, and of a principle of
Generation, which is communicated to it by means of the Air and Water, those
two great vehicles of the Universal ferment, this Gem is only found in those
Shells that are most Rugged, and that contain the Leanest and most languid
Fish, which shows that in the production of this Jewel, it is deprived of that
sweet sulphurous milky substance, of which this object of Luxury and curiosity
is perfected.

This concrete has ever been acknowledged both by ancient and modern Authors to
be of a nature capable to free the Natural Balsum from all outward and inward
insultations, to reestablish the Languid strength, to recreate and stimulate
the Spirits, suppress Poisons, the Plague, and all Putrid humors, by reason of
the sweetness of its sulphur, which deads all the effects of these sharp and
saline serosities, that prick and irretate the Membranous and Nervous parts,
inflame the viscera and prey upon the very spirits and Balsum of Life, whence
are produced the Gout, Scurvy, Mange, Venereal diseases, and the Leprosy, all
which qualities have made me give place in this composition, for the soluble
magister of Pearls.

Antimony.
This mineral abounds in a noble mineral sulphur, it pertakes also of a
metallic undigestible mercury, and a small proportion of salt, it is called by
some, the Gray Woolf, the black Eagle, the Dragon, the Leprous Gold, and by
many other denominations.

Basilius Valentinus says that it is of an Hermaphrodite nature, fix and
volatile, in temperament hot, cold, dry, and moist, that there may be had from
it a Medicine for every disease, besides a general Panacea, he says further
that there is as great a variety in goodness amongst the diverse sorts of
Antimonys, as there is difference between the flesh of some Fishes and four
footed Beasts, which though agreeing in name, are of various differences, but
the best he concludes to be that which comes from Hungaria full of long bright
and glittering strikes, and here and there tinged with a Purple and Gold Color.

This Mineral as it comes from the Mines, is crude and undigested, and imbued
with some malignant qualities, but not to be rejected, since that by due
preparations its impurities may be separated from its purer parts, its
Homogenious principles from its Heterogenious adherences, and its Medicinal
virtues, freed and purged from all venomous and offensive qualities, therefore
not to be despised, much less wholly rejected; for daily experience teaches us,
that Vipers, which are venomous in their own Nature, are notwithstanding
inserted in the Theriaca Andromachy not without great success, and that the
bare suffocation of them in Wine, or in its Spirit, produces a sovereign
Antidote against all Poisons, nay, what is more, by this bare Emergency, they
become a test, by which such medicaments as are daily used as Catharticks, are
examined, whether they be of a venomous nature.

It is not my intention hear to Impeach any particular Medicament, least I
should add to the general adversion against Physic, I have two much respect
for it, and its learned Dogmatists, therefore only in general take this
example, make choice of two persons, as near as you can of one age, habit and
complexion, give to the one an ordinary dose of Viper Wine, to the other none,
then administer to each an ordinary dose of a Cathartick Infusion, and you will
find, that the Person which took the Viper wine, shall not be moved, and the
other sufficiently purged which clearly proves the Alexipharmicalo peration of
the Vipers, upon the noxious qualities of the said Catharticks: which with
pricking Volatile Salt irritates the expultrice faculty, and so provokes
dejection, it being a Maxim, that none but fix qualities can expel fix
diseases. Neither is it so much the driving forth by stools of the
excrementitious peccant matter, which is so effectual as the Evacuations
through the Emunctories by Sweats, Urines, and imperceptible perspirations.

Now this Preparation, which I have chosen here, being the most fix of all the
Preparations of Antimony, for that very reason I have made choice of it, having
in twenty years experience found it to be most efficacious against the Leprosy,
the inveterate Itch, the Scurvy, and all Venereal diseases, as also in the
Dropsy, and generally all obstructions, it purifies the Mass of blood, helps
Melancholy, resists Poisons, opens Asshmaticks, heals Ulcerated lungs, cleanses
the womb, helps Generation, and Conception, and is endowed with a renewing
quality. Thus much of Antimony. And now,

Concerning Coral.
Coral is a stony Vegetation in the form of a Tree sticking fast unto rocks in
the bottom of the Sea. There are chiefly two sorts, the White, and the Red, but
this last is the best. There is some of other colors also, to be seen in the
Closets of curious Persons, as Black, Yellow, Blew, and the like. As to the
choice, the Male is the best, which is of a deep and clear Red, this Concrete,
if well prepared, and opened, yields a Tincture, as red as blood; whose effects
and vitutes are to purify and renew the blood; it dries and cools, strengthens
the Ventricle, and the Liver, but chiefly the Heart. It is good against the
Plague, Poisons, and malignant Fevers, it recreates the spirits, stops all
Fluxes, it is an excellent Anti-Epileptick, prevents Convulsions in Children,
is sovereign in the Palpitation of the Heart, Fainting fits, Melancholy,
Dropsy, Gout all which it performs through that Solar Tincture, which is
communicated to it from Gold, in a great measure, which gives it the true and
deserving Title of Preserver and Renewer.

Concerning Vipers.
The Viper is a Serpent, the most venomous of all Reptils, apt to be irritated,
and when so, it drives in the twinkling of an eye from the vesicle of the gall
to the gumms, through an almost imperceptible vessel, so spirituous and subtle
a poison, which insinuates and communicates it self so suddenly to the
spirits, and the natural heat, that it as subtlely stupifies the parts, as it
has bit; which poison communicates it self immediately to the heart, and from
thence to the brain by the means of Circulation.

The remedies which this Animal affords, are no less surprising and admirable,
than its poison, for it does not only combat its proper poison, but enervates,
and absolutely overcomes the strength and power of all the poisons that the
three natural Families does produce; provided that these Vipers be well
prepared, and administered in time and order.

This long-lived Animal, of so great assistance, so abounding in a Balsamic
Salt, does not only renew those that frequently make use of its preparations,
but renews it self also, in order to which, toward the end of the year, when
their food begins to fail them, they hide themselves under stones, and in the
Earth, where they remain languid till the beginning of the next Spring, when so
soon as they have fed upon the balsamic blades and sprouts of budding plants,
refreshed themselves with the Aromatic Air, and cherished themselves in the
Rays of the Life-giving Sun; they seek out rugged places to rub themselves
against, and strip off their old skin, which they have no sooner laid by,
selves against, and strip off their old skin, which they have no sooner said
by, but immediately possessed with the sense thereof, and of its acquired
benefit, it crawls more nimbly, and declares by the quickness and liveliness of
its motion, and the Oriental colors of its new garment, that it is really
renewed, and that by consequence, those remedies which it does yield, can
produce the same effects in humane bodies also.

The Virtues of this Animal are to strongly resist all poisons, they are good
against Leprosy, all Venereal diseases, Consumptions, Hectic Fevers, but
chiefly against the Scurvy, driving forth, through its Volatile Balsamic Salt,
all the malignant ^erosities, which infect the mass of blood, the cause and
fomenter of this popular disease, so raging at this very time amongst us.

Of the Roots of Sarsa, China, and of Saffron, Rosemary, and Lavender flowers.
These two Indian Roots are so frequently used, and well known to every vulgar
eye, that I need not say much concerning them; I shall only in few words give
you the reasons, why I have chosen them to enter into this Composition. They
abound both in a fix Balsamic Salt, and in a Faecula, which is of a very
drying, and healing quality; they are both Diuretic and Diaphoretick, friendly
to the Liver, good against the Dropsy, Palsy, Gout, Headache, Jaundice,
Greensickness, the Scurvy, and all Venereal diseases; they heal, and dry up all
inward Ulcers, which makes them to be daily used in all diseases which require
exiccation.

Saffron is a flower which abounds in such Virtues, as are Analogick with the
rest of those Ingredients wh ch compose this noble Balsum; so that I should
have done it wrong, not to have inserted it amongst the rest. It is a great
Anodyne, a great Cleanser of the womb, a Cherisher of the Heart, a Disopilator
of the Liver and Spleen, a great Provoker of Childbirth, and of what should
immediately follow; it is esteemed the most sovereign Cordial of the Lungs, the
actions of its Virtues being carried and distributed unto the very last
disgestions through the Circulation of the blood, and by respiration. It is a
little Panacea against the Plague, and all other infections, and malignant
diseases; a great Specific in the Jaundice, good against the Apoplex, Asthmas,
and fits of the Mother: in a word, it abounds in a Balsamic Sulphur, which is
manifested by its exquisite odor, and in a Magnetic salt, which makes that
after it has been dessicated, it attracts to it self again from the ambient Air
that Balsum, which affords it afresh the same weight of body, the same vivacity
of colors, and the same activity of odours, as it had at first, which is a
thing worth observation.

The flower of Rosemary, which the Greeks call (...), by excellency does not
come short of the Saffron; for not the flower only, but the leaves of the plant
also, are totally Balsamic, which renders it a Specific against all the
diseases of the head, and of the Genus nervosum, they strengthen the stomach,
clear the Optic nerve, resolve and open all the obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Womb, Mesentery, Pancreas, etc. They cleanse, and strengthen the Womb,
help Conception, good against the Palsy, Apoplex, Convul^ions, the yellow
Jaundice, Greensickness, and the white Effluviums.

The Flowers of Lavender are absolutely devoted to the Brain, and Genus
nervosum; Therefore excellent against Apoplex, Palsy, Trembling of Nerves,
Cramps, Convulsions, Falling Sickness, fits of the Mother, and concussions of
the Brains. All these three Flowers are also excellent in all Contusions, old
Ulcers, Fistulas, outwardly applied, especially in spirit of wine.

Of the Gumm Guajacum.
This Gumm which proceeds from a great Indian Tree is of so pure a Balsamic
body, that it dissolves wholly in spirit of wine, leaving little, or no faeces
at all behind it. It is drying and healing, and taken in a large quantity
purges downwards; it is a great Sudorifick and Diuretic, and has an
Alexipharmical faculty: it is also cleansing, dissolving, and attenuating. All
which qualities makes it a Specific against Venereal diseases, for by these
forementioned qualities, it purifies the blood, dryes up, and drives forth all
superfluous moistures, heales all inward wounds, ulcers, and inflammations,
strengthens the Nerves, resists putrefactions, augments the radical Balsum, and
fortifies the stomach, and the Viscera, against all putrid humors, suppressing
all preternatural ferments, strengthening the natural Acid. It cures the Dropsy,
Asshma, or stuffing of the Lungs, Convulsion fits, all diseases of the Bladder
and Reins, pains in the Joints, Gout, Flatulences, Crudities, and all Cronical
diseases, especially such as have their being from cold and moist causes. It
expels all gross and viscous humors, helps decayed memory, Catarrhs, Deafness,
Gripings, Colicks, Sterility, Cancers, or Ulcers of the Womb, and all cold
humors.

It was in respect to this large Catalogue of its excellent Virtues, that I
have elected it to be the basis of this Balsamic remedy, it being a Balsum in
it self, proper against the Scurvy, and all venereal Deseases, as likewise a
preserver and renovator.

Of Myrrh.
Myrrh is of those Balsamic Gums, which are used for the Inbalming of Dead
Bodies, for their preservation, from corruption, and Putrefaction, during many
Ages, and seeing that through such properties, this Gum has a peculiar Energy
of preservation, I thought I could not err by introducing it among the rest of
our Balsamic Ingredients, as a preserver, as well as in respect to its other
excellent Virtues, for it is such a resister of all putrid and corrupt humors,
and all accidents and diseases that result from thence, that it is daily used
in all those diseases, that proceed from corruption and putrefaction, as in the
Scurvy all Venereal diseases, Poisons, Putrid Fevers, Small Pox, and the like,
it is a Cephalic Specific, it drives all impurities from the Womb, the dead
Child, also Facilitates Childbirth, and, what should Immediately follow it, and
helps conception; Provokes Generation, strengthens the Nerves, and is a
sovereign Antidote against the Plague.

It was not therefore without good reasons that I have admited it to a
considerable quantity in this Potable Balsum of Life.

Some short but necessary reflections upon the means of Preservation and
Renovation.
The reasons why I have given the name of Balsum of Life to this excellent
composition, are because this Medicament is not a bare remedy for the cure of
diseases, but that also through its admirable Virtues, and qualities, it is a
preserver of Life, by the means of its Balsamic Principles, and great Virtues
in Renovation, but because there are diverse Persons that will not allow of
Preservers, and especially of renewers; I will endeavor (in as few words as I
can possible) to assert it. In order to this (that those to whom I address this
discourse may the better relish what I shall say hereafter; I would desire them
to reflect a little upon the daily method in preservation of dead bodies, such
as are wholly deprived of all inward assisting qualitys, which are nevertheless
so preserved, through the assistance of some Medicaments as to be kept from
Putrefaction for many after ages, and then I hope) they will be more inclined
to approve, and allow, of a preserving and prolonging power in such Balsamic
remedy, as may be administered to living bodies such as are replen^shed with
vital Spirits, and a Native Balsum of Life.

Now whereas our Nature (according to the opinion of the learned) cannot renew
her self without the aid and assistance of some Medicaments, by reason of her
own insufficiency, in the separation and extraction, of a pure and clear
Quintessence from her ordinary and usual food, whereby to renew her self, we
must conclude, that these assisters, hold the place of Preservers and
Renovators.

For could nature make a pure extraction from the Aliments, such a one as would
be required for Renovation, it would be contented with very little proportion,
whereas on the contrary she does daily crave a large quantity of the said
Aliments to supply her self withal, whereby an abundance of impurities are
distributed throughout the whole body, which puts her to a continual Labor in
the expelling of them again.

This its deficiency is daily manifested by a continued vissicitude of Lapsies
into diverse sorts of distempers, but could she extract any such excellency from
the aliments, life would then be a continued series of health, without
alteration.

Now since our Nature is destitute of such qualities, and too Weak and
deficient in her self, to attain to such a height of perfection, by her
peculiar fire, and the Instruments of her own Laboratory, Medicine must be
invited to her Aid, with refined Balsamic and Spirituous Medicaments, such as
Almighty God (who has promised length of Days) through his immense goodness to
Mankind has ordained for preservation and prolongation of Life, whence may be
concluded a necessity of such preservatives in Nature, whereby our humane
Nature, being supported and exalted by a pure Quintessence the sphere of her
activity may be expatiated beyond its Natural extent, and limits, both for the
preservation and prolongation of Life.

In the Chemical anatomy of Blood, the fixed Salt is found in a less quantity
than the Volatile, which fix salt it a powerful principle, whose Balsamic
parts, are so absolutely necessary to Life, that the durance thereof is to be
measured by the standard of its quantity and quality, so that according as any
living being does abound more or less in this fix salt, it does accordingly
continue more or less, and requires less nutriment, this is most particularly
evinced in the Viper, an Animal of great abstinence, and long Life, out of two
ounces of whose Flesh, has been extracted, a dram of Balsamic Salt.

What I have said either concerning this Salt, or in reference to the
preservers and renovators, is without derogating in the least from the Archeus
that fervent Spirit and Prince of Life which resides in us, who assisted by its
Balsum, and concurring with the results of the exterior restoratives, does
Visit, inlighten, and comfort, all the Parts and render them partakers of the
effects of its Virtues, but whereas this said spirit does keep its chief
residence in the more noble parts, where all its Virtues are treasured up, and
in which its faculties do shine with a greater luster, influence, and
Authority, the preservatives have likewise a greater power upon, and sympathy
with the noble than with the Inferior and subjected parts,

Now whereas the Heart first agent of the Blood does extract a too small
proportion of this fix salt out of the Nutriment to sufficiently supply all the
parts withal, and that the Volatile salt does evaporate too fast, and is too
easily dissipated, Whereby the said parts remain in a continual craving. If
that a Quintessence does add Energy, both in quantity and quality, to the
Balsamic Salt, and suppress the Subtle Evaporation of the Voltatils of
necessity preservative and prolongation must be adjudged as Infallibly as
necessarily.

These things rightly Considered I am of opinion, that to deny the existency of
preservers and Renovators, amongst plants, Animals and Minerals, is to oppose
experience, maintained by reason, and confirmed by diverse Ancient and Modern
Authentic Authors.

I shall no longer insist upon this Theme least it should swell this little
Piece beyond my first intention, the rather, since many have treated at large
upon this Subject, but they have involved it (for the most part) in so many
circumstances, and accompanied it with such a numerous variety of Nicitys which
has elevated it beyond the reach of Vulgar capacities, and rendered it so
intricate, and of so difficult an acquisition, that but few will attempt the
purchase, at such a troublesome rate, whilst that man, (who naturally aspires
to glory) wants but diligence to search, with courage to execute, he being
already endowed with reason to understand, that he is in possession of that
Instrument of Instruments, the hand to perform, and that kind and plentiful
Nature is at hand to supply him withal requisite materials, to operate upon,
imploring only the ingenious Artists Care and Diligence.

Of the Qualities and Virtue of this Balsum.
It is now time I should give you an account of the singular properties and
virtues of this Exquisite Balsum of Life, which I shall do as succinctly as its
various Energies and natures will permit.

It dissolves and opens all obstructions, drives forth all impurities, heales
inward bruises, sores, wounds, or ulcers, suppresses all evil ferments,
strengthens all the viscera, and the senses, recreates the Spirits,
reestablishes and augments the natural heat and radical humide, purefies the
blood and natural Balsum, resists all corruptions and putrefactions, cleanses
the reins, bladder, and womb, and drys the superfluities thereof, helps
conception, provokes the Terms, yet drys up the white effluviums. Accelerates
Childbirth, and drives forth what should follow, combats all Poisons,
corroborates the whole body, and strengthens and renews nature.

These Qualities and Virtues render it of power to resist and suppress the
violence, of some, and to radically extirpate, and absolutely cure others of
these following Diseases.

All Headaches. Disiness. Plagues. Leprosy. Scurvy All Venereal diseases.
Dropsy. Jaundice. Gout, Consumption. All Agues. Convulsions Hectic Fevers.
Apoplex. Melancholy. Falling sickness. Wind. Palsy. Indigestions. Cramps.
Green Sickness. Gripings. Stone. and Gravil. Stuffings of the Lungs. Vlceration
of the Lungs. Earenness. Colicks.
and to be used by all such as are accustomed to take of those Pills which they
call the Drunkey Pills, or Pills of good fellowship.

This balsum is no less excellent outwardly applied for the cure of Cancerous,
cavernous, Venereal Ulcers, and Fistulas, applying it with Lint upon the Sore,
or injecting of it in the cavities which it performs at the farthest at the
third dressing, but sometimes at the very first application, applying over it
only some sort of descicative Plaster, and desticates all wounds as are
difficult to be cured through a flux of humors. It dissipates and disperses
all Venereal Nodes, and those little scurfy and dry pustulas or scabs on the
head, face, or any other part of the body.

Allays the pains of the Gout and Cramps.

Heals all concussions, contusions, Sprains, cold aches, contracted nerves,
weakness of joints and limbs, and the dead Palsy.

Discusses all hard cancerous and scrophulous tumors, by chafing of it into
the Part with a warm hand, and in the nape of the neck also; as also for
gripings, colicks, and the worms chafing the belly and navel with it.

Thus much concerning the Virtues and Qualities of this Balsum, now a word or
two concerning the preparation of the body for its reception, as also some
instructions in the administration of it, and of its doses, and so conclude.

According to the intention and nature of the distemper, so must the body be
prepared and disposed for the reception of this specific in gross plethorick
bodies, there is required more circumstantial preparations then others; in such
persons care must be had not to stir up the humors too hastily, nor to let
them remain long in the body after once set in motion, lest through a new
fermentation, they should create new diseases, and produce putrid Fevers. But
because I have limited this Discourse to two or three sheets of Paper, and that
I desire all persons to rely upon the consultations and advices of their own
experienced Physicians, though I had much to say upon this subject, I shall
forbear it, and only in compassion to such as live in Country Towns, far
remote, from Physicians, or that cannot reach to the charge of a Physicians
Fees, I shall set down some few Rules.

If the partys design is but to prevent or intercept the growth of some budding
distemper, or for preservation and renovation, and that he has lately taken
some purging medicament, or that his stomach is clean of it self, as also in
time of infection against the Plague, or any other infectious diseases, there
is no use for preparatives.

But if the Person aims at the rooting out, and curing of some distemper. Then
it is necessary first to cleanse the stomach, which according to its foulness
and repletion, is to be done either by vomits or purgations, and if requisite
by both. The best of Vomits for this purpose is the Vinum Emeticum, and
infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or of glass of Antimony, as also the Antimonial
Cup, in the Dropsy, Jaundice, Asthmas, Melancholy, Green Sickness, and the
like. In the S^urvy, Gout, and all Venereal Diseases, make use of Mercurius
Vitae; well and rightly prepared, and in all Cephalic, or Diseases of the Head
and Nerves, as Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplex, and the like, make use of the
Salt of white Vitriol. But because these vomits are not to be had every where,
(especially in the Country) so well and duly prepared as they should be; I will
take care to provide some in the Laboratory of my own preparing with all care
and circumspection. As concerning Purges, they being to be had from the
Vegetables in every Druggist or Apothecary; Shop, and appropriated to the
respective distempers, I shall not mention them. As concerning the ^aking of
this Balsum in the cure of Venereal diseases, the Scurvy, the Gout, Apoplex,
Palsies of the head and tongue, Wind, Colicks, Gripings, Faintings, and Mother
fits, and Wind in the stomach. Though this Balsum (through the penetrating
quality of the Gumm Guajacum) is hot and biting in the mouth and throat; I
would advise all such as can bare with it, to take it without any mixture, and
to drink presently after it a glass of white wine, or of some appropriated
Liquor to the distemper, because that in the mixing of it with any other Liquor
before it is in the body, makes it immediately turn white, and stick, and
precitate to the bottom of the vessel that contains it, which alteration
(though it does not destroy its virtues) yet retards for some time its active
and nimble penetration, which is much required in the forementioned diseases.

But in all other cases it is to be dropped according to its dose in some
liquors, appropriated to the distempers, and sweetened with some syrup; or if
you will make it a most pleasant and delitious drink, take eight times the
proporion of white wine, as is the dose you are to take of the Balsum, and drop
the said proportion of Balsum into it, sweeten it at your pleasure with sugar,
or some pleasant syrup, stir and mix all well together, and it will be like a
spiced draught of new milk and sugar in taste, smell, and locks.

If there be any that had rather take this Balsum in extract or pills they must
put the proportion of a dose in a silver spoon (if it will contain it) but if
the dose be more than one spoonful, fill your spoon first, and set it at such a
distance, as it may not fire over a Candle, or kindled coals, and as it
evaporates away, add more till you have the just dose; which dry up to such a
consistence, that being mixed with a little loave sugar or sugar Candy in
powder, may be made up into a Pill or Bolus.

Those that are desirous to keep by them their whole proportion of Balsum in an
Extract, let them set it in a silver or earthen glased Cup or Pot in warm
water, and let it stand there till it be evaporated to that thickness, but
observe that in the keeping it grows hard in sucess of time which may be
softened again by setting of it in warm water as before, with addition of very
strong spirit of wine.

As concerning its Doses, I shall insist upon them as given to a body of a
strong constitution, which all persons are to alter in adding or diminishing
according to the strength, sex, habit, constitution, there being no danger of
over dosing of it except too extravagantly.

In a body that is but slightly threatened with the beginning of some distempers,
this Balsum is to be taken in small quantity from 10 to 20 or 30 drops once in
two or three days in the morning fasting, and continuing so two hours after,
keeping from cold, and using such a moderate exercise as will keep you warm,
stir up the spirit, yet cause no sweat, nor evaporation, or loss of them;
continue this during 7 or 8 days or more if required. The same in Preservation
and Prolongation.

In time of Infection take every morning, or oftener in the day the same
proportion after the same manner.

If you intend to remove some recent obstructions in any part to help
disgestion, to expel wind and crudities from the stomach, and bowels, take it
during 10 12, or more mornings in the same manner, to half a spoonful for dose

If you would help barreness, fits of the Mother, or provoke the Terms, take it
going to bed, at the full of the Moon, and presently before or after the time
of the evacuations, during five or six days, which if need be, must be repeated
every fall of the Moon, during five or six days, in the same quantity as
before, adding in the Mother fits a little spirit of Castor.

In distempers of the Lungs, Consumptions, Hectic, Fevers, etc. it is to be
taken in drops from 5 to 10 or five or 6 times a day.

The same against all Headaches, Convulsions, Palsies, but in an Apoplex give
to a spoonful, blow some up the Nostrils, and pour some into the Ears also.

But if you intend to cure a confirmed or a Chronical disease, take it in a
larger quantity, and continue the use of it till you find the distemper, moving
the doses one or two spoonfuls to three. The same in the Scurvy.

In all Venereal diseases, and the Gout, it is to be taken in the largest
proportions, and continue the taking during 14 days at the least, but more if
the obstinacy of the disease does require it, sweating every day once or twice,
if strength will permit it, either in bed, in a sweating chair, ^ub, or
hot-house. The dose is one ounce or 4 spoonfuls, I observe that if the disease
is not too much confirmed, one pint or pound performs the cure; but if it be
very inveterate and complicate you must proceed further.

This is what I was desirous to say concerning the choice, perparations,
Composition, qualities and virtues of the ingredients of this excellent Potable
Balsum of life, as also of the Balsum it self. In so wide a field I might have
expatiated my self at large, but my intention being only to inform the
generality in few words of the nature, use and doses of this Balsum, I shall
forbear giving any further account of it, except it be desired of me by some
understanding civil persons at the Laboratory, where at any seasonable hours
all such persons shall be very welcome unto their humble Servant

Belon.

FINIS.

