The Belief of the ATHANASIAN CREED not required by the Church of England as
necessary to Salvation.
In a Letter to a Friend.
My worthy and dear Friend;
SIR, You cannot but remember, that when I was lately in your good Company,
there was a Discourse concerning the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as delivered
in the Creed called Athanasius's; and that there was a Person present who
declared his Opinion to be, that the Church of England did not require the
Belief of that Doctrine as necessary to eternal Salvation, and the Reasons he
gives for that his Opinion are briefly these, viz.

1. Because (says he) no Persons are by the Church of England (nor I verily
think by any Church) ever baptized into the Faith, as contained in that Creed,
but in the Apostles Creed. 2. As Persons are admitted by the Church of England
into her Communion without the Belief of that Creed, so in her Office of the
Visitation of the Sick they are not examined in it, but upon a Declaration of
steadfast Faith in all the Articles of the Apostles Creed (in which I could
never yet find any thing of an Athanasian Trinity) Absolution is granted; and
in the Office for Burial that Person is owned to be a Christian Brother: and in
the last Clause of the Exhortation, immediately preceding the Apostles Creed,
in that Office of Visitation it is plain, that he that believes the Articles of
the Apostles Creed, does believe as a Christian Man should. And, 3. Because in
the Exhortation, almost at the End of Office of Public Baptism, he that has
declared his Belief of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, is said to believe
in God; and in the same Exhortation the Child (as to Faith) is chiefly to be
taught the Creed, which I presume was never understood of the Athanasian Creed.
4. Look upon the third Answer in the Church-Catechism, where the Child is
taught to answer, that his Godfathers and Godmothers did promise that he should
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, which Articles the Child being
required to rehearse, Quest. 5. is directed, and says the Apostles Creed; and
it is also evident by the Office of Baptism, no other can be understood in the
Baptismal Vow. 5. In the Office of Confirmation, the first Question and Answer,
the Person to be confirmed does declare in the Presence of God and the
Congregation, that he does renew the solemn Promise and Vow that was made in
his Name at Baptism, which was to believe the Articles of the Apostles Creed;
and neither the Church of England, nor yet any other ever dared yet to impose
the Athanasian Creed as a Condition of Baptism, no more than Pius IV. and his
Council of Trent, dared to impose their novel Faith as a Condition of the same,
but content themselves (as we do) with that which bears the Name of the
Apostles, as containing the Abstract of all Primitive Christianity. See Dr.
Ford's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, June 5, 1692. p. 18. And by such Practice
it is apparent, as the Doctor there clearly argues, that whatsoever Men may
talk, yet they do not believe those Articles to be de fide, and necessary to
Salvation, without the Profession of which they admit by Baptism Proselytes
into the Church; and consequently that Men cannot exclude those from their
Church, for not believing those Articles that they dare not impose, no nor
mention to those they admit to be Members of their Church.
But I find it is commonly objected, that the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as
delivered in the Athanasian Creed, is contained in the 39 Articles; and that
every Clergyman that holds any Place of Profit in the Church, is bound to
subscribe them, and give his unfeigned Assent and Consent to the same. To which
may be answered;

1st. That those 39 Articles are not Articles of Faith but Peace, as several of
her most learned Bishops have plainly declared. See Archbish. Bromhal's Schism
guarded, p. 396. Which Passage is both cited and approved by the excellent
Bishop Fowler, in his Free Discourse. And the Bishops Laud, Tailor, Sanderson,
have expressed themselves to the same purpose. And in a word, the Title of the
Articles says as much. 2dly. Because, if the 39 Articles were Articles of
Faith, the Church would baptize into them. 3dly. If the 39 Articles became
Articles of Faith by subscribing them, then it would follow that the Clergy
would have more Articles of Faith than the Laiety, and then further there would
be more than one Faith, which is contrary to the express Words of Holy
Scripture. 4thly. Because in the sixth Article the Church declares that all
things necessary to Salvation are contained in the Holy Scriptures; and thereto
nothing is to be added, nor from it any thing to be diminished; the Canonical
Books of the Holy Scripture are in that 6th Article named, and thereby the 39
Articles are excluded, otherwise than agreeable with them. But I find it is
further objected,
Object. That the 8th Article requires that the Nicene, Athanasian and Apostles
Creeds be thoroughly received and believed; and hence it seems evident, that the
Church imposes the Belief of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as delivered in
the Creed called Athanasius's.

Sol To this it may be answered, (1) It Is not said as necessary to Salvation.
(2) In that very 8th Article the Church does not absolutely require the Belief
of it, but for that, or supposing it may be proved firmly from the Holy
Scripture: And that this is the Meaning of the Church of England does appear,
1st. By the second Question, and Answer in the Form of ordering Priests and
consecrating Bishops, set forth by Authority, where it is apparent that the
Person to be ordained Priest is directed by that Form to declare, that he is
persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrines required
of Necessity to Salvation; and that he has determined to teach nothing (as
required of Necessity to eternal Salvation) but that which he shall be
persuaded may be concluded and proved by the H. Scripture. You may see the like
in the Form of consecrating Bishops, the second Question and Answer, and by the
fourth Question and Answer, in the public Form of ordering Priests: The Priest
is to promise to drive away all erroneous and strange Doctrines, contrary to
God's Word: Now I presume that every erroneous Doctrine is to be looked upon as
strange, and that we must not retain an erroneous Doctrine, because it has been
of long standing.

And further, in the fourth Question and Answer, in the Form of consecrating
Bishops: The Bishop to be consecrated does promise to drive away all erroneous
and strange Doctrine contrary to God's Word, and both privately and publicly
to call upon others to do the same.

But to end, supposing but not granting that the Church of England had required
the Belief of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as delivered in the Creed
called the Athanasian.

1. She does not assume the Privilege of Infallibility, for then she would be
guilty of that which she charges (and that justly) as a Crime on the Church of
Rome.

2. In Article 20 the Church of England sets forth what Authority it is she
claims in Matters of Faith, or rather disclaims what Authority she has not.

1st. It Is not an Authority to impose any thing contrary to the written Word of
God. Nor,

2dly. An Authority to expound one Place of Scripture that it may be contrary
to another; plainly that as the Church ought not to decree any thing contrary
to the same, so besides the same she ought not to decree any thing to be
believed for Necessity of Salvation.

Now from what has been said it seems to follow, that the Church of England
does not require the Belief of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity as delivered in
the Athanasian Creed as necessary to Salvation. For,

If she baptizeth not into that Faith, if he is said to believe as a Christian
Man ought to believe, that declares his Belief of only the Apostles Creed, and
is thereupon owned as a Christian Brother; if thereby he is said to believe in
God; to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith; if the Person to be
confirmed renews only a Promise to believe the Apostles Creed; if the Doctrine
of the Holy Trinity is not to be believed by being in the 39 Articles, or by
their being subscribed to, they being no Articles of Faith, as by the Title of
them and Preface before them is evident, no Person being baptized into them.
And the sixth Article being a Key to all the rest, and showing us very plainly
how far they are to be believed; and if whatsoever else is before asserted is
evidently to be seen, it appears for those Reasons, that the Doctrine of the
Trinity, as set down in the Athanasian Creed, is not such an Article of Faith,
in the Opinion of the Church, as is necessarily to be believed in order to
eternal Salvation. Thus, Sir, according to my mean Ability, I have faithfully
and conscientiously discharged my Promise, and beg the Favor of a Line, if
this come safe to your Hands. I am,

Sir, Yours,

FINIS.

